[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010114)  [Next](2010116) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ix.vi"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.ix.vi-p1.1"></span>Chapter VI.—</span>*The Last Siege of the
Jews under Adrian*.

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.ix.vi-p2.1"></span>As</span> the rebellion of the Jews at this
time grew much more serious, <span id="fr_1008"></span>[1009](#fn_1008)
Rufus, governor of Judea, after an auxiliary force had been sent him by
the emperor, using their madness as a pretext, proceeded against them
without mercy, and destroyed indiscriminately thousands of men and women
and children, and in accordance with the laws of war reduced their
country to a state of complete subjection.

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p4"></span>2. The leader of the Jews at this time
was a man by the name of Barcocheba <span
id="fr_1009"></span>[1010](#fn_1009) (which signifies a star), who
possessed the character of a robber and a murderer, but nevertheless,
relying upon his name, boasted to them, as if they were slaves, that he
possessed wonderful powers; and he pretended that he was a star that had
come down to them out of heaven to bring them light in the midst of
their misfortunes.

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p6"></span>3. The war raged most fiercely in the
eighteenth year of Adrian, <span id="fr_1010"></span>[1011](#fn_1010) at
the city of Bithara, <span id="fr_1011"></span>[1012](#fn_1011) which
was a very secure fortress, situated not far from Jerusalem. When the
siege had lasted a long time, and the rebels had been driven to the last
extremity by hunger and thirst, and the instigator of the rebellion had
suffered his just punishment, the whole nation was prohibited from this
time on by a decree, and by the commands of Adrian, from ever going up
to the country about Jerusalem. For the emperor gave orders that they
should not even see from a distance the land of their fathers. Such is
the account of Aristo of Pella. <span
id="fr_1012"></span>[1013](#fn_1012)

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p11"></span>4. And thus, when the city had been
emptied of the Jewish nation and had suffered the total destruction of
its ancient inhabitants, it was colonized by a different race, and the
Roman city which subsequently arose changed its name and was called
Ælia, in honor of the emperor Ælius Adrian. And as the church there was
now com<span id="page_178">p. 178</span> <span
id="iii.ix.vi-Page_178"></span>posed of Gentiles, the first one to
assume the government of it after the bishops of the circumcision was
Marcus. <span id="fr_1013"></span>[1014](#fn_1013)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1008"></span>[177:1009](2010115.htm#fr_1008) <span
id="iii.ix.vi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p3"></span> The rebellions of the Jews which had
broken out in Cyrene and elsewhere during the reign of Trajan only
increased the cruelty of the Romans toward them, and in Palestine, as
well as elsewhere in the East, their position was growing constantly
worse. Already during the reign of Trajan Palestine itself was the scene
of many minor disturbances and of much bitter persecution. Hadrian
regarded them as a troublesome people, and showed in the beginning of
his reign that he was not very favorably disposed toward them. Indeed,
it seems that he even went so far as to determine to build upon the site
of Jerusalem a purely heathen city. It was at about this time, when all
the Jews were longing for the Messiah, that a man appeared (his original
name we do not know, but his coins make it probable that it was Simon),
claiming to be the Messiah, and promising to free the Jews from the
Roman yoke. He took the name Bar-Cochba, “Son of a star,” and was
enthusiastically supported by Rabbi Akiba and other leading men among
the Jews, who believed him to be the promised Messiah. He soon gathered
a large force, and war finally broke out between him and Rufus, the
governor of Judea, about the year 132. Rufus was not strong enough to
put down the rebellion, and Julius Severus, Hadrian’s greatest general,
was therefore summoned from Britain with a strong force. Bar-Cochba and
his followers shut themselves up in Bethar, a strong fortification, and
after a long siege the place was taken in 135 <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.ix.vi-p3.1"></span>a.d.</span>, in the fourth year of the war,
and Bar-Cochba was put to death. The Romans took severe revenge upon the
Jews. Hadrian built upon the site of Jerusalem a new city, which he
named Ælia Capitolina, and upon the site of the temple a new temple to
the Capitoline Jupiter, and passed a law that no Jew should henceforth
enter the place. Under Bar-Cochba the Christians, who refused to join
him in his rebellion, were very cruelly treated (cf. Justin Martyr,
*Apol.* I. 31, quoted in chap. 8, below). Upon this last war of the
Jews, see Dion Cassius, LXIX. 12–14, and compare Jost’s *Gesch. der
Israeliten,* III. p. 227 sq., and Münter’s *Jüdischer Krieg.*

<span id="fn_1009"></span>[177:1010](2010115.htm#fr_1009) <span
id="iii.ix.vi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p5"></span> Heb. <span class="Hebrew"><span
id="iii.ix.vi-p5.1"></span>בר כוכבא</span>, Bar-Cochba, which signifies
“Son of a star” (cf. [Num. xxiv.
17](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#017)<span id="iii.ix.vi-p5.2"></span>).
After his defeat the Jews gave him the name <span class="Hebrew"><span
id="iii.ix.vi-p5.3"></span>בר כוזיבא</span>, Bar-Coziba, which means
“Son of a lie.”

<span id="fn_1010"></span>[177:1011](2010115.htm#fr_1010) <span
id="iii.ix.vi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p7"></span> I.e. Aug. 134 to Aug. 135.

<span id="fn_1011"></span>[177:1012](2010115.htm#fr_1011) <span
id="iii.ix.vi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p8"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.vi-p8.1"></span>Βίθθηρα</span>, Rufinus *Bethara.* The exact
situation of this place cannot be determined, although various
localities have been suggested by travelers (see Robinson’s *Bibl.
Researches,* III. p. 267 sqq.). We may conclude at any rate that it was,
as Eusebius says, a strongly fortified place, and that it was situated
somewhere in Judea.

<span id="fn_1012"></span>[177:1013](2010115.htm#fr_1012) <span
id="iii.ix.vi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p9"></span> Whether the whole of the previous
account, or only the close of it, was taken by Eusebius from Aristo of
Pella, we do not know. Of Aristo of Pella himself we know very little.
Eusebius is the first writer to mention him, and he and Maximus
Confessor (in his notes on the work *De mystica Theol.* cap. I. p. 17,
ed. Corderii) are the only ones to give us any information about him
(for the notices in Moses Chorenensis and in the *Chron. Paschale*—the
only other places in which Aristo is mentioned—are entirely unreliable).
Maximus informs us that Aristo was the author of a *Dialogue of Papiscus
and Jason,* a work mentioned by many of the Fathers, but connected by
none of them with Aristo. The dialogue, according to Maximus, was known
to Clement of Alexandria and therefore must have been written as early
as, or very soon after, the middle of the second century; and the fact
that it recorded a dialogue between a Hebrew Christian and an
Alexandrian Jew (as we learn from the epistle of Celsus, *De Judaica
Incredulitate,* printed with the works of Cyprian, in Hartel’s edition,
III. p. 119–132) would lead us to expect an early date for the work.
There can be found no good reason for doubting the accuracy of Maximus’
statement; and if it be accepted, we must conclude that the writer whom
Eusebius mentions here was the author of the dialogue referred to. If
this be so, it is quite possible that it was from this dialogue that
Eusebius drew the account which he here ascribes to Aristo; for such an
account might well find a place in a dialogue between two Hebrews. It is
possible, of course, that Aristo wrote some other work in which he
discussed this subject; but if it had been an historical work, we should
expect Eusebius, according to his custom, to give its title. Harnack is
quite correct in assuming that Eusebius’ silence in regard to the work
itself is significant. Doubtless the work did not please him, and hence
he neither mentions it, nor gives an account of its author. This is just
what we should expect Eusebius’ attitude to be toward such a Jewish
Christian work (and at the same time, such a ‘simple’ work, as Origen
calls it in *Contra Cels.* IV. 52) as we know the dialogue to have been.
We are, of course, left largely to conjecture in this matter; but the
above conclusions seem at least probable. Compare Harnack’s
*Ueberlieferung der griech. Apol.,* p. 115 sq.; and for a discussion of
the nature of the dialogue (which is no longer extant), see his
*Altercatio Simonis Judæi et Theophili Christiani* (*Texte und
Untersuchungen,* I. 3), p. 115 sq. (Harnack looks upon this Latin
*altercatio* as, in part at least, a free reproduction of the lost
dialogue). See, also, the writer’s *Dialogue between a Christian and a
Jew* (<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.vi-p9.1"></span>᾽</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.vi-p9.2"></span>Αντιβολὴ Παπίσκου καὶ
φίλωνος ᾽Ιουδαίων πρὸς μοναχόν τινα</span>), p. 33.

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p10"></span>The town of Pella lay east of the
Jordan, in Perea. See Bk. III. chap. 5, note 10, above.

<span id="fn_1013"></span>[178:1014](2010115.htm#fr_1013) <span
id="iii.ix.vi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p12"></span> Of this Marcus we know nothing more.
Upon the Gentile bishops of Jerusalem, see Bk. V. chap. 12.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII](2010116)
