[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010023)  [Next](2010025) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iii.iii.v"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iii.v-p1"></span> §5. *Literature*.

<span id="iii.iii.iii.v-p2"></span>The literature upon Eusebius’
*History* is very extensive. Many of the editions already mentioned
discuss, in their prolegomena, the *History* itself and Eusebius’
character as a historian, as do also all the lives of Eusebius referred
to above, and all the larger histories of the Church. In addition to
these we have numerous important monographs and essays, of which the
following may be mentioned here: Möller, *de Fide Eusebii in rebus
christianis enarrandis*, Havn. 1813; Danz, *de Eusebio Cæsariensi Hist.
Ecclesiasticæ Scriptore*, Jenæ, 1815. This was mentioned in Chapter I.
as containing a valuable discussion of the life of Eusebius. Its chief
importance lies in its treatment of the sources of the *Church History*,
to which the author devotes the whole of <span id="page_56">p. 56</span>
<span id="iii.iii.iii.v-Page_56"></span>Chap. III. which bears the
title, *de fontibus, quibus usus, historiam ecclesiasticam conscripsit
Eusebius*, pp. 76–144. Kestner, *de Eusebii Historiæ Eccles. conditoris
auctoritate, et fide diplomatica, sive de ejus Fontibus et Ratione qua
eis usus est*, Gottingæ, 1816; and by the same author, *Ueber die
Einseitigkeit und Partheiligkeit des Eusebius als Geschichtschreibers*,
Jenæ, 1819; Reuterdahl, *de Fontibus Historiæ Eccles. Eusebianæ*,
Londini Gothorum, 1826; Reinstra, *de Fontibus, ex quibus Historiæ
Eccles. opus hausit Eusebius Pamphili, et de Ratione, qua iis usus est*,
Trajecti ad Rhenum, 1833; F. C. Baur, *Comparatur Eusebius Historiæ
Eccles. Parens cum Parente Historiæ Herodoto*, Tüb. 1834; and pp. 9–26
of the same author’s *Epochen der kirchlichen Geschichtschreibung*, Tüb.
1852; Dowling, *Introduction to the Critical Study of Eccles. History*,
London, 1838, pp. 11–18; Hély, *Eusèbe de Césarée, premier Historien de
l’Église*, Paris, 1877; J. Burckhardt, *Zeit Constantins*, 2d ed. 1880,
pp. 307 sq. Burckhardt depreciates Eusebius’ value and questions his
veracity. The review articles that have been written on Eusebius’
*History* are legion. I shall mention only Engelhardt’s *Eusebius als
Kirchengeschichtschreiber*, in the *Zeitschrift für hist. Theol*. 1852,
pp. 652–657; and Jachmann’s *Bemerkungen über die Kirchengeschichte des
Eusebius, ib*. 1839, II. pp. 10–60. The latter contains one of the most
unsparing attacks upon Eusebius’ honesty that has ever been made (see
above, p. 49).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Testimonies of the Ancients in Favor of Eusebius.](2010025)
