[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010618)  [Next](2010620) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.iv.xxxiii"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iv.xxxiii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vi.iv.xxxiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXIII</span>.—*How he listened
standing to Eusebius’ Declamation in Honor of our Saviour’s Sepulchre.*

<span id="iv.vi.iv.xxxiii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vi.iv.xxxiii-p2.1"></span>One</span> act, however, I must by no
means omit to record, which this admirable prince performed in my own
presence. On one occasion, emboldened by the confident assurance I
entertained of his piety, I had begged permission to pronounce a
discourse on the subject of our Saviour’s sepulchre in his hearing. With
this request he most readily complied, and in the midst of a large
number of auditors, in the interior of the palace itself, he stood and
listened with the rest. I entreated him, but in vain, to seat himself on
the imperial throne which stood near: he continued with fixed attention
to weigh the topics of my discourse, and gave his own testimony to the
truth of the theological doctrines it contained. After some time had
passed, the oration being of considerable length, I was myself desirous
of concluding; but this he would not permit, and exhorted me to proceed
to the very end. On my again entreating him to sit, he in his turn was
displeased and said that it was not right to listen in a careless manner
to the discussion of doctrines relating to God; and again, that this
posture was good and profitable to himself, since it was reverent to
stand while listening to sacred truths. Having, therefore, concluded my
discourse, I returned home, and resumed my usual occupations.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXIV](2010620)
