[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010174)  [Next](2010176.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xi.v"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.v-p1"></span> <span id="page_253">p. 253</span> <span
id="iii.xi.v-Page_253"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xi.v-p1.1"></span>Chapter V.—</span>*Potamiæna.* <span
id="fr_1798"></span>[1799](#fn_1798.md)

<span id="iii.xi.v-p3"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xi.v-p3.1"></span>Basilides <span
id="fr_1799"></span>[1800](#fn_1799.md) </span> may be counted the seventh
of these. He led to martyrdom the celebrated Potamiæna, who is still
famous among the people of the country for the many things which she
endured for the preservation of her chastity and virginity. For she was
blooming in the perfection of her mind and her physical graces. Having
suffered much for the faith of Christ, finally after tortures dreadful
and terrible to speak of, she with her mother, Marcella, <span
id="fr_1800"></span>[1801](#fn_1800.md) was put to death by fire.

<span id="iii.xi.v-p6"></span>2. They say that the judge, Aquila by
name, having inflicted severe tortures upon her entire body, at last
threatened to hand her over to the gladiators for bodily abuse. After a
little consideration, being asked for her decision, she made a reply
which was regarded as impious.

<span id="iii.xi.v-p7"></span>3. Thereupon she received sentence
immediately, and Basilides, one of the officers of the army, led her to
death. But as the people attempted to annoy and insult her with abusive
words, he drove back her insulters, showing her much pity and kindness.
And perceiving the man’s sympathy for her, she exhorted him to be of
good courage, for she would supplicate her Lord for him after her
departure, and he would soon receive a reward for the kindness he had
shown her.

<span id="iii.xi.v-p8"></span>4. Having said this, she nobly sustained
the issue, burning pitch being poured little by little, over various
parts of her body, from the sole of her feet to the crown of her head.
Such was the conflict endured by this famous maiden.

<span id="iii.xi.v-p9"></span>5. Not long after this Basilides, being
asked by his fellow-soldiers to swear for a certain reason, declared
that it was not lawful for him to swear at all, for he was a Christian,
and he confessed this openly. At first they thought that he was jesting,
but when he continued to affirm it, he was led to the judge, and,
acknowledging his conviction before him, he was imprisoned. But the
brethren in God coming to him and inquiring the reason of this sudden
and remarkable resolution, he is reported to have said that Potamiæna,
for three days after her martyrdom, stood beside him by night and placed
a crown on his head and said that she had besought the Lord for him and
had obtained what she asked, and that soon she would take him with her.

<span id="iii.xi.v-p10"></span>6. Thereupon the brethren gave him the
seal <span id="fr_1801"></span>[1802](#fn_1801.md) of the Lord; and on the
next day, after giving glorious testimony for the Lord, he was beheaded.
And many others in Alexandria are recorded to have accepted speedily the
word of Christ in those times.

<span id="iii.xi.v-p12"></span>7. For Potamiæna appeared to them in
their dreams and exhorted them. But let this suffice in regard to this
matter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1798"></span>[253:1799](2010175.htm#fr_1798.md) <span
id="iii.xi.v-p1.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.v-p2"></span> Potamiæna, one of the most celebrated of
the martyrs that suffered under Severus, is made by Rufinus a disciple
of Origen, but Eusebius does not say that she was, and indeed, in making
Basilides the seventh of Origen’s disciples to suffer, he evidently
excludes Potamiæna from the number. Quite a full account of her
martyrdom is given by Palladius in his *Historia Lausiaca,* chap. 3
(Migne’s *Patr. Gr.* XXXIV. 1014), which contains some characteristic
details not mentioned by Eusebius. It appears from that account that she
was a slave, and that her master, not being able to induce her to yield
to his passion, accused her before the judge as a Christian, bribing
him, if possible, to break her resolution by tortures and then return
her to him, or, if that was not possible, to put her to death as a
Christian. We cannot judge as to the exact truth of this and other
details related by Palladius, but his history (which was written early
in the fifth century) is, in the main at least, reliable, except where
it deals with miracles and prodigies (cf. the article on *Palladius of
Helenopolis,* in the *Dict. of Christ. Biog.*).

<span id="fn_1799"></span>[253:1800](2010175.htm#fr_1799.md) <span
id="iii.xi.v-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.v-p4"></span> Basilides is clearly reckoned here among
the disciples of Origen. The correctness of Eusebius’ statement has been
doubted, but there is no ground for such doubt, for there is no reason
to suppose that all of Origen’s pupils became converted under his
instruction.

<span id="fn_1800"></span>[253:1801](2010175.htm#fr_1800.md) <span
id="iii.xi.v-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.v-p5"></span> Of Marcella, we know only that she was
the mother of the more celebrated Potamiæna, and suffered martyrdom by
fire.

<span id="fn_1801"></span>[253:1802](2010175.htm#fr_1801.md) <span
id="iii.xi.v-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.v-p11"></span> The word <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.v-p11.1"></span>σφραγίς</span>, “seal,” was very commonly
used by the Fathers to signify baptism (see Suicer’s *Thesaurus*).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI](2010176.md)
