[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010252)  [Next](2010254) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xiii.ii"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xiii.ii-p1.1"></span>Chapter I.—</span>*The Events which
preceded the Persecution in our Times.*

<span id="iii.xiii.ii-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xiii.ii-p2.1"></span>It</span> is beyond our ability to describe
in a suitable manner the extent and nature of the glory and freedom with
which the word of piety toward the God of the universe, proclaimed to
the world through Christ, was honored among all men, both Greeks and
barbarians, before the persecution in our day.

<span id="iii.xiii.ii-p3"></span>2. The favor shown our people by the
rulers might be adduced as evidence; as they committed to them the
government of provinces, <span id="fr_2492"></span>[2493](#fn_2492) and
on account of the great friendship which they entertained toward their
doctrine, released them from anxiety in regard to sacrificing.

<span id="iii.xiii.ii-p5"></span>3. Why need I speak of those in the
royal palaces, and of the rulers over all, who allowed the members of
their households, wives <span id="fr_2493"></span>[2494](#fn_2493) and
children and servants, to speak openly before them for the Divine word
and life, and suffered them almost to boast of the freedom of their
faith?

<span id="iii.xiii.ii-p7"></span>4. Indeed they esteemed them highly,
and preferred them to their fellow-servants. Such an one was that
Dorotheus, <span id="fr_2494"></span>[2495](#fn_2494) the most devoted
and faithful to them of all, and on this account especially honored by
them among those who held the most honorable offices and governments.
With him was the celebrated Gorgonius, <span
id="fr_2495"></span>[2496](#fn_2495) and as many as had been esteemed
worthy of the same distinction on account of the word of God.

<span id="iii.xiii.ii-p10"></span>5. And one could see the rulers in
every church accorded the greatest favor <span
id="fr_2496"></span>[2497](#fn_2496) by all officers and governors. But
how can any one describe those vast assemblies, and the multitude that
crowded together in every city, and the famous gatherings in the houses
of prayer; on whose account not being satisfied with the ancient
buildings they erected from the foundation large churches in all the
cities?

<span id="iii.xiii.ii-p12"></span>6. No envy hindered the progress of
these affairs which advanced gradually, and grew and increased day by
day. Nor could any evil demon slander them or hinder them through human
counsels, so long as the divine and heavenly hand watched over and
guarded his own people as worthy.

<span id="iii.xiii.ii-p13"></span>7. But when on account of the abundant
freedom, we fell into laxity and sloth, and envied and reviled each
other, and were almost, as it were, taking up arms against one another,
rulers assailing rulers with words like spears, and people forming
parties against people, and monstrous hypocrisy and dissimulation rising
to the greatest height of wickedness, the divine judgment with
forbearance, as is its pleasure, while the multitudes yet continued to
assemble, gently and moderately harassed the episcopacy.

<span id="iii.xiii.ii-p14"></span>8. This persecution began with the
brethren in the army. But as if without sensibility, we were not eager
to make the Deity favorable and propitious; and some, like atheists,
thought that our affairs were unheeded and ungoverned; and thus we added
one wickedness to another. <span id="page_324">p. 324</span> <span
id="iii.xiii.ii-Page_324"></span>And those esteemed our shepherds,
casting aside the bond of piety, were excited to conflicts with one
another, and did nothing else than heap up strifes and threats and
jealousy and enmity and hatred toward each other, like tyrants eagerly
endeavoring to assert their power. Then, truly, according to the word of
Jeremiah, “The Lord in his wrath darkened the daughter of Zion, and cast
down the glory of Israel from heaven to earth, and remembered not his
foot-stool in the day of his anger. The Lord also overwhelmed all the
beautiful things of Israel, and threw down all his strongholds.” <span
id="fr_2497"></span>[2498](#fn_2497)

<span id="iii.xiii.ii-p16"></span>9. And according to what was foretold
in the Psalms: “He has made void the covenant of his servant, and
profaned his sanctuary to the earth,—in the destruction of the
churches,—and has thrown down all his strongholds, and has made his
fortresses cowardice. All that pass by have plundered the multitude of
the people; and he has become besides a reproach to his neighbors. For
he has exalted the right hand of his enemies, and has turned back the
help of his sword, and has not taken his part in the war. But he has
deprived him of purification, and has cast his throne to the ground. He
has shortened the days of his time, and besides all, has poured out
shame upon him.” <span id="fr_2498"></span>[2499](#fn_2498)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2492"></span>[323:2493](2010253.htm#fr_2492) <span
id="iii.xiii.ii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.ii-p4"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xiii.ii-p4.1"></span>τὰς τῶν ἐθνῶν ἡγεμονίας</span>

<span id="fn_2493"></span>[323:2494](2010253.htm#fr_2493) <span
id="iii.xiii.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.ii-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xiii.ii-p6.1"></span>γαμεταῖς</span>. Prisca, the wife, and
Valeria, the daughter, of Diocletian, and the wife of Galerius, were
very friendly to the Christians, and indeed there can be little doubt
that they were themselves Christians, or at least catechumens, though
they kept the fact secret and sacrificed to the gods (Lactantius, *De
mort. pers.* 15) when all of Diocletian’s household were required to do
so, after the second conflagration in the palace (see Mason’s
*Persecution of Diocletian,* p. 40, 121 sq.). It is probable in the
present case that Eusebius is thinking not simply of the wives of
Diocletian and Galerius, but also of all the women and children
connected in any way with the imperial household.

<span id="fn_2494"></span>[323:2495](2010253.htm#fr_2494) <span
id="iii.xiii.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.ii-p8"></span> Of this Dorotheus we know only what is
told us here and in chap. 6, below, where it is reported that he was put
to death by strangling. It might be thought at first sight that he is to
be identified with the Dorotheus mentioned above in Bk. VII. chap. 32,
for both lived at the same time, and the fact that the Dorotheus
mentioned there was a eunuch would fit him for a prominent station in
the emperor’s household. At the same time he is said by Eusebius to have
been made superintendent of the purple dye house at Tyre, and nothing is
said either as to his connection with the household of the emperor or as
to his martyrdom; nor is the Dorotheus mentioned in this chapter said to
have been a presbyter. In fact, inasmuch as Eusebius gives no hint of
the identity of the two men, we must conclude that they were different
persons in spite of the similarity of their circumstances.

<span id="fn_2495"></span>[323:2496](2010253.htm#fr_2495) <span
id="iii.xiii.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.ii-p9"></span> Of Gorgonius, who is mentioned also in
chap. 6, we know only that he was one of the imperial household, and
that he was strangled, in company with Dorotheus and others, in
consequence of the fires in the Nicomedian palace. See chap. 6, note 3.

<span id="fn_2496"></span>[323:2497](2010253.htm#fr_2496) <span
id="iii.xiii.ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.ii-p11"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xiii.ii-p11.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xiii.ii-p11.2"></span>ποδοχῆς</span>. A few <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.xiii.ii-p11.3"></span>mss.</span>, followed by
Stephanus, Valesius, Stroth, Burton, and most translators, add the words
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.xiii.ii-p11.4"></span>καὶ θεραπείας
καὶ δεξιώσεως οὐ τῆς τυχούσης</span>, but the weight of <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.xiii.ii-p11.5"></span>ms.</span> authority is
against them, and they are omitted by the majority of editors.

<span id="fn_2497"></span>[324:2498](2010253.htm#fr_2497) <span
id="iii.xiii.ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.ii-p15"></span> [Lam.
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#002)<span
id="iii.xiii.ii-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2498"></span>[324:2499](2010253.htm#fr_2498) <span
id="iii.xiii.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.ii-p17"></span> <span
id="iii.xiii.ii-p17.1"></span>[Ps. lxxxix.
39-45](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#039)<span
id="iii.xiii.ii-p17.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II](2010254)
