[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010188)  [Next](2010190) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xi.xix"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xix-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xi.xix-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIX.—</span>*Circumstances Related
of Origen.*

<span id="iii.xi.xix-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xi.xix-p2.1"></span>The</span> Greek philosophers of his age are
witnesses to his proficiency in these subjects. We find frequent mention
of him in their writings. Sometimes they dedicated their own works to
him; again, they submitted their labors to him as a teacher for his
judgment.

<span id="iii.xi.xix-p3"></span>2. Why need we say these things when
even Porphyry, <span id="fr_1902"></span>[1903](#fn_1902) who lived in
Sicily in our own times and <span id="page_265">p. 265</span> <span
id="iii.xi.xix-Page_265"></span>wrote books against us, attempting to
traduce the Divine Scriptures by them, mentions those who have
interpreted them; and being unable in any way to find a base accusation
against the doctrines, for lack of arguments turns to reviling and
calumniating their interpreters, attempting especially to slander
Origen, whom he says he knew in his youth.

<span id="iii.xi.xix-p7"></span>3. But truly, without knowing it, he
commends the man; telling the truth about him in some cases where he
could not do otherwise; but uttering falsehoods where he thinks he will
not be detected. Sometimes he accuses him as a Christian; again he
describes his proficiency in philosophic learning. But hear his own
words:

<span id="iii.xi.xix-p8"></span>4. “Some persons, desiring to find a
solution of the baseness of the Jewish Scriptures rather than abandon
them, have had recourse to explanations inconsistent and incongruous
with the words written, which explanations, instead of supplying a
defense of the foreigners, contain rather approval and praise of
themselves. For they boast that the plain words of Moses are enigmas,
and regard them as oracles full of hidden mysteries; and having
bewildered the mental judgment by folly, they make their explanations.”
Farther on he says:

<span id="iii.xi.xix-p9"></span>5. “As an example of this absurdity take
a man whom I met when I was young, and who was then greatly celebrated
and still is, on account of the writings which he has left. I refer to
Origen, who is highly honored by the teachers of these doctrines.

<span id="iii.xi.xix-p10"></span>6. For this man, having been a hearer
of Ammonius, <span id="fr_1903"></span>[1904](#fn_1903) who had attained
the greatest proficiency in philosophy of any in our day, derived much
benefit from his teacher in the knowledge of the sciences; but as to the
correct choice of life, he pursued a course opposite to his.

<span id="iii.xi.xix-p12"></span>7. For Ammonius, being a Christian, and
brought up by Christian parents, when he gave himself to study and to
philosophy straightway conformed to the life required by the laws. But
Origen, having been educated as a Greek in Greek literature, went over
to the barbarian recklessness. <span
id="fr_1904"></span>[1905](#fn_1904) And carrying over the learning
<span id="page_266">p. 266</span> <span
id="iii.xi.xix-Page_266"></span>which he had obtained, he hawked it
about, in his life conducting himself as a Christian and contrary to the
laws, but in his opinions of material things and of the Deity being like
a Greek, and mingling Grecian teachings with foreign fables. <span
id="fr_1905"></span>[1906](#fn_1905)

<span id="iii.xi.xix-p15"></span>8. For he was continually studying
Plato, and he busied himself with the writings of Numenius <span
id="fr_1906"></span>[1907](#fn_1906) and Cronius, <span
id="fr_1907"></span>[1908](#fn_1907) Apollophanes, <span
id="fr_1908"></span>[1909](#fn_1908) Longinus, <span
id="fr_1909"></span>[1910](#fn_1909) Moderatus, <span
id="fr_1910"></span>[1911](#fn_1910) and Nicomachus, <span
id="fr_1911"></span>[1912](#fn_1911) and those famous among the
Pythagoreans. And he used the books of Chæremon <span
id="fr_1912"></span>[1913](#fn_1912) the Stoic, and of Cornutus. <span
id="fr_1913"></span>[1914](#fn_1913) Becoming acquainted through them
with the figurative interpretation of the Grecian mysteries, he applied
it to the Jewish Scriptures.” <span id="fr_1914"></span>[1915](#fn_1914)

<span id="iii.xi.xix-p26"></span>9. These things are said by Porphyry in
the third book of his work against the Christians. <span
id="fr_1915"></span>[1916](#fn_1915) He speaks truly of the industry and
learning of the man, but plainly utters a falsehood (for what will not
an opposer of Christians do?) when he says that he went over from the
Greeks, <span id="fr_1916"></span>[1917](#fn_1916) and that Ammonius
fell from a life of piety into heathen customs.

<span id="iii.xi.xix-p29"></span>10. For the doctrine of Christ was
taught to Origen by his parents, as we have shown above. And Ammonius
held the divine philosophy unshaken and <span id="page_267">p.
267</span> <span id="iii.xi.xix-Page_267"></span>unadulterated to the
end of his life. <span id="fr_1917"></span>[1918](#fn_1917) His works
yet extant show this, as he is celebrated among many for the writings
which he has left. For example, the work entitled The Harmony of Moses
and Jesus, and such others as are in the possession of the learned.

<span id="iii.xi.xix-p31"></span>11. These things are sufficient to
evince the slander of the false accuser, and also the proficiency of
Origen in Grecian learning. He defends his diligence in this direction
against some who blamed him for it, in a certain epistle, <span
id="fr_1918"></span>[1919](#fn_1918) where he writes as follows:

<span id="iii.xi.xix-p33"></span>12. “When I devoted myself to the word,
and the fame of my proficiency went abroad, and when heretics and
persons conversant with Grecian learning, and particularly with
philosophy, came to me, it seemed necessary that I should examine the
doctrines of the heretics, and what the philosophers say concerning the
truth.

<span id="iii.xi.xix-p34"></span>13. And in this we have followed
Pantænus, <span id="fr_1919"></span>[1920](#fn_1919) who benefited many
before our time by his thorough preparation in such things, and also
Heraclas, <span id="fr_1920"></span>[1921](#fn_1920) who is now a member
of the presbytery of Alexandria. I found him with the teacher of
philosophic learning, with whom he had already continued five years
before I began to hear lectures on those subjects. <span
id="fr_1921"></span>[1922](#fn_1921)

<span id="iii.xi.xix-p38"></span>14. And though he had formerly worn the
common dress, he laid it aside and assumed and still wears the
philosopher’s garment; <span id="fr_1922"></span>[1923](#fn_1922) and he
continues the earnest investigation of Greek works.”

<span id="iii.xi.xix-p40"></span>He says these things in defending
himself for his study of Grecian literature.

<span id="iii.xi.xix-p41"></span>15. About this time, while he was still
at Alexandria, a soldier came and delivered a letter from the governor
of Arabia <span id="fr_1923"></span>[1924](#fn_1923) to Demetrius,
bishop of the parish, and to the prefect of Egypt who was in office at
that time, requesting that they would with all speed send Origen to him
for an interview. Being sent by them, he went to Arabia. And having in a
short time accomplished the object of his visit, he returned to
Alexandria.

<span id="iii.xi.xix-p43"></span>16. But sometime after a considerable
war broke out in the city, <span id="fr_1924"></span>[1925](#fn_1924)
and he departed from Alexandria. And thinking that it would be unsafe
for him to remain in Egypt, he went to Palestine and abode in Cæsarea.
While there the bishops of the church in that country <span
id="fr_1925"></span>[1926](#fn_1925) requested him to preach and expound
the Scriptures publicly, although he had not yet been ordained as
presbyter. <span id="fr_1926"></span>[1927](#fn_1926)

<span id="iii.xi.xix-p47"></span>17. This is evi<span id="page_268">p.
268</span> <span id="iii.xi.xix-Page_268"></span>dent from what
Alexander, <span id="fr_1927"></span>[1928](#fn_1927) bishop of
Jerusalem and Theoctistus <span id="fr_1928"></span>[1929](#fn_1928) of
Cæsarea, wrote to Demetrius <span id="fr_1929"></span>[1930](#fn_1929)
in regard to the matter, defending themselves thus:

<span id="iii.xi.xix-p51"></span>“He has stated in his letter that such
a thing was never heard of before, neither has hitherto taken place,
that laymen should preach in the presence of bishops. I know not how he
comes to say what is plainly untrue.

<span id="iii.xi.xix-p52"></span>18. For whenever persons able to
instruct the brethren are found, they are exhorted by the holy bishops
to preach to the people. Thus in Laranda, Euelpis by Neon; and in
Iconium, Paulinus by Celsus; and in Synada, Theodorus by Atticus, our
blessed brethren. <span id="fr_1930"></span>[1931](#fn_1930) And
probably this has been done in other places unknown to us.”

<span id="iii.xi.xix-p54"></span>He was honored in this manner while yet
a young man, not only by his countrymen, but also by foreign
bishops. <span id="fr_1931"></span>[1932](#fn_1931)

<span id="iii.xi.xix-p56"></span>19. But Demetrius sent for him by
letter, and urged him through members and deacons of the church to
return to Alexandria. So he returned and resumed his accustomed duties.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1902"></span>[264:1903](2010189.htm#fr_1902) <span
id="iii.xi.xix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xix-p4"></span> Porphyry, one of the most distinguished
of the Neo-Platonists, disciple, biographer, and expounder of Plotinus,
was born in 232 or 233 in the Orient (perhaps at Tyre), and at the age
of thirty went to Rome, where he came into connection with Plotinus, and
spent a large part of his life. He was a man of wide and varied
learning; and though not an original thinker, he was a clear and
vigorous writer and expounder of the philosophy of Plotinus. It may be
well, at this point, to say a word about that remarkable school or
system of philosophy, of which Plotinus was the greatest master and
Porphyry the chief expounder. Neo-Platonism was the most prominent
phenomenon of the age in the philosophic world. The object of the
Neo-Platonists was both speculative and practical: on the one side to
elaborate an eclectic system of philosophy which should reconcile
Platonism and Aristotelianism, and at the same time do justice to
elements of truth in other schools of thought; on the other side, to
revivify and strengthen the old paganism by idealizing and purifying it
for the sake of the philosophers, and at the same time by giving it a
firmer philosophic basis than it had hitherto possessed. Neo-Platonism,
taken as a whole, has therefore both a philosophic and a religious
motive. It may be defined in the briefest terms, in its philosophic
aspect, as an eclectic revival of Greek metaphysics (especially
Platonic-Aristotelian), modified by the influence of Oriental philosophy
and of Christianity; in its religious aspect, as an attempt to restore
and regenerate paganism by means of philosophy. In its earlier and
better days, the philosophic element greatly predominated,—in fact, the
religious element may be said to have been, in large part, a later
growth; but gradually the latter came more and more into the foreground,
until, under Jamblichus (d. 330 <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xi.xix-p4.1"></span>a.d.</span>), the chief master of the Syrian
school, Neo-Platonism degenerated into a system of religious mysteries,
in which theurgic practices played a prominent part. Under Proclus (d.
485), the great master of the Athenian school, the philosophic element
was again emphasized; but Aristotelianism now gained the predominance,
and the system became a sort of scholastic art, and gradually
degenerated into pure formalism, until it finally lost all influence.
The extent of the influence which Christianity exerted upon
Neo-Platonism is a greatly disputed point. We shall, perhaps, come
nearest the truth if we say that its influence was in the main not
direct, but that it was nevertheless real, inasmuch as it had introduced
problems up to that time undiscussed, with which Neo-Platonism busied
itself; in fact, it may almost be said that Neo-Platonism was at first
little more than (Aristotelian-) Platonism busying itself with the new
problems of salvation and redemption which Christianity had thrown into
the world of thought. It was un-Christian at first (it became under
Porphyry and later Neo-Platonists anti-Christian), because it solved
these problems in a way different from the Christian way. This will
explain the fact that all through, whether in the more strictly
philosophic system of Plotinus, or in the more markedly religious and
theurgic system of Jamblichus, there ran a vein of mysticism, the
conception of an intimate union with the supreme God as the highest
state to which man can attain.

<span id="iii.xi.xix-p5"></span>Porphyry, with whom we are at present
concerned, was eminently practical in his thinking. The end of
philosophy with him was not knowledge, but holiness, the salvation of
the soul. He recommended a moderate asceticism as a chief means of
freeing the soul from the bonds of matter, and thus permitting it to
rise to union with God. At the same time, he did not advise the neglect
of the customary religious rites of Paganism, which might aid in the
elevation of the spirit of man toward the deity. It was with Porphyry
that Neo-Platonism first came into direct conflict with Christianity,
and its enmity against the latter goes far to explain the increasing
emphasis which he and the Neo-Platonists who followed him laid upon
religious rites and practices. Its philosophy, its solution of the great
problems of the age, was essentially and radically different from that
of Christianity; and although at first they might run alongside one
another as independent schools, without much thought of conflict, it was
inevitable that in time the rivalry, and then the active hostility,
should come. Neo-Platonism, like Christianity, had a solution of the
great problem of living to offer to the world,—in an age of unexampled
corruption, when thoughtful men were all seeking for a solution,—and
each was essentially exclusive of the other. The attack, therefore,
could not be long delayed. Porphyry seems to have begun it in his famous
work in fifteen books, now lost, which was answered *in extenso* by
Methodius of Tyre, Eusebius, and Apolinarius of Laodicea. The answers,
too, have perished; but from extant fragments we are able to see that
Porphyry’s attack was very learned and able. He endeavored to point out
the inconsistencies in the sacred narrative, in order to discredit its
divine origin. At the same time, he treated Christ with the greatest
respect, and ranked him very high as a sage (though only human), and
found much that was good in his teaching. Augustine (*De consensu
Evang.* I. 15) says that the Neo-Platonists praised Christ, but railed
at his disciples (cf. Eusebius’ words in this chapter). Porphyry was a
very prolific writer; but only a few of his works are now extant, chief
among them the <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xix-p5.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xix-p5.2"></span>φορμαὶ πρὸς τὰ νοητ€</span>, or *Sententiæ*,
a brief but comprehensive exposition of his philosophic system. We learn
from this chapter that he had met Origen when very young (he was but
about twenty when Origen died); where, we do not know. He lived to be at
least sixty-eight years old (see his *Vita Plot. 23*), and Suidas says
that he died under Diocletian, i.e. before 305 <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xi.xix-p5.3"></span>a.d.</span>

<span id="iii.xi.xix-p6"></span>On Porphyry and Neo-Platonism in
general, see the great works of Vacherot *(Hist. critique de l’Ecole
d’Alexandrie)* and Simon *(Hist. de l’Ecole d’Alexandrie);* also
Zeller’s *Philosophie der Griechen,* and especially Erdmann’s *History
of Philosophy* (Engl. trans., London, 1889).

<span id="fn_1903"></span>[265:1904](2010189.htm#fr_1903) <span
id="iii.xi.xix-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xix-p11"></span> Of the life of Ammonius Saccas, the
“father of Neo-Platonism” very little is known. He is said by Suidas
(*s. v. Origenes*) and by Ammianus Marcellinus to have been a porter in
his youth and to have gained his second name from his occupation. That
he was of Christian parents and afterward embraced paganism is stated in
this passage by Porphyry, though Eusebius (§10, below) and Jerome assert
that he remained a Christian. From all that we know of the teachings of
Ammonius Saccas as reported to us by Plotinus and other Neo-Platonists,
we cannot imagine him to have remained a Christian. The only solution of
the difficulty then is to suppose Eusebius (whom Jerome follows) to have
confounded him with a Christian of the same name who wrote the works
which Eusebius mentions (see note 16). Ammonius was an Alexandrian by
birth and residence, and died in 243. His teaching was of a lofty and
noble character, to judge from Plotinus’ descriptions, and as a teacher
he was wonderfully fascinating. He numbered among his pupils Herennius,
Longinus, the pagan Origen, and Plotinus. The Christian Origen also
studied under him for a time, according to this passage. He wrote
nothing (according to the *Vita Plot,* c. 20), and hence we have to rely
solely upon the reports of his disciples and successors for our
knowledge of his system. It is difficult in the absence of all direct
testimony to ascertain his teaching with exactness. Plotinus claims to
give only what he learned from Ammonius, but it is evident, from his
disagreement in many points with others of Ammonius’ disciples, that the
system taught by him was largely modified by his own thinking. It is
clear that Ammonius, who undoubtedly took much from his great master,
Numenius, endeavored to reconcile Plato and Aristotle, thus laying the
basis for the speculative eclecticism of Neo-Platonism, while at the
same time there must have been already in his teaching the same
religious and mystical element which was present to some extent in all
his disciples, and which played so large a part in Neo-Platonism.

<span id="fn_1904"></span>[265:1905](2010189.htm#fr_1904) <span
id="iii.xi.xix-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xix-p13"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xix-p13.1"></span>τὸ β€ρβαρον τόλμημα</span>. Porphyry means
to say that Origen was originally a heathen, and was afterward converted
to Christianity; but this is refuted by the universal tradition of
antiquity, and is clearly a mistake, as Eusebius (who calls it a
“falsehood”) remarks below. Porphyry’s supposition, in the absence of
definite knowledge, is not at all surprising, for Origen’s attainments
in secular learning were such as apparently only a pagan youth could or
would have acquired.

<span id="fn_1905"></span>[266:1906](2010189.htm#fr_1905) <span
id="iii.xi.xix-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xix-p14"></span> On Origen’s Greek culture, see p. 392,
and also his own words quoted below in §12 sq.

<span id="fn_1906"></span>[266:1907](2010189.htm#fr_1906) <span
id="iii.xi.xix-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xix-p16"></span> Numenius was a philosopher of Syria,
who lived about the middle of the second century, and who exerted great
influence over Plotinus and others of the Neo-Platonists. He was,
perhaps, the earliest of the Orientalizing Greek philosophers whose
thinking was affected by the influence of Christian ideas, and as such
occupies an important place in the development of philosophy, which
prepared the way for Neo-Platonism. His object seems to have been to
reconcile Pythagoras and Plato by tracing the doctrines of the latter
back to the former, and also to exhibit their agreement with Jewish and
other Oriental forms of thought. It is significant that he was called by
the Church Fathers a Pythagorean, and that he himself called Plato a
Greek-speaking Moses (cf. Erdmann’s *Hist. of Phil.* I. p. 236). He was
a prolific writer, but only fragments of his works are extant. Numerous
extracts from the chief of them (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xix-p16.1"></span>περὶ τἀγαθοῦ</span>) have been preserved by
Eusebius in his *Præp. Evang.* (see Heinichen’s ed. Index I.).

<span id="fn_1907"></span>[266:1908](2010189.htm#fr_1907) <span
id="iii.xi.xix-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xix-p17"></span> Of Cronius, a celebrated Pythagorean
philosopher, apparently a contemporary of Numenius, and closely related
to him in his thinking, we know very little. A brief account of him is
given by Porphyry in his *Vita Plot. 20.*

<span id="fn_1908"></span>[266:1909](2010189.htm#fr_1908) <span
id="iii.xi.xix-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xix-p18"></span> The Apollophanes referred to here was
a Stoic philosopher of Antioch who lived in the third century <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.xi.xix-p18.1"></span>b.c.</span>, and was a
disciple of Ariston of Chios. None of his writings are extant.

<span id="fn_1909"></span>[266:1910](2010189.htm#fr_1909) <span
id="iii.xi.xix-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xix-p19"></span> Longinus was a celebrated philosopher
and rhetorician of Athens, who was born about 213 and died in 273 <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.xi.xix-p19.1"></span>a.d.</span> He traveled
widely in his youth, and was for a time a pupil of Ammonius Saccas at
Alexandria; but he remained a genuine Platonist, and seems not to have
been influenced by the eclecticism of the Neo-Platonists. He was a man
of marked ability, of the broadest culture, and a thorough master of
Greek style. Of his numerous writings we possess a large part of one
beautiful work entitled <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xix-p19.2"></span>περὶ ὕψους</span> (often published), and
fragments of some others (e.g. in *Eusebius’ Præp. Evang.* XV. 21).
Longinus was the teacher of Porphyry before the latter went to Rome to
study under Plotinus.

<span id="iii.xi.xix-p20"></span>Porphyry has made a mistake in classing
Longinus with those other philosophers whose works Origen studied. He
was a younger contemporary of Origen, and cannot even have studied with
Ammonius until after Origen had left Alexandria. It is possible, of
course, that Origen in later life read some of his works; but Porphyry
evidently means that the works of all the philosophers, Longinus among
them, had an influence upon Origen’s intellectual development. Heinichen
reads <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xix-p20.1"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xix-p20.2"></span>Αλβίνου</span> instead of <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi.xix-p20.3"></span>Λογγίνου</span> in his
text, on the assumption that Porphyry cannot possibly have written <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi.xix-p20.4"></span>Λογγίνου</span>; but
the latter word has the support of all the <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xi.xix-p20.5"></span>mss.</span> and versions, and there is no
warrant for making the change. We must simply conclude that Porphyry,
who, of course, is not pretending to give an exact list of all the
philosophical works which Origen had read, classes Longinus, the
celebrated philosopher, along with the rest, as one whose works such a
student of Greek philosophy as Origen must have read, without thinking
of the serious anachronism involved.

<span id="fn_1910"></span>[266:1911](2010189.htm#fr_1910) <span
id="iii.xi.xix-p20.6"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xix-p21"></span> Moderatus was a distinguished
Pythagorean philosopher of the first century after Christ, whose works
(no longer extant) were not without influence over some of the
Neo-Platonists.

<span id="fn_1911"></span>[266:1912](2010189.htm#fr_1911) <span
id="iii.xi.xix-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xix-p22"></span> Nicomachus was a Pythagorean of the
first (or second?) century after Christ, who gained great fame as a
mathematician and exerted considerable influence upon European studies
in the fifteenth century. Two of his works, one on arithmetic and the
other on music, are extant, and have been published.

<span id="fn_1912"></span>[266:1913](2010189.htm#fr_1912) <span
id="iii.xi.xix-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xix-p23"></span> Chæremon was a Stoic philosopher and
historian of Alexandria who lived during the first century after Christ.
He was for a time librarian at the Serapeum in Alexandria, and afterward
went to Rome to become a tutor of Nero. His chief writings were a
history of Egypt, a work on Hieroglyphics, and another on Comets
(mentioned by Origen in his *Contra Cels.* I. 59). He also wrote on
grammatical subjects. His works, with the exception of a fragment of the
first, are no longer extant. Cf. Eusebius’ *Præf. Evang.* V. 10, and
Suidas,*<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xix-p23.1"></span>s.v.</span>* <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xix-p23.2"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xix-p23.3"></span>Ω</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xix-p23.4"></span>ριγένης</span>.

<span id="fn_1913"></span>[266:1914](2010189.htm#fr_1913) <span
id="iii.xi.xix-p23.5"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xix-p24"></span> Cornutus a distinguished Stoic
philosopher, lived and taught in Rome during the reign of Nero, and
numbered among his pupils and friends the poet Persius. Most of his
numerous works have perished, but one on the Nature of the Gods is still
extant in a mutilated form (see Gall’s *Opuscula*). See Suidas (*s.v.*
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi.xix-p24.1"></span>Κορνοῦτος</span>)
and Dion Cassius, XLII. 29.

<span id="fn_1914"></span>[266:1915](2010189.htm#fr_1914) <span
id="iii.xi.xix-p24.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xix-p25"></span> Origen was not the first to interpret
the Scriptures allegorically. The method began among the Alexandrian
Jews some time before the Christian era, the effort being made to
reconcile the Mosaic revelation with Greek philosophy, and to find in
the former the teachings of the latter. This effort appears in many of
the apocryphal books, but the great exponent of the method was the
Alexandrian Philo. It was natural that the early Christians, especially
in Alexandria, should be influenced by this already existing method of
interpretation, which enabled them to make of the Old Testament a
Christian book, and to find in it all the teachings of the Gospel.
Undoubtedly the Old Testament owes partly to this principle of
interpretation its adoption by the Christian Church. Had it been looked
upon as the Jewish Scriptures only, containing Jewish national history,
and in large part Jewish national prophecy, it could never have retained
its hold upon the early Church, which was so bitterly hostile to all
that savored of Judaism. The early Gentile Christians were taught from
the beginning by Jewish Christians who could not do otherwise than look
upon their national Scriptures as divine, that those Scriptures
contained prophecies of Jesus Christ, and hence those Gentile Christians
accepted them as divine. But it must be remembered that they could of
course have no meaning to these Gentile Christians except as they did
prophesy of Christian things or contain Christian teaching. They could
not be content to find Christian prophecy in one part and only Jewish
history or Jewish prophecy in another part. It must *all* be Christian
if it was to have any meaning to them. In this emergency the allegorical
method of interpretation, already practiced upon the Old Testament by
the Alexandrian Jews, came to their assistance and was eagerly adopted.
The so-called epistle of Barnabus is an early and most significant
instance of its use. With Clement of Alexandria the matter first took
scientific shape. He taught that two senses are everywhere to be
assumed; that the verbal sense is only for babes in the faith, and that
the allegorical sense alone leads to true spiritual knowledge. With
Origen allegorical interpretation reached its height. He taught a
threefold sense of Scripture, corresponding to body, soul, and spirit.
Many voices were raised against his interpretation, but they were
directed against his particular explanations of the meaning of passages,
seldom against his method. In the early centuries Alexandria remained
the chief center of this kind of exegesis, while Antioch became in the
fifth century the seat of a school of exegetes who emphasized rather the
grammatical and historical interpretation of Scripture over against the
extremes of the Alexandrian teachers. And yet even they were not
entirely free from the vicious methods of the age, and, moreover, errors
of various kinds crept in to lessen their influence, and the allegorical
method finally prevailed almost universally; and it has not even yet
fully lost its hold. This method of Scripture interpretation has, as
Porphyry says, its analogy in the methods of the Greek philosophers
during the centuries immediately preceding the Christian era. It became
early the custom for philosophers, scandalized by the licentious stories
of their gods, to interpret the current myths allegorically and refer
them to the processes of nature. Homer and others of the ancient poets
were thus made by these later philosophers to teach philosophies of
nature of which they had never dreamed. With the Neo-Platonists this
method reached its highest perfection, and while the Christian teachers
were allegorizing the Old Testament Scriptures, these philosophers were
transforming the popular myths into records of the profoundest physical
and spiritual processes. Porphyry saw that the method of pagans and
Christians was the same in this respect, and he may be correct in
assigning some influence to these writings in the shaping of Origen’s
thinking, but the latter was an allegorist before he studied the
philosophers to whom Porphyry refers (cf. chap. 2, §9, above), and would
have been an allegorist had he never studied them. Allegory was in that
age in the atmosphere of the Church as well as of the philosophical
school.

<span id="fn_1915"></span>[266:1916](2010189.htm#fr_1915) <span
id="iii.xi.xix-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xix-p27"></span> On this great work of Porphyry, see
note 1.

<span id="fn_1916"></span>[266:1917](2010189.htm#fr_1916) <span
id="iii.xi.xix-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xix-p28"></span> See note 3.

<span id="fn_1917"></span>[267:1918](2010189.htm#fr_1917) <span
id="iii.xi.xix-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xix-p30"></span> This is certainly a mistake on
Eusebius’ part (see above, note 2), in which he is followed by Jerome
(*de vir. ill.* c. 55). Against the identification of the Christian
Ammonius, whose works are mentioned by Eusebius and Jerome, with
Ammonius Saccas, may be urged first the fact that the teaching of
Ammonius Saccas, as known to us from Porphyry’s *Vita Plotini* and from
other Neo-Platonic sources, is not such as could have emanated from a
Christian; and, in the second place, the fact that the Christian
Ammonius, according to Eusebius, was the author of more than one
important work, while Longinus (as quoted by Porphyry in the *Vita
Plot.* c. 20) says explicitly that Ammonius Saccas wrote nothing. It is
clear from Eusebius’ words that his sole reason for supposing that
Ammonius Saccas remained a Christian is the existence of the writings to
which he refers; and it is quite natural that he and others should
erroneously attribute the works of an unknown Christian of Alexandria,
named Ammonius, to the celebrated Alexandrian philosopher of the same
name, especially since it was known that the latter had been a Christian
in his youth, and that he had been Origen’s teacher in his mature years.
We know nothing about the life of the Christian Ammonius, unless he be
identified with the presbyter Ammonius of Alexandria, who is said by
Eusebius to have perished in the persecution of Diocletian. The
identification is possible; but even if it be accepted, we are helped
very little, for is only the death, not the life, of the presbyter
Ammonius with which Eusebius acquaints us. Ammonius’ writings, whoever
he may have been, were well known in the Church. Eusebius mentions here
his work *On the Harmony of Moses and Jesus* (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xix-p30.1"></span>περὶ τῆς Μωϋσέως καὶ ᾽Ιησοῦ
συμφωνίας</span>), and in an epistle addressed to Carpianus (see above,
p. 38 sq.) speaks of a *Diatessaron* or *Harmony of the Four Gospels*
(<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi.xix-p30.2"></span>τὸ διὰ τεσσ€ρων
εὐαγγέλιον</span>), composed by Ammonius. Jerome mentions both these
works (*de vir. ill.* 55), the latter under the title *Evangelici
Canones.* He refers to these *Canones* again in his preface to the *Four
Gospels* (Migne’s ed., Vol. X. 528); and so does Victor of Capua. The
former work is no longer extant, nor have we any trace of it. But there
is extant a Latin translation of a *Diatessaron* which was made by
Victor of Capua, and which was formerly, and is still, by many scholars
supposed to be a version of this work of Ammonius. By others it is
thought to be a translation of Tatian’s *Diatessaron.* For further
particulars, see above, Bk. IV. chap. 29, note 11.

<span id="fn_1918"></span>[267:1919](2010189.htm#fr_1918) <span
id="iii.xi.xix-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xix-p32"></span> The names of the persons to whom this
epistle was addressed we do not know, nor can we ascertain the exact
time when it was composed, though it must have been written before
Heraclas became bishop of Alexandria, and indeed, we may assume, while
Origen was in Alexandria, and still engaged in the study which he
defends in the epistle, i.e., if Eusebius is correct in the order of
events, before 216 <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xi.xix-p32.1"></span>a.d.</span> (see note 23).

<span id="fn_1919"></span>[267:1920](2010189.htm#fr_1919) <span
id="iii.xi.xix-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xix-p35"></span> On Pantænus, see Bk. V. chap. 10, note
1.

<span id="fn_1920"></span>[267:1921](2010189.htm#fr_1920) <span
id="iii.xi.xix-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xix-p36"></span> On Heraclas, see chap. 3, note 2.

<span id="fn_1921"></span>[267:1922](2010189.htm#fr_1921) <span
id="iii.xi.xix-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xix-p37"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xix-p37.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xix-p37.2"></span>κείνων τῶν λόγων</span>.

<span id="fn_1922"></span>[267:1923](2010189.htm#fr_1922) <span
id="iii.xi.xix-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xix-p39"></span> See above, Bk. IV. chap. 11, note 21.

<span id="fn_1923"></span>[267:1924](2010189.htm#fr_1923) <span
id="iii.xi.xix-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xix-p42"></span> The words used to designate the
official who sent for Origen (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xix-p42.1"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xix-p42.2"></span>τῆς ᾽Αραβίας ἡγουμενος</span>) lead us to
think him a Roman, and governor of the Roman province of Arabia, which
was formed by the Emperor Trajan in the year 106, and which comprised
only the northern part of the peninsula. We know no particulars of this
visit of Origen to that province, but that he was remembered and held in
honor by the people is proved by chaps. 33 and 37, which record that he
was summoned thither twice to assist in settling doctrinal difficulties.

<span id="fn_1924"></span>[267:1925](2010189.htm#fr_1924) <span
id="iii.xi.xix-p43.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xix-p44"></span> In the sixth year of his reign (216
<span class="c13"><span id="iii.xi.xix-p44.1"></span>a.d.</span>)
Caracalla visited Alexandria, and improved the occasion to take bloody
vengeance upon the inhabitants of the city, from whom had emanated a
number of satirical and cutting comments upon the murder of his brother
Geta. He instituted a horrible butchery, in which young and old, guilty
and innocent, perished, and in which scholars were objects of especial
fury. (See Herodian, IV. 8, 9, and Dion Cassius, LXXVII. 22–24, and cf.
Tillemont, *Hist. des Emp.* III. p. 115 sq.) This was undoubtedly the
occasion, referred to here, which caused Origen to flee from the city
and retire to Palestine.

<span id="fn_1925"></span>[267:1926](2010189.htm#fr_1925) <span
id="iii.xi.xix-p44.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xix-p45"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xix-p45.1"></span>οἱ τῇδε ἐπίσκοποι</span>. The <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi.xix-p45.2"></span>τῇδε</span> must refer
to Palestine, not to Cæsarea, for “bishops” are spoken of, not “bishop.”

<span id="fn_1926"></span>[267:1927](2010189.htm#fr_1926) <span
id="iii.xi.xix-p45.3"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xix-p46"></span> In the apostolic age, and the
generations immediately succeeding, it was the privilege of every
Christian to take part in the public meetings of the Church in the way
of teaching or prophesying, the only condition being the consciousness
of guidance by the Spirit (see [1 Cor.
xiii](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#000)<span
id="iii.xi.xix-p46.1"></span>.). We cannot call this teaching and
prophesying preaching in our sense of the term. The services seem rather
to have resembled our “open prayer-meetings.” Gradually, as the services
became more formal and stereotyped, a stated address by the “president”
(as Justin calls him) became a regular part of the service (see Justin’s
*Apol.* I. 67), and we may assume that the liberty of teaching or
prophesying in the public meetings did not now belong to all the members
as it had in the beginning. The sermon, in our sense of the word, seems
to have been a slow growth, but a direct development from this
exhortation of the president mentioned by Justin. The confinement of the
speaking (or preaching) to a single individual,—the leader,—which we see
in Justin, is what we find in subsequent generations quite generally
established. It becomes, in time, the prerogative of the bishop to
preach, and this prerogative he confers upon his presbyters also (not
universally, but in most cases), while deacons and laymen are almost
everywhere excluded from the right. We see from the present chapter,
however, that the custom was not the same in all parts of the Church in
the time of Origen. The principle had evidently before this become
firmly established in Alexandria that only bishops and presbyters should
preach. But in Palestine no such rule was recognized as binding. At the
same time, it is clear enough that it was exceptional even there for
laymen to preach (in the presence of their bishops), for Alexander in
his epistle, instead of saying that laymen preach everywhere and of
right, cites particular instances of their preaching, and says that
where they are qualified they are especially requested by the bishops to
use their gifts; so that the theory that the prerogative belonged of
right to the bishop existed there just as truly as in Alexandria. Origen
of course knew that he was acting contrary to the custom (if not the
canon) of his own church in thus preaching publicly, and yet undoubtedly
he took it for granted that he was perfectly right in doing what these
bishops requested him to do in their own dioceses. They were supreme in
their own churches, and he knew of nothing, apparently, which should
hinder him from doing what they approved of, while in those churches.
Demetrius, however, thought otherwise, and considered the public
preaching of an unordained man irregular, in any place and at any time.
Whether jealousy of Origen’s growing power had anything to do with his
action it is difficult to say with certainty. He seems to have treated
Origen in a perfectly friendly way after his return; and yet it is
possible that the difference of opinion on this point, and the reproof
given by Demetrius, may not have been wholly without influence upon
their subsequent relations, which became in the end so painful (see
chap. 8, note 4).

<span id="fn_1927"></span>[268:1928](2010189.htm#fr_1927) <span
id="iii.xi.xix-p47.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xix-p48"></span> On Alexander, see chap. 8, note 6.

<span id="fn_1928"></span>[268:1929](2010189.htm#fr_1928) <span
id="iii.xi.xix-p48.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xix-p49"></span> Theoctistus, bishop of Cæsarea, seems
to have been one of the most influential bishops of the East in his day,
and played a prominent part in the controversy which arose in regard to
Novatus, as we learn from chap. 46 of this book and from chap. 5 of the
next. He was also a firm friend of Origen’s for many years (see chap.
27), probably until the latter’s death. We do not know the dates of his
accession and of his death, but we find him already bishop in the year
216, and still bishop at the time of the episcopate of Stephen of Rome
(254–257; see Bk. VII. chap. 5), but already succeeded by Domnus, when
Xystus was bishop of Rome (257–258; see Bk. VII. chap. 14). We must,
therefore, put his death between 255 and 258.

<span id="fn_1929"></span>[268:1930](2010189.htm#fr_1929) <span
id="iii.xi.xix-p49.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xix-p50"></span> Eusebius is apparently mistaken in
stating that this epistle was addressed to Demetrius, for the latter is
spoken of throughout the epistle in the third person. It seems probable
that Eusebius has made a slip and said “to Demetrius” when he meant to
say “concerning Demetrius.”

<span id="fn_1930"></span>[268:1931](2010189.htm#fr_1930) <span
id="iii.xi.xix-p52.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xix-p53"></span> Of the persons mentioned here by the
Palestinian bishops in support of their conduct, Neon, bishop of Laranda
in Lycaonia, Celsus, bishop of Iconium, and Atticus, bishop of Synada in
Phrygia, together with the laymen Euelpis, Paulinus, and Theodore, we
know only the names.

<span id="fn_1931"></span>[268:1932](2010189.htm#fr_1931) <span
id="iii.xi.xix-p54.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xix-p55"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xix-p55.1"></span>οὐ πρὸς μόνων τῶν συνήθων, ἀλλὰ καὶ τῶν ἐπὶ
ξένης ἐπισκόπων. συνήθων</span> seems here to have the sense of
“countrymen” or (bishops) “of his own country” over against the <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi.xix-p55.2"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi.xix-p55.3"></span>πὶ ξένης</span>, rather
than the meaning “friends” or “acquaintances,” which is more common.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XX](2010190)
