[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010293)  [Next](2010295.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xv.ix"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.ix-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xv.ix-p1.1"></span>Chapter IX.—</span>*The Victory of the
God-Beloved Emperors.* <span id="fr_2747"></span>[2748](#fn_2747.md)

<span id="iii.xv.ix-p3"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xv.ix-p3.1"></span>Thus</span> when Constantine, whom we have
already mentioned <span id="fr_2748"></span>[2749](#fn_2748.md) as an
emperor, born of an emperor, a pious son of a most pious and prudent
father, and Licinius, second to him, <span
id="fr_2749"></span>[2750](#fn_2749.md) —two God-beloved emperors, honored
alike for their intelligence and their piety,—being stirred up against
the two most impious tyrants by God, the absolute Ruler and Saviour of
all, engaged in formal war against them, with God as their ally,
Maxentius <span id="fr_2750"></span>[2751](#fn_2750.md) was defeated at
Rome by Constantine in a remarkable manner, and the tyrant of the
East <span id="fr_2751"></span>[2752](#fn_2751.md) did not long survive
him, but met a most shameful death at the hand of Licinius, who had not
yet become insane. <span id="fr_2752"></span>[2753](#fn_2752.md)

<span id="iii.xv.ix-p9"></span>2. Constantine, who was the superior both
in dignity and imperial rank, <span id="fr_2753"></span>[2754](#fn_2753.md)
first took compassion upon those who were oppressed at Rome, and having
invoked in prayer the God of heaven, and his Word, and Jesus Christ
himself, the Saviour of all, as his aid, advanced with his whole
army, <span id="fr_2754"></span>[2755](#fn_2754.md) proposing to restore to
the Romans their ancestral liberty.

<span id="iii.xv.ix-p12"></span>3. But Maxentius, putting confidence
rather in the arts of sorcery than in the devotion of his subjects, did
not dare to go forth beyond the gates of the city, but fortified every
place and district and town which was enslaved by him, in the
neighborhood of Rome and in all Italy, with an immense multitude of
troops and with innumerable bands of soldiers. But the emperor, relying
upon the assistance of God, attacked the first, second, and third army
of the tyrant, and conquered them all; and having advanced through the
greater part of Italy, was already very near Rome.

<span id="iii.xv.ix-p13"></span>4. Then, that he might not be compelled
to wage war with the Romans for the sake of the tyrant, God himself drew
the latter, as if bound in chains, some distance without the gates, and
confirmed those threats against the impious which had been anciently
inscribed in sacred books,—disbelieved, indeed, by most as a myth, but
believed by the faithful,—confirmed them, in a word, by the deed itself
to all, both believers and unbelievers, that saw the wonder with their
eyes.

<span id="iii.xv.ix-p14"></span>5. Thus, as in the time of Moses himself
and of the ancient God-beloved race of Hebrews, “he cast Pharaoh’s
chariots and host into the sea, and overwhelmed his chosen charioteers
in the Red Sea, and covered them with the flood,” <span
id="fr_2755"></span>[2756](#fn_2755.md) in the same way Maxentius also with
his soldiers and body-guards “went down into the depths like a
stone,” <span id="fr_2756"></span>[2757](#fn_2756.md) when he fled before
the power of God which was with Constantine, and passed through the
river which lay in his way, over which he had formed a <span
id="page_364">p. 364</span> <span id="iii.xv.ix-Page_364"></span>bridge
with boats, and thus prepared the means of his own destruction.

<span id="iii.xv.ix-p18"></span>6. In regard to him one might say, “he
digged a pit and opened it and fell into the hole which he had made; his
labor shall turn upon his own head, and his unrighteousness shall fall
upon his own crown.” <span id="fr_2757"></span>[2758](#fn_2757.md)

<span id="iii.xv.ix-p20"></span>7. Thus, then, the bridge over the river
being broken, the passageway settled down, and immediately the boats
with the men disappeared in the depths, and that most impious one
himself first of all, then the shield-bearers who were with him, as the
divine oracles foretold, “sank like lead in the mighty waters”; <span
id="fr_2758"></span>[2759](#fn_2758.md) so that those who obtained the
victory from God, if not in words, at least in deeds, like Moses, the
great servant of God, and those who were with him, fittingly sang as
they had sung against the impious tyrant of old, saying, “Let us sing
unto the Lord, for he hath gloriously glorified himself; horse and rider
hath he thrown into the sea; a helper and a protector hath he become for
my salvation;” <span id="fr_2759"></span>[2760](#fn_2759.md) and “Who is
like unto thee, O Lord; among the gods, who is like unto thee glorious
in holiness, <span id="fr_2760"></span>[2761](#fn_2760.md) marvelous in
glory, doing wonders.” <span id="fr_2761"></span>[2762](#fn_2761.md)

<span id="iii.xv.ix-p25"></span>8. These and the like praises
Constantine, by his very deeds, sang to God, the universal Ruler, and
Author of his victory, as he entered Rome in triumph.

<span id="iii.xv.ix-p26"></span>9. Immediately all the members of the
senate and the other most celebrated men, with the whole Roman people,
together with children and women, received him as their deliverer, their
saviour, and their benefactor, with shining eyes and with their whole
souls, with shouts of gladness and unbounded joy.

<span id="iii.xv.ix-p27"></span>10. But he, as one possessed of inborn
piety toward God, did not exult in the shouts, nor was he elated by the
praises; but perceiving that his aid was from God, he immediately
commanded that a trophy of the Saviour’s passion be put in the hand of
his own statue.

<span id="iii.xv.ix-p28"></span>11. And when he had placed it, with the
saving sign of the cross in its right hand, in the most public place in
Rome, he commanded that the following inscription should be engraved
upon it in the Roman tongue: “By this salutary sign, the true proof of
bravery, I have saved and freed your city from the yoke of the tyrant
and moreover, having set at liberty both the senate and the people of
Rome, I have restored them to their ancient distinction and
splendor.” <span id="fr_2762"></span>[2763](#fn_2762.md)

<span id="iii.xv.ix-p30"></span>12. And after this both Constantine
himself and with him the Emperor Licinius, who had not yet been seized
by that madness into which he later fell, <span
id="fr_2763"></span>[2764](#fn_2763.md) praising God as the author of all
their blessings, with one will and mind drew up a full and most complete
decree in behalf of the Christians, <span
id="fr_2764"></span>[2765](#fn_2764.md) and sent an account of the
wonderful things done for them by God, and of the victory over the
tyrant, together with a copy of the decree itself, to Maximinus, who
still ruled over the nations of the East and pretended friendship toward
them.

<span id="iii.xv.ix-p33"></span>13. But he, like a tyrant, was greatly
pained by what he learned; but not wishing to seem to yield to others,
nor, on the other hand, to suppress that which was commanded, for fear
of those who enjoined it, as if on his own authority, he addressed,
under compulsion, to the governors under him this first communication in
behalf of the Christians, <span id="fr_2765"></span>[2766](#fn_2765.md)
falsely inventing things against himself which had never been done by
him.

<span id="iii.xv.ix-p35"></span>Copy of a translation of the epistle of
the tyrant Maximinus.

<span id="iii.xv.ix-p36"></span>14. “Jovius Maximinus Augustus to
Sabinus. <span id="fr_2766"></span>[2767](#fn_2766.md) I am confident that
it is manifest both to thy firmness and to all men that our masters
Diocletian and Maximianus, our fathers, when they saw almost all men
abandoning the worship of the gods and attaching themselves to the party
of the Christians, rightly decreed that all who gave up the worship of
those same immortal gods should be recalled by open chastisement and
punishment to the worship of the gods.

<span id="iii.xv.ix-p38"></span>15. But when I first came to the <span
id="page_365">p. 365</span> <span id="iii.xv.ix-Page_365"></span>East
under favorable auspices and learned that in some places a great many
men who were able to render public service had been banished by the
judges for the above-mentioned cause, I gave command to each of the
judges that henceforth none of them should treat the provincials with
severity, but that they should rather recall them to the worship of the
gods by flattery and exhortations. <span
id="fr_2767"></span>[2768](#fn_2767.md)

<span id="iii.xv.ix-p40"></span>16. Then when, in accordance with my
command, these orders were obeyed by the judges, it came to pass that
none of those who lived in the districts of the East were banished or
insulted, but that they were rather brought back to the worship of the
gods by the fact that no severity was employed toward them.

<span id="iii.xv.ix-p41"></span>17. But afterwards, when I went up last
year <span id="fr_2768"></span>[2769](#fn_2768.md) under good auspices to
Nicomedia and sojourned there, citizens of the same city came to me with
the images of the gods, earnestly entreating that such a people should
by no means be permitted to dwell in their country. <span
id="fr_2769"></span>[2770](#fn_2769.md)

<span id="iii.xv.ix-p44"></span>18. But when I learned that many men of
the same religion dwelt in those regions, I replied that I gladly
thanked them for their request, but that I perceived that it was not
proffered by all, and that if, therefore, there were any that persevered
in the same superstition, each one had the privilege of doing as he
pleased, even if he wished to recognize the worship of the gods. <span
id="fr_2770"></span>[2771](#fn_2770.md)

<span id="iii.xv.ix-p46"></span>19. Nevertheless, I considered it
necessary to give a friendly answer to the inhabitants of Nicomedia and
to the other cities which had so earnestly presented to me the same
petition, namely, that no Christians should dwell in their cities,—both
because this same course had been pursued by all the ancient emperors,
and also because it was pleasing to the gods, through whom all men and
the government of the state itself endure,—and to confirm the request
which they presented in behalf of the worship of their deity.

<span id="iii.xv.ix-p47"></span>20. Therefore, although before this
time, special letters have been sent to thy devotedness, and commands
have likewise been given that no harsh measures should be taken against
those provincials who desire to follow such a course, but that they
should be treated mildly and moderately,—nevertheless, in order that
they may not suffer insults or extortions <span
id="fr_2771"></span>[2772](#fn_2771.md) from the beneficiaries, <span
id="fr_2772"></span>[2773](#fn_2772.md) or from any others, I have thought
meet to remind thy firmness in this epistle <span
id="fr_2773"></span>[2774](#fn_2773.md) also that thou shouldst lead our
provincials rather by flatteries and exhortations to recognize the care
of the gods.

<span id="iii.xv.ix-p51"></span>21. Hence, if any one of his own choice
should decide to adopt the worship of the gods, it is fitting that he
should be welcomed, but if any should wish to follow their own religion,
do thou leave it in their power.

<span id="iii.xv.ix-p52"></span>22. Wherefore it behooves thy
devotedness to observe that which is committed to thee, and to see that
power is given to no one to oppress our provincials with insults and
extortions, <span id="fr_2774"></span>[2775](#fn_2774.md) since, as already
written, it is fitting to recall our provincials to the worship of the
gods rather by exhortations and flatteries. But, in order that this
command of ours may come to the knowledge of all our provincials, it is
incumbent upon thee to proclaim that which has been enjoined, in an
edict issued by thyself.”

<span id="iii.xv.ix-p54"></span>23. Since he was forced to do this by
necessity and did not give the command by his own will, he was not
regarded by any one as sincere or trustworthy, because he had already
shown his unstable and deceitful disposition after his former similar
concession.

<span id="iii.xv.ix-p55"></span>24. None of our people, therefore,
ventured to hold meetings or even to appear in public, because his
communication did not cover this, but only commanded to guard against
doing us any injury, and did not give orders that we should hold
meetings or build churches or perform any of our customary acts.

<span id="iii.xv.ix-p56"></span>25. And yet Constantine and Licinius,
the advocates of peace and piety, had written him to permit this, and
had granted it to all their subjects by edicts and ordinances. <span
id="fr_2775"></span>[2776](#fn_2775.md) But this most impious man did not
choose to yield in this matter until, being driven by the divine
judgment, he was at last compelled to do it against his will.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2747"></span>[363:2748](2010294.htm#fr_2747.md) <span
id="iii.xv.ix-p1.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.ix-p2"></span> All the <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xv.ix-p2.1"></span>mss.</span>, followed by Valesius and Crusè,
give this as the title of the next chapter, and give as the title of
this chapter the one which I have placed at the head of chapter 10. It
is plain enough from the contents of the two chapters that the titles
have in some way become transposed in the <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xv.ix-p2.2"></span>mss.</span>, and so they are restored to
their proper position by the majority of the editors, whom I have
followed.

<span id="fn_2748"></span>[363:2749](2010294.htm#fr_2748.md) <span
id="iii.xv.ix-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.ix-p4"></span> See above, Bk. VIII. chap. 13.

<span id="fn_2749"></span>[363:2750](2010294.htm#fr_2749.md) <span
id="iii.xv.ix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.ix-p5"></span> On Licinius, see *ibid.* note 21.
Constantine and Licinius were both Augusti, and thus nominally of equal
rank. Nevertheless, both in the edict of Galerius, quoted in Bk. VIII.
chap. 17, and in the edict of Milan, given in full in the *De Mort.
pers.* chap. 48, Constantine’s name precedes that of Licinius, showing
that he was regarded as in some sense the latter’s senior, and thus
confirming Eusebius’ statement, the truth of which Closs unnecessarily
denies. It seems a little peculiar that Constantine should thus be
recognized as Licinius’ senior, especially in the edict of Galerius; for
although it is true that he had been a Cæsar some time before Licinius
had been admitted to the imperial college, yet, on the other hand,
Licinius was made Augustus by Galerius before Constantine was, and
enjoyed his confidence and favor much more fully than the latter.

<span id="fn_2750"></span>[363:2751](2010294.htm#fr_2750.md) <span
id="iii.xv.ix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.ix-p6"></span> On Maxentius, see above, Bk. VIII. chap.
14, note 1.

<span id="fn_2751"></span>[363:2752](2010294.htm#fr_2751.md) <span
id="iii.xv.ix-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.ix-p7"></span> i.e. Maximinus. For an account of his
defeat by Licinius and his death, see below, chap. 10.

<span id="fn_2752"></span>[363:2753](2010294.htm#fr_2752.md) <span
id="iii.xv.ix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.ix-p8"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xv.ix-p8.1"></span>οὔπω μανέντος τότε</span>. This refers to
Licinius’ hostility to the Christians, which made its appearance some
years later, and resulted in a persecution (see below, Bk. X. chap. 8).
The clause, if a part of the original, obliges us to suppose that the
ninth book was composed after Licinius had begun to persecute, but there
are strong reasons for thinking that the first nine books were completed
before 314 (see above, p. 45); indeed, we cannot explain Eusebius’
eulogistic words in speaking of Licinius here and elsewhere in this book
on any other ground. It seems necessary, therefore, to regard this
clause and the similar clause in §12, below, as later insertions, made
possibly at the time of the addition of the tenth book (see p. 45).

<span id="fn_2753"></span>[363:2754](2010294.htm#fr_2753.md) <span
id="iii.xv.ix-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.ix-p10"></span> See above, note 2.

<span id="fn_2754"></span>[363:2755](2010294.htm#fr_2754.md) <span
id="iii.xv.ix-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.ix-p11"></span> Constantine’s battle with Maxentius,
described in this chapter, took place on the sixth anniversary of the
latter’s accession, Oct. 27, 312 (see Lactantius, *De Mort. pers.* 44
and 46). For particulars respecting Constantine himself and his campaign
against Maxentius, see Dr. Richardson’s prolegomena to his translation
of the *Life of Constantine,* p. 416. sq. of this volume.

<span id="fn_2755"></span>[363:2756](2010294.htm#fr_2755.md) <span
id="iii.xv.ix-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.ix-p15"></span> [Exod.
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#004.md),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#005.md)<span id="iii.xv.ix-p15.1"></span>.
The phrase translated “charioteers” is <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xv.ix-p15.2"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xv.ix-p15.3"></span>ναβ€τας τριστ€τας</span>, which is employed
in the LXX to translate the Hebrew <span class="Hebrew"><span
id="iii.xv.ix-p15.4"></span>שָׁלִישָׁיו</span>. The word <span
class="Hebrew"><span id="iii.xv.ix-p15.5"></span>שָׁלִישׁ</span>,

<span id="iii.xv.ix-p16"></span>which means literally a “third,” and
hence a “third man” (Greek <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xv.ix-p16.1"></span>τριστ€της</span>, is used, according to
Gesenius, to denote a chariot warrior, who was so called because “three
always stood upon one chariot, one of whom fought, while the second
protected him with the shield, and the third drove.”

<span id="fn_2756"></span>[363:2757](2010294.htm#fr_2756.md) <span
id="iii.xv.ix-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.ix-p17"></span> [Ex. xv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#005.md)<span id="iii.xv.ix-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2757"></span>[364:2758](2010294.htm#fr_2757.md) <span
id="iii.xv.ix-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.ix-p19"></span> <span id="iii.xv.ix-p19.1"></span>[Ps.
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#015.md),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#016.md)<span id="iii.xv.ix-p19.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_2758"></span>[364:2759](2010294.htm#fr_2758.md) <span
id="iii.xv.ix-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.ix-p21"></span> [Ex. xv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#010.md)<span id="iii.xv.ix-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2759"></span>[364:2760](2010294.htm#fr_2759.md) <span
id="iii.xv.ix-p21.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.ix-p22"></span> [Exod.
15.1](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#001.md)<span
id="iii.xv.ix-p22.1"></span>. Eusebius, in this and the next passage,
follows the LXX, which differs considerably from the Hebrew.

<span id="fn_2760"></span>[364:2761](2010294.htm#fr_2760.md) <span
id="iii.xv.ix-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.ix-p23"></span> The LXX, followed by Eusebius, reads
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.xv.ix-p23.1"></span>δεδοξασμένος ἐν
ἁγίοις</span> to translate the Hebrew <span class="Hebrew"><span
id="iii.xv.ix-p23.2"></span>נֶאְדָּר בַּקֹּדֶשׁ</span>. It seems
probable both from the Hebrew original and from the use of the plural
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.xv.ix-p23.3"></span>δόξαις</span> in
the next clause, that the LXX translator used the plural <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xv.ix-p23.4"></span>ἁ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xv.ix-p23.5"></span>γίοις</span>, not to
denote “saints,” as Closs renders (“durch die Heiligen”), which would in
strictness require the article, but “holiness.” I have therefore
ventured to render the word thus in the text, although quite conscious
that the translation does not accurately reproduce the Greek phrase as
it stands.

<span id="fn_2761"></span>[364:2762](2010294.htm#fr_2761.md) <span
id="iii.xv.ix-p23.6"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.ix-p24"></span> [Ex. xv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#011.md)<span id="iii.xv.ix-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2762"></span>[364:2763](2010294.htm#fr_2762.md) <span
id="iii.xv.ix-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.ix-p29"></span> Upon Constantine’s conversion, see Dr.
Richardson’s prolegomena, p. 431, below. On the famous tale of the
flaming cross with its inscription <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xv.ix-p29.1"></span>τούτῳ νίκα</span>, related in the *Life of
Constantine,* I. 28, see his note on that passage, p. 490, below.

<span id="fn_2763"></span>[364:2764](2010294.htm#fr_2763.md) <span
id="iii.xv.ix-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.ix-p31"></span> Σεε αβόε, νοτε 5.

<span id="fn_2764"></span>[364:2765](2010294.htm#fr_2764.md) <span
id="iii.xv.ix-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.ix-p32"></span> This is the famous edict of Milan,
which was issued late in the year 312, and which is given in the Latin
original in Lactantius’ *De Mort. pers.* 48, and in a Greek translation
in Eusebius’ *History,* Bk. X. chap. 5, below. For a discussion of its
date and significance, see the notes upon that chapter.

<span id="fn_2765"></span>[364:2766](2010294.htm#fr_2765.md) <span
id="iii.xv.ix-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.ix-p34"></span> This epistle or rescript (Eusebius
calls it here a <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xv.ix-p34.1"></span>γρ€μμα</span>, just below an <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xv.ix-p34.2"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xv.ix-p34.3"></span>πιστολή</span>) of
Maximin’s was written before the end of the year 312, as can be seen
from the fact that in §17, below, his visit to Nicomedia is spoken of as
having taken place in the previous year. But that visit, as we learn
from the *De Mort. pers.* chap. 36, occurred in 311 (cf. chap. 2, note
1, above). It must therefore have been issued immediately upon the
receipt of the edict of Constantine and Licinius. As Mason remarks, his
reasons for writing this epistle can hardly have been fear of
Constantine and Licinius, as Eusebius states, for he was bent upon war
against them, and attacked Licinius at the earliest possible moment. He
cannot have cared, therefore, to take any special pains to conciliate
them. He was probably moved by a desire to conciliate, just at this
crisis, the numerous and influential body of his subjects whom he had
persecuted, in order that he might not have to contend with disaffection
and disloyalty within his own dominions during his impending conflict
with Licinius. The document itself is a most peculiar one, full of false
statements and contradictions. Mason well says: “In this curious letter
Maximin contradicts himself often enough to make his Christian subjects
dizzy. First he justifies bloody persecution, then plumes himself upon
having stopped it, next apologizes for having set it again on foot, then
denies that it was going on, and lastly orders it to cease. We cannot
wonder at what Eusebius relates, that the people whose wrongs the letter
applauded and forbade, neither built church nor held meeting in public
on the strength of it; they did not know where to have it.”

<span id="fn_2766"></span>[364:2767](2010294.htm#fr_2766.md) <span
id="iii.xv.ix-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.ix-p37"></span> On Sabinus, see above, chap. 1, note 3.

<span id="fn_2767"></span>[365:2768](2010294.htm#fr_2767.md) <span
id="iii.xv.ix-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.ix-p39"></span> Νοτηινγ χουλδ βε φαρτηερ φρομ τηε τρυτη
τηαν τηισ ανδ τηε φολλοωινγ στατεμεντ.

<span id="fn_2768"></span>[365:2769](2010294.htm#fr_2768.md) <span
id="iii.xv.ix-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.ix-p42"></span> That is, after the death of Galerius in
the year 311. “Maximinus, on receiving this news (i.e. of the death of
Galerius), hasted with relays of horses from the East that he might
seize the provinces, and, while Licinius delayed, might arrogate to
himself the Chalcedonian straits. On his entry into Bithynia, with the
view of acquiring immediate popularity, he abolished the tax to the
great joy of all. Dissension arose between the two emperors, and almost
war. They stood on the opposite shores with their armies. But peace and
friendship were established under certain conditions; a treaty was
concluded on the narrow sea, and they joined hands” (Lactantius, *De
mort. pers.* 36). See above, chap. 2, note 1.

<span id="fn_2769"></span>[365:2770](2010294.htm#fr_2769.md) <span
id="iii.xv.ix-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.ix-p43"></span> On these embassies, see *ibid*. note 3.

<span id="fn_2770"></span>[365:2771](2010294.htm#fr_2770.md) <span
id="iii.xv.ix-p44.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.ix-p45"></span> There is no sign of such consideration
in Maximin’s rescript, quoted in chap. 7, above. The sentences which
follow are quite contradictory. Certainly no one could gain from them
any idea as to what the emperor had done in the matter.

<span id="fn_2771"></span>[365:2772](2010294.htm#fr_2771.md) <span
id="iii.xv.ix-p47.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.ix-p48"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xv.ix-p48.1"></span>σεισμούς</span>, literally, “shakings,” or
“shocks.” The word is doubtless used to translate the Latin *concussio,*
which in legal language meant the extortion of money by threats or other
similar means. The words *concussio, concussor, concutit,* are used very
frequently by Tertullian in this sense; e.g. in his *De fuga in
persecutione,* chap. 12, *ad Scap.* chaps. 4 and 5, *Apol.* chap. 7. See
especially Oehler’s note on the word in his edition of Tertullian’s
works, I. p. 484.

<span id="fn_2772"></span>[365:2773](2010294.htm#fr_2772.md) <span
id="iii.xv.ix-p48.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.ix-p49"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xv.ix-p49.1"></span>βενεφικιαλίων</span>, a simple reproduction
of the Latin *beneficiarii.* These *beneficiarii* were “free or
privileged soldiers, who through the favor of their commander were
exempt from menial offices” (Andrews’ Lexicon). We are nowhere told, so
far as I am aware, that these *beneficiarii* were especially active in
thus practicing extortions upon the Christians; but we can gather from
Tertullian’s words in the various passages referred to that the
Christians had to suffer particularly from the soldiers in this respect,
and doubtless from the *beneficiarii* most of all; for they possessed
more leisure than the common soldiers, and at the same time greater
opportunity, because of their more intimate relations with the
authorities, of bringing the Christians into difficulty by entering
accusations against them.

<span id="fn_2773"></span>[365:2774](2010294.htm#fr_2773.md) <span
id="iii.xv.ix-p49.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.ix-p50"></span> τοῖς γρ€μμασι. On the use of the plural
in speaking of a single epistle, see above, Bk. IV. chap. 8, note 12.

<span id="fn_2774"></span>[365:2775](2010294.htm#fr_2774.md) <span
id="iii.xv.ix-p52.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.ix-p53"></span> Σεε νοτε 24.

<span id="fn_2775"></span>[365:2776](2010294.htm#fr_2775.md) <span
id="iii.xv.ix-p56.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.ix-p57"></span> See above, note 17, and below, Bk. X.
chap. 5.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X](2010295.md)
