[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010273)  [Next](2010275) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xiv.iv"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.iv-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xiv.iv-p1.1"></span>Chapter III.</span>

<span id="iii.xiv.iv-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xiv.iv-p2.1"></span>In</span> the course of the second year, the
persecution against us increased greatly. And at that time Urbanus <span
id="fr_2632"></span>[2633](#fn_2632) being governor of the province,
imperial edicts were first issued to him, commanding by a general decree
that all the people should sacrifice at once in the different cities,
and offer libations to the idols. <span
id="fr_2633"></span>[2634](#fn_2633)

<span id="iii.xiv.iv-p6"></span>In Gaza, a city of Palestine, Timotheus
endured countless tortures, and afterwards was subjected to a slow and
moderate fire. Having given, by his patience in all his sufferings, most
genuine evidence of sincerest piety toward the Deity, he bore away the
crown of the victorious athletes of religion. At the same time
Agapius <span id="fr_2634"></span>[2635](#fn_2634) and our contemporary,
Thecla, <span id="fr_2635"></span>[2636](#fn_2635) having exhibited most
noble constancy, were condemned as food for the wild beasts.

<span id="iii.xiv.iv-p9"></span>2. But who that beheld these things
would not have admired, or if they heard of them by report, would not
have been astonished? For when the heathen everywhere were holding a
festival and the customary shows, it was noised abroad that besides the
other entertainments, the public combat of those who had lately been
condemned to wild beasts would also <span id="page_345">p. 345</span>
<span id="iii.xiv.iv-Page_345"></span>take place.

<span id="iii.xiv.iv-p10"></span>3. As this report increased and spread
in all directions, six young men, namely, Timolaus, a native of Pontus,
Dionysius from Tripolis in Phœnicia, Romulus, a sub-deacon of the parish
of Diospolis, <span id="fr_2636"></span>[2637](#fn_2636) Pæsis and
Alexander, both Egyptians, and another Alexander from Gaza, having first
bound their own hands, went in haste to Urbanus, who was about to open
the exhibition, evidencing great zeal for martyrdom. They confessed that
they were Christians, and by their ambition for all terrible things,
showed that those who glory in the religion of the God of the universe
do not cower before the attacks of wild beasts.

<span id="iii.xiv.iv-p12"></span>4. Immediately, after creating no
ordinary astonishment in the governor and those who were with him, they
were cast into prison. After a few days two others were added to them.
One of them, named Agapius, <span id="fr_2637"></span>[2638](#fn_2637)
had in former confessions endured dreadful torments of various kinds.
The other, who had supplied them with the necessaries of life, was
called Dionysius. All of these eight were beheaded on one day at
Cæsarea, on the twenty-fourth day of the month Dystrus, <span
id="fr_2638"></span>[2639](#fn_2638) which is the ninth before the
Kalends of April.

<span id="iii.xiv.iv-p15"></span>5. Meanwhile, a change in the emperors
occurred, and the first of them all in dignity, and the second retired
into private life, <span id="fr_2639"></span>[2640](#fn_2639) and public
affairs began to be troubled.

<span id="iii.xiv.iv-p17"></span>6. Shortly after the Roman government
became divided against itself, and a cruel war arose among them. <span
id="fr_2640"></span>[2641](#fn_2640) And this division, with the
troubles which grew out of it, was not settled until peace toward us had
been established throughout the entire Roman Empire.

<span id="iii.xiv.iv-p19"></span>7. For when this peace arose for all,
as the daylight after the darkest and most gloomy night, the public
affairs of the Roman government were re-established, and became happy
and peaceful, and the ancestral good-will toward each other was revived.
But we will relate these things more fully at the proper time. Now let
us return to the regular course of events.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2632"></span>[344:2633](2010274.htm#fr_2632) <span
id="iii.xiv.iv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.iv-p3"></span> Of Urbanus governor of Palestine, we
know only what is told us in the present work (he is mentioned in this
passage and in chaps. 4, 7, and 8, below) and in the Syriac version.
From the latter we learn that he succeeded Flavianus in the second year
of the persecution (304), and that he was deposed by Maximinus in the
fifth year (see also chap. 8, §7, below), and miserably executed.

<span id="fn_2633"></span>[344:2634](2010274.htm#fr_2633) <span
id="iii.xiv.iv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.iv-p4"></span> This is the famous fourth edict of
Diocletian, which was issued in the year 304. It marks a stupendous
change of method; in fact, Christianity as such is made, for the first
time since the toleration edict of Gallienus, a *religio illicita,*
whose profession is punishable by death. The general persecution, in the
full sense, begins with the publication of this edict. Hitherto
persecution had been directed only against supposed political offenders
and church officers. The edict is a complete stultification of
Diocletian’s principles as revealed in the first three edicts, and shows
a lamentable lack of the wisdom which had dictated those measures. Mason
has performed an immense service in proving (to my opinion conclusively)
that this brutal edict, senseless in its very severity, was not issued
by Diocletian, but by Maximian, while Diocletian was quite incapacitated
by illness for the performance of any public duties. Mason’s arguments
cannot be reproduced here; they are given at length on p. 212 sq. of his
work. He remarks at the close of the discussion: “Diocletian, though he
might have wished Christianity safely abolished, feared the growing
power of the Church, and dared not persecute (till he was forced), lest
he should rouse her from her passivity. But this Fourth Edict was
nothing more nor less than a loud alarum to muster the army of the
Church: as the centurions called over their lists, it taught her the
statistics of her numbers, down to the last child: it proved to her that
her troops could endure all the hardships of the campaign: it ranged her
generals in the exact order of merit. Diocletian, by an exquisite
refinement of thought, while he did not neglect the salutary fear which
strong penalties might inspire in the Christians, knew well enough that
though he might torture every believer in the world into sacrificing,
yet Christianity was not killed: he knew that men were Christians again
afterwards as well as before: could he have seen deeper yet, he would
have known that the utter humiliation of a fall before men and angels
converted many a hard and worldly prelate into a broken-hearted saint:
and so he rested his hopes, not merely on the punishment of individuals,
but on his three great measures for crushing the corporate life,—the
destruction of the churches, the Scriptures, and the clergy. But this
Fourth Edict evidently returns with crass dullness and brutal
complacency to the thought that if half the church were racked till they
poured the libations, and the other half burned or butchered, Paganism
would reign alone forever more, and that the means were as eminently
desirable as the end. Lastly, Diocletian had anxiously avoided all that
could rouse fanatic zeal. The first result of the Fourth Edict was to
rouse it.”

<span id="iii.xiv.iv-p5"></span>According to the *Passio S. Sabini,*
which Mason accepts as in the main reliable, and which forms the
strongest support for his theory, the edict was published in April, 304.
Diocletian, meanwhile, as we know from Lactantius (*de Mort. pers.* 17)
did not recover sufficiently to take any part in the government until
early in the year 305, so that Maximian and Galerius had matters all
their own way during the entire year, and could persecute as severely as
they chose. As a result, the Christians, both east and west, suffered
greatly during this period.

<span id="fn_2634"></span>[344:2635](2010274.htm#fr_2634) <span
id="iii.xiv.iv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.iv-p7"></span> Agapius, as we learn from chap. 6,
below, survived his contest with the wild beasts at this time, and was
thrown into prison, where he remained until the fourth year of the
persecution, when he was again brought into the arena in the presence of
the tyrant Maximinus, and was finally thrown into the sea.

<span id="fn_2635"></span>[344:2636](2010274.htm#fr_2635) <span
id="iii.xiv.iv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.iv-p8"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xiv.iv-p8.1"></span>ἡ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xiv.iv-p8.2"></span>καθ᾽ ἡμᾶς Θέκλα</span>. Thecla seems to be
thus designated to distinguish her from her more famous namesake, whom
tradition connected with Paul and who has played so large a part in
romantic legend (see the *Acts of Paul and Thecla* in the *Ante-Nicene
Fathers,* VIII. 487 sq., and the *Dict. of Christ. Biog., s.v.*). She is
referred to again in chap. 6, below, but we are not told whether she
actually suffered or not.

<span id="fn_2636"></span>[345:2637](2010274.htm#fr_2636) <span
id="iii.xiv.iv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.iv-p11"></span> A city of Palestine, lying northwest
of Jerusalem, and identical with the Lydda of <span
id="iii.xiv.iv-p11.1"></span>[Acts ix.
32](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#032)<span id="iii.xiv.iv-p11.2"></span>
sq. For many centuries the seat of a bishop, and still prominent in the
time of the crusades. The persons referred to in this paragraph are to
be distinguished from others of the same names mentioned elsewhere.

<span id="fn_2637"></span>[345:2638](2010274.htm#fr_2637) <span
id="iii.xiv.iv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.iv-p13"></span> To be distinguished from the Agapius
mentioned earlier in the chapter, as is clear from the date of his
death, given in this paragraph.

<span id="fn_2638"></span>[345:2639](2010274.htm#fr_2638) <span
id="iii.xiv.iv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.iv-p14"></span> Dystrus was the seventh month of the
Macedonian year, corresponding to our March. See the table on p. 403,
below.

<span id="fn_2639"></span>[345:2640](2010274.htm#fr_2639) <span
id="iii.xiv.iv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.iv-p16"></span> Diocletian and Maximian abdicated on
May 1, 305. See above, Bk. VIII. chap. 13, note 16.

<span id="fn_2640"></span>[345:2641](2010274.htm#fr_2640) <span
id="iii.xiv.iv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.iv-p18"></span> When Maxentius usurped the purple in
Rome, in the year 306. See above, Bk. VIII. chap. 13, note 21.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV](2010275)
