[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010321)  [Next](2010323.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xvii.xv"></span>

<span id="iii.xvii.xv-p1"></span> On Bk. VI. chap. 2 (note 1,
continued). *Origen’s Life and Writings*.

<span id="iii.xvii.xv-p2"></span>Origen Adamantius (on the second name,
see Bk. VI. chap. 14, note 12) was of Christian parentage and probably
of Greek descent on his father’s side (as stated in the previous note),
but whether born in Alexandria or not we do not know. Westcott suggests
that his mother may have been of Jewish descent, because in an epistle
of Jerome (*ad Paulam*: *Ep*. 39, § 1, Migne’s ed.) he is said to have
learned Hebrew so thoroughly that he “vied with his mother” in the
singing of psalms (but compare the stricture of Redepenning on this
passage, p. 187, note 1). The date of his birth may be gathered from the
fact (stated in this chapter) that he was in his seventeenth <span
id="page_392">p. 392</span> <span id="iii.xvii.xv-Page_392"></span>year
at the time of his father’s death, which gives us 185 or 186 as the year
of his birth (cf. Redepenning, I. p. 417–420, Erste Beilage). We learn
from the present chapter that as a boy he was carefully trained by his
father in the Scriptures and afterward in Greek literature, a training
of which he made good use in later life. He was also a pupil of Clement
in the catechetical school, as we learn from chaps. 6 and 14 (on the
time, see chap. 6, note 4). He showed remarkable natural ability, and
after the death of his father (being himself saved from martyrdom only
by a device of his mother), when left in poverty with his mother and six
younger brothers (see § 13 of this chapter), he was able, partly by the
assistance of a wealthy lady and partly by teaching literature, to
support himself (§ 14). Whether he supported the rest of the family
Eusebius does not state, but his thoroughly religious character does not
permit us to imagine that he left them to suffer. In his eighteenth
year, there being no one at the head of the catechetical school in
Alexandria, he was induced to take the school in charge and to devote
himself to the work of instruction in the Christian faith. Soon
afterward the entire charge of the work was officially committed to him
by Demetrius, the bishop of Alexandria (see chap. 3). He lived at this
time a life of rigid asceticism (*ibid*.), and even went so far as to
mutilate himself in his zeal for the prosecution of his work (see chap.
8). His great influence naturally aroused the hostility of unbelievers
against him; but though many of his pupils suffered martyrdom (see chap.
4), he himself escaped, we do not know how. Eusebius ascribes his
preservation to the providence of God (*ibid*.). During these years in
which he was at the head of the catechetical school, he devoted himself
with vigor to the study of Greek philosophy, and was for a time a pupil
of the Neo-Platonist Ammonius Saccas (chap. 19). He studied
non-Christian thought, as he tells us, in order that he might be the
better able to instruct his pagan and heretical pupils (*ibid*.). His
labors in the school in time grew so heavy that he was obliged to
associate with himself his friend and fellow-pupil Heraclas, to whom he
committed the work of elementary instruction (chap. 15). It was during
this time that he seems to have begun his *Hexapla*, having learned
Hebrew in order to fit himself the better for his work upon the Old
Testament (chap. 16). During this period (while Zephyrinus was bishop of
Rome, i.e. before 217) he made a brief visit to Rome (chap. 14), and
later he was summoned to Arabia, to give instruction to the governor of
that country, and remained there a short time (chap. 19). Afterward, on
account of a great tumult in Alexandria (see chap. 19, note 22), he left
the city and went to Cæsarea in Palestine, where, although only a
layman, he publicly expounded the Scriptures in the church (chap. 19).
The bishop Demetrius strongly disapproved of this, and summoned him back
to Alexandria (*ibid*.). Upon his return to Alexandria he entered upon
the work of writing Commentaries on the Scriptures (see chap. 23).
During this period he wrote also other important works (see chap. 24).

<span id="iii.xvii.xv-p3"></span>In the tenth year of Alexander Severus
(<span class="c13"><span id="iii.xvii.xv-p3.1"></span>a.d.</span> 231)
he left Alexandria (according to chap. 26) and took up his residence in
Cæsarea, leaving his catechetical school in charge of his assistant,
Heraclas. The cause of his departure is stated in chap. 23 to have been
“some necessary affairs of the church” which called him to Greece. (For
a statement of the reasons which lead me, contrary to the common
opinion, to identify the departure mentioned in chap. 23 with that
mentioned in chap. 26, see below, p. 395 sq.) Jerome (*de vir. ill*. c.
54) says that he went to Achaia on account of heresies which were
troubling the churches there. His words are: *Et propter ecclesias
Achaiæ, quæ pluribus hæresibus vexabantur, sub testimonio ecclesiasticæ
epistolæ Athenas per Palæstinam pergeret*. He passed through Palestine
on his way to Greece, and it was at this time that he was ordained a
presbyter by the Palestinian bishops (chap. 23), Theoctistus of Cæsarea
and Alexander of Jerusalem (according to Jerome, *l.c.*; cf. also Euseb.
chap. 8). Whether he remained long in Palestine at this time, or went on
at once to Greece, we do not know; but that a visit (to be distinguished
from the second visit mentioned in chap. 32; see note 4 on that chapter)
was made we know from a fragment of one of Origen’s epistles written
from Athens (printed in Lommatzsch’s ed. of Origen’s works, XXV. p.
388); with which are to be compared Epiphanius, *Hær*. LXIV. 1, and the
remark made by Eusebius in chap. 16, § 2. in regard to the finding of a
copy of a translation in Nicopolis. Origen’s ordination resulted in the
complete alienation of the bishop Demetrius (upon his earlier and later
attitude toward Origen, and the causes of the change, see below, p. 394
sq.), and he called a council in Alexandria of bishops and presbyters
(the council must have been held very soon after the receipt of the news
of Origen’s ordination, for Demetrius died in 232; see Bk. V. chap. 22,
note 4) which decided that Origen should be required to leave Alexandria
and not be allowed to reside or to teach there, but did not depose him
from the priesthood. Afterward, however, Demetrius, combining with some
bishops of like mind with himself, deposed Origen from his office, and
the sentence was ratified by those who had before voted with him.
Photius gives this account in *Cod*. 118, quoting from the lost
*Defense* of Pamphilus and Eusebius. Eusebius himself tells us nothing
<span id="page_393">p. 393</span> <span
id="iii.xvii.xv-Page_393"></span>about these proceedings in his History,
but simply refers us (chap. 23) to the second book of his *Defense*,
which he says contained a full account of the matter. (Upon the bearing
of the words quoted by Photius from the *Defense*, see below, p. 395
sq.) Demetrius wrote of the result of the council “to the whole world”
(according to Jerome’s *de vir. ill*. c. 54), and the sentence was
concurred in by the bishops of Rome and of all the other churches,
except those of Palestine, Arabia, Phœnicia, and Achaia (see Jerome *ad
Paul. Ep*. 33; and *Apol. adv. libros Ruf*. II. 18). Taking up his abode
in Cæsarea, Origen made this place his headquarters for the rest of his
life, and found there the most cordial sympathy and support (chap. 27).
He carried on in Cæsarea a catechetical school, expounding the
Scriptures, lecturing on theology, and at the same time continuing his
literary labors in peace until the persecution of Maximinus (<span
class="c13"><span id="iii.xvii.xv-p3.2"></span>a.d.</span> 235–237),
during which some of his friends in Cæsarea suffered (see chaps. 27, 28,
30, 32, and 36). How Origen escaped and where he was during the
persecution we do not know (see chap. 28, note 2). In 237 or 238 at any
rate, he was (again) in Cæsarea and at this time Gregory Thaumaturgus
delivered his *Panegyric*, which is our best source for a knowledge of
Origen’s methods of teaching and of the influence which he exerted over
his pupils. (Upon the date, see Draeseke, *<span
id="iii.xvii.xv-p3.3"></span>Der Brief des Origenes an Gregorios*in the
*<span id="iii.xvii.xv-p3.4"></span>Jabrbücher f. prot. Theologie*,
1887, p. 102 sq.) During this period he did considerable traveling,
making another visit to Athens (see chap. 32) and two to Arabia (see
chaps. 33 and 37). It was while in Cæsarea, and when he was over sixty
years old, that he first permitted his discourses to be taken down by
shorthand writers (see chap. 26). His correspondence with the Emperor
Philip and his wife is mentioned by Eusebius in the same chapter. He was
arrested during the Decian persecution and suffered terrible torments,
but not martyrdom (chap. 39). He died not much more than a year after
the close of the persecution, in the seventieth year of his age (see Bk.
VII. chap. 1), at Tyre, and was buried there (Jerome, *de vir. ill*. c.
54).

<span id="iii.xvii.xv-p4"></span>Origen was without doubt the greatest
scholar and the most original thinker of his age. He was at the same
time a man of most devout piety, and employed all his wonderful talents
in the service of what he believed to be the truth. His greatest labors
were in the field of exegesis, and here his writings were epoch-making,
although his results were often completely vitiated by his use of the
allegorical method of interpretation and his neglect of the grammatical
and historical sense. His services in the cause of scientific theology
cannot be overestimated, and his thinking long stimulated the brightest
minds of the Church, both orthodox and heretical. Both his natural
predilections and his training in the philosophy which prevailed in
Alexandria in that day led him in the direction of idealism, and to an
excess of this, combined with his deep desire—common also to Clement—to
reconcile Christianity with reason and to commend it to the minds of
philosophers, are due most of his errors, nearly all of which are
fascinating and lofty in conception. Those errors led the Church to
refuse him a place among its saints and even among its Fathers in the
stricter sense. Even before his death suspicions of his orthodoxy were
widespread; and although he had many followers and warm defenders, his
views were finally condemned at a home synod in Constantinople in 543
(?) (see Helele, II. 790). Into the bitter controversies which raged
during the fourth and fifth centuries, and in which Jerome and Rufinus
(the former against, the latter for, Origen) played so large a part we
cannot enter here. See the article *Origenistic Controversies* in the
*Dict. of Christ. Biog.*, or any of the Church histories and lives of
Origen.

<span id="iii.xvii.xv-p5"></span>Origen was a marvelously prolific
writer. Epiphanius (*Hær*. LXIV. 63) says that it was commonly reported
that he had written 6000 works. Jerome reduces the number to less than a
third (*adv. Ruf*. II. 22). But whatever the number, we know that he was
one of the most voluminous—perhaps the most voluminous writer of
antiquity. He wrote works of the most diverse nature, critical,
exegetical, philosophical and theological, apologetic and practical,
besides numerous epistles. (On his great critical work, the *Hexpla*,
see chap. 16, note 8.) His exegetical works consisted of commentaries,
*scholia* (or detached notes), and homilies. Of his commentaries on the
Old Testament, which were very numerous, only fragments of those on
Genesis, Exodus, the Psalms, and the Song of Solomon are presented in
the version of Rufinus, and a fragment of the commentary on Ezekiel in
the *Philocalia*. Of the New Testament commentaries we have numerous
fragments both in Greek and Latin (especially on Matthew and John), and
the whole of Romans in the translation of Rufinus. Upon the commentaries
composed by Origen while still in Alexandria, see chap. 24; on those
written afterwards, see chaps. 32 and 36. No complete *scholia* are
extant; but among the numerous exegetical fragments which are preserved
there may be portions of these *scholia*, as well as of the commentaries
and homilies. It is not always possible to tell to which a fragment
belongs. Of the homilies, over 200 are preserved, the majority of them
in the translation of Rufinus.

<span id="iii.xvii.xv-p6"></span><span id="page_394">p. 394</span> <span
id="iii.xvii.xv-Page_394"></span>The philosophical and theological works
known to us are the two books *On the Resurrection* (see chap. 24, note
5): the *De principiis* (see *ibid*. note 6); and the *Stromata* (see
*ibid*. note 7).

<span id="iii.xvii.xv-p7"></span>Origen’s great apologetic work is his
*Contra Celsum* (see chap. 36, note 3).

<span id="iii.xvii.xv-p8"></span>Two works of a practical character are
known to us: *On Martyrdom* (see chap. 28, note 3); and *On Prayer*. The
latter work is not mentioned by Eusebius in his *History*, but is
referred to in Pamphilus’ *Apology for Origen*, Chap. VIII. (Lommatzsch,
XXIV. p. 397). It is extant in the original Greek, and is printed by
Lommatzsch, XVII. p. 79–297. It is addressed to two of his friends,
Ambrosius and Tatiana, and is one of his most beautiful works. As to the
date at which Origen wrote the work, we know (from chap. 23 of the work)
only that it was written after the composition of the commentary on
Genesis (see above, Bk. VI. chap. 24), but whether before or after his
departure from Alexandria we cannot tell.

<span id="iii.xvii.xv-p9"></span>Of his epistles only two are preserved
entire, one to Julius Africanus, and another to Gregory Thaumaturgus. On
the former, see chap. 31, note 1. On the latter and on Origen’s other
epistles, see chap. 36, note 7.

<span id="iii.xvii.xv-p10"></span>Finally must be mentioned the
*Philocalia* (Lommatzsch, XXV. p. 1–278), a collection of judiciously
selected extracts from Origen’s works in twenty-seven books. Its
compilers were Gregory Nazianzen and Basil.

<span id="iii.xvii.xv-p11"></span>The principal edition of Origen’s
works is that of the Benedictine Delarue in 4 vols. fol.; reprinted by
Migne in 8 vols. 8vo. A convenient edition is that of Lommatzsch, in 25
vols. small 8vo., a revision of Delarue’s. Only his *De principiis*,
*Contra Cels*., and the epistles to Africanus and to Gregory have been
translated into English, and are given in the *Ante-Nicene Fathers*,
Vol. IV. p. 221 sqq. Of lives of Origen must be mentioned that of
Huetius: *Origeniana* (Paris, 1679, in 2 vols.; reprinted in Delarue and
Lommatzsch); also Redepenning’s *Origenes*. *<span
id="iii.xvii.xv-p11.1"></span>Eine Darstellung seines Lebens und seiner
Lehre* (Bonn, 1841 and 1846, in 2 vols.). The respective sections in
Lardner and Tillemont should be compared, and the thorough article of
Westcott in the *Dict. of Christ. Biog.* IV. 96–142. For a good list of
the literature on Origen, see Schaff, *Ch. Hist.* II. p. 785.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Note 16](2010323.md)
