[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010010)  [Next](2010012) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iii.i.v"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.i.v-p1"></span> §5. *The Outbreak of the Arian
Controversy. The Attitude of Eusebius*.

<span id="iii.iii.i.v-p2"></span>About the year 318, while Alexander was
bishop of Alexandria, the Arian controversy broke out in that city, and
the whole Eastern Church was soon involved in the strife. We cannot
enter here into a discussion of Arius’ views; but in order to understand
the rapidity with which the Arian party grew, and the strong hold which
it possessed from the very start in Syria and Asia Minor, we must
remember that Arius was not himself the author of that system which we
know as Arianism, but that he learned the essentials of it from his
instructor Lucian. The latter was one of the most learned men of his age
in the Oriental Church, and founded an exegetico-theological school in
Antioch, which for a number of years stood outside of the communion of
the orthodox Church in that city, but shortly before the martyrdom of
Lucian himself (which took place in 311 or 312) made its peace with the
Church, and was recognized by it. He was held in the highest reverence
by his disciples, and exerted a great influence over them even after his
death. Among them were such men as Arius, Eusebius of Nicomedia,
Asterius, and others who were afterward known as staunch Arianists.
According to Harnack the chief points in the system of Lucian and his
disciples were the creation of the Son, the denial of his co-eternity
with the Father, and his immutability acquired by persistent progress
and steadfastness. His doctrine, which differed <span id="page_12">p.
12</span> <span id="iii.iii.i.v-Page_12"></span>from that of Paul of
Samosata chiefly in the fact that it was not a man but a created
heavenly being who became “Lord,” was evidently the result of a
combination of the teaching of Paul and of Origen. It will be seen that
we have here, at least in germ, all the essential elements of Arianism
proper: the creation of the Son out of nothing, and consequently the
conclusion that there was a time when he was not; the distinction of his
essence from that of the Father, but at the same time the emphasis upon
the fact that he “was not created as the other creatures,” and is
therefore to be sharply distinguished from them. There was little for
Arius to do but to combine the elements given by Lucian in a more
complete and well-ordered system, and then to bring that system forward
clearly and publicly, and endeavor to make it the faith of the Church at
large. His christology was essentially opposed to the Alexandrian, and
it was natural that he should soon come into conflict with that church,
of which he was a presbyter (upon Lucian’s teaching and its relation to
Arianism, see Harnack’s *Dogmengeschichte*, II. p. 183 sq.).

<span id="iii.iii.i.v-p3"></span>Socrates (*H. E.* I. 5 sq.), Sozomen
(*H. E.* I. 15) and Theodoret (*H. E.* I. 2 sq.), all of whom give
accounts of the rise of Arianism, differ as to the immediate occasion of
the controversy, but agree that Arius was excommunicated by a council
convened at Alexandria, and that both he and the bishop Alexander sent
letters to other churches, the latter defending his own course, the
former complaining of his harsh treatment, and endeavoring to secure
adherents to his doctrine. Eusebius of Nicomedia at once became his firm
supporter, and was one of the leading figures on the Arian side
throughout the entire controversy. His influential position as bishop of
Nicomedia, the imperial residence, and later of Constantinople, was of
great advantage to the Arian cause, especially toward the close of
Constantine’s reign. From a letter addressed by this Eusebius to
Paulinus of Tyre (Theodoret, *H. E.* I. 6) we learn that Eusebius of
Cæsarea was quite zealous in behalf of the Arian cause. The exact date
of the letter we do not know, but it must have been written at an early
stage of the controversy. Arius himself, in an epistle addressed to
Eusebius of Nicomedia (Theodoret, *H. E.* I. 5), claims Eusebius of
Cæsarea among others as accepting at least one of his fundamental
doctrines (“And since Eusebius, your brother in Cæsarea, and Theodotus,
and Paulinus, and Athanasius, and Gregory, and Ætius, and all the
bishops of the East say that God existed before the Son, they have been
condemned,” etc.). More than this, Sozomen (*H. E.* I. 15) informs us
that Eusebius of Cæsarea and two other bishops, having been appealed to
by Arius for “permission for himself and his adherents, as he had
already attained the rank of presbyter, to form the people who were with
them into a church,” concurred with others “who were assembled in
Palestine,” in granting the petition of Arius, and permitting him to
assemble the people as before; but they “enjoined submission to
Alexander, and commanded Arius to strive incessantly to be restored to
peace and communion with him.” The addition of the last sentence is
noticeable, as showing that they did not care to support a presbyter in
open and persistent rebellion against his bishop. A fragment of a letter
written by our Eusebius to Alexander is still extant, and is preserved
in the proceedings of the Second Council of Nicæa, Act. VI. Tom. V.
(*Labbei et Cossartii Conc.* VII. col. 497). In this epistle Eusebius
strongly remonstrates with Alexander for having misrepresented the views
of Arius. Still further, in his epistle to Alexander of Constantinople,
Alexander of Alexandria (Theodoret, *H. E.* I. 4) complains of three
Syrian bishops “who side with them \[*i.e.* the Arians\] and excite them
to plunge deeper and deeper into iniquity.” The reference here is
commonly supposed to be to Eusebius of Cæsarea, and his two friends
Paulinus of Tyre and Theodotus of Laodicea, who are known to have shown
favor to Arius. It is probable, though not certain, that our Eusebius is
one of the persons meant. Finally, many of the Fathers (above all Jerome
and Photius), and in addition to them the Second Council of Nicæa,
directly accuse Eusebius of holding the Arian heresy, as may be seen by
examining the testimonies quoted below on p. 67 sq. In agreement with
these early Fathers, many modern historians have attacked Eusebius with
great severity, and have endeavored to show that the opinion that he was
an Arian is supported by his own writings. Among those who have judged
him most harshly are Baronius (*ad ann.* 340, c. 38 sq.), Petavius <span
id="page_13">p. 13</span> <span id="iii.iii.i.v-Page_13"></span>(*Dogm.
Theol. de Trin*. I. c. 11 sq.), Scaliger (*In Elencho Trihæresii*, c.
27, and *De emendatione temporum*, Bk. VI. c. 1), Mosheim
(*Ecclesiastical History*, Murdock’s translation, I. p. 287 sq.),
Montfaucon (*Prælim. in Comment. ad Psalm*. c. VI.), and Tillemont (*H.
E.* VII. p. 67 sq. 2d ed.).

<span id="iii.iii.i.v-p4"></span>On the other hand, as may be seen from
the testimonies in Eusebius’ favor, quoted below on p. 57 sq., many of
the Fathers, who were themselves orthodox, looked upon Eusebius as
likewise sound on the subject of the Trinity. He has been defended in
modern times against the charge of Arianism by a great many prominent
scholars; among others by Valesius in his *Life of Eusebius*, by Bull
(*Def. Fid. Nic*. II. 9. 20, III. 9. 3, 11), Cave (*Lives of the
Fathers*, II. p. 135 sq.), Fabricius (*Bibl. Græc*. VI. p. 32 sq.),
Dupin (*Bibl. Eccles*. II. p. 7 sq.), and most fully and carefully by
Lee in his prolegomena to his edition of Eusebius’ *Theophania*, p.
xxiv. sq. Lightfoot also defends him against the charge of heresy, as do
a great many other writers whom it is not necessary to mention here.
Confronted with such diversity of opinion, both ancient and modern, what
are we to conclude? It is useless to endeavor, as Lee does, to clear
Eusebius of all sympathy with and leaning toward Arianism. It is
impossible to explain such widespread and continued condemnation of him
by acknowledging only that there are many expressions in his works which
are in themselves perfectly orthodox but capable of being wrested in
such a way as to produce a suspicion of possible Arianistic tendencies,
for there are such expressions in the works of multitudes of ancient
writers whose orthodoxy has never been questioned. Nor can the
widespread belief that he was an Arian be explained by admitting that he
was for a time the personal friend of Arius, but denying that he
accepted, or in any way sympathized with his views (cf. Newman’s
*Arians*, p. 262). There are in fact certain fragments of epistles
extant, which are, to say the least, decidedly Arianistic in their modes
of expression, and these must be reckoned with in forming an opinion of
Eusebius’ views; for there is no reason to deny, as Lee does, that they
are from Eusebius’ own hand. On the other hand, to maintain, with some
of the Fathers and many of the moderns, that Eusebius was and continued
through life a genuine Arian, will not do in the face of the facts that
contemporary and later Fathers were divided as to his orthodoxy, that he
was honored highly by the Church of subsequent centuries, except at
certain periods, and was even canonized (see Lightfoot’s article, p.
348), that he solemnly signed the Nicene Creed, which contained an
express condemnation of the distinctive doctrines of Arius, and finally
that at least in his later works he is thoroughly orthodox in his
expressions, and is explicit in his rejection of the two main theses of
the Arians,—that there *was a time when the Son of God was not*, and
that he was *produced out of nothing*. It is impossible to enter here
into a detailed discussion of such passages in Eusebius’ works as bear
upon the subject under dispute. Lee has considered many of them at great
length, and the reader may be referred to him for further information.

<span id="iii.iii.i.v-p5"></span>A careful examination of them will, I
believe, serve to convince the candid student that there is a
distinction to be drawn between those works written before the rise of
Arius, those written between that time and the Council of Nicæa, and
those written after the latter. It has been very common to draw a
distinction between those works written before and those written after
the Council, but no one, so far as I know, has distinguished those
productions of Eusebius’ pen which appeared between 318 and 325, and
which were caused by the controversy itself, from all his other
writings. And yet such a distinction seems to furnish the key to the
problem. Eusebius’ opponents have drawn their strongest arguments from
the epistles which Eusebius wrote to Alexander and to Euphration; his
defenders have drawn their arguments chiefly from the works which he
produced subsequent to the year 325; while the exact bearing of the
expressions used in his works produced before the controversy broke out
has always been a matter of sharp dispute. Lee has abundantly shown his
*Contra Marcel*., his *De Eccl. Theol*., his *Thephania* (which was
written after the Council of Nicæa, and not, as Lee supposes, before
it), and other later works, to be thoroughly orthodox and to contain
nothing which a trinitarian might not have written. In his *Hist. Eccl.,
Præparatio Evang., Demonstratio Evang*., and other earlier works, <span
id="page_14">p. 14</span> <span id="iii.iii.i.v-Page_14"></span>although
we find some expressions employed which it would not have been possible
for an orthodox trinitarian to use after the Council of Nicæa, at least
without careful limitation to guard against misapprehension, there is
nothing even in these works which requires us to believe that he
accepted the doctrines of Arius’ predecessor, Lucian of Antioch; that
is, there is nothing distinctly and positively Arianistic about them,
although there are occasional expressions which might lead the reader to
expect that the writer would become an Arian if he ever learned of
Arius’ doctrines. But if there is seen to be a lack of emphasis upon the
divinity of the Son, or rather a lack of clearness in the conception of
the nature of that divinity, it must be remembered that there was at
this time no especial reason for emphasizing and defining it, but there
was on the contrary very good reason for laying particular stress upon
the subordination of the Son over against Sabellianism, which was so
widely prevalent during the third century, and which was exerting an
influence even over many orthodox theologians who did not consciously
accept Sabellianistic tenets. That Eusebius was a decided
subordinationist must be plain to every one that reads his works with
care, especially his earlier ones. It would be surprising if he had not
been, for he was born at a time when Sabellianism (monarchianism) was
felt to be the greatest danger to which orthodox christology was
exposed, and he was trained under the influence of the followers of
Origen, who had made it one of his chief aims to emphasize the
subordination of the Son over against that very monarchianism. <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) The same subordinationism may be clearly
seen in the writings of Dionysius of Alexandria and of Gregory
Thaumaturgus, two of Origen’s greatest disciples. It must not be
forgotten that at the beginning of the fourth century the problem of how
to preserve the Godhood of Christ and at the same time his subordination
to the Father (in opposition to the monarchianists) had not been solved.
Eusebius in his earlier writings shows that he holds both (he cannot be
convicted of denying Christ’s divinity), but that he is as far from a
solution of the problem, and is just as uncertain in regard to the exact
relation of Father and Son, as Tertullian, Hippolytus, Origen,
Dionysius, and Gregory Thaumaturgus were; is just as inconsistent in his
modes of expression as they, and yet no more so (see Harnack’s
*Dogmengeschichte*, I. pp. 628 sq. and 634 sq., for an exposition of the
opinions of these other Fathers on the subject). Eusebius, with the same
immature and undeveloped views which were held all through the third
century, wrote those earlier works which have given rise to so much
dispute between those who accuse him of Arianism and those who defend
him against the charge. When he wrote them he was neither Arian nor
Athanasian, and for that reason passages may be found in them which if
written after the Council of Nicæa might prove him an Arian, and other
passages which might as truly prove him an Athanasian, just as in the
writings of Origen were found by both parties passages to support their
views, and in Gregory Thaumaturgus passages apparently teaching
Arianism, and others teaching its opposite, Sabellianism (see Harnack,
*ib*. p. 646).

<span id="iii.iii.i.v-p7"></span>Let us suppose now that Eusebius,
holding fast to the divinity of Christ, and yet convinced just as firmly
of his subordination to the Father, becomes acquainted through Arius, or
other like-minded disciples of Lucian of Antioch, with a doctrine which
seems to preserve the Godhood, while at the same time emphasizing
strongly the subordination of the Son, and which formulates the relation
of Father and Son in a clear and rational manner. That he should accept
such a doctrine eagerly is just what we should expect, and just what we
find him doing. In his epistles to Alexander and Euphration, he shows
himself an Arian, and Arius and his followers were quite <span
id="page_15">p. 15</span> <span id="iii.iii.i.v-Page_15"></span>right in
claiming him as a supporter. There is that in the epistles which is to
be found nowhere in his previous writings, and which distinctly
separates him from the orthodox party. How then are we to explain the
fact that a few years later he signed the Nicene creed and anathematized
the doctrines of Arius? Before we can understand his conduct, it is
necessary to examine carefully the two epistles in question. Such an
examination will show us that what Eusebius is defending in them is not
genuine Arianism. He evidently thinks that it is, evidently supposes
that he and Arius are in complete agreement upon the subjects under
discussion; but he is mistaken. The extant fragments of the two epistles
are given below on p. 70. It will be seen that Eusebius in them defends
the Arian doctrine that there was a time when the Son of God was not. It
will be seen also that he finds fault with Alexander for representing
the Arians as teaching that the “Son of God was made out of nothing,
like all creatures,” and contends that Arius teaches that the Son of God
was *begotten*, and that he was not produced like all creatures. We know
that the Arians very commonly applied the word “begotten” to Christ,
using it in such cases as synonymous with “created,” and thus not
implying, as the Athanasians did when they used the word, that he was of
one substance with the Father (compare, for instance, the explanation of
the meaning of the term given by Eusebius of Nicomedia in his epistle to
Paulinus; Theod. *H. E*. I. 6). It is evident that the use of this word
had deceived our Eusebius, and that he was led by it to think that they
taught that the Son was of the Father in a peculiar sense, and did in
reality partake in some way of essential Godhood. And indeed it is not
at all surprising that the words of Arius, in his epistle to Alexander
of Alexandria (see Athan. *Ep. de conc. Arim. et Seleuc*., chap. II. §3;
Oxford edition of Athanasius’ *Tracts against Arianism*, p. 97), quoted
by Eusebius in his epistle to the same Alexander, should give Eusebius
that impression. The words are as follows: “The God of the law, and of
the prophets, and of the New Testament before eternal ages begat an
only-begotten Son, through whom also He made the ages and the universe.
And He begat him not in appearance, but in truth, and subjected him to
his own will, unchangeable and immutable, a perfect creature of God, but
not as one of the creatures.” Arius’ use here of the word “begat,” and
his qualification of the word “creature” by the adjective “perfect,” and
by the statement that he was “not as one of the creatures” naturally
tended to make Eusebius think that Arius acknowledged a real divinity of
the Son, and that appeared to him to be all that was necessary.
Meanwhile Alexander in his epistle to Alexander of Constantinople
(Theod. *H. E*. I. 4) had, as Eusebius says, misstated Arius’ opinion,
or at least had attributed to him the belief that Christ was “made like
all other men that have ever been born,” whereas Arius expressly
disclaims such a belief. Alexander undoubtedly thought that that was the
legitimate result to which the other views of Arius must lead; but
Eusebius did not think so, and felt himself called upon to remonstrate
with Alexander for what seemed to him the latter’s unfairness in the
matter.

<span id="iii.iii.i.v-p8"></span>When we examine the Cæsarean
creed <span id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1) which Eusebius presented to the
Council as a fair statement of his belief, we find nothing in it
inconsistent with the acceptance of the kind of Arianism which he
defends in his epistle to Alexander, and which he evidently supposed to
be practically the Arianism of Arius himself. In his epistle to
Euphration, however, Eusebius seems at first glance to go further and to
give up the real divinity of the Son. His words are, “Since the Son is
himself God, but not true God.” But we have no right to interpret these
words, torn as they are from the context which might make their meaning
perfectly plain, without due regard to Eusebius’ belief expressed
elsewhere in this epistle, and in his epistle to Alexander which was
evidently written about the same time. In the epistle to Alexander he
clearly reveals a belief in the real divinity of the Son, while in the
other fragment of his epistle to Euphration he dwells upon the
subordination of the Son and approves the Arian opinion, which he had
defended also in the other epistle, that the “Father was before the
Son.” The expression, “not true God” (a very common Arian expression;
see Athan. *Orat. c. Arian*. I. 6) seems therefore to have been <span
id="page_16">p. 16</span> <span id="iii.iii.i.v-Page_16"></span>used by
Eusebius to express a belief, not that the Son did not possess real
divinity (as the genuine Arians used it), but that he was not equal to
the Father, who, to Eusebius’ thought, was “true God.” He indeed
expressly calls the Son <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.i.v-p9.1"></span>θεός</span>, which shows—when the sense in
which he elsewhere uses the word is considered—that he certainly did
believe him to partake of Godhood, though, in some mysterious way, in a
smaller degree, or in a less complete manner than the Father. That
Eusebius misunderstood Arius, and did not perceive that he actually
denied all real deity to the Son, was due doubtless in part to his lack
of theological insight (Eusebius was never a great theologian), in part
to his habitual dread of Sabellianism (of which Arius had accused
Alexander, and toward which Eusebius evidently thought that the latter
was tending), which led him to look with great favor upon the pronounced
subordinationism of Arius, and thus to overlook the dangerous extreme to
which Arius carried that subordinationism.

<span id="iii.iii.i.v-p10"></span>We are now, the writer hopes, prepared
to admit that Eusebius, after the breaking out of the Arian controversy,
became an Arian, as he understood Arianism, and supported that party
with considerable vigor; and that not as a result of mere personal
friendship, but of theological conviction. At the same time, he was
then, as always, a peace-loving man, and while lending Arius his
approval and support, he united with other Palestinian bishops in
enjoining upon him submission to his bishop (Sozomen, *H. E*. I. 15). As
an Arian, then, and yet possessed with the desire of securing, if it
were possible, peace and harmony between the two factions, Eusebius
appeared at the Council of Nicæa, and there signed a creed containing
Athanasian doctrine and anathematizing the chief tenets of Arius. How
are we to explain his conduct? We shall, perhaps, do best to let him
explain his own conduct. In his letter to the church of Cæsarea
(preserved by Socrates, *H. E*. I. 8, as well as by other authors), he
writes as follows:—

<span id="iii.iii.i.v-p11"></span>“What was transacted concerning
ecclesiastical faith at the Great Council assembled at Nicæa you have
probably learned, Beloved, from other sources, rumour being wont to
precede the accurate account of what is doing. But lest in such reports
the circumstances of the case have been misrepresented, we have been
obliged to transmit to you, first, the formula of faith presented by
ourselves; and next, the second, which the Fathers put forth with some
additions to our words. Our own paper, then, which was read in the
presence of our most pious Emperor, and declared to be good and
unexceptionable, ran thus:—

<span id="iii.iii.i.v-p12"></span>“‘As we have received from the Bishops
who preceded us, and in our first catechisings, and when we received the
Holy Laver, and as we have learned from the divine Scriptures, and as we
believed and taught in the presbytery, and in the Episcopate itself, so
believing also at the time present, we report to you our faith, and it
is this:—

<span id="iii.iii.i.v-p13"></span>“‘We believe in One God, the Father
Almighty, the Maker of all things visible and invisible. And in One Lord
Jesus Christ, the Word of God, God from God, Light from Light, Life from
Life, Son Only-begotten, first-born of every creature, before all the
ages, begotten from the Father, by whom also all things were made; who
for our salvation was made flesh, and lived among men, and suffered, and
rose again the third day, and ascended to the Father, and will come
again in glory to judge quick and dead. And we believe also in One Holy
Ghost; believing each of These to be and to exist, the Father truly
Father, and the Son truly Son, and the Holy Ghost truly Holy Ghost, as
also our Lord, sending forth His disciples for the preaching, said, *Go,
teach all nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost*. Concerning whom we confidently affirm that
so we hold, and so we think, and so we have held aforetime, and we
maintain this faith unto the death, anathematizing every godless heresy.
That this we have ever thought from our heart and soul, from the time we
recollect ourselves, and now think and say in truth, before God Almighty
and our Lord Jesus Christ do we witness, being able by proofs to show
and to convince you, that, even in times past, such has been our belief
and preaching.’

<span id="iii.iii.i.v-p14"></span>“On this faith being publicly put
forth by us, no room for contradiction appeared; but our most pious
Emperor, before any one else, testified that it comprised most orthodox
statements. He confessed, moreover, that such were his own sentiments;
and he advised all present to agree to it, and to subscribe its articles
and to assent to them, with the insertion of the single word, ‘One in
substance’ (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.i.v-p14.1"></span>ὁ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.i.v-p14.2"></span>μοούσιος</span>), which, moreover, he
interpreted as not in the sense of the affections of bodies, nor as if
the Son subsisted from the Father, in the way of division, or any
sever<span id="page_17">p. 17</span> <span
id="iii.iii.i.v-Page_17"></span>ance; for that the immaterial and
intellectual and incorporeal nature could not be the subject of any
corporeal affection, but that it became us to conceive of such things in
a divine and ineffable manner. And such were the theological remarks of
our most wise and most religious Emperor; but they, with a view to the
addition of ‘One in substance,’ drew up the following formula:—

<span id="iii.iii.i.v-p15"></span>“‘We believe in One God, the Father
Almighty, Maker of all things visible and invisible:— And in One Lord
Jesus Christ, the Son of God, begotten of the Father, Only-begotten,
that is, from the Substance of the Father; God from God, Light from
Light, very God from very God, begotten, not made, One in substance with
the Father, by whom all things were made, both things in heaven and
things in earth; who for us men and for our salvation came down and was
made flesh, was made man, suffered, and rose again the third day,
ascended into heaven, and cometh to judge quick and dead.

<span id="iii.iii.i.v-p16"></span>“‘And in the Holy Ghost. But those who
say, “Once He was not,” and “Before His generation He was not,” and “He
came to be from nothing,” or those who pretend that the Son of God is
“Of other subsistence or substance,” or “created,” or “alterable,” or
“mutable,” the Catholic Church anathematizes.’

<span id="iii.iii.i.v-p17"></span>“On their dictating this formula, we
did not let it pass without inquiry in what sense they introduced ‘of
the substance of the Father,’ and ‘one in substance with the Father.’
Accordingly questions and explanations took place, and the meaning of
the words underwent the scrutiny of reason. And they professed that the
phrase ‘of the substance’ was indicative of the Son’s being indeed from
the Father, yet without being as if a part of Him. And with this
understanding we thought good to assent to the sense of such religious
doctrine, teaching, as it did, that the Son was from the Father, not,
however, a part of His substance. On this account we assented to the
sense ourselves, without declining even the term ‘One in substance,’
peace being the object which we set before us, and steadfastness in the
orthodox view. In the same way we also admitted ‘begotten, not made’;
since the Council alleged that ‘made’ was an appellative common to the
other creatures which came to be through the Son, to whom the Son had no
likeness. Wherefore, said they, He was not a work resembling the things
which through Him came to be, but was of a substance which is too high
for the level of any work, and which the Divine oracles teach to have
been generated from the Father, the mode of generation being inscrutable
and incalculable to every generated nature. And so, too, on examination
there are grounds for saying that the Son is ‘one in substance’ with the
Father; not in the way of bodies, nor like mortal beings, for He is not
such by division of substance, or by severance; no, nor by any
affection, or alteration, or changing of the Father’s substance and
power (since from all such the ingenerate nature of the Father is
alien), but because ‘one in substance with the Father’ suggests that the
Son of God bears no resemblance to the generated creatures, but that to
His Father alone who begat Him is He in every way assimilated, and that
He is not of any other subsistence and substance, but from the Father.

<span id="iii.iii.i.v-p18"></span>“To which term also, thus interpreted,
it appeared well to assent; since we were aware that, even among the
ancients, some learned and illustrious Bishops and writers have used the
term ‘one in substance’ in their theological teaching concerning the
Father and Son. So much, then, be said concerning the faith which was
published; to which all of us assented, not without inquiry, but
according to the specified senses, mentioned before the most religious
Emperor himself, and justified by the fore-mentioned considerations. And
as to the anathematism published by them at the end of the Faith, it did
not pain us, because it forbade to use words not in Scripture, from
which almost all the confusion and disorder of the Church have come.
Since, then, no divinely inspired Scripture has used the phrases, ‘out
of nothing’ and ‘once He was not,’ and the rest which follow, there
appeared no ground for using or teaching them; to which also we assented
as a good decision, since it had not been our custom hitherto to use
these terms. Moreover, to anathematize ‘Before His generation He was
not’ did not seem preposterous, in that it is confessed by all that the
Son of God was before the generation according to the flesh. Nay, our
most religious Emperor did at the time prove, in a speech, that He was
in being even according to His divine generation which is before all
ages, since even before he was generated <span id="page_18">p. 18</span>
<span id="iii.iii.i.v-Page_18"></span>in energy, He was in virtue with
the Father ingenerately, the Father being always Father, as King always
and Saviour always, having all things in virtue, and being always in the
same respects and in the same way. This we have been forced to transmit
to you, Beloved, as making clear to you the deliberation of our inquiry
and assent, and how reasonably we resisted even to the last minute, as
long as we were offended at statements which differed from our own, but
received without contention what no longer pained us, as soon as, on a
candid examination of the sense of the words, they appeared to us to
coincide with what we ourselves have professed in the faith which we
have already published.” <span id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2)

<span id="iii.iii.i.v-p20"></span>It will be seen that while the
expressions “of the substance of the Father,” “begotten not made,” and
“One in substance,” or “consubstantial with the Father,” are all
explicitly anti-Arianistic, yet none of them contradicts the doctrines
held by Eusebius before the Council, so far as we can learn them from
his epistles to Alexander and Euphration and from the Cæsarean creed.
His own explanation of those expressions, which it is to be observed was
the explanation given by the Council itself, and which therefore he was
fully warranted in accepting,—even though it may not have been so rigid
as to satisfy an Athanasius,—shows us how this is. He had believed
before that the Son partook of the Godhood in very truth, that He was
“begotten,” and therefore “not made,” if “made” implied something
different from “begotten,” as the Nicene Fathers held that it did; and
he had believed before that the “Son of God has no resemblance to
created’ things, but is in every respect like the Father only who begat
him, and that He is of no other substance or essence than the Father,”
and therefore if that was what the word “Consubstantial” (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.i.v-p20.1"></span>ὁ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.i.v-p20.2"></span>μοούσιος</span>) meant
he could not do otherwise than accept that too.

<span id="iii.iii.i.v-p21"></span>It is clear that the dread of
Sabellianism was still before the eyes of Eusebius, and was the cause of
his hesitation in assenting to the various changes, especially to the
use of the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.i.v-p21.1"></span>ὁ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.i.v-p21.2"></span>μοούσιος</span>, which had been a
Sabellian word and had been rejected on that account by the Synod of
Antioch, at which Paul of Samosata had been condemned some sixty years
before.

<span id="iii.iii.i.v-p22"></span>It still remains to explain Eusebius’
sanction of the anathemas attached to the creed which expressly condemn
at least one of the beliefs which he had himself formerly held, viz.:
that the “Father was before the Son,” or as he puts it elsewhere, that
“He who is begat him who was not.” The knot might of course be simply
cut by supposing an act of hypocrisy on his part, but the writer is
convinced that such a conclusion does violence to all that we know of
Eusebius and of his subsequent treatment of the questions involved in
this discussion. It is quite possible to suppose that a real change of
opinion on his part took place during the sessions of the Council.
Indeed when we realize how imperfect and incorrect a conception of
Arianism he had before the Council began, and how clearly its true
bearing was there brought out by its enemies, we can see that he could
not do otherwise than change; that he must have become either an
out-and-out Arian, or an opponent of Arianism as he did. When he
learned, and learned for the first time, that Arianism meant the denial
of all essential divinity to Christ, and when he saw that it involved
the ascription of mutability and of other finite attributes to him, he
must either change entirely his views on those points or he must leave
the Arian party. To him who with all his subordinationism had laid in
all his writings so much stress on the divinity of the Word (even though
he had not realized exactly what that divinity involved) it would have
been a revolution in his Christian life and faith to have admitted what
he now learned that Arianism involved. Sabellianism had been his dread,
but now this new fear, which had aroused so large a portion of the
Church, seized him too, and he felt that stand must be made against this
too great separation of Father and Son, which was leading to dangerous
results. Under the pressure of this fear it is not surprising that he
should become convinced that the Arian formula—“there was a time when
the Son was not”—involved serious consequences, and that Alexander and
his followers should have succeeded in pointing out to him its untruth,
because it led necessarily to a false conclusion. It is not surprising,
moreover, that they should have succeeded in explaining to him at least
<span id="page_19">p. 19</span> <span
id="iii.iii.i.v-Page_19"></span>partially their belief, which, as his
epistle to Alexander shows, had before been absolutely incomprehensible,
that the Son was generated from all eternity, and that therefore the
Father did not exist before him in a temporal sense.

<span id="iii.iii.i.v-p23"></span>He says toward the close of his
epistle to the Cæsarean church that he had not been accustomed to use
such expressions as “There was a time when he was not,” “He came to be
from nothing,” etc. And there is no reason to doubt that he speaks the
truth. Even in his epistles to Alexander and Euphration he does not use
those phrases (though he does defend the doctrine taught by the first of
them), nor does Arius himself, in the epistle to Alexander upon which
Eusebius apparently based his knowledge of the system, use those
expressions, although he too teaches the same doctrine. The fact is that
in that epistle Arius studiously avoids such favorite Arian phrases as
might emphasize the differences between himself and Alexander, and
Eusebius seems to have avoided them for the same reason. We conclude
then that Eusebius was not an Arian (nor an adherent of Lucian) before
318, that soon after that date he became an Arian in the sense in which
he understood Arianism, but that during the Council of Nicæa he ceased
to be one in any sense. His writings in later years confirm the course
of doctrinal development which we have supposed went on in his mind. He
never again defends Arian doctrines in his works, and yet he never
becomes an Athanasian in his emphasis upon the <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.i.v-p23.1"></span>ὁ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.i.v-p23.2"></span>μοούσιον</span>. In fact he represents a
mild orthodoxy, which is always orthodox—when measured by the Nicene
creed as interpreted by the Nicene Council—and yet is always mild.
Moreover, he never acquired an affection for the word <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.i.v-p23.3"></span>ὁ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii.i.v-p23.4"></span>μοούσιος</span>, which
to his mind was bound up with too many evil associations ever to have a
pleasant sound to him. He therefore studiously avoided it in his own
writings, although clearly showing that he believed fully in what the
Nicene Council had explained it to mean. It must be remembered that
during many years of his later life he was engaged in controversy with
Marcellus, a thorough-going Sabellian, who had been at the time of the
Council one of the strongest of Athanasius’ colleagues. In his contest
with him it was again anti-Sabellianistic polemics which absorbed him
and increased his distaste for <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.i.v-p23.5"></span>ὁ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iii.i.v-p23.6"></span>μοούσιον</span> and minimized his emphasis
upon the distinctively anti-Arianistic doctrines formulated at Nicæa.
For any except the very wisest minds it was a matter of enormous
difficulty to steer between the two extremes in those times of strife;
and while combating Sabellianism not to fall into Arianism, and while
combating the latter not to be engulfed in the former. That Eusebius
under the constant pressure of the one fell into the other at one time,
and was in occasional danger of falling into it again in later years,
can hardly be cited as an evidence either of wrong heart or of weak
head. An Athanasius he was not, but neither was he an unsteady
weather-cock, or an hypocritical time-server.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[14:1](2010011.htm#fr_0) <span
id="iii.iii.i.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.i.v-p6"></span> It is interesting to notice that the
creed of the Cæsarean church which Eusebius presented at the Council of
Nice contains a clause which certainly looks as if it had been composed
in opposition to the familiar formula of the Sabellians: “The same one
is the Father, the same one the Son, the same one the Holy Spirit” (τὸν
αὐτὸν εἶναι πατέρα, τὸν αὐτὸν εἶναι υἱ& 232·ν, τὸν αὐτὸν εἶναι ἅγιον
πνεῦμα; see Epiphan. *Hær*. LXII. 1; and compare the statement made in
the same section, that the Sabellians taught that God acts in three
forms: in the form of the Father, as creator and lawgiver; in the form
of the Son, as redeemer; and in the form of the Spirit, as life-giver,
etc.). The clause of the Cæsarean creed referred to runs as follows:
“That the Father is truly Father, the Son truly Son, and the Holy Spirit
truly Holy Spirit” (πατέρα ἀληθῶς πατέρα, καὶ υἱ& 232·ν ἀληθῶς υἱ&
232·ν, καὶ πνεῦμα ἅγιον ἀληθῶς ἅγιον). It is significant that in the
revised creed adopted by the Council these words are omitted, evidently
because the occasion for them no longer existed, since not Sabellianism
but Arianism was the heresy combated; and because, more than that, the
use of them would but weaken the emphasis which the Council wished to
put upon the essential divinity of all three persons.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[15:2](2010011.htm#fr_1) <span
id="iii.iii.i.v-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.i.v-p9"></span> For a translation of the creed see
below, p. 16, where it is given as a part of Eusebius’ epistle to the
Church of Cæsarea.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[18:3](2010011.htm#fr_2) <span
id="iii.iii.i.v-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.i.v-p19"></span> The translation is that of Newman, as
given in the Oxford edition of Athanasius’ *Select Treatises against
Arianism*, p. 59 sq.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 6](2010012)
