[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010162)  [Next](2010164.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.x.xxiii"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxiii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.x.xxiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXII.—</span>*The Bishops that were
well known at this Time.*

<span id="iii.x.xxiii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.x.xxiii-p2.1"></span>In</span> the tenth year of the reign of
Commodus, Victor <span id="fr_1677"></span>[1678](#fn_1677.md) succeeded
Eleutherus, <span id="fr_1678"></span>[1679](#fn_1678.md) the latter having
held the episcopate for thirteen years. In the same year, after
Julian <span id="fr_1679"></span>[1680](#fn_1679.md) had completed his
tenth year, Demetrius <span id="fr_1680"></span>[1681](#fn_1680.md)
received the charge of the parishes at Alexandria. At this time the
above-mentioned Serapion, <span id="fr_1681"></span>[1682](#fn_1681.md) the
eighth from the apostles, was still well known as bishop of the church
at Antioch. Theophilus <span id="fr_1682"></span>[1683](#fn_1682.md)
presided at Cæsarea in Palestine; and Narcissus, <span
id="fr_1683"></span>[1684](#fn_1683.md) whom we have mentioned before,
still had charge of the church at Jerusalem. Bacchylus <span
id="fr_1684"></span>[1685](#fn_1684.md) at the same time was bishop of
Corinth in Greece, and Polycrates <span
id="fr_1685"></span>[1686](#fn_1685.md) of <span id="page_241">p.
241</span> <span id="iii.x.xxiii-Page_241"></span>the parish of Ephesus.
And besides these a multitude of others, as is likely, were then
prominent. But we have given the names of those alone, the soundness of
whose faith has come down to us in writing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1677"></span>[240:1678](2010163.htm#fr_1677.md) <span
id="iii.x.xxiii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxiii-p3"></span> The dates assigned to Victor’s
episcopate by the ancient authorities vary greatly. Eusebius here puts
his accession in the tenth year of Commodus (i.e. 189 <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.x.xxiii-p3.1"></span>a.d.</span>), and this is
accepted by Lipsius as the correct date. Jerome’s version of the
*Chron.* puts his accession in the reign of Pertinax, or the first year
of Septimius Severus (i.e. 193), while the Armenian version puts it in
the seventh year of Commodus (186). Eusebius, in his *History,* does not
state directly the duration of his episcopate, but in chap. 28 he says
that Zephyrinus succeded him about the ninth year of Severus, i.e.
according to his erroneous reckoning (see Bk. VI. chap. 21, note 3)
about 200, which would give Victor an episcopate of about eleven years.
Jerome, in his version of the *Chron.* and in his *de vir. ill.,*
assigns him ten years; the Armenian version of the *Chron.* twelve
years. The Liberian Catalogue makes his episcopate something over nine
years long; the Felician Catalogue something over ten. Lipsius,
considering Victor in connection with his successors, concludes that he
held office between nine and ten years, and therefore gives as his dates
189–198 or 199 (see p. 172 sq.). According to an anonymous writer quoted
in chap. 28, Victor excommunicated Theodotus of Byzantium for teaching
that Christ was a mere man. He is best known, however, on account of his
action in connection with the great Quartodeciman controversy (see chap.
24). Jerome, in his version of the *Chron.,* says of him *cujus
mediocria de religione extant volumina,* and in his *de vir. ill.* chap.
34, he tells us that he wrote upon the passover, and also some other
works (*super quæstione Paschæ, et alia quædam scribens opuscula*).
Harnack believes that he has discovered one of these works (all of which
have been supposed lost) in the Pseudo-Cyprianic *de Aleatoribus.* In
his *Texte und Unters.* Bd. V. Heft 1, he has discussed the subject in a
very learned and ingenious manner. The theory has much to commend it,
but there are difficulties in its way which have not yet been removed;
and I am inclined to think it a product of the first half of the third
century, rather than of the last quarter of the second (see the writer’s
review of Harnack’s discussion in the *Presbyterian Review,* Jan., 1889,
p. 143 sqq.).

<span id="fn_1678"></span>[240:1679](2010163.htm#fr_1678.md) <span
id="iii.x.xxiii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxiii-p4"></span> On Eleutherus, see the Introduction to
this book, note 2. As remarked there, Eleutherus, according to the
testimony of most of our sources, held office fifteen years. The
“thirteen years” of this chapter are therefore an error, clearly caused
by the possession on the part of Eusebius of a trustworthy tradition
that he died in the tenth year of Commodus, which, since he incorrectly
put his accession into the seventeenth year of Marcus Aurelius (or
Antoninus Verus, as he calls him), made it necessary for him to draw the
false conclusion that he held office only thirteen years.

<span id="fn_1679"></span>[240:1680](2010163.htm#fr_1679.md) <span
id="iii.x.xxiii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxiii-p5"></span> On Julian, bishop of Alexandria, see
chap. 9, note 2.

<span id="fn_1680"></span>[240:1681](2010163.htm#fr_1680.md) <span
id="iii.x.xxiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxiii-p6"></span> The date of the accession of
Demetrius, the eleventh bishop of Alexandria, as given here and in the
*Chron.,* was 189 <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.x.xxiii-p6.1"></span>a.d.</span> According to Bk. VI. chap. 26,
below, confirmed by the *Chron.,* he held office forty-three years.
There is no reason for doubting the approximate accuracy of these dates.
Demetrius is known to us chiefly because of his relations to Origen,
which were at first friendly, but finally became hostile. He seems to
have been a man of great energy, renowned as an administrator rather
than as a literary character. He was greatly interested in the
catechetical school at Alexandria, but does not seem to have taught in
it, and he left no writings, so far as we know. His relations with
Origen will come up frequently in the Sixth Book, where he is mentioned
a number of times (see especially chap. 8, note 4).

<span id="fn_1681"></span>[240:1682](2010163.htm#fr_1681.md) <span
id="iii.x.xxiii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxiii-p7"></span> On Serapion, bishop of Antioch, see
above, chap. 19.

<span id="fn_1682"></span>[240:1683](2010163.htm#fr_1682.md) <span
id="iii.x.xxiii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxiii-p8"></span> Theophilus, bishop of Cæsarea, has
gained prominence chiefly on account of his connection with the paschal
controversy. He presided with Narcissus over the council mentioned in
the next chapter, which was called to consider the paschal question, and
in conjunction with the other bishops present composed an epistle, which
was still extant in Eusebius’ time (according to the next chapter), and
of which he gives a fragment in chap. 25. Jerome, in his *de vir. ill.*
c. 43, speaks very highly of this epistle (*synodicam valde utilem
composuit epistolam*); but it seems to have been no longer extant in his
time, for in mentioning it and the epistle of Bacchylus of Corinth and
others in his *Chron.,* he says that the memory of them still endured
(*quarum memoria ad nos usque perdurat*). The dates of Theophilus’
accession to office and of his death are not known to us.

<span id="fn_1683"></span>[240:1684](2010163.htm#fr_1683.md) <span
id="iii.x.xxiii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxiii-p9"></span> On Narcissus, see above, chap. 12.

<span id="fn_1684"></span>[240:1685](2010163.htm#fr_1684.md) <span
id="iii.x.xxiii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxiii-p10"></span> This Bacchylus is possibly identical
with the Bacchylides who is mentioned in Bk. IV. chap. 23 as one of
those who had urged Dionysius, bishop of Corinth, to write a certain
epistle. Bacchylus also is prominent solely on account of his connection
with the paschal controversy. According to the next chapter, he was
himself the author of an epistle on the subject, which he wrote,
according to Jerome (*de vir. ill.* c. 44), in the name of all the
bishops of Achaia (*ex omnium qui in Achaia erant episcoporum persona*).
But the words of Eusebius seem to imply that the epistle was an
individual, not a synodical one, for he does not say, “an epistle of
those in,” &c., as he does in every other case. We must conclude,
therefore, that Jerome, who had not seen the epistle, was mistaken in
making it a synodical letter. Jerome characterizes it as an elegant
composition (*elegantem librum*); but, like the epistle of Theophilus,
mentioned in the preceding note, it seems not to have been extant in
Jerome’s time. The dates of Bacchylus’ accession to office and of his
death are not known to us.

<span id="fn_1685"></span>[240:1686](2010163.htm#fr_1685.md) <span
id="iii.x.xxiii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxiii-p11"></span> Polycrates, bishop of Ephesus, is one
of the most noted men connected with the paschal controversy, for the
reason that he was the leader of the bishops of the province of Asia, in
which province alone the Quartodeciman practice was uniformly observed.
He was thus the leading opponent of Bishop Victor of Rome. His relation
to the paschal controversy is brought out more fully in chap. 24. The
dates of Polycrates’ accession to office and of his death are not known
to us; though, of course, with Theophilus, Narcissus, Bacchylus, and the
other bishops concerned in the paschal controversy, he flourished during
the reign of Septimius Severus, while Victor was bishop of Rome. The
only writing of Polycrates of which we know is his epistle to Victor, a
portion of which is quoted by Eusebius, in Bk. III. chap. 31, and a
still larger portion in chap. 24 of this book.

<span id="iii.x.xxiii-p12"></span>Jerome, in his *de vir. ill.* c. 45
speaks in terms of the highest praise of Polycrates, and quotes from
Eusebius the larger fragment, given in chap. 24, adding, *Hæc propterea
posui, ut ingenium et auctoritatem viri ex parvo opusculo demonstrarem.*
The fact that he quotes only the passages given by Eusebius would be
enough to show that he quoted from Eusebius, and not directly from
Polycrates, even were it not plain from the statement in his *Chron.,*
referred to in note 6, that Polycrates’ epistle was, so far as Jerome
knew, no longer extant. Polycrates himself informs us, in the second
fragment given in chap. 24, that he wrote his epistle with the consent
and approval of all the bishops present at the council summoned by him
to discuss the paschal question. The fact that both Eusebius and Jerome
praise Polycrates so highly, and testify to his orthodoxy, shows how
completely the paschal question had been buried before their time, and
how little the Quartodeciman practice was feared.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIII](2010164.md)
