[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010379)  [Next](2010381.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.i"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p1"></span> <span id="page_466">p. 466</span> <span
id="iv.iv.i-Page_466"></span><span class="c16"><span
id="iv.iv.i-p1.1"></span>II.—Special Prolegomena.</span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p2"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="iv.iv.i-p2.1"></span>\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_</span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p3"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iv.iv.i-p3.1"></span>§1. The Life of Constantine.</span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p4"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iv.iv.i-p4.1"></span>1.</span> *Editions*

<span id="iv.iv.i-p5"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iv.iv.i-p5.1"></span>The</span> Life is found in the editions of
Eusebius (compare list in Dr. McGiffert’s Prolegomena) of 1544 (p.
117a–), 1612 (p. 301–), 1659, 1672, 1678, 1720 (p. 583–) and 1822 at
least. The edition of Heinichen first published in 1830 (p. 1–332,
333–406, 407–500) and republished in 1869: *Eusebius Pamphili Vita
Constantini et Panegyricus atque Constantini ad sanctorum Coetum oratio.
Recensuit cum annotatione critica atque indicibus denuo edidit…Lipsiæ,
Hermann Mendelssohn, 1869.* 8o is the latest and best.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p6"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iv.iv.i-p6.1"></span>2.</span> *Translations*

<span id="iv.iv.i-p7"></span>The editions of *Latin* translations are
very numerous. Basil. 1549, Portesius (V.C. 650–698, O.C. 698–715, no
L.C.); Basil, 1557, Musculus (V.C. 158–215, O.C. 217–231, no L.C.);
Basil, 1559 (V.C. 650–698, O.C. 698–715); Par. 1562, Musculus (V.C.
160–218, O.C. 218–234); Antv. 1568 (?), Christophorson (V.C. 224–306a,
O.C. 306b–326a, L.C. 326b–361); Basil, 1570, Portesius (V.C. 862–914,
O.C. 915–932) and Christophorson (L.C. 932–971); Paris, 1571,
Christophorson (258–341, 341–362, 362–397); Basil, 1579, Portesius (V.C.
862–914, O.C. 915–932), and Christophorson (L.C. 923–971); Paris, 1581
(V.C. p. 214–297, O.C. 297–317, L.C. 317–355); Colon. 1581,
Christophorson (V.C. 195–268, O.C. 269–286, L.C. 287–317); “1591
(Grynæus)”; Basil, 1611 (Grynæus), Christophorson (V.C. 118–170, O.C.
171–184, no L.C.); Paris, 1677, Valesius (V.C. 164–232, O.C. 233–248;
L.C. 249–275); Frf. ad M. 1695, Valesius (328–465, 466–497, 498–549);
Cambr. 1720 (Reading) Valesius; Cambr. 1746 (Reading) Valesius; 1822
(Zimmermann), Valesius (772–1046, 1047–1117, 1118–1232); Par. 1842
(Cailleau). The editions of 1612, 1659, and 1672 at least also have
Latin translations. There is a *French* translation by J. Morin, *<span
id="iv.iv.i-p7.1"></span>Histoire de la délivrance de l’Église, &c.,
Par. 1630,* fol., and another by Cousin, *Par. 1675,* 4º, and *1686,*
4º. There is a *German* translation by Stroth, Quedlinb. 1799, v. 2, p.
141–468, and one by Molzberger. Kempten, 1880. For English translations,
see the following paragraph.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p8"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iv.iv.i-p8.1"></span>3.</span> *English translations*

<span id="iv.iv.i-p9"></span>The first English translation of Eusebius
was by Merideth Hanmer (compare Prolegomena of Dr. McGiffert). The first
editions of Hanmer did not contain the Life of Constantine. It is a
little hard to distinguish the early editions, but there were at least
three, and perhaps four, editions (1577 (76), 1585 (84), 1607, 1619?),
before there was added in 1637 to the 1636 edition (“fourth edition” not
“fifth edition 1650,” as Wood, *Athenæ Oxon.*), a translation by Wye
Saltonstall as follows:

<span id="iv.iv.i-p10"></span>*Eusebius* \| *His life of Constantine,*
\| *in foure* \| *bookes.* \| *With Constantine’s Oration to the Clergie
\| … \| London.* \| *Printed by Thomas Cotes, for Michael Sparke, and
are to be* \| *sold at the blue Bible in greene Arbour* \| *1637*; fol.
pp. (2) 1–106 (E), 107–132 (C), 133–163 (4) (L.C.). The dedication by
the “translator” is signed *Wye Saltonstall*. This was reprinted:
*London.* <span id="page_467">p. 467</span> <span
id="iv.iv.i-Page_467"></span>*Printed by Abraham Miller, dwelling in
Black Friers, 1649.* fol., and is probably the same as that quoted often
(e.g. Hoffmann) as 1650. The Life occupies p. 1–74. It was again
reprinted, *London*, *1656*, fol., it is said, revised and enlarged. The
former editions having become exhausted, it was proposed to re-edit and
republish Hanmer’s (Saltonstall’s) version, but the editor found it “a
work of far greater labor to bring *Dr. Hanmer’s Translation* to an
agreement with the *Greek Text of Valesius’ Edition*, than to make a
*New One*,” which latter thing he accordingly did and did well. It was
published in 1682, with the following title:

<span id="iv.iv.i-p11"></span>*The \| Life \| of \| Constantine \| in
four books, \| Written in Greek, by Eusebius Pamphilus, Bishop of
Cæsarea in \| Palestine; done into English from that edition set forth
by \| Valesius, and Printed at Paris in the Year 1659. \| Together with
\| Valesius’s Annotations on the said Life, which are made \| English,
and set at their proper places in the margin. \| Hereto is also annext
the Emperour Constantine’s Oration to the \| Convention of the Saints,
and Eusebius Pamphilus’s Speech concerning the praises of Constantine,
\| spoken at his tricennalia. \| Cambridge, \| Printed by John Hayes,
Printer to the University, 1682*, fol. This was published with the 1683
edition of the History, and so is properly 1683 in spite of title-page.
In 1692 this was reprinted with a general title-page, but otherwise
identically the same edition with same sub-titles and same paging. In
1709 a new edition was published, also with the History, having
substantially the same matter on the title-page but *The second edition.
London. Printed for N. and J. Churchill, in the Year 1709.* In this
paging is the same (527–633), but there is preliminary matter added
before the History. This version is said by Crusé (compare also Dr.
McGiffert’s Prolegomena) to be by T. Shorting. Whoever it was by, it was
well done and most interesting. In the course of time, however, it
became antiquated in form, and there was added in 1845 to the Bagster
edition of the ecclesiastical historians an anonymous translation:

<span id="iv.iv.i-p12"></span>*The* \| *Life* \| *of* \| *the Blessed
Emperor* \| *Constantine*, \| *in four books*. \| *From 306–337 <span
class="c13"><span id="iv.iv.i-p12.1"></span>a.d</span>* \| *By* \|
*Eusebius Pamphilus* \| ... \| *London:* \| *Samuel Bagster and Sons;*
\| ... \| *MDCCCXLV*. 8º p. xx, 380. This translation is in somewhat
inflated style, which perhaps represents Eusebius and Constantine better
than a simpler one, but which sometimes out-Herods Herod, as, e.g. in
the oration of Constantine, p. 279, where it takes fourteen English
words to express seven Greek ones, “Far otherwise has it been during the
corrupt and lawless period of human life” for “It was not thus in
lawless times.” A quotation from Matthew ([Matt.
26.52](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#052)<span id="iv.iv.i-p12.2"></span>.md)
on p. 267 takes eight words in the original, twelve in the 1881 Revised
Version, sixteen in the phrase of Constantine, and twenty-two in this
translation. The translation is made from the edition of Valesius, not
the first of Heinichen, as appears from the division of Bk. I, chap. 10,
and similar peculiarities. The present edition (1890) is a revision of
the translation of 1845 founded on the edition of Heinichen.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p13"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iv.iv.i-p13.1"></span>4.</span> *Author and date*

<span id="iv.iv.i-p14"></span>Almost no fact of history is unquestioned;
therefore the unquestionable authorship of Eusebius has been questioned.
Some have made the author Macarius (compare Vog. Hist. lit. p. 12),
evidently on the ground of the letter (3. 52) which the author says was
addressed to himself, but which is to Macarius and others, but there is
no real doubt of the Eusebian authorship. It was written after the death
of Constantine (337), and therefore between 337 and 340, when Eusebius
died. The interesting hypothesis of Meyer (p. 28) that it was perhaps
written mainly in Constantine’s lifetime, at the suggestion and under
the direction of Constantine, to defend him against charges brought, or
which might be brought, against him, is worth mentioning, although it is
more ingenious than probable. The headings of the chapters are by
another, though probably not much later, and a competent hand (cf.
Lightfoot).

<span id="iv.iv.i-p15"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iv.iv.i-p15.1"></span>5.</span> *Trustworthiness of Eusebius*

<span id="iv.iv.i-p16"></span>The value of a writer is determined by (1)
His sources of knowledge, (2) His own intellectual and moral ability.
Again, the criticism of a given work seeks whether the aim pro<span
id="page_468">p. 468</span> <span id="iv.iv.i-Page_468"></span>posed for
that work has been truly fulfilled. A man who attempts a treatise on
Geometry is not to be criticised because he omits mention of sulphuric
acid, or if he proposes a description of Wagner’s music, because he does
not produce a Helmholtz on Sound. The application of these principles to
Eusebius’ Life of Constantine requires brief examination of 1. The
proposed scope of the work. 2. The character of the sources. 3. The
intellectual and moral competency of Eusebius on the premises.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p17"></span>(1) *The Scope of the Work*. This is quite
definitely outlined (i. 11). In contrast with those who have recorded
the evil deeds of other emperors and have thus “become to those who by
some favor had been kept apart from evil, teachers not of good, but of
what should be silenced in oblivion and darkness,” he proposes to record
the noble actions of this emperor. He proposes, however, to pass over
many things,—his wars, personal bravery, victories, and successes, his
legislative acts, and many other things, and confine himself to such
things as have reference to his religious character. His aim, therefore,
is distinctly limited to his religious acts, and it is not stretching
his meaning too far to say, expressly limited to his virtuous actions.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p18"></span>(2) *Character of the Sources*. Respecting
this there is endless controversy. The fullness of material is
unquestionable, the intellectual competency of Eusebius is almost
equally so, and the questionings regard mainly whether the author has
made a proper use of material. Opinions are various, but this does not
mean that they are equally well grounded and valuable. Some of the
latest judgments are the most severe. Crivellucci (Livorno, 1888) calls
it an historical novel, and Görres, in a review of Crivellucci, agrees
that it is worth less than the Panegyrics of Eumenius and Nazarius,
which is certainly milder than Manso’s (p. 222) “more shameless and
lying” than these. Right or wrong, this is a frequently repeated view.
Some (Hely, p. 141) cannot speak too strongly of the “contempt” which he
“deserves,” and accuse of “pious fraud” or the next thing to it
(Kestner, 1816, p. 67). For farther criticisms consult the works cited
by Dr. McGiffert under *Literature*, and the special works on Eusebius
cited in the *Literature* to Constantine above, *passim*. The criticisms
group generally around 1. The suppression of the facts respecting the
deaths of Crispus, &c., and various others derogatory to Constantine. 2.
The eulogistic tone and coloring of the work, especially the very
pietistic saintly sort of flavor given to Constantine.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p19"></span>As to the suppression of facts, note (1)
That he gives entire warning of his plan. It would have been
artistically and ethically improper, in a work which distinctly sets out
with such purpose, to admit that class of facts. It takes more or less
from the value of the work, but it does not reflect on the general
trustworthiness of what is said. (2) No similar judgment is passed on
Eutropius, the Victors, Anonymous Valesianus or Zosimus, for not
mentioning his pious acts. (3) A comparison of most biographies of
living and dead presidents, kings, and emperors will be greatly to the
advantage, even, of this fourth century eulogist over those of our
boasted critical age.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p20"></span>As to the eulogistic and exaggerated tone,
observe (1) That it was more or less justified. That is, the premises of
the criticism which are substantially that Constantine was not saintly
or pietistic and was non-committal toward Christianity, are false. His
extreme testimony is backed by very general testimony in the election of
Constantine to technical saintship. (2) That is compares well with
modern eulogists and extremely well with the contemporary Panegyrists of
Constantine. (3) That Eusebius takes care frequently to guard his
statements by quoting his source, as in the matter of the vision of the
cross, or by ascribing to hearsay.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p21"></span>In general, the work stands much on the
same level as the biographies of generals in the late civil war, or of
presidents, written by admiring members of their staffs or cabinets,
incorporat<span id="page_469">p. 469</span> <span
id="iv.iv.i-Page_469"></span>ing authentic documents, intending to be
truthful, and generally succeeding, but yet full of the enthusiasm of
admiring friendship and inclined not to see, or to extenuate or even
suppress, faults and mistakes. Nevertheless, they are valuable on the
positive side as the real testimony to genuinely believed excellency by
those in the position to know intimately. Eusebius is, substantially,
genuine. Such supreme hypocrisy as would produce this work, without
admiring respect and *after its subject was dead*, is inconceivable in
him. All the unconscious turns of phrase show at least a consistent
attitude of mind. The work is, in brief, by a competent author, from
ample sources and without intentional falsification or
misrepresentation. It probably represents the current Christian view of
the man as accurately and honestly as any biography of Lincoln or the
Emperor William written within a year or two of their deaths has done.
As we now think of these two men whom doubtless inquisitive criticism
might find to have faults, so the Christians in general and his friend
Eusebius in particular thought of the Great Emperor. Compare discussion
and literature of the trustworthiness of Eusebius as a historical writer
in the Prolegomena of Dr. McGiffert in this volume.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p22"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iv.iv.i-p22.1"></span>6.</span> *Value of the Work*

<span id="iv.iv.i-p23"></span>That the work on any basis but the
untenable one of out-and-out forgery should be characterized as
“worthless” or “a mere romance” or “of less value than the heathen
panegyrists” is a curious bit of psychological performance, for it does
precisely what it grounds its contempt for Eusebius on,—suppresses and
exaggerates. Taking the minimum residuum of the most penetrating
criticism, and the work is yet a source of primary value for
understanding the man Constantine. This residuum includes (1) The
documents which the work contains. These amount at the very least
estimate to more than one-fourth of the whole matter, and the appended
oration of Constantine is nearly as much more. (2) Many facts and
details where there could be no possibility of motive for falsifying.
(3) Much which critical care can draw out of the over-statements of
eulogy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 2](2010381.md)
