[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010077)  [Next](2010079.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.viii.ix"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ix-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.viii.ix-p1.1"></span>Chapter IX.—</span>*Josephus and the Works
which he has left.*

<span id="iii.viii.ix-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.viii.ix-p2.1"></span>After</span> all this it is fitting that we
should know something in regard to the origin and family of Josephus,
who has contributed so much to the history in hand. He himself gives us
information on this point in the following words: <span
id="fr_666"></span>[667](#fn_666.md) “Josephus, the son of Mattathias, a
priest of Jerusalem, who himself fought against the Romans in the
beginning and was compelled to be present at what happened afterward.”

<span id="iii.viii.ix-p4"></span>2. He was the most noted of all the
Jews of that day, not only among his own people, but also among the
Romans, so that he was honored by the erection of a statue in
Rome, <span id="fr_667"></span>[668](#fn_667.md) and his works were deemed
worthy of a place in the library. <span
id="fr_668"></span>[669](#fn_668.md)

<span id="iii.viii.ix-p7"></span>3. He wrote the whole of the
Antiquities of the Jews <span id="fr_669"></span>[670](#fn_669.md) in
twenty books, and a history of the war with the Romans which took place
in his time, in seven books. <span id="fr_670"></span>[671](#fn_670.md) He
himself testifies that the latter work was not only written in Greek,
but that it was also translated by himself <span id="page_144">p.
144</span> <span id="iii.viii.ix-Page_144"></span>into his native
tongue. <span id="fr_671"></span>[672](#fn_671.md) He is worthy of credit
here because of his truthfulness in other matters.

<span id="iii.viii.ix-p11"></span>4. There are extant also two other
books of his which are worth reading. They treat of the antiquity of the
Jews, <span id="fr_672"></span>[673](#fn_672.md) and in them he replies to
Apion the Grammarian, who had at that time written a treatise against
the Jews, and also to others who had attempted to vilify the hereditary
institutions of the Jewish people.

<span id="iii.viii.ix-p13"></span>5. In the first of these books he
gives the number of the canonical books of the so-called Old Testament.
Apparently <span id="fr_673"></span>[674](#fn_673.md) drawing his
information from ancient tradition, he shows what books were accepted
without dispute among the Hebrews. His words are as follows.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_666"></span>[143:667](2010078.htm#fr_666.md) <span
id="iii.viii.ix-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ix-p3"></span> *B. J.,*Preface, §1. We have an
original source for the life of Josephus, not only in his various works,
in which he makes frequent reference to himself, but also in his
autobiography, which was written after the year 100. The work was
occasioned by the *Chronicle* of Justus of Tiberias, which had
represented him as more patriotic and more hostile to the Romans than he
liked, and he therefore felt impelled to paint himself in the blackest
of colors, as a traitor and renegade,—probably much blacker than he
really was. It is devoted chiefly to an account of the intrigues and
plots formed against him while he was governor of Galilee, and contains
little of general biographical interest, except in the introduction and
the conclusion. Josephus was of a priestly family,—his father Matthias
belonging to the first of the twenty-four courses—and he was born in the
first year of Caius Cæsar; i.e. in the year beginning March 16, 37 <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.viii.ix-p3.1"></span>a.d.</span> He played a
prominent part in the Jewish war, being entrusted with the duty, as
governor of Galilee and commander of the forces there, of meeting and
opposing Vespasian, who attacked that province first. He was, however,
defeated, and gave himself up to the victors, in the summer of 67. He
was treated with honor in the camp of the Romans, whom he served until
the end of the war, and became a favorite and flatterer of the Vespasian
house, incurring thereby the everlasting contempt of his country men. He
went to Rome at the close of the war, and lived in prosperity there
until early in the second century. His works are our chief source for a
knowledge of Jewish affairs from the time of the Maccabees, and as such
are, and will always remain, indispensable, and their author immortal,
whatever his character. He was a man of learning and of talent, but of
inordinate selfishness and self-esteem. He was formerly accused of great
inaccuracy, and his works were considered a very poor historical source;
but later investigations have increased his credit, and he seems, upon
the whole, to have been a historian of unusual ability and
conscientiousness.

<span id="fn_667"></span>[143:668](2010078.htm#fr_667.md) <span
id="iii.viii.ix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ix-p5"></span> Eusebius is the only one, so far as we
know, to mention this statue in Rome, and what authority there is for
his statement we cannot tell.

<span id="fn_668"></span>[143:669](2010078.htm#fr_668.md) <span
id="iii.viii.ix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ix-p6"></span> In §64 of his *Life* Josephus tells us
that Titus was so much pleased with his accounts of the Jewish war that
he subscribed his name to them, and ordered them published (see the next
chapter, §8 sqq., where the passage is quoted). The first public library
in Rome, according to Pliny, was founded by Pollio (76 <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.viii.ix-p6.1"></span>b.c.</span>–4 <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.viii.ix-p6.2"></span>a.d.</span>). The one
referred to here is undoubtedly the imperial library, which, according
to Suetonius, was originally established by Augustus in the temple of
Apollo on the Palatine, and contained two sections,—one for Greek, and
the other for Latin works. It was greatly enlarged by Tiberius and
Domitian.

<span id="fn_669"></span>[143:670](2010078.htm#fr_669.md) <span
id="iii.viii.ix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ix-p8"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.ix-p8.1"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.ix-p8.2"></span>Ιουδαϊκὴ ᾽Αρχαιολογία</span>, *Antiquitates
Judaicæ.* This work, which is still extant, is Josephus’ most extensive
work, and aims to give, in twenty books, a complete history of the Jews,
from the time of Abraham to the beginning of the great war with Rome.
The object of the work is mainly apologetic, the author aiming to place
Judaism before Gentile readers in as favorable a light as possible. It
contains much legendary matter, but is the main source for our knowledge
of a long period of Jewish history, and as such is invaluable. The work
was completed, according to his own statement (XX. 11. 2), in the
thirteenth year of Domitian (93–94 <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.viii.ix-p8.3"></span>a.d.</span>), and frequently corrects
erroneous statements made in his earlier work upon the Jewish war.

<span id="fn_670"></span>[143:671](2010078.htm#fr_670.md) <span
id="iii.viii.ix-p8.4"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ix-p9"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.ix-p9.1"></span>῾</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.ix-p9.2"></span>Ιστορία ᾽Ιουδαϊκοῦ πολέμου πρὸς
῾Ρωμαίους</span>, *de Bello Judaico.* This work, in seven books,
constitutes our most complete and trustworthy source for a knowledge of
that great war, so momentous in its consequences both to Judaism and to
Christianity. The author wrote from personal knowledge of many of the
events described, and had, besides, access to extensive and reliable
written sources: and the general accuracy of the work may therefore be
accepted. He says that he undertook the work for the purpose of giving a
true narrative of the war, in consequence of the many false and
distorted accounts which had already appeared in various quarters. He
presented the work, when finished, to Vespasian and Titus, and obtained
their approval and testimony to its trustworthiness: and hence it must
have been written during the reign of Vespasian, probably toward the end
of it, as other works upon the war had preceded his (*B. J.,* Preface,
§1).

<span id="fn_671"></span>[144:672](2010078.htm#fr_671.md) <span
id="iii.viii.ix-p9.3"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ix-p10"></span> The work, as Josephus informs us (*B.
J.,* Preface, §1; and *contra Apion.* I. 9), was written originally in
his own tongue,—Aramaic,—and afterwards translated by himself into
Greek, with the help of others. Eusebius inverts the fact, making the
Greek the original.

<span id="fn_672"></span>[144:673](2010078.htm#fr_672.md) <span
id="iii.viii.ix-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ix-p12"></span> The full title of this work is the
*Apology of Flavius Josephus on the Antiquities of the Jews against
Apion* (<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.viii.ix-p12.1"></span>περὶ
ἀρχαιότητος ᾽Ιουδαίων κατὰ ᾽Απίωνος</span>, *De Antiquitate Judæorum
contra Apionem*). It is ordinarily cited simply as *contra Apionem*
(*Against Apion*). It consists of two books, and is, in fact, nothing
else than an apology for Judaism in general, and to a less extent, a
defense of himself and his former work (the *Antiquities*) against
hostile critics. The common title, *contra Apionem,* is rather
misleading, as he is not once mentioned in the first book, although in
the first part of the second book he is attacked with considerable
bitterness and through him a large class of enemies and detractors of
Judaism. (Upon Apion, the famous Alexandrian and the bitter enemy of the
Jews, see above, Bk. II. chap. 5, note 5.) The work is Josephus’ best
effort from a literary point of view, and shows both learning and
ability, and in spite of its brevity contains much of great value. It
was written after his *Antiquities* (i.e. after 93 <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.viii.ix-p12.2"></span>a.d.</span>), how long
afterward we cannot tell. These three works of Josephus, with his
autobiography already mentioned (note 1), are all that are extant,
although he seems to have written another work relating to the history
of the Seleucidæ (cf. *Ant.* XIII. 2. 1, 2. 4, 4. 6, 5. 11) of which not
a trace remains, and which is mentioned by no one else. The other works
planned by Josephus—*On God and his Essence* (*Ant.* XX. 11. 3), and *On
the Laws of the Jews* (*ibid.* and *Ant.* III. 5. 6, 8. 10)—seem never
to have been written. (They are mentioned also by Eusebius in the next
chapter.) Other compositions attributed to him are not from his hand.
The best edition of the works of Josephus is that of Benedict Niese
(Berlin, 1885 sq.), of which the first two volumes have been already
issued, comprising ten books of the *Antiquities.* A good complete
edition is that of Dindorf (Paris, 1845–47, 2 vols.). That of Bekker
(Leipzig, 1855, 6 vols.) is very convenient. The only complete English
translation is by Whiston, unfortunately uncritical and inaccurate.
Traill’s translation of the *Jewish War* (London, 1862) is a great
improvement, but does not cover the remainder of Josephus’ works. Upon
Josephus and his writings, see the article of Edersheim in the *Dict. of
Christ. Biog.* III. 441–460, and compare the literature given there.

<span id="fn_673"></span>[144:674](2010078.htm#fr_673.md) <span
id="iii.viii.ix-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ix-p14"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.ix-p14.1"></span>ὡ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.ix-p14.2"></span>σ€ν</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X](2010079.md)
