[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010066)  [Next](2010068.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vii.xxvi"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xxvi-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vii.xxvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXV.—</span>*The Persecution under
Nero in which Paul and Peter were honored at Rome with Martyrdom in
Behalf of Religion.*

<span id="iii.vii.xxvi-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.vii.xxvi-p2.1"></span>When</span> the government of Nero was now
firmly established, he began to plunge into unholy pursuits, and armed
himself even against the religion of the God of the universe.

<span id="iii.vii.xxvi-p3"></span>2. To describe the greatness of his
depravity does not lie within the plan of the present work. As there are
many indeed that have recorded his history in most accurate
narratives, <span id="fr_535"></span>[536](#fn_535.md) every one may at his
pleasure learn from them the coarseness of the man’s extraordinary
madness, under the influence of which, after he had accomplished the
destruction of so many myriads without any reason, he ran into such
blood-guiltiness that he did not spare even his nearest relatives and
dearest friends, but destroyed his mother and his brothers and his
wife, <span id="fr_536"></span>[537](#fn_536.md) with very many others of
his own family <span id="page_129">p. 129</span> <span
id="iii.vii.xxvi-Page_129"></span>as he would private and public
enemies, with various kinds of deaths.

<span id="iii.vii.xxvi-p6"></span>3. But with all these things this
particular in the catalogue of his crimes was still wanting, that he was
the first of the emperors who showed himself an enemy of the divine
religion.

<span id="iii.vii.xxvi-p7"></span>4. The Roman Tertullian is likewise a
witness of this. He writes as follows: <span
id="fr_537"></span>[538](#fn_537.md) “Examine your records. There you will
find that Nero was the first that persecuted this doctrine, <span
id="fr_538"></span>[539](#fn_538.md) particularly then when after subduing
all the east, he exercised his cruelty against all at Rome. <span
id="fr_539"></span>[540](#fn_539.md) We glory in having such a man the
leader in our punishment. For whoever knows him can understand that
nothing was condemned by Nero unless it was something of great
excellence.”

<span id="iii.vii.xxvi-p11"></span>5. Thus publicly announcing himself
as the first among God’s chief enemies, he was led on to the slaughter
of the apostles. It is, therefore, recorded that Paul was beheaded in
Rome itself, <span id="fr_540"></span>[541](#fn_540.md) and that Peter
likewise was crucified under Nero. <span
id="fr_541"></span>[542](#fn_541.md) This account of Peter and Paul is
substantiated by the fact that their names are preserved in the
cemeteries of that place even to the present day.

<span id="iii.vii.xxvi-p14"></span>6. It is confirmed likewise by
Caius, <span id="fr_542"></span>[543](#fn_542.md) <span id="page_130">p.
130</span> <span id="iii.vii.xxvi-Page_130"></span>a member of the
Church, <span id="fr_543"></span>[544](#fn_543.md) who arose <span
id="fr_544"></span>[545](#fn_544.md) under Zephyrinus, <span
id="fr_545"></span>[546](#fn_545.md) bishop of Rome. He, in a published
disputation with Proclus, <span id="fr_546"></span>[547](#fn_546.md) the
leader of the Phrygian heresy, <span id="fr_547"></span>[548](#fn_547.md)
speaks as follows concerning the places where the sacred corpses of the
aforesaid apostles are laid:

<span id="iii.vii.xxvi-p21"></span>7. “But <span
id="fr_548"></span>[549](#fn_548.md) I can show the trophies of the
apostles. For if you will go to the Vatican <span
id="fr_549"></span>[550](#fn_549.md) or to the Ostian way, <span
id="fr_550"></span>[551](#fn_550.md) you will find the trophies of those
who laid the foundations of this church.” <span
id="fr_551"></span>[552](#fn_551.md)

<span id="iii.vii.xxvi-p26"></span>8. And that they both suffered
martyrdom at the same time is stated by Dionysius, bishop of
Corinth, <span id="fr_552"></span>[553](#fn_552.md) in his epistle to the
Romans, <span id="fr_553"></span>[554](#fn_553.md) in the following words:
“You have thus by such an admonition bound together the planting of
Peter and of Paul at Rome and Corinth. For both of them planted and
likewise taught us in our Corinth. <span
id="fr_554"></span>[555](#fn_554.md) And they taught together in like
manner in Italy, and suffered martyrdom at the same time.” <span
id="fr_555"></span>[556](#fn_555.md) I have quoted these things in order
that the truth of the history might be still more confirmed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_535"></span>[128:536](2010067.htm#fr_535.md) <span
id="iii.vii.xxvi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xxvi-p4"></span> Tacitus (*Ann.* XIII.–XVI.),
Suetonius (*Nero*), and Dion Cassius (LXI.–LXIII.).

<span id="fn_536"></span>[128:537](2010067.htm#fr_536.md) <span
id="iii.vii.xxvi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xxvi-p5"></span> Nero’s mother, Agrippina the younger,
daughter of Germanicus and of Agrippina the elder, was assassinated at
Nero’s command in 60 <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.vii.xxvi-p5.1"></span>a.d.</span> in her villa on Lake Lucrine,
after an unsuccessful attempt to drown her in a boat so constructed as
to break to pieces while she was sailing in it on the lake. His younger
brother Britannicus was poisoned by his order at a banquet in 55 <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.vii.xxvi-p5.2"></span>a.d.</span> His first
wife Octavia was divorced in order that he might marry Poppæa, the wife
of his friend Otho, and was afterward put to death. Poppæa herself died
from the effects of a kick given her by Nero while she was with child.

<span id="fn_537"></span>[129:538](2010067.htm#fr_537.md) <span
id="iii.vii.xxvi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xxvi-p8"></span> Tertullian, *Apol.* V.

<span id="fn_538"></span>[129:539](2010067.htm#fr_538.md) <span
id="iii.vii.xxvi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xxvi-p9"></span> We learn from Tacitus, *Ann.* XV. 39,
that Nero was suspected to be the author of the great Roman
conflagration, which took place in 64 <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.vii.xxvi-p9.1"></span>a.d.</span> (Pliny, *H. N.* XVII. I,
Suetonius, 38, and Dion Cassius, LXII. 18, state directly that he was
the author of it), and that to avert this suspicion from himself he
accused the Christians of the deed, and the terrible Neronian
persecution which Tacitus describes so fully was the result. Gibbon, and
in recent times especially Schiller (*Geschichte der Römischen
Kaiserzeit unter der Regierung des Nero,* p. 584 sqq.), have maintained
that Tacitus was mistaken in calling this a persecution of Christians,
which was rather a persecution of the Jews as a whole. But we have no
reason for impeaching Tacitus’ accuracy in this case, especially since
we remember that the Jews enjoyed favor with Nero through his wife
Poppæa. What is very significant, Josephus is entirely silent in regard
to a persecution of his countrymen under Nero. We may assume as probable
(with Ewald and Renan) that it was through the suggestion of the Jews
that Nero’s attention was drawn to the Christians, and he was led to
throw the guilt upon them, as a people whose habits would best give
countenance to such a suspicion, and most easily excite the rage of the
populace against them. This was not a persecution of the Christians in
the strict sense, that is, it was not aimed against their religion as
such; and yet it assumed such proportions and was attended with such
horrors that it always lived in the memory of the Church as the first
and one of the most awful of a long line of persecutions instituted
against them by imperial Rome, and it revealed to them the essential
conflict which existed between Rome as it then was and Christianity.

<span id="fn_539"></span>[129:540](2010067.htm#fr_539.md) <span
id="iii.vii.xxvi-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xxvi-p10"></span> The Greek translator of Tertullian’s
*Apology,* whoever he may have been (certainly not Eusebius himself; see
chap. 2, note 9, above), being ignorant of the Latin idiom *cum maxime,*
has made very bad work of this sentence, and has utterly destroyed the
sense of the original, which runs as follows: *illic reperietis primum
Neronem in hanc sectam cum maxime Romæ orientem Cæsariano gladio
ferocisse* (“There you will find that Nero was the first to assail with
the imperial sword the Christian sect, which was then especially
flourishing in Rome”). The Greek translation reads: <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.vii.xxvi-p10.1"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.vii.xxvi-p10.2"></span>κεῖ εὑρήσετε πρῶτον
Νερῶνα τοῦτο τὸ δόγμα, ἡνίκα μ€λιστα ἐν ῾Ρώμῃ τὴν ἀνατολὴν πᾶσαν
ὑποτ€ξας ὠμὸς ἦν εἰς π€ντας, διώξοντα</span>, in the rendering of which
I have followed Crusè, who has reproduced the idea of the Greek
translator with as much fidelity as the sentence will allow. The German
translators, Stroth and Closs, render the sentence directly from the
original Latin, and thus preserve the meaning of Tertullian, which is,
of course, what the Greek translator intended to reproduce. I have not,
however, felt at liberty in the present case to follow their example.

<span id="fn_540"></span>[129:541](2010067.htm#fr_540.md) <span
id="iii.vii.xxvi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xxvi-p12"></span> This tradition, that Paul suffered
martyrdom in Rome, is early and universal, and disputed by no
counter-tradition and may be accepted as the one certain historical fact
known about Paul outside of the New Testament accounts. Clement (*Ad.
Cor.* chap. 5) is the first to mention the death of Paul, and seems to
imply, though he does not directly state, that his death took place in
Rome during the persecution of Nero. Caius (quoted below, §7), a writer
of the first quarter of the third century, is another witness to his
death in Rome, as is also Dionysius of Corinth (quoted below, §8) of the
second century. Origen (quoted by Euseb. III. 1) states that he was
martyred in Rome under Nero. Tertullian (at the end of the second
century), in his *De præscriptione Hær.* chap. 36, is still more
distinct, recording that Paul was beheaded in Rome. Eusebius and Jerome
accept this tradition unhesitatingly, and we may do likewise. As a Roman
citizen, we should expect him to meet death by the sword.

<span id="fn_541"></span>[129:542](2010067.htm#fr_541.md) <span
id="iii.vii.xxvi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xxvi-p13"></span> The tradition that Peter suffered
martyrdom in Rome is as old and as universal as that in regard to Paul,
but owing to a great amount of falsehood which became mixed with the
original tradition by the end of the second century the whole has been
rejected as untrue by some modern critics, who go so far as to deny that
Peter was ever at Rome. (See especially Lipsius’ *Die Quellen der
römischen Petrus-Sage,* Kiel, 1872; a summary of his view is given by
Jackson in the *Presbyterian Quarterly and Princeton Review,* 1876, p.
265 sq. In Lipsius’ latest work upon this subject, *Die Acta Pauli und
Petri,* 1887, he makes important concessions.) The tradition is,
however, too strong to be set aside, and there is absolutely no trace of
any conflicting tradition. We may therefore assume it as overwhelmingly
probable that Peter was in Rome and suffered martyrdom there. His
martyrdom is plainly referred to in [John xxi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#010.md)<span
id="iii.vii.xxvi-p13.1"></span>, though the place of it is not given.
The first extra-biblical witness to it is Clement of Rome. He also
leaves the place of the martyrdom unspecified (*Ad Cor.* 5), but he
evidently assumes the place as well known, and indeed it is impossible
that the early Church could have known of the death of Peter and Paul
without knowing where they died, and there is in neither case a single
opposing tradition. Ignatius (*Ad Rom.* chap. 4) connects Paul and Peter
in an especial way with the Roman Church, which seems plainly to imply
that Peter had been in Rome. Phlegon (supposed to be the Emperor Hadrian
writing under the name of a favorite slave) is said by Origen (*Contra
Celsum,* II. 14) to have confused Jesus and Peter in his *Chronicles.*
This is very significant as implying that Peter must have been well
known in Rome. Dionysius, quoted below, distinctly states that Peter
labored in Rome, and Caius is a witness for it. So Irenæus, Clement,
Tertullian, and later Fathers without a dissenting voice. The first to
mention Peter’s death by crucifixion (unless [John xxi.
18](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#018.md)<span
id="iii.vii.xxvi-p13.2"></span> be supposed to imply it) is Tertullian
(*De Præscrip. Hær.* chap. 36), but he mentions it as a fact already
known, and tradition since his time is so unanimous in regard to it that
we may consider it in the highest degree probable. On the tradition
reported by Origen, that Peter was crucified head downward, see below,
Bk. III. chap. 1, where Origen is quoted by Eusebius.

<span id="fn_542"></span>[129:543](2010067.htm#fr_542.md) <span
id="iii.vii.xxvi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xxvi-p15"></span> The history of Caius is veiled in
obscurity. All that we know of him is that he was a very learned
ecclesiastical writer, who at the beginning of the third century held a
disputation with Proclus in Rome (cf. Bk. VI. chap. 20, below). The
accounts of him given by Jerome, Theodoret, and Nicephorus are drawn
from Eusebius and furnish us no new data. Photius, however (*Bibl.*
XLVIII.), reports that Caius was said to have been a presbyter of the
Roman Church during the episcopates of Victor and Zephyrinus, and to
have been elected “Bishop of the Gentiles,” and hence he is commonly
spoken of as a presbyter of the Roman Church, though the tradition rests
certainly upon a very slender foundation, as Photius lived some six
hundred years after Caius, and is the first to mention the fact. Photius
also, although with hesitation, ascribes to Caius a work *On the Cause
of the Universe,* and one called *The Labyrinth,* and another *Against
the Heresy of Artemon* (see below, Bk. V. chap. 28, note 1). The first
of these (and by some the last also), is now commonly ascribed to
Hippolytus. Though the second may have been written by Caius it is no
longer extant, and hence all that we have of his writings are the
fragments of the *Dialogue with Proclus* preserved by Eusebius in this
chapter and in Bk. III. chaps. 28, 31. The absence of any notice of the
personal activity of so distinguished a writer has led some critics
(e.g. Salmon in Smith and Wace, I. p. 386, who refers to Lightfoot,
*Journal of Philology,* I. 98, as holding the same view) to assume the
identity of Caius and Hippolytus, supposing that Hippolytus in the
*Dialogue with Proclus* styled himself simply by his prænomen Caius and
that thus as the book fell into the hands of strangers the tradition
arose of a writer Caius who in reality never had a separate existence.
This theory is ingenious, and in many respects plausible, and certainly
cannot be disproved (owing chiefly to our lack of knowledge about
Caius), and yet in the absence of any proof that Hippolytus actually
bore the prænomen Caius it can be regarded as no more than a bare
hypothesis. The two are distinguished by Eusebius and by all the writers
who mention them. On Caius’ attitude toward the Apocalypse, see Bk. III.
chap. 28, note 4; and on his opinion in regard to the authorship of the
Epistle to the Hebrews, see Bk. VI. chap. 20, and Bk. III. chap. 3, note
17. The fragments of Caius (including fragments from the *Little
Labyrinth,* mentioned above) are given with annotations in Routh’s *Rel.
Sacræ,* II. 125–158 and in translation (with the addition of the
Muratorian Fragment, wrongly ascribed to Caius by its discoverer) in the
*Ante-Nicene Fathers,* V. 599–604. See also the article of Salmon in
Smith and Wace, of Harnack, in Herzog (2d ed.), and Schaff’s *Ch. Hist.*
II. p. 775 sqq.

<span id="fn_543"></span>[130:544](2010067.htm#fr_543.md) <span
id="iii.vii.xxvi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xxvi-p16"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vii.xxvi-p16.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vii.xxvi-p16.2"></span>κκλησιαστικὸς ἀνἡρ</span>.

<span id="fn_544"></span>[130:545](2010067.htm#fr_544.md) <span
id="iii.vii.xxvi-p16.3"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xxvi-p17"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vii.xxvi-p17.1"></span>γεγονώς</span>. Crusè translates “born”;
but Eusebius cannot have meant that, for in Bk. VI. chap. 20 he tells us
that Caius’ disputation with Proclus was held during the episcopate of
Zephyrinus. He used <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vii.xxvi-p17.2"></span>γεγονώς</span>, therefore, as to indicate
that at that time he came into public notice, as we use the word
“arose.”

<span id="fn_545"></span>[130:546](2010067.htm#fr_545.md) <span
id="iii.vii.xxvi-p17.3"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xxvi-p18"></span> On Zephyrinus, see below, Bk. V.
chap. 28, §7.

<span id="fn_546"></span>[130:547](2010067.htm#fr_546.md) <span
id="iii.vii.xxvi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xxvi-p19"></span> This Proclus probably introduced
Montanism into Rome at the beginning of the third century. According to
Pseudo-Tertullian (*Adv. omnes Hær.* chap. 7) he was a leader of one
division of the Montanists, the other division being composed of
followers of Æschines. He is probably to be identified with the
*Proculus noster,* classed by Tertullian, in *Adv. Val.* chap. 5, with
Justin Martyr, Miltiades, and Irenæus as a successful opponent of
heresy.

<span id="fn_547"></span>[130:548](2010067.htm#fr_547.md) <span
id="iii.vii.xxvi-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xxvi-p20"></span> The sect of the Montanists. Called
the “Phrygian heresy,” from the fact that it took its rise in Phrygia.
Upon Montanism, see below, Bk. IV. chap. 27, and especially Bk. V. chap.
16 sqq.

<span id="fn_548"></span>[130:549](2010067.htm#fr_548.md) <span
id="iii.vii.xxvi-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xxvi-p22"></span> The <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vii.xxvi-p22.1"></span>δὲ</span> here makes it probable that
Caius, in reply to certain claims of Proclus, was asserting over against
him the ability of the Roman church to exhibit the true trophies of the
greatest of all the apostles. And what these claims of Proclus were can
perhaps be gathered from his words, quoted by Eusebius in Bk. III. chap.
31, §4, in which Philip and his daughters are said to have been buried
in Hierapolis. That these two sentences were closely connected in the
original is quite possible.

<span id="fn_549"></span>[130:550](2010067.htm#fr_549.md) <span
id="iii.vii.xxvi-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xxvi-p23"></span> According to an ancient tradition,
Peter was crucified upon the hill of Janiculum, near the Vatican, where
the Church of San Pietro in Montorio now stands, and the hole in which
his cross stood is still shown to the trustful visitor. A more probable
tradition makes the scene of execution the Vatican hill, where Nero’s
circus was, and where the persecution took place. Baronius makes the
whole ridge on the right bank of the Tiber one hill, and thus reconciles
the two traditions. In the fourth century the remains of Peter were
transferred from the Catacombs of San Sebastiano (where they are said to
have been interred in 258 <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.vii.xxvi-p23.1"></span>a.d.</span>) to the Basilica of St.
Peter, which occupied the sight of the present basilica on the Vatican.

<span id="fn_550"></span>[130:551](2010067.htm#fr_550.md) <span
id="iii.vii.xxvi-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xxvi-p24"></span> Paul was beheaded, according to
tradition, on the Ostian way, at the spot now occupied by the Abbey of
the Three Fountains. The fountains, which are said to have sprung up at
the spots where Paul’s head struck the ground three times after the
decapitation, are still shown, as also the pillar to which he is
supposed to have been bound! In the fourth century, at the same time
that Peter’s remains were transferred to the Vatican, Paul’s remains are
said to have been buried in the Basilica of St. Paul, which occupied the
site now marked by the church of San Paolo fuori le mura. There is
nothing improbable in the traditions as to the spot where Paul and Peter
met their death. They are as old as the second century; and while they
cannot be accepted as indisputably true (since there is always a
tendency to fix the deathplace of a great man even if it is not known),
yet on the other hand if Peter and Paul were martyred in Rome, it is
hardly possible that the place of their death and burial could have been
forgotten by the Roman church itself within a century and a half.

<span id="fn_551"></span>[130:552](2010067.htm#fr_551.md) <span
id="iii.vii.xxvi-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xxvi-p25"></span> Neither Paul nor Peter founded the
Roman church in the strict sense, for there was a congregation of
believers there even before Paul came to Rome, as his Epistle to the
Romans shows, and Peter cannot have reached there until some time after
Paul. It was, however, a very early fiction that Paul and Peter together
founded the church in that city.

<span id="fn_552"></span>[130:553](2010067.htm#fr_552.md) <span
id="iii.vii.xxvi-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xxvi-p27"></span> On Dionysius of Corinth, see below,
Bk. IV. chap. 23.

<span id="fn_553"></span>[130:554](2010067.htm#fr_553.md) <span
id="iii.vii.xxvi-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xxvi-p28"></span> Another quotation from this epistle
is given in Bk. IV. chap. 23. The fragments are discussed by Routh,
*Rel. Sac.* I. 179 sq.

<span id="fn_554"></span>[130:555](2010067.htm#fr_554.md) <span
id="iii.vii.xxvi-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xxvi-p29"></span> Whatever may be the truth of
Dionysius’ report as to Peter’s martyrdom at Rome, he is almost
certainly in error in speaking as he does of Peter’s work in Corinth. It
is difficult, to be sure, to dispose of so direct and early a tradition,
but it is still more difficult to accept it. The statement that Paul and
Peter together planted the Corinthian church is certainly an error, as
we know that it was Paul’s own church, founded by him alone. The
so-called Cephas party, mentioned in [1 Cor.
i](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#000.md)<span
id="iii.vii.xxvi-p29.1"></span>., is perhaps easiest explained by the
previous presence and activity of Peter in Corinth, but this is by no
means necessary, and the absence of any reference to the fact in the two
epistles of Paul renders it almost absolutely impossible. It is barely
possible, though by no means probable, that Peter visited Corinth on his
way to Rome (assuming the Roman journey) and that thus, although the
church had already been founded many years, he became connected in
tradition with its early days, and finally with its origination. But it
is more probable that the tradition is wholly in error and arose, as
Neander suggests, partly from the mention of Peter in [1 Cor.
i](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#000.md)<span
id="iii.vii.xxvi-p29.2"></span>., partly from the natural desire to
ascribe the origin of this great apostolic church to the two leading
apostles, to whom in like manner the founding of the Roman church was
ascribed. It is significant that this tradition is recorded only by a
Corinthian, who of course had every inducement to accept such a report,
and to repeat it in comparing his own church with the central church of
Christendom. We find no mention of the tradition in later writers, so
far as I am aware.

<span id="fn_555"></span>[130:556](2010067.htm#fr_555.md) <span
id="iii.vii.xxvi-p29.3"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xxvi-p30"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vii.xxvi-p30.1"></span>κατὰ τὸν αὐτὸν καιρόν</span>. The <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.vii.xxvi-p30.2"></span>κατὰ</span> allows
some margin in time and does not necessarily imply the same day.
Dionysius is the first one to connect the deaths of Peter and Paul
chronologically, but later it became quite the custom. One tradition put
their deaths on the same day, one year apart (Augustine and Prudentius,
e.g., are said to support this tradition). Jerome (*de vir. ill.* 1) is
the first to state explicitly that they suffered on the same day.
Eusebius in his *Chron.* (Armen.) puts their martyrdom in 67, Jerome in
68. The Roman Catholic Church celebrates the death of Peter on the 29th
and that of Paul on the 30th of June, but has no fixed tradition as to
the year of the death of either of them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVI](2010068.md)
