[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010093)  [Next](2010095) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.viii.xxv"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxv-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.viii.xxv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXV.—</span>*The Divine Scriptures
that are accepted and those that are not.* <span
id="fr_777"></span>[778](#fn_777)

<span id="iii.viii.xxv-p10"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.viii.xxv-p10.1"></span>Since</span> we are dealing with this
subject it is proper to sum up the writings of the New Testament which
have been already mentioned. First then must be put the holy quaternion
of the Gospels; <span id="fr_778"></span>[779](#fn_778) following them
the Acts of the Apostles. <span id="fr_779"></span>[780](#fn_779)

<span id="iii.viii.xxv-p13"></span>2. After this must be reckoned the
epistles of Paul; <span id="fr_780"></span>[781](#fn_780) next in <span
id="page_156">p. 156</span> <span
id="iii.viii.xxv-Page_156"></span>order the extant former epistle of
John, <span id="fr_781"></span>[782](#fn_781) and likewise the epistle
of Peter, <span id="fr_782"></span>[783](#fn_782) must be
maintained. <span id="fr_783"></span>[784](#fn_783) After them is to be
placed, if it really seem proper, the Apocalypse of John, <span
id="fr_784"></span>[785](#fn_784) concerning which we shall give the
different opinions at the proper time. <span
id="fr_785"></span>[786](#fn_785) These then belong among the accepted
writings. <span id="fr_786"></span>[787](#fn_786)

<span id="iii.viii.xxv-p21"></span>3. Among the disputed writings, <span
id="fr_787"></span>[788](#fn_787) which are nevertheless
recognized <span id="fr_788"></span>[789](#fn_788) by many, are extant
the so-called epistle of James <span id="fr_789"></span>[790](#fn_789)
and that of Jude, <span id="fr_790"></span>[791](#fn_790) also the
second epistle of Peter, <span id="fr_791"></span>[792](#fn_791) and
those that are called the second and third of John, <span
id="fr_792"></span>[793](#fn_792) whether they belong to the evangelist
or to another person of the same name.

<span id="iii.viii.xxv-p28"></span>4. Among the rejected writings <span
id="fr_793"></span>[794](#fn_793) must be reckoned also the Acts of
Paul, <span id="fr_794"></span>[795](#fn_794) and the so-called
Shepherd, <span id="fr_795"></span>[796](#fn_795) and the Apocalypse of
Peter, <span id="fr_796"></span>[797](#fn_796) and in addition to these
the extant epistle of Barnabas, <span id="fr_797"></span>[798](#fn_797)
and the so-called Teachings of the Apostles; <span
id="fr_798"></span>[799](#fn_798) and besides, as I said, the Apocalypse
of John, if it seem proper, which some, as I said, reject, <span
id="fr_799"></span>[800](#fn_799) but which others class with the
accepted books. <span id="fr_800"></span>[801](#fn_800)

<span id="iii.viii.xxv-p37"></span>5. And among these some have placed
also the Gospel according to the Hebrews, <span
id="fr_801"></span>[802](#fn_801) with which <span id="page_157">p.
157</span> <span id="iii.viii.xxv-Page_157"></span>those of the Hebrews
that have accepted Christ are especially delighted. And all these may be
reckoned among the disputed books. <span
id="fr_802"></span>[803](#fn_802)

<span id="iii.viii.xxv-p41"></span>6. But we have nevertheless felt
compelled to give a catalogue of these also, distinguishing those works
which according to ecclesiastical tradition are true and genuine and
commonly accepted, <span id="fr_803"></span>[804](#fn_803) from those
others which, although not canonical but disputed, <span
id="fr_804"></span>[805](#fn_804) are yet at the same time known to most
ecclesiastical writers—we have felt compelled to give this catalogue in
order that we might be able to know both these works and those that are
cited by the heretics under the name of the apostles, including, for
instance, such books as the Gospels of Peter, <span
id="fr_805"></span>[806](#fn_805) of Thomas, <span
id="fr_806"></span>[807](#fn_806) of Matthias, <span
id="fr_807"></span>[808](#fn_807) or of any others besides them, and the
Acts of Andrew <span id="fr_808"></span>[809](#fn_808) and John <span
id="fr_809"></span>[810](#fn_809) and the other apostles, which no one
belonging to the succession of ecclesiastical writers has deemed worthy
of mention in his writings.

<span id="iii.viii.xxv-p50"></span>7. And further, the character of the
style is at variance with apostolic usage, and both the thoughts and the
purpose of the things that are related in them are so completely out of
accord with true orthodoxy that they clearly show themselves to be the
fictions of heretics. <span id="fr_810"></span>[811](#fn_810) Wherefore
they are not to be placed even among the rejected <span
id="fr_811"></span>[812](#fn_811) writings, but are all of them to be
cast aside as absurd and impious.

<span id="iii.viii.xxv-p53"></span>Let us now proceed with our history.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_777"></span>[155:778](2010094.htm#fr_777) <span
id="iii.viii.xxv-p1.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxv-p2"></span> This chapter is the only place in
which Eusebius attempts to treat the canon systematically, and in it he
is speaking purely as an historian, not as a critic. He is endeavoring
to give an accurate statement of the general opinion of the orthodox
Church of his day in regard to the number and names of its sacred books.
He does not, in this passage, apply to the various works any criterion
of canonicity further than their acceptance as canonical by the orthodox
Church. He simply records the state of the canon; he does not endeavor
to form a canon. He has nothing to do, therefore, with the nature and
origin of the books which the church accepts. As remarked by Weiss
(*Einleitung in das N. T.,* p. 96), the influence of Eusebius in the
formation of the canon is very commonly overestimated. He contributed
himself very little; his office was to record the usage of the church of
his age, not to mould it.

<span id="iii.viii.xxv-p3"></span>The church whose judgment he takes is,
in the main, the church of the Orient, and in that church at this time
all the works which we now call canonical (and only those) were already
commonly accepted, or were becoming more and more widely accepted as
such. From the standpoint, then, of canonicity, Eusebius divided the
works which he mentions in this chapter into two classes: the canonical
(including the *Homologoumena* and the *Antilogomena*) and the
uncanonical (including the <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxv-p3.1"></span>νόθοι</span> and the <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.viii.xxv-p3.2"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.viii.xxv-p3.3"></span>ναπλ€σματα αὶρετικῶν
ἀνδρῶν</span>). But the <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxv-p3.4"></span>νόθοι</span> he connects much more closely
with the *Homologoumena* and *Antilegomena* than with the heretical
works, which are, in fact, separated from all the rest and placed in a
class by themselves. What, then, is the relation of the *Homologoumena,
Antilegomena,* and <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxv-p3.5"></span>νόθοι</span> to each other, as Eusebius
classifies them? The crucial point is the relation of the <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.viii.xxv-p3.6"></span>νόθοι</span> to the
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.viii.xxv-p3.7"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.viii.xxv-p3.8"></span>ντιλεγόμενα</span>.
Lücke (*Ueber den N. T. Kanon des Eusebius,* p. 11 sq.) identified the
two, but such identification is impossible in this passage. The passages
which he cites to confirm his view prove only that the word
*Antilegomena* is commonly employed by Eusebius in a general sense to
include all disputed works, and therefore, of course, the <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.viii.xxv-p3.9"></span>νόθοι</span> also;
that is, the term *Antilegomena* is ordinarily used, not as identical
with <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxv-p3.10"></span>νόθοι</span>, but as inclusive of it.
This, however, establishes nothing as to Eusebius’ technical use of the
words in the present passage, where he is endeavoring to draw close
distinctions. Various views have been taken since Lücke’s time upon the
relation of these terms to each other in this connection; but, to me at
least, none of them seem satisfactory, and I have been led to adopt the
following simple explanation. The *Antilegomena,* in the narrower sense
peculiar to this summary, were works which, in Eusebius’ day, were, as
he believed, commonly accepted by the Eastern Church as canonical, but
which, nevertheless, as he well knew, had not always been thus accepted,
and, indeed, were not even then universally accepted as such. The
tendency, however, was distinctly in the direction of their ever-wider
acceptance. On the other hand, the <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxv-p3.11"></span>νόθοι</span> were works which, although
they had been used by the Fathers and were quoted as <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.viii.xxv-p3.12"></span>γραφὴ</span> by some
of them, were, at this time, not acknowledged as canonical. Although
perhaps not universally rejected from the canon, yet they were commonly
so rejected, and the tendency was distinctly in the direction of their
ever-wider rejection. Whatever their merit, and whatever their antiquity
and their claims to authenticity, Eusebius could not place them among
the canonical books. The term <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxv-p3.13"></span>νόθοι</span>, then, in this passage, must
not be taken, as it commonly is, to mean spurious or unauthentic, but to
mean uncanonical. It is in this sense, as against the canonical
*Homologoumena* and *Antilegomena,* that Eusebius, as I believe, uses it
here, and his use of it in this sense is perfectly legitimate. In using
it he passes no judgment upon the authenticity of the works referred to;
that, in the present case, is not his concern. As an historian he
observed tendencies, and judged accordingly. He saw that the authority
of the *Antilegomena* was on the increase, that of the <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.viii.xxv-p3.14"></span>νόθοι</span> on the
decrease, and already he could draw a sharp distinction between them, as
Clement of Alexandria could not do a century before. The distinction
drawn has no relation to the authenticity or original authority of the
works of the two classes, but only to their canonicity or uncanonicity
at the time Eusebius wrote.

<span id="iii.viii.xxv-p4"></span>This interpretation will help us to
understand the peculiar way in which Eusebius treats the Apocalypse, and
thus his treatment of it becomes an argument in favor of the
interpretation. He puts it, first among the *Homologoumena* with an
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.viii.xxv-p4.1"></span>εἴγε
φανείη</span>, and then among the <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxv-p4.2"></span>νόθοι</span> with an <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.viii.xxv-p4.3"></span>εἴ φανείη</span>. No
one, so far as I know, has explained why it should be put among the
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.viii.xxv-p4.4"></span>νόθοι</span> as
an alternative to the *Homologoumena,* instead of among the
*Antilegomena,* which, on the common interpretation of the relation of
the classes, might be naturally expected. If the view presented is
correct, the reason is clear. The *Antilegomena* were those works which
had been disputed, but were becoming more and more widely accepted as
canonical. The Apocalypse could not under any circumstances fall into
this class, for the doubts raised against it in the orthodox Church were
of recent date. It occupied, in fact, a peculiar position, for there was
no other work which, while accepted as canonical, was doubted in the
present more than in the past. Eusebius then must either put it into a
special class or put it conditionally into two different classes, as he
does. If the doubts should become so widespread as to destroy its
canonicity, it would fall naturally into the <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxv-p4.5"></span>νόθοι</span>, for then it would hold the
same position as the other works of that class. As an historian,
Eusebius sees the tendency and undoubtedly has the idea that the
Apocalypse may eventually, like the other Christian works of the same
class (the Shepherd, the Apocalypse of Peter, etc.), become one of the
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.viii.xxv-p4.6"></span>νόθοι</span>,
one of the works which, formerly accepted, is at length commonly denied
to be canonical: and so, as an historian, he presents the alternative.
The Apocalypse was the only work in regard to which any doubt could
exist.

<span id="iii.viii.xxv-p5"></span>Eusebius’ failure to mention
explicitly in this passage the Epistle to the Hebrews, has caused
considerable misunderstanding. The explanation, if the view presented be
adopted, is simple. Eusebius included it, I believe, among the epistles
of Paul, and did not especially mention it, simply because there was no
dispute about its canonicity. Its Pauline authorship had been widely
disputed as Eusebius informs us elsewhere, and various theories had been
proposed to account for it; but its canonicity had not been doubted in
the orthodox Church, and therefore doubts as to the authorship of it did
not in the least endanger its place among the *Homologoumena,* as used
here in a technical sense; and since Eusebius was simply stating the
works of each class, not discussing the nature and origin of those
works, he could, in perfect fairness, include it in Paul’s epistles
(where he himself believed it belonged) without entering upon any
discussion of it.

<span id="iii.viii.xxv-p6"></span>Another noticeable omission is that of
the Epistle of Clement to the Corinthians. All efforts to find a
satisfactory reason for this are fruitless. It should have been placed
among the <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxv-p6.1"></span>νόθοι</span> with the Epistle of Barnabas,
etc., as Eusebius’ treatment of it in other passages shows. It must be
assumed, with Holtzmann, that the omission of it was nothing more nor
less than an oversight.

<span id="iii.viii.xxv-p7"></span>Eusebius, then, classifies the works
mentioned in this chapter upon two principles: first, in relation to
canonicity, into the canonical and the uncanonical; and secondly, in
relation to character, into the orthodox (*Homologoumena, Antilegomena,*
which are canonical, and <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxv-p7.1"></span>νόθοι</span>, which are uncanonical), and
heterodox (which are not, and never have been, canonical, never have
been accepted as of use or authority). The *Homologoumena* and
*Antilegomena,* then, are both canonical and orthodox, the <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.viii.xxv-p7.2"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.viii.xxv-p7.3"></span>ναπλ€σματα αἱρετικῶν
ἀνδρῶν</span> are neither canonical nor orthodox, while the <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.viii.xxv-p7.4"></span>νόθοι</span> occupy a
peculiar position, being orthodox but not canonical. The last-named are
much more closely related to the canonical than to the heterodox works,
because when the canon was a less concrete and exact thing than it had
at length become, they were associated with the other orthodox works as,
like them, useful for edification and instruction. With the heretical
works they had never been associated, and possessed in common with them
only the negative characteristic of non-canonicity. Eusebius naturally
connects them closely with the former, and severs them completely from
the latter. The only reason for mentioning the latter at all was the
fact that they bore the names of apostles, and thus might be supposed,
as they often had been—by Christians, as well as by unbelievers—to be
sacred books like the rest. The statement of the canon gives Eusebius an
opportunity to warn his readers against them.

<span id="iii.viii.xxv-p8"></span>Upon Eusebius’ New Testament Canon,
see especially the work of Lücke referred to above, also Westcott’s
*Canon of the New Testament,* 5th ed., p. 414 sq., Harnack’s *Lehre der
Zwölf Apostel,* p. 6 sq., Holtzmann’s *Einleitung in das N.T.,* p. 154
sq., and Weiss’ *Einleitung,* p. 92 sq.

<span id="iii.viii.xxv-p9"></span>The greater part of the present note
was read before the American Society of Church History in December,
1888, and is printed in Vol. I. of that Society’s papers, New York,
1889, p. 251 sq.

<span id="fn_778"></span>[155:779](2010094.htm#fr_778) <span
id="iii.viii.xxv-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxv-p11"></span> On Matthew, see the previous
chapter, note 5; on Mark, Bk. II. chap. 15, note 4; on Luke, Bk. III.
chap. 4, notes 12 and 15; on John, the previous chapter, note 1.

<span id="fn_779"></span>[155:780](2010094.htm#fr_779) <span
id="iii.viii.xxv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxv-p12"></span> See above, chap. 4, note 14.

<span id="fn_780"></span>[155:781](2010094.htm#fr_780) <span
id="iii.viii.xxv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxv-p14"></span> See chap. 3, note 16. Eusebius
evidently means to include the Epistle to the Hebrews among Paul’s
epistles at this point, for he mentions it nowhere else in this chapter
(see above, note 1).

<span id="fn_781"></span>[156:782](2010094.htm#fr_781) <span
id="iii.viii.xxv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxv-p15"></span> See the previous chapter, note 18.

<span id="fn_782"></span>[156:783](2010094.htm#fr_782) <span
id="iii.viii.xxv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxv-p16"></span> See chap. 3, note 1.

<span id="fn_783"></span>[156:784](2010094.htm#fr_783) <span
id="iii.viii.xxv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxv-p17"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxv-p17.1"></span>κυρωτέον</span>

<span id="fn_784"></span>[156:785](2010094.htm#fr_784) <span
id="iii.viii.xxv-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxv-p18"></span> See the previous chapter, note 20.
Upon Eusebius’ treatment in this chapter of the canonicity of the
Apocalypse, see note 1, above.

<span id="fn_785"></span>[156:786](2010094.htm#fr_785) <span
id="iii.viii.xxv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxv-p19"></span> Compare the previous chapter, note
21.

<span id="fn_786"></span>[156:787](2010094.htm#fr_786) <span
id="iii.viii.xxv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxv-p20"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxv-p20.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxv-p20.2"></span>ν ὁμολογουμένοις</span>

<span id="fn_787"></span>[156:788](2010094.htm#fr_787) <span
id="iii.viii.xxv-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxv-p22"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxv-p22.1"></span>τῶν ἀντιλεγομένων</span>

<span id="fn_788"></span>[156:789](2010094.htm#fr_788) <span
id="iii.viii.xxv-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxv-p23"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxv-p23.1"></span>γνωρίμων</span>

<span id="fn_789"></span>[156:790](2010094.htm#fr_789) <span
id="iii.viii.xxv-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxv-p24"></span> See Bk. II. chap. 23, note 46.

<span id="fn_790"></span>[156:791](2010094.htm#fr_790) <span
id="iii.viii.xxv-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxv-p25"></span> See *ibid.* note 47.

<span id="fn_791"></span>[156:792](2010094.htm#fr_791) <span
id="iii.viii.xxv-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxv-p26"></span> See above, chap. 3, note 4.

<span id="fn_792"></span>[156:793](2010094.htm#fr_792) <span
id="iii.viii.xxv-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxv-p27"></span> See the previous chapter, note 19.

<span id="fn_793"></span>[156:794](2010094.htm#fr_793) <span
id="iii.viii.xxv-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxv-p29"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxv-p29.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxv-p29.2"></span>ν τοῖς νόθοις</span>.

<span id="fn_794"></span>[156:795](2010094.htm#fr_794) <span
id="iii.viii.xxv-p29.3"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxv-p30"></span> See above, chap. 3, note 20.

<span id="fn_795"></span>[156:796](2010094.htm#fr_795) <span
id="iii.viii.xxv-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxv-p31"></span> *Ibid.*note 23.

<span id="fn_796"></span>[156:797](2010094.htm#fr_796) <span
id="iii.viii.xxv-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxv-p32"></span> *Ibid.*note 9.

<span id="fn_797"></span>[156:798](2010094.htm#fr_797) <span
id="iii.viii.xxv-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxv-p33"></span> The author of the so-called Epistle
of Barnabas is unknown. No name appears in the epistle itself, and no
hints are given which enable us to ascribe it to any known writer.
External testimony, without a dissenting voice, ascribes it to Barnabas,
the companion of Paul. But this testimony, although unanimous, is
neither very strong nor very extensive. The first to use the epistle is
Clement of Alexandria, who expressly and frequently ascribes it to
Barnabas the companion of Paul. Origen quotes from the epistle twice,
calling it the Epistle of Barnabas, but without expressing any judgment
as to its authenticity, and without defining its author more closely.
Jerome (*de vir. ill.* 6) evidently did not doubt its authenticity, but
placed it nevertheless among the Apocrypha, and his opinion prevailed
down to the seventeenth century. It is difficult to decide what Eusebius
thought in regard to its authorship. His putting it among the <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.viii.xxv-p33.1"></span>νόθοι</span> here
does not prove that he considered it unauthentic (see note 1, above);
nor, on the other hand, does his classing it among the *Antilegomena*
just below prove that he considered it authentic, but non-apostolic, as
some have claimed. Although, therefore, the direct external testimony
which we have is in favor of the apostolic Barnabas as its author, it is
to be noticed that there must have existed a widespread doubt as to its
authenticity, during the first three centuries, to have caused its
complete rejection from the canon before the time of Eusebius. That this
rejection arose from the fact that Barnabas was not himself one of the
twelve apostles cannot be. For apostolic authorship was not the sole
test of canonicity, and Barnabas stood in close enough relation to the
apostles to have secured his work a place in the canon, during the
period of its gradual formation, had its authenticity been undoubted. We
may therefore set this inference over against the direct external
testimony for Barnabas’ authorship. When we come to internal testimony,
the arguments are conclusive against “the Levite Barnabas” as the author
of the epistle. These arguments have been well stated by Donaldson, in
his *History of Christian Literature,* I. p. 204 sqq. Milligan, in Smith
and Wace’s *Dict. of Christ. Biog.,* endeavors to break the force of
these arguments, and concludes that the authenticity of the epistle is
highly probable; but his positions are far from conclusive, and he may
be said to stand almost alone among modern scholars. Especially during
the last few years, the verdict against the epistle’s authenticity has
become practically unanimous. Some have supposed the author to have been
an unknown man by the name of Barnabas: but this is pure conjecture.
That the author lived in Alexandria is apparently the ruling opinion,
and is quite probable. It is certain that the epistle was written
between the destruction of Jerusalem (<span class="c13"><span
id="iii.viii.xxv-p33.2"></span>a.d.</span> 70) and the time of Clement
of Alexandria: almost certain that it was written before the building of
Ælia Capitolina; and probable that it was written between 100 and 120,
though dates ranging all the way from the beginning of Vespasian’s reign
to the end of Hadrian’s have been, and are still, defended by able
scholars. The epistle is still extant in a corrupt Greek original and in
an ancient Latin translation. It is contained in all the editions of the
Apostolic Fathers (see especially Gebhardt and Harnack’s second edition,
1876, and Hilgenfeld’s edition of 1877). An English translation is given
in the *Ante-Nicene Fathers,* Vol. I. p. 133 sqq. For the most important
literature, see Schaff, *Ch. Hist.* II. p. 671 sqq., and Gebhardt and
Harnack’s edition, p. xl. sqq.

<span id="fn_798"></span>[156:799](2010094.htm#fr_798) <span
id="iii.viii.xxv-p33.3"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxv-p34"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxv-p34.1"></span>τῶν ἀποστόλων αἰ λεγόμεναι
διδαχαί</span>. *The Teaching of the Twelve Apostles,* <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.viii.xxv-p34.2"></span>Διδαχὴ τῶν δώδεκα
ἀποστόλων</span>, a brief document in sixteen chapters, was published in
1884 by Philotheos Bryennios, Metropolitan of Nicomedia, from a <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.viii.xxv-p34.3"></span>ms.</span> discovered
by him in the Jerusalem convent in Constantinople in 1873. The discovery
threw the whole theological world into a state of excitement, and the
books and articles upon the subject from America and from every nation
in Europe have appeared by the hundred. No such important find has been
made for many years. The light which the little document has thrown upon
early Church history is very great, while at the same time the questions
which it has opened are numerous and weighty. Although many points in
regard to its origin and nature are still undecided, the following
general positions may be accepted as practically established. It is
composed of two parts, of which the former (chaps. 1–6) is a redaction
of an independent moral treatise, probably of Jewish origin, entitled
the *Two Ways,* which was known and used in Alexandria, and there formed
the basis of other writings (e.g. the Epistle of Barnabas, chaps. 18–21,
and the *Ecclesiastical Canons*) which were at first supposed to have
been based upon the *Teaching* itself. (Bryennios, Harnack, and others
supposed that the Teaching was based upon Barnabas, but this view has
never been widely accepted.) This (Jewish) *Two Ways* which was in
existence certainly before the end of the first century (how much
earlier we do not know) was early in the second century (if not before)
made a part of a primitive church manual, viz. our present *Teaching of
the Twelve Apostles.* The *Two Ways,* both before and at the time of
(perhaps after) its incorporation into the *Teaching,* received
important additions, partly of a Christian character. The completed
*Teaching* dates from Syria, though this is denied by many writers (e.g.
by Harnack), who prefer, upon what seem to me insufficient grounds,
Egypt as the place of composition. The completed *Teaching* formed the
basis of a part of the seventh book of the *Apostolic Constitutions,*
which originated in Syria in the fourth century. The most complete and
useful edition is that of Schaff (*The Teaching of the Twelve Apostles,*
3d ed., New York, 1889), which contains the Greek text with English
translation and a very full discussion of the work itself and of the
various questions which are affected by its discovery. Harnack’s
important edition *Die Lehre der zwölff Apostel* (*Texte und
Untersuchungen zur Gesch. der altchrist. Lit.,* II. 1 and 2, 1884) is
still the standard German work upon the subject, though it represents
many positions in regard to the origin and history of the work which
have since been proved incorrect, and which he himself has given up. His
article in Herzog, 2d ed., XVII. 656 sqq. and his *Die Apostel-Lehre und
die jüdischen Beiden Wege,* 1886, should therefore be compared with his
original work. Schaff’s book contains a very complete digest of the
literature down to the close of 1888. As to the position which the
*Teaching* occupied in the canon we know very little, on account of the
very sparing use of it made by the early Fathers. Clement of Alexandria
cites it once as Scripture (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxv-p34.4"></span>γραφή</span>), but no other writer before
the time of Eusebius treats it in the same way, and yet Eusebius’
mention of it among the <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxv-p34.5"></span>νόθοι</span> shows that it must have
enjoyed a wide circulation at some time and have been accepted by at
least a portion of the Church as a book worthy to be read in divine
service, and thus in a certain sense as a part of the canon. In
Eusebius’ time, however, its canonicity had been denied (though
according to Athanasius *Fest. Ep.* 39, it was still used in
catechetical instruction), and he was therefore obliged to relegate it
to a position among the <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxv-p34.6"></span>νόθοι</span>. Upon Eusebius’ use of the
plural <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxv-p34.7"></span>διδαχαί</span>, see the writer’s article
in the *Andover Review,* April, 1886, p. 439 sq.

<span id="fn_799"></span>[156:800](2010094.htm#fr_799) <span
id="iii.viii.xxv-p34.8"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxv-p35"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxv-p35.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxv-p35.2"></span>θετοῦσιν</span>. See the previous
chapter, note 20.

<span id="fn_800"></span>[156:801](2010094.htm#fr_800) <span
id="iii.viii.xxv-p35.3"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxv-p36"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxv-p36.1"></span>τοῖς ὁμολογουμένοις</span>. See note 1,
above.

<span id="fn_801"></span>[156:802](2010094.htm#fr_801) <span
id="iii.viii.xxv-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxv-p38"></span> This Gospel, probably composed in
Hebrew (Aramaic), is no longer extant, but we possess a few fragments of
it in Greek and Latin which are collected by Grabe, *Spic.* I. 15–31,
and by Hilgenfeld, *N. T. Extra Can. rec.* II. The existing material
upon which to base a judgment as to the nature of the lost Gospel and as
to its relation to our canonical gospels is very limited. It is certain,
however, that it cannot in its original form have been a working over of
our canonical Matthew (as many have thought); it contains too many
little marks of originality over against our Greek Matthew to admit of
such a supposition. That it was, on the other hand, the original of
which our Greek Matthew is the translation is also impossible; a
comparison of its fragments with our Matthew is sufficient to prove
this. That it was the original source from which Matthew and Luke
derived their common matter is possible—more cannot be said. Lipsius
(*Dict. of Christ. Biog.* II. 709–712) and Westcott (*Hist. of the
Canon,* p. 515 sqq.) give the various quotations which are supposed to
have been made from it. How many of them are actually to be traced back
to it as their source is not certain. It is possible, but not certain,
that Papias had seen it (see chap. 39, note 28), possible also that
Ignatius had, but the passage relied on to establish the fact fails to
do so (see chap. 36, note 14). It was probably used by Justin (see
Westcott, *ibid.* p. 516, and Lipsius, *ibid.* p. 712), undoubtedly by
Hegesippus (see below, Bk. IV. chap. 22), and was perhaps known to
Pantænus (see below, Bk. V. chap. 10, note 8). Clement of Alexandria
(*Strom.* II. 9) and Origen (*in Johan.* II. 6 and often) are the first
to bear explicit testimony to the existence of such a gospel. Eusebius
also was personally acquainted with it, as may be gathered from his
references to it in III. 39 and IV. 22, and from his quotation in (the
Syriac version of) his *Theophany,* IV. 13 (Lee’s trans. p. 234), and in
the Greek *Theophany,* §22 (Migne, VI. 685). The latter also shows the
high respect in which he held the work. Jerome’s testimony in regard to
it is very important, but it must be kept in mind that the gospel had
undergone extensive alterations and additions before his time, and as
known to him was very different from the original form (cf. Lipsius,
*ibid.* p. 711), and therefore what he predicates of it cannot be
applied to the original without limitation. Epiphanius has a good deal
to say about it, but he evidently had not himself seen it, and his
reports of it are very confused and misleading. The statement of
Lipsius, that according to Eusebius the gospel was reckoned by many
among the *Homologoumena,* is incorrect; <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxv-p38.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxv-p38.2"></span>ν τούτοις</span> refers rather to the
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.viii.xxv-p38.3"></span>νόθοι</span>
among which its earlier acceptance by a large part of the Church, but
present uncanonicity, places it by right. Irenæus expressly states that
there were but four canonical gospels (*Adv. Hær.* III. 2, 8), so also
Tertullian (*Adv. Marc.* IV. 5), while Clement of Alexandria cites the
gospel with the same formula which he uses for the Scriptures in
general, and evidently looked upon it as, if not quite, at least almost,
on a par with the other four Gospels. Origen on the other hand (*in
Johan.* II. 6, *Hom. in Jer.* XV. 4, and often) clearly places it upon a
footing lower than that of the four canonical Gospels. Upon the use of
the gospel by the Ebionites and upon its relation to the Hebrew Gospel
of Matthew, see chap. 27, note 8.

<span id="iii.viii.xxv-p39"></span>The literature upon the Gospel
according to the Hebrews is very extensive. Among recent discussions the
most important are by Hilgenfeld, in his *Evangelien nach ihrer
Entstehung* (1854); in the *Zeitschrift f. wiss. Theol.,* 1863, p. 345
sqq.; in his *N. T. extra Canon. rec.* (2d ed. 1884); and in his
*Einleitung z. N. T.* (1875); by Nicholson, *The Gospel according to the
Hebrews* (1879); and finally, a very thorough discussion of the subject,
which reached me after the composition of the above note, by Handmann,
*Das Hebräer-Evangelium* (Gebhardt and Harnack’s *Texte und
Untersuchungen,* Bd. V. Heft 3, Leipzig, 1888). This work gives the
older literature of the subject with great fullness. Still more recently
Resch’s *Agrapha* (*ibid.* V. 4, Leipzig, 1889) has come to hand. It
discusses the Gospel on p. 322 sq.

<span id="fn_802"></span>[157:803](2010094.htm#fr_802) <span
id="iii.viii.xxv-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxv-p40"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxv-p40.1"></span>τῶν ἀντιλεγομένων</span>

<span id="fn_803"></span>[157:804](2010094.htm#fr_803) <span
id="iii.viii.xxv-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxv-p42"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxv-p42.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxv-p42.2"></span>νωμολογημένας</span>

<span id="fn_804"></span>[157:805](2010094.htm#fr_804) <span
id="iii.viii.xxv-p42.3"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxv-p43"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxv-p43.1"></span>οὐκ ἐνδιαθήκους μὲν, ἀλλὰ καὶ
ἀντιλεγομένας</span>. Eusebius, in this clause, refers to the <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.viii.xxv-p43.2"></span>νόθοι</span>, which,
of course, while distinguished from the canonical *Antilegomena,* yet
are, like them, disputed, and hence belong as truly as they to the more
general class of *Antilegomena.* This, of course, explains how, in so
many places in his History, he can use the words <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.viii.xxv-p43.3"></span>νόθοι</span> and
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.viii.xxv-p43.4"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.viii.xxv-p43.5"></span>ντιλεγόμενα</span>
interchangeably (as e.g. in chap. 31, §6). In the present passage the
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.viii.xxv-p43.6"></span>νόθοι</span>,
as both uncanonical and disputed, are distinguished from the canonical
writings,—including both the universally accepted and the
disputed,—which are here thrown together without distinction. The point
to be emphasized is that he is separating here the uncanonical from the
canonical, without regard to the character of the individual writings
within the latter class.

<span id="fn_805"></span>[157:806](2010094.htm#fr_805) <span
id="iii.viii.xxv-p43.7"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxv-p44"></span> See chap. 3, note 5.

<span id="fn_806"></span>[157:807](2010094.htm#fr_806) <span
id="iii.viii.xxv-p44.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxv-p45"></span> The Gospel of Thomas is of Gnostic
origin and thoroughly Docetic. It was written probably in the second
century. The original Gnostic form is no longer extant, but we have
fragmentary Catholic recensions of it in both Latin and Greek, from
which heretical traits are expunged with more or less care. The gospel
contained many very fabulous stories about the childhood of Jesus. It is
mentioned frequently by the Fathers from Origen down, but always as an
heretical work. The Greek text is given by Tischendorf, p. 36 sqq., and
an English translation is contained in the *Ante-Nicene Fathers,* VIII.
395–405. See Lipsius in the *Dict. of Christ. Biog.* II. p. 703–705.

<span id="fn_807"></span>[157:808](2010094.htm#fr_807) <span
id="iii.viii.xxv-p45.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxv-p46"></span> This gospel is mentioned by Origen
(*Hom. in Lucam* I.), by Jerome (*Præf. in Matt.*), and by other later
writers. The gospel is no longer extant, though some fragments have been
preserved by Clement of Alexandria, e.g. in *Strom.* II. 9, *Strom.*
III. 4 (quoted below in chap. 30), and *Strom.* VII. 13, which show that
it had a high moral tone and emphasized asceticism. We know very little
about it, but Lipsius conjectures that it was “identical with the <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.viii.xxv-p46.1"></span>παραδόσεις
Ματθίου</span> which were in high esteem in Gnostic circles, and
especially among the Basilidæans.” See Lipsius, *ibid.* p. 716.

<span id="fn_808"></span>[157:809](2010094.htm#fr_808) <span
id="iii.viii.xxv-p46.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxv-p47"></span> Eusebius so far as we know is the
first writer to refer to these Acts. But they are mentioned after him by
Epiphanius, Philaster, and Augustine (see Tischendorf’s *Acta Apost.
Apoc.* p. xl.). The Acts of Andrew (*Acta Andrææ*) were of Gnostic
origin and circulated among that sect in numerous editions. The oldest
extant portions (both in Greek and somewhat fragmentary) are the *Acts
of Andrew and Matthew* (translated in the *Ante-Nicene Fathers,* VIII.
517–525) and the *Acts of Peter and Andrew* (*ibid.* 526–527). The *Acts
and Martyrdom of the Holy Apostle Andrew* (*ibid.* 511–516), or the
so-called *Epistle of the Presbyters and Deacons of Achaia concerning
the Passion of Andrew,* is a later work, still extant in a Catholic
recension in both Greek and Latin. The fragments of these three are
given by Tischendorf in his *Acta Apost. Apoc.* p. 105 sqq. and 132
sqq., and in his *Apocal. Apoc.* p. 161 sq. See Lipsius in the *Dict. of
Christ. Biog.* I. p. 30.

<span id="fn_809"></span>[157:810](2010094.htm#fr_809) <span
id="iii.viii.xxv-p47.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxv-p48"></span> Eusebius is likewise, so far as we
know, the first writer to refer to these Acts. But they are afterward
mentioned by Epiphanius, Photius, Augustine, Philaster, &c. (see
Tischendorf, *ibid.* p. lxxiii.). They are also of Gnostic origin and
extant in a few fragments (collected by Thilo, *Fragmenta Actum S.
Johannis a Leucio Charino conscriptorum,* Halle, 1847). A Catholic
extract very much abridged, but containing clear Gnostic traits, is
still extant and is given by Tischendorf, *Acta Apost. Apoc.* p. 266 sq.
(translated in the *Ante-Nicene Fathers,* VIII. 560–564).

<span id="iii.viii.xxv-p49"></span>The last two works mentioned belong
to a collection of apocryphal Acts which were commonly ascribed to
Leucius, a fictitious character who stands as the legendary author of
the whole of this class of Gnostic literature. From the fourth century
on, frequent reference is made to various Gnostic Acts whose number must
have been enormous. Although no direct references are made to them
before the time of Eusebius, yet apparent traces of them are found in
Clement of Alexandria, Tertullian, Origen, &c., which make it probable
that these writers were acquainted with them, and it may at any rate be
assumed as established that many of them date from the third century and
some of them even from the second century. See Salmon’s article
*Leucius* in the *Dict. of Christ. Biog.* III. 703–707, and Lipsius’
article in the same work, I. 28.

<span id="fn_810"></span>[157:811](2010094.htm#fr_810) <span
id="iii.viii.xxv-p50.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxv-p51"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxv-p51.1"></span>αἱρετικῶν ἀνδρῶν ἀναπλ€σματα</span>

<span id="fn_811"></span>[157:812](2010094.htm#fr_811) <span
id="iii.viii.xxv-p51.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxv-p52"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxv-p52.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxv-p52.2"></span>ν νόθοις</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVI](2010095)
