[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010185)  [Next](2010187) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xi.xvi"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xvi-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xi.xvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVI.—</span>*Origen’s Earnest Study
of the Divine Scriptures.*

<span id="iii.xi.xvi-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xi.xvi-p2.1"></span>So</span> earnest and assiduous was Origen’s
research into the divine words that he learned the Hebrew
language, <span id="fr_1883"></span>[1884](#fn_1883) and procured as his
own the original Hebrew Scriptures which were in the hands of the Jews.
He investigated also the works of other translators of the Sacred
Scriptures besides the Seventy. <span
id="fr_1884"></span>[1885](#fn_1884) And in addition to the well-known
translations of Aquila, <span id="fr_1885"></span>[1886](#fn_1885)
Symmachus, <span id="fr_1886"></span>[1887](#fn_1886) and
Theodotion, <span id="fr_1887"></span>[1888](#fn_1887) he discovered
certain others which had been concealed from remote times,—in what
out-of-the-way corners I know not,—and by his search he brought them to
light. <span id="fr_1888"></span>[1889](#fn_1888)

<span id="iii.xi.xvi-p10"></span>2. Since he did not <span
id="page_263">p. 263</span> <span id="iii.xi.xvi-Page_263"></span>know
the authors, he simply stated that he had found this one in Nicopolis
near Actium <span id="fr_1889"></span>[1890](#fn_1889) and that one in
some other place.

<span id="iii.xi.xvi-p12"></span>3. In the Hexapla <span
id="fr_1890"></span>[1891](#fn_1890) of the Psalms, after the four
prominent translations, he adds not only a fifth, but also a sixth and
seventh. <span id="fr_1891"></span>[1892](#fn_1891) He states of one of
these that he found it in a jar in Jericho in the time of Antoninus, the
son of Severus.

<span id="iii.xi.xvi-p15"></span>4. Having collected all of these, he
divided them into sections, and placed them opposite each other, with
the Hebrew text itself. He thus left us the copies of the so-called
Hexapla. He arranged also separately an edition of Aquila and Symmachus
and Theodotion with the Septuagint, in the Tetrapla. <span
id="fr_1892"></span>[1893](#fn_1892)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1883"></span>[262:1884](2010186.htm#fr_1883) <span
id="iii.xi.xvi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xvi-p3"></span> Origen’s study of the Hebrew, which,
according to Jerome (*de vir. ill.* chap. 54), was “contrary to the
custom of his day and race,” is not at all surprising. He felt that he
needed some knowledge of it as a basis for his study of the Scriptures
to which he had devoted himself, and also as a means of comparing the
Hebrew and Greek texts of the Old Testament, a labor which he regarded
as very important for polemical purposes. As to his familiarity with the
Hebrew it is now universally conceded that it was by no means so great
as was formerly supposed. He seems to have learned only about enough to
enable him to identify the Hebrew which corresponded with the Greek
texts which he used, and even in this he often makes mistakes. He
sometimes confesses openly his lack of critical and independent
knowledge of the Hebrew (e.g. *Hom. in Num.* XIV. 1; XVI. 4). He often
makes blunders which seem absurd, and yet in many cases he shows
considerable knowledge in regard to peculiar forms and idioms. His
Hebrew learning was clearly fragmentary and acquired from various
sources. Cf. Redepenning, I. p. 365 sq.

<span id="fn_1884"></span>[262:1885](2010186.htm#fr_1884) <span
id="iii.xi.xvi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xvi-p4"></span> On the LXX, see Bk. V. chap. 8, note
31.

<span id="fn_1885"></span>[262:1886](2010186.htm#fr_1885) <span
id="iii.xi.xvi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xvi-p5"></span> Aquila is first mentioned by Irenæus
(*Adv. Hær.* III. 21. 1, quoted by Eusebius, Bk. V. chap. 8, above), who
calls him a Jewish proselyte of Pontus; Epiphanius says of Sinope in
Pontus. Tradition is uniform that he was a Jewish proselyte, and that he
lived in the time of Hadrian, or in the early part of the second century
according to Rabbinic tradition. He produced a Greek translation of the
Old Testament, which was very slavish in its adherence to the original,
sacrificing the Greek idiom to the Hebrew without mercy, and even
violating the grammatical structure of the former for the sake of
reproducing the exact form of the latter. Because of its faithfulness to
the original, it was highly prized by the Rabbinic authorities, and
became more popular among the Jews in general than the LXX. (On the
causes of the waning popularity of the latter, see note 8, below.)
Neither Aquila’s version, nor the two following, are now extant; but
numerous fragments have been preserved by those Fathers who saw and used
Origen’s *Hexapla.*

<span id="fn_1886"></span>[262:1887](2010186.htm#fr_1886) <span
id="iii.xi.xvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xvi-p6"></span> Symmachus is said by Eusebius, in the
next chapter, to have been an Ebionite; and Jerome agrees with him
(*Comment. in Hab.,* lib. II. c. 3), though the testimony of the latter
is weakened by the fact that he wrongly makes Theodotion also an
Ebionite (see next note). It has been claimed that Symmachus was a Jew,
not a Christian; but Eusebius’ direct statement is too strong to be set
aside, and is corroborated by certain indications in the version itself,
e.g. in [Dan. ix. 26](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#026)<span
id="iii.xi.xvi-p6.1"></span>, where the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xvi-p6.2"></span>χριστός</span>, which Aquila avoids, is
used. The composition of his version is assigned by Epiphanius and the
*Chron. paschale* to the reign of Septimius Severus (193–211); and
although not much reliance is to be placed upon their statements, still
they must be about right in this case, for that Symmachus’ version is
younger than Irenæus is rendered highly probable by the latter’s
omission of it where he refers to those of Theodotion and Aquila; and,
on the other hand, it must of course have been composed before Origen
began his *Hexapla.* Symmachus’ version is distinguished from Aquila’s
by the purity of its Greek and its freedom from Hebraisms. The author’s
effort was not slavishly to reproduce the original, but to make an
elegant and idiomatic Greek translation, and in this he succeeded very
well, being excellently versed in both languages, though he sometimes
sacrificed the exact sense of the Hebrew, and occasionally altered it
under the influence of dogmatic prepossessions. The version is spoken
very highly of by Jerome, and was used freely by him in the composition
of the Vulgate. For further particulars in regard to Symmachus’ version,
see the *Dict. of Christ. Biog.* III. p. 19 sq.

<span id="fn_1887"></span>[262:1888](2010186.htm#fr_1887) <span
id="iii.xi.xvi-p6.3"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xvi-p7"></span> It has been disputed whether Theodotion
was a Jew or a Christian. Jerome (*de vir. ill.* 54, and elsewhere)
calls him an Ebionite; in his *Ep. ad Augustin.* c. 19 (Migne’s ed.
*Ep.* 112), a Jew; while in the preface to his commentary on Daniel he
says that some called him an Ebionite, *qui altero genere Judæus est.*
Irenæus (*Adv. Hær.* III. 21. 1) and Epiphanius (*de mens. et pond.* 17)
say that he was a Jewish proselyte, which is probably true. The reports
in regard to his nationality are conflicting. The time at which he lived
is disputed. The *Chron. paschale* assigns him to the reign of Commodus,
and Epiphanius may also be urged in support of that date, though he
commits a serious blunder in making a second Commodus, and is thus led
into great confusion. But Theodotion, as well as Aquila, is mentioned by
Irenæus, and hence must be pushed back well into the second century. It
has been discovered, too, that Hermas used his version (see Hort’s
article in the *Johns Hopkins University Circular,* December, 1884),
which obliges us to throw it back still further, and Schürer has adduced
some very strong reasons for believing it older than Aquila’s version
(see Schürer’s *Gesch. d. Juden im Zeitalter Jesu,* II. p. 709).
Theodotion’s version, like Aquila’s, was intended to reproduce the
Hebrew more exactly than the LXX did. It is based upon the LXX, however,
which it corrects by the Hebrew, and therefore resembles the former much
more closely than Theodotion’s does. We have no notices of the use of
this version by the Jews. Aquila’s version (supposing it younger than
Theodotion’s) seems to have superseded it entirely. Theodotion’s
translation of Daniel, however, was accepted by the Christians, instead
of the LXX Daniel, and replacing the latter in all the <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.xi.xvi-p7.1"></span>mss.</span> of the LXX,
has been preserved entire. Aside from this we have only such fragments
as have been preserved by the Fathers that saw and used the *Hexapla.*
It will be seen that the order in which Eusebius mentions the three
versions here is not chronological. He simply follows the order in which
they stand in Origen’s *Hexapla* (see below, note 8). Epiphanius is led
by that order to make Theodotion’s version later than the other, which
is quite a mistake, as has been seen.

<span id="iii.xi.xvi-p8"></span>For further particulars in regard to the
versions of Aquila and Theodotion, and for the literature of the
subject, see Schürer, *ibid.* p. 704 sq.

<span id="fn_1888"></span>[262:1889](2010186.htm#fr_1888) <span
id="iii.xi.xvi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xvi-p9"></span> We know very little about these
anonymous Greek versions of the Old Testament. Eusebius’ words (“which
had been concealed *from remote times,*” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xvi-p9.1"></span>τὸν π€λαι λανθανούσας χρόνον</span>) would
lead us to think them older than the versions of Aquila, Theodotion, and
Symmachus. One of them, Eusebius tells us, was found at Nicopolis near
Actium, another in a jar at Jericho, but where the third was discovered
he did not know. Jerome (in his *Prologus in expos. Cant. Cant. sec.
Originem;* Origen’s works, ed. Lommatzsch, XIV. 235) reports that the
“fifth edition” (*quinta editio*) was found *in Actio litore;* but
Epiphanius, who seems to be speaking with more exact knowledge than
Jerome, says that the “fifth” was discovered at Jericho and the
*“sixth”* in Nicopolis, near Actium (*De mens. et pond.* 18). Jerome
calls the authors of the “fifth” and “sixth” *Judaïcos translatores,*
which according to his own usage might mean either Jews or Jewish
Christians (see Redepenning, p. 165), and at any rate the author of the
“sixth” was a Christian, as is clear from his rendering of [Heb. iii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#013)<span id="iii.xi.xvi-p9.2"></span>:
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi.xvi-p9.3"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi.xvi-p9.4"></span>ξῆλθες τοῦ σῶσαι τὸν
λαὸν σου διὰ ᾽Ιησοῦ τοῦ χριστοῦ</span>. The “fifth” is quoted by Origen
on the Psalms, Proverbs, Song of Songs, minor prophets, Kings, &c.; the
“sixth,” on the Psalms, Song of Songs, and Habakkuk, according to Field,
the latest editor of the *Hexapla.* Whether these versions were
fragmentary, or were used only in these particular passages for special
reasons, we do not know. Of the “seventh” no clear traces can be
discovered, but it must have been used for the Psalms at any rate, as we
see from this chapter. As to the time when these versions were found we
are doubtless to assign the discovery of the one at Nicopolis near
Actium to the visit made by Origen to Greece in 231 (see below, p. 396).
Epiphanius, who in the present case seems to be speaking with more than
customary accuracy, puts its discovery into the time of the emperor
Alexander (222–235). The other one, which Epiphanius calls the “fifth,”
was found, according to him, in the seventh year of Caracalla’s reign
(217) “in jars at Jericho.” We know that at this time Origen was in
Palestine (see chap. 19, note 23), and hence Epiphanius’ report may well
be correct. If it is, he has good reason for calling the latter the
“fifth,” and the former the “sixth.” The place and time of the discovery
of the “seventh” are alike unknown. For further particulars in regard to
these versions, see the prolegomena to Field’s edition of the *Hexapla,*
the article *Hexapla* in the *Dict. of Christ. Biog.,* and Redepenning,
II. 164 sq.

<span id="fn_1889"></span>[263:1890](2010186.htm#fr_1889) <span
id="iii.xi.xvi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xvi-p11"></span> Nicopolis near Actium, so designated
to distinguish it from a number of other cities bearing the same name,
was a city of Epirus, lying on the northern shore of the Ambracian gulf,
opposite the promontory of Actium.

<span id="fn_1890"></span>[263:1891](2010186.htm#fr_1890) <span
id="iii.xi.xvi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xvi-p13"></span> Origen’s *Hexapla* (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi.xvi-p13.1"></span>τὰ ἑξαπλᾶ, τὸ ἑξαπλοῦν,
τὸ ἑξασέλιδον</span>, the first form being used by Eusebius in this
chapter) was a polyglot Old Testament containing the Hebrew text, a
transliteration of it in Greek letters (important because the Hebrew
text was unpointed), the versions of Aquila, of Symmachus, of the LXX,
and of Theodotion, arranged in six columns in the order named, with the
addition in certain places of a fifth, sixth, and even seventh Greek
version (see Jerome’s description of it, in his Commentary on Titus,
chap. 3, ver. 9). The parts which contained these latter versions were
sometimes called *Octapla* (they seem never to have borne the name
*nonapla.*) The order of the columns was determined by the fact that
Aquila’s version most closely resembled the Hebrew, and hence was put
next to it, followed by Symmachus’ version, which was based directly
upon the Hebrew, but was not so closely conformed to it; while
Theodotion’s version, which was based not upon the Hebrew, but upon the
LXX, naturally followed the latter. Origen’s object in undertaking this
great work was not scientific, but polemic; it was not for the sake of
securing a correct Hebrew text, but for the purpose of furnishing
adequate means for the reconstruction of the original text of the LXX,
which in his day was exceedingly corrupt. It was Origen’s belief, and he
was not alone in his opinion (cf. Justin Martyr’s *Dial. with Trypho,*
chap. 71), that the Hebrew Old Testament had been seriously altered by
the Jews, and that the LXX (an inspired translation, as it was commonly
held to be by the Christians) alone represented the true form of
Scripture. For two centuries before and more than a century after Christ
the LXX stood in high repute among the Jews, even in Palestine, and
outside of Palestine had almost completely taken the place of the
original Hebrew. Under the influence of its universal use among the Jews
the Christians adopted it, and looked upon it as inspired Scripture just
as truly as if it had been in the original tongue. Early in the second
century (as Schürer points out) various causes were at work to lessen
its reputation among the Jews. Chief among these were first, the growing
conservative reaction against all non-Hebraic culture, which found its
culmination in the Rabbinic schools of the second century; and second,
the ever-increasing hostility to Christianity. The latter cause tended
to bring the LXX into disfavor with the Jews, because it was universally
employed by the Christians, and was cited in favor of Christian
doctrines in many cases where it differed from the Hebrew text, which
furnished less support to the particular doctrine defended. It was under
the influence of this reaction against the LXX, which undoubtedly began
even before the second century, that the various versions already
mentioned took their rise. Aquila especially aimed to keep the Hebrew
text as pure as possible, while making it accessible to the
Greek-speaking Jews, who had hitherto been obliged to rely upon the LXX.
It will be seen that the Christians and the Jews, who originally
accepted the same Scriptures, would gradually draw apart, the one party
still holding to the LXX, the other going back to the original; and the
natural consequence of this was that the Jews taunted the Christians
with using only a translation which did not agree with the original, and
therefore was of no authority, while the Christians, on the other hand,
accused the Jews of falsifyng their Scriptures, which should agree with
the more pure and accurate LXX. Under these circumstances, Origen
conceived the idea that it would be of great advantage to the
Christians, in their polemics against the Jews, to know more accurately
than they did the true form of the LXX text, and the extent and nature
of its variations from the Hebrew. As the matter stood everything was
indefinite, for no one knew to exactly what extent the two differed, and
no one knew, in the face of the numerous variant texts, the precise form
of the LXX itself (cf. Redepenning, II. p. 156 sq.). The Hebrew text
given by Origen seems to have been the vulgar text, and to have differed
little from that in use to-day. With the LXX it was different. Here
Origen made a special effort to ascertain the most correct text, and did
not content himself with giving simply one of the numerous texts extant,
for he well knew that all were more or less corrupt. But his method was
not to throw out of the text all passages not well supported by the
various witnesses, but rather to enrich the text from all available
sources, thus making it as full as possible. Wherever, therefore, the
Hebrew contained a passage omitted in the LXX, he inserted in the latter
the translation of the passage, taken from one of the other versions,
marking the addition with “obeli”; and wherever, on the other hand, the
fullest LXX text which he had contained more than the Hebrew and the
other versions combined, he allowed the redundant passage to stand, but
marked it with asterisks. The *Hexapla* as a whole seems never to have
been reproduced, but the LXX text as contained in the fifth column was
multiplied many times, especially under the direction of Pamphilus and
Eusebius (who had the original <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xi.xvi-p13.2"></span>ms.</span> at Cæsarea), and this recension
came into common use. It will be seen that Origen’s process must have
wrought great confusion in the text of the LXX; for future copyists, in
reproducing the text given by Origen, would be prone to neglect the
critical signs, and give the whole as the correct form of the LXX; and
critical editors to-day find it very difficult to reach even the form of
the LXX text used by Origen. The *Hexapla* is no longer extant. When the
Cæsarean <span class="c13"><span id="iii.xi.xvi-p13.3"></span>ms.</span>
of it perished we do not know. Jerome saw it, and made large use of it,
but after his time we have no further trace of it, and it probably
perished with the rest of the Cæsarean library before the end of the
seventh century, perhaps considerably earlier. Numerous editions have
been published of the fragments of the *Hexapla*, taken from the works
of the Fathers, from Scholia in <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xi.xvi-p13.4"></span>mss.</span> of the LXX, and from a Syriac
version of the Hexaplar LXX, which is still in large part extant. The
best edition is that of Field, in two vols., Oxford, 1875. His
prolegomena contain the fullest and most accurate information in regard
to the *Hexapla.* Comp. also Taylor’s article in the *Dict. of Christ.
Biog.,* and Redepenning, II. p. 156 sq. Origen seems to have commenced
his great work in Alexandria. This is implied by the account of
Eusebius, and is stated directly by Epiphanius (*Hær.* LXIV. 3), who
says that this was the first work which he undertook at the solicitation
of Ambrose (see chap. 18). We may accept this as in itself quite
probable, for there could be no better foundation for his exegetical
labors than just such a piece of critical work, and the numerous scribes
furnished him by Ambrose (see chap. 18) may well have devoted themselves
largely to this very work, as Redepenning remarks. But the work was by
no means completed at once. The time of his discovery of the other
versions of the Old Testament (see above, note 6) in itself shows that
he continued his labor upon the great edition for many years (the late
discovery of these versions may perhaps explain the fact that he did not
use them in connection with all the books of the Old Testament?); and
Epiphanius (*de mens. et pond.* 18) says that he was engaged upon it for
twenty-eight years, and completed it at Tyre. This is quite likely, and
will explain the fact that the <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xi.xvi-p13.5"></span>ms.</span> of the work remained in the
Cæsarean library. Field, however, maintains that our sources do not
permit us to fix the time or place either of the commencement or of the
completion of the work with any degree of accuracy (see p. xlviii. sq.).

<span id="fn_1891"></span>[263:1892](2010186.htm#fr_1891) <span
id="iii.xi.xvi-p13.6"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xvi-p14"></span> Valesius remarks that there is an
inconsistency here, and that it should be said “not only a fifth and
sixth, but also a seventh.” All the <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xi.xvi-p14.1"></span>mss.</span> and versions, however, support
the reading of the text, and we must therefore suppose the inconsistency
(if there is one, which is doubtful) to be Eusebius’ own, not that of a
scribe.

<span id="fn_1892"></span>[263:1893](2010186.htm#fr_1892) <span
id="iii.xi.xvi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xvi-p16"></span> Greek: <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xvi-p16.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xvi-p16.2"></span>ν τοῖς τετραπλοῖς ἐπικατασκευ€σας</span>.
The last word indicates that the *Tetrapla* was prepared after, not
before, the *Hexapla* (cf. Valesius *in hoc loco*), and Redepenning (p.
175 sq.) gives other satisfactory reasons for this conclusion. The
design seems to have been simply to furnish a convenient abridgment of
larger work, fitted for those who did not read Hebrew; that is, for the
great majority of Christians, even scholars.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVII](2010187)
