[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010138)  [Next](2010140.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ix.xxx"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxx-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.ix.xxx-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXX.—</span>*Bardesanes the Syrian
and his Extant Works.*

<span id="iii.ix.xxx-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.ix.xxx-p2.1"></span>In</span> the same reign, as heresies were
abounding in the region between the rivers, <span
id="fr_1336"></span>[1337](#fn_1336.md) a certain Bardesanes, <span
id="fr_1337"></span>[1338](#fn_1337.md) a most able man and a <span
id="page_210">p. 210</span> <span id="iii.ix.xxx-Page_210"></span>most
skillful disputant in the Syriac tongue, having composed dialogues
against Marcion’s followers and against certain others who were authors
of various opinions, committed them to writing in his own language,
together with many other works. His pupils, <span
id="fr_1338"></span>[1339](#fn_1338.md) of whom he had very many (for he
was a powerful defender of the faith), translated these productions from
the Syriac into Greek.

<span id="iii.ix.xxx-p10"></span>2. Among them there is also his most
able dialogue On Fate, <span id="fr_1339"></span>[1340](#fn_1339.md)
addressed to Antoninus, and other works which they say he wrote on
occasion of the persecution which arose at that time. <span
id="fr_1340"></span>[1341](#fn_1340.md)

<span id="iii.ix.xxx-p13"></span>3. He indeed was at first a follower of
Valentinus, <span id="fr_1341"></span>[1342](#fn_1341.md) but afterward,
having rejected his teaching and having refuted most of his fictions, he
fancied that he had come over to the more correct opinion. Nevertheless
he did not entirely wash off the filth of the old heresy. <span
id="fr_1342"></span>[1343](#fn_1342.md)

<span id="iii.ix.xxx-p16"></span>About this time also Soter, <span
id="fr_1343"></span>[1344](#fn_1343.md) bishop of the church of Rome,
departed this life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1336"></span>[209:1337](2010139.htm#fr_1336.md) <span
id="iii.ix.xxx-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxx-p3"></span> i.e. Mesopotamia: <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xxx-p3.1"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xxx-p3.2"></span>πὶ τῆς μέσης τῶν
ποταμῶν</span>.

<span id="fn_1337"></span>[209:1338](2010139.htm#fr_1337.md) <span
id="iii.ix.xxx-p3.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxx-p4"></span> Bardesanes or Bardaisan (Greek, <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xxx-p4.1"></span>Βαρδησ€νης</span>), a
distinguished Syrian scholar, poet, and theologian, who lived at the
court of the king of Edessa, is commonly classed among the Gnostics,
but, as Hort shows, without sufficient reason. Our reports in regard to
him are very conflicting. Epiphanius and Barhebræus relate that he was
at first a distinguished Christian teacher, but afterward became
corrupted by the doctrines of Valentinus. Eusebius on the other hand
says that he was originally a Valentinian, but afterward left that sect
and directed his attacks against it. Moses of Chorene gives a similar
account. To Hippolytus he appeared as a member of the Eastern school of
Valentinians, while to Ephraem the Syrian he seemed in general one of
the most pernicious of heretics, who nevertheless pretended to be
orthodox, veiling his errors in ambiguous language, and thus carrying
away many of the faithful. According to Hort, who has given the subject
very careful study, “there is no reason to suppose that Bardesanes
rejected the ordinary faith of the Christians as founded on the Gospels
and the writings of the apostles, except on isolated points. The more
startling peculiarities of which we hear belong for the most part to an
outer region of speculation, which it may easily have seemed possible to
combine with Christianity, more especially with the undeveloped
Christianity of Syria in the third century. The local color is
everywhere prominent. In passing over to the new faith Bardaisan could
not shake off the ancient glamour of the stars, or abjure the Semitic
love of clothing thoughts in mythological forms.” This statement
explains clearly enough the reputation for heresy which Bardesanes
enjoyed in subsequent generations. There is no reason to think that he
taught a system of æons like the Gnostics, but he does seem to have
leaned toward docetism, and also to have denied the proper resurrection
of the body. Ephraem accuses him of teaching Polytheism, in effect if
not in words, but this charge seems to have arisen from a
misunderstanding of his mythological forms; he apparently maintained
always the supremacy of the one Christian God. There is nothing in his
theology itself to imply Valentinian influence, but the traditions to
that effect are too strong to be entirely set aside. It is not
improbable that he may, as Eusebius says, have been a Valentinian for a
time, and afterward, upon entering the orthodox church, have retained
some of the views which he gained under their influence. This would
explain the conflicting reports of his theology. It is not necessary to
say more about his beliefs. Hort’s article in Smith and Wace’s *Dict. of
Christ. Biog.* contains an excellent discussion of the subject, and the
student is referred to that.

<span id="iii.ix.xxx-p5"></span>The followers of Bardesanes seem to have
emphasized those points in which he differed with the Church at large,
and thus to have departed further from catholic orthodoxy. Undoubtedly
Ephraem (who is our most important authority for a knowledge of
Bardesanes) knows him only through his followers, who were very numerous
throughout the East in the fourth century, and hence passes a harsher
judgment upon him than he might otherwise have done. Ephraem makes the
uprooting of the “pernicious heresy” one of his foremost duties.

<span id="iii.ix.xxx-p6"></span>Eusebius in this chapter, followed by
Jerome (*de vir. ill.* chap. 33), Epiphanius, Theodoret, and others,
assigns the activity of Bardesanes to the reign of Marcus Aurelius (so
also in the *Chron.*). But Hort says that according to the Chronicle of
Edessa (Assemani, *Bibl. Or.* I. 389) he was born July 11, 155, and
according to Barhebræus (*Chron. Eccl.* ed. Abbeloos and Lamy, p. 49) he
died in 223 at the age of sixty-eight, which confirms the date of his
birth given by the Chronicle of Edessa. These dates are accepted as
correct by Hilgenfeld and Hort, and the error committed by Eusebius and
those who followed him is explained by their confusion of the later with
the earlier Antonines, a confusion which was very common among the
Fathers.

<span id="iii.ix.xxx-p7"></span>His writings, as stated by Eusebius,
Epiphanius, Theodoret, and others, were very numerous, and were
translated (at least many of them) into Greek. The dialogues against the
Marcionists and other heretics are mentioned also by Theodoret (*Hær.
Fab.* I. 22) and by Barhebræus. Epiphanius (who apparently had some
independent knowledge of the man and his followers) mentions (*Hær.*
LVI.) an Apology “in which he resisted Apollonius, the companion of
Antoninus, when urged to deny that he was a Christian.” This was
probably one of the many works which Eusebius says he wrote on occasion
of the persecution which arose at the time.

<span id="iii.ix.xxx-p8"></span>The *Dialogue on Fate* is said by
Eusebius, followed by Rufinus and Jerome, to have been addressed to
Antoninus. Epiphanius says that in this work he “copiously refuted
Avidas the astronomer,” and it is quite possible that Eusebius’
statement rests upon a confusion of the names Avidas and Antoninus, for
it is difficult to conceive that the work can have been addressed to an
emperor, and in any case it cannot have been addressed to Marcus
Aurelius, whom Eusebius here means. This *Dialogue on Fate* is
identified either wholly or in part with a work entitled *Book of the
Laws of Countries,* which is still extant in the original Syriac, and
has been published with an English translation by Cureton in his
*Spicileg. Syr.* A fragment of this work is given in Eusebius’ *Præp.
Evang.* VI. 9–10, and, until the discovery of the Syriac text of the
entire work, this was all that we had of it. This is undoubtedly the
work referred to by Eusebius, Epiphanius, and other Fathers, but it is
no less certain that it was not written by Bardesanes himself. As Hort
remarks, “the natural impulse to confuse the author with the chief
interlocutor in an anonymous dialogue will sufficiently explain the
early ascription of the Dialogue to Bardaisan himself by the Greek
Fathers.” It was undoubtedly written by one of Bardesanes’ disciples,
probably soon after his death, and it is quite likely that it does not
depart widely from the spirit of Bardesanes’ teaching. Upon Bardesanes,
see, in addition to Hort’s article, the monograph of Merx, *Bardesanes
von Edessa* (Halle, 1863), and that of Hilgenfeld, *Bardesanes, der
Letzte Gnostiker* (Leipz. 1864).

<span id="fn_1338"></span>[210:1339](2010139.htm#fr_1338.md) <span
id="iii.ix.xxx-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxx-p9"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xxx-p9.1"></span>γνώριμοι</span>

<span id="fn_1339"></span>[210:1340](2010139.htm#fr_1339.md) <span
id="iii.ix.xxx-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxx-p11"></span> See note 2.

<span id="fn_1340"></span>[210:1341](2010139.htm#fr_1340.md) <span
id="iii.ix.xxx-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxx-p12"></span> Hort conjectures that Caracalla, who
spent the winter of 216 in Edessa, and threw the Prince Bar-Manu into
captivity, may have allied himself with a party which was discontented
with the rule of that prince, and which instituted a heathen reaction,
and that this was the occasion of the persecution referred to here, in
which Bardesanes proved his firmness in the faith as recorded by
Epiphanius.

<span id="fn_1341"></span>[210:1342](2010139.htm#fr_1341.md) <span
id="iii.ix.xxx-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxx-p14"></span> See note 2.

<span id="fn_1342"></span>[210:1343](2010139.htm#fr_1342.md) <span
id="iii.ix.xxx-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxx-p15"></span> It is undoubtedly quite true, as
remarked in note 2, that Bardesanes, after leaving Valentianism, still
retained views acquired under its influence, and that these colored all
his subsequent thinking. This fact may have been manifest to Eusebius,
who had evidently read many of Bardesanes’ works, and who speaks here as
if from personal knowledge.

<span id="fn_1343"></span>[210:1344](2010139.htm#fr_1343.md) <span
id="iii.ix.xxx-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxx-p17"></span> On Soter, see chap. 19, note 2.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book V](2010140.md)
