[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010029)  [Next](2010031) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vi.iii"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vi.iii-p1.1"></span>Chapter</span> III.—*The Name Jesus and also
the Name Christ were known from the Beginning, and were honored by the
Inspired Prophets.*

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.vi.iii-p2.1"></span>It</span> is now the proper place to show
that the very name Jesus and also the name Christ were honored by the
ancient prophets beloved of God. <span id="fr_52"></span>[53](#fn_52)

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p4"></span>2. Moses was the first to make known the
name of Christ as a name especially august and glorious. When he
delivered types and symbols of heavenly things, and mysterious images,
in accordance with the oracle which said to him, “Look that thou make
all things according to the pattern which was shown thee in the
mount,” <span id="fr_53"></span>[54](#fn_53) he consecrated a man high
priest of God, in so far as that was possible, and him he called
Christ. <span id="fr_54"></span>[55](#fn_54) And thus to this dignity of
the high priesthood, which in his opinion surpassed the most honorable
position among men, he attached for the sake of honor and glory the name
of Christ.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p7"></span>3. He knew so well that in Christ was
something divine. And the same one foreseeing, under the influence of
the divine Spirit, the name Jesus, dignified it also with a certain
distinguished privilege. For the name of Jesus, which had never been
uttered among men before the time of Moses, he applied first and only to
the one who he knew would receive after his death, again as a type and
symbol, the supreme command.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p8"></span>4. His successor, therefore, who had not
hitherto borne the name Jesus, but had been called by another name,
Auses, <span id="fr_55"></span>[56](#fn_55) which had been given him by
his parents, he now called Jesus, bestowing the name upon him as a gift
of honor, far greater than any kingly diadem. For Jesus himself, the son
of Nave, bore a resemblance to our Saviour in the fact that he alone,
after Moses and after the completion of the symbolical worship which had
been transmitted by him, succeeded to the government of the true and
pure religion.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p10"></span>5. Thus Moses bestowed the name of our
Saviour, Jesus Christ, as a mark of the highest honor, upon the two men
who in his time surpassed all the rest of the people in virtue and
glory; namely, upon the high priest and upon his own successor in the
government.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p11"></span>6. And the prophets that came after
also clearly foretold Christ by name, predicting at the same time the
plots which the Jewish people would form against him, and the calling of
the nations through him. Jeremiah, for instance, speaks as follows: “The
<span id="page_86">p. 86</span> <span
id="iii.vi.iii-Page_86"></span>Spirit before our face, Christ the Lord,
was taken in their destructions; of whom we said, under his shadow we
shall live among the nations.” <span id="fr_56"></span>[57](#fn_56) And
David, in perplexity, says, “Why did the nations rage and the people
imagine vain things? The kings of the earth set themselves in array, and
the rulers were gathered together against the Lord and against his
Christ”; <span id="fr_57"></span>[58](#fn_57) to which he adds, in the
person of Christ himself, “The Lord said unto me, Thou art my Son, this
day have I begotten thee. Ask of me, and I will give thee the nations
for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy
possession.” <span id="fr_58"></span>[59](#fn_58)

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p15"></span>7. And not only those who were honored
with the high priesthood, and who for the sake of the symbol were
anointed with especially prepared oil, were adorned with the name of
Christ among the Hebrews, but also the kings whom the prophets anointed
under the influence of the divine Spirit, and thus constituted, as it
were, typical Christs. For they also bore in their own persons types of
the royal and sovereign power of the true and only Christ, the divine
Word who ruleth over all.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p16"></span>8. And we have been told also that
certain of the prophets themselves became, by the act of anointing,
Christs in type, so that all these have reference to the true Christ,
the divinely inspired and heavenly Word, who is the only high priest of
all, and the only King of every creature, and the Father’s only supreme
prophet of prophets.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p17"></span>9. And a proof of this is that no one
of those who were of old symbolically anointed, whether priests, or
kings, or prophets, possessed so great a power of inspired virtue as was
exhibited by our Saviour and Lord Jesus, the true and only Christ.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p18"></span>10. None of them at least, however
superior in dignity and honor they may have been for many generations
among their own people, ever gave to their followers the name of
Christians from their own typical name of Christ. Neither was divine
honor ever rendered to any one of them by their subjects; nor after
their death was the disposition of their followers such that they were
ready to die for the one whom they honored. And never did so great a
commotion arise among all the nations of the earth in respect to any one
of that age; for the mere symbol could not act with such power among
them as the truth itself which was exhibited by our Saviour.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p19"></span>11. He, although he received no symbols
and types of high priesthood from any one, although he was not born of a
race of priests, although he was not elevated to a kingdom by military
guards, although he was not a prophet like those of old, although he
obtained no honor nor pre-eminence among the Jews, nevertheless was
adorned by the Father with all, if not with the symbols, yet with the
truth itself.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p20"></span>12. And therefore, although he did not
possess like honors with those whom we have mentioned, he is called
Christ more than all of them. And as himself the true and only Christ of
God, he has filled the whole earth with the truly august and sacred name
of Christians, committing to his followers no longer types and images,
but the uncovered virtues themselves, and a heavenly life in the very
doctrines of truth.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p21"></span>13. And he was not anointed with oil
prepared from material substances, but, as befits divinity, with the
divine Spirit himself, by participation in the unbegotten deity of the
Father. And this is taught also again by Isaiah, who exclaims, as if in
the person of Christ himself, “The Spirit of the Lord is upon me;
therefore hath he anointed me. He hath sent me to preach the Gospel to
the poor, to proclaim deliverance to captives, and recovery of sight to
the blind.” <span id="fr_59"></span>[60](#fn_59)

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p23"></span>14. And not only Isaiah, but also David
addresses him, saying, “Thy throne, O God, is forever and ever. A
scepter of equity is the scepter of thy kingdom. Thou hast loved
righteousness and hast hated iniquity. Therefore God, thy God, hath
anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows.” <span
id="fr_60"></span>[61](#fn_60) Here the Scripture calls him God in the
first verse, in the second it honors him with a royal scepter.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p25"></span>15. Then a little farther on, after the
divine and royal power, it represents him in the third place as having
become Christ, being anointed not with oil made of material substances,
but with the divine oil of gladness. It thus indicates his especial
honor, far superior to and different from that of those who, as types,
were of old anointed in a more material way.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p26"></span>16. And elsewhere the same writer
speaks of him as follows: “The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou at my
right hand until I make thine enemies thy footstool”; <span
id="fr_61"></span>[62](#fn_61) and, “Out of the womb, before the morning
star, have I begotten thee. The Lord hath sworn and he will not repent.
Thou art a priest forever after the order of Melchizedec.” <span
id="fr_62"></span>[63](#fn_62)

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p29"></span>17. But this Melchizedec is introduced
in the Holy Scriptures as a priest of the most high God, <span
id="fr_63"></span>[64](#fn_63) not consecrated by any anointing oil,
especially prepared, and not even belonging by descent to the priesthood
of the Jews. Wherefore after his order, but not after the order of the
others, who received symbols and types, was our Saviour proclaimed, with
an appeal to an oath, Christ and priest.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p31"></span>18. History, therefore, does not relate
that he was anointed corporeally by the Jews, nor <span id="page_87">p.
87</span> <span id="iii.vi.iii-Page_87"></span>that he belonged to the
lineage of priests, but that he came into existence from God himself
before the morning star, that is before the organization of the world,
and that he obtained an immortal and undecaying priesthood for eternal
ages.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p32"></span>19. But it is a great and convincing
proof of his incorporeal and divine unction that he alone of all those
who have ever existed is even to the present day called Christ by all
men throughout the world, and is confessed and witnessed to under this
name, and is commemorated both by Greeks and Barbarians and even to this
day is honored as a King by his followers throughout the world, and is
admired as more than a prophet, and is glorified as the true and only
high priest of God. <span id="fr_64"></span>[65](#fn_64) And besides all
this, as the pre-existent Word of God, called into being before all
ages, he has received august honor from the Father, and is worshiped as
God.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p34"></span>20. But most wonderful of all is the
fact that we who have consecrated ourselves to him, honor him not only
with our voices and with the sound of words, but also with complete
elevation of soul, so that we choose to give testimony unto him rather
than to preserve our own lives.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p35"></span>21. I have of necessity prefaced my
history with these matters in order that no one, judging from the date
of his incarnation, may think that our Saviour and Lord Jesus, the
Christ, has but recently come into being.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_52"></span>[85:53](2010030.htm#fr_52) <span
id="iii.vi.iii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p3"></span> Compare the *Dem. Evang.* iv. 17.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[85:54](2010030.htm#fr_53) <span
id="iii.vi.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p5"></span> [Ex. xxv.
40](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#040)<span id="iii.vi.iii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[85:55](2010030.htm#fr_54) <span
id="iii.vi.iii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p6"></span> “Eusebius here has in mind the passages
[Lev. 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#005),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#016), [Lev.
6:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#022)<span
id="iii.vi.iii-p6.1"></span>[Lev. 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#005),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#016)<span id="iii.vi.iii-p6.2"></span>,
and [Lev. vi. 22](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#022)<span
id="iii.vi.iii-p6.3"></span>, where the LXX. reads <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.vi.iii-p6.4"></span>ὁ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.vi.iii-p6.5"></span>ἱερεὺς ὁ χριστός</span>:
*The priest, the anointed one*” (Closs). The Authorized Version reads,
*The priest that was anointed;* the Revised Version, *The anointed
priest.*

<span id="fn_55"></span>[85:56](2010030.htm#fr_55) <span
id="iii.vi.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p9"></span> A few <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.vi.iii-p9.1"></span>mss.</span>, followed by Laemmer and
Heinichen, read here <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vi.iii-p9.2"></span>Ναυῇ</span>, but the best <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.vi.iii-p9.3"></span>mss.</span> followed by
the majority of editors read ᾽<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vi.iii-p9.4"></span>Αυσῇ</span>, which is a corruption of the
name *Oshea,* which means “Salvation,” and which Joshua bore before his
name was changed, by the addition of a syllable, to
Jehoshua=Joshua=Jesus, meaning “God’s salvation” ([Num. xiii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#016)<span id="iii.vi.iii-p9.5"></span>).
Jerome (*de vir. ill.* c. I.) speaks of this corruption as existing in
Greek and Latin <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.vi.iii-p9.6"></span>mss.</span> of the Scriptures, and as having
no sense, and contends that Osee is the proper form, Osee meaning
“Salvator.” The same corruption (Auses) occurs also in Tertullian, *Adv.
Marc.* iii. 16, and *Adv. Jud.* 9 (where the English translator, as
Crusè also does in the present passage, in both cases departs from the
original, and renders ‘Oshea,’ *Ante-Nicene Fathers*, Am. Ed. III. p.
334, 335, and 163), and in Lactantius, *Institutes*, iv. 17.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[86:57](2010030.htm#fr_56) <span
id="iii.vi.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p12"></span> [Lam. iv.
20](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#020)<span id="iii.vi.iii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[86:58](2010030.htm#fr_57) <span
id="iii.vi.iii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p13"></span> [Ps.
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#002)<span id="iii.vi.iii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[86:59](2010030.htm#fr_58) <span
id="iii.vi.iii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p14"></span> [Ps.
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#008)<span id="iii.vi.iii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[86:60](2010030.htm#fr_59) <span
id="iii.vi.iii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p22"></span> [Isa. lxi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#001)<span id="iii.vi.iii-p22.1"></span>.
Eusebius as usual follows the LXX., which in this case differs somewhat
from the Hebrew, and hence the translation differs from the English
version. The LXX., however, contains an extra clause which Eusebius
omits. See Heinichen’s edition, Vol. I. p. 21, note 49.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[86:61](2010030.htm#fr_60) <span
id="iii.vi.iii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p24"></span> [Ps.
45:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#007)<span id="iii.vi.iii-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[86:62](2010030.htm#fr_61) <span
id="iii.vi.iii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p27"></span> [Ps. cx.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#001)<span id="iii.vi.iii-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[86:63](2010030.htm#fr_62) <span
id="iii.vi.iii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p28"></span> [Ps. cx.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#004)<span id="iii.vi.iii-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[86:64](2010030.htm#fr_63) <span
id="iii.vi.iii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p30"></span> See [Gen.
14:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#018), [Heb.
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#006),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#010), [Heb.
6:20](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#020), [Heb.
8:0](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#000)<span
id="iii.vi.iii-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[87:65](2010030.htm#fr_64) <span
id="iii.vi.iii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p33"></span> Eusebius, in this chapter and in the
*Dem. Evang.* IV. 15, is the first of the Fathers to mention the three
offices of Christ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV](2010031)
