[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010244)  [Next](2010246) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xii.xxviii"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xxviii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xii.xxviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXVII</span>.—*Paul of Samosata,
and the Heresy introduced by him at Antioch.*

<span id="iii.xii.xxviii-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xii.xxviii-p2.1"></span>After</span> Xystus had presided over
the church of Rome for eleven years, <span
id="fr_2374"></span>[2375](#fn_2374) Dionysius, <span
id="fr_2375"></span>[2376](#fn_2375) namesake of him of Alexandria,
succeeded him. About the same time Demetrianus <span
id="fr_2376"></span>[2377](#fn_2376) died in Antioch, and Paul of
Samosata <span id="fr_2377"></span>[2378](#fn_2377) received that
episcopate.

<span id="iii.xii.xxviii-p8"></span>2. As he held, contrary to the
teaching of the Church, low and degraded views of Christ, namely, that
in his nature he was a common man, Dionysius of Alexandria was entreated
to come to the synod. <span id="fr_2378"></span>[2379](#fn_2378) But
being unable to come on account of age and physical weakness, he gave
his opinion on the subject under consideration by letter. <span
id="fr_2379"></span>[2380](#fn_2379) But all the other pastors of the
churches from all directions, made haste to assemble at Antioch, as
against a despoiler of the flock of Christ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2374"></span>[312:2375](2010245.htm#fr_2374) <span
id="iii.xii.xxviii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xxviii-p3"></span> Xystus II. was bishop only eleven
months, not eleven years. See chap. 5, note 5. Eusebius’ chronology of
the Roman bishops of this time is in inextricable confusion.

<span id="fn_2375"></span>[312:2376](2010245.htm#fr_2375) <span
id="iii.xii.xxviii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xxviii-p4"></span> After the martyrdom of Xystus II.
the bishopric of Rome remained vacant for nearly a year on account of
the severe persecution of Valerian. Dionysius became bishop on the 22d
of July, 259, according to the Liberian catalogue. Lipsius accepts this
as the correct date. Jerome’s version of the *Chron.* gives the twelfth
year of “Valerian and Gallienus” (i.e. 265–266) which is wide of the
mark. The Armenian *Chron.* gives the eighth year of the same reign. As
to the duration of his episcopate, authorities vary considerably.
Eusebius (chap. 30, §23, below) and Jerome’s version of the *Chron.* say
nine years; the Armenian *Chron.,* twelve; the Liberian catalogue,
eight. Lipsius shows that nine is the correct figure, and that five
months and two days are to be read instead of the two months and four
days of the Liberian catalogue. According to Lipsius, then, he was
bishop until Dec. 27, 268. Dionysius of Alexandria addressed to
Dionysius of Rome, while the latter was still a presbyter, one of his
epistles on baptism (see above, chap. 7, §6, where the latter is called
by Eusebius a “learned and capable man”). Another epistle of the same
writer addressed to him is mentioned in chap. 9, §6. Dionysius of
Alexandria’s four books against the Sabellians were likewise addressed
to him (see chap. 26, above, and Bk. VI. chap. 40, note 1). Gallienus’
edict of toleration was promulgated while Dionysius was bishop (see
chap. 13, note 3).

<span id="fn_2376"></span>[312:2377](2010245.htm#fr_2376) <span
id="iii.xii.xxviii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xxviii-p5"></span> On Demetrianus, see Bk. VI. chap.
46, note 12.

<span id="fn_2377"></span>[312:2378](2010245.htm#fr_2377) <span
id="iii.xii.xxviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xxviii-p6"></span> Paul of Samosata was one of the
most famous heretics of the early Church. He was bishop of Antioch and
at the same time viceroy of Zenobia, Queen of Palmyra. Both versions of
Eusebius’ *Chron.* put the date of his accession to the see of Antioch
in the seventh year of Valerian and Gallienus, the year of Abr. 2277
(2278), i.e. in <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xii.xxviii-p6.1"></span>a.d.</span> 259 (260); and Jerome’s
version puts his deposition in the year of Abr. 2283, i.e. <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.xii.xxviii-p6.2"></span>a.d.</span> 265. These
dates, however, are not to be relied upon. Harnack (*Zeit des Ignatius,*
p. 51) shows that he became bishop between 257 and 260. Our chief
knowledge of his character and career is derived from the encyclical
letter written by the members of the council which condemned him, and
quoted in part by Eusebius in chap. 30, below. This, as will be seen,
paints his character in very black colors. It may be somewhat overdrawn,
for it was written by his enemies; at the same time, such an official
communication can hardly have falsified the facts to any great extent.
We may rely then upon its general truthfulness. Paul reproduced the
heresy of Artemon (see above, Bk. V. chap. 28), teaching that Christ was
a mere man, though he was filled with divine power, and that from his
birth, not merely from his baptism, as the Ebionites had held. He
admitted, too, the generation by the Holy Spirit. “He denied the
personality of the Logos and of the Holy Spirit, and considered them
merely powers of God, like reason and mind in man; but granted that the
Logos dwelt in Christ in a larger measure than in any former messenger
of God, and taught, like the Socinians in later times, a gradual
elevation of Christ, determined by his own moral development, to divine
dignity. He admitted that Christ remained free from sin, conquered the
sin of our forefathers, and then became the Saviour of the race”
(Schaff). At various Antiochian synods (the exact number of them we do
not know), efforts were made to procure his condemnation, but they were
not successful. Finally one of the synods condemned and excommunicated
him, and Domnus was appointed bishop in his place. The date of this
synod is ordinarily fixed at 268 or 269, but it cannot have occurred in
269, and probably occurred earlier than 268 (see below, chap. 29, note
1). Since Paul was in favor with Zenobia, his deposition could not be
effected until 272, when Aurelian conquered her. Being appealed to by
the Church, Aurelian left the decision between the claims of Paul and
Domnus to the bishops of Rome and Italy, who decided at once for Domnus,
and Paul was therefore deposed and driven out in disgrace.

<span id="iii.xii.xxviii-p7"></span>Our sources for a knowledge of Paul
and his heresy are the letter quoted in chap. 30; a number of fragments
from the acts of the council, given by Routh, *Rel. Sac.* III. 287 sq.;
and scattered notices in the Fathers of the fourth century, especially
Athanasius, Hilary, Gregory of Nyssa, &c. Cf. also Jerome’s *de vir.
ill.* 71, and Epiphanius’ *Hær.* 65. See Harnack’s article
*Monarchianismus,* in Herzog, second ed. (abbreviated in Schaff-Herzog);
also Smith and Wace’s *Dict. of Christ. Biog.,* art. *Paulus of
Samosata.*

<span id="fn_2378"></span>[312:2379](2010245.htm#fr_2378) <span
id="iii.xii.xxviii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xxviii-p9"></span> This synod to which Dionysius was
invited was not the last one, at which Paul was condemned, but one of
the earlier ones, at which his case was considered. It is not probable
that the synod was called especially to consider his case, but that at
two or more of the regular annual synods of Antioch the subject was
discussed without result, until finally condemnation was procured (cf.
Harnack, *ibid.* p. 52, and Lipsius, *ibid.* p. 228). Dionysius mentions
the fact that he was invited to attend this synod in an epistle
addressed to Cornelius, according to Eusebius, Bk. VI. chap. 46.

<span id="fn_2379"></span>[312:2380](2010245.htm#fr_2379) <span
id="iii.xii.xxviii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xxviii-p10"></span> Jerome, *de vir. ill.* 69, tells
us that Dionysius wrote a few days before his death, but that is only an
inference drawn from Eusebius’ statement. This epistle of Dionysius is
no longer extant, although a copy of it was originally appended to the
encyclical of the Antiochian synod (as we learn from chap. 30, §4), and
hence must have been extant in the time of Eusebius, and also of Jerome.
An epistle purporting to have been written by Dionysius to Paul of
Samosata is given by Labbe, *Concil.* I. 850–893, but it is not
authentic.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVIII](2010246)
