[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010697)  [Next](2010699.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.ix"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ix-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.viii.ix-p1.1"></span>Chapter VIII.</span>

<span id="iv.viii.ix-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.viii.ix-p2.1"></span>For</span> as soon as he understood that the
ignorant multitudes were inspired with a vain and childish dread of
these bugbears of error, wrought in gold and silver, he judged it right
to remove these also, like stumbling-stones thrown in the path of men
walking in the dark, and henceforward to open a royal road, plain and
unobstructed, to all.

<span id="iv.viii.ix-p3"></span>2. Having formed this resolution, he
considered that no soldiers or military force of any sort was needed for
the repression of the evil: a few of his own friends sufficed for this
service, and these he sent by a simple expression of his will to visit
each several province.

<span id="iv.viii.ix-p4"></span>3. Accordingly, sustained by confidence
in the emperor’s piety and their own personal devotion to God, they
passed through the midst of numberless tribes and nations, abolishing
this ancient system of error in every city and country. They ordered the
priests themselves, in the midst of general laughter and scorn, to bring
their gods from their dark recesses to the light of day. They then
stripped them of their ornaments, and exhibited to the gaze of all the
unsightly reality which had been hidden beneath a painted exterior: and
lastly, whatever part of the material appeared to be of value they
scraped off and melted in the fire to prove its worth, after which they
secured and set apart whatever they judged needful for their purposes,
leaving to the superstitious worshipers what was altogether useless, as
a memorial of their shame.

<span id="iv.viii.ix-p5"></span>4. Meanwhile our admirable prince was
himself engaged in a work similar to that we have described. For at the
same time that these costly images of the dead were stripped, as we have
said, of their precious <span id="page_592">p. 592</span> <span
id="iv.viii.ix-Page_592"></span>materials, he also attacked those
composed of brass; causing those to be dragged from their places with
ropes, and, as it were, carried away captive, whom the dotage of
mythology had esteemed as gods. The next care of our august emperor was
to kindle, as it were, a brilliant torch, by the light of which he
directed his imperial gaze around, to see if any hidden vestiges of
error might yet exist.

<span id="iv.viii.ix-p6"></span>5. And as the keen-sighted eagle in its
heavenward flight is able to descry from its lofty height the most
distant objects on the earth: so did he, whilst residing in the imperial
palace of his own fair city, discover, as from a watch-tower, a hidden
and fatal snare of souls in the province of Phœnicia. This was a grove
and temple, not situated in the midst of any city, or in any public
place, as for splendor of effect is generally the case, but apart from
the beaten and frequented road, on part of the summit of Mount Lebanon,
and dedicated to the foul demon known by the name of Venus.

<span id="iv.viii.ix-p7"></span>6. It was a school of wickedness for all
the abandoned votaries of impurity and such as destroyed their bodies
with effeminacy. Here men undeserving the name forgot the dignity of
their sex, and propitiated the demon by their effeminate conduct: here
too unlawful commerce of women, and adulterous intercourse, with other
horrible and infamous practices, were perpetrated in this temple as in a
place beyond the scope and restraint of law.

<span id="iv.viii.ix-p8"></span>Meantime these evils remained unchecked
by the presence of any observer, since no one of fair character ventured
to visit such scenes.

<span id="iv.viii.ix-p9"></span>7. These proceedings, however, could not
escape the vigilance of our august emperor, who, having himself
inspected them with characteristic forethought, and judging that such a
temple was unfit for the light of heaven, gave orders that the building
with its offerings should be utterly destroyed. Accordingly, in
obedience to the imperial edict, these engines of an impure superstition
were immediately abolished, and the hand of military force was made
instrumental in purging the place. And now those who had heretofore
lived without restraint, learned, through the imperial threat of
punishment, to practice self-control.

<span id="iv.viii.ix-p10"></span>8. Thus did our emperor tear the mask
from this system of delusive wickedness, and expose it to the public
gaze, at the same time proclaiming openly his Saviour’s name to all. No
advocate appeared; neither god nor demon, prophet nor diviner, could
lend his aid to the detected authors of the imposture. For the souls of
men were no longer enveloped in thick darkness: but enlightened by the
rays of true godliness, they deplored the ignorance and pitied the
blindness of their forefathers, rejoicing at the same time in their own
deliverance from such fatal error. <span
id="fr_3530"></span>[3531](#fn_3530.md)

<span id="iv.viii.ix-p12"></span>9. Thus speedily, according to the
counsel of the mighty God, and through our emperor’s agency, was every
enemy, whether visible or unseen, utterly removed: and henceforward
peace, the happy nurse of youth, extended her reign throughout the
world. Wars were no more, for the gods were not: no more did warfare in
country or town, no more did the effusion of human blood, distress
mankind, as heretofore, when demon-worship and the madness of idolatry
prevailed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3530"></span>[592:3531](2010698.htm#fr_3530.md) <span
id="iv.viii.ix-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ix-p11"></span> “The Pharisee stood and prayed thus
with himself, God, I thank thee that I am not as the rest of men.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX](2010699.md)
