[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010152)  [Next](2010154) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.x.xiii"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xiii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.x.xiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XII.—</span>*The Bishops in
Jerusalem.*

<span id="iii.x.xiii-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.x.xiii-p2.1"></span>At</span> this time Narcissus <span
id="fr_1529"></span>[1530](#fn_1529) was the bishop of the church at
Jerusalem, and he is celebrated by many to this day. He was the
fifteenth in succession from the siege of the Jews under Adrian. We have
shown that from that time first the church in Jerusalem was composed of
Gentiles, after those of the circumcision, and that Marcus was the first
Gentile bishop that presided over them. <span
id="fr_1530"></span>[1531](#fn_1530)

<span id="iii.x.xiii-p6"></span>2. After him the succession in the
episcopate was: first Cassianus; after him Publius; then Maximus; <span
id="fr_1531"></span>[1532](#fn_1531) following them Julian; then
Gaius; <span id="fr_1532"></span>[1533](#fn_1532) after him Symmachus
and another Gaius, and again another Julian; after these Capito <span
id="fr_1533"></span>[1534](#fn_1533) and Valens and Dolichianus; and
after all of them Narcissus, the thirtieth in regular succession from
the apostles.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1529"></span>[226:1530](2010153.htm#fr_1529) <span
id="iii.x.xiii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xiii-p3"></span> The date of Narcissus’ accession to the
see of Jerusalem is not known to us. The *Chron.* affords us no
assistance; for although it connects him among other bishops with the
first (Armen.) or third (Jerome) year of Severus, it does not pretend to
give the date of accession, and in one place says expressly that the
dates of the Jerusalem bishops are not known (*non potuimus discernere
tempora singulorum*). But from chap. 22 we learn that he was already
bishop in the tenth year of Commodus (189 <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.x.xiii-p3.1"></span>a.d.</span>); from chap. 23, that he was one
of those that presided at a Palestinian council, called in the time of
Bishop Victor, of Rome, to discuss the paschal question (see chap. 23,
§2); from Bk. VI. chap. 8, that he was alive at the time of the
persecution of Severus (202 sq.); and from the fragment of one of
Alexander’s epistles given in Bk. VI. chap. 11, that he was still alive
in his 116th year, sometime after 212 <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.x.xiii-p3.2"></span>a.d.</span> (see Bk. VI. chap. 11, note 1).
Epiphanius (*Hær.* LXVI. 20) reports that he lived until the reign of
Alexander Severus (222 <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.x.xiii-p3.3"></span>a.d.</span>), and this in itself would not
be impossible; for the epistle of Alexander referred to might have been
written as late as 222. But Epiphanius is a writer of no authority; and
the fact is, that in connection with Origen’s visit in Palestine, in 216
(see Bk. VI. chap. 19), Alexander is mentioned as bishop of Jerusalem;
and Narcissus is not referred to. We must, therefore, conclude that
Narcissus was dead before 216. We learn from Bk. VI. chap. 9 that
Narcissus had the reputation of being a great miracle-worker, and he was
a man of such great piety and sanctity as to excite the hatred of a
number of evil-doers, who conspired against him to blacken his
character. In consequence of this he left Jerusalem, and disappeared
entirely from the haunts of men, so that it became necessary to appoint
another bishop in his place. Afterward, his slanderers having suffered
the curses imprecated upon themselves in their oaths against him,
Narcissus returned, and was again made bishop, and was given an
assistant, Alexander (see Bk. VI. chaps. 10 and 11). A late tradition
makes Narcissus a martyr (see Nicephorus, *H. E.* IV. 19), but there is
no authority for the report.

<span id="fn_1530"></span>[226:1531](2010153.htm#fr_1530) <span
id="iii.x.xiii-p3.4"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xiii-p4"></span> Upon the so-called bishops of Jerusalem
down to the destruction of the city under Hadrian, see Bk. IV. chap. 5.
Upon the destruction of Jerusalem under Hadrian, and the founding of the
Gentile Church in Ælia Capitolina, and upon Marcus the first Gentile
bishop, see Bk. IV. chap. 6.

<span id="iii.x.xiii-p5"></span>The list given here by Eusebius purports
to contain fifteen names, Marcus being the sixteenth, and Narcissus
being the thirtieth; but only thirteen names are given. In the *Chron.,*
however, and in Epiphanius (*Hær.* LXVI. 20) the list is complete, a
second Maximus and a Valentinus being inserted, as 26th and 27th,
between Capito and Valens. The omission here is undoubtedly due simply
to the mistake of some scribe. The *Chron.* puts the accession of
Cassianus into the 23d year of Antoninus Pius (160 <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.x.xiii-p5.1"></span>a.d.</span>), and the
accession of the second Maximus into the sixth year of Commodus (185
<span class="c13"><span id="iii.x.xiii-p5.2"></span>a.d.</span>), but it
is said in the *Chron.* itself that the dates of the various bishops are
not known, and hence no reliance can be placed upon these figures.
Epiphanius puts the accession of the first Gaius into the tenth year of
Antoninus Pius, which is thirteen years earlier than the date of the
*Chron.* for the fourth bishop preceding. He also puts the death of the
second Gaius in the eighth year of Marcus Aurelius (168 <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.x.xiii-p5.3"></span>a.d.</span>) and the death
of the second Maximus in the sixteenth year of the same reign, thus
showing a variation from the *Chron.* of more than nine years. The
episcopate of Dolichianus is brought down by him to the reign of
Commodus (180 <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.x.xiii-p5.4"></span>a.d.</span>). As shown in note 1, however,
the date given by him for Narcissus is quite wrong, and there is no
reason for bestowing any greater credence upon his other dates.
Syncellus assigns five years to Cassianus, five to Publius, four to
Maximus, two to Julian, three to the first Gaius, two to Symmachus,
three to the second Gaius, four to the second Julian, two to an Elias
who is not named by our other authorities, four to Capito, four to the
second Maximus, five to Antoninus, three to Valens, four to Narcissus
the first time, and ten the second time. His list, however, is
considerably confused,—Dolichianus being thrown after Narcissus with an
episcopate of twelve years,—and at any rate no reliance can be placed
upon the figures given. We must conclude that we have no means of
ascertaining the dates of these various bishops until we reach
Narcissus. We know nothing about any of them (Narcissus excepted) beyond
the fact that they were bishops.

<span id="fn_1531"></span>[226:1532](2010153.htm#fr_1531) <span
id="iii.x.xiii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xiii-p7"></span> Called Maximinus by the Armenian
*Chron.,* but all our other authorities call him Maximus.

<span id="fn_1532"></span>[226:1533](2010153.htm#fr_1532) <span
id="iii.x.xiii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xiii-p8"></span> The name is given <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.x.xiii-p8.1"></span>Γ€ιος</span> in this
chapter, and by Syncellus; but Jerome and the Armenian give Gaianus, and
Epiphanius <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xiii-p8.2"></span>Γαιανός</span>. All the authorities agree
upon the name of the next Gaius (who is, however, omitted by Rufinus).

<span id="fn_1533"></span>[226:1534](2010153.htm#fr_1533) <span
id="iii.x.xiii-p8.3"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xiii-p9"></span> Eusebius has <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xiii-p9.1"></span>Καπίτων</span>, so also Epiphanius, with
whom Jerome agrees, writing *Capito.* The Armenian, however, has Apion,
and Syncellus says <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xiii-p9.2"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xiii-p9.3"></span>Α</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xiii-p9.4"></span>πίων, οἱ δὲ Καπίτων</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII](2010154)
