[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010449)  [Next](2010451) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.ii.v"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.ii.v-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vi.ii.v-p1.1"></span>Chapter V</span>.—*What Licinius, while
sacrificing in a Grove, said concerning Idols, and concerning Christ.*

<span id="iv.vi.ii.v-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vi.ii.v-p2.1"></span>And</span> when he was now ready to engage,
he desired the most approved of his body-guard <span
id="fr_3164"></span>[3165](#fn_3164) and his most valued friends to meet
him in one of the places which they consider sacred. It was a
well-watered and shady grove, and in it were several marble statues of
those whom he accounted to be gods. After lighting tapers and performing
the usual sacrifices in honor of these, he is said to have delivered the
following speech:

<span id="iv.vi.ii.v-p4"></span>“Friends and fellow-soldiers! These are
our country’s gods, and these we honor with a worship derived from our
remotest ancestors. But he who leads the army now opposed to us has
proved false to the religion of his forefathers, and adopted atheistic
sentiments, honoring in his infatuation some strange and unheard-of
Deity, with whose despicable standard he now disgraces his army, and
confiding in whose aid he has taken up arms, and is now advancing, not
so much against *us* as against those very gods whom he has forsaken.
However, the present occasion shall prove which of us is mistaken in his
judgment, and shall decide between our gods and those whom our
adversaries profess to honor. For either it will declare the victory to
be ours, and so most justly evince that our gods are the true saviours
and helpers; or else, if this God of Constantine’s, who comes we know
not whence, shall prove superior to our deities (who are many, and in
point of numbers, at least, have the advantage), let no one henceforth
doubt which god he ought to worship, but attach himself at once to the
superior power, and ascribe to him the honors of the victory. Suppose,
then, this strange God, whom we now regard with ridicule, should really
prove victorious; then indeed we must acknowledge and give him honor,
and so bid a long farewell to those for whom we light our tapers in
vain. But if our own gods triumph (as they undoubtedly will), then, as
soon as we have secured the present victory, let us prosecute the war
without delay against these despisers of the gods.”

<span id="iv.vi.ii.v-p5"></span>Such were the words he addressed to
those then present, as reported not long after to the writer of this
history by some who heard them spoken. <span
id="fr_3165"></span>[3166](#fn_3165) And as soon as he had concluded his
speech, he gave orders to his forces to commence the attack.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3164"></span>[501:3165](2010450.htm#fr_3164) <span
id="iv.vi.ii.v-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.ii.v-p3"></span> Literally, “shield-bearers,” but here
relates to a chosen body of guards, as in the Macedonian army. Compare
Liddell and Scott, *Lex.* s.v. <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vi.ii.v-p3.1"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vi.ii.v-p3.2"></span>πασπιστής</span>

<span id="fn_3165"></span>[501:3166](2010450.htm#fr_3165) <span
id="iv.vi.ii.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.ii.v-p6"></span> The whole passage seems altogether too
appropriate to receive ready credence; but it is worth noting here how
Eusebius “quotes his authors,” and seems to give the thing for what it
is worth, keeping perhaps the same modicum of reservation for the
hearers’ relative imagination and memory, when relating after the
events, that the modern reader does.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI](2010451)
