[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010123)  [Next](2010125.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ix.xv"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.ix.xv-p1.1"></span>Chapter</span> <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.ix.xv-p1.2"></span>XV.—</span>*Under Verus,* <span
id="fr_1130"></span>[1131](#fn_1130.md) *Polycarp with Others suffered
Martyrdom at Smyrna*.

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p3"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.ix.xv-p3.1"></span>At</span> this time, <span
id="fr_1131"></span>[1132](#fn_1131.md) when the greatest persecutions were
exciting Asia, Polycarp ended his life by martyrdom. But I consider it
most important that his death, a written account of which is still
extant, should be recorded in this history.

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p5"></span>2. There is a letter, written in the name
of the church over which he himself presided, <span
id="fr_1132"></span>[1133](#fn_1132.md) to the parishes in Pontus, <span
id="fr_1133"></span>[1134](#fn_1133.md) which relates the events that
befell him, in the following words:

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p8"></span>3. “The church of God which dwelleth in
Philomelium, <span id="fr_1134"></span>[1135](#fn_1134.md) and to all the
parishes of the holy catholic Church <span
id="fr_1135"></span>[1136](#fn_1135.md) in every place; mercy and peace and
love from God the Father be multiplied. We write <span
id="fr_1136"></span>[1137](#fn_1136.md) unto you, brethren, an account of
what happened to those that suffered martyrdom and to the blessed
Polycarp, who put an end to the persecution, having, as it were, sealed
it <span id="page_189">p. 189</span> <span
id="iii.ix.xv-Page_189"></span>by his martyrdom.”

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p12"></span>4. After these words, before giving the
account of Polycarp, they record the events which befell the rest of the
martyrs, and describe the great firmness which they exhibited in the
midst of their pains. For they say that the bystanders were struck with
amazement when they saw them lacerated with scourges even to the
innermost veins and arteries, so that the hidden inward parts of the
body, both their bowels and their members, were exposed to view; and
then laid upon sea-shells and certain pointed spits, and subjected to
every species of punishment and of torture, and finally thrown as food
to wild beasts.

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p13"></span>5. And they record that the most noble
Germanicus <span id="fr_1137"></span>[1138](#fn_1137.md) especially
distinguished himself, overcoming by the grace of God the fear of bodily
death implanted by nature. When indeed the proconsul <span
id="fr_1138"></span>[1139](#fn_1138.md) wished to persuade him, and urged
his youth, and besought him, as he was very young and vigorous, to take
compassion on himself, he did not hesitate, but eagerly lured the beast
toward himself, all but compelling and irritating him, in order that he
might the sooner be freed from their unrighteous and lawless life.

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p16"></span>6. After his glorious death the whole
multitude, marveling at the bravery of the God-beloved martyr and at the
fortitude of the whole race of Christians, began to cry out suddenly,
“Away with the atheists; <span id="fr_1139"></span>[1140](#fn_1139.md) let
Polycarp be sought.”

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p18"></span>7. And when a very great tumult arose in
consequence of the cries, a certain Phrygian, Quintus <span
id="fr_1140"></span>[1141](#fn_1140.md) by name, who was newly come from
Phrygia, seeing the beasts and the additional tortures, was smitten with
cowardice and gave up the attainment of salvation.

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p20"></span>8. But the above-mentioned epistle shows
that he, too hastily and without proper discretion, had rushed forward
with others to the tribunal, but when seized had furnished a clear proof
to all, that it is not right for such persons rashly and recklessly to
expose themselves to danger. Thus did matters turn out in connection
with them.

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p21"></span>9. But the most admirable Polycarp, when
he first heard of these things, continued undisturbed, preserved a quiet
and unshaken mind, and determined to remain in the city. But being
persuaded by his friends who entreated and exhorted him to retire
secretly, he went out to a farm not far distant from the city and abode
there with a few companions, night and day doing nothing but wrestle
with the Lord in prayer, beseeching and imploring, and asking peace for
the churches throughout the whole world. For this was always his custom.

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p22"></span>10. And three days before his arrest,
while he was praying, he saw in a vision at night the pillow under his
head suddenly seized by fire and consumed; and upon this awakening he
immediately interpreted the vision to those that were present, almost
foretelling that which was about to happen, and declaring plainly to
those that were with him that it would be necessary for him for Christ’s
sake to die by fire.

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p23"></span>11. Then, as those who were seeking him
pushed the search with vigor, they say that he was again constrained by
the solicitude and love of the brethren to go to another farm. Thither
his pursuers came after no long time, and seized two of the servants
there, and tortured one of them for the purpose of learning from him
Polycarp’s hiding-place.

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p24"></span>12. And coming late in the evening, they
found him lying in an upper room, whence he might have gone to another
house, but he would not, saying, “The will of God be done.”

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p25"></span>13. And when he learned that they were
present, as the account says, he went down and spoke to them with a very
cheerful and gentle countenance, so that those who did not already know
the man thought that they beheld a miracle when they observed his
advanced age and the gravity and firmness of his bearing, and they
marveled that so much effort should be made to capture a man like him.

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p26"></span>14. But he did not hesitate, but
immediately gave orders that a table should be spread for them. Then he
invited them to partake of a bounteous meal, and asked of them one hour
that he might pray undisturbed. And when they had given permission, he
stood up and prayed, being full of the grace of the Lord, so that those
who were present and heard him praying were amazed, and many of them now
repented that such a venerable and godly old man was about to be put to
death.

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p27"></span>15. In addition to these things the
narrative concerning him contains the following account: “But when at
length he had brought his prayer to an end, after remembering all that
had ever come into contact with him, small and great, famous and
obscure, and the whole catholic Church throughout the world, the hour of
departure being come, they put him upon an ass and brought him to the
city, it being a great Sabbath. <span
id="fr_1141"></span>[1142](#fn_1141.md) And he was met by <span
id="page_190">p. 190</span> <span
id="iii.ix.xv-Page_190"></span>Herod, <span
id="fr_1142"></span>[1143](#fn_1142.md) the captain of police, <span
id="fr_1143"></span>[1144](#fn_1143.md) and by his father Nicetes, who took
him into their carriage, and sitting beside him endeavored to persuade
him, saying, ‘For what harm is there in saying, Lord Cæsar, and
sacrificing and saving your life?’ He at first did not answer; but when
they persisted, he said, ‘I am not going to do what you advise me.’

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p31"></span>16. And when they failed to persuade
him, they uttered dreadful words, and thrust him down with violence, so
that as he descended from the carriage he lacerated his shin. But
without turning round, he went on his way promptly and rapidly, as if
nothing had happened to him, and was taken to the stadium.

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p32"></span>17. But there was such a tumult in the
stadium that not many heard a voice from heaven, which came to Polycarp
as he was entering the place: ‘Be strong, Polycarp, and play the
man.’ <span id="fr_1144"></span>[1145](#fn_1144.md) And no one saw the
speaker, but many of our people heard the voice.

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p34"></span>18. And when he was led forward, there
was a great tumult, as they heard that Polycarp was taken. Finally, when
he came up, the proconsul asked if he were Polycarp. And when he
confessed that he was, he endeavored to persuade him to deny, saying,
‘Have regard for thine age,’ and other like things, which it is their
custom to say: ‘Swear by the genius of Cæsar; <span
id="fr_1145"></span>[1146](#fn_1145.md) repent and say, Away with the
Atheists.’

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p36"></span>19. But Polycarp, looking with dignified
countenance upon the whole crowd that was gathered in the stadium, waved
his hand to them, and groaned, and raising his eyes toward heaven, said,
‘Away with the Atheists.’

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p37"></span>20. But when the magistrate pressed him,
and said, ‘Swear, and I will release thee; revile Christ,’ Polycarp
said, ‘Fourscore and six years <span
id="fr_1146"></span>[1147](#fn_1146.md) have I been serving him, and he
hath done me no wrong; how then can I blaspheme my king who saved me?’

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p39"></span>21. “But when he again persisted, and
said, ‘Swear by the genius of Cæsar,’ Polycarp replied, ‘If thou vainly
supposest that I will swear by the genius of Cæsar, as thou sayest,
feigning to be ignorant who I am, hear plainly: I am a Christian. But if
thou desirest to learn the doctrine of Christianity, assign a day and
hear.’

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p40"></span>22. The proconsul said, ‘Persuade the
people.’ But Polycarp said, ‘As for thee, I thought thee worthy of an
explanation; for we have been taught to render to princes and
authorities ordained by God the honor that is due, <span
id="fr_1147"></span>[1148](#fn_1147.md) so long as it does not injure
us; <span id="fr_1148"></span>[1149](#fn_1148.md) but as for these, I do
not esteem them the proper persons to whom to make my defense.’ <span
id="fr_1149"></span>[1150](#fn_1149.md)

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p44"></span>23. But the proconsul said, ‘I have wild
beasts; I will throw thee to them unless thou repent.’ But he said,
‘Call them; for repentance from better to worse is a change we cannot
make. But it is a noble thing to turn from wickedness to righteousness.’

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p45"></span>24. But he again said to him, ‘If thou
despisest the wild beasts, I will cause thee to be consumed by fire,
unless thou repent.’ But Polycarp said, ‘Thou threatenest a fire which
burneth for an hour, and after a little is quenched; for thou knowest
not the fire of the future judgment and of the eternal punishment which
is reserved for the impious. But why dost thou delay? Do what thou
wilt.’

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p46"></span>25. Saying these and other words
besides, he was filled with courage and joy, and his face was suffused
with grace, so that not only was he not terrified and dismayed by the
words that were spoken to him, but, on the contrary, the proconsul was
amazed, and sent his herald to proclaim three times in the midst of the
stadium: ‘Polycarp hath confessed that he is a Christian.’

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p47"></span>26. And when this was proclaimed by the
herald, the whole multitude, both of Gentiles and of Jews, <span
id="fr_1150"></span>[1151](#fn_1150.md) who dwelt in Smyrna, cried out with
ungovernable wrath and with a great shout, ‘This is the teacher of Asia,
the father of the Christians, the overthrower of our gods, who teacheth
many not to sacrifice nor to worship.’

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p49"></span>27. When they had said this, they cried
out and asked the Asiarch Philip <span
id="fr_1151"></span>[1152](#fn_1151.md) to let a lion loose upon Polycarp.
But he said that it was not lawful for <span id="page_191">p. 191</span>
<span id="iii.ix.xv-Page_191"></span>him, since he had closed the games.
Then they thought fit to cry out with one accord that Polycarp should be
burned alive.

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p51"></span>28. For it was necessary that the vision
should be fulfilled which had been shown him concerning his pillow, when
he saw it burning while he was praying, and turned and said
prophetically to the faithful that were with him, ‘I must needs be
burned alive.’

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p52"></span>29. These things were done with great
speed,—more quickly than they were said,—the crowds immediately
collecting from the workshops and baths timber and fagots, the Jews
being especially zealous in the work, as is their wont.

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p53"></span>30. But when the pile was ready, taking
off all his upper garments, and loosing his girdle, he attempted also to
remove his shoes, although he had never before done this, because of the
effort which each of the faithful always made to touch his skin first;
for he had been treated with all honor on account of his virtuous life
even before his gray hairs came.

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p54"></span>31. Forthwith then the materials
prepared for the pile were placed about him; and as they were also about
to nail him to the stake, <span id="fr_1152"></span>[1153](#fn_1152.md) he
said, ‘Leave me thus; for he who hath given me strength to endure the
fire, will also grant me strength to remain in the fire unmoved without
being secured by you with nails.’ So they did not nail him, but bound
him.

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p56"></span>32. And he, with his hands behind him,
and bound like a noble ram taken from a great flock, an acceptable
burnt-offering unto God omnipotent, said,

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p57"></span>33. ‘Father of thy beloved and blessed
Son <span id="fr_1153"></span>[1154](#fn_1153.md) Jesus Christ, through
whom we have received the knowledge of thee, the God of angels and of
powers and of the whole creation and of the entire race of the righteous
who live in thy presence, I bless thee that thou hast deemed me worthy
of this day and hour, that I might receive a portion in the number of
the martyrs, in the cup of Christ, unto resurrection of eternal
life, <span id="fr_1154"></span>[1155](#fn_1154.md) both of soul and of
body, in the immortality of the Holy Spirit.

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p60"></span>34. Among these may I be received before
thee this day, in a rich and acceptable sacrifice, as thou, the faithful
and true God, hast beforehand prepared and revealed, and hast fulfilled.

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p61"></span>35. Wherefore I praise thee also for
everything; I bless thee, I glorify thee, through the eternal high
priest, Jesus Christ, thy beloved Son, through whom, with him, in the
Holy Spirit, be glory unto thee, both now and for the ages to come,
Amen.’

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p62"></span>36. When he had offered up his Amen and
had finished his prayer, the firemen lighted the fire and as a great
flame blazed out, we, to whom it was given to see, saw a wonder, and we
were preserved that we might relate what happened to the others.

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p63"></span>37. For the fire presented the
appearance of a vault, like the sail of a vessel filled by the wind, and
made a wall about the body of the martyr, <span
id="fr_1155"></span>[1156](#fn_1155.md) and it was in the midst not like
flesh burning, but like gold and silver refined in a furnace. For we
perceived such a fragrant odor, as of the fumes of frankincense or of
some other precious spices.

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p65"></span>38. So at length the lawless men, when
they saw that the body could not be consumed by the fire, commanded an
executioner <span id="fr_1156"></span>[1157](#fn_1156.md) to approach and
pierce him with the sword.

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p67"></span>39. And when he had done this there came
forth a quantity of blood <span id="fr_1157"></span>[1158](#fn_1157.md) so
that it extinguished the fire; and the whole crowd marveled that there
should be such a difference between the unbelievers and the elect, of
whom this man also was one, the most wonderful teacher in our times,
apostolic and prophetic, who was bishop of the catholic Church <span
id="fr_1158"></span>[1159](#fn_1158.md) in Smyrna. For every word which
came from his mouth was accomplished and will be accomplished.

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p70"></span>40. But the jealous and envious Evil
One, the adversary of the race of the righteous, when he saw the
greatness of his martyrdom, and his blameless life from the beginning,
and when he saw him crowned with the crown of immortality and bearing
off an incontestable prize, took care that not even his body should be
taken away by us, although many desired to do it and to have communion
with his holy flesh.

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p71"></span>41. Accordingly certain ones secretly
suggested to Nicetes, the father of Herod and brother of Alce, <span
id="fr_1159"></span>[1160](#fn_1159.md) that he should plead with the
magistrate <span id="page_192">p. 192</span> <span
id="iii.ix.xv-Page_192"></span>not to give up his body, ‘lest,’ it was
said, ‘they should abandon the crucified One and begin to worship this
man.’ <span id="fr_1160"></span>[1161](#fn_1160.md) They said these things
at the suggestion and impulse of the Jews, who also watched as we were
about to take it from the fire, not knowing that we shall never be able
either to forsake Christ, who suffered for the salvation of the whole
world of those that are saved, or to worship any other.

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p74"></span>42. For we worship him who is the Son of
God, but the martyrs, as disciples and imitators of the Lord, we love as
they deserve on account of their matchless affection for their own king
and teacher. May we also be made partakers and fellow-disciples with
them.

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p75"></span>43. The centurion, therefore, when he
saw the contentiousness exhibited by the Jews, placed him in the midst
and burned him, as was their custom. And so we afterwards gathered up
his bones, which were more valuable than precious stones and more to be
esteemed than gold, and laid them in a suitable place.

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p76"></span>44. There the Lord will permit us to
come together as we are able, in gladness and joy to celebrate the
birthday of his martyrdom, <span id="fr_1161"></span>[1162](#fn_1161.md)
for the commemoration of those who have already fought and for the
training and preparation of those who shall hereafter do the same.

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p78"></span>45. Such are the events that befell the
blessed Polycarp, who suffered martyrdom in Smyrna with the eleven <span
id="fr_1162"></span>[1163](#fn_1162.md) from Philadelphia. This one man is
remembered more than the others by all, so that even by the heathen he
is talked about in every place.”

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p80"></span>46. Of such an end was the admirable and
apostolic Polycarp deemed worthy, as recorded by the brethren of the
church of Smyrna in their epistle which we have mentioned. In the same
volume <span id="fr_1163"></span>[1164](#fn_1163.md) concerning him are
subjoined also other martyrdoms which took place in the same city,
Smyrna, about the same period of time with Polycarp’s martyrdom. Among
them also Metrodorus, who appears to have been a proselyte of the
Marcionitic sect, suffered death by fire.

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p82"></span>47. A celebrated martyr of those times
was a certain man named Pionius. Those who desire to know his several
confessions, and the boldness of his speech, and his apologies in behalf
of the faith before the people and the rulers, and his instructive
addresses and, moreover, his greetings to those who had yielded to
temptation in the persecution, and the words of encouragement which he
addressed to the brethren who came to visit him in prison, and the
tortures which he endured in addition, and besides these the sufferings
and the nailings, and his firmness on the pile, and his death after all
the extraordinary trials, <span id="fr_1164"></span>[1165](#fn_1164.md)
—those we refer to that epistle which has been given in the Martyrdoms
of the Ancients, <span id="fr_1165"></span>[1166](#fn_1165.md) collected by
us, and which contains a very full account of him.

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p85"></span>48. And there are also records extant of
others that suffered martyrdom in Pergamus, a city <span
id="page_193">p. 193</span> <span id="iii.ix.xv-Page_193"></span>of
Asia,—of Carpus and Papylus, and a woman named Agathonice, who, after
many and illustrious testimonies, gloriously ended their lives. <span
id="fr_1166"></span>[1167](#fn_1166.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1130"></span>[188:1131](2010124.htm#fr_1130.md) <span
id="iii.ix.xv-p1.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p2"></span> Marcus Aurelius Verus. See below, p.
390, note.

<span id="fn_1131"></span>[188:1132](2010124.htm#fr_1131.md) <span
id="iii.ix.xv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p4"></span> Polycarp’s martyrdom occurred in Smyrna,
not during the reign of Marcus Aurelius, as Eusebius says, but during
the reign of Antoninus Pius, between 154 and 156 (probably in 155). This
has been proved by Waddington in his *Memoire sur la Chronologie de la
vie du rheteur Ælius Aristide* (in *Mem. de l’acad. des inscript. et
belles lettres*, Tom. XXVI., part II., 1867, p. 232 sq.’ see, also, his
*Fastes des provinces Asiatiques*, 1872, p. 219 sq.), and the date is
now almost universally accepted (for example, by Renan, Ewald,
Hilgenfeld, Lightfoot, Harnack, &c.). But the *Chron*. of Eusebius seems
to put the martyrdom in the seventh year of Marcus Aurelius (166–167
<span class="c13"><span id="iii.ix.xv-p4.1"></span>a.d</span>.), and
this is the date given by Jerome and others, who based their chronology
upon Eusebius, and was commonly accepted until Waddington proved it
false. Lightfoot, however, shows that Eusebius did not mean to assign
Polycarp’s death to the seventh year of Marcus Aurelius, but that he
meant only to place it in the reign of that emperor, and did not pretend
to fix the year. How he made the mistake of assigning it to the wrong
emperor we do not know, but knowing Eusebius’ common confusion of the
various emperors that bore the name of Antonine, we are not surprised at
his error at this point. For the best and most recent discussion of this
whole subject, see Lightfoot’s *Ignatius*, I. p. 629 sq. Since
Waddington published his researches, Wieseler (in his
*Christenverfolgungen*, 1878, p. 34–87) and Keim (*Aus dem
Urchristenthum*, 1878, p. 92–133) have ventured to dispute his
conclusions and to advocate the old date (167), but their arguments are
worthless, and have been completely refuted by Lightfoot (*ibid*. p. 655
sq.).

<span id="fn_1132"></span>[188:1133](2010124.htm#fr_1132.md) <span
id="iii.ix.xv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p6"></span> I.e. the church of Smyrna. This letter
(the greater part of which Eusebius gives in this chapter) is still
extant in four Greek <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.ix.xv-p6.1"></span>mss</span>., and also in a poor Latin version
which is preserved in numerous <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.ix.xv-p6.2"></span>mss</span>. The letter has been published a
number of times, most recently by Zahn (in Gebhardt, Harnack, and Zahn’s
*Patrum Ap. opera*, II. p. 132. sq.), and by Lightfoot (in his
*Apostolic Fathers*, Part II.; *St. Ignatius and St. Polycarp*, p. 947
sq). Lightfoot gives the Greek text with full notes and an English
translation, and to his edition the reader is referred for fuller
particulars on the whole subject.

<span id="fn_1133"></span>[188:1134](2010124.htm#fr_1133.md) <span
id="iii.ix.xv-p6.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p7"></span> Pontus was the northeast province of
Asia Minor, bordering on the Black Sea. What led Eusebius to suppose
that this epistle was addressed to the church in Pontus, we do not know.
The letter is addressed to the church in Philomalium, and that city was
not Pontus (according to Lightfoot, *ibid*. II. p. 948). Valesius
suggests that we should read π€ντα τόπον instead of Πόντον, but the
latter reading is confirmed both by Rufinus and by the Syriac as well as
by all the Greek <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.ix.xv-p7.1"></span>mss</span>. I am inclined to think that
Eusebius may have read hastily and erroneously in the heading of the
letter Πόντον instead of π€ντα τόπον, and, not knowing that Philomelium
was not in Pontus, never thought that his reading was incorrect. Such
careless mistakes are by no means uncommon, even in these days, and,
having once written Pontus, it is easy enough to suppose that nothing
would occur to call his attention to his mistake, and of course no
copyist would think of making a correction.

<span id="fn_1134"></span>[188:1135](2010124.htm#fr_1134.md) <span
id="iii.ix.xv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p9"></span> Philomelium, according to Lightfoot
(*ibid*. p. 947), was an important city in Phrygia Paroreios, not far
from Pisidian Antioch.

<span id="fn_1135"></span>[188:1136](2010124.htm#fr_1135.md) <span
id="iii.ix.xv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p10"></span> τῆς ἁγίας καθολικῆς ἐκκλησίας. The
phrase “Catholic Church” occurs first in Ignatius’ *Ep. ad Smyr*., chap.
8, and there the word “catholic” evidently has the common and early
meaning, “universal” (see Lightfoot’s *Ignatius*, I. p. 398 sqq.). In
later usage (so in Tertullian, Clement of Alexandria, and the Muratorian
Fragment) it has the meaning “orthodox,” as opposed to heretical and
schismatical bodies. In the present epistle it occurs four times (§§3,
15, 39, below, and in a passage not quoted in this chapter), and at
least the first three times with the later meaning, and consequently, in
all probability, it has the same meaning the fourth time also.
(Lightfoot, it is true, contends that it has the earlier meaning,
“universal,” in the first, second and fourth cases; but in at least the
first two that sense of the word produces most decided tautology, and is
therefore to be rejected.) The occurrence of the word in the later sense
has caused some critics to deny the genuineness of the epistle; but its
genuineness is too well established to admit of doubt, and it must be
granted that it is by no means impossible that a word which was used at
the end of the second century (in Alexandra, in Rome, and in Carthage)
with a certain meaning may have been employed in the same sense a
generation earlier. On the other hand it is possible, as suggested by
some, that the word “Catholic” itself is an interpolation; for it is
just such a word that would most easily slip into a document, through
the inadvertency of copyists, at a later time, when the phrase “Catholic
Church” had become current. Lightfoot (*ibid*. p. 605 sq.) maintains the
genuineness of the word (taking it in its earlier sense) in all but the
third instance, where he substitutes ἁγίας upon what seem to me
insufficient grounds.

<span id="fn_1136"></span>[188:1137](2010124.htm#fr_1136.md) <span
id="iii.ix.xv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p11"></span> ἐγρ€ψαμεν, the epistolary aorist,
referring, not to another epistle, but to the one which follows, the
writer putting himself in thought in the position of those who are
reading the letter. See Lightfoot’s note on [Gal. vi.
11](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#011.md)<span id="iii.ix.xv-p11.1"></span>,
in his Commentary on that epistle.

<span id="fn_1137"></span>[189:1138](2010124.htm#fr_1137.md) <span
id="iii.ix.xv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p14"></span> Of Germanicus we know only what is told
us in this epistle

<span id="fn_1138"></span>[189:1139](2010124.htm#fr_1138.md) <span
id="iii.ix.xv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p15"></span> This proconsul was Statius Quadratus,
as we are told in the latter part of this epistle, in a passage which
Eusebius does not quote. Upon his dates, see the discussions of the date
of Polycarp’s martyrdom mentioned in note 2, above.

<span id="fn_1139"></span>[189:1140](2010124.htm#fr_1139.md) <span
id="iii.ix.xv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p17"></span> Compare Justin Martyr’s *Apol.* I. 6;
Tertullian’s *Apol.* 10, &c.; and see chap. 7, note 20, above.

<span id="fn_1140"></span>[189:1141](2010124.htm#fr_1140.md) <span
id="iii.ix.xv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p19"></span> Of Quintus we know only what is told us
in this epistle. It is significant that he was a Phrygian, for the
Phrygians were proverbially excitable and fanatical, and it was among
them that Montanism took its rise. The conduct of Polycarp, who avoided
death as long as he could without dishonor, was in great contrast to
this; and it is noticeable that the Smyrnæans condemn Quintus’ hasty and
ill-considered action, and that Eusebius echoes their judgment (see
above, p. 8).

<span id="fn_1141"></span>[189:1142](2010124.htm#fr_1141.md) <span
id="iii.ix.xv-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p28"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xv-p28.1"></span>Σαββ€του μεγ€λου</span>. “The great Sabbath”
in the Christian Church, at least from the time of Chrysostom on, was
the Saturday between Good-Friday and Easter. But so far as we know,
there are no examples of that use of the phrase earlier than
Chrysostom’s time. Lightfoot points out that, in the present instance,
it is not “*The* great Sabbath” (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xv-p28.2"></span>τὸ μέγα Σ€ββατον</span>), but only “*A*
great Sabbath”; and therefore, in the present instance, any great
Sabbath might be meant,—that is, any Sabbath which coincided with a
festival or other marked day in the Jewish calendar. Lightfoot gives
strong reasons for assuming that the traditional day of Polycarp’s death
(Feb. 23) is correct, and that the Sabbath referred to here was a great
Sabbath because it coincided with the Feast of Purim (see Lightfoot,
*ibid.* I. p. 660 sqq. and 690 sqq.).

<span id="fn_1142"></span>[190:1143](2010124.htm#fr_1142.md) <span
id="iii.ix.xv-p28.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p29"></span> Of Herod and Nicetes we know only what
is told us in this epistle. The latter was not an uncommon name in
Smyrna, as we learn from inscriptions (see Lightfoot, *ibid.* II. p.
958).

<span id="fn_1143"></span>[190:1144](2010124.htm#fr_1143.md) <span
id="iii.ix.xv-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p30"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xv-p30.1"></span>εἰρήναρχος</span> (see Lightfoot, *ibid.* p.
955).

<span id="fn_1144"></span>[190:1145](2010124.htm#fr_1144.md) <span
id="iii.ix.xv-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p33"></span> Compare [Josh.
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#006.md),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#007.md),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#009.md), [Deut.
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#007.md),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#023.md)<span
id="iii.ix.xv-p33.1"></span>[Josh.
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#006.md),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#007.md),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#009.md)<span id="iii.ix.xv-p33.2"></span>,
and [Deut. 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#007.md),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#023.md)<span id="iii.ix.xv-p33.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_1145"></span>[190:1146](2010124.htm#fr_1145.md) <span
id="iii.ix.xv-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p35"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xv-p35.1"></span>τὴν Καίσαρος τύχην</span>. This oath was
invented under Julius Cæsar, and continued under his successors. The
oath was repudiated by the Christians, who regarded the “genius” of the
emperor as a false God, and therefore the taking of the oath a species
of idolatry. It was consequently employed very commonly by the
magistrates as a test in times of persecution (cf. Tertullian, *Apol.*
32; Origen, *Contra Cels.* VIII. 65, and many other passages).

<span id="fn_1146"></span>[190:1147](2010124.htm#fr_1146.md) <span
id="iii.ix.xv-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p38"></span> See above, chap. 14, note 5. Whether
the eighty-six years are to be reckoned from Polycarp’s birth, or from
the time of his conversion or baptism, we cannot tell. At the same time,
inasmuch as he speaks of serving *Christ,* for eighty-six years, not
*God,* I am inclined to think that he is reckoning from the time of his
conversion or baptism, which may well be if we suppose him to have been
baptized in early boyhood.

<span id="fn_1147"></span>[190:1148](2010124.htm#fr_1147.md) <span
id="iii.ix.xv-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p41"></span> See [Rom.
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#001.md), [1 Pet.
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#013.md)<span
id="iii.ix.xv-p41.1"></span>[Rom. xiii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#001.md)<span id="iii.ix.xv-p41.2"></span>
sq., [1 Pet. ii. 13](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#013.md)<span
id="iii.ix.xv-p41.3"></span> sq.

<span id="fn_1148"></span>[190:1149](2010124.htm#fr_1148.md) <span
id="iii.ix.xv-p41.4"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p42"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xv-p42.1"></span>τιμὴν</span>…<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xv-p42.2"></span>τὴν μὴ βλ€πτουσαν ἡμᾶς</span>. Compare
Pseudo-Ignatius, *ad Antioch.* 11, and *Mart. Ignat. Rom.* 6 (in both of
which are found the words <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xv-p42.3"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xv-p42.4"></span>ν οἷς ἀκίνδυνος ἡ ὑποταγή</span>).

<span id="fn_1149"></span>[190:1150](2010124.htm#fr_1149.md) <span
id="iii.ix.xv-p42.5"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p43"></span> The proconsul made quite a concession
here. He would have been glad to have Polycarp quiet the multitude if he
could. Polycarp was not reckless and foolish in refusing to make the
attempt, for he knew it would fail, and he preferred to retain his
dignity and not compromise himself by appearing to ask for mercy.

<span id="fn_1150"></span>[190:1151](2010124.htm#fr_1150.md) <span
id="iii.ix.xv-p47.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p48"></span> The Jews appear very frequently as
leading spirits in the persecution of Christians. The persecution under
Nero was doubtless due to their instigation (see Bk. II. chap. 25, note
4). Compare also Tertullian, *Scorp.* 10, and Eusebius, *H. E.* V. 16.
That the Jews were numerous in Smyrna has been shown by Lightfoot,
*ibid.* p. 966.

<span id="fn_1151"></span>[190:1152](2010124.htm#fr_1151.md) <span
id="iii.ix.xv-p49.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p50"></span> “The Asiarch was the head of the
Commune Asiæ, the confederation of the principal cities of the Roman
province of Asia. As such, he was the ‘chief priest’ of Asia, and
president of the games” (Lightfoot, *ibid.* p. 967; on p. 987 ff. of the
same volume, Lightfoot discusses the Asiarchate at considerable length).
The Asiarch Philip mentioned here was a Trallian, as we learn from a
statement toward the close of the epistle, which Eusebius does not
quote; Lightfoot identifies him with a person named in various Trallian
Inscriptions.

<span id="fn_1152"></span>[191:1153](2010124.htm#fr_1152.md) <span
id="iii.ix.xv-p54.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p55"></span> The Greek reads simply <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xv-p55.1"></span>προσηλοῦν αὐτόν</span>.

<span id="fn_1153"></span>[191:1154](2010124.htm#fr_1153.md) <span
id="iii.ix.xv-p57.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p58"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xv-p58.1"></span>παιδός</span> not <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xv-p58.2"></span>υἱοῦ</span>. <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xv-p58.3"></span>παίς</span> commonly conveys the meaning of
servant rather than son, although in this passage it is evidently used
in the latter sense. Its use in connection with Christ was in later
times dropped as Arianistic in its tendency.

<span id="fn_1154"></span>[191:1155](2010124.htm#fr_1154.md) <span
id="iii.ix.xv-p58.4"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p59"></span> Compare <span
id="iii.ix.xv-p59.1"></span>[John v.
29](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#029.md)<span id="iii.ix.xv-p59.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_1155"></span>[191:1156](2010124.htm#fr_1155.md) <span
id="iii.ix.xv-p63.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p64"></span> It is not necessary to dispute the
truthfulness of the report in this and the next sentences on the ground
that the events recorded are miraculous in their nature, and therefore
cannot have happened. Natural causes may easily have produced some such
phenomena as the writers describe, and which they of course regarded as
miraculous. Lightfoot refers to a number of similar cases, Vol. I. p.
598 ff. Compare also Harnack in the *Zeitschrift für Kirchengesch.* II.
p. 291 ff.

<span id="fn_1156"></span>[191:1157](2010124.htm#fr_1156.md) <span
id="iii.ix.xv-p65.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p66"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xv-p66.1"></span>Κομφέκτορα</span>. It was the common
business of the *Confectores* to dispatch such wild beasts as had not
been killed outright during the combat in the arena. See Lightfoot, p.
974.

<span id="fn_1157"></span>[191:1158](2010124.htm#fr_1157.md) <span
id="iii.ix.xv-p67.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p68"></span> Before the words “a quantity of blood”
are found in all the Greek <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.ix.xv-p68.1"></span>mss.</span> of the epistle the words <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xv-p68.2"></span>περιστερὰ καὶ</span>, “a
dove and.” It seems probable that these words did not belong to the
original text, but that they were, as many critics believe, an
unintentional corruption of some other phrase, or that they were, as
Lightfoot thinks, a deliberate interpolation by a late editor (see
Lightfoot, II. 974 ff. and I. 627 ff.). No argument, therefore, against
the honesty of Eusebius can be drawn from his omission of the words.

<span id="fn_1158"></span>[191:1159](2010124.htm#fr_1158.md) <span
id="iii.ix.xv-p68.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p69"></span> See above, note 6. That the word <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xv-p69.1"></span>καθολικῆς</span> is used
here in the later sense of “orthodox,” as opposed to heretical and
schismatical bodies, can be questioned by no one. Lightfoot, however,
reads at this point <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xv-p69.2"></span>ἁ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xv-p69.3"></span>γίας</span> instead of <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xv-p69.4"></span>καθολικῆς</span> in his
edition of the epistle. It is true that he has some <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.ix.xv-p69.5"></span>ms.</span> support, but
the <span class="c13"><span id="iii.ix.xv-p69.6"></span>mss.</span> and
versions of Eusebius are unanimous in favor of the latter word, and
Lightfoot’s grounds for making the change seem to be quite insufficient.
If any change is to be made, the word should be dropped out entirely, as
suggested by the note already referred to.

<span id="fn_1159"></span>[191:1160](2010124.htm#fr_1159.md) <span
id="iii.ix.xv-p71.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p72"></span> All, or nearly all, the <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.ix.xv-p72.1"></span>mss.</span> of Eusebius
read <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xv-p72.2"></span>Δ€λκης</span>, and that reading is adopted
by Stephanus, Valesius (in his text), Schwegler, Laemmer, Heinichen, and
Crusè. On the other hand, the <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.ix.xv-p72.3"></span>mss.</span> of the epistle itself all
support the form <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xv-p72.4"></span>῎</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xv-p72.5"></span>Α</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xv-p72.6"></span>λκης</span> (or <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xv-p72.7"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xv-p72.8"></span>Α</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xv-p72.9"></span>λκῆς</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xv-p72.10"></span>,</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xv-p72.11"></span>῞</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xv-p72.12"></span>Ε</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xv-p72.13"></span>λκεις</span>, as it appears respectively in
two <span class="c13"><span id="iii.ix.xv-p72.14"></span>mss.</span>),
and Lightfoot accepts this unhesitatingly as the original form of the
word, and it is adopted by many editors of Eusebius (Valesius, in his
notes, Stroth, Zimmermann, Burton, and Closs). Dalce is an otherwise
unknown name, while Alce, though rare, is a good Greek name, and is once
connected with Smyrna in an inscription. Moreover, we learn from
Ignatius, *ad Smyr.* 13, and *ad Polyc.* VIII., that Alce was a
well-known Christian in Smyrna at the time Ignatius wrote his epistles.
The use of the name at this point shows that its possessor was or had
been a prominent character in the church of Smyrna, and the
identification of the two seems to me beyond all reasonable doubt (see,
also, Lightfoot, I. 353; II. 325 and 978). That Eusebius, however, wrote
Alce is not so certain. In fact, in view of the external testimony, it
might be regarded as quite as likely that he, by a mistake, wrote Dalce,
as that some copyist afterwards committed the error. Still, the name
Alce must have been to Eusebius, with his remarkable memory, familiar
from Ignatius’ epistles, and hence his mistaking it for another word
seems a little strange. But whether Eusebius himself wrote Dalce or
Alce, believing the latter to be the correct form, the form which he
should have written, I have ventured to adopt it in my translation.

<span id="fn_1160"></span>[192:1161](2010124.htm#fr_1160.md) <span
id="iii.ix.xv-p72.15"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p73"></span> This shows that the martyrs were highly
venerated even at this early date, as was indeed most natural, and as is
acknowledged by the writers themselves just below. But it does not show
that the Christians already worshiped or venerated their relics as they
did in later centuries. The heathen, in their own paganism, might easily
conclude from the Christians’ tender care of and reverence for the
martyrs’ relics that they also worshiped them.

<span id="fn_1161"></span>[192:1162](2010124.htm#fr_1161.md) <span
id="iii.ix.xv-p76.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p77"></span> This is, so far as I am aware, the
earliest notice of the annual celebration of the day of a martyr’s
death, a practice which early became so common in the Church. The next
reference to the custom is in Tertullian’s *de Corona,* 3 (cf. also
*Scorp.* 15). So natural a practice, however, and one which was soon
afterward universal, need not surprise us at this early date (see
Ducange, *Natalis,* and Bingham, *Ant.* XIII. 9. 5, XX. 7. 2).

<span id="fn_1162"></span>[192:1163](2010124.htm#fr_1162.md) <span
id="iii.ix.xv-p78.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p79"></span> The majority of the <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.ix.xv-p79.1"></span>mss.</span> read <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xv-p79.2"></span>δώδεκα τοῦ ἐν Σμύρνῃ
μαρτυρήσαντος</span>, which, however, is quite ungrammatical as it
stands in the sentence, and cannot be accepted. Heinichen reads <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xv-p79.3"></span>δώδεκα τὸν ἐν
κ.τ.λ</span>., changing the genitive of the majority of the <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.ix.xv-p79.4"></span>mss.</span> to an
accusative, but like them, as also like Rufinus, making twelve martyrs
besides Polycarp. But the <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.ix.xv-p79.5"></span>mss.</span> of the epistle itself read <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xv-p79.6"></span>δωδέκατος ἐν Σμ.
μαρτυρήσας</span>, thus making only eleven martyrs in addition to
Polycarp, and it cannot be doubted that this idiomatic Greek
construction is the original. In view of that fact, I am constrained to
read with Valesius, Schwegler, and Zahn (in his note on this passage in
his edition of the epistle), <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xv-p79.7"></span>δωδέκατον ἐν Σμ. μαρτυρήσαντα</span>,
translating literally, “suffered martyrdom with those from Philadelphia,
the twelfth”; or, as I have rendered it freely in the text, “suffered
martyrdom with the eleven from Philadelphia.” It is, of course, possible
that Eusebius himself substituted the <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xv-p79.8"></span>δώδεκα</span> for the <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ix.xv-p79.9"></span>δωδέκατος</span>, but
the variations and inconsistencies in the <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.ix.xv-p79.10"></span>mss.</span> at this point make it more
probable that the change crept in later, and that Eusebius agreed with
his original in making Polycarp the twelfth martyr, not the thirteenth.
Of these eleven only Germanicus is mentioned in this epistle, and who
the others were we do not know. They cannot have been persons of
prominence, or Polycarp’s martyrdom would not so completely have
overshadowed theirs.

<span id="fn_1163"></span>[192:1164](2010124.htm#fr_1163.md) <span
id="iii.ix.xv-p80.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p81"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xv-p81.1"></span>γραφῇ</span>. These other accounts were not
given in the epistle of the Smyrnæans, but were doubtless appended to
that epistle in the <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.ix.xv-p81.2"></span>ms.</span> which Eusebius used. The accounts
referred to are not found in any of our <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.ix.xv-p81.3"></span>mss.</span> of the epistle, but there is
published in Ruinart’s *Acta Martyrum Sincera,* p. 188 sq., a narrative
in Latin of the martyrdom of a certain Pionius and of a certain
Marcionist Metrodorus, as well as of others, which appears to be
substantially the same as the document which Eusebius knew in the
original Greek, and which he refers to here. The account bears all the
marks of genuineness, and may be regarded as trustworthy, at least in
the main points. But Eusebius has fallen into a serious chronological
blunder in making these other martyrs contemporaries of Polycarp. We
learn from a notice in the document given by Ruinart that Pionius,
Metrodorus, and the others were put to death during the persecution of
Decius, in 250 <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.ix.xv-p81.4"></span>a.d.</span>, and this date is confirmed by
external evidence. The document which Eusebius used may not have
contained the distinct chronological notice which is now found in it, or
Eusebius may have overlooked it, and finding the narrative given in his
<span class="c13"><span id="iii.ix.xv-p81.5"></span>ms.</span> in close
connection with the account of Polycarp’s martyrdom, he may have jumped
hastily to the conclusion that both accounts relate to the same period
of time. Or, as Lightfoot suggests, in the heading of the document there
may have stood the words <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xv-p81.6"></span>ἡ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ix.xv-p81.7"></span>αὐτὴ περίοδος τοῦ χρόνου</span> (a peculiar
phrase, which Eusebius repeats) indicating (as the words might indicate)
that the events took place at the same season of the year, while
Eusebius interpreted them to mean the same period of time. Upon these
*Acts,* and upon Metrodorus and Pionius, see Lightfoot, I. p. 622 sqq.
The *Life of Polycarp,* which purports to have been written by Pionius,
is manifestly spurious and entirely untrustworthy, and belongs to the
latter part of the fourth century. The true Pionius, therefore, who
suffered under Decius, and the Pseudo-Pionius who wrote that *Life* are
to be sharply distinguished (see Lightfoot, I. p. 626 sqq.).

<span id="fn_1164"></span>[192:1165](2010124.htm#fr_1164.md) <span
id="iii.ix.xv-p82.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p83"></span> This is an excellent summary of
Pionius’ sufferings, as recorded in the extant *Acts* referred to in the
previous note.

<span id="fn_1165"></span>[192:1166](2010124.htm#fr_1165.md) <span
id="iii.ix.xv-p83.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p84"></span> This is the *Collection of Ancient
Martyrdoms,* which is no longer extant, but which is referred to by
Eusebius more than once in his *History.* For particulars in regard to
it, see above, p. 30 sq.

<span id="fn_1166"></span>[193:1167](2010124.htm#fr_1166.md) <span
id="iii.ix.xv-p85.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p86"></span> A detailed account of the martyrdoms of
Carpus, Papylus, and Agathonice is extant in numerous <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.ix.xv-p86.1"></span>mss.</span>, and has been
published more than once. It has, however, long been recognized as
spurious and entirely untrustworthy. But in 1881 Aubè published in the
*Revue Archæologique* (Dec., p. 348 sq.) a shorter form of the Acts of
these martyrs, which he had discovered in a Greek <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.ix.xv-p86.2"></span>ms.</span> in the Paris
Library. There is no reason to doubt that these Acts are genuine and, in
the main, quite trustworthy. The longer Acts assign the death of these
martyrs to the reign of Decius, and they have always been regarded as
suffering during that persecution. Aubè, in publishing his newly
discovered document, still accepted the old date; but Zahn, upon the
basis of the document which he had also seen, remarked in his *Tatian’s
Diatessaron* (p. 279) that Eusebius was correct in assigning these
martyrdoms to the reign of Marcus Aurelius, and Lightfoot (I. p. 625)
stated his belief that they are to be assigned either to that reign or
to the reign of Septimius Severus. In 1888 Harnack (*Texte und Unters.*
III. 4) published a new edition of the Acts from the same <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.ix.xv-p86.3"></span>ms.</span> which Aubè had
used, accompanying the text with valuable notes and with a careful
discussion of the age of the document. He has proved beyond all doubt
that these martyrs were put to death during the reign of Marcus
Aurelius, and that the shorter document which we have contains a genuine
account related by an eye-witness. These are evidently the Acts which
Eusebius had before him. In the spurious account Carpus is called a
bishop, and Papylus a deacon. But in the shorter account they are simply
Christians, and Papylus informs the judge that he is a citizen of
Thyatira.

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p87"></span>Eusebius apparently did not include the
account of these martyrs in his collection of Ancient Martyrdoms, and
Harnack concludes from that that he found in it something that did not
please him, viz. the fanaticism of Agathonice, who rashly and needlessly
rushes to martyrdom, and the approval of her conduct expressed by the
author of the Acts. We are reminded of the conduct of the Phrygian
Quintus mentioned in the epistle of the Smyrnæans but in that epistle
such conduct is condemned.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI](2010125.md)
