[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010670)  [Next](2010672) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.ix"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.ix-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vii.ix-p1.1"></span>Chapter IX</span>.—*Of the Philosophers, who
fell into Mistaken Notions, and Some of them into Danger, by their
Desire of Universal Knowledge.—Also of the Doctrines of Plato.*

<span id="iv.vii.ix-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vii.ix-p2.1"></span>We</span> ought, therefore, to aim at objects
which are within our power, and exceed not the capacities of our nature.
For the persuasive influence of argument has a tendency to draw most of
us away from the truth of things, which has happened to many
philosophers, who have employed themselves in reasoning, and the study
of natural science, and who, as often as the magnitude of the subject
surpasses their powers of investigation, adopt various devices for
obscuring the truth. Hence their diversities of judgment, and
contentious opposition to each others’ doctrines, and this
notwithstanding their pretensions to wisdom. Hence, too, popular
commotions have arisen, and severe sentences, passed by those in power,
apprehensive of the overthrow of hereditary institutions, have proved
destructive to many of the disputants themselves. Socrates, for example,
elated by his skill in argumentation, indulging his power of making the
worse appear the better reason, <span
id="fr_3404"></span>[3405](#fn_3404) and playing continually with the
subtleties of controversy, fell a victim to the slander of his own
countrymen and fellow-citizens. Pythagoras, too, who laid special claim
to the virtues of silence and self-control, was convicted of falsehood.
For he declared to the Italians that the doctrines which he had received
during his travels in Egypt, and which had long before been divulged by
the priests of that nation, were a personal revelation to himself from
God. Lastly, Plato himself, the gentlest and most refined of all, who
first essayed to draw men’s thoughts from sensible to intellectual and
eternal objects, and taught them to aspire to sublimer speculations, in
the first place declared, with truth, a God exalted above every essence,
but to him he added also a second, distinguishing them numerically as
two, though both possessing one perfection, and the being of the second
Deity proceeding from <span id="fr_3405"></span>[3406](#fn_3405) the
first. For he is the creator and controller of the universe, and
evidently supreme: while the second, as the obedient agent of his
commands, refers the origin of all creation to him as the cause. In
accordance, therefore, with the soundest reason, we may say that there
is one Being whose care and providence are over all things, even God the
Word, who has ordered all things; but the Word being God himself is also
the Son of God. For by what name can we designate him except by this
title of the Son, without falling into the most grievous error? For the
Father of all things is properly considered the Father of his own Word.
Thus far, then, Plato’s sentiments were sound; but in what follows he
appears to have wandered from the truth, in that he introduces a
plurality of gods, to each of whom he assigns specific forms. And this
has given occasion to still greater error among the unthinking portion
of <span id="page_567">p. 567</span> <span
id="iv.vii.ix-Page_567"></span>mankind, who pay no regard to the
providence of the Supreme God, but worship images of their own devising,
made in the likeness of men or other living beings. Hence it appears
that the transcendent nature and admirable learning of this philosopher,
tinged as they were with such errors as these, were by no means free
from impurity and alloy. And yet he seems to me to retract, and correct
his own words, when he plainly declares that a rational soul is the
breath <span id="fr_3406"></span>[3407](#fn_3406) of God, and divides
all things into two classes, intellectual and sensible: \[the one
simple, the other\] <span id="fr_3407"></span>[3408](#fn_3407)
consisting of bodily structure; the one comprehended by the intellect
alone, the other estimated by the judgment and the senses. The former
class, therefore, which partakes of the divine spirit, and is
uncompounded and immaterial, is eternal, and inherits everlasting life;
but the latter, being entirely resolved into the elements of which it is
composed, has no share in everlasting life. He farther teaches the
admirable doctrine, that those who have passed a life of virtue, that
is, the spirits of good and holy men, are enshrined, after their
separation from the body, in the fairest mansions of heaven. A doctrine
not merely to be admired, but profitable too. <span
id="fr_3408"></span>[3409](#fn_3408) For who can believe in such a
statement, and aspire to such a happy lot, without desiring to practice
righteousness and temperance, and to turn aside from vice? Consistently
with this doctrine he represents the spirits of the wicked as tossed
like wreckage on the streams of Acheron and Pyriphlegethon.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3404"></span>[566:3405](2010671.htm#fr_3404) <span
id="iv.vii.ix-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.ix-p3"></span> This is almost identically the form of
what Socrates (*Apol.* c. 2) declared to be the falsehood circulated by
his enemies to his prejudice. “But far more dangerous are those who
began when you were children and took possession of your minds with
their falsehoods, telling of one Socrates, a wise man who…made the worse
appear the better cause” (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vii.ix-p3.1"></span>λόγον</span>, “reason”), Tr. Jowett, 1
(1874), 316. This example does peculiar discredit either to the learning
or the mental honesty of the author.

<span id="fn_3405"></span>[566:3406](2010671.htm#fr_3405) <span
id="iv.vii.ix-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.ix-p4"></span> Rather “deriving existence from,”
“proceeding from,” gives strict idea, but may be confounded with the
technical “proceeding from” of the “filioque” controversy, which is
quite another phrase.

<span id="fn_3406"></span>[567:3407](2010671.htm#fr_3406) <span
id="iv.vii.ix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.ix-p5"></span> “Spirit.”

<span id="fn_3407"></span>[567:3408](2010671.htm#fr_3407) <span
id="iv.vii.ix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.ix-p6"></span> “The one simple” is not in the text, but
is a conjectural addition of Valesius, followed by most translators.
“Consisting of bodily structure” seems possibly to be an epexegetical
phrase relating to the “all things” which he divides into intellectual
and sensible, making the intellectual as well as the sensible to have
bodily (somatic) structure. “All things,” or “the universe,” a plural
technical term, is regarded as his mind passes to the explanation as
“the all.” This psychological probability appears a simpler solution
than the various textual conjectures.

<span id="fn_3408"></span>[567:3409](2010671.htm#fr_3408) <span
id="iv.vii.ix-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.ix-p7"></span> Heinichen suspects that there has been
an inversion of words here, and that it should have been, “He further
teaches the admirable and profitable doctrine,” and “a doctrine not
merely to be admired” omitted.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X](2010672)
