[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010647)  [Next](2010649.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.iv.lxii"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iv.lxii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vi.iv.lxii-p1.1"></span>Chapter LXII</span>.—*Constantine’s
Appeal to the Bishops, requesting them to confer upon him the Rite of
Baptism.*

<span id="iv.vi.iv.lxii-p2"></span>“<span class="c13"><span
id="iv.vi.iv.lxii-p2.1"></span>The</span> time is arrived which I have
long hoped for, with an earnest desire and prayer that I might obtain
the salvation of God. The hour is come in which I too may have the
blessing of that seal which confers immortality; the hour in which I may
receive the seal of salvation. I had thought to do this in the waters of
the river Jordan, wherein our Saviour, for our example, is recorded to
have been baptized: but God, who knows what is expedient for us, is
pleased that I should receive this blessing here. Be it so, then,
without delay: <span id="fr_3358"></span>[3359](#fn_3358.md) for should it
be his will who is Lord of life and death, that my existence here should
be prolonged, and should I be destined henceforth to associate with the
people of God, and unite with them in prayer as a member of his Church,
I will prescribe to myself from this time such a course of life as
befits his service.” After he had thus spoken, the prelates performed
the sacred ceremonies in the usual manner, and, having given him the
necessary instructions, made him a partaker of the mystic ordinance.
Thus was Constantine the first of all sovereigns who was regenerated and
perfected in a church dedicated to the martyrs of Christ; thus gifted
with the Divine seal of baptism, he rejoiced in spirit, was renewed, and
filled with heavenly light: his soul was gladdened by reason of the
fervency of his faith, and astonished at the manifestation of the power
of God. At the conclusion of the ceremony he arrayed himself in shining
imperial vestments, brilliant as the light, <span
id="fr_3359"></span>[3360](#fn_3359.md) and reclined on a couch of the
purest white, refusing to clothe himself with the purple any more.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3358"></span>[556:3359](2010648.htm#fr_3358.md) <span
id="iv.vi.iv.lxii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iv.lxii-p3"></span> Or “no hesitation.” On this clause a
deal of controversy has hinged. “No hesitation shall longer prevail” is
the rendering of *Molz.,* and Keim (Uebertritt C. p. 1) similarly gives
“let all duplicity be banished.” In the view of this translation,
Constantine had been hedging all his life, trying to be Christian to
Christians and heathen to heathen. The basis of the hypothesis is too
slight for it to have any weight in view of the overwhelming documentary
evidence of the frequent public professions of Christianity by
Constantine, for which see Prolegomena, under *Character.* Discussion of
various points relating to his baptism will be found under *Literature,*
under the names Busæus, Castelli, Dalhus, Frimelius Fuhrmann, Guidi,
Halloix, Hynitzsch, Jacobus of Sarug, Nicolai, Polus, Schelstrate,
Scultetus, Tentzel, Walther, Withof.

<span id="fn_3359"></span>[556:3360](2010648.htm#fr_3359.md) <span
id="iv.vi.iv.lxii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iv.lxii-p4"></span> \[It was customary for neophytes to
wear white garments, which they laid aside on the eighth day from their
baptism.—*Bag.*\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXIII](2010649.md)
