[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010177)  [Next](2010179.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xi.viii"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.viii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xi.viii-p1.1"></span>Chapter VIII.—</span>*Origen’s Daring
Deed.*

<span id="iii.xi.viii-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xi.viii-p2.1"></span>At</span> this time while Origen was
conducting catechetical instruction at Alexandria, a deed was done by
him which evidenced an immature and youthful mind, but at the same time
gave the highest proof of faith and continence. <span
id="fr_1808"></span>[1809](#fn_1808.md) For he took the words, “There are
eunuchs who have made themselves eunuchs for the kingdom of heaven’s
sake,” <span id="fr_1809"></span>[1810](#fn_1809.md) in too literal and
extreme a sense. And in order to fulfill the Saviour’s word, and at the
same time to take away from the unbelievers all opportunity for
scandal,—for, although young, he met for the study of divine things with
women as well as men,—he carried out in action the word of the Saviour.

<span id="iii.xi.viii-p5"></span>2. He thought that this would not be
known by many of his acquaintances. But it was impossible for him,
though desiring to do so, to keep such an action secret.

<span id="iii.xi.viii-p6"></span>3. When Demetrius, who presided over
that parish, at last learned of this, he admired greatly the daring
nature of the act, and as he perceived his zeal and the genuineness of
his faith, he immediately exhorted him to courage, and urged him the
more to continue his work of catechetical instruction.

<span id="iii.xi.viii-p7"></span>4. Such was he at that time. But soon
afterward, seeing that he was prospering, and becoming great and
distinguished among all men, the same Demetrius, overcome by human
weakness, wrote of his deed <span id="page_255">p. 255</span> <span
id="iii.xi.viii-Page_255"></span>as most foolish to the bishops
throughout the world. But the bishops of Cesarea and Jerusalem, who were
especially notable and distinguished among the bishops of Palestine,
considering Origen worthy in the highest degree of the honor, ordained
him a presbyter. <span id="fr_1810"></span>[1811](#fn_1810.md)

<span id="iii.xi.viii-p9"></span>5. Thereupon his fame increased
greatly, and his name became renowned everywhere, and he obtained no
small reputation for virtue and wisdom. But Demetrius, having nothing
else that he could say against him, save this deed of his boyhood,
accused him bitterly, <span id="fr_1811"></span>[1812](#fn_1811.md) and
dared to include with him in these accusations those who had raised him
to the presbyterate.

<span id="iii.xi.viii-p11"></span>6. These things, however, took place a
little later. But at this time Origen continued fearlessly the
instruction in divine things at Alexandria by day and night to all who
came to him; devoting his entire leisure without cessation to divine
studies and to his pupils.

<span id="iii.xi.viii-p12"></span>7. Severus, having held the government
for eighteen years, was succeeded by his son, Antoninus. <span
id="fr_1812"></span>[1813](#fn_1812.md) Among those who had endured
courageously the persecution of that time, and had been preserved by the
Providence of God through the conflicts of confession, was Alexander, of
whom we have spoken already <span id="fr_1813"></span>[1814](#fn_1813.md)
as bishop of the church in Jerusalem. On account of his pre-eminence in
the confession of Christ he was thought worthy of that bishopric, while
Narcissus, <span id="fr_1814"></span>[1815](#fn_1814.md) his predecessor,
was still living.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1808"></span>[254:1809](2010178.htm#fr_1808.md) <span
id="iii.xi.viii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.viii-p3"></span> This act of Origen’s has been greatly
discussed, and some have even gone so far as to believe that he never
committed the act, but that the report of it arose from a
misunderstanding of certain figurative expressions used by him (so,
e.g., Boehringer, Schnitzer, and Baur). There is no reason, however, to
doubt the report, for which we have unimpeachable testimony, and which
is in itself not at all surprising (see the arguments of Redepenning, I.
p. 444 sqq.). The act was contrary to the civil law (see Suetonius,
*Domitian,* c. 7; and cf. Justin Martyr, *Apol.* I. 29), and yet was a
very common one; the existence of the law itself would alone prove what
we know from many sources to have been the fact. Nor was Origen alone
among the Christians (cf. e.g. Origen, *In Matt.,* XV. 1, the passage of
Justin Martyr referred to above, and also the first canon of the Council
of Nicæa, the very existence of which proves the necessity of it). It
was natural that Christians, seeking purity of life, and strongly
ascetic in their tendencies, should be influenced by the actions of
those about them, who sought thus to be freed from the domination of the
passions, and should interpret certain passages of the Bible as
commending the act. Knowing it to be so common, and knowing Origen’s
character, as revealed to us in chap. 3, above (to say nothing of his
own writings), we can hardly be surprised that he performed the act. His
chief motive was undoubtedly the same as that which actuated him in all
his ascetic practices, the attainment of higher holiness through the
subjugation of his passions, and the desire to sacrifice everything
fleshly for the sake of Christ. Of course this could not have led him to
perform the act he did, unless he had entirely misunderstood, as
Eusebius says he did, the words of Christ quoted below. But he was by no
means the only one to misunderstand them (see Suicer’s *Thesaurus,* I.
1255 sq.). Eusebius says that the requirements of his position also had
something to do with his resolve. He was obliged to teach both men and
women, and both day and night (as we learn from §7), and Eusebius thinks
he would naturally desire to avoid scandal. At the same time, this
motive can hardly have weighed very heavily, if at all, with him; for
had his giving instruction in this way been in danger of causing serious
scandal, other easier methods of avoiding such scandal might have been
devised, and undoubtedly would have been, by the bishop. And the fact
is, he seems to have wished to conceal the act, which is inconsistent
with the idea that he performed it for the sake of avoiding scandal. It
is quite likely that his intimate association with women may have had
considerable to do with his resolve, because he may have found that such
association aroused his unsubdued passions, and therefore felt that they
must be eradicated, if he was to go about his duties with a pure and
single heart. That he afterward repented his youthful act, and judged
the words of Christ more wisely, is clear from what he says in his
*Comment. in Matt.* XV. 1. And yet he never outgrew his false notions of
the superior virtue of an ascetic life. His act seems to have caused a
reaction in his mind which led him into doubt and despondency for a
time; for Demetrius found it necessary to exhort him to cherish
confidence, and to urge him to continue his work of instruction.
Eusebius, while not approving Origen’s act, yet evidently admired him
the more for the boldness and for the spirit of self-sacrifice shown in
its performance.

<span id="fn_1809"></span>[254:1810](2010178.htm#fr_1809.md) <span
id="iii.xi.viii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.viii-p4"></span> [Matt. xix.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#012.md)<span id="iii.xi.viii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1810"></span>[255:1811](2010178.htm#fr_1810.md) <span
id="iii.xi.viii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.viii-p8"></span> See chap. 23.

<span id="fn_1811"></span>[255:1812](2010178.htm#fr_1811.md) <span
id="iii.xi.viii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.viii-p10"></span> On the relations existing between
Demetrius and Origen, see below, p. 394.

<span id="fn_1812"></span>[255:1813](2010178.htm#fr_1812.md) <span
id="iii.xi.viii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.viii-p13"></span> Septimius Severus died on February 4,
211, after a reign of a little more than seventeen years and eight
months, and was succeeded by his two sons, Marcus Aurelius Severus
Antoninus Bassianus (commonly known by his nickname Caracalla, which,
however, was never used in official documents or inscriptions), and
Lucius, or Publius, Septimius Geta. Eusebius mentions here only the
former, giving him his official name, Antoninus.

<span id="fn_1813"></span>[255:1814](2010178.htm#fr_1813.md) <span
id="iii.xi.viii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.viii-p14"></span> Eusebius makes a slip here, as this
is the first time he has mentioned Alexander in his *Church History.* He
was very likely under the impression that he had mentioned him just
above, where he referred to the bishops of Cæsarea and Jerusalem. He
does refer to him in his *Chron.,* putting his appointment as assistant
bishop into the second year of Caracalla (*Armen.* fourth year), and
calling him the thirty-fifth bishop of Jerusalem (*Armen.*
thirty-sixth). In Bk. V. chap. 12 of the *History* (also in the
*Chron.*) we are told that Narcissus was the thirtieth bishop of
Jerusalem. The number thirty-five for Alexander (the number thirty-six
of the *Armen.* is a mistake, and is set right in connection with
Alexander’s successor, who is also called the thirty-sixth) is made out
by counting the three bishops mentioned in chap. 10, and then reckoning
the second episcopate of Narcissus (see the same chapter) as the
thirty-fourth. We learn from chap. 14 that Alexander was an early friend
of Origen’s, and a fellow-pupil in the school of Clement. We know him
next as bishop of some church in Cappadocia (chap. 11; see note 2 on
that chapter), whence he was called to be assistant bishop of Jerusalem
(see the same chapter). From this passage, compared with chap. 11, we
learn that Alexander was imprisoned during the persecutions, and the
*Chron.* gives the year of his “confession” as 203 <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.xi.viii-p14.1"></span>a.d.</span> But from
chap. 11 we learn that he wrote while still in prison to the church of
Antioch on occasion of the appointment of Asclepiades to the episcopate
there. According to the *Chron.* Asclepiades did not become bishop until
211; and though this may not be the exact date, yet it cannot be far out
of the way (see chap. 11, note 6); and hence, if Alexander was a
confessor in 203, he must have remained in prison a number of years, or
else have undergone a second persecution. It is probable either that the
date 203 is quite wrong, or else that he suffered a second time toward
the close of Severus’ reign; for the persecution, so far as we know, was
not so continuous during that reign as to keep one man confined for
eight years. Our knowledge of the persecutions in Asia Minor at this
time is very limited, but they do not seem to have been of great
severity or of long duration. The date of Alexander’s episcopate in
Cappadocia it is impossible to determine, though as he was a
fellow-pupil of Origen’s in Alexandria, it cannot have begun much, if
any, before 202. The date of his translation to the see of Jerusalem is
likewise uncertain. The *Chron.* gives the second year of Caracalla
(*Armen.* fourth). The connection in which Eusebius mentions it in chap.
11 makes it look as if it took place before Asclepiades’ accession to
the see of Antioch; but this is hardly possible, for it was his firmness
under persecution which elevated him to the see of Jerusalem (according
to this passage), and it is apparently that persecution which he is
enduring when Asclepiades becomes bishop. We find no reason, then, for
correcting the date of his translation to Jerusalem given by the
*Chron.* At any rate, he was bishop of Jerusalem when Origen visited
Palestine in 216 (see chap. 19, §17). In 231 he assisted at the
ordination of Origen (see chap. 23, note 6), and finally perished in
prison during the Decian persecution (see chaps. 39 and 46). His
friendship for Origen was warm and steadfast (cf., besides the other
passages referred to, chap. 27). The latter commemorates the loveliness
and gentleness of his character in his first *Homily on 1 Samuel,* §1.
He collected a valuable library in Jerusalem, which Eusebius made use of
in the composition of his *History* (see chap. 20). This act shows the
literary tastes of the man. Of his epistles only the five fragments
preserved by Eusebius (chaps. 11, 14, and 19) are now extant. Jerome
(*de vir. ill.* 62) says that other epistles were extant in his day; and
he relates, on the authority of an epistle written *pro Origene contra
Demetrium,* that Alexander had ordained Origen *juxta testimonium
Demetri.* This epistle is not mentioned by Eusebius, but in spite of
Jerome’s usual dependence upon the latter, there is no good reason to
doubt the truth of his statement in this case (see below, p. 396).

<span id="fn_1814"></span>[255:1815](2010178.htm#fr_1814.md) <span
id="iii.xi.viii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.viii-p15"></span> On Narcissus, see the next three
chapters, and also Bk. V. chap. 12, note 1.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX](2010179.md)
