[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010212)  [Next](2010214) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xi.xliii"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xliii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xi.xliii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XLIII.—</span>*Novatus,* <span
id="fr_2104"></span>[2105](#fn_2104) *his Manner of Life and his
Heresy.*

<span id="iii.xi.xliii-p3"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xi.xliii-p3.1"></span>After</span> this, Novatus, a presbyter of
the church at Rome, being lifted up with arrogance against these
persons, as if there was no longer for them a hope of salvation, not
even if they should do all things pertaining to a genuine and pure
conversion, became leader of the heresy of those who, in the pride of
their imagination, call themselves Cathari. <span
id="fr_2105"></span>[2106](#fn_2105)

<span id="iii.xi.xliii-p5"></span>2. There upon a very large synod
assembled at Rome, <span id="fr_2106"></span>[2107](#fn_2106) of bishops
in number sixty, and a great many more presbyters and deacons; while the
pastors of the remaining provinces deliberated in their places privately
concerning what ought to be done. A decree was confirmed by all, that
Novatus and those who joined with him, and those who adopted his
brother-hating and inhuman opinion, should be considered by the church
as strangers; but that they should heal such of the brethren as had
fallen into misfortune, <span id="fr_2107"></span>[2108](#fn_2107) and
should minister to them with the medicines of repentance.

<span id="iii.xi.xliii-p8"></span>3. There have reached us
epistles <span id="fr_2108"></span>[2109](#fn_2108) of Cornelius, bishop
of Rome, to Fabius, of the church at Antioch, which show what was done
at the synod at Rome, and what seemed best to all those in Italy and
Africa and the regions thereabout. <span
id="fr_2109"></span>[2110](#fn_2109) Also other epistles, written in the
<span id="page_287">p. 287</span> <span
id="iii.xi.xliii-Page_287"></span>Latin language, of Cyprian and those
with him in Africa, <span id="fr_2110"></span>[2111](#fn_2110) which
show that they agreed as to the necessity of succoring those who had
been tempted, and of cutting off from the Catholic Church the leader of
the heresy and all that joined with him.

<span id="iii.xi.xliii-p12"></span>4. Another epistle of Cornelius,
concerning the resolutions of the synod, is attached to these; and yet
others, <span id="fr_2111"></span>[2112](#fn_2111) on the conduct of
Novatus, from which it is proper for us to make selections, that any one
who sees this work may know about him.

<span id="iii.xi.xliii-p14"></span>5. Cornelius informs Fabius what sort
of a man Novatus was, in the following words:

<span id="iii.xi.xliii-p15"></span>“But that you may know that a long
time ago this remarkable man desired the episcopate, but kept this
ambitious desire to himself and concealed it,—using as a cloak for his
rebellion those confessors who had adhered to him from the beginning,—I
desire to speak.

<span id="iii.xi.xliii-p16"></span>6. Maximus, <span
id="fr_2112"></span>[2113](#fn_2112) one of our presbyters, and
Urbanus, <span id="fr_2113"></span>[2114](#fn_2113) who twice gained the
highest honor by confession, with Sidonius, <span
id="fr_2114"></span>[2115](#fn_2114) and Celerinus, <span
id="fr_2115"></span>[2116](#fn_2115) a man who by the grace of God most
heroically endured all kinds of torture, and by the strength of his
faith overcame the weakness of the flesh, and mightily conquered the
adversary,—these men found him out and detected his craft and duplicity,
his perjuries and falsehoods, his unsociability and cruel friendship.
And they returned to the holy church and proclaimed in the presence of
many, both bishops and presbyters and a large number of the laity, all
his craft and wickedness, which for a long time he had concealed. And
this they did with lamentations and repentance, because through the
persuasions of the crafty and malicious beast they had left the church
for the time.” A little farther on he says:

<span id="iii.xi.xliii-p21"></span>7. “How remarkable, beloved brother,
the change and transformation which we have seen take place in him in a
short time. For this most illustrious man, who bound himself with
terrible oaths in nowise to seek the bishopric, <span
id="fr_2116"></span>[2117](#fn_2116) sudden<span id="page_288">p.
288</span> <span id="iii.xi.xliii-Page_288"></span>ly appears a bishop
as if thrown among us by some machine. <span
id="fr_2117"></span>[2118](#fn_2117)

<span id="iii.xi.xliii-p24"></span>8. For this dogmatist, this defender
of the doctrine of the Church, <span
id="fr_2118"></span>[2119](#fn_2118) attempting to grasp and seize the
episcopate, which had not been given him from above, chose two of his
companions who had given up their own salvation. And he sent them to a
small and insignificant corner of Italy, that there by some counterfeit
argument he might deceive three bishops, who were rustic and very simple
men. And they asserted positively and strongly that it was necessary
that they should come quickly to Rome, in order that all the dissension
which had arisen there might be appeased through their mediation,
jointly with other bishops.

<span id="iii.xi.xliii-p26"></span>9. When they had come, being, as we
have stated, very simple in the craft and artifice of the wicked, they
were shut up with certain selected men like himself. And by the tenth
hour, when they had become drunk and sick, he compelled them by force to
confer on him the episcopate through a counterfeit and vain imposition
of hands. Because it had not come to him, he avenged himself by craft
and treachery.

<span id="iii.xi.xliii-p27"></span>10. One of these bishops shortly
after came back to the church, lamenting and confessing his
transgression. And we communed with him as with a layman, all the people
present interceding for him. And we ordained successors of the other
bishops, and sent them to the places where they were.

<span id="iii.xi.xliii-p28"></span>11. This avenger of the Gospel <span
id="fr_2119"></span>[2120](#fn_2119) then did not know that there should
be one bishop in a catholic church; <span
id="fr_2120"></span>[2121](#fn_2120) yet he was not ignorant (for how
could he be?) that in it there were forty-six presbyters, seven <span
id="fr_2121"></span>[2122](#fn_2121) deacons, seven sub-deacons, <span
id="fr_2122"></span>[2123](#fn_2122) forty-two acolyths, <span
id="fr_2123"></span>[2124](#fn_2123) fifty-two exorcists, <span
id="fr_2124"></span>[2125](#fn_2124) readers, <span
id="fr_2125"></span>[2126](#fn_2125) and janitors, <span
id="fr_2126"></span>[2127](#fn_2126) and over fifteen hundred widows and
persons in distress, all of whom the grace and kindness of the Master
nourish.

<span id="iii.xi.xliii-p37"></span>12. But not even this great
multitude, so necessary in the church, nor those who, through God’s
providence, were rich and full, together with the very many, even
innumerable people, could turn him from such desperation and presumption
and recall him to the Church.”

<span id="iii.xi.xliii-p38"></span>13. Again, farther on, he adds these
words: “Permit us to say further: On account of what works or conduct
had he the assurance to contend for the episcopate? Was it that he had
been brought up in the Church from the beginning, and had endured many
conflicts in her behalf, and had passed through many and great dangers
for religion? Truly this is not the fact.

<span id="iii.xi.xliii-p39"></span>14. But Satan, who entered and dwelt
in him for a long time, became the occasion of his believing. Being
delivered by the exorcists, he fell into a severe sickness; and as he
seemed about to die, he received baptism by affusion, <span
id="page_289">p. 289</span> <span id="iii.xi.xliii-Page_289"></span>on
the bed where he lay; <span id="fr_2127"></span>[2128](#fn_2127) if
indeed we can say that such a one did receive it.

<span id="iii.xi.xliii-p41"></span>15. And when he was healed of his
sickness he did not receive the other things which it is necessary to
have according to the canon of the Church, even the being sealed by the
bishop. <span id="fr_2128"></span>[2129](#fn_2128) And as he did not
receive this, <span id="fr_2129"></span>[2130](#fn_2129) how could he
receive the Holy Spirit?”

<span id="iii.xi.xliii-p45"></span>16. Shortly after he says again:

<span id="iii.xi.xliii-p46"></span>“In the time of persecution, through
cowardice and love of life, he denied that he was a presbyter. For when
he was requested and entreated by the deacons to come out of the chamber
in which he had imprisoned himself and give aid to the brethren as far
as was lawful and possible for a presbyter to assist those of the
brethren who were in danger and needed help, he paid so little respect
to the entreaties of the deacons that he went away and departed in
anger. For he said that he no longer desired to be a presbyter, as he
was an admirer of another philosophy.” <span
id="fr_2130"></span>[2131](#fn_2130)

<span id="iii.xi.xliii-p48"></span>17. Passing by a few things, he adds
the following:

<span id="iii.xi.xliii-p49"></span>“For this illustrious man forsook the
Church of God, in which, when he believed, he was judged worthy of the
presbyterate through the favor of the bishop who ordained him to the
presbyterial office. This had been resisted by all the clergy and many
of the laity; because it was unlawful that one who had been affused on
his bed on account of sickness as he had been should enter into any
clerical office; <span id="fr_2131"></span>[2132](#fn_2131) but the
bishop requested that he might be permitted to ordain this one only.”

<span id="iii.xi.xliii-p51"></span>18. He adds to these yet another, the
worst of all the man’s offenses, as follows:

<span id="iii.xi.xliii-p52"></span>“For when he has made the offerings,
and distributed a part to each man, as he gives it he compels the
wretched man to swear in place of the blessing. Holding his hands in
both of his own, he will not release him until he has sworn in this
manner (for I will give his own words):

<span id="iii.xi.xliii-p53"></span>‘Swear to me by the body and blood of
our Lord Jesus Christ that you will never forsake me and turn to
Cornelius.’

<span id="iii.xi.xliii-p54"></span>19. And the unhappy man does not
taste until he has called down imprecations on himself; and instead of
saying Amen, as he takes the bread, he says, I will never return to
Cornelius.” Farther on he says again:

<span id="iii.xi.xliii-p55"></span>20. “But know that he has now been
made bare and desolate; as the brethren leave him every day and return
to the church. Moses <span id="fr_2132"></span>[2133](#fn_2132) <span
id="page_290">p. 290</span> <span
id="iii.xi.xliii-Page_290"></span>also, the blessed martyr, who lately
suffered among us a glorious and admirable martyrdom, while he was yet
alive, beholding his boldness and folly, refused to commune with him and
with the five presbyters who with him had separated themselves from the
church.”

<span id="iii.xi.xliii-p58"></span>21. At the close of his letter he
gives a list of the bishops who had come to Rome and condemned the
silliness of Novatus, with their names and the parish over which each of
them presided.

<span id="iii.xi.xliii-p59"></span>22. He mentions also those who did
not come to Rome, but who expressed by letters their agreement with the
vote of these bishops, giving their names and the cities from which they
severally sent them.” <span id="fr_2133"></span>[2134](#fn_2133)
Cornelius wrote these things to Fabius, bishop of Antioch.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2104"></span>[286:2105](2010213.htm#fr_2104) <span
id="iii.xi.xliii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xliii-p2"></span> Eusebius, and the Greeks in general,
write the name <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xliii-p2.1"></span>Νοου€τος</span> (though in Bk. VII. chap.
8, below, Dionysius writes <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xliii-p2.2"></span>Νοουατι€νος</span>). Socrates has the form
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi.xliii-p2.3"></span>Ναυ€τος</span>,
which appears also in some <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xi.xliii-p2.4"></span>mss.</span> of Eusebius. Cyprian and the
Latins write the name Novatianus. Lardner, in a note on chap. 47 of his
*Credibility,* argues with great force for the correctness of the name
Novatus, while Heinichen and others maintain that Novatianus is the
right form. The name *Novatiani,* <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xliii-p2.5"></span>Νοουατιανοί</span>, which was given to his
followers, is urged with some reason by Lardner as an argument for the
shorter form of the name. But even if his opinion is correct, the name
Novatian is too long established to be displaced, and serves to
distinguish him from the Carthaginian presbyter Novatus. The schism of
Novatian was only one of the outcrops of the old strife between lax and
strict discipline in the Church, the strife which had shown itself in
connection with Montanism and also between Callistus and Hippolytus (see
above, chap. 21, note 3). But in the present case the immediate cause of
the trouble was the treatment of the lapsed. The terrible Decian
persecution had naturally caused many to deny the faith, but afterward,
when the stress was past, they repented and desired to be readmitted to
the Church. The question became a very serious one, and opinions were
divided, some advocating their acceptance after certain prescribed
penances, others their continued exclusion. The matter caused a great
deal of discussion, especially in Rome and Carthage. The trouble came to
a head in Rome, when Cornelius, who belonged to the lax party, was
chosen bishop in the year 251, after the see had been vacant for more
than a year. The stricter party at once aroused to action and chose
Novatian, the leader of the party, opposition bishop. He had been made a
presbyter by the bishop Fabian, and occupied a very prominent position
in the Roman Church. He seems originally to have held less rigid notions
in regard to the treatment of the lapsed, but before the end of the
persecution he became very decided in his opposition to their absolution
and restoration. His position, as well as his ability and piety, made
him the natural leader of the party and the rival candidate for the
bishopric. He does not, however, seem to have desired to accept
consecration as an opposition bishop, but his party insisted. He
immediately sent the usual letters announcing the fact to the bishops of
the principal sees, to Carthage, Alexandria, and Rome. Cyprian at once
refused to recognize his appointment. Dionysius wrote to him advising
him to withdraw (see his epistle, quoted in chap. 45). But Fabius of
Antioch was inclined to take his side (see chap. 44, §1). Novatian was
excommunicated by the council mentioned just below, and then founded an
independent church, baptizing all who came over to his side. We know
nothing of his subsequent career (according to the tradition of his
followers, and also Socrates, *H. E.* IV. 28, he suffered martyrdom
under Valerian), but his sect spread throughout the East and West, and
continued in existence until the sixth century. Novatian was not at all
heretical in doctrine. His work upon the Trinity is both able and
orthodox. His character was austere and of unblemished purity (the
account given by Cornelius below is a gross misrepresentation, from the
pen of an enemy) and his talents were of a high order. But the tendency
of the Church was toward a more merciful treatment of the lapsed and of
other sinners, and the stricter methods advocated by him fell more and
more into disfavor. Novatian was quite a prolific writer. According to
Jerome, *de vir. ill.* chap. 10, he wrote *de Pascha, de Sabbato, de
Circumcisione, de Sacerdote, de Oratione, de Cibis Judaicis, de
Instantia, de Attalo Multaque alia, et de Trinitate grande Volumen.* The
*de Cibis Judaicis* and the *de Trinitate* are still extant. The best
edition of his works is that of Jackson (London, 1728). An English
translation is given in the *Ante-Nicene Fathers,* V. 611–650. Novatian
was the author also of one of the epistles of the Roman clergy to
Cyprian (*Ep.* 30). Our contemporaneous sources for a knowledge of
Novatian and his schism are the epistles of Cyprian (some ten of them),
and the epistles of Dionysius and Cornelius, quoted by Eusebius in this
chapter and in chaps. 44 and 45.

<span id="fn_2105"></span>[286:2106](2010213.htm#fr_2105) <span
id="iii.xi.xliii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xliii-p4"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xliii-p4.1"></span>καθαροί</span>, “pure.”

<span id="fn_2106"></span>[286:2107](2010213.htm#fr_2106) <span
id="iii.xi.xliii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xliii-p6"></span> This council is undoubtedly identical
with the one mentioned in Cyprian’s epistle to Antonianus (*Ep.* 51, §6;
*al.* 55). It was held, according to Cyprian, soon after the
Carthaginian synod, in which the treatment of the *lapsi* was first
discussed, and accepted the decisions of that council. The Carthaginian
synod met in the spring of 251 (see Hefele, *Conciliengesch.* I. p.
112). The Roman synod must, therefore, have been held before the end of
the same year; Hefele thinks about October (*ibid.* p. 114). Cornelius
would not, of course, have waited long before procuring the official
condemnation of the opposition bishop. We know nothing more about the
constitution of the council than is told us here. It was, of course,
only a local synod. The pastors of the remaining provinces were the
other Italian bishops who could not be present at the council. Cornelius
solicits their opinion, in order that the decree passed by the council
may represent as large a number of bishops as possible.

<span id="fn_2107"></span>[286:2108](2010213.htm#fr_2107) <span
id="iii.xi.xliii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xliii-p7"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xliii-p7.1"></span>τοὺς δὲ τῇ συμφορŽ περιπεπτοκότας</span>.
The Carthaginian synod had decided that no offenses are beyond the
regular power of the Church to remit.

<span id="fn_2108"></span>[286:2109](2010213.htm#fr_2108) <span
id="iii.xi.xliii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xliii-p9"></span> Jerome (*de vir. ill.* chap. 66)
gives the singular instead of the plural (*epistolam ad Fabium*); so
also Rufinus; but there is no reason for doubting the integrity of the
Greek text of Eusebius, which runs, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xliii-p9.1"></span>ἦ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xliii-p9.2"></span>λθον δ᾽ οὖν εἰς ἡμᾶς ἐπιστολαὶ
Κορνηλίου</span>. Valesius, although translating *epistolæ Cornelii,*
yet follows Jerome and Rufinus in believing that only one epistle is
meant here. Neither Rufinus nor, apparently, Jerome knew anything about
the epistle, except what they read in Eusebius, and therefore it is more
probable that Eusebius was correct in using the plural than that they
were correct in using the singular. It is easy to understand the change
of Eusebius’ indefinite plural into their definite singular. They were
evidently written in Greek; for in speaking of Cyprian’s epistles
immediately afterward, Eusebius especially mentions the fact that they
were written in Latin. The epistle from which Eusebius quotes just below
was also written in Greek, for Eusebius would otherwise, as is his
custom have mentioned the fact that he gives only a translation of it.
This has been pointed out by Valesius; but, as Routh remarks, we can
certainly go further, and say that the other epistle mentioned by
Eusebius must have been in Greek, too, since it was written by the same
Cornelius, and addressed to the same Fabius. These epistles are no
longer extant.

<span id="fn_2109"></span>[286:2110](2010213.htm#fr_2109) <span
id="iii.xi.xliii-p9.3"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xliii-p10"></span> Eusebius says, <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi.xliii-p10.1"></span>τὰ περὶ τῆς ῾Ρωμαίων
συνόδου καὶ τὰ δόξαντα πᾶσι τοῖς κατὰ τὴν ᾽Ιταλίαν κ.τ.λ</span>., which
Jerome has transformed or compressed into *de Synodo Romana, Italica,
Africana,* another instance of the careless way in which his *de vir.
ill.* was composed.

<span id="fn_2110"></span>[287:2111](2010213.htm#fr_2110) <span
id="iii.xi.xliii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xliii-p11"></span> These epistles from Cyprian and the
African bishops Jerome transforms into a single epistle from Cornelius
to Fabius, *de Novatiano, et de his qui lapsi sunt.* At least, it seems
impossible to explain this epistle mentioned by Jerome in any other way.
Knowing the slovenly way in which he put his work together, it is not
surprising that he should attribute these epistles to the same person
who wrote the ones mentioned just before and after. Since the first
epistles mentioned are said to have been addressed to Fabius and also
the last one, from which Eusebius quotes, it is reasonable to conclude
that all mentioned in this connection were addressed to him; and it
would of course be quite natural for Cyprian, too, to write to Fabius
(who was known to be inclined to favor Novatian), in order to confirm
the account of Cornelius, and to announce that he agreed with the latter
in regard to the treatment of the lapsed. No epistle, however, of
Cyprian or of other African bishops to Fabius are extant, though the
same subject is discussed in many epistles of Cyprian addressed to the
people.

<span id="fn_2111"></span>[287:2112](2010213.htm#fr_2111) <span
id="iii.xi.xliii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xliii-p13"></span> Rufinus mentions only two epistles
of Cornelius in this connection, apparently confounding this one on the
deeds of the Novatians with the one mentioned just before on the Decrees
of the Council. Jerome, on the other hand, making Cornelius, as already
mentioned, the author of the epistles of Cyprian and the African
bishops, assigns four epistles to Cornelius. None of the epistles
mentioned in this section are extant, except the long fragment of the
last one quoted just below. As mentioned in the next chapter, Fabius
inclined to take the side of Novatian over against the laxer party; and
it was on this account that Cornelius wrote him so many epistles
(compare also the epistle of Dionysius of Alexandria, quoted in chaps.
41 and 42, and see note 1 on the former chapter), and endeavored to
blacken the character of Novatian as he does in the passages quoted.

<span id="fn_2112"></span>[287:2113](2010213.htm#fr_2112) <span
id="iii.xi.xliii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xliii-p17"></span> This Maximus was a presbyter, and
one of a party of Roman confessors who played a prominent part in the
controversy about the lapsed. He and his companions were imprisoned at
the very beginning of the Decian persecution (Cyprian, *Ep.* 24; *al.*
28), i.e. early in the year 250, and while in prison they adopted
rigoristic views and wrote to some Carthaginian confessors, urging
strict methods in dealing with the lapsed (see Cyprian, *Ep.* 22; *al.*
27). Early in the year 251, after eleven months in prison, the presbyter
Moses, the leading spirit of the party, died, and Maximus became the
chief one among them. Moses before his death, in spite of his rigoristic
principles, refused to commune with Novatian and his five presbyters (as
we learn from §20 of this chapter), apparently because he saw that his
insistence upon strict discipline was tending toward schism, and that
such discipline could not be maintained without sacrificing the Church.
But Maximus and those mentioned with him here, together with some others
(see Cyprian, *Ep.* 45; *al.* 49), became even stricter than at first,
and finally went over to the party of Novatian (which took its rise
after the election of Cornelius in 251), but were at length reconciled
to Cornelius and the rest of the Church, and received back with
rejoicing (see Cyprian, *Ep.* 43, 45, 46, 49, 50; *al.* 46, 49, 51, 53,
54). The notices of Maximus and Urbanus in Cyprian’s epistles, which
with the epistle of Cornelius constitute our only source for a knowledge
of their lives, do not mention a second confession made by these two
men, so that we cannot tell when it took place, but it must of course
have been during the persecution of Decius.

<span id="fn_2113"></span>[287:2114](2010213.htm#fr_2113) <span
id="iii.xi.xliii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xliii-p18"></span> Urbanus was a confessor only, not a
presbyter or deacon as we learn from the notices of him in Cyprian’s
epistles, in connection with the party referred to in the previous note.

<span id="fn_2114"></span>[287:2115](2010213.htm#fr_2114) <span
id="iii.xi.xliii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xliii-p19"></span> Sidonius likewise was a confessor
simply, and is mentioned with the others in the epistles of Cornelius
and Cyprian.

<span id="fn_2115"></span>[287:2116](2010213.htm#fr_2115) <span
id="iii.xi.xliii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xliii-p20"></span> Celerinus was also one of this party
of Roman confessors (as we learn from Cyprian, *Ep.* 15, *al.* 87), who,
upon his release from prison, went to Carthage, and was there ordained a
reader by Cyprian (*Ep.* 33, *al.* 39). His release from prison and
departure for Carthage took place before the release of the others and
before the death of Moses (as we learn from *Ep.* 15), that is, before
the end of the year 250. He was still in Rome, however, at Easter of
that year, as we learn from his epistle to Lucian, mentioned below. He
came of a family of martyrs (*Ep.* 33), and was himself one of the most
celebrated confessors of his time. There is extant an epistle written by
him to Lucian, the Carthaginian confessor (Cyprian, *Ep.* 21), in which
he begs absolution for his sisters, who had denied the faith. The
epistle (as we learn from its own statements) was written at Easter time
and in the year 250, for there was no bishop of Rome at the time of its
composition. As we learn from this passage, Celerinus went over with
these other Roman confessors to the party of Novatian, and returned with
them to the Church. He is, however, mentioned neither by Cyprian nor by
Cornelius (in his epistle to Cyprian) in connection with the schism of
these confessors. This is very remarkable, especially since Celerinus
was quite a prominent character. It is possible that he was in Carthage
the greater part of the time, and did not return to Rome until shortly
before the confessors returned to the Church. He might then have thrown
in his lot with them, and have returned with them to the orthodox
church; and yet, not having been mentioned by Cornelius’ earlier epistle
to Cyprian, announcing the schismatic position of the confessors, he was
omitted also in the later letters announcing their return (which in fact
only mentions the three leaders), and in Cyprian’s reply, which of
course would only mention those of whom he had been told in Cornelius’
first epistle. Of the subsequent career of Celerinus and of these other
confessors we know nothing.

<span id="fn_2116"></span>[287:2117](2010213.htm#fr_2116) <span
id="iii.xi.xliii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xliii-p22"></span> There is no reason to doubt, as
Cornelius does, Novatian’s sincerity in declaring that he did not seek
the office of bishop. Both Cornelius and Cyprian make his ambition and
his jealousy of Cornelius, the successful candidate, the cause of his
schism. But such an accusation was made against every schismatic, even
when there was not a shadow of support for it, and there is no reason to
suppose it nearer the truth in this than in other cases. In fact, his
own protestation, as recorded here by Cornelius, and as testified to by
Dionysius in chap. 45, as well as the character of the man as revealed
in his life previous to his episcopal ordination (as certified to even
by his enemies), and in his writings, are entirely opposed to the
supposition that he sought the episcopal office and that his schism was
a result of his defeat. We shall do much better to reject entirely this
exceedingly hostile and slanderous account of his enemy Cornelius, and
to accept his own account of the matter as reported by Dionysius in
chap. 25. He was the natural head of the rigoristic party, made such by
his commanding ability, his deep piety, and his ascetic principles of
living; and when Cornelius, the head of the lax party, was made bishop
(in March, 251), the strict party revolted, and it could not be
otherwise than that Novatian should be elected bishop, and that even if
reluctant he should feel compelled to accept the office in order to
assert the principles which he believed vital, and to prevent the
complete ruin of the Church. Cornelius gives a sad story of his
ordination to the episcopate. But one thing is certain, he had with him
for some time a large portion of the best people in the Roman church,
among them Maximus and others of the most influential confessors, who
seem at length to have returned to the Church only because they saw that
the schism was injuring it. Certainly if Novatian had been a
self-seeker, as Cornelius describes him, and if his ordination had been
of such a nature as Cornelius reports, he could never have had the
support of so many earnest and prominent men. It is doubtless true, as
Cornelius states, that Novatian was ordained by three Italian bishops,
very likely bishops of rural and comparatively insignificant sees, and
it is quite possible that one of them, as he also records, afterwards
repented of his act as schismatic, and returned to the Church and
received absolution. But all this does not imply that these three
bishops were deceived by false pretenses on the part of Novatian, or
that they were intoxicated when they performed the service. This, in
fact, may be looked upon as baseless calumny. Novatus, the Carthaginian
agitator who had caused Cyprian so much trouble, took a prominent part
in the Novatian schism, though to make him the author of it, as Cyprian
does, is undoubtedly incorrect (see Lardner, *Works,* III. p. 94 sq.;
London ed. 1829). It was perhaps he (as reported by Eulogius, according
to Photius, *Cod.* 182, and by Theodoret, *Hær. Fab.* III. 5) that found
these three bishops to ordain Novatian. It is not at all improbable,
when so many prominent men in the Roman church favored the stricter
principles and supported Novatian, that bishops could be found in Italy
who held the same principles and would be glad to ordain Novatian as
bishop of Rome.

<span id="fn_2117"></span>[288:2118](2010213.htm#fr_2117) <span
id="iii.xi.xliii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xliii-p23"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xliii-p23.1"></span>μ€γγανον</span>

<span id="fn_2118"></span>[288:2119](2010213.htm#fr_2118) <span
id="iii.xi.xliii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xliii-p25"></span> As Closs remarks, these words are
evidently an allusion to Novatian’s work, *de Trinitate.*

<span id="fn_2119"></span>[288:2120](2010213.htm#fr_2119) <span
id="iii.xi.xliii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xliii-p29"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xliii-p29.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xliii-p29.2"></span>κδικητἡς τοῦ εὐαγγελίου</span>. Possibly
another sarcastic reference to Novatian’s work in defense of the
doctrine of the Church; possibly only an allusion to the fact that he
prided himself on his orthodoxy.

<span id="fn_2120"></span>[288:2121](2010213.htm#fr_2120) <span
id="iii.xi.xliii-p29.3"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xliii-p30"></span> The principle, that there should be
only one bishop in a city, was not clearly enunciated and forcibly
emphasized until the third century. Cyprian’s writings are full of it
(cf. his treatise *On the Unity of the Church*), and in connection with
this Novatian schism, which showed so plainly the disintegrating effects
of a division of the church under two bishops, the principle was
established so firmly as never again to be questioned. I do not mean to
assert here that the principle so clearly and conclusively established
at this time was a new principle. We find it enunciated even by Ignatius
at the beginning of the second century, and it was the common opinion of
Christendom, or otherwise Cyprian could not have appealed to universal
custom as he does in discussing the matter. I mean simply that the
principle had never before been brought to such a test as to require its
formal enunciation and public recognition by the clergy and the Church
at large. The emergency which now arose compelled such formal statement
of it; and the Council of Nicæa made it canon law (cf. Bingham’s
*Antiquities,* I. p. 160 sq.).

<span id="fn_2121"></span>[288:2122](2010213.htm#fr_2121) <span
id="iii.xi.xliii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xliii-p31"></span> The limitation of the deacons to
seven in number was due to the fact that the appointment of the Seven by
the apostles ([Acts vi](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#000)<span
id="iii.xi.xliii-p31.1"></span>.) was commonly looked upon as the
institution of the office of the diaconate. But upon this matter, see
above, Bk. II. chap. 1, note 2*a*. The practice of limiting the number
of the deacons to seven was quite a common one, and was enacted as a law
in the fifteenth canon of the Council of Neo-Cæsarea (held early in the
third century). The practice, however, was by no means universal, as we
are informed by Sozomen (*H. E.* VII. 19). Indeed, at least in
Alexandria and in Constantinople, their number was much greater (see
Bingham’s *Ant.* I. p. 286).

<span id="fn_2122"></span>[288:2123](2010213.htm#fr_2122) <span
id="iii.xi.xliii-p31.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xliii-p32"></span> The sub-deacons (the highest of the
inferior orders of the clergy) are first mentioned in this epistle of
Cornelius and in various epistles of Cyprian. At what time they arose we
cannot tell, but they seem to have appeared in the East later than in
the West, at least the first references we have to them in the Orient
are in the fourth century, e.g. in the *Apost. Const.* VIII. 21. They
acted as deacons’ assistants, preparing the sacred vessels for use at
the altar, attended the doors during communion service, and were often
employed by the bishops for the conveyance of letters or messages to
distant churches. See Bingham’s *Ant.* Bk. III. chap. 2.

<span id="fn_2123"></span>[288:2124](2010213.htm#fr_2123) <span
id="iii.xi.xliii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xliii-p33"></span> The Acolyths (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi.xliii-p33.1"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi.xliii-p33.2"></span>κόλουθοι</span>),
another of the inferior orders of the clergy, are likewise first
mentioned here and in Cyprian’s epistles. They seem to have been of much
later institution in the East, for we first hear of them there in the
time of Justinian (Justin. *Novel.* 59). Their duties seem to have been
to attend to the lights of the church and to procure the wine for
communion service. See Bingham, *ibid.* chap. 3.

<span id="fn_2124"></span>[288:2125](2010213.htm#fr_2124) <span
id="iii.xi.xliii-p33.3"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xliii-p34"></span> The Exorcists likewise constituted
one of the inferior orders of the clergy; but although we find exorcism
very frequently referred to by the Fathers of the second century, there
seems to have been no such office until the third century, the present
being the earliest distinct reference to it. In the fourth century we
find the office in all parts of the Church East and West. Their duty was
to take charge of those supposed to be possessed of an evil spirit; to
pray with them, care for them, and exorcise the demon when possible. See
Bingham, *ibid.* chap. 4.

<span id="fn_2125"></span>[288:2126](2010213.htm#fr_2125) <span
id="iii.xi.xliii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xliii-p35"></span> The Readers, or Lectors (Greek,
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi.xliii-p35.1"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi.xliii-p35.2"></span>ναγνῶσται</span>;
Latin, *Lectores*), constituted still another of the inferior orders,
and were already a distinct office in the time of Tertullian (cf. *de
Præscrip.* chap. 41). From the third century on the order seems to have
been universal. Their duty was to read the Scriptures in the public
services of the sanctuary. See Bingham, *ibid.* chap. 5.

<span id="fn_2126"></span>[288:2127](2010213.htm#fr_2126) <span
id="iii.xi.xliii-p35.3"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xliii-p36"></span> The Janitors, or Doorkeepers (Greek,
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi.xliii-p36.1"></span>πυλωροί</span>
or <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xliii-p36.2"></span>θυρωροί</span>; Latin, *ostiarii* or
*janitores*), are first mentioned in this passage. In the fourth
century, however, we find them frequently referred to. Their office
seems to have been about the same as that of the modern janitor or
sexton. See Bingham, *ibid.* chap. 6.

<span id="fn_2127"></span>[289:2128](2010213.htm#fr_2127) <span
id="iii.xi.xliii-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xliii-p40"></span> There is no reason to doubt that
Novatian received clinical baptism, as here stated by Cornelius. This
does not imply, as is commonly supposed, that he was of heathen
parentage, for many Christians postponed baptism as long as possible, in
order not to sacrifice baptismal grace by sins committed after baptism.
We do not know whether his parents were heathen or Christians. Upon the
objection to Novatian’s ordination, based upon his irregular baptism,
see below, §17.

<span id="fn_2128"></span>[289:2129](2010213.htm#fr_2128) <span
id="iii.xi.xliii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xliii-p42"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xliii-p42.1"></span>τοῦ τε σφραγισθῆναι ὑπὸ τοῦ
ἐπισκόπου</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xliii-p42.2"></span>σφραγισθῆναι</span> here means
confirmation or consignation (as it was commonly called among the
Latins); that is, the imposition of the hands of the bishop which
regularly followed baptism, immediately if the bishop were on the
ground, in other cases at as early a date as possible. The imposition of
hands was for the purpose of conveying the Holy Spirit, who should
supply the newly baptized Christian with the necessary grace to fit him
for the Christian life. Confirmation was thus looked upon as completing
the baptism and as a necessary pre-condition of receiving the eucharist.
At the same time, if a person died after baptism, before it was possible
to receive imposition of hands, the baptism was not regarded as rendered
invalid by the omission, for in the baptism itself the full remission of
sins was supposed to be granted. The confirmation was not necessary for
such remission, but was necessary for the bestowal of the requisite
sustaining grace for the Christian life. Cornelius in the present
paragraph does not intend to imply that regenerating grace was not given
in Novatian’s baptism. He means simply that the Holy Spirit was not
given in that full measure in which it was given by the laying on of
hands, and which was necessary for growth in grace and Christian living.
The baptism was looked on in ordinary cases as in a sense
negative,—effecting the washing away of sin, the laying on of hands as
positive, confirming the gift of the Spirit. The former, therefore, was
sufficient to save the man who died immediately thereafter; the latter
was necessary to sustain the man who still remained in the world.
Compare with these words of Cornelius Tertullian’s *de Baptism.* chap.
6. The earliest extant canon on this subject is the thirty-eighth of the
synod of Elvira (306 <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xi.xliii-p42.3"></span>a.d.</span>), which decrees that a sick
person may in case of necessity be baptized by a layman, but that he is
afterward, if he recovers, to be taken to the bishop that the baptism
may be perfected by the laying on of hands. The seventy-seventh canon
decrees the same thing for those baptized by deacons, but expressly
declares that if the baptized person die before the imposition of hands,
he is to be regarded as saved in virtue of the faith which he confessed
in his baptism. It is not necessary to give other references in
connection with this matter. For further particulars, see Bingham,
*ibid.* Bk. XII.

<span id="iii.xi.xliii-p43"></span>On the signification of the verb
<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xliii-p43.1"></span>σθραγίζω</span>, see Suicer’s
*Thesaurus.* We can hardly believe that Novatian failed to receive
imposition of hands from the bishop, for it is inconceivable that the
latter would have omitted what was regarded as such an important
prerequisite to church communion in the case of one whom he ordained to
the presbyterate. Novatian may not have received confirmation
immediately after his recovery, but he must have received it before his
ordination. As seen in §17, it is not the omission of confirmation that
causes the objections on the part of the clergy, but the clinical
baptism.

<span id="fn_2129"></span>[289:2130](2010213.htm#fr_2129) <span
id="iii.xi.xliii-p43.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xliii-p44"></span> The majority of the <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.xi.xliii-p44.1"></span>mss.</span>, followed
by Schwegler, Laemmer, and Heinichen, read <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xliii-p44.2"></span>τούτων</span>. But some of the best <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.xi.xliii-p44.3"></span>mss.</span>, followed
by all the other editors, read <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xliii-p44.4"></span>τούτου</span>.

<span id="fn_2130"></span>[289:2131](2010213.htm#fr_2130) <span
id="iii.xi.xliii-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xliii-p47"></span> This is certainly a calumny. It is
possible, as Neander suggests, that Novatian, although a presbyter,
withdrew somewhat from active duty and lived the life of an ascetic, and
that it is this to which Cornelius refers in speaking of his admiration
for “another philosophy.” But however that may be, Cornelius’
interpretation of his conduct as cowardly or unworthy is quite false.
See above, note 1.

<span id="fn_2131"></span>[289:2132](2010213.htm#fr_2131) <span
id="iii.xi.xliii-p49.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xliii-p50"></span> Clinic baptism (so-called from <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi.xliii-p50.1"></span>κλίνη</span>, “a
bed”) was ordinarily looked upon in the early Church, in which immersion
was the common mode of baptism, as permanently debarring a person from
the presbyterate, and by many persons it was denied that such baptism
was baptism at all. The latter opinion, however, the Church refused to
sustain (cf. Cyprian, Ep. 75<span id="iii.xi.xliii-p50.2"></span>; *al.*
19). The twelfth canon of the Council of Neo-Cæsarea (held early in the
fourth century) says, “If any man is baptized only in time of sickness,
he shall not be ordained a presbyter; because his faith was not
voluntary, but as it were of constraint; except his subsequent faith and
diligence recommend him, or else the scarcity of men make it necessary
to ordain him.” It is clear that this canon meant to apply only to
persons whose baptism was delayed by their own fault. It was common for
catechumens to postpone the rite as long as possible in order not to
forfeit baptismal grace by their post-baptismal sins, and it was to
discourage this practice that such canons as this of Neo-Cæsarea were
passed. Even this canon, however, provided for exceptional cases, and
the fact that Novatian was ordained in spite of his irregular baptism is
a proof that he must have been an exceptionally pious and zealous man.

<span id="fn_2132"></span>[289:2133](2010213.htm#fr_2132) <span
id="iii.xi.xliii-p55.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xliii-p56"></span> On Moses (or Moyses, as he is called
by Cyprian), see note 9, above.

<span id="iii.xi.xliii-p57"></span>Lipsius (*Chron. der röm. Bischöfe,*
p. 202, note) maintains that Cornelius is referring, at this point, not
to Novatian, but to Novatus, the Carthaginian presbyter, and that
Eusebius has confounded the two men. He bases this opinion upon the
mention of the five presbyters, whom he identifies with those who, with
Novatus, separated from the Carthaginian church in connection with the
schism of Felicissimus (see Cyprian, *Ep.* 39; *al.* 43), and also upon
the fact that Moses died before the election of Novatian as opposition
bishop. In regard to the first point, it must be noticed that, in an
epistle to Cyprian upon the schism of Novatian (Cyprian, *Ep.* 47; *al.*
50), Cornelius mentions five presbyters (including Novatus) as connected
with Novatian in his schism. Certainly it is most natural to refer
Cornelius’ words in this paragraph to the same five men. Indeed, to
speak of Novatus and the five presbyters with him would be very
peculiar, for Novatus himself was one of the five, and therefore there
were but four with him. As to the second point, it may simply be said
that Moses might well have refused to commune with Novatian, before the
election of the latter, seeing that his position would inevitably lead
to schism. There remains, therefore, no reason for supposing Eusebius
mistaken, and for referring these words to Novatus of Carthage, instead
of Novatian of Rome.

<span id="fn_2133"></span>[290:2134](2010213.htm#fr_2133) <span
id="iii.xi.xliii-p59.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xliii-p60"></span> These lists of the bishops present
at the council, and of those who expressed their agreement with the
decision of the synod, are no longer extant.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLIV](2010214)
