[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010398)  [Next](2010400) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.i.xiv"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.i.xiv-p1"></span> <span id="page_486">p. 486</span>
<span id="iv.vi.i.xiv-Page_486"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vi.i.xiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIV</span>.—*How Constantius his
Father, being reproached with Poverty by Diocletian, filled his
Treasury, and afterwards restored the Money to those by whom it had been
contributed.*

<span id="iv.vi.i.xiv-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vi.i.xiv-p2.1"></span>In</span> consequence of the many reports
in circulation respecting this prince, describing his kindness and
gentleness of character, and the extraordinary elevation of his piety,
alleging too, that by reason of his extreme indulgence to his subjects,
he had not even a supply of money laid up in his treasury; the emperor
who at that time occupied the place of supreme power sent to reprehend
his neglect of the public weal, at the same time reproaching him with
poverty, and alleging in proof of the charge the empty state of his
treasury. On this he desired the messengers of the emperor to remain
with him awhile, and, calling together the wealthiest of his subjects of
all nations under his dominion, he informed them that he was in want of
money, and that this was the time for them all to give a voluntary proof
of their affection for their prince.

<span id="iv.vi.i.xiv-p3"></span>As soon as they heard this (as though
they had long been desirous of an opportunity for showing the sincerity
of their good will), with zealous alacrity they filled the treasury with
gold and silver and other wealth; each eager to surpass the rest in the
amount of his contribution: and this they did with cheerful and joyous
countenances. And now Constantius desired the messengers of the great
emperor <span id="fr_3081"></span>[3082](#fn_3081) personally to inspect
his treasures, and directed them to give a faithful report of what they
had seen; adding, that on the present occasion he had taken this money
into his own hands, but that it had long been kept for his use in the
custody of the owners, as securely as if under the charge of faithful
treasurers. The ambassadors were overwhelmed with astonishment at what
they had witnessed: and on their departure it is said that the truly
generous prince sent for the owners of the property, and, after
commending them severally for their obedience and true loyalty, restored
it all, and bade them return to their homes.

<span id="iv.vi.i.xiv-p6"></span>This one circumstance, then, conveys a
proof of the generosity of him whose character we are attempting to
illustrate: another will contain the clearest testimony to his piety.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3081"></span>[486:3082](2010399.htm#fr_3081) <span
id="iv.vi.i.xiv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.i.xiv-p4"></span> Or the senior Augustus. “Diocletian is
thus entitled in the ancient panegyrists and in
inscriptions.”—*Heinichen.*

<span id="iv.vi.i.xiv-p5"></span>It was “towards the end of the second
century of the Christian era” that there began to be a plurality of
*Augusti,* but “from this time we find two or even a greater number of
*Augusti;* and though in that and in all similar cases the persons
honored with the title were regarded as participators of the imperial
power, still the one who received the title first was looked upon as the
head of the empire.”—Smith, *Dict. Gr. and Rom. Ant.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XV](2010400)
