[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010071)  [Next](2010073) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.viii.iii"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.viii.iii-p1.1"></span>Chapter III.—</span>*The Epistles of the
Apostles.*

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.viii.iii-p2.1"></span>One</span> epistle of Peter, that called
the first, is acknowledged as genuine. <span
id="fr_577"></span>[578](#fn_577) And this the ancient elders <span
id="fr_578"></span>[579](#fn_578) used freely in their own writings as
an undisputed work. <span id="fr_579"></span>[580](#fn_579) But we have
learned that his extant second Epistle does not belong to the
canon; <span id="fr_580"></span>[581](#fn_580) yet, as it has appeared
profitable to many, it has been used with the other Scriptures. <span
id="fr_581"></span>[582](#fn_581)

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p8"></span>2. The so-called Acts of Peter, <span
id="fr_582"></span>[583](#fn_582) however, and the Gospel <span
id="fr_583"></span>[584](#fn_583) which bears his name, and the
Preaching <span id="fr_584"></span>[585](#fn_584) and the <span
id="page_134">p. 134</span> <span
id="iii.viii.iii-Page_134"></span>Apocalypse, <span
id="fr_585"></span>[586](#fn_585) as they are called, we know have not
been universally accepted, <span id="fr_586"></span>[587](#fn_586)
because no ecclesiastical writer, ancient or modern, has made use of
testimonies drawn from them. <span id="fr_587"></span>[588](#fn_587)

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p15"></span>3. But in the course of my history I
shall be careful to show, in addition to the official succession, what
ecclesiastical writers have from time to time made use of any of the
disputed works, <span id="fr_588"></span>[589](#fn_588) and what they
have said in regard to the canonical and accepted writings, <span
id="fr_589"></span>[590](#fn_589) as well as in regard to those which
are not of this class.

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p18"></span>4. Such are the writings that bear
the name of Peter, only one of which I know to be genuine <span
id="fr_590"></span>[591](#fn_590) and acknowledged by the ancient
elders. <span id="fr_591"></span>[592](#fn_591)

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p21"></span>5. Paul’s fourteen epistles are well
known and undisputed. <span id="fr_592"></span>[593](#fn_592) It is not
indeed right to overlook the fact that some have rejected the Epistle to
the Hebrews, <span id="fr_593"></span>[594](#fn_593) saying that it is
dis<span id="page_135">p. 135</span> <span
id="iii.viii.iii-Page_135"></span>puted <span
id="fr_594"></span>[595](#fn_594) by the church of Rome, on the ground
that it was not written by Paul. But what has been said concerning this
epistle by those who lived before our time I shall quote in the proper
place. <span id="fr_595"></span>[596](#fn_595) In regard to the
so-called Acts of Paul, <span id="fr_596"></span>[597](#fn_596) I have
not found them among the undisputed writings. <span
id="fr_597"></span>[598](#fn_597)

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p28"></span>6. But as the same apostle, in the
salutations at the end of the Epistle to the Romans, <span
id="fr_598"></span>[599](#fn_598) has made mention among others of
Hermas, to whom the book called The Shepherd <span
id="fr_599"></span>[600](#fn_599) is ascribed, it should be observed
that this too has been disputed by some, and on their account cannot be
placed among the acknowledged books; while by others it is considered
quite indispensable, especially to those who need instruction in the
elements of the faith. Hence, as we know, it has been publicly read in
churches, and I have found that some of the most ancient writers used
it.

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p32"></span>7. This will serve to show the divine
writings that are undisputed as well as those that are not universally
acknowledged.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_577"></span>[133:578](2010072.htm#fr_577) <span
id="iii.viii.iii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p3"></span> The testimony of tradition is
unanimous for the authenticity of the first Epistle of Peter. It was
known to Clement of Rome, Polycarp, Papias, Hermas, &c. (the Muratorian
Fragment, however, omits it), and was cited under the name of Peter by
Irenæus, Tertullian, and Clement of Alexandria, from whose time its
canonicity and Petrine authorship were established, so that Eusebius
rightly puts it among the *homologoumena.* Semler, in 1784, was the
first to deny its direct Petrine authorship, and Cludius, in 1808,
pronounced it absolutely ungenuine. The Tübingen School followed, and at
the present time the genuineness is denied by all the negative critics,
chiefly on account of the strong Pauline character of the epistle (cf.
Holtzmann, *Einleitung,* p. 487 sqq., also Weiss, *Einleitung,* p. 428
sqq., who confines the resemblances to the Epistles to the Romans and to
the Ephesians, and denies the general Pauline character of the epistle).
The great majority of scholars, however, maintain the Petrine
authorship. A new opinion, expressed by Harnack, upon the assumption of
the distinctively Pauline character of the epistle, is that it was
written during the apostolic age by some follower of Paul, and that the
name of Peter was afterward attached to it, so that it represents no
fraud on the part of the writer, but an effort of a later age to find an
author for the anonymous epistle. In support of this is urged the fact
that though the epistle is so frequently quoted in the second century,
it is never connected with Peter’s name until the time of Irenæus. (Cf.
Harnack’s *Lehre der Zwölf Apostel,* p. 106, note, and his
*Dogmengeschichte*, I. p. 278, note 2.) This theory has found few
supporters.

<span id="fn_578"></span>[133:579](2010072.htm#fr_578) <span
id="iii.viii.iii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p4"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.iii-p4.1"></span>οἱ π€λαι πρεσβύτεροι</span>. On the use of
the term “elders” among the Fathers, see below, chap. 39, note 6.

<span id="fn_579"></span>[133:580](2010072.htm#fr_579) <span
id="iii.viii.iii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.iii-p5.1"></span>ὡ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.iii-p5.2"></span>ς</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.iii-p5.3"></span>ἀναμφιλέκτῳ</span>

<span id="fn_580"></span>[133:581](2010072.htm#fr_580) <span
id="iii.viii.iii-p5.4"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.iii-p6.1"></span>οὐκ ἐνδι€θηκον μὲν εἶναι
παρειλήφαμεν</span>. The authorship of the second Epistle of Peter has
always been widely disputed. The external testimony for it is very weak,
as no knowledge of it can be proved to have existed before the third
century. Numerous explanations have been offered by apologists to
account for this curious fact; but it still remains almost inexplicable,
if the epistle be accepted as the work of the apostle. The first clear
references to it are made by Firmilian, Bishop of Cæsarea in Cappadocia
(third century), in his Epistle to Cyprian, §6 (*Ep.* 74, in the
collection of Cyprian’s Epistles, *Ante-Nicene Fathers,* Am. ed., V. p.
391), and by Origen (quoted by Eusebius, VI. 25, below), who mentions
the second Epistle as disputed. Clement of Alexandria, however, seems at
least to have known and used it (according to Euseb. VI. 14). The
epistle was not admitted into the Canon until the Council of Hippo, in
393, when all doubts and discussion ceased until the Reformation. It is
at present disputed by all negative critics, and even by many otherwise
conservative scholars. Those who defend its genuineness date it shortly
before the death of Peter, while the majority of those who reject it
throw it into the second century,—some as late as the time of Clement of
Alexandria (e.g. Harnack, in his *Lehre der Zwölf Apostel,* p. 15 and
159, who assigns its composition to Egypt). Cf. Holtzmann, *Einleitung,*
p. 495 sqq., and Weiss (who leaves its genuineness an open question),
*Einleitung,* p. 436 sqq. For a defense of the genuineness, see
especially Warfield, in the *Southern Pres. Rev.,* 1883, p. 390 sqq.,
and Salmon’s *Introduction to the N. T.,* p. 512 sqq.

<span id="fn_581"></span>[133:582](2010072.htm#fr_581) <span
id="iii.viii.iii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p7"></span> Although disputed by many, as already
remarked, and consequently not looked upon as certainly canonical until
the end of the fourth century, the epistle was yet used, as Eusebius
says, quite widely from the time of Origen on, e.g. by Origen,
Firmilian, Cyprian, Hippolytus, Methodius, etc. The same is true,
however, of other writings, which the Church afterward placed among the
Apocrypha.

<span id="fn_582"></span>[133:583](2010072.htm#fr_582) <span
id="iii.viii.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p9"></span> These <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.iii-p9.1"></span>πρ€ξεις</span> (or <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.viii.iii-p9.2"></span>περίοδοι</span>, as
they are often called) <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.iii-p9.3"></span>Πέτρου</span> were of heretical origin,
according to Lipsius, and belonged, like the heretical *Acta Pauli*
(referred to in note 20, below), to the collection of <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.viii.iii-p9.4"></span>περίοδοι τῶν
ἀποστόλων</span>, which were ascribed to Lucius Charinus, and, like
them, formed also, from the end of the fourth century, a part of the
Manichean Canon of the New Testament. The work, as a whole, is no longer
extant, but a part of it is preserved, according to Lipsius, in a late
Catholic redaction, under the title *Passio Petri.* Upon these *Acts of
Peter,* their original form, and their relation to other works of the
same class, see Lipsius, *Apocryphen Apostelgeschichten,* II. I, p. 78
sq. Like the heretical *Acta Pauli* already referred to, this work, too,
was used in the composition of the Catholic *Acts of Paul and Peter,*
which are still extant, and which assumed their present form in the
fifth century, according to Lipsius. These Catholic *Acts of Peter and
Paul* have been published by Thilo (*Acta Petri et Pauli,* Halle, 1837),
and by Tischendorf, in his *Acta Apost. Apocr.,* p. 1–39. English
translation in the *Ante-Nicene Fathers* (Am. ed.), VIII. p. 477.

<span id="fn_583"></span>[133:584](2010072.htm#fr_583) <span
id="iii.viii.iii-p9.5"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p10"></span> This Gospel is mentioned by Serapion
as in use in the church of Rhossus (quoted by Eusebius, Bk. VI. chap.
12, below), but was rejected by him because of the heretical doctrines
which it contained. It is mentioned again by Eusebius, III. 25, only to
be rejected as heretical; also by Origen (*in Matt.* Vol. X. 17) and by
Jerome (*de vir. ill.* 1), who follows Eusebius in pronouncing it an
heretical work employed by no early teachers of the Christian Church.
Lipsius regards it as probably a Gnostic recast of one of the Canonical
Gospels. From Serapion’s account of this Gospel (see below, Bk. VI.
chap. 12), we see that it differs from the Canonical Gospels, not in
denying their truth, or in giving a contradictory account of Christ’s
life, but rather in adding to the account given by them. This, of
course, favors Lipsius’ hypothesis; and in any case he is certainly
quite right in denying that the Gospel was an original work made use of
by Justin Martyr, and that it in any way lay at the base of our present
Gospel of Mark. The Gospel (as we learn from the same chapter) was used
by the *Docetæ,* but that does not imply that it contained what we call
Docetic ideas of Christ’s body (cf. note 8 on that chapter). The Gospel
is no longer extant. See Lipsius, in Smith and Wace’s *Dict. of Christ.
Biog.* II. p. 712.

<span id="fn_584"></span>[133:585](2010072.htm#fr_584) <span
id="iii.viii.iii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p11"></span> This *Preaching of Peter* (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.viii.iii-p11.1"></span>Κήρυγμα
Πέτρου</span>, *Prædicatio Petri*), which is no longer extant, probably
formed a part of a lost *Preaching of Peter and Paul* (cf. Clement of
Alexandria, *Strom.* VI. 5, and Lactantius, *Inst.* IV. 21). It was
mentioned frequently by the early Fathers, and a number of fragments of
it have been preserved by Clement of Alexandria, who quotes it
frequently as a genuine record of Peter’s teaching. (The fragments are
collected by Grabe in his *Spic. Patr.* I. 55–71, and by Hilgenfeld in
his *N. T. extra Can. rec.,* 2d ed., IV. p. 51 sqq.). It is mentioned
twice by Origen (*in Johan.* XIII. 17, and *De Princ.* Præf. 8), and in
the latter place is expressly classed among spurious works. It was
probably, according to Lipsius, closely connected with the *Acts of
Peter and Paul* mentioned in note 6, above. Lipsius, however, regards
those *Acts* as a Catholic adaptation of a work originally Ebionitic,
though he says expressly that the *Preaching* is not at all of that
character, but is a Petro-Pauline production, and is to be distinguished
from the Ebionitic <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.iii-p11.2"></span>κηρύγματα</span>. It would seem therefore
that he must put the *Preaching* later than the original of the *Acts,*
into a time when the Ebionitic character of the latter had been done
away with. Salmon meanwhile holds that the *Preaching* is as old as the
middle of the second century and the most ancient of the works recording
Peter’s preaching, and hence (if this view be accepted) the Ebionitic
character which Lipsius ascribes to the *Acts* did not (if it existed at
all) belong to the original form of the record of Peter’s preaching
embodied in the *Acts* and in the *Preaching.* The latter (if it
included also the *Preaching of Paul,* as seems almost certain) appears
to have contained an account of some of the events of the life of
Christ, and it may have been used by Justin. Compare the remarks of
Lipsius in the *Dict. of Christ. Biog.* I. p. 28 (*Cath. Adaptations of
Ebionitic Acts*), and Salmon’s article on the *Preaching of Peter,
ibid.* IV. 329.

<span id="fn_585"></span>[134:586](2010072.htm#fr_585) <span
id="iii.viii.iii-p11.3"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p12"></span> The *Apocalypse of Peter* enjoyed
considerable favor in the early Church and was accepted by some Fathers
as a genuine work of the apostle. It is mentioned in the Muratorian
Fragment in connection with the Apocalypse of John, as a part of the
Roman Canon, and is accepted by the author of the fragment himself;
although he says that some at that time rejected it. Clement of
Alexandria, in his *Hypotyposes* (according to Eusebius, IV. 14, below),
commented upon it, thus showing that it belonged at that time to the
Alexandrian Canon. In the third century it was still received in the
North African Church (so Harnack, who refers to the stichometry of the
Codex Claramontanus). The *Eclogæ or Prophetical Selections* of Clement
of Alexandria give it as a genuine work of Peter (§§41, 48, 49, p. 1000
sq., Potter’s ed.), and so Methodius of Tyre (*Sympos.* XI. 6, p. 16,
ed. Jahn, according to Lipsius). After Eusebius’ time the work seems to
have been universally regarded as spurious, and thus, as its canonicity
depended upon its apostolic origin (see chap. 24, note 19), it gradually
fell out of the Canon. It nevertheless held its place for centuries
among the semi-scriptural books, and was read in many churches.
According to Sozomen, *H. E.* VII. 19, it was read at Easter, which
shows that it was treated with especial respect. Nicephorus in his
*Stichometry* puts it among the Antilegomena, in immediate connection
with the Apocalypse of John. As Lipsius remarks, its “lay-recognition in
orthodox circles proves that it could not have had a Gnostic origin, nor
otherwise have contained what was offensive to Catholic Christians” (see
Lipsius, *Dict. of Christ. Biog.* I. p. 130 sqq.). Only a few fragments
of the work are extant, and these are given by Hilgenfeld, in his *Nov.
Test. extra Can. receptum,* IV. 74 sq., and by Grabe, *Spic. Patr.* I.
71 sqq.

<span id="fn_586"></span>[134:587](2010072.htm#fr_586) <span
id="iii.viii.iii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p13"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.iii-p13.1"></span>οὐδ᾽ ὅλως ἐν καθολικαῖς ἴσμεν
παραδεδομένα</span>

<span id="fn_587"></span>[134:588](2010072.htm#fr_587) <span
id="iii.viii.iii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p14"></span> Eusebius exaggerates in this
statement. The *Apocalypse of Peter* was in quite general use in the
second century, as we learn from the Muratorian Fragment; and Clement
(as Eusebius himself says in VI. 14) wrote a commentary upon it in
connection with the other Antilegomena.

<span id="fn_588"></span>[134:589](2010072.htm#fr_588) <span
id="iii.viii.iii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p16"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.iii-p16.1"></span>τῶν ἀντιλεγομένων</span>

<span id="fn_589"></span>[134:590](2010072.htm#fr_589) <span
id="iii.viii.iii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p17"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.iii-p17.1"></span>περὶ τῶν ἐνδιαθήκων καὶ
ὁμολογουμένων</span>

<span id="fn_590"></span>[134:591](2010072.htm#fr_590) <span
id="iii.viii.iii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p19"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.iii-p19.1"></span>ὧ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.iii-p19.2"></span>ν μόνην μίαν γνησίαν žγνων</span>.

<span id="fn_591"></span>[134:592](2010072.htm#fr_591) <span
id="iii.viii.iii-p19.3"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p20"></span> As above; see note 2.

<span id="fn_592"></span>[134:593](2010072.htm#fr_592) <span
id="iii.viii.iii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p22"></span> The thirteen Pauline Epistles of our
present Canon, and the Epistle to the Hebrews. These formed for Eusebius
an absolutely undisputed part of the Canon (cf. chap. 25, below, where
he speaks of them with the same complete assurance), and were
universally accepted until the present century. The external testimony
for all of them is ample, going back (the Pastoral Epistles excepted) to
the early part of the second century. The Epistles to the Romans,
Corinthians, and Galatians have never been disputed (except by an
individual here and there, especially during the last few years in
Holland), even the Tübingen School accepting them as genuine works of
Paul. The other epistles have not fared so well. The genuineness of
Ephesians was first questioned by Usteri in 1824 and De Wette in 1826,
and the Tübingen School rejected it. Scholars are at present greatly
divided; the majority of negative critics reject it, while many liberal
and all conservative scholars defend it. Colossians was first attacked
by Mayerhoff in 1838, followed by the whole Tübingen School. It fares
to-day somewhat better than Ephesians. It is still, however, rejected by
many extreme critics, while others leave the matter in suspense (e.g.
Weizsäcker in his *Apostolisches Zeitalter*). Since 1872, when the
theory was proposed by Holtzmann, some scholars have held that our
present Epistle contains a genuine Epistle of Paul to the Colossians, of
which it is a later revision and expansion. Baur and the Tübingen School
were the first to attack Philippians as a whole, and it too is still
rejected by many critics, but at the same time it is more widely
accepted than either Ephesians or Colossians (e.g. Weizsäcker and even
Hilgenfeld defend its genuineness). Second Thessalonians was first
attacked by Schmidt in 1801, followed by a number of scholars, until
Baur extended the attack to the first Epistle also. Second Thessalonians
is still almost unanimously rejected by negative critics, and even by
some moderates, while First Thessalonians has regained the support of
many of the former (e.g. Hilgenfeld, Weizsäcker, and even Holtzmann),
and is entirely rejected by comparatively few critics. Philemon—which
was first attacked by Baur—is quite generally accepted, but the Pastoral
Epistles are almost as generally rejected, except by the regular
conservative school (upon the Pastorals, see Bk. II. chap. 22, note 8,
above). For a concise account of the state of criticism upon each
epistle, see Holtzmann’s *Einleitung.* For a defense of them all, see
the *Einleitung* of Weiss.

<span id="fn_593"></span>[134:594](2010072.htm#fr_593) <span
id="iii.viii.iii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p23"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.iii-p23.1"></span>τινες ἠθετήκασι</span>. That the Epistle
to the Hebrews was not written by Paul is now commonly acknowledged, and
may be regarded as absolutely certain. It does not itself lay any claim
to Pauline authorship; its theology and style are both non-Pauline; and
finally, external testimony is strongly against its direct connection
with Paul. The first persons to assign the epistle to Paul are Pantænus
and Clement of Alexandria (see below, Bk. VI. chap. 14), and they
evidently find it necessary to defend its Pauline authorship in the face
of the objections of others. Clement, indeed, assumes a Hebrew original,
which was translated into Greek by Luke. Origen (see below, Bk. VI.
chap. 25) leaves its authorship undecided, but thinks it probable that
the thoughts are Paul’s, but the diction that of some one else, who has
recorded what he heard from the apostle. He then remarks that one
tradition assigned it to Clement of Rome, another to Luke. Eusebius
himself, in agreement with the Alexandrians (who, with the exception of
Origen, unanimously accept the Pauline authorship), looks upon it as a
work of Paul, but accepts Clement of Alexandria’s theory that it was
written in Hebrew, and thinks it probable that Clement of Rome was its
translator (see chap. 38, below). In the Western Church, where the
epistle was known very early (e.g. Clement of Rome uses it freely), it
is not connected with Paul until the fourth century. Indeed, Tertullian
(*de pudicit.* 20) states that it bore the name of Barnabas, and
evidently had never heard that it had been ascribed to any one else. The
influence of the Alexandrians, however, finally prevailed, and from the
fifth century on we find it universally accepted, both East and West, as
an epistle of Paul, and not until the Reformation was its origin again
questioned. Since that time its authorship has been commonly regarded as
an insoluble mystery. Numerous guesses have been made (e.g. Luther
guessed Apollos, and he has been followed by many), but it is impossible
to prove that any of them are correct. For Barnabas, however, more can
be said than for any of the others. Tertullian expressly connects the
epistle with him; and its contents are just what we should expect from
the pen of a Levite who had been for a time under Paul’s influence, and
yet had not received his Christianity from him; its standpoint, in fact,
is Levitic, and decidedly non-Pauline, and yet reveals in many places
the influence of Pauline ideas. Still further, it is noticeable that in
the place where the Epistle to the Hebrews is first ascribed to Paul,
there first appears an epistle which is ascribed (quite wrongly; see
below, chap. 25, note 20) to Barnabas. May it not be (as has been
suggested by Weiss and others) that the anonymous Epistle to the Hebrews
was originally accepted in Alexandria as the work of Barnabas, but that
later it was ascribed to Paul; and that the tradition that Barnabas had
written an epistle, which must still have remained in the Church, led to
the ascription of another anonymous epistle to him? We seem thus most
easily to explain the false ascription of the one epistle to Paul, and
the false ascription of the other to Barnabas. It may be said that the
claims of both Barnabas and Apollos have many supporters, while still
more attempt no decision. In regard to the canonicity of the epistle
there seems never to have been any serious dispute, and it is this fact
doubtless which did most to foster the belief in its Pauline authorship
from the third century on. For the criterion of canonicity more and more
came to be looked upon as apostolicity, direct or indirect. The early
Church had cared little for such a criterion. In only one place does
Eusebius seem to imply that doubts existed as to its canonicity,—in Bk.
VI. chap. 13, where he classes it with the Book of Wisdom, and the
Epistles of Barnabas, Clement, and Jude, among the *antilegomena.* But
in view of his treatment of it elsewhere it must be concluded that he is
thinking in that passage not at all of its canonicity, but of its
Pauline authorship, which he knows is disputed by some, and in reference
to which he uses the same word, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.iii-p23.2"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.iii-p23.3"></span>ντιλέγεσθαι</span>, in the present
sentence. Upon the canonicity of the epistle, see still further chap.
25, note 1. For a discussion of the epistle, see especially the N. T.
Introductions of Weiss and Holtzmann.

<span id="fn_594"></span>[135:595](2010072.htm#fr_594) <span
id="iii.viii.iii-p23.4"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p24"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.iii-p24.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.iii-p24.2"></span>ντιλέγεσθαι</span>

<span id="fn_595"></span>[135:596](2010072.htm#fr_595) <span
id="iii.viii.iii-p24.3"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p25"></span> See Bk. VI. chaps. 14, 20, 25.

<span id="fn_596"></span>[135:597](2010072.htm#fr_596) <span
id="iii.viii.iii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p26"></span> These <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.iii-p26.1"></span>πρ€ξεις</span> are mentioned also in
chap. 25, below, where they are classed among the <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.viii.iii-p26.2"></span>νόθοι</span>,
implying that they had been originally accepted as canonical, but were
not at the time Eusebius wrote widely accepted as such. This implies
that they were not, like the works which he mentions later in the
chapter, of an heretical character. They were already known to Origen,
who (*De Prin.* I. 2, 3) refers to them in such a way as to show that
they were in good repute in the Catholic Church. They are to be
distinguished from the Gnostic <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.iii-p26.3"></span>περίοδοι</span> or <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.viii.iii-p26.4"></span>πρ€ξεις
Παύλου</span>, which from the end of the fourth century formed a part of
the Manichean canon of the New Testament, and of which some fragments
are still extant under various forms. The failure to keep these Catholic
and heretical *Acta Pauli* always distinct has caused considerable
confusion. Both of these Acts, the Catholic and the heretical, formed,
according to Lipsius (*Apokr. Apostelgeschichten,* II. 1, p. 305 sq.)
one of the sources of the Catholic *Acts of Peter and Paul,* which in
their extant form belong to the fifth century. For a discussion of these
Catholic *Acts of Paul* referred to by Eusebius, see Lipsius, *ibid.,*
p. 70 sq.

<span id="fn_597"></span>[135:598](2010072.htm#fr_597) <span
id="iii.viii.iii-p26.5"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p27"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.iii-p27.1"></span>οὐδὲ μὴν τὰς λεγομένας αὐτοῦ πρ€ξεις ἐν
ἀναμφιλέκτοις παρείληφα</span>

<span id="fn_598"></span>[135:599](2010072.htm#fr_598) <span
id="iii.viii.iii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p29"></span> See [Rom. xvi.
14](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#014)<span
id="iii.viii.iii-p29.1"></span>. The greater part of this last chapter
of Romans is considered by many a separate epistle addressed to Ephesus.
This has been quite a common opinion since 1829, when it was first
broached by David Schulz (*Studien und Kritiken,* p. 629 sq.), and is
accepted even by many conservative scholars (e.g. Weiss), while on the
other hand it is opposed by many of the opposite school. While Aquila
and Priscilla, of [Rom. 16.3](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#003)<span
id="iii.viii.iii-p29.2"></span>, and Epænetus, of [Rom.
16.5](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#005)<span
id="iii.viii.iii-p29.3"></span>, seem to point to Ephesus, and the fact
that so many personal friends are greeted, leads us to look naturally to
the East as Paul’s field of labor, where he had formed so many
acquaintances, rather than to Rome, where he had not been; yet on the
other hand such names as Junias, Narcissus, Rufus, Hermas, Nereus,
Aristobulus, and Herodion point strongly to Rome. We must, however, be
content to leave the matter undecided, but may be confident that the
evidence for the Ephesian hypothesis is certainly, in the face of the
Roman names mentioned, and of universal tradition (for which as for
Eusebius the epistle is a unit), not strong enough to establish it.

<span id="fn_599"></span>[135:600](2010072.htm#fr_599) <span
id="iii.viii.iii-p29.4"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p30"></span> The *Shepherd* of Hermas was in
circulation in the latter half of the second century, and is quoted by
Irenæus (*Adv. Hær.* IV. 20. 2) as Scripture, although he omits it in
his discussion of Scripture testimonies in Bk. III. chap. 9 sqq., which
shows that he considered it not quite on a level with regular Scripture.
Clement of Alexandria and Origen often quote it as an inspired book,
though the latter expressly distinguishes it from the canonical books,
admitting that it is disputed by many (cf. *De Prin.* IV. 11). Eusebius
in chap. 25 places it among the <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.iii-p30.1"></span>νόθοι</span> or spurious writings in
connection with the *Acts of Paul* and the *Apocalypse of Peter.*
According to the Muratorian Fragment it was “written very recently in
our times in the city of Rome by Hermas, while his brother, Bishop Pius,
sat in the chair of the Church of Rome. And therefore it also ought to
be read; but it cannot be made public in the Church to the people, nor
placed among the prophets, as their number is complete, nor among the
apostles to the end of time.” This shows the very high esteem in which
the work was held in that age. It was very widely employed in private
and in public, both in the East and the West, until about the fourth
century, when it gradually passed out of use. Jerome (*de vir. ill.* 10)
says that it was almost unknown among the Latins of his time. As to the
date and authorship of the *Shepherd* opinions vary widely. The only
direct testimony of antiquity is that of the Muratorian Fragment, which
says that it was written by Hermas, the brother of Pius, during the
episcopacy of the latter (139–154 <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.viii.iii-p30.2"></span>a.d.</span>). This testimony is accepted
by the majority of scholars, most of whom date the book near the middle
of the second century, or at least as late as the reign of Hadrian. This
opinion received not long ago what was supposed to be a strong
confirmation from the discovery of the fact that Hermas in all
probability quoted from Theodotion’s version of Daniel (see Hort’s
article in the *Johns Hopkins University Circular,* December, 1884),
which has been commonly ascribed to the second century. But it must now
be admitted that no one knows the *terminus a quo* for the composition
of Theodotian’s version, and therefore the discovery leaves the date of
Hermas entirely undetermined (see Schürer, *Gesch. des jüdischen
Volkes,* II. p. 709). Meanwhile Eusebius in this connection records the
tradition, which he had read, that the book was written by the Hermas
mentioned in [Romans xvi](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#000)<span
id="iii.viii.iii-p30.3"></span>. This tradition, however, appears to be
no older than Origen, with whom it is no more than a mere guess. While
in our absence of any knowledge as to this Hermas we cannot absolutely
disprove his claim (unless we prove decisively the late date of the
book), there is yet no ground for accepting it other than a mere
coincidence in a very common name. In *Vis.* II. 4. 3 Hermas is told to
give one copy of his book to Clement. From this it is concluded by many
that the author must have been contemporary with the well-known Roman
Clement, the author of the Epistle to the Corinthians. While this
appears very likely, it cannot be called certain in the face of evidence
for a considerably later date. Internal testimony helps us little, as
there is nothing in the book which may not have been written at the very
beginning of the second century, or, on the other hand, as late as the
middle of it. Zahn dates it between 97 and 100, and assigns it to an
unknown Hermas, a contemporary of the Roman Clement, in which he is
followed by Salmon in a very clear and keen article in the *Dict. of
Christ. Biog.* Critics are unanimously agreed that the book was written
in Rome. It consists of three parts, Visions, Mandates, and Similitudes,
and is of the nature of an apocalypse, written for the purpose of
reforming the life of the Church, which seemed to the author to have
become very corrupt. The work (especially the last part) is in the form
of an allegory, and has been compared to the *Pilgrim’s Progress.*
Opinions are divided as to whether it is actually founded upon visions
and dreams of the author, or is wholly a fiction. The former opinion
seems to be the more probable.

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p31"></span>Until recent years only a Latin
translation of Hermas was known. In 1856 the first Greek edition was
issued by Anger and Dindorf, being based upon a Mt. Athos <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.viii.iii-p31.1"></span>ms.</span> discovered
shortly before by Simonides. Of the ten leaves of the <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.viii.iii-p31.2"></span>ms.</span> the last was
lost; three were sold by Simonides to the University of Leipsic, and the
other six were transcribed by him in a very faulty manner. The Sinaitic
Codex has enabled us to control the text of Simonides in part, but
unfortunately it contains only the *Visions* and a small part of the
*Mandates.* All recent editions have been obliged to take the faulty
transcription of Simonides as their foundation. In 1880 the six leaves
of the Athos Codex, which had been supposed to be lost, and which were
known only through Simonides’ transcription, were discovered by Lambros
at Mt. Athos, and in 1888 *A Collation of the Athos Codex of the
Shepherd of Hermas by Dr. Spyr Lambros* was issued in English
translation by J. A. Robinson, at Cambridge, England. We thus have now a
reliable Greek text of nine-tenths of the *Shepherd* of Hermas.
Hilgenfeld, in his last edition (1887) of his *Novum Test. Extra Can.
Rec.,* published also a Greek text of the lost part of the work, basing
it upon a pretended transcription by Simonides from the lost Athos <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.viii.iii-p31.3"></span>ms.</span> But this has
been conclusively shown to be a mere fraud on the part of Simonides, and
we are therefore still without any <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.viii.iii-p31.4"></span>ms.</span> authority for the Greek text
of the close of the work. Cf. Robinson’s introduction to the *Collation
of Lambros* mentioned above, and Harnack’s articles in the *Theol.
Literaturzeitung* (1887). The most useful edition of the original is
that of Gebhardt and Harnack, *Patrum Apost. Opera,* Fasc. III. (Lips.
1877). The work is translated in the *Ante-Nicene Fathers,* Vol. II. The
literature upon the subject is very extensive, but the reader should
examine especially the Prolegomena of Harnack in his edition. Cf. Zahn’s
*Hirt des Hermas* (1868), and the article by Salmon in the *Dict. of
Christ. Biog.* II. p. 912 sqq. Cf. also chap. 24, note 20, in regard to
the reasons for the non-canonicity of the *Shepherd.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV](2010073)
