[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010536)  [Next](2010538.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.iii.xviii"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii.xviii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vi.iii.xviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVIII</span>.—*He speaks of
their Unanimity respecting the Feast of Easter, and against the Practice
of the Jews.*

<span id="iv.vi.iii.xviii-p2"></span>“<span class="c13"><span
id="iv.vi.iii.xviii-p2.1"></span>At</span> this meeting the question
concerning the most holy day of Easter was discussed, and it was
resolved by the united judgment of all present, that this feast ought to
be kept by all and in every place on one and the same day. For what can
be more becoming or honorable to us than that this feast from which we
date our hopes of immortality, should be observed unfailingly by all
alike, according to one ascertained order and arrangement? And first of
all, it appeared an unworthy thing that in the celebration of this most
holy feast we should follow the practice of the Jews, who have impiously
defiled their hands with enormous sin, and are, therefore, deservedly
afflicted with blindness of soul. For we have it in our power, if we
abandon their custom, to prolong the due observance of this ordinance to
future ages, by a truer order, which we have preserved from the very day
of the passion until the present time. Let us then have nothing in
common with the detestable Jewish crowd; for we have received from our
Saviour a different way. A course at once legitimate and honorable lies
open to our most holy religion. Beloved brethren, let us with one
consent adopt this course, and withdraw ourselves from all participation
in their baseness. <span id="fr_3253"></span>[3254](#fn_3253.md) For their
boast is absurd indeed, that it is not in our power without instruction
from them to observe these things. For how should they be capable of
forming a sound judgment, who, since their parricidal guilt in slaying
their Lord, have been subject to the direction, not of reason, but of
ungoverned passion, and are swayed by every impulse of the mad spirit
that is in them? Hence it is that on this point as well as others they
have no perception of the truth, so that, being altogether ignorant of
the true adjustment of this question, they sometimes celebrate <span
id="page_525">p. 525</span> <span
id="iv.vi.iii.xviii-Page_525"></span>Easter twice in the same year. Why
then should we follow those who are confessedly in grievous error?
Surely we shall never consent to keep this feast a second time in the
same year. But supposing these reasons were not of sufficient weight,
still it would be incumbent on your Sagacities <span
id="fr_3254"></span>[3255](#fn_3254.md) to strive and pray continually that
the purity of your souls may not seem in anything to be sullied by
fellowship with the customs of these most wicked men. We must consider,
too, that a discordant judgment in a case of such importance, and
respecting such religious festival, is wrong. For our Saviour has left
us one feast in commemoration of the day of our deliverance, I mean the
day of his most holy passion; and he has willed that his Catholic Church
should be one, the members of which, however scattered in many and
diverse places, are yet cherished by one pervading spirit, that is, by
the will of God. And let your Holinesses’ sagacity reflect how grievous
and scandalous it is that on the self-same days some should be engaged
in fasting, others in festive enjoyment; and again, that after the days
of Easter some should be present at banquets and amusements, while
others are fulfilling the appointed fasts. It is, then, plainly the will
of Divine Providence (as I suppose you all clearly see), that this usage
should receive fitting correction, and be reduced to one uniform rule.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3253"></span>[524:3254](2010537.htm#fr_3253.md) <span
id="iv.vi.iii.xviii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii.xviii-p3"></span> \[The idea seems to be (as
explained by Valesius) that if they joined the Jews in celebrating this
feast they would seem to consent to their crime in crucifying the
Lord.—*Bag.*\] He carried out his reprobation of the Jews in his actions
in discriminating laws at least, and perhaps in actual persecution.

<span id="fn_3254"></span>[525:3255](2010537.htm#fr_3254.md) <span
id="iv.vi.iii.xviii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii.xviii-p4"></span> \[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vi.iii.xviii-p4.1"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vi.iii.xviii-p4.2"></span>Αγχίνοια</span>. This word is one of a
class of expressions frequently used by Eusebius, and which, being
intended as *titles of honor,* like “Excellency,” &c., should, where
possible, be thus rendered. In the present instance it is applied to the
heads of the churches collectively.—*Bag.*\] More probably in this case
it is not the title, but means “your sagacity.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIX](2010538.md)
