[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010096)  [Next](2010098.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.viii.xxviii"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxviii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.viii.xxviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXVIII.—</span>*Cerinthus the
Heresiarch.*

<span id="iii.viii.xxviii-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.viii.xxviii-p2.1"></span>We</span> have understood that at this
time Cerinthus, <span id="fr_833"></span>[834](#fn_833.md) the author of
another heresy, made his appearance. Caius, whose words we quoted
above, <span id="fr_834"></span>[835](#fn_834.md) in the Disputation which
is ascribed to him, writes as follows concerning this man:

<span id="iii.viii.xxviii-p5"></span>2. “But Cerinthus also, by means of
revelations which he pretends were written by a great apostle, brings
before us marvelous things which he falsely claims were shown him by
angels; and he says that after the resurrection the kingdom of Christ
will be set up on earth, and that the flesh dwelling in Jerusalem will
again be subject to desires and pleasures. And being an enemy of the
Scriptures of God, he asserts, with the purpose of deceiving men, that
there is to be a period of a thousand years <span
id="fr_835"></span>[836](#fn_835.md) for marriage festivals.” <span
id="fr_836"></span>[837](#fn_836.md)

<span id="iii.viii.xxviii-p8"></span>3. And Dionysius, <span
id="fr_837"></span>[838](#fn_837.md) who was bishop of the parish of
Alexandria in our day, in the second book of his work On the Promises,
where he says some things concerning the Apocalypse of John which he
draws from tradition, mentions this same man in the following
words: <span id="fr_838"></span>[839](#fn_838.md)

<span id="iii.viii.xxviii-p11"></span>4. “But (they say that) Cerinthus,
who founded the sect which was called, after him, the Cerinthian,
desiring reputable authority for his fiction, prefixed the name. For the
doctrine which he taught was this: that the kingdom of Christ will be an
<span id="page_161">p. 161</span> <span
id="iii.viii.xxviii-Page_161"></span>earthly one.

<span id="iii.viii.xxviii-p12"></span>5. And as he was himself devoted
to the pleasures of the body and altogether sensual in his nature, he
dreamed that that kingdom would consist in those things which he
desired, namely, in the delights of the belly and of sexual passion,
that is to say, in eating and drinking and marrying, and in festivals
and sacrifices and the slaying of victims, under the guise of which he
thought he could indulge his appetites with a better grace.”

<span id="iii.viii.xxviii-p13"></span>6. These are the words of
Dionysius. But Irenæus, in the first book of his work Against
Heresies, <span id="fr_839"></span>[840](#fn_839.md) gives some more
abominable false doctrines of the same man, and in the third book
relates a story which deserves to be recorded. He says, on the authority
of Polycarp, that the apostle John once entered a bath to bathe; but,
learning that Cerinthus was within, he sprang from the place and rushed
out of the door, for he could not bear to remain under the same roof
with him. And he advised those that were with him to do the same,
saying, “Let us flee, lest the bath fall; for Cerinthus, the enemy of
the truth, is within.” <span id="fr_840"></span>[841](#fn_840.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_833"></span>[160:834](2010097.htm#fr_833.md) <span
id="iii.viii.xxviii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxviii-p3"></span> The earliest account which we have
of Cerinthus is that of Irenæus (*Adv. Hær.* I. 26. 1; cf. III. 3. 4,
quoted at the end of this chapter, and 11. 1), according to which
Cerinthus, a man educated in the wisdom of the Egyptians, taught that
the world was not made by the supreme God, but by a certain power
distinct from him. He denied the supernatural birth of Jesus, making him
the son of Joseph and Mary, and distinguishing him from Christ, who
descended upon him at baptism and left him again at his crucifixion. He
was thus Ebionitic in his Christology, but Gnostic in his doctrine of
the creation. He claimed no supernatural power for himself as did Simon
Magus and Menander, but pretended to angelic revelations, as recorded by
Caius in this paragraph. Irenæus (who is followed by Hippolytus, VII. 21
and X. 17) says nothing of his chiliastic views, but these are mentioned
by Caius in the present paragraph, by Dionysius (quoted by Eusebius,
VII. 25, below), by Theodoret (*Hær. Fab.* II. 3), and by Augustine (*De
Hær.* I. 8), from which accounts we can see that those views were very
sensual. The fullest description which we have of Cerinthus and his
followers is that of Epiphanius (*Hær.* XXVIII.), who records a great
many traditions as to his life (e.g. that he was one of the false
apostles who opposed Paul, and one of the circumcision who rebuked Peter
for eating with Cornelius, &c.), and also many details as to his system,
some of which are quite contradictory. It is clear, however, that he was
Jewish in his training and sympathies, while at the same time possessed
of Gnostic tendencies. He represents a position of transition from
Judaistic Ebionism to Gnosticism, and may be regarded as the earliest
Judaizing Gnostic. Of his death tradition tells us nothing, and as to
his dates we can say only that he lived about the end of the first
century. Irenæus (III. 2. 1) supposed John to have written his gospel
and epistle in opposition to Cerinthus. On the other hand, Cerinthus
himself was regarded by some as the author of the Apocalypse (see Bk.
VII. chap. 25, below), and most absurdly as the author of the Fourth
Gospel also (see above, chap. 24, note 1).

<span id="fn_834"></span>[160:835](2010097.htm#fr_834.md) <span
id="iii.viii.xxviii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxviii-p4"></span> See Bk. II. chap. 25, §7. Upon
Caius, see the note given there. The *Disputation* is the same that is
quoted in that passage.

<span id="fn_835"></span>[160:836](2010097.htm#fr_835.md) <span
id="iii.viii.xxviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxviii-p6"></span> Cf. [Rev. xx.
4](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#004.md)<span
id="iii.viii.xxviii-p6.1"></span>. On chiliasm in the early Church, see
below, chap. 39, note 19.

<span id="fn_836"></span>[160:837](2010097.htm#fr_836.md) <span
id="iii.viii.xxviii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxviii-p7"></span> It is a commonly accepted opinion
founded upon this passage that Caius rejected the apostolic authorship
of the Apocalypse and considered it a work of Cerinthus. But the
quotation by no means implies this. Had he believed that Cerinthus wrote
the Apocalypse commonly ascribed to John, he would certainly have said
so plainly, and Eusebius would just as certainly have quoted his
opinion, prejudiced as he was himself against the Apocalypse. Caius
simply means that Cerinthus abused and misinterpreted the vision of the
Apocalypse for his own sensual purposes. That this is the meaning is
plain from the words “being an enemy to the Divine Scriptures,” and
especially from the fact that in the Johannine Apocalypse itself occur
no such sensual visions as Caius mentions here. The sensuality was
evidently superimposed by the interpretation of Cerinthus. Cf. Weiss’
*N. T. Einleitung,* p. 82.

<span id="fn_837"></span>[160:838](2010097.htm#fr_837.md) <span
id="iii.viii.xxviii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxviii-p9"></span> Upon Dionysius and his writings,
see below, Bk. VI. chap. 40, note 1.

<span id="fn_838"></span>[160:839](2010097.htm#fr_838.md) <span
id="iii.viii.xxviii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxviii-p10"></span> The same passage is quoted with
its context in Bk. VII. chap. 25, below. The verbs in the portion of the
passage quoted here are all in the infinitive, and we see, from Bk. VII.
chap. 25, that they depend upon an indefinite <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xxviii-p10.1"></span>λέγουσιν</span>, “they say”; so that
Eusebius is quite right here in saying that Dionysius is drawing from
tradition in making the remarks which he does. Inasmuch as the verbs are
not independent, and the statement is not, therefore, Dionysius’ own, I
have inserted, at the beginning of the quotation, the words “they say
that,” which really govern all the verbs of the passage. Dionysius
himself rejected the theory of Cerinthus’ authorship of the Apocalypse,
as may be seen from Bk. VII. chap. 25, §7.

<span id="fn_839"></span>[161:840](2010097.htm#fr_839.md) <span
id="iii.viii.xxviii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxviii-p14"></span> Irenæus, *Adv. Hær.* I. 26. 1.

<span id="fn_840"></span>[161:841](2010097.htm#fr_840.md) <span
id="iii.viii.xxviii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxviii-p15"></span> See *ibid.* III. 3. 4. This story
is repeated by Eusebius, in Bk. IV. chap. 14. There is nothing
impossible in it. The occurrence fits well the character of John as a
“son of thunder,” and shows the same spirit exhibited by Polycarp in his
encounter with Marcion (see below, Bk. IV. chap. 14). But the story is
not very well authenticated, as Irenæus did not himself hear it from
Polycarp, but only from others to whom Polycarp had told it. The
unreliability of such second-hand tradition is illustrated abundantly in
the case of Irenæus himself, who gives some reports, very far from true,
upon the authority of certain presbyters (e.g. that Christ lived fifty
years; II. 22. 5). This same story, with much more fullness of detail,
is repeated by Epiphanius (*Hær.* XXX. 24), but of Ebion (who never
existed), instead of Cerinthus. This shows that the story was a very
common one, while, at the same time, so vague in its details as to admit
of an application to any heretic who suited the purpose. That somebody
met somebody in a bath seems quite probable, and there is nothing to
prevent our accepting the story as it stands in Irenæus, if we choose to
do so. One thing, at least, is certain, that Cerinthus is a historical
character, who in all probability was, for at least a part of his life,
contemporary with John, and thus associated with him in tradition,
whether or not he ever came into personal contact with him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIX](2010098.md)
