[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010203)  [Next](2010205.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xi.xxxiv"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxxiv-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xi.xxxiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXIV.—</span>*Philip Cæsar.*

<span id="iii.xi.xxxiv-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xi.xxxiv-p2.1"></span>Gordianus</span> had been Roman emperor
for six years when Philip, with his son Philip, succeeded him. <span
id="fr_2038"></span>[2039](#fn_2038.md) It is reported that he, being a
Christian, desired, on the day of the last paschal vigil, to share with
the multitude in the prayers of the Church, <span
id="fr_2039"></span>[2040](#fn_2039.md) but that he was not permitted to
enter, by him who then presided, <span
id="fr_2040"></span>[2041](#fn_2040.md) until he had made confession and
had numbered himself among those who were reckoned as transgressors and
who occupied the place of penance. <span
id="fr_2041"></span>[2042](#fn_2041.md) For if he had not done this, he
would never have been received by him, on account of the many crimes
which he had committed. It is said that he obeyed readily, manifesting
in his conduct a genuine and pious fear of God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2038"></span>[278:2039](2010204.htm#fr_2038.md) <span
id="iii.xi.xxxiv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxxiv-p3"></span> The younger Gordian reigned from the
summer of 238 until early in the year 244, when he was murdered by the
soldiers, and succeeded by his prætorian prefect, Philip of Arabia, who
took the name Marcus Julius Philippus, and reigned until 249, when he
was conquered and succeeded by Decius. His son Philip, who was seven
years old at the time of his father’s accession, was immediately
proclaimed Cæsar and afterward given the title of Augustus. He bore the
name Marcus Julius Philippus Severus, and was slain at the time of his
father’s death.

<span id="fn_2039"></span>[278:2040](2010204.htm#fr_2039.md) <span
id="iii.xi.xxxiv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxxiv-p4"></span> There has been much dispute as to
Philip’s relation to Christianity. Eusebius is the first one known to us
to represent him as a Christian, and he gives the report only upon the
authority of oral tradition (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xxxiv-p4.1"></span>τοῦτον κατέχει λόγος χριστιανὸν
ὄντα</span>). Jerome (*de vir. ill.* 54) states explicitly that Philip
was the first Christian emperor (*qui primus de regibus Romanis
christianus fuit*), and this became common tradition in the Church. At
the same time it must be noticed that Eusebius does not himself state
that Philip was a Christian,—he simply records a tradition to that
effect; and in his *Vita Const.* I. 3 he calls Constantine the first
Christian emperor. Little reliance can be placed upon Jerome’s explicit
statement, for he seems only to be repeating as certain what Eusebius
reported as possible. The only things known to us which can or could
have been urged in support of the alleged fact that Philip was a
Christian are his act recorded in this chapter and the letter written to
him by Origen, as recorded in chap. 36. Moreover, it happens to be the
fact that no heathen writer hints that he was a Christian, and we know
that he celebrated games in Rome with pagan rites and great pomp. It
seems, on the whole, probable that Philip showed himself favorable to
Christianity, and perhaps superstitiously desired to gain the favor of
the Christians’ God, and hence went through some such process as
Eusebius describes in this chapter, looking upon it merely as a sort of
sacrifice to be offered to this God as he would offer other sacrifices
to other gods. It is quite conceivable that he may have done this much,
and this would be quite enough to start the report, after his death,
that he had been a Christian secretly, if not openly; and from this to
the tradition that he was unconditionally the first Christian emperor is
but a step. Some ground for the common tradition must be assumed, but
our sources do not warrant us in believing more than has been thus
suggested as possible. For a full discussion of the question, see
Tillemont, *Hist. des Emp.* III. p. 494 sq.

<span id="fn_2040"></span>[278:2041](2010204.htm#fr_2040.md) <span
id="iii.xi.xxxiv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxxiv-p5"></span> Chrysostom (*De St. Bab. c. Gentes.*
Tom. I.) and Leontius of Antioch (quoted in the *Chron. pasch.*)
identify the bishop referred to here with Babylas, bishop of Antioch
(see above, chap. 29, note 8). Eusebius’ silence as to the name of the
bishop looks as if he were ignorant on the matter, but there is nothing
inherently improbable in the identification, which may therefore be
looked upon as very likely correct.

<span id="fn_2041"></span>[278:2042](2010204.htm#fr_2041.md) <span
id="iii.xi.xxxiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxxiv-p6"></span> That is, the place assigned to
penitents: <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xxxiv-p6.1"></span>μετανοίας χώραν</span>. Christians who had
committed flagrant transgressions were excluded from communion and
required to go through a course of penance, more or less severe
according to their offense, before they could be received again into the
Church. In some cases they were excluded entirely from the services for
a certain length of time; in other cases they were allowed to attend a
part of the services, but in no case could they partake of the
communion. In the fourth century a regular system of discipline grew up,
and the penitents (*pœnitentes*) were divided into various
classes,—mourners, hearers, and kneelers; the first of whom were
excluded entirely from the church, while the last two were admitted
during a part of the service. The statement in the present case is of
the most general character. Whether the place which he was obliged to
take was without or within the church is not indicated. Upon the whole
subject of ancient church discipline, see Bingham’s *Antiquities,* Bk.
XVI., and the article *Penitence* in Smith’s *Dict. of Christian Antiq.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXV](2010205.md)
