[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010016)  [Next](2010018.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iii.ii.i"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.i-p1"></span> <span class="c29"><span
id="iii.iii.ii.i-p1.1"></span>Chapter II</span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.i-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.iii.ii.i-p2.1"></span>The Writings of Eusebius.</span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.i-p3"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.iii.ii.i-p3.1"></span>§1.</span> *Eusebius as a Writer*

<span id="iii.iii.ii.i-p4"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.iii.ii.i-p4.1"></span>Eusebius</span> was one of the most
voluminous writers of antiquity, and his labors covered almost every
field of theological learning. In the words of Lightfoot he was
“historian, apologist, topographer, exegete, critic, preacher, dogmatic
writer, in turn.” It is as an historian that he is best known, but the
importance of his historical writings should not cause us to overlook,
as modern scholars have been prone to do, his invaluable productions in
other departments. Lightfoot passes a very just judgment upon the
importance of his works in the following words: “If the permanent
utility of an author’s labors may be taken as a test of literary
excellence, Eusebius will hold a very high place indeed. The
*Ecclesiastical History* is absolutely unique and indispensable. The
*Chronicle* is the vast storehouse of information relating to the
ancient monarchies of the world. The *Preparation* and *Demonstration*
are the most important contributions to theology in their own province.
Even the minor works, such as the *Martyrs of Palestine*, the *Life of
Constantine,* the *Questions addressed to Stephanus and to Marinus*, and
others, would leave an irreparable blank, if they were obliterated. And
the same permanent value attaches also to his more technical treatises.
The *Canons* and *Sections* have never yet been superseded for their
particular purpose. The *Topography of Palestine* is the most important
contribution to our knowledge in its own department. In short, no
ancient ecclesiastical writer has laid posterity under heavier
obligations.”

<span id="iii.iii.ii.i-p5"></span>If we look in Eusebius’ works for
evidences of brilliant genius we shall be disappointed. He did not
possess a great creative mind like Origen’s or Augustine’s. His claim to
greatness rests upon his vast erudition and his sterling sense. His
powers of acquisition were remarkable and his diligence in study
unwearied. He had at his command undoubtedly more acquired material than
any man of his age, and he possessed that true literary and historical
instinct which enabled him to select from his vast stores of knowledge
those things which it was most worth his while to tell to the world. His
writings therefore remain valuable while the works of many others,
perhaps no less richly equipped than himself for the mission of adding
to the sum of human knowledge, are entirely forgotten. He thus had the
ability to do more than acquire; he had the ability to impart to others
the very best of that which he acquired, and to make it useful to them.
There is not in his writings the brilliancy which we find in some
others, there is not the same sparkle and freshness of new and
suggestive thought, there is not the same impress of an overmastering
individuality which transforms everything it touches. There is, however,
a true and solid merit which marks his works almost without exception,
and raises them above the commonplace. His exegesis is superior to that
of most of his contemporaries, and his apologetics is marked by fairness
of statement, breadth of treatment, and instinctive appreciation of the
difference between the important and the unimportant points under
discussion, which give to his apologetic works a <span id="page_27">p.
27</span> <span id="iii.iii.ii.i-Page_27"></span>permanent value. His
wide acquaintance, too, with other systems than his own, and with the
products of Pagan as well as Christian thought, enabled him to see
things in their proper relations and to furnish a treatment of the great
themes of Christianity adapted to the wants of those who had looked
beyond the confines of a single school. At the same time it must be
acknowledged that he was not always equal to the grand opportunities
which his acquaintance with the works and lives of other men and other
peoples opened before him. He does not always reveal the possession of
that high quality of genius which is able to interpret the most various
forces and to discover the higher principles of unity which alone make
them intelligible; indeed, he often loses himself completely in a
wilderness of thoughts and notions which have come to him from other men
and other ages, and the result is dire confusion.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.i-p6"></span>We shall be disappointed, too, if we
seek in the works of Eusebius for evidences of a refined literary taste,
or for any of the charms which attach to the writings of a great master
of composition. His style is, as a rule, involved and obscure, often
painfully rambling and incoherent. This quality is due in large part to
the desultoriness of his thinking. He did not often enough clearly
define and draw the boundaries of his subject before beginning to write
upon it. He apparently did much of his thinking after he had taken pen
in hand, and did not subject what he had thus produced to a sufficiently
careful revision, if to any revision at all. Thoughts and suggestions
poured in upon him while he was writing; and he was not always able to
resist the temptation to insert them as they came, often to the utter
perversion of his train of thought, and to the ruin of the coherency and
perspicuity of his style. It must be acknowledged, too, that his
literary taste was, on the whole, decidedly vicious. Whenever a flight
of eloquence is attempted by him, as it is altogether too often, his
style becomes hopelessly turgid and pretentious. At such times his skill
in mixing metaphors is something astounding (compare, for instance, *H.
E*. II. 14). On the other hand, his works contain not a few passages of
real beauty. This is especially true of his *Martyrs of Palestine*,
where his enthusiastic admiration for and deep sympathy with the heroes
of the faith cause him often to forget himself and to describe their
sufferings in language of genuine fire or pathos. At times, too, when he
has a sharply defined and absorbing aim in mind, and when the subject
with which he is dealing does not seem to him to demand rhetorical
adornment, he is simple and direct enough in his language, showing in
such cases that his commonly defective style is not so much the
consequence of an inadequate command of the Greek tongue as of desultory
thinking and vicious literary taste.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.i-p7"></span>But while we find much to criticise in
Eusebius’ writings, we ought not to fail to give him due credit for the
conscientiousness and faithfulness with which he did his work. He wrote
often, it is true, too rapidly for the good of his style, and he did not
always revise his works as carefully as he should have done; but we
seldom detect undue haste in the collection of materials or carelessness
and negligence in the use of them. He seems to have felt constantly the
responsibilities which rested upon him as a scholar and writer, and to
have done his best to meet those responsibilities. It is impossible to
avoid contrasting him in this respect with the most learned man of the
ancient Latin Church, St. Jerome. The haste and carelessness with which
the latter composed his *De Viris Illustribus*, and with which he
translated and continued Eusebius’ *Chronicle*, remain an everlasting
disgrace to him. An examination of those and of some others of Jerome’s
works must tend to raise Eusebius greatly in our esteem. He was at least
conscientious and honest in his work, and never allowed himself to palm
off ignorance as knowledge, or to deceive his readers by sophistries,
misstatements, and pure inventions. He aimed to put the reader into
possession of the knowledge which he had himself acquired, but was
always conscientious enough to stop there, and not attempt to make fancy
play the *rôle* of fact.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.i-p8"></span>One other point, which was mentioned
some pages back, and to which Lightfoot calls particular attention,
should be referred to here, because of its bearing upon the character of
Eusebius’ writings. He was, above all things, an apologist; and the
apologetic aim governed both the selection of his subjects and method of
his treatment. He composed none of his works with a <span
id="page_28">p. 28</span> <span id="iii.iii.ii.i-Page_28"></span>purely
scientific aim. He thought always of the practical result to be
attained, and his selection of material and his choice of method were
governed by that. And yet we must recognize the fact that this aim was
never narrowing in its effects. He took a broad view of apologetics, and
in his lofty conception of the Christian religion he believed that every
field of knowledge might be laid under tribute to it. He was bold enough
to be confident that history, philosophy, and science all contribute to
our understanding and appreciation of divine truth; and so history and
philosophy and science were studied and handled by him freely and
fearlessly. He did not feel the need of distorting truth of any kind
because it might work injury to the religion which he professed. On the
contrary, he had a sublime faith which led him to believe that all truth
must have its place and its mission, and that the cause of Christianity
will be benefited by its discovery and diffusion. As an apologist,
therefore, all fields of knowledge had an interest for him; and he was
saved that pettiness of mind and narrowness of outlook which are
sometimes characteristic of those who write with a purely practical
motive.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 2](2010018.md)
