[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010289)  [Next](2010291.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xv.v"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.v-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xv.v-p1.1"></span>Chapter V.—</span>*The Forged Acts.*

<span id="iii.xv.v-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xv.v-p2.1"></span>Having</span> therefore forged Acts of
Pilate <span id="fr_2730"></span>[2731](#fn_2730.md) and our Saviour full
of every kind of blasphemy against Christ, they sent them with the
emperor’s approval to the whole of the empire subject to him, with
written commands that they should be openly posted to the view of all in
every place, both in country and city, and that the schoolmasters should
give them to their scholars, instead of their customary lessons, to be
studied and learned by heart.

<span id="iii.xv.v-p4"></span>2. While these things were taking place,
another military commander, whom the Romans call Dux, <span
id="fr_2731"></span>[2732](#fn_2731.md) seized some infamous women in the
market-place at Damascus in Phœnicia, <span
id="fr_2732"></span>[2733](#fn_2732.md) and by threatening to inflict
tortures upon them compelled them to make a written declaration that
<span id="page_360">p. 360</span> <span
id="iii.xv.v-Page_360"></span>they had once been Christians and that
they were acquainted with their impious deeds,—that in their very
churches they committed licentious acts; and they uttered as many other
slanders against our religion as he wished them to. Having taken down
their words in writing, he communicated them to the emperor, who
commanded that these documents also should be published in every place
and city.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2730"></span>[359:2731](2010290.htm#fr_2730.md) <span
id="iii.xv.v-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.v-p3"></span> These Acts are no longer extant, but
their character can be gathered from this chapter. They undoubtedly
contained the worst calumnies against Christ’s moral and religious
character. They cannot have been very skillful forgeries, for Eusebius,
in Bk. I. chap. 9, above, points out a palpable chronological blunder
which stamped them as fictitious on their very face. And yet they
doubtless answered every purpose; for few of the heathen would be in a
position to detect such an error, and perhaps fewer still would care to
expose it if they discovered it. These Acts are of course to be
distinguished from the numerous *Acta Pilati* which proceeded from
Christian sources (see above, Bk. II. chap. 2, note 1). The way in which
these Acts were employed was diabolical in its very shrewdness.
Certainly there was no more effectual way of checking the spread of
Christianity than systematically and persistently to train up the youth
of the empire to look with contempt and disgust upon the founder of
Christianity, the Christian’s Saviour and Lord. Incalculable mischief
must inevitably have been produced had Maximin’s reign lasted for a
number of years. As it was, we can imagine the horror of the Christians
at this new and sacrilegious artifice of the enemy. Mason assigns “the
crowning, damning honor of this masterstroke” to Theotecnus, but I am
unable to find any proof that he was the author of the documents. It is,
of course, not impossible nor improbable that he was; but had Eusebius
known him to be the author, he would certainly have informed us. As it
is, his statement is entirely indefinite, and the Acts are not brought
into any connection with Theotecnus.

<span id="fn_2731"></span>[359:2732](2010290.htm#fr_2731.md) <span
id="iii.xv.v-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.v-p5"></span> The commandant of the Roman garrison in
Damascus.

<span id="fn_2732"></span>[359:2733](2010290.htm#fr_2732.md) <span
id="iii.xv.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.v-p6"></span> Damascus, from the time of Hadrian
(according to Spruner-Menke), or of Severus (according to Mommsen), was
the capital of the newly formed province of Syria-Phœnice, or
Syro-Phœnicia.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI](2010291.md)
