[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010160)  [Next](2010162.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.x.xxi"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxi-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.x.xxi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XX.—</span>*The Writings of Irenæus
against the Schismatics at Rome.*

<span id="iii.x.xxi-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.x.xxi-p2.1"></span>Irenæus <span
id="fr_1660"></span>[1661](#fn_1660.md) </span> wrote several letters
against those who were disturbing the sound ordinance of the Church at
Rome. One of them was to Blastus On Schism; <span
id="fr_1661"></span>[1662](#fn_1661.md) another to Florinus <span
id="page_238">p. 238</span> <span id="iii.x.xxi-Page_238"></span>On
Monarchy, <span id="fr_1662"></span>[1663](#fn_1662.md) or That God is not
the Author of Evil. For Florinus seemed to be defending this opinion.
And because he was being drawn away by the error of Valentinus, Irenæus
wrote his work On the Ogdoad, <span id="fr_1663"></span>[1664](#fn_1663.md)
in which he shows that he himself had been acquainted with the first
successors of the apostles. <span id="fr_1664"></span>[1665](#fn_1664.md)

<span id="iii.x.xxi-p9"></span>2. At the close of the treatise we have
found a most beautiful note which we are constrained to insert in this
work. <span id="fr_1665"></span>[1666](#fn_1665.md) It runs as follows:

<span id="iii.x.xxi-p11"></span>“I adjure thee who mayest copy this
book, by our Lord Jesus Christ, and by his glorious advent when he comes
to judge the living and the dead, to compare what thou shalt write, and
correct it carefully by this manuscript, and also to write this
adjuration, and place it in the copy.”

<span id="iii.x.xxi-p12"></span>3. These things may be profitably read
in his work, and related by us, that we may have those ancient and truly
holy men as the best example of painstaking carefulness.

<span id="iii.x.xxi-p13"></span>4. In the letter to Florinus, of which
we have spoken, <span id="fr_1666"></span>[1667](#fn_1666.md) Irenæus
mentions again his intimacy with Polycarp, saying:

<span id="iii.x.xxi-p15"></span>“These doctrines, O Florinus, to speak
mildly, are not of sound judgment. These doctrines disagree with the
Church, and drive into the greatest impiety those who accept them. These
doctrines, not even the heretics outside of the Church, have ever dared
to publish. These doctrines, the presbyters who were before us, and who
were companions of the apostles, did not deliver to thee.

<span id="iii.x.xxi-p16"></span>5. “For when I was a boy, I saw thee in
lower Asia with Polycarp, moving in splendor in the royal court, <span
id="fr_1667"></span>[1668](#fn_1667.md) and endeavoring to gain his
approbation.

<span id="iii.x.xxi-p18"></span>6. I remember the events of that time
more clearly than those of recent years. For what boys learn, growing
with their mind, becomes joined with it; so that I am able to describe
the very place in which the blessed Polycarp sat as he discoursed, and
his goings out and his comings in, and the man<span id="page_239">p.
239</span> <span id="iii.x.xxi-Page_239"></span>ner of his life, and his
physical appearance, and his discourses to the people, and the accounts
which he gave of his intercourse with John and with the others who had
seen the Lord. And as he remembered their words, and what he heard from
them concerning the Lord, and concerning his miracles and his teaching,
having received them from eyewitnesses of the ‘Word of life,’ <span
id="fr_1668"></span>[1669](#fn_1668.md) Polycarp related all things in
harmony with the Scriptures.

<span id="iii.x.xxi-p20"></span>7. These things being told me by the
mercy of God, I listened to them attentively, noting them down, not on
paper, but in my heart. And continually, through God’s grace, I recall
them faithfully. And I am able to bear witness before God that if that
blessed and apostolic presbyter had heard any such thing, he would have
cried out, and stopped his ears, and as was his custom, would have
exclaimed, O good God, unto what times hast thou spared me that I should
endure these things? And he would have fled from the place where,
sitting or standing, he had heard such words. <span
id="fr_1669"></span>[1670](#fn_1669.md)

<span id="iii.x.xxi-p22"></span>8. And this can be shown plainly from
the letters <span id="fr_1670"></span>[1671](#fn_1670.md) which he sent,
either to the neighboring churches for their confirmation, or to some of
the brethren, admonishing and exhorting them.” Thus far Irenæus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1660"></span>[237:1661](2010161.htm#fr_1660.md) <span
id="iii.x.xxi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxi-p3"></span> On Irenæus, see Bk. IV. chap. 21, note
9.

<span id="fn_1661"></span>[237:1662](2010161.htm#fr_1661.md) <span
id="iii.x.xxi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxi-p4"></span> Eusebius, in chap. 15, informs us that
both Blastus and Florinus drew many away from the church of Rome by
their heretical innovations. He does not tell us either there or here
the nature of the opinions which Blastus held, but from
Pseudo-Tertullian’s *Adv. omnes Hær.* chap. 8, we learn that Blastus was
a Quartodeciman. (“In addition to all these, there is likewise Blastus,
who would latently introduce Judaism. For he says the passover is not to
be kept otherwise than according to the law of Moses, on the fourteenth
of the month.”) From Pacianus’ *Epistola ad Sympronian. de catholico
nomine,* chap. 2, we learn that he was a Montanist; and since the
Montanists of Asia Minor were, like the other Christians of that region,
Quartodecimans, it is not surprising that Blastus should be at the same
time a Montanist and a Quartodeciman. Florinus, as will be shown in the
next note, taught his heresies while Victor was bishop of Rome (189–198
or 199); and since Eusebius connects Blastus so closely with him, we may
conclude that Blastus flourished at about the same time. Irenæus’
epistle to Blastus, *On Schism,* is no longer extant. A Syriac fragment
of an epistle of Irenæus, addressed to “an Alexandrian,” on the paschal
question (Fragment 27 in Harvey’s edition) is possibly a part of this
lost epistle. If the one referred to in this fragment be Blastus, he was
an Alexandrian, and in that case must have adopted the Quartodeciman
position under the influence of the Asiatic Montanists, for the paschal
calendar of the Alexandrian church was the same as that of Rome (see the
*Dict. of Christ. Biog.* III. p. 264). If Blastus was a Montanist, as
stated by Pacianus, his heresy was quite different from that of Florinus
(who was a Gnostic); and the fact that they were leaders of different
heresies is confirmed by the words of Eusebius in chap. 15, above: “Each
one striving to introduce *his own* innovations in respect to the
truth.” Whether Blastus, like Florinus, was a presbyter, and like him
was deposed from his office, we do not know, but the words of Eusebius
in chap. 15 seem to favor this supposition.

<span id="fn_1662"></span>[238:1663](2010161.htm#fr_1662.md) <span
id="iii.x.xxi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxi-p5"></span> Florinus, as we learn from chap. 15, was
for a time a presbyter of the Roman Church, but lost his office on
account of heresy. From the fragment of this epistle of Irenæus to
Florinus quoted by Eusebius just below, we learn that Florinus was
somewhat older than Irenæus, but like him a disciple of Polycarp. The
title of this epistle shows that Florinus was already a Gnostic, or at
least inclined toward Gnostic views. Eusebius evidently had no direct
knowledge of the opinions of Florinus on the origin of evil, for he says
that he *appeared* to maintain (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xxi-p5.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xxi-p5.2"></span>δόκει προασπίζειν</span>) the opinion that
God was the author of evil. Eusebius’ conclusion is accepted by most
ancient and modern writers, but it is suggested by Salmon (*Dict. of
Christ. Biog.* II. 544) that Eusebius was perhaps mistaken, “for, since
the characteristic of dualism is not to make God the author of evil, but
to clear him from the charge by ascribing evil to an independent origin,
the title would lead us to think that the letter was directed, not
against one who had himself held God to be the author of evil, but
against one who had charged the doctrine of a single first principle
with necessarily leading to this conclusion. And we should have supposed
that the object of Irenæus was to show that it was possible to assert
God to be the sole origin and ruler of the universe, without holding
evil to be his work.” Since Eusebius had seen the epistle of Irenæus to
Florinus, it is difficult to understand how he can have misconceived
Florinus’ position. At the same time, he does not state it with
positiveness; and the fact that Florinus, if not already, certainly was
soon afterward a Valentinian, and hence a dualist, makes Salmon’s
supposition very plausible. Florinus is not mentioned in Irenæus’ great
work against heresies, nor by Tertullian, Pseudo-Tertullian, Hippolytus,
or Epiphanius. It is probable, therefore, that he was not named in
Hippolytus’ earlier work, nor in the lectures of Irenæus which formed
the groundwork (see Salmon, *l.c.*). The silence of Irenæus is easily
explained by supposing Florinus’ fall into heresy to have taken place
after the composition of his lectures against heresies and of his great
work; and the silence of the later writers is probably due to the fact
that Irenæus’ work makes no mention of him and that, whatever his
influence may have been during his lifetime, it did not last, and hence
his name attracted no particular attention after his death.

<span id="iii.x.xxi-p6"></span>It has been maintained by some (e.g.
Lightfoot in the *Contemporary Review,* 1875, p. 834) that this epistle
to Florinus was one of the earliest of Irenæus’ writings but Lipsius
(*Dict. of Christ. Biog.* III. 263) has given other and satisfactory
reasons for thinking that Florinus’ heresy, and therefore Irenæus’
epistle and his work *On the Ogdoad,* belonged to the time of Victor,
and hence were later than the work *Against Heresies.* A Syriac fragment
of an epistle concerning Florinus, addressed by Irenæus to Victor
(Harvey’s edition, Fragm. 28), is extant, and supports Lipsius’
conclusion. It would seem that Irenæus, subsequent to the writing of his
great work, learning that Florinus was holding heretical opinions on the
origin of evil, addressed him the epistle mentioned in this chapter.
That afterward, Florinus having embraced Valentinianism, and having
written “an abominable book” (as the fragment just referred to says),
Irenæus wrote his work *On the Ogdoad,* and subsequently addressed his
epistle to Victor, calling upon him to take decisive measures against
Florinus, now seen to be a regular heretic. What was the result of
Irenæus’ epistles and book we do not know; we hear nothing more about
the matter, nor do we know anything more about Florinus (for Augustine’s
mention of Florinus as the founder of a sect of Floriniani is a mistake;
see Salmon, *l.c.*).

<span id="fn_1663"></span>[238:1664](2010161.htm#fr_1663.md) <span
id="iii.x.xxi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxi-p7"></span> This treatise, *On the Ogdoad,* is no
longer extant, though it is probable that we have a few fragments of it
(see Harvey, I. clxvi.). The importance which Irenæus attached to this
work is seen from the solemn adjuration with which he closed it. It must
have been largely identical in substance with the portions of his *Adv.
Hær.* which deal with the æons of the Valentinians. It may have been
little more than an enlargement of those portions of the earlier work.
The Ogdoad (Greek, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xxi-p7.1"></span>ὀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xxi-p7.2"></span>γδόας</span>, a word signifying primarily a
thing in eight parts) occupied a prominent place in the speculations of
the Gnostics. Valentinus taught eight primary æons, in four pairs, as
the root and origin of the other æons and of all beings. These eight he
called the first or primary Ogdoad; and hence a work upon the Ogdoad,
written against a Valentinian, must, of course, be a general discussion
of the Valentinian doctrine of the æons. The word Ogdoad was not used by
all the Gnostics in the same sense. It was quite commonly employed to
denote the supercelestial region which lay above the seven planetary
spheres (or Hebdomad), and hence above the control of the seven angels
who severally presided over these spheres. In the Valentinian system a
higher sphere, the Pleroma, the abode of the æons, was added, and the
supercelestial sphere, the Ogdoad of the other systems, was commonly
called the Mesotes. or middle region. For further particulars in regard
to the Ogdoad, see Salmon’s articles *Hebdomad* and *Ogdoad* in the
*Dict. of Christ. Biog.*

<span id="fn_1664"></span>[238:1665](2010161.htm#fr_1664.md) <span
id="iii.x.xxi-p7.3"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxi-p8"></span> Literally, “in which he shows that he
himself had seized upon (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xxi-p8.1"></span>κατειληφέναι</span>) the first succession
(<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.x.xxi-p8.2"></span>διαδοχήν</span>)
of the apostles.” In order to emphasize the fact that he was teaching
true doctrine, he pointed out, as he did so often elsewhere, the
circumstance that he was personally acquainted with disciples of the
apostles.

<span id="fn_1665"></span>[238:1666](2010161.htm#fr_1665.md) <span
id="iii.x.xxi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxi-p10"></span> It was not at all uncommon for
copyists, both by accident and by design, to make changes, often
serious, in copying books. We have an instance of intentional
alterations mentioned in Bk. IV. chap. 23. It is not at all strange,
therefore, that such an adjuration should be attached to a work which
its author considered especially liable to corruption, or whose accurate
transcription be regarded as peculiarly important. Compare the warning
given in <span id="iii.x.xxi-p10.1"></span>[Rev.
22:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#018.md),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#019.md)<span id="iii.x.xxi-p10.2"></span>.
The fragments from Irenæus’ works preserved in this chapter are
translated in the *Ante-Nicene Fathers,* I. p. 568 sq.

<span id="fn_1666"></span>[238:1667](2010161.htm#fr_1666.md) <span
id="iii.x.xxi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxi-p14"></span> The epistle *On Monarchy* mentioned at
the beginning of this chapter.

<span id="fn_1667"></span>[238:1668](2010161.htm#fr_1667.md) <span
id="iii.x.xxi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxi-p17"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xxi-p17.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xxi-p17.2"></span>ν τῇ βασιλικῇ αὐλῇ</span>. This expression
is a little puzzling, as the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xxi-p17.3"></span>βασιλική</span> implies the imperial court,
and could not properly be used of the provincial court of the proconsul.
No sojourn of an emperor in Asia Minor is known which will meet the
chronology of the case; and hence Lightfoot (*Contemporary Review* May,
1875, p. 834) has offered the plausible suggestion that the words may
have been loosely employed to denote the court of Titus Aurelius Fulvus,
who was proconsul of Asia about 136 <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.x.xxi-p17.4"></span>a.d.</span>, and afterward became the
emperor Antoninus Pius.

<span id="fn_1668"></span>[239:1669](2010161.htm#fr_1668.md) <span
id="iii.x.xxi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxi-p19"></span> [1 John i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#001.md)<span id="iii.x.xxi-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1669"></span>[239:1670](2010161.htm#fr_1669.md) <span
id="iii.x.xxi-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxi-p21"></span> This would have been quite like
Polycarp, who appears to have had a special horror of heretics. Compare
his words to Marcion, quoted above, in Bk. IV. chap. 14. He seems to
have inherited this horror from John the apostle, if Irenæus’ account is
to be believed; see *Adv. Hær.* III. 3, 4, quoted by Eusebius in Bk.
III. chap. 28, and in Bk. IV. chap. 14.

<span id="fn_1670"></span>[239:1671](2010161.htm#fr_1670.md) <span
id="iii.x.xxi-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxi-p23"></span> We know of only one epistle by
Polycarp, that to the Philippians, which is still extant. Upon his life
and epistle, see Bk. IV. chap. 14, notes 5 and 16.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXI](2010162.md)
