[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010692)  [Next](2010694) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iv.viii.iv-p1.1"></span>Chapter III.</span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iv.viii.iv-p2.1"></span>And</span> gladly does he accept and welcome
this sacrifice, and commend the presenter of so august and noble an
offering, by protracting his reign to a lengthened period of years,
giving larger proofs of his beneficence in proportion to the emperor’s
holy services to himself. Accordingly he permits him to celebrate each
successive festival during great and general prosperity throughout the
empire, advancing one of his sons, at the recurrence of each decennial
period, to a share of his own imperial power. <span
id="fr_3505"></span>[3506](#fn_3505)

<span id="iv.viii.iv-p4"></span>2. The eldest, who bears his father’s
name, he received as his partner in the empire about the close of the
first decade of his reign: the second, next in point of age, at the
second; and the third in like manner at the third decennial period, the
occasion of this our present festival. And now that the fourth period
has commenced, and the time of his reign is still further prolonged, he
desires to extend his imperial authority by calling still more of his
kindred to partake his power; and, by the appointment of the
Cæsars, <span id="fr_3506"></span>[3507](#fn_3506) fulfills the
predictions of the holy prophets, according to what they uttered ages
before: “And the saints of the Most High shall take the kingdom.” <span
id="fr_3507"></span>[3508](#fn_3507)

<span id="iv.viii.iv-p7"></span>3. And thus the Almighty Sovereign
himself accords an increase both of years and of children to our most
pious emperor, and renders his sway over the nations of the world still
fresh and flourishing, as though it were even now springing up in its
earliest vigor. He it is who appoints him this present festival, in that
he has made him victorious over every enemy that disturbed his peace: he
it is who displays him as an example of true godliness to the human
race.

<span id="iv.viii.iv-p8"></span>4. And thus our emperor, like the
radiant sun, illuminates the most distant subjects of his empire through
the presence of the Cæsars, as with the far piercing rays of his own
brightness. To us who occupy the eastern regions he has given a son
worthy of himself; <span id="fr_3508"></span>[3509](#fn_3508) a second
and a third respectively to other departments of his empire, to be, as
it were, brilliant reflectors of the light which proceeds from himself.
Once more, having harnessed, as it were, under the self-same yoke the
four most noble Cæsars <span id="fr_3509"></span>[3510](#fn_3509) as
horses in the imperial chariot, he sits on high and directs their course
by the reins of holy harmony and concord; and, himself every where
present, and observant of every event, thus traverses every region of
the world.

<span id="iv.viii.iv-p11"></span>5. Lastly, invested as he is with a
semblance of heavenly sovereignty, he directs his gaze above, and frames
his earthly government according to the pattern of that Divine original,
feeling strength in its conformity to the monarchy of God. And this
conformity is granted by the universal Sovereign to man alone of the
creatures of this earth: for he only is the author of sovereign power,
who decrees that all should be subject to the rule of one.

<span id="iv.viii.iv-p12"></span>6. And surely monarchy far transcends
every other constitution and form of government: for that democratic
equality of power, which is its opposite, may rather be described as
anarchy and disorder. Hence there is one God, and not two, or three, or
more: for to assert a plurality of gods is plainly to deny the being of
God at all. There is one Sovereign; and his Word and royal Law is one: a
Law not expressed in syllables and words, not written or engraved on
tablets, and therefore subject to the ravages of time; but the living
and self-subsisting Word, who himself is God, and who administers his
Father’s kingdom on behalf of all who are after him and subject to his
power.

<span id="iv.viii.iv-p13"></span>7. His attendants are the heavenly
hosts; the myriads of God’s angelic ministers; the super-terrestrial
armies, of unnumbered multitude; and those unseen spirits within heaven
itself, whose agency is employed in regulating the order of this world.
Ruler and chief of all these is the royal Word, acting as Regent of the
Supreme Sovereign. To him the names of Captain, and great High Priest,
Prophet of the Father, Angel of mighty counsel, Brightness of the
Father’s light, Only begotten Son, with a thousand other titles, are
ascribed in the oracles of the sacred writers. And the Father, having
constituted him the living Word, and Law and Wisdom, the fullness of all
blessing, has presented this best and greatest gift to all who are the
subjects of his sovereignty.

<span id="iv.viii.iv-p14"></span>8. And he himself, who pervades all
things, and is every where present, unfolding his Father’s bounties to
all with unsparing hand, has accorded a specimen of his sov<span
id="page_585">p. 585</span> <span id="iv.viii.iv-Page_585"></span>ereign
power even to his rational creatures of this earth, in that he has
provided the mind of man, who is formed after his own image, with Divine
faculties, whence it is capable of other virtues also, which flow from
the same heavenly source. For he only is wise, who is the only God: he
only is essentially good: he only is of mighty power, the Parent of
justice, the Father of reason and wisdom, the Fountain of light and
life, the Dispenser of truth and virtue: in a word, the Author of empire
itself, and of all dominion and power.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3505"></span>[584:3506](2010693.htm#fr_3505) <span
id="iv.viii.iv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv-p3"></span> A general statement, such as Eusebius
is fond of making. The elevation of his sons was about these times, but
not on them exactly. Compare Prolegomena, *Life.*

<span id="fn_3506"></span>[584:3507](2010693.htm#fr_3506) <span
id="iv.viii.iv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv-p5"></span> \[Dalmatius and
Hanniballianus.—*Bag.*\]

<span id="fn_3507"></span>[584:3508](2010693.htm#fr_3507) <span
id="iv.viii.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv-p6"></span> \[[Dan. vii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#018)<span id="iv.viii.iv-p6.1"></span>.
It is surely needless to remark on so singular and vicious an
application of Scripture as this, further than that it is either a
culpable rhetorical flourish, or else an indication of a lamentable
defect of spiritual intelligence in the most learned writer of the
fourth century.—*Bag.*\] “But the saints of the Most High shall receive
the kingdom.”—*Revised Version.*

<span id="fn_3508"></span>[584:3509](2010693.htm#fr_3508) <span
id="iv.viii.iv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv-p9"></span> \[Constantius Cæsar.—*Bag.*\]

<span id="fn_3509"></span>[584:3510](2010693.htm#fr_3509) <span
id="iv.viii.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv-p10"></span> Compare Prolegomena, under *Life.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV](2010694)
