[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010013)  [Next](2010015) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iii.i.viii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.i.viii-p1"></span> §8. *Eusebius and Marcellus*.

<span id="iii.iii.i.viii-p2"></span>It was during this visit to
Constantinople that another synod was held, at which Eusebius was
present, and the result of which was the condemnation and deposition of
the bishop Marcellus of Ancyra (see Socrates, I. 36; Sozomen, II. 33;
Eusebius, *Contra Marc*. II. 4). The attitude of our Eusebius toward
Marcellus is again significant of his theological tendencies. Marcellus
had written a book against Asterius, a prominent Arian, in which, in his
zeal for the Nicene orthodoxy, he had laid himself open to the charge of
Sabellianism. On this account he was deposed by the Constantinopolitan
Synod, and our Eusebius was urged to write a work exposing his errors
and defending the action of the Council. As a consequence he composed
his two works against Marcellus which will be described later. That
Eusebius, if not in the case of Athanasius and possibly not in that of
Eustathius, had at least in the present case good ground for the belief
that Marcellus was a Sabellian, or Sabellianistic in tendency, is
abundantly proved by the citations which he makes from Marcellus’ own
works; and, moreover, his judgment and that of the Synod was later
confirmed even by Athanasius himself. Though not suspecting Marcellus
for some time, Athanasius finally became convinced that he had deviated
from the path of orthodoxy, and, as Newman has shown (in his
introduction to Athanasius’ fourth discourse against the Arians, *Oxford
Library of the Fathers*, vol. 19, p. 503 sq.), directed that discourse
against his errors and those of his followers.

<span id="iii.iii.i.viii-p3"></span>The controversy with Marcellus seems
to have been the last in which Eusebius was engaged, and it was
opposition to the dreaded heresy of Sabellius which moved him here as in
all the other cases. It is important to emphasize, however, what is
often overlooked, that though Eusebius during these years was so
continuously engaged in controversy with one or another of the members
of the anti-Arian party, there is no evidence that he ever deviated from
the doctrinal position which he took at the Council of Nicæa. After that
date it was never Arianism which he consciously supported; it was never
the Nicene orthodoxy which he opposed. He supported those members of the
old Arian party who had signed the Nicene creed and protested that they
accepted its teaching, against those members of the opposite party whom
he believed to be drifting toward Sabellianism, or acting tyrannously
and unjustly toward their opponents. The anti-Sabellianistic interest
influenced him all the time, but his post-Nicene writings contain no
evidence that he had fallen back into the Arianizing position which he
had held before 325. They reveal, on the contrary, a fair type of
orthodoxy, colored only by its decidedly anti-Sabellian emphasis.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 9](2010015)
