[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010228)  [Next](2010230.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xii.xii"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xii.xii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XI.—</span>*The Events which
happened at this Time to Dionysius and those in Egypt.*

<span id="iii.xii.xii-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xii.xii-p2.1"></span>But</span> as regards the persecution which
prevailed so fiercely in his reign, and the sufferings which Dionysius
with others endured on account of piety toward the God of the universe,
his own words shall show, which he wrote in answer to Germanus, <span
id="fr_2226"></span>[2227](#fn_2226.md) a contemporary bishop who was
endeavoring to slander him. His statement is as follows:

<span id="iii.xii.xii-p4"></span>2. “Truly I am in danger of falling
into great folly and stupidity through being forced to relate the
wonderful providence of God toward us. But since it is said <span
id="fr_2227"></span>[2228](#fn_2227.md) that ‘it is good to keep close the
secret of a king, but it is honorable to reveal the works of God,’ <span
id="fr_2228"></span>[2229](#fn_2228.md) I will join issue with the violence
of Germanus.

<span id="iii.xii.xii-p7"></span>3. I went not alone to Æmilianus; <span
id="fr_2229"></span>[2230](#fn_2229.md) but my fellow-presbyter,
Maximus, <span id="fr_2230"></span>[2231](#fn_2230.md) and the deacons
Faustus, <span id="fr_2231"></span>[2232](#fn_2231.md) Eusebius, <span
id="fr_2232"></span>[2233](#fn_2232.md) and Chæremon, <span
id="fr_2233"></span>[2234](#fn_2233.md) and a brother who was present from
Rome, went with me.

<span id="iii.xii.xii-p13"></span>4. But Æmilianus did not at first say
to me: ‘Hold no assemblies;’ <span id="fr_2234"></span>[2235](#fn_2234.md)
for this was superfluous to him, and the last thing to one who was
seeking to accomplish the first. For he was not concerned about our
assembling, but that we ourselves should not be Christians. And he
commanded me to give this up; supposing if I turned from it, the others
also would follow me.

<span id="iii.xii.xii-p15"></span>5. But I answered him, neither
unsuitably nor in many <span id="page_300">p. 300</span> <span
id="iii.xii.xii-Page_300"></span>words: ‘We must obey God rather than
men.’ <span id="fr_2235"></span>[2236](#fn_2235.md) And I testified openly
that I worshiped the one only God, and no other; and that I would not
turn from this nor would I ever cease to be a Christian. Thereupon he
commanded us to go to a village near the desert, called Cephro. <span
id="fr_2236"></span>[2237](#fn_2236.md)

<span id="iii.xii.xii-p18"></span>6. But listen to the very words which
were spoken on both sides, as they were recorded: “Dionysius, Faustus,
Maximus, Marcellus, <span id="fr_2237"></span>[2238](#fn_2237.md) and
Chæremon being arraigned, Æmilianus the prefect said:

<span id="iii.xii.xii-p20"></span>7. ‘I have reasoned verbally with you
concerning the clemency which our rulers have shown to you; for they
have given you the opportunity to save yourselves, if you will turn to
that which is according to nature, and worship the gods that preserve
their empire, and forget those that are contrary to nature. <span
id="fr_2238"></span>[2239](#fn_2238.md) What then do you say to this? For I
do not think that you will be ungrateful for their kindness, since they
would turn you to a better course.’

<span id="iii.xii.xii-p22"></span>8. Dionysius replied: ‘Not all people
worship all gods; but each one those whom he approves. We therefore
reverence and worship the one God, the Maker of all; who hath given the
empire to the divinely favored and august Valerian and Gallienus; and we
pray to him continually for their empire that it may remain unshaken.’

<span id="iii.xii.xii-p23"></span>9. Æmilianus, the prefect, said to
them: ‘But who forbids you to worship him, if he is a god, together with
those who are gods by nature. For ye have been commanded to reverence
the gods, and the gods whom all know.’ Dionysius answered:

<span id="iii.xii.xii-p24"></span>10. ‘We worship no other.’ Æmilianus,
the prefect, said to them: ‘I see that you are at once ungrateful, and
insensible to the kindness of our sovereigns. Wherefore ye shall not
remain in this city. But ye shall be sent into the regions of Libya, to
a place called Cephro. For I have chosen this place at the command of
our sovereigns, and it shall by no means be permitted you or any others,
either to hold assemblies, or to enter into the so called
cemeteries. <span id="fr_2239"></span>[2240](#fn_2239.md)

<span id="iii.xii.xii-p26"></span>11. But if any one shall be seen
without the place which I have commanded, or be found in any assembly,
he will bring peril on himself. For suitable punishment shall not fail.
Go, therefore where ye have been ordered.’

<span id="iii.xii.xii-p27"></span>“And he hastened me away, though I was
sick, not granting even a day’s respite. What opportunity then did I
have, either to hold assemblies, or not to hold them?” <span
id="fr_2240"></span>[2241](#fn_2240.md)

<span id="iii.xii.xii-p29"></span>12. Farther on he says: “But through
the help of the Lord we did not give up the open assembly. But I called
together the more diligently those who were in the city, as if I were
with them; being, so to speak, <span
id="fr_2241"></span>[2242](#fn_2241.md) ‘absent in body but present in
spirit.’ <span id="fr_2242"></span>[2243](#fn_2242.md) But in Cephro a
large church gathered with us of the brethren that followed us from the
city, and those that joined us from Egypt; and there ‘God opened unto us
a door for the Word.’ <span id="fr_2243"></span>[2244](#fn_2243.md)

<span id="iii.xii.xii-p33"></span>13. At first we were persecuted and
stoned; but afterwards not a few of the heathen forsook the idols and
turned to God. For until this time they had not heard the Word, since it
was then first sown by us.

<span id="iii.xii.xii-p34"></span>14. And as if God had brought us to
them for this purpose, when we had performed this ministry he
transferred us to another place. For Æmilianus, as it appeared, desired
to transport us to rougher and more Libyan-like places; <span
id="fr_2244"></span>[2245](#fn_2244.md) so he commanded them to assemble
from all quarters in Mareotis, <span
id="fr_2245"></span>[2246](#fn_2245.md) and assigned to them different
villages throughout the country. But he ordered us to be placed nearer
the highway that we might be seized first. <span
id="fr_2246"></span>[2247](#fn_2246.md) For evidently he arranged and
prepared matters so that whenever he wished to seize us he could take
all of us without difficulty.

<span id="iii.xii.xii-p38"></span>15. When I was first ordered to go to
Cephro I did not know where the place was, and had scarcely ever heard
the name; yet I went readily and cheerfully. But when I was told that I
was to remove to the district of Colluthion, <span
id="fr_2247"></span>[2248](#fn_2247.md) those <span id="page_301">p.
301</span> <span id="iii.xii.xii-Page_301"></span>who were present know
how I was affected.

<span id="iii.xii.xii-p40"></span>16. For here I will accuse myself. At
first I was grieved and greatly disturbed; for though these places were
better known and more familiar to us, yet the country was said to be
destitute of brethren and of men of character, and to be exposed to the
annoyances of travelers and incursions of robbers.

<span id="iii.xii.xii-p41"></span>17. But I was comforted when the
brethren reminded me that it was nearer the city, and that while Cephro
afforded us much intercourse with the brethren from Egypt, so that we
were able to extend the Church more widely, as this place was nearer the
city we should enjoy more frequently the sight of those who were truly
beloved and most closely related and dearest to us. For they would come
and remain, and special meetings <span
id="fr_2248"></span>[2249](#fn_2248.md) could be held, as in the more
remote suburbs. And thus it turned out.” After other matters he writes
again as follows of the things which happened to him:

<span id="iii.xii.xii-p43"></span>18. “Germanus indeed boasts of many
confessions. He can speak forsooth of many adversities which he himself
has endured. But is he able to reckon up as many as we can, of
sentences, confiscations, proscriptions, plundering of goods, loss of
dignities, contempt of worldly glory, disregard for the flatteries of
governors and of councilors, and patient endurance of the threats of
opponents, of outcries, of perils and persecutions, and wandering and
distress, and all kinds of tribulation, such as came upon me under
Decius and Sabinus, <span id="fr_2249"></span>[2250](#fn_2249.md) and such
as continue even now under Æmilianus? But where has Germanus been seen?
And what account is there of him?

<span id="iii.xii.xii-p45"></span>19. But I turn from this great folly
into which I am falling on account of Germanus. And for the same reason
I desist from giving to the brethren who know it an account of
everything which took place.”

<span id="iii.xii.xii-p46"></span>20. The same writer also in the
epistle to Domitius and Didymus <span
id="fr_2250"></span>[2251](#fn_2250.md) mentions some particulars of the
persecution as follows: “As our people are many and unknown to you, it
would be superfluous to give their names; but understand that men and
women, young and old, maidens and matrons, soldiers and civilians, of
every race and age, some by scourging and fire, others by the sword,
have conquered in the strife and received their crowns.

<span id="iii.xii.xii-p48"></span>21. But in the case of some a very
long time was not sufficient to make them appear acceptable to the Lord;
as, indeed, it seems also in my own case, that sufficient time has not
yet elapsed. Wherefore he has retained me for the time which he knows to
be fitting, saying, ‘In an acceptable time have I heard thee, and in a
day of salvation have I helped thee.’ <span
id="fr_2251"></span>[2252](#fn_2251.md)

<span id="iii.xii.xii-p50"></span>22. For as you have inquired of our
affairs and desire us to tell you how we are situated, you have heard
fully that when we—that is, myself and Gaius and Faustus and Peter and
Paul <span id="fr_2252"></span>[2253](#fn_2252.md) —were led away as
prisoners by a centurion and magistrates, with their soldiers and
servants, certain persons from Mareotis came and dragged us away by
force, as we were unwilling to follow them. <span
id="fr_2253"></span>[2254](#fn_2253.md)

<span id="iii.xii.xii-p53"></span>23. But now I and Gaius and Peter are
alone, deprived of the other brethren, and shut up in a desert and dry
place in Libya, three days’ journey from Parætonium.” <span
id="fr_2254"></span>[2255](#fn_2254.md)

<span id="iii.xii.xii-p55"></span>24. He says farther on: “The
presbyters, Maximus, <span id="fr_2255"></span>[2256](#fn_2255.md)
Dioscorus, <span id="fr_2256"></span>[2257](#fn_2256.md) Demetrius, and
Lucius <span id="fr_2257"></span>[2258](#fn_2257.md) concealed themselves
in the city, and visited the brethren secretly; for Faustinus and
Aquila, <span id="fr_2258"></span>[2259](#fn_2258.md) who are more
prominent in the world, are wandering in Egypt. But the deacons,
Faustus, Eusebius, and Chæremon, <span
id="fr_2259"></span>[2260](#fn_2259.md) have survived those who died in the
pestilence. Eusebius is one whom God has strengthened and endowed from
the first to fulfill energetically the ministrations for the imprisoned
confessors, and to attend to the dangerous task of preparing for burial
the bodies of the perfected and blessed martyrs.

<span id="iii.xii.xii-p61"></span>25. For as I have said be<span
id="page_302">p. 302</span> <span id="iii.xii.xii-Page_302"></span>fore,
unto the present time the governor continues to put to death in a cruel
manner those who are brought to trial. And he destroys some with
tortures, and wastes others away with imprisonment and bonds; and he
suffers no one to go near them, and investigates whether any one does
so. Nevertheless God gives relief to the afflicted through the zeal and
persistence of the brethren.”

<span id="iii.xii.xii-p62"></span>26. Thus far Dionysius. But it should
be known that Eusebius, whom he calls a deacon, shortly afterward became
bishop of the church of Laodicea in Syria; <span
id="fr_2260"></span>[2261](#fn_2260.md) and Maximus, of whom he speaks as
being then a presbyter, succeeded Dionysius himself as bishop of
Alexandria. <span id="fr_2261"></span>[2262](#fn_2261.md) But the Faustus
who was with him, and who at that time was distinguished for his
confession, was preserved until the persecution in our day, <span
id="fr_2262"></span>[2263](#fn_2262.md) when being very old and full of
days, he closed his life by martyrdom, being beheaded. But such are the
things which happened at that time <span
id="fr_2263"></span>[2264](#fn_2263.md) to Dionysius.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2226"></span>[299:2227](2010229.htm#fr_2226.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xii-p3"></span> On Germanus, and Dionysius’ epistle to
him, see above, Bk. VI. chap. 40, note 2.

<span id="fn_2227"></span>[299:2228](2010229.htm#fr_2227.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xii-p5"></span> Literally “it says” (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xii.xii-p5.1"></span>φησί</span>), a common
formula in quoting from Scripture.

<span id="fn_2228"></span>[299:2229](2010229.htm#fr_2228.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xii-p6"></span> [Tob. xii.
7](../../../bib/apo/tob012.htm#007.md)<span id="iii.xii.xii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2229"></span>[299:2230](2010229.htm#fr_2229.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xii-p8"></span> This Æmilianus, prefect of Egypt,
under whom the persecution was carried on in Alexandria during
Valerian’s reign, later, during the reign of Gallienus, was induced (or
compelled) by the troops of Alexandria to revolt against Gallienus, and
assume the purple himself. He was defeated, however, by Theodotus,
Gallienus’ general, and was put to death in prison, in what year we do
not know. Cf. Tillemont’s *Hist. des Emp.* III. p. 342 sq.

<span id="fn_2230"></span>[299:2231](2010229.htm#fr_2230.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xii-p9"></span> Maximus is mentioned a number of times
in this chapter in connection with the persecution. After the death of
Dionysius he succeeded him as bishop of Alexandria, and as such is
referred to below, in chaps. 28, 30, and 32. For the dates of his
episcopate, see chap. 28, note 10.

<span id="fn_2231"></span>[299:2232](2010229.htm#fr_2231.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xii-p10"></span> On Faustus, see above, Bk. VI. chap.
40, note 10.

<span id="fn_2232"></span>[299:2233](2010229.htm#fr_2232.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xii-p11"></span> In regard to this deacon Eusebius,
who later became bishop of Laodicea, see chap. 32, note 12.

<span id="fn_2233"></span>[299:2234](2010229.htm#fr_2233.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xii-p12"></span> Chæremon is mentioned three times in
the present chapter, but we have no other reliable information in regard
to him.

<span id="fn_2234"></span>[299:2235](2010229.htm#fr_2234.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xii-p14"></span> We may gather from §11, below, that
Germanus had accused Dionysius of neglecting to hold the customary
assemblies, and of seeking safety by flight. Valesius, in his note *ad
locum,* remarks, “Dionysius was accused by Germanus of neglecting to
hold the assemblies of the brethren before the beginning of the
persecution, and of providing for his own safety by flight. For as often
as persecution arose the bishops were accustomed first to convene the
people, that they might exhort them to hold fast to their faith in
Christ. Then they baptized infants and catechumens, that they might not
depart this life without baptism, and they gave the eucharist to the
faithful, because they did not know how long the persecution might
last.” Valesius refers for confirmation of his statements to an epistle
sent to Pope Hormisdas, by Germanus and others, in regard to Dorotheus,
bishop of Thessalonica (circa <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xii.xii-p14.1"></span>a.d.</span> 519). I have not been able to
verify the reference. The custom mentioned by Valesius is certainly a
most natural one, and therefore Valesius’ statements are very likely
quite true, though there seems to be little direct testimony upon which
to rest them.

<span id="fn_2235"></span>[300:2236](2010229.htm#fr_2235.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xii-p16"></span> [Acts v.
29](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#029.md)<span
id="iii.xii.xii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2236"></span>[300:2237](2010229.htm#fr_2236.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xii-p17"></span> We learn from §10, below, that Cephro
was in Libya. Beyond this nothing is known of the place so far as I am
aware.

<span id="fn_2237"></span>[300:2238](2010229.htm#fr_2237.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xii-p19"></span> This Marcellus, the only one not
mentioned in §3, above, is an otherwise unknown person.

<span id="fn_2238"></span>[300:2239](2010229.htm#fr_2238.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xii-p21"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xii.xii-p21.1"></span>τῶν παρὰ φύσιν</span>. That the <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xii.xii-p21.2"></span>τῶν</span> refers to
“gods” (viz. the gods of the Christians, Æmilianus thinking of them as
plural) seems clear, both on account of the <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xii.xii-p21.3"></span>θεοὺς</span> just preceding, and also in
view of the fact that in §9 we have the phrase <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xii.xii-p21.4"></span>τῶν κατὰ φύσιν θεῶν</span>. A contrast,
therefore, is drawn in the present case between the gods of the heathen
and those of the Christians.

<span id="fn_2239"></span>[300:2240](2010229.htm#fr_2239.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xii-p25"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xii.xii-p25.1"></span>κοιμητήρια</span>; literally,
“sleeping-places.” The word was used only in this sense in classic
Greek; but the Christians, looking upon death only as a sleep, early
applied the name to their burial places; hence Æmilian speaks of them as
the “*so-called* (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xii.xii-p25.2"></span>καλούμενα</span>) cemeteries.”

<span id="fn_2240"></span>[300:2241](2010229.htm#fr_2240.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xii-p28"></span> See above, note 9.

<span id="fn_2241"></span>[300:2242](2010229.htm#fr_2241.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xii-p30"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xii.xii-p30.1"></span>ὡ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xii.xii-p30.2"></span>ς</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xii.xii-p30.3"></span>εἰπεῖν</span>, a reading approved by
Valesius in his notes, and adopted by Schwegler and Heinichen. This and
the readings <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xii.xii-p30.4"></span>ὡ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xii.xii-p30.5"></span>ς</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xii.xii-p30.6"></span>εἶπεν</span>, “as he said” (adopted by
Stroth, Zimmermann, and Laemmer), and <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xii.xii-p30.7"></span>ὡ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xii.xii-p30.8"></span>ς</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xii.xii-p30.9"></span>εἶπον</span>, “as I said” (adopted by
Stephanus, Valesius in his text, and Burton), are about equally
supported by <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xii.xii-p30.10"></span>ms.</span> authority, while some <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.xii.xii-p30.11"></span>mss.</span> read <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xii.xii-p30.12"></span>ὡ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xii.xii-p30.13"></span>ς</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xii.xii-p30.14"></span>εἶπεν ὁ
ἀπόστολος</span>, “as the apostle said.” It is impossible to decide with
any degree of assurance between the first three readings.

<span id="fn_2242"></span>[300:2243](2010229.htm#fr_2242.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xii-p30.15"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xii-p31"></span> [1 Cor. v.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#003.md)<span id="iii.xii.xii-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2243"></span>[300:2244](2010229.htm#fr_2243.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xii-p31.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xii-p32"></span> [Col. iv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#003.md)<span id="iii.xii.xii-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2244"></span>[300:2245](2010229.htm#fr_2244.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xii-p35"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xii.xii-p35.1"></span>Λιβυκωτέρους τόπους</span>. Libya was an
indefinite term among the ancients for that part of Africa which
included the Great Desert and all the unexplored country lying west and
south of it. Almost nothing was known about the country, and the desert
and the regions beyond were peopled by the fancy with all sorts of
terrible monsters, and were looked upon as the theater of the most dire
forces, natural and supernatural. As a consequence, the term “Libyan”
became a synonym for all that was most disagreeable and dreadful in
nature.

<span id="fn_2245"></span>[300:2246](2010229.htm#fr_2245.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xii-p35.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xii-p36"></span> Mareotis, or Mareia, or Maria, was
one of the land districts into which Egypt was divided. A lake, a town
situated on the shore of the lake, and the district in which they lay,
all bore the same name. The district Mareotis lay just south of
Alexandria, but did not include it, for Alexandria and Ptolemais formed
an independent sphere of administration sharply separated from the
thirty-six land districts of the country. Cf. Bk. II. chap. 17, notes 10
and 12, above. Mommsen (*Roman Provinces,* Scribner’s ed. Vol. II. p.
255) remarks that these land districts, like the cities, became the
basis of episcopal dioceses. This we should expect to be the case, but I
am not aware that we can prove it to have been regularly so, at any rate
not during the earlier centuries. Cf. e.g. Wiltsch’s *Geography and
Statistics of the Church,* London ed., I. p. 192 sq.

<span id="fn_2246"></span>[300:2247](2010229.htm#fr_2246.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xii-p37"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xii.xii-p37.1"></span>ἡ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xii.xii-p37.2"></span>μᾶς δὲ μᾶλλον ἐν ὁδῷ καὶ πρώτους
καταληφθησομένους žταξεν</span>.

<span id="fn_2247"></span>[300:2248](2010229.htm#fr_2247.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xii-p39"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xii.xii-p39.1"></span>τὰ Κολλουθίωνος</span> (sc. <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xii.xii-p39.2"></span>μέρη</span>), i.e. the
parts or regions of Colluthion. Of Colluthion, so far as I am aware,
nothing is known. It seems to have been a town, possibly a section of
country in the district of Mareotis. Nicephorus spells the word with a
single *l,* which Valesius contends is more correct because the word is
derived from Colutho, which was not an uncommon name in Egypt (see
Valesius’ note *ad locum*).

<span id="fn_2248"></span>[301:2249](2010229.htm#fr_2248.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xii-p42"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xii.xii-p42.1"></span>κατὰ μέρος συναγωγαί</span>, literally,
“partial meetings.” It is plain enough from this that persons living in
the suburbs were allowed to hold special services in their homes or
elsewhere, and were not compelled always to attend the city church,
which might be a number of miles distant. It seems to me doubtful
whether this passage is sufficient to warrant Valesius’ conclusion, that
in the time of Dionysius there was but one church in Alexandria, where
the brethren met for worship. It may have been so, but the words do not
appear to indicate, as Valesius thinks they do, that matters were in a
different state then from that which existed in the time of Athanasius,
who, in his *Apology to Constantius,* §14 sq., expressly speaks of a
number of church buildings in Alexandria.

<span id="fn_2249"></span>[301:2250](2010229.htm#fr_2249.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xii-p43.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xii-p44"></span> Sabinus has been already mentioned in
Bk. VI. chap. 40, §2, from which passage we may gather that he held the
same position under Decius which Æmilianus held under Valerian (see note
3 on the chapter referred to).

<span id="fn_2250"></span>[301:2251](2010229.htm#fr_2250.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xii-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xii-p47"></span> We learn from chap. 20, below, that
this epistle to Domitius and Didymus was one of Dionysius’ regular
festal epistles (for there is no ground for assuming that a different
epistle is referred to in that chapter). Domitius and Didymus are
otherwise unknown personages. Eusebius evidently (as we can see both
from this chapter and from chapter 20) supposes this epistle to refer to
the persecution, of which Dionysius has been speaking in that portion of
his epistle to Germanus quoted in this chapter; namely, to the
persecution of Valerian. But he is clearly mistaken in this supposition;
for, as we can see from a comparison of §22, below, with Bk. VI. chap.
40, §6 sq., Dionysius is referring in this epistle to the same
persecution to which he referred in that chapter; namely, to the
persecution of Decius. But the present epistle was written (as we learn
from §23) while this same persecution was still going on, and,
therefore, some years before the time of Valerian’s persecution, and
before the writing of the epistle to Germanus (see Bk. VI. chap. 40,
note 2), with which Eusebius here associates it. Cf. Valesius’ note *ad
locum* and Dittrich’s *Dionysius der Grosse,* p. 40 sq.

<span id="fn_2251"></span>[301:2252](2010229.htm#fr_2251.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xii-p48.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xii-p49"></span> [Isa. xlix.
8](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#008.md)<span id="iii.xii.xii-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2252"></span>[301:2253](2010229.htm#fr_2252.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xii-p50.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xii-p51"></span> See above, Bk. VI. chap. 40, note 10.

<span id="fn_2253"></span>[301:2254](2010229.htm#fr_2253.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xii-p51.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xii-p52"></span> See *ibid.* §6 sq.

<span id="fn_2254"></span>[301:2255](2010229.htm#fr_2254.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xii-p53.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xii-p54"></span> Parætonium was an important town and
harbor on the Mediterranean, about 150 miles west of Alexandria. A day’s
journey among the ancients commonly denoted about 180 to 200 stadia (22
to 25 miles), so that Dionysius retreat must have lain some 60 to 70
miles from Parætonium, probably to the south of it.

<span id="fn_2255"></span>[301:2256](2010229.htm#fr_2255.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xii-p55.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xii-p56"></span> On Maximus, see above, note 5.

<span id="fn_2256"></span>[301:2257](2010229.htm#fr_2256.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xii-p56.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xii-p57"></span> Of Dioscorus we know only what is
told us here. He is not to be identified with the lad mentioned in Bk.
VI. chap. 41, §19 (see note 17 on that chapter).

<span id="fn_2257"></span>[301:2258](2010229.htm#fr_2257.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xii-p57.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xii-p58"></span> Of Demetrius and Lucius we know only
what is recorded here.

<span id="fn_2258"></span>[301:2259](2010229.htm#fr_2258.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xii-p58.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xii-p59"></span> Faustinus and Aquila are known to us
only from this passage.

<span id="fn_2259"></span>[301:2260](2010229.htm#fr_2259.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xii-p59.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xii-p60"></span> On these three deacons, see above,
notes 6–8.

<span id="fn_2260"></span>[302:2261](2010229.htm#fr_2260.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xii-p62.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xii-p63"></span> See below, chap. 32, §5.

<span id="fn_2261"></span>[302:2262](2010229.htm#fr_2261.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xii-p63.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xii-p64"></span> See chap. 28, note 8.

<span id="fn_2262"></span>[302:2263](2010229.htm#fr_2262.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xii-p64.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xii-p65"></span> That is, until the persecution of
Diocletian, <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xii.xii-p65.1"></span>a.d.</span> 303 sq.

<span id="fn_2263"></span>[302:2264](2010229.htm#fr_2263.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xii-p65.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xii-p66"></span> That is, according to Eusebius, in
the time of Valerian, but only the events related in the first part of
the chapter took place at that time; those recorded in the epistle to
Domitius and Didymus in the time of Decius. See above, note 25.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII](2010230.md)
