[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010105)  [Next](2010107.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.viii.xxxvii"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxvii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.viii.xxxvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXVII</span>.—*The Evangelists
that were still Eminent at that Time.*

<span id="iii.viii.xxxvii-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.viii.xxxvii-p2.1"></span>Among</span> those that were celebrated
at that time was Quadratus, <span id="fr_928"></span>[929](#fn_928.md) who,
report says, was renowned along with the daughters of Philip for his
prophetical gifts. And there were many others besides these who were
known in those days, and who occupied the first place among the
successors of the apostles. And they also, being illustrious disciples
of such great men, built up the foundations of the churches which had
been laid by the apostles in every place, and preached the Gospel more
and more widely and scattered the saving seeds of the kingdom of heaven
far and near throughout the whole world. <span
id="fr_929"></span>[930](#fn_929.md)

<span id="iii.viii.xxxvii-p5"></span>2. For indeed most of the disciples
of that time, animated by the divine word with a more ardent love for
philosophy, <span id="fr_930"></span>[931](#fn_930.md) had already
fulfilled the command of the Saviour, and had distributed their goods to
the needy. <span id="fr_931"></span>[932](#fn_931.md) Then starting out
upon long journeys they performed the office of evangelists, being
filled with the desire to preach Christ to those who had not yet heard
the word of faith, and to deliver to them the divine Gospels.

<span id="iii.viii.xxxvii-p8"></span>3. And when they had only laid the
foundations of the faith in foreign places, they appointed others as
pastors, and entrusted them with the nurture of those that had recently
been brought in, while they themselves went on again to other countries
and nations, with the grace and the co-operation of God. For a great
many wonderful works were done through them by the power of the divine
Spirit, so that at the first hearing whole multitudes of men eagerly
embraced the religion of the Creator of the universe.

<span id="iii.viii.xxxvii-p9"></span>4. But since it is impossible for
us to enumerate the names of all that became shepherds or evangelists in
the churches throughout the world in the age immediately succeeding the
apostles, we have recorded, as was fitting, the names of those only who
have transmitted the apostolic doctrine to us in writings still extant.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_928"></span>[169:929](2010106.htm#fr_928.md) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxvii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxvii-p3"></span> This Quadratus had considerable
reputation as a prophet, as may be gathered from Eusebius’ mention of
him here, and also from the reference to him in the anonymous work
against the Montanists (see below, Bk. V. chap. 16). We know nothing
about this Quadratus except what is told us in these two passages,
unless we identify him, as many do, with Quadratus the apologist
mentioned below, in Bk. IV. chap. 3. This identification is possible,
but by no means certain. See Bk. IV. chap. 3, note 2.

<span id="fn_929"></span>[169:930](2010106.htm#fr_929.md) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxvii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxvii-p4"></span> This rhetorical flourish arouses
the suspicion that Eusebius, although he says there were “many others”
that were well known in those days, was unacquainted with the names of
such persons as we, too, are unacquainted with them. None will deny that
there may have been some men of prominence in the Church at this time,
but Eusebius apparently had no more information to impart in regard to
them than he gives us in this chapter, and he makes up for his lack of
facts in a way which is not at all uncommon.

<span id="fn_930"></span>[169:931](2010106.htm#fr_930.md) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxvii-p6"></span> That is, an ascetic mode of life.
See Bk. VI. chap. 3, note 9.

<span id="fn_931"></span>[169:932](2010106.htm#fr_931.md) <span
id="iii.viii.xxxvii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxxvii-p7"></span> See [Matt. xix.
21](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#021.md)<span
id="iii.viii.xxxvii-p7.1"></span>. Eusebius agrees with nearly all the
Fathers, and with the Roman Catholic Church of the past and present, in
his misinterpretation of this advice given by Christ to the rich young
man.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXVIII](2010107.md)
