[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010267)  [Next](2010269) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xiii.xvii"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.xvii-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xiii.xvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVI.—</span>*The Change of
Affairs for the Better.*

<span id="iii.xiii.xvii-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xiii.xvii-p2.1"></span>Such</span> was the state of affairs
during the entire persecution. But in the tenth year, through the grace
of God, it ceased altogether, having begun to decrease after the eighth
year. <span id="fr_2586"></span>[2587](#fn_2586) For when the divine and
heavenly grace showed us favorable and propitious oversight, then truly
our rulers, and the very persons <span
id="fr_2587"></span>[2588](#fn_2587) by whom the war against us had been
earnestly prosecuted, most remarkably changed their minds, and issued a
revocation, and quenched the great fire of persecution which had been
kindled, by merciful proclamations and ordinances concerning us.

<span id="iii.xiii.xvii-p5"></span>2. But this was not due to any human
agency; nor was it the result, as one might say, of the compassion or
philanthropy of our rulers;—far from it, for daily from the beginning
until that time they were devising more and more severe measures against
us, and continually inventing outrages by a greater variety of
instruments;—but it was manifestly due to the oversight of Divine
Providence, on the one hand becoming reconciled to his people, and on
the other, attacking him <span id="fr_2588"></span>[2589](#fn_2588) who
instigated these evils, and showing anger toward him as the author of
the cruelties of the entire persecution.

<span id="iii.xiii.xvii-p7"></span>3. For though it was necessary that
these things should take place, according to the divine judgment, yet
the Word saith, “Woe to him through whom the offense cometh.” <span
id="fr_2589"></span>[2590](#fn_2589) Therefore punishment from God came
upon him, beginning with his flesh, and proceeding to his soul. <span
id="fr_2590"></span>[2591](#fn_2590)

<span id="iii.xiii.xvii-p10"></span>4. For an abscess suddenly appeared
in the midst of the secret parts of his body, and from it a deeply
perforated sore, which spread irresistibly into his inmost bowels. An
indescribable multitude of worms sprang from them, and a deathly odor
arose, as the entire bulk of his body had, through his gluttony, been
changed, before his sickness, into an excessive mass of soft fat, which
became putrid, and thus presented an awful and intolerable sight to
those who came near.

<span id="iii.xiii.xvii-p11"></span>5. Some of the physicians, being
wholly unable to endure the exceeding offensiveness of the odor, were
slain; others, as the entire mass had swollen and passed beyond hope of
restoration, and they were unable to render any help, were put to death
without mercy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2586"></span>[338:2587](2010268.htm#fr_2586) <span
id="iii.xiii.xvii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.xvii-p3"></span> The edict of Milan, issued by
Constantine and Licinius toward the close of the year 312 (upon the
date, see Mason, p. 333, note) put an end to the persecution in its
tenth year, though complete toleration was not proclaimed by Maximin
until the following spring. Very soon after the close of the eighth
year, in April, 311, Galerius issued his edict of toleration which is
given in the next chapter. It is, therefore, to the publication of this
edict that Eusebius refers when he says that the persecution had begun
to decrease after the eighth year. Maximin yielded reluctant and partial
consent to this edict for a few months, but before the end of the year
he began to persecute again; and during the year 312 the Christians
suffered severely in his dominions (see Bk. IX. chap. 2 sq.).

<span id="fn_2587"></span>[338:2588](2010268.htm#fr_2587) <span
id="iii.xiii.xvii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.xvii-p4"></span> The plural here seems a little
peculiar, for the edict was issued only in the name of Galerius,
Constantine, and Licinius, not in the name of Maximin. We have no record
of Licinius as a persecutor before this time, and Eusebius’ words of
praise in the ninth book would seem to imply that he had not shown
himself at all hostile to the Church. And in fact Licinius seems ruled
out by §2, below, where “they” are spoken of as having “from the
beginning devised more and more severe measures against us.” And yet,
since Constantine did not persecute, we must suppose either that
Licinius is included in Eusebius’ plural, or what is perhaps more
probable, that Eusebius thinks of the edict as proceeding from all four
emperors though bearing the names of only three of them. It is true that
the latter is rather a violent supposition in view of Eusebius’ own
words in the first chapter of Bk. IX. I confess that I find no
satisfactory explanation of the apparent inconsistency.

<span id="fn_2588"></span>[338:2589](2010268.htm#fr_2588) <span
id="iii.xiii.xvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.xvii-p6"></span> i.e. Galerius.

<span id="fn_2589"></span>[338:2590](2010268.htm#fr_2589) <span
id="iii.xiii.xvii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.xvii-p8"></span> [Matt. xviii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#007)<span
id="iii.xiii.xvii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2590"></span>[338:2591](2010268.htm#fr_2590) <span
id="iii.xiii.xvii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.xvii-p9"></span> Galerius seems to have been smitten
with the terrible disease, which Eusebius here refers to, and which is
described by Lactantius at considerable length (*De mort. pers.* chap.
33) and with many imaginative touches (e.g. the stench of his disease
pervades “not only the palace, but even the whole city”!), before the
end of the year 310, and his death took place in May of the following
year.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVII](2010269)
