[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2010301)  [Next](2010303) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xvi.v"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.v-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xvi.v-p1.1"></span>Chapter V.—</span>*Copies of Imperial
Laws.* <span id="fr_2914"></span>[2915](#fn_2914)

<span id="iii.xvi.v-p3"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xvi.v-p3.1"></span>Let</span> us finally subjoin the
translations from the Roman tongue of the imperial decrees of
Constantine and Licinius.

<span id="iii.xvi.v-p4"></span><span id="page_379">p. 379</span> <span
id="iii.xvi.v-Page_379"></span>*Copy of imperial decrees translated from
the Roman tongue.* <span id="fr_2915"></span>[2916](#fn_2915)

<span id="iii.xvi.v-p6"></span>2. “Perceiving long ago that religious
liberty ought not to be denied, but that it ought to be granted to the
judgment and desire of each individual to perform his religious duties
according to his own choice, we had given orders that every man,
Christians as well as others, should preserve the faith of his own sect
and religion. <span id="fr_2916"></span>[2917](#fn_2916)

<span id="iii.xvi.v-p8"></span>3. But since in that rescript, in which
such liberty was granted them, many and various conditions <span
id="fr_2917"></span>[2918](#fn_2917) seemed clearly added, some of them,
it may be, after a little retired from such observance.

<span id="iii.xvi.v-p10"></span>4. When I, Constantine Augustus, and I,
Licinius Augustus, came under favorable auspices to Milan and took under
consideration everything which pertained to the common weal and
prosperity, we resolved among other things, or rather first of all, to
make such decrees as seemed in many respects for the benefit of every
one; namely, such as should preserve reverence and piety toward the
deity. We resolved, that is, to grant both to the Christians and to all
men freedom to follow the religion which they choose, that whatever
heavenly divinity exists <span id="fr_2918"></span>[2919](#fn_2918) may
be propitious to us and to all that live under our government.

<span id="iii.xvi.v-p12"></span>5. We have, therefore, determined, with
sound and upright purpose, that liberty is to be denied to no one, to
choose and to follow the religious observances of the Christians, but
that to each one freedom is to be given to devote his mind to that
religion which he may think adapted to himself, <span
id="fr_2919"></span>[2920](#fn_2919) in order that the Deity may exhibit
to us in all things his accustomed care and favor.

<span id="iii.xvi.v-p14"></span>6. It was fitting that we should write
that this is our pleasure, that those conditions <span
id="fr_2920"></span>[2921](#fn_2920) being entirely left out which were
contained in our former letter concerning the Christians which was sent
to your devotedness, everything that seemed very severe and foreign to
our mildness may be annulled, and that now every one who has the same
desire to observe the religion of the Christians may do so without
molestation.

<span id="iii.xvi.v-p16"></span>7. We have resolved to communicate this
most fully to thy care, in order that thou mayest know that we have
granted to these same Christians freedom and full liberty to observe
their own religion.

<span id="iii.xvi.v-p17"></span>8. Since this has been granted freely by
us to them, thy devotedness perceives that liberty is granted to others
also who may wish to follow their own religious observances; it being
clearly in accordance with the tranquillity of our times, that each one
should have the liberty of choosing and worshiping whatever deity he
pleases. This has been done by us in order that we might not seem in any
way to discriminate against any rank or religion. <span
id="fr_2921"></span>[2922](#fn_2921)

<span id="iii.xvi.v-p19"></span>9. And we decree still further in regard
to the Christians, that their places, in which they were formerly
accustomed to assemble, and concerning which in the former letter sent
to thy devotedness a different command was given, <span
id="fr_2922"></span>[2923](#fn_2922) if it appear that any have bought
them either from our treasury or from any other person, shall be
restored to the said Christians, without demanding money or any other
equivalent, with no delay or hesitation.

<span id="iii.xvi.v-p21"></span>10. If any happen to have received the
said places as a gift, they shall restore them as quickly as possible to
these same Christians: with the understanding that if those who have
bought these places, or those who have received them as a gift, demand
anything from our bounty, they may go to the judge of the district, that
provision may be made for them by our clemency. All these things are to
be granted to the society of Christians by your care immediately and
<span id="page_380">p. 380</span> <span
id="iii.xvi.v-Page_380"></span>without any delay.

<span id="iii.xvi.v-p22"></span>11. And since the said Christians are
known to have possessed not only those places in which they were
accustomed to assemble, but also other places, belonging not to
individuals among them, but to the society <span
id="fr_2923"></span>[2924](#fn_2923) as a whole, that is, to the society
of Christians, you will command that all these, in virtue of the law
which we have above stated, be restored, without any hesitation, to
these same Christians; that is, to their society and congregation: the
above-mentioned provision being of course observed, that those who
restore them without price, as we have before said, may expect
indemnification from our bounty.

<span id="iii.xvi.v-p24"></span>12. In all these things, for the behoof
of the aforesaid society of Christians, you are to use the utmost
diligence, to the end that our command may be speedily fulfilled, and
that in this also, by our clemency, provision may be made for the common
and public tranquillity. <span id="fr_2924"></span>[2925](#fn_2924)

<span id="iii.xvi.v-p26"></span>13. For by this means, <span
id="fr_2925"></span>[2926](#fn_2925) as we have said before, the divine
favor toward us which we have already experienced in many matters will
continue sure through all time.

<span id="iii.xvi.v-p28"></span>14. And that the terms of this our
gracious ordinance may be known to all, it is expected that this which
we have written will be published everywhere by you and brought to the
knowledge of all, in order that this gracious ordinance of ours may
remain unknown to no one.”

<span id="iii.xvi.v-p29"></span>*Copy of another imperial decree which
they issued,* <span id="fr_2926"></span>[2927](#fn_2926) *indicating
that the grant was made to the Catholic Church alone.*

<span id="iii.xvi.v-p31"></span>15. “Greeting to thee, our most esteemed
Anulinus. It is the custom of our benevolence, most esteemed Anulinus,
to will that those things which belong of right to another should not
only be left unmolested, but should also be restored. <span
id="fr_2927"></span>[2928](#fn_2927)

<span id="iii.xvi.v-p33"></span>16. Wherefore it is our will that when
thou receivest this letter, if any such things belonged to the Catholic
Church of the Christians, in any city or other place, but are now held
by citizens <span id="fr_2928"></span>[2929](#fn_2928) or by any others,
thou shalt cause them to be restored immediately to the said churches.
For we have already determined that those things which these same
churches formerly possessed shall be restored to them.

<span id="iii.xvi.v-p35"></span>17. Since therefore thy devotedness
perceives that this command of ours is most explicit, do thou make haste
to restore to them, as quickly as possible, everything which formerly
belonged to the said churches,—whether gardens or buildings or whatever
they may be,—that we may learn that thou hast obeyed this decree of ours
most carefully. Farewell, our most esteemed and beloved Anulinus.”

<span id="iii.xvi.v-p36"></span>*Copy of an epistle in which the Emperor
commands that a synod of bishops be held at Rome in behalf of the unity
and concord of the churches.* <span id="fr_2929"></span>[2930](#fn_2929)

<span id="iii.xvi.v-p38"></span><span id="page_381">p. 381</span> <span
id="iii.xvi.v-Page_381"></span>18. “Constantine Augustus to
Miltiades, <span id="fr_2930"></span>[2931](#fn_2930) bishop of Rome,
and to Marcus. <span id="fr_2931"></span>[2932](#fn_2931) Since many
such communications have been sent to me by Anulinus, <span
id="fr_2932"></span>[2933](#fn_2932) the most illustrious proconsul of
Africa, in which it is said that Cæcilianus, <span
id="fr_2933"></span>[2934](#fn_2933) bishop of the city of Carthage, has
been accused by some of his colleagues in Africa, in many matters; <span
id="fr_2934"></span>[2935](#fn_2934) and since it seems to me a very
serious thing that in those provinces which Divine Providence has freely
entrusted to my devotedness, and in which there is a great population,
the multitude are found following the baser course, and dividing, as it
were, into two parties, and the bishops are at variance,—

<span id="iii.xvi.v-p44"></span>19. it has seemed good to me that
Cæcilianus himself, with ten of the bishops that appear to accuse him,
and with ten others whom he may consider necessary for his defense,
should sail to Rome, that there, in the presence of yourselves and of
Retecius <span id="fr_2935"></span>[2936](#fn_2935) and Maternus <span
id="fr_2936"></span>[2937](#fn_2936) and Marinus, <span
id="fr_2937"></span>[2938](#fn_2937) your colleagues, whom I have
commanded to hasten to Rome for this purpose, <span
id="fr_2938"></span>[2939](#fn_2938) he may be heard, as you may
understand to be in accordance with the most holy law.

<span id="iii.xvi.v-p49"></span>20. But in order that you may be enabled
to have most perfect knowledge of all these things, I have subjoined to
my letter copies of the documents sent to me by Anulinus, and have sent
them to your above-mentioned colleagues. When your firmness has read
these, you will consider in what way the above-mentioned case may be
most accurately investigated and justly decided. For it does not escape
your diligence that I have such reverence for the legitimate <span
id="fr_2939"></span>[2940](#fn_2939) Catholic Church that I do not wish
you to leave schism or division in any place. May the divinity of the
great God preserve you, most honored sirs, for many years.”

<span id="iii.xvi.v-p51"></span>Copy of an epistle in which the emperor
commands another synod to be held for the purpose of removing all
dissensions among the bishops.

<span id="iii.xvi.v-p52"></span>21. “Constantine Augustus to
Chrestus, <span id="fr_2940"></span>[2941](#fn_2940) bishop of Syracuse.
When some began wickedly and perversely to disagree <span
id="fr_2941"></span>[2942](#fn_2941) among themselves in regard to the
holy worship and celestial power and Catholic doctrine, <span
id="fr_2942"></span>[2943](#fn_2942) wishing to put an end to such
disputes among them, I formerly gave command that certain bishops should
be sent from Gaul, and that the opposing parties <span id="page_382">p.
382</span> <span id="iii.xvi.v-Page_382"></span>who were contending
persistently and incessantly with each other, should be summoned from
Africa; that in their presence, and in the presence of the bishop of
Rome, the matter which appeared to be causing the disturbance might be
examined and decided with all care. <span
id="fr_2943"></span>[2944](#fn_2943)

<span id="iii.xvi.v-p57"></span>22. But since, as it happens, some,
forgetful both of their own salvation and of the reverence due to the
most holy religion, do not even yet bring hostilities to an end, and are
unwilling to conform to the judgment already passed, and assert that
those who expressed their opinions and decisions were few, or that they
had been too hasty and precipitate in giving judgment, before all the
things which ought to have been accurately investigated had been
examined,—on account of all this it has happened that those very ones
who ought to hold brotherly and harmonious relations toward each other,
are shamefully, or rather abominably, <span
id="fr_2944"></span>[2945](#fn_2944) divided among themselves, and give
occasion for ridicule to those men whose souls are aliens to this most
holy religion. Wherefore it has seemed necessary to me to provide that
this dissension, which ought to have ceased after the judgment had been
already given by their own voluntary agreement, should now, if possible,
be brought to an end by the presence of many.

<span id="iii.xvi.v-p59"></span>23. Since, therefore, we have commanded
a number of bishops from a great many different places <span
id="fr_2945"></span>[2946](#fn_2945) to assemble in the city of
Arles, <span id="fr_2946"></span>[2947](#fn_2946) before the kalends of
August, we have thought proper to write to thee also that thou shouldst
secure from the most illustrious Latronianus, <span
id="fr_2947"></span>[2948](#fn_2947) corrector of Sicily, <span
id="fr_2948"></span>[2949](#fn_2948) a public vehicle, and that thou
shouldst take with thee two others of the second rank, <span
id="fr_2949"></span>[2950](#fn_2949) whom thou thyself shalt choose,
together with three servants who may serve you on the way, and betake
thyself to the above-mentioned place before the appointed day; that by
thy firmness, and by the wise unanimity and harmony of the others
present, this dispute, which has disgracefully continued until the
present time, in consequence of certain shameful strifes, after all has
been heard which those have to say who are now at variance with one
another, and whom we have likewise commanded to be present, may be
settled in accordance with the proper faith, and that brotherly harmony,
though it be but gradually, may be restored.

<span id="iii.xvi.v-p65"></span>24. May the Almighty God preserve thee
in health for many years.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2914"></span>[378:2915](2010302.htm#fr_2914) <span
id="iii.xvi.v-p1.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.v-p2"></span> Heinichen gives ᾽Αντίγραφα βασιλικῶν
νόμων περὶ τῶν χριστιανοῖς προσηκόντων as the title of this chapter. All
but three of the <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xvi.v-p2.1"></span>mss</span>., however, agree in limiting the
title to the first three words, the last four being given by the
majority of them as the title of chap. 6. The words are quite out of
place at the head of that chapter, which in two important <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.xvi.v-p2.2"></span>mss</span>., followed by
Stroth, is made a part of chap. 5. Heinichen inserts the words at this
point because they are out of place in the position in which they
commonly occur; but the truth is, they are no better adapted to the
present chapter than to that one, for only one of the edicts quoted in
this chapter has reference to the property of Christians. It seems to me
much more likely that the words were originally written in the margin of
some codex opposite that particular rescript, and thence by an error
slipped into the text at the head of a later one, which was then made a
separate chapter. In view of the uncertainty, however, as to the
original position of the words, I have followed Laemmer, Schwegler,
Stroth, Closs, and Stigloher, in omitting them altogether.

<span id="fn_2915"></span>[379:2916](2010302.htm#fr_2915) <span
id="iii.xvi.v-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.v-p5"></span> This is the famous Edict of Milan,
issued by Constantine and Licinius late in the year 312, after the
former’s victory over Maxentius (see above, Bk. IX. chap. 9, note 7).
The edict has a claim to be remembered as the first announcement of the
great doctrine of complete freedom of conscience, and that not for one
religion only, but for all religions. In this respect it was a great
advance upon the edict of Galerius, which had granted conditional
liberty to a single faith. The greater part of the edict (beginning with
§ 4) is extant in its original Latin form in Lactantius’ *De mort.
pers*. chap. 48. The Greek translation is still less accurate than the
translation of the edict of Galerius given in Bk. VIII. chap. 17, above,
but the variations from the original are none of them of great
importance. The most marked ones will be mentioned in the notes.

<span id="fn_2916"></span>[379:2917](2010302.htm#fr_2916) <span
id="iii.xvi.v-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.v-p7"></span> The reference in this sentence is not,
as was formerly supposed, to a lost edict of Constantine and Licinius,
but to the edict of Galerius, as is proved by Mason (p. 327 sq.), who
has completely exploded the old belief in three edicts of toleration,
and has shown that there were only two; viz. that of Galerius,
Constantine, and Licinius, published in 311, and the present one, issued
by Constantine and Licinius in 312.

<span id="fn_2917"></span>[379:2918](2010302.htm#fr_2917) <span
id="iii.xvi.v-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.v-p9"></span> The Greek word is αἱρέσεις, which has
been commonly translated “sects,” and the reference has been supposed to
be to various schismatic bodies included in the former edict, but, as
Mason remarks, such an interpretation is preposterous, and introduces an
idea in direct contradiction to the entire tenor of the present
document. The fact is that, although “sects” is the natural translation
of the word αἱρέσεις, we find the same word in § 6, below, used to
translate *conditiones*, and it may be reasonably assumed—in fact, it
may be regarded as certain in view of the context—that in the present
case the same word stood in the Latin original. I have no hesitation,
therefore, in adopting the rendering which I have given in the text.
These “conditions,” then, to which the edict refers were enumerated, not
in the former edict itself, but in the rescript which accompanied it
(see above, Bk. VIII. chap. 17, note 9). What these conditions were may
be conjectured, as remarked in that note, from the provisions of the
present edict (cf. Mason, p. 330 sq.).

<span id="fn_2918"></span>[379:2919](2010302.htm#fr_2918) <span
id="iii.xvi.v-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.v-p11"></span> ὅτί ποτέ ἐστι θειότης καὶ οὐρανίου
πρ€γματος. Latin: *quo quidem divinitas in sede cœlesti*. The Greek is
by no means a reproduction of the sense of the Latin, and indeed, as it
stands, is quite untranslatable. I have contented myself with a
paraphrase, which does not express what the Greek translator says, but
perhaps is not entirely at variance with what he meant to say.

<span id="fn_2919"></span>[379:2920](2010302.htm#fr_2919) <span
id="iii.xvi.v-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.v-p13"></span> In this sentence it is stated
distinctly, not simply that Christians may remain Christians, but that
anybody that pleases may become a Christian; that is, that the fullest
liberty is granted to every man either to observe his ancestral religion
or to choose another.

<span id="fn_2920"></span>[379:2921](2010302.htm#fr_2920) <span
id="iii.xvi.v-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.v-p15"></span> Greek, αἱρέσεων; Latin, *conditionibus*
(see note 4, above).

<span id="fn_2921"></span>[379:2922](2010302.htm#fr_2921) <span
id="iii.xvi.v-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.v-p18"></span> μηδεμιŽ τιμῇ μηδὲ θρησκεία τινί. Latin,
*honori, neque cuiquam religioni*. Mason concludes from this clause that
in the rescript which accompanied the previous edict Christians had been
excluded from certain official positions.

<span id="fn_2922"></span>[379:2923](2010302.htm#fr_2922) <span
id="iii.xvi.v-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.v-p20"></span> That there was some condition attached
in the last rescript to the restoration of their property to the
Christians is clear from these words. We may gather from what follows
that the Christians were obliged to pay something for the restored
property, either to the occupants or to the government. Constantine
states that henceforth the imperial treasury will freely bear all the
expense involved in the transfer.

<span id="fn_2923"></span>[380:2924](2010302.htm#fr_2923) <span
id="iii.xvi.v-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.v-p23"></span> τῷ σωματί& 251·. Latin, *corpori*. The
use of this word (which we might almost translate “body corporate”) is a
distinct recognition of the full legal status of the Christian Church,
and of their right as a corporation in the eyes of the law to hold
property. The right did not on this occasion receive recognition for the
first time, but more distinctly and in broader terms than ever before.
Upon the right of the Church to hold property before the publication of
this edict, see especially Hatch’s *Constitution of the Early Christian
Churches*, p. 152, note 25.

<span id="fn_2924"></span>[380:2925](2010302.htm#fr_2924) <span
id="iii.xvi.v-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.v-p25"></span> Greek, τῆς κοινῆς καὶ δημοσίας ἡσυχίας.
Latin, more simply, *quieti publicæ*.

<span id="fn_2925"></span>[380:2926](2010302.htm#fr_2925) <span
id="iii.xvi.v-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.v-p27"></span> τούτῳ γὰρ τῷ λογισμῷ. Latin,
*hactenus*.

<span id="fn_2926"></span>[380:2927](2010302.htm#fr_2926) <span
id="iii.xvi.v-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.v-p30"></span> It would seem that this communication
was sent to Anulinus soon after the issue of the Edict of Milan; for it
gives directions for the carrying out of some of the provisions made in
that edict, and is very likely but a sample of special letters sent in
connection with that document to the governors of the various provinces.
We know from the next chapter that Anulinus was proconsul of the Roman
province of Africa, of which Carthage was the capital city, and which
was very thickly populated with Christians. Of Anulinus himself we know
only what we can learn from this and the next two chapters. The title of
the rescript as given by Eusebius is somewhat misleading. There is no
indication in the document itself that it was written with the distinct
purpose of distinguishing the Catholic Church from schismatic bodies,
and granting it privileges denied to them. If such had been its aim, it
would certainly have stated it more clearly. The term “Catholic Church”
(in § 16) seems in fact to be used in a general sense to indicate the
Christian Church as a whole. It is, to be sure, possible that
Constantine may already have had some knowledge of the schismatics whom
he refers to in another epistle, quoted in the next chapter; but his
omission of all reference to them in the present case shows that he did
not intend at this time to draw lines between parties, or to pass
judgment upon any society calling itself a Christian church.

<span id="fn_2927"></span>[380:2928](2010302.htm#fr_2927) <span
id="iii.xvi.v-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.v-p32"></span> i.e. that if they *have* been molested,
or taken from their owners, they should be restored.

<span id="fn_2928"></span>[380:2929](2010302.htm#fr_2928) <span
id="iii.xvi.v-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.v-p34"></span> πολιτῶν. Valesius conjectures that
πολιτευτῶν should be read instead of πολιτῶν, and therefore translates
*a decurionibus*. Crusè, following him, reads “by the decurions.” The
correction, however, though an improvement, is not necessary, and I have
not felt justified in adopting it.

<span id="fn_2929"></span>[380:2930](2010302.htm#fr_2929) <span
id="iii.xvi.v-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.v-p37"></span> This and the next epistle were
occasioned by the Donatist schism. This great schism arose after the
close of the Diocletian persecution, and divided the church of North
Africa for more than a century. Like the Novatian schism, it was due to
the conflict of the more rigid and the more indulgent theories of
discipline. In Novatianism, however, the burning question was the
readmission of the lapsed; in Donatism, the validity of clerical
functions performed by unholy or unfaithful clergymen. In the latter,
therefore, the question was one of clerical, not lay discipline, and
there was involved in it a very important theological principle. The
Donatists maintained that the validity of clerical functions depended
upon the character of the administering clergyman; the Catholic party
maintained that the validity of those functions depended solely upon
Christ, and was quite independent of the character of the officiating
clergyman, provided he had been duly qualified by the Church for the
performance of such functions. Augustine, nearly a century after the
rise of the sect, found it necessary to oppose it, and it was in the
controversy with it that he developed his doctrine of the Church and the
Sacraments. The immediate occasion of the schism was the election of
Cæcilianus, who favored the milder principles of church discipline, to
the bishopric of Carthage, in 311. His election was opposed by the
entire rigoristic party in Carthage and throughout North Africa. It was
claimed that the Bishop Felix of Aptunga, by whom he was ordained, had
been a traditor during the persecution, and that therefore Cæcilian’s
ordination was not valid. As a consequence the bishops of Numidia, who
had not been invited to assist in the choice and ordination of Cæcilian,
held a synod in Carthage, and elected a counter-bishop, Majorinus. Thus
the schism was definitely launched. The party called itself for a time
by the name of its first bishop, but in 315 he was succeeded by Donatus,
called the Great, to distinguish him from Donatus, bishop of Casæ Nigræ,
who had been one of the original leaders of the movement. From him the
sect took the name by which it was thenceforth known. Doubtless personal
jealousies and enmities had considerable to do with the origin of the
schism, but it is quite inaccurate to ascribe it wholly to such causes.
The fundamental ground lay in the deep-seated difference in principles
between the two parties in the Church, and it was inevitable that that
difference should make itself felt in some such rupture, even had
personal reasons not co-operated to such an extent as they did. Our
chief sources for a knowledge of Donatism are the anti-Donatistic works
of Augustine (see *The Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers*, first series,
Vol. IV. p. 369 sq.), together with a number of his epistles, and
Optatus’ *De Schismate Donatistarum*. The literature on the subject is
very extensive. See especially Valesius’ essay, *De Schismate Donat*.,
appended to his edition of Eusebius (Reading’s edition, p. 775 sq.);
Ribbeck, *Donatus and Augustinus*, 1858; the articles *Cæcilianus* and
*Donatism* in the *Dict. of Christ. Biog*.; Neander’s *Church History*,
Torrey’s translation, II. p. 182 sq.; Hefele’s *Conciliengesch*. 2d ed.,
I. p. 293 sq.; and Schaff’s *Church History*, III. p. 360 sq.
Constantine did not voluntarily meddle in the Donatistic controversy. He
was first appealed to by the Donatists themselves, through the proconsul
Anulinus, early in the year 313 (see Augustine, *Epistle* 88, for a copy
of the letter in which Anulinus communicates their request to the
emperor). In response to their appeal Constantine (in the present
epistle) summoned the two parties to appear before a Roman synod, which
was held in October, 313. The Donatists were unable to prove their
charges, and the synod gave decision against them. Again, at their own
request, their case was heard at a council held in Gaul the following
year (the synod of Arles; see the next epistle of Constantine quoted in
this chapter). This council also decided against them, and the Donatists
appealed once more to the judgment of the emperor himself. He heard
their case in Milan in 316, and confirmed the decisions of the councils,
and soon afterward issued laws against them, threatening them with the
banishment of their bishops and the confiscation of their property. He
soon, however, withdrew his persecuting measures, and adopted a policy
of toleration. During subsequent reigns their condition grew worse, and
they were often obliged to undergo severe hardships; but they clung
rigidly to their principles until the invasion of the Vandals in 428,
when the entire North African Church was devastated.

<span id="fn_2930"></span>[381:2931](2010302.htm#fr_2930) <span
id="iii.xvi.v-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.v-p39"></span> Miltiades (called also Melchiades) was
bishop of Rome from July 2, 310, to Jan. 10 or 11, 314. See Lipsius,
*Chron. der röm. Bischöfe*, p. 257 sq.

<span id="fn_2931"></span>[381:2932](2010302.htm#fr_2931) <span
id="iii.xvi.v-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.v-p40"></span> Marcus is an otherwise unknown
personage, unless Valesius’ not improbable conjecture be accepted, that
he was at this time a presbyter of Rome, and is to be identified with
the Marcus who was bishop of Rome for some eight months in 336.

<span id="fn_2932"></span>[381:2933](2010302.htm#fr_2932) <span
id="iii.xvi.v-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.v-p41"></span> χ€ρται. The reference, as remarked by
Valesius, seems to be not to epistles of Anulinus, but to the
communications of the Donatists forwarded to the emperor by Anulinus. In
his epistle to the emperor, which was written April 15, 313 (see
Augustine, *Ep*. 88), Anulinus speaks of two communications handed to
him by the Donatists, which he forwards to the emperor with his own
letter. The former of them, which is no longer extant, bore the title
*Libellus ecclesiæ Catholicæ criminum Cæciliani*. The other, which is
preserved by Optatus (Du Pin’s edition, p. 22, and Routh, *Rel. Sac*.
IV. 280) contained the request that the emperor would appoint some
Gallic bishops to hear the case, because the church of that country had
not been subjected to the same temptation as themselves during the
persecution, and could therefore render an impartial decision. It was in
consequence of this request that the Gallic bishops mentioned below were
directed by the emperor to proceed to Rome to join with Miltiades in the
adjudication of the case. Constantine speaks of receiving many such
communications, but no others are preserved to us.

<span id="fn_2933"></span>[381:2934](2010302.htm#fr_2933) <span
id="iii.xvi.v-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.v-p42"></span> Cæcilianus had been arch-deacon of the
church of Carthage under the bishop Mensurius, and had been a diligent
supporter of the latter in his opposition to the fanatical conduct and
the extreme rigor of the stricter party during the persecution. In 311
he became bishop, and lived until about 345. We know nothing about his
life after the first few years of the conflict. His title to the
bishopric was universally acknowledged outside of North Africa, and by
all there except the Donatists themselves.

<span id="fn_2934"></span>[381:2935](2010302.htm#fr_2934) <span
id="iii.xvi.v-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.v-p43"></span> The chief charge brought against
Cæcilian was that he had been ordained by a traditor, Felix of Aptunga,
and that his ordination was therefore invalid. The charge against Felix
was carefully investigated at the Council of Arles, and pronounced quite
groundless. Many personal charges, such as cruelty to the martyrs in
prison (which had its ground, doubtless, in his condemnation of the
foolish fanaticism which was so common during the persecution in
Africa), tyranny, bloodthirstiness, &c., were brought against Cæcilian,
but were dismissed in every case as quite groundless.

<span id="fn_2935"></span>[381:2936](2010302.htm#fr_2935) <span
id="iii.xvi.v-p44.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.v-p45"></span> Retecius was bishop of Autun in Gaul
(see Optatus, I. 22, and the references given below). An extended
account of him, largely legendary, is given by Gregory of Tours (*De
gloria Conf*. 75, according to the *Dict. of Christ. Biog*.). The dates
of his accession and death are unknown to us. He attended the Council of
Arles in 313 (see the list of those present, in Routh, IV. p. 312), and
is spoken of in high terms by Augustine (*Contra Jul*. I. 7; *Opus
imperf. cont. Jul*. I. 55), and also by Jerome, who informs us that he
wrote a commentary on the Song of Songs and a work against Novatian (see
his *de vir. ill*. 82, *Ep. ad Florentium*, and *ad Marcellam*, Migne,
Nos. 5 and 37).

<span id="fn_2936"></span>[381:2937](2010302.htm#fr_2936) <span
id="iii.xvi.v-p45.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.v-p46"></span> Maternus was bishop of Cologne, the
first one of that see known to us, but the date of his accession and
death are unknown. He is mentioned by Optatus (*ibid*.), and was present
at the Council of Arles (Routh, *ibid*.).

<span id="fn_2937"></span>[381:2938](2010302.htm#fr_2937) <span
id="iii.xvi.v-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.v-p47"></span> Marinus, whose dates are likewise
unknown, was bishop of Arles (see Optatus, *ibid*.), and was present at
the Council in that city in 314 (see Routh, *ibid*. p. 313).

<span id="fn_2938"></span>[381:2939](2010302.htm#fr_2938) <span
id="iii.xvi.v-p47.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.v-p48"></span> This Roman Council convened in the
house of Fausta, in the Lateran, on the second day of October, 313, and
was attended by nineteen bishops,—the three from Gaul just mentioned,
Miltiades himself, and fifteen Italian bishops (see Optatus, *ibid*.).
The synod resulted in the complete victory of the party of Cæcilian, as
remarked above (note 15).

<span id="fn_2939"></span>[381:2940](2010302.htm#fr_2939) <span
id="iii.xvi.v-p49.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.v-p50"></span> ἐνθέσμῳ.

<span id="fn_2940"></span>[381:2941](2010302.htm#fr_2940) <span
id="iii.xvi.v-p52.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.v-p53"></span> The name of Chrestus appears first in
the list of those present at the Council of Arles (see Routh, IV. 312),
and in consequence it has been thought that he presided at the Council,
a conclusion which some have regarded as confirmed by Constantine’s own
words in § 24, below. But on the other hand, in the epistle of the synod
addressed to Sylvester of Rome, and containing the canons of the
Council, it is distinctly stated that Marinus, bishop of Arles,
presided; and this in itself seems more probable, although the document
in which the statement is found may not perhaps be genuine (see, for
instance, Ffoulke’s article *Marinus* in the *Dict. of Christ. Biog*.,
which needs, however, to be taken with allowance, for the case against
the genuineness of the extant canons of the Council is by no means so
strong as he implies). Of Chrestus himself we know nothing more than can
be gathered from this epistle.

<span id="fn_2941"></span>[381:2942](2010302.htm#fr_2941) <span
id="iii.xvi.v-p53.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.v-p54"></span> ἀποδιΐστασθαι

<span id="fn_2942"></span>[381:2943](2010302.htm#fr_2942) <span
id="iii.xvi.v-p54.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.v-p55"></span> τῆς αἱρέσεως τῆς καθολικῆς

<span id="fn_2943"></span>[382:2944](2010302.htm#fr_2943) <span
id="iii.xvi.v-p55.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.v-p56"></span> See the previous epistle.

<span id="fn_2944"></span>[382:2945](2010302.htm#fr_2944) <span
id="iii.xvi.v-p57.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.v-p58"></span> αἰσχρῶς, μᾶλλον δὲ μυσερῶς.

<span id="fn_2945"></span>[382:2946](2010302.htm#fr_2945) <span
id="iii.xvi.v-p59.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.v-p60"></span> ἐκ διαφόρων καὶ ἀμυθήτων τόπων. Some
old accounts give the number of bishops present at the Council as six
hundred, but this is wild. Baronius gave the number as two hundred, and
he has been followed by many others, but this rests upon a false reading
in a passage in Augustine’s works. The truth seems to be that there were
not more than thirty-three bishops present, the number given in the only
lists of the members of the synod which we have (see Routh, *ibid*., and
see also Hefele, *Conciliengesch*. I. p. 201).

<span id="fn_2946"></span>[382:2947](2010302.htm#fr_2946) <span
id="iii.xvi.v-p60.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.v-p61"></span> Arles (Latin *Arelate*), a city of
Southern France, situated not far from the mouth of the Rhone. It was at
this time one of the most prominent episcopal sees of Gaul, and was the
seat of more than one important council, of which the present is the
first known to us. The one summoned by Constantine convened, as we may
gather from this passage, on the first of August, 314. We do not know
how long its sessions continued, nor indeed any particulars in regard to
it, though twenty-two canons are extant in an epistle addressed to
Sylvester of Rome, which purport to be the genuine canons of the
Council, and are commonly so regarded. Their genuineness, however, is by
no means universally admitted (cf. e.g. the article in the *Dict. of
Christ. Biog.* referred to in note 27). If the canons are genuine, we
see that the Council busied itself with many other maters besides the
Donatistic schism, especially with the Easter question and with various
matters of church discipline. See Hefele, *Conciliengesch*. I. p. 201
sq. (2d ed.).

<span id="fn_2947"></span>[382:2948](2010302.htm#fr_2947) <span
id="iii.xvi.v-p61.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.v-p62"></span> According to Valesius the name of
Latronianus is found (*teste Gualthero*) in an ancient Palermo
inscription (*in tabulis Siculis, numero 164*). He is an otherwise
unknown personage.

<span id="fn_2948"></span>[382:2949](2010302.htm#fr_2948) <span
id="iii.xvi.v-p62.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.v-p63"></span> The Greek τοῦ κοῤ& 191·ήκτορος is
evidently simply a transliteration of the original Latin *correctoris*.
*Corrector*, in the time of the emperors, was “the title of a kind of
land bailiff, a governor” (Andrews’ Lexicon).

<span id="fn_2949"></span>[382:2950](2010302.htm#fr_2949) <span
id="iii.xvi.v-p63.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi.v-p64"></span> τῶν ἐκ τοῦ δευτέρου θρόνου; i.e.
presbyters. Valesius remarks *ad locum* that presbyters were commonly
called “priests of the second order,” as may be gathered from various
authors. He refers among others to Jerome, who says in his Epitaph on
the blessed Paula, “There were present the bishops of Jerusalem and
other cities, and an innumerable company of priests and Levites of the
lower order (*inferioris gradus*)”; and to Gregory Nazianzen (*Carm.
iambic. de vita sua*, p. 6), who says, “the bishops in the church sat on
a higher throne, the presbyters on lower seats on either side, while the
deacons stood by in white garments.” Compare also Eusebius’ description
of the arrangement of the seats in the church of Tyre (chap. 4, § 67,
above), and for other references see Valesius’ note. Possibly the Latin
phrase used by Constantine was similar to that employed by Jerome:
*secundi gradus*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI](2010303)
