[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](orrp20.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# VIII. THE TRANSFORMATION OF PAGANISM.

BIBLIOGRAPHY: The history of the destruction of paganism is a subject
that has tempted many historians. Beugnot (1835), Lasaulx (1854),
Schulze (Jena, 1887-1892) have tried it with varying success (see
Wissowa, *Religion der Römer*, pp. 84 ff.). But hardly any one has been
interested in the reconstruction of the theology of the last pagans,
although material is not lacking. The meritorious studies of Gaston
Boissier (*La fin du Paganisme*, Paris, 1891) treat especially the
literary and moral aspects of that great transformation. Allard (*Julien
l'Apostat*, I, 1900, p. 39 ff.) has furnished a summary of the religious
evolution during the fourth century.

<span id="xref_8_1">8\_1</span>. Socrates, *Hist. Eccl.*, IV, 32.

<span id="xref_8_2">8\_2</span>. It is a notable fact that astrology
scarcely penetrated at all into the rural districts (*supra*, ch. VII,
n.  [7\_9](orrp20.htm#xref_7_9).md), where the ancient devotions maintained
themselves; see the *Vita S. Eligii*, Migne, *P. L.*, XL, col. 1172
f.--In the same way the cult of the menhirs in Gaul persisted in the
Middle Ages; see d'Arbois de Jubainville, *Comptes Rendus Acad. Inscr.*,
1906, pp. 146 ff.; S. Reinach, *Mythes, cultes*, III, 1908, pp. 365 ff.

<span id="xref_8_3">8\_3</span>. Aug., *Civ. Dei*, IV, 21 et *passim*.
Arnobius and Lactantius had previously developed this theme.

<span id="xref_8_4">8\_4</span>. On the use made of mythology during the
fourth century, cf. Burckhardt, *Zeit Contantins*, 2d ed., 1880, pp.
145-147; Boissier, *La fin du paganisme*, II, pp. 276 ff. and *passim*.

<span id="page_282">p. 282</span>

<span id="xref_8_5">8\_5</span>. It is well known that the poems of
Prudentius (348-410), especially the Peristephanon, contain numerous
attacks on paganism and the pagans.

<span id="xref_8_6">8\_6</span>. Cf. *La polémique de l'Ambrosiaster
contre les païens* (*Rev. hist. et litt. relig.*, VIII, 1903, pp. 418
ff.). On the personality of the author (probably the converted Jew
Isaac), cf. Souter, *A Study of Ambrosiaster*, Cambridge, 1905 (*Texts
and Studies,* VII) and his edition of the *Quaestiones* (Vienna, 1908),
intr. p. xxiv.

<span id="xref_8_7">8\_7</span>. The identity of Firmicus Maternus, the
author of *De errore profanarum, religionum*, and that of the writer of
the eight books *Matheseos* appears to have been definitely established.

<span id="xref_8_8">8\_8</span>. Maximus was Bishop of Turin about
458-465 A.D. We possess as yet only a very defective edition of the
treatises *Contra Paganos* and *Contra Judaeos* (Migne, *Patr. lat.*,
LVII, col. 781 ff.).

<span id="xref_8_9">8\_9</span>. Particularly the *Carmen adversus
paganos* written after Eugene's attempt at restoration in 394 A. D.
(Riese, *Anthol. lat.*, I, 20) and the *Carmen ad senatorem ad idolorum
servitutem conversum*, attributed to St. Cyprian (Hartel. ed., III, p.
302), which is probably contemporaneous with the former.

<span id="xref_8_10">8\_10</span>. On this point see the judicious
reflections of Paul Allard, *Julien l'Apostat*, I, 1900, p. 35.

<span id="xref_8_11">8\_11</span>. Hera was the goddess of the air after
the time of the Stoics (Ἥρα = ἀήρ).

<span id="xref_8_12">8\_12</span>. Cf. *supra*, pp.
[51](orrp07.htm#page_51), [75](orrp08.htm#page_75.md),
[99](orrp08.htm#page_99), [120](orrp09.htm#page_120.md),
[148](orrp10.htm#page_148.md). Besides the Oriental gods the only ones to
retain their authority were those of the Grecian mysteries, Bacchus and
Hecate, and even these were transformed by their neighbors.

<span id="xref_8_13">8\_13</span>. The wife of Praetextatus, after
praising his career and talents in his epitaph, adds: "Sed ista parva:
tu pius mystes sacris \| teletis reperta mentis arcano premis, \|
divumque numen multiplex doctus colis" (*CIL*, 1779 =Dessau, *Inscr.
sel.*, 1259).

<span id="xref_8_14">8\_14</span>. Pseudo-August. \[Ambrosiaster\],
*Quaest. Vet. et Nov. Test.*, (p. 139, 9-11, Souter ed): "Paganos
elementis esse subiectos

<span id="page_283">p. 283</span>

nulli dubium est. . . . Paganos elementa colere omnibus cognitum est";
cf. 103 (p. 304, 4 Souter ed.): "Solent (pagani) ad elementa confugere
dicentes haec se colere quibus gubernaculis regitur vita humana" (cf.
*Rev. hist. lit. rel.*, VIII, 1903, p. 426, n. 3).--Maximus of Turin
(Migne, *P. L.*, LVII, 783): "Dicunt pagani: nos solem, lunam et stellas
et universa elementa colimus et veneramur." Cf. *Mon. myst. Mithra*, I,
p. 103, n. 4, p. 108.

<span id="xref_8_15">8\_15</span>. Firmicus Maternus, *Mathes.*, VII
prooem: "(Deus) qui ad fabricationem onmium elementorum diversitate
composita ex contrariis et repugnantibus cuncta perfecit."

<span id="xref_8_16">8\_16</span>. Elementum is the translation of
στοιχεῖον, which has had the same meaning in Greek at least ever since
the first century (see Diels, *Elementum*, 1899, pp. 44 ff., and the
Septuagint, Sap. Sal., 7, 18; 19, 17. Pfister, "*Die στοιχεῖα τοῦ κόσμου
in den Briefen des Paulus*," *Philologus*, LXIX, 1910, p. 410.--In the
fourth century this meaning was generally accepted: Macrobius, *Somn.
Scipionis*, I, 12, § 16: "Caeli dico et siderum, aliorumque
elementorum"; cf. I, II, § 7 ff. Martianus Capella, II, 209;
Ambrosiaster, *loc. cit.*; Maximus of Turin, *loc. cit.*; Lactantius,
II, 13, 2: "Elementa mundi, caelum, solem, terram, mare."--Cf. Diels,
*op. cit.*, pp. 78 ff.

<span id="xref_8_17">8\_17</span>. Cf. *Rev. hist. litt. rel.*, VIII,
1903, pp. 429 ff.--Until the end of the fifth century higher education
in the Orient remained in the hands of the pagans. The life of Severus
of Antioch, by Zachariah the Scholastic, preserved in a Syrian
translation \[*supra*, ch. VII, n.  [7\_81](orrp20.htm#xref_7_81.md)\], is
particularly instructive in this regard. The Christians, who were
opposed to paganism and astrology, consequently manifested an aversion
to the profane sciences in general, and in that way they became
responsible to a serious extent for the gradual extinction of the
knowledge of the past (cf. *Rev. hist. litt. rel.*, *ibid.*, p. 431;
Royer, *L'enseignement d'Ausone à Alcuin*, 1906, p. 130 ff.). But it
must be said in their behalf that before them Greek philosophy had
taught the vanity of every science that did not have the moral culture
of the ego for its purpose, see Geffcken, *Aus der Werdezeit des
Christentums*, p. 7, p. III.

<span id="xref_8_18">8\_18</span>. *Mon. myst. Mithra*, I, p. 294. Cf.
*supra*, pp. [175](orrp11.htm#page_175.md) f.

<span id="page_284">p. 284</span>

<span id="xref_8_19">8\_19</span>. Ambrosiaster, *Comm. in Epist.
Pauli*, p. 58 B: "Dicentes per istos posse ire ad Deum sicut per comites
pervenire ad regem" (cf. *Rev. his. lit. rel.*, VIII, 1903, p.
427).--The same idea was set forth by Maximus of Turin (*Adv. pag.*,
col. 791) and by Lactantius (*Inst. div.*, II, 16, § 5 ff., p. 168
Brandt); on the celestial court, see also Arnobius, II, 36; Tertullian,
Apol., 24.--Zeus bore the name of king, but the Hellenic Olympus was in
reality a turbulent republic. The conception of a supreme god, the
sovereign of a hierarchical court, seems to have been of Persian origin,
and to have been propagated by the magi and the mysteries of Mithra. The
inscription of the Nemroud Dagh speaks of Διὸς Ὠρομάσδου θρόνους
(*supra*, ch. VI, n.  [6\_26](orrp19.htm#xref_6_26).md), and, in fact, a
bas-relief shows Zeus-Oramasdes sitting on a throne, scepter in hand.
The Mithra bas-reliefs likewise represent Jupiter Ormuzd on a throne,
with the other gods standing around him (*Mon. myst. Mithra*, I, p. 129;
11, p. 188, fig. 11); and Hostanes pictured the angels sitting around
the throne of God (*supra*, ch. VI, n.  [6\_38](orrp19.htm#xref_6_38.md);
see Rev. iv). Moreover, the celestial god was frequently compared, not
to a king in general, but to the Great King, and people spoke of his
satraps; cf. Pseudo-Arist., Περὶ κόσμου, c.6, p. 398a, 10 ff. = Apul.,
*De mundo*, c. 26; Philo, *De opif. mundi*, c. 23, 27 (p. 24, 17; 32,
24, Cohn); Maximus of Turin, X, 9; and Capelle, *Die Schrift von der
Welt* (*Neue Jahrb. für das klass. Altert.*, VIII), 1905, p. 556, n. 6.
Particularly important is a passage of Celsus (Origen, *Contra Cels.*,
VIII, 35) where the relation of this doctrine to the Persian demonology
is shown. But the Mazdean conception must have combined, at an early
date, with the old Semitic idea that Baal was the lord and master of his
votaries (*supra*, [p. 94](orrp08.htm#page_94) ff..md). In his
*Neutestamentliche Zeitgeschichte* (2d. ed., 1906, p. 364 ff.),
Holtzmann insists on the fact that the people derived their conception
of the kingdom of God from the pattern of the Persian monarchy. See also
*supra*, [p. 111](orrp09.htm#page_111.md).

A comparison similar to this one, which is also found among the pagans
of the fourth century, is the comparison of heaven with a city
(Nectarius in St. Aug., Epist., 103 \[Migne, *P. L.*, XXXIII, Col.
386\]): "Civitatem quam magnus Deus et bene meritae de eo animae
habitant," etc. Compare the City of God of St. Augustine and the
celestial Jerusalem of the Jews

<span id="page_285">p. 285</span>

\[paragraph continues\] (Bousset, *Religion des Judentums*, 1903, p.
272).--Cf. also Manilius, V, 735 ff.

<span id="xref_8_20">8\_20</span>. August., *Epist.* 16 \[48\] (Migne,
*Pat. Lat.*, XXXIII, col. 82): "Equidem unum esse Deum summum sine
initio, sine prole naturae, seu patrem magnum atque magnificum, quis tam
demens, tam mente captus neget esse certissimum? Huius nos virtutes per
mundanum opus diffusas multis vocabulis invocamus, quoniam nomen eius
cuncti proprium videlicet ignoramus. Nam Deus omnibus religionibus
commune nomen est. Ita fit ut, dum eius quasi quaedam membra carptim
variis supplicationibus prosequimur, totum colere profecto videamur."
And at the end: "Dii te servent, per quos et eorum atque cunctorum
mortalium communem patrem, universi mortales, quos terra sustinet, mille
modis concordi discordia, veneramur et colimus." Cf. Lactantius
Placidus, *Comm. in Stat. Theb.*, IV, 516.--Another pagan (*Epist.*, 234
\[21\], Migne, *P. L.*, XXXIII, col. 1030 speaks "deorum comitatu
vallatus, Dei utique potestatibus emeritus, id est eius unius et
universi et incomprehensibilis et ineffabilis infatigabilisque Creatoris
impletus virtutibus, quos (*read* quas) ut verum est angelos dicitis vel
quid alterum post Deum vel cum Deo aut a Deo aut in Deum."

<span id="xref_8_21">8\_21</span>. The two ideas are contrasted in the
*Paneg. ad Constantin. Aug.*, 313 A. D., c. 26 (p. 212, Bährens ed.):
"Summe rerum sator, cuius tot nomina sunt quot gentium linguas esse
voluisti (quem enim te ipse dici velis, scire non possumus), sive tute
quaedam vis mensque divina es, quae toto infusa mundo omnibus miscearis
elementis et sine ullo extrinsecus accedente vigoris impulsu per te ipsa
movearis, sive alique supra onme caelum potestas es quae hoc opus tuum
ex altiore naturae arce despicias."--Compare with what we have said of
*Jupiter exsuperantissimus* ([p. 190](orrp11.htm#page_190).md).

<span id="xref_8_22">8\_22</span>. Macrobius, *Sat.*, I, 17 ff.; cf.
*Firm. Mat., Err. prof. rel.*, c. 8; *Mon. myst. Mithra*, I, 338 ff.
Some have supposed that the source of Macrobius's exposition was
Iamblichus.

<span id="xref_8_23">8\_23</span>. Julian had intended to make all the
temples centers of moral instruction (Allard, *Julien l'Apostat*, II,
186 ff.), and this great idea of his reign was partially realized after
his death. His homilies were little appreciated by the bantering

<span id="page_286">p. 286</span>

and frivolous Greeks of Antioch or Alexandria, but they appealed much
more to Roman gravity. At Rome the rigorous mysteries of Mithra had
paved the way for reform. St. Augustine, *Epist.*, 91 \[202\] (Migne,
*P. L.*, XXXIII, Col. 315), c. 408 A. D., relates that moral
interpretations of the old myths were told among the pagans during his
time: "Illa omnia quae antiquitus de vita deorum moribusque conscripta
sunt, longe aliter sunt intelligenda atque interpretanda sapientibus.
Ita vero in templis populis congregatis recitari huiuscemodi salubres
interpretationes heri et nudiustertius audivimus." See also *Civ. Dei*,
II, 6: "Nec nobis nescio quos susurros paucissimorum auribus anhelatos
et arcana velut religione traditos iactent (pagani), quibus vitae
probitas sanctitasque discatur." Compare the epitaph of Praetextatus
(*CIL*, VI, 1779 = Dessau, *Inscr. sel.*, 1259): "Paulina veri et
castitatis conscia \| dicata templis," etc.--Firmicus Maternus
(*Mathes*, II, 30) demands of the astrologer the practice of all
virtues, "antistes enim deorum separatus et alienus esse debet a pravis
illecebris voluptatum. . . . Itaque purus, castus esto, etc."

<span id="xref_8_24">8\_24</span>. This is clearly asserted by the
verses of the epitaph cited (v. 22 ff): "Tu me, marite, disciplinarum
bono \| puram ac pudicam SORTE MORTIS EXIMENS, \| in templa ducis ac
famulam divis dicas: \| Te teste cunctis imbuor mysteriis." Cf. Aug.,
*Epist.*, 234 (Migne, *P. L.,* XXXIII, col. 1031, letter of a pagan to
the bishop,):"'Via est in Deum melior, qua vir bonus, piis, puris
iustis, castis, veris dictisque factisque probatus et deorum comitatu
vallatus . . . . ire festinat; via est, inquam, qua purgati antiquorum
sacrorum piis praeceptis expiationibusque purissimis et abstemiis
observationibus decocti anima et corpore constantes deproperant.'--St.
Augustine( *Civ. Dei*, VI, 1 and VI, 12) opposes the pagans who assert
"deos non propter praesentem vitam coli sed propter aeternam."

<span id="xref_8_25">8\_25</span>. The variations of this doctrine are
set forth in detail by Macrobius, *In Somn. Scip.,* I, II, § 5 ff.
According to some, the soul lived above the sphere of the moon, where
the immutable realm of eternity began; according to others, in the
spheres of the fixed stars where they placed the Elysian Fields
(*supra*, ch. V, n.  [5\_65](orrp18.htm#xref_5_65.md); see Martian,
Capella, II, 209). The Milky Way in particular was assigned to them as
their residence

<span id="page_297">p. 297</span>

\[paragraph continues\] (Macr., *ib.*, c. 12; cf. Favon. Eulog.,
*Disput. de somn. Scipionis*, p. I, 20 \[Holder ed.\]: "Bene meritis . .
. . lactei circuli lucida ac candens habitatio deberetur"; St. Jerome,
*Ep.*, 23, § 3 \[Migne, *P. L.*, XXII, col. 426), in conformity with an
old Pythagorean doctrine (Gundel, *De stellarum appellatione et relig.
Romana*, 1907, p. 153 \[245\], as well as an Egyptian doctrine (Maspero,
*Hist. des peuples de l'Orient*, I, p. 181).--According to others,
finally, the soul was freed from all connection with the body and lived
in the highest region of heaven, descending first through the gates of
Cancer and Capricorn, at the intersection of the zodiac and the Milky
Way, then through the spheres of the planets. This theory, which was
that of the mysteries (*supra*, pp. [126](orrp09.htm#page_126.md),
[152](orrp10.htm#page_152).md) obtained the approbation of Macrobius
("quorum sectae amicior est ratio") who explains it in detail (I, 12, §
13 ff.). Arnobius, who got his inspiration from Cornelius Labeo
(*supra*, ch. V, n.  [5\_64](orrp18.htm#xref_5_64).md), opposed it, as a
widespread error (II, 16): "Dum ad corpora labimur et properamus humana
ex mundanis circulis, sequuntur causae quibus mali simas et pessimi."
Cf. also, II, 33: "Vos, cum primum soluti membrorum abieretis e nodis,
alas vobis adfuturas putatis quibus ad caelum pergere atque ad sidera
volare possitis," etc.). It had become so popular that the comedy by
Querolus, written in Gaul during the first years of the fifth century,
alluded to it in a mocking way, in connection with the planets (V, 38):
"Mortales vero addere animas sive inferis nullus labor sive superis." It
was still taught, at least in part, by the Priscillianists (Aug., *De
haeres.*, 70; Priscillianus, éd. Schepss., p. 153, 15; cf. Herzog-Hauck,
*Realencycl.*, 3d ed., s. v. "Priscillian," p. 63.--We have mentioned
(*supra*, ch. V, n.  [5\_54](orrp18.htm#xref_5_54).md) the origin of the
belief and of its diffusion under the empire.

<span id="xref_8_26">8\_26</span>. Cf. *supra*, [p.
152](orrp10.htm#page_152), and pp. [189](orrp11.htm#page_189.md) ff.; *Mon.
myst. Mithra*, I, p. 310.

<span id="xref_8_27">8\_27</span>. This idea was spread by the Stoics
(ἐκπύρωσις) and by astrology (*supra*, [p. 262](orrp19.htm#page_262).md);
also by the Oriental religions, see Lactantius, *Inst.*, VII, 18, and
*Mon. myst. Mithra*, I, p. 310.

<span id="xref_8_28">8\_28</span>. Gruppe (*Griech. Mythol.*, pp. 1488
ff.) has tried to indicate the different elements that entered into this
doctrine.

<span id="xref_8_29">8\_29</span>. Cf. *supra*, pp.
[134](orrp09.htm#page_134) f., [p. 160](orrp10.htm#page_160.md) and
*passim*. The similarity

<span id="page_288">p. 288</span>

of the pagan theology to Christianity was strongly brought out by
Arnobius, II, 13-14.--Likewise in regard to the Orient, de Wilamowitz
has recently pointed out the close affinity uniting the theology of
Synesius with that of Proclus (*Sitzungsb. Akad. Berlin*, XIV, 1907, pp.
280 ff.) he has also indicated how philosophy then led to Christianity.

<span id="xref_8_30">8\_30</span>. M. Pichon (*Les derniers écrivains
profanes*, Paris, 1906) has recently shown how the eloquence of the
panegyrists unconsciously changed from paganism to monotheism. See also
Maurice, *Comptes Rendus Acad. Inscriptions*, 1909, p. 165.--The vague
deism of Constantine strove to reconcile the opposition of heliolatry
and Christianity (Burckhardt, *Die Zeit Constantins*, pp. 353 ff.) and
the emperor's letters addressed to Arius and the community of Nicomedia
(Migne, *P. G.*, LXXXV, col. 1343 ff.) are, as shown by Loeschke (*Das
Syntagma des Gelasius* \[Rhein. Mus., LXII, 1906, p. 44), "ein
merkwüirdiges Produkt theologischen Dilettantismus, aufgebaut auf im
wesentlichen pantheistischer Grundlage init Hilfe weniger christlicher
Termini und fast noch weniger christlicher Gedanken." I shall cite a
passage in which the influence of the astrological religion is
particularly noticeable (Col. 1552 D): Ἰδοῦ γὰρ ὁ κόσμος μορφῆ εἳτουν
σχῆμα τυγχάνει ὥν· καὶ οἱ ἀστέρες γε χαρακτῆρας προβέβληνται· καὶ ὅλως
τὸ πνεῦμα τοῦ σφαιροειδοῦς τούτου κύκλου, εῖ᾽δος τῶν ὃντων τυγχάνει ὅν,
καὶ ὥσπερ μόρφωμα· καὶ ὅμως ὁ Θεὸς πανταχοῦ πάρεστι.
