[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](orrp13)  [Next](orrp15.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# I. ROME AND THE ORIENT.

<span id="xref_1_1">1\_1</span>. Renan, *L'Antéchrist*, p. 130.

<span id="xref_1_2">1\_2</span>. M. Krumbacher (*Byzant. Zeitschr.*,
XVI, 1907, p. 710) notes, in connection with the idea that I am
defending here: "In ähnlicher Weise war dieser Gedanke (der
Ueberflügelung des Abendlandes durch die auf alien Kulturgebieten
vordringende Regsamkeit der Orientalen) kurz vorher in meiner Skizze der
byzantinischen Literatur (*Kultur der Gegenwart*, I, 8 \[1907\], pp.
246-253) auseinandergelegt worden; es ist ein erfreulicher und bei dem
Wirrsal widerstreitender Doctrinen tröstlicher Beweis für den
Fortschritt der Erkenntniss, dass

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

zwei von ganz verschiedenen Richtungen ausgehende Diener der
Wissenschaft sich in so wichtigen allgemeinen Fragen so nahe kommen."

<span id="xref_1_3">1\_3</span>. Cf. Kornemann, "Aegyptische Einflüsse
im römischen Kaiserreich" (*Neue Jahrb. für das klass. Altertum*, II,
1898, p. 118 ff.) and Otto Hirschfeld, *Die kaiserl.
Verwaltungsbeamten*, 2d. ed., p. 469.

<span id="xref_1_4">1\_4</span>. See Cicero's statement regarding the
ancient Roman dominion (*De off.*, II, 8): "Illud patrocinium orbis
terrae verius quam imperium poterat nominari."

<span id="xref_1_5">1\_5</span> O. Hirschfeld, *op. cit.*, pp. 53, 91,
93, etc.; cf. Mitteis, *Reichsrecht und Volksrecht*, p. 9, n. 2, etc.
Thus have various institutions been transmitted from the ancient
Persians to the Romans; see Ch. VI, n. 5.

<span id="xref_1_6">1\_6</span>. Rostovtzew, "Der Ursprung des Kolonats"
(*Beiträge zur alten Gesch.*, I, 1901, p. 295); Haussoullier, Histoire
de Milet et du Didymeion, 1902, p. 106.

<span id="xref_1_7">1\_7</span>. Mitteis, *Reichsrecht und Volksrecht*
in *den östlichen Provinzen*, 1891, pp. 8 ff.

<span id="xref_1_8">1\_8</span>. Mommsen, *Gesammelte Schriften*, II,
1905, p. 366: "Seit Diocletian übernimmt der östliche Reichsteil, die
*partes Orientis*, auf allen Gebieten die Führung. Dieser späte Sieg des
Hellenismus über die Lateiner ist vielleiclit nirgends auffälliger als
auf dem Gebiet der juristischen Schriftstellerei."

<span id="xref_1_9">1\_9</span>. De Vogüe and Duthoit, *L'Architecture
civile et rcligieuse de la Syrie centrale*, Paris, 1866-1877.

<span id="xref_1_10">1\_10</span>. This result is especially due to the
researches of Al. Strzygowski, but we cannot enter here into the
controversies aroused by his publications: *Orient oder Rom*, 1911;
*Hellas in des Orients Umarmung*, Munich, 1902, and especially
*Kleinasien, ein Neuland der Kunsigeschichte*, Leipsic, 1903; \[cf. the
reports of Ch. Diehl, *Journal des Savants*, 1904, pp. 236 ff. = *Etudes
byzantines*, 1905, pp. 336 ff.; Gabriel Millet, *Revue archéolog.*,
1905, 1, pp. 93 ff.; Marcel Laurent, *Revue de l'Instr. publ. en
Belgique*, 1905, pp. 145 ff\]; *Mschatta*, 1904, \[cf. *infra*, Ch. VI,
n. \].--M. Bréhier, "Orient ou Byzance?" (*Rev. archéol.*, 1907, II, pp.
396 ff.), gives a substantial summary of the question.--In his last
volume, *Amida* (1910), M. Strzygowski

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

tries to find the source of medieval art in Mesopotamia. For this
controversy see Diehl's *Manuel d'art byzantin*, 1910.

<span id="xref_1_11">1\_11</span>. See also Pliny, *Epist. Traian.*, 40:
"Architecti tibi \[in Bithynia\] deesse non possunt . . . . cum ex
Graecia etiam ad nos \[at Rome\] venire soliti sint."--Among the names
of architects mentioned in Latin inscriptions there are a great many
revealing Greek or Oriental origin (see Ruggiero, *Dizion. epigr.*, s.
v. "Architectus"), in spite of the consideration which their eminently
useful profession always enjoyed at Rome..

<span id="xref_1_12">1\_12</span>. The question of the artistic and
industrial influences exercised by the Orient over Gaul during the Roman
period, has been broached frequently--among others by Courajod (*Leçons
du Louvre*, I, 1899, pp. 115, 327. ff.)--but it has never been seriously
studied in its entirety. Michaëlis has recently devoted a suggestive
article to this subject in connection with a statue from the museum of
Metz executed in the style of the school of Pergamum (*Jahrb. der
Gesellsch. für lothring. Geschichte*, XVII, 1905, pp. 203 ff.). By the
influence of Marseilles in Gaul, and the ancient connection of that city
with the towns of Hellenic Asia, he explains the great difference
between the works of sculpture discovered along the upper Rhine, which
had been civilized by the Italian legions, and those unearthed on the
other side of the Vosges. This is a very important discovery rich in
results. We believe, however, that Michaëlis ascribes too much
importance to the early Marseilles traders traveling along the old "tin
road" towards Brittany and the "amber road" towards Germany. The Asiatic
merchants and artisans did not set out from one point only. There were
many emigrants all over the valley of the Rhone. Lyons was a
half-Hellenized city, and the relations of Arles with Syria, of Nimes
with Egypt, etc., are well known. We shall speak of them in connection
with the religions of those countries.

<span id="xref_1_13">1\_13</span>. Even in the bosom of the church the
Latin Occident of the fourth century was still subordinate to the Greek
Orient, which imposed its doctrinal problems upon it (Harnack, *Mission
und Ausbreitung*, II, p. 283, n. 1).

<span id="xref_1_14">1\_14</span>. The sacred formulas have been
collected by Alb. Dieterich, *Eine Mithrasliturgie*, pp. 212 ff. He adds
Δοίη σοὶ Ὄοσιρις

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

τὸ ψυςρὸν ὔδωρ, *Archiv für Religionswiss.*, VIII, 1905, p. 504, n 1.
\[Cf. *infra*, ch. IV, n.  [4\_90](orrp17.htm#xref_4_90.md).\] Among the
hymns of greatest importance for the Oriental cults we must cite those
in honor of Isis, discovered in the island of Andros (Kaibel, *Epigr*.,
4028) and elsewhere (see ch. IV, n.  [4\_6](orrp17.htm#xref_4_6).md).
Fragments of hymns in honor of Attis have been preserved by Hippolytus
(*Philosoph.*, V, 9. pp. 168 ff.) The so-called orphic hymns (Abel,
*Orphica*, 1883), which date back to a rather remote period, do not seem
to contain many Oriental elements (see Maas, *Orpheus*, 1895, pp. 173
ff.), but this does not apply to the gnostic hymns of which we possess
very instructive fragments.--Cf. *Mon. myst. de Mithra*, I, p. 313, n.
1.

<span id="xref_1_15">1\_15</span>. Regarding the imitations of the
stage, see Adami, *De poetis scen. Graecis hymnorum sacrorum
imitatoribu*s, 1901. Wünsch has shown the liturgic character of a prayer
to Asklepios, inserted by Herondas into his mimiambi (*Archiv für
Religionswiss.*, VII, 1904, pp. 95 ff.) Dieterich believes he has found
an extensive extract from the Mithraic liturgy in a magic papyrus of
Paris (see *infra*, ch. VI, Bibliography). But all these discoveries
amount to very little if we think of the enormous number of liturgic
texts that have been lost, and even in the case of ancient Greece we
know little regarding this sacred literature. See Ausfeld, *De Graecorum
precationibus*, Leipsic, 1903; Ziegler, *De precationum apud Graecos
formis quaestiones selectae*, Breslau, 1905; H. Schmidt, *Veteres
philosophi quomodo iudicaverint de precibus*, Giessen, 1907.

<span id="xref_1_16">1\_16</span>. For instance, the hymn "which the
magi sung"' about the steeds of the supreme god; its contents are given
by Dion Chrysostom, *Orat.*, XXXVI, 39 (see *Mon. myst. Mithra*, I. p.
298; II, p. 60).

<span id="xref_1_17">1\_17</span>. I have in mind the hymns of Cleanthes
(Von Arnim, *Stoic. fragm.*, I, Nos. 527, 537), also Demetrius's act of
renunciation in Seneca, *De Provid.*, V, 5, which bears a surprising
resemblance to one of the most famous Christian prayers, the *Suscipe*
of Saint Ignatius which concludes the book of Spiritual Exercises
(Delehaye, *Les légendes hagiographiques*, 1905, p. 170, n. 1).--In this
connection we ought to mention the prayer translated in the *Asclepius*,
the Greek text

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

of which has recently been found on a papyrus (Reitzenstein, *Archiv für
Religionswiss.*, VII, 1904, p. 395). On pagan prayers introduced into
the Christian liturgy see Reitzenstein and Wendland, *Nachrichten Ges.
Wiss.*, Göttingen, 1910, pp. 325 ff.

<span id="xref_1_18">1\_18</span>. This point has been studied more in
detail in our *Monuments relatifs aux mystères de Mithra*, from which we
have taken parts of the following observations (I, pp. 21 ff.).

<span id="xref_1_19">1\_19</span>. Lucian's authorship of the treatise
Περὶ τῆς Συρίης θεοῦ has been questioned but wrongly; see Maurice
Croiset, *Essai sur Lucien*, 1882, pp. 63, 204. I am glad to be able to
cite the high authority of Nöldeke in favor of its authenticity. Nöldeke
writes me on this subject: "Ich habe jeden Zweifel daran schon lange
aufgegeben. . . . Ich habe lange den Plan gehabt, einen Commentar zu
diesem immerhin recht lehrreichen Stück zu schreiben and viel Material
dazu gesammelt. Aus der Annahme der Echtheit dieser Schrift ergiebt sich
mir, dass auch das Περὶ ἀστρονομίας echt ist.

<span id="xref_1_20">1\_20</span>. Cf. Frisch, *De compositione libri
Plutarchei qui inscribitur*, Περὶ Ἴσιδος, Leipsic, 1906, and the
observations of Neustadt, *Berl. Philol. Wochenschr.*, 1907, p.
1117.--One of Plutarch's sources is the Ἰουδαϊκά by Apion.--See also
Scott Moncrieft, *Journ. of Hell. Studies*, XIX, 1909, p. 81.

<span id="xref_1_21">1\_21</span>. See ch. VII, pp.
[202](orrp12.htm#page_202.md)-203.

<span id="xref_1_22">1\_22</span>. Cf. *Mon myst. Mithra*, I, p. 75, p.
219.--For Egypt see Georges Foucart, "L'art et la religion dans
l'ancienne Egypte," *Revue des idées*, Nov. 15, 1908.

<span id="xref_1_23">1\_23</span>. The narrative and symbolic sculpture
of the Oriental cults was a preparation for that of the Middle Ages, and
many remarks in Mile's beautiful book *L'Art du XIII<sup>e</sup> siècle
en France*, can be applied to the art of dying paganism.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II. Why the Oriental Religions Spread](orrp15.md)
