[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](orrp05)  [Next](orrp07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

# WHY THE ORIENTAL RELIGIONS SPREAD.

WHEN, during the fourth century, the weakened empire split asunder like
an overburdened scale whose beam is broken, this political divorce
perpetuated a moral separation that had existed for a long time. The
opposition between the Greco-Oriental and the Latin worlds manifests
itself especially in religion and in the attitude taken by the central
power toward it.

Occidental paganism was almost exclusively Latin under the empire. After
the annexation of Spain, Gaul and Brittany, the old Iberian, Celtic and
other religions were unable to keep up the unequal struggle against the
more advanced religion of the conquerors. The marvelous rapidity with
which the literature of the civilizing Romans was accepted by the
subject peoples has frequently been pointed out. Its influence was felt
in the temples as well as in the forum; it transformed the prayers to
the gods as well as the conversation between men. Besides, it was part
of the political program of the Cæsars to make the adoption of the Roman
divinities general, and the government imposed the rules of its
sacerdotal law as well as the principles of its public and civil law
upon its new subjects. The municipal laws prescribed the election of
pontiffs and augurs in common with the judicial duumvirs. In Gaul
druidism, with its oral traditions embodied in

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

long poems, perished and disappeared less on account of the police
measures directed against it than in consequence of its voluntary
relinquishment by the Celts, as soon as they came under the ascendency
of Latin culture. In Spain it is difficult to find any traces of the
aboriginal religions. Even in Africa, where the Punic religion was far
more developed, it maintained itself only by assuming an entirely Roman
appearance. Baal became Saturn and Eshmoun Æsculapius. It is doubtful if
there was one temple in all the provinces of Italy and Gaul where, at
the time of the disappearance of idolatry, the ceremonies were
celebrated according to native rites and in the local idiom. To this
exclusive predominance of Latin is due the fact that it remained the
only liturgic language of the Occidental church, which here as in many
other cases perpetuated a preexisting condition and maintained a unity
previously established. By imposing her speech upon the inhabitants of
Ireland and Germany, Christian Rome simply continued the work of
assimilation in the barbarian provinces subject to her influence that
she had begun while pagan. [2\_1](orrp15.htm#xref_2_1)

In the Orient, however, the churches that are separate from the Greek
orthodoxy use, even to-day, a variety of dialects calling to mind the
great diversity of races formerly subject to Rome. In those times twenty
varieties of speech translated the religious thought of the peoples
joined under the dominion of the Cæsars. At the beginning of our era
Hellenism had not yet conquered the uplands of
Anatolia [2\_2](orrp15.htm#xref_2_2) nor central Syria, nor the
divisions of Egypt. Annexation to the empire might retard and in certain
regions weaken the power of expansion of Greek civilization,

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

but it could not substitute Latin culture for
it [2\_3](orrp15.htm#xref_2_3) except around the camps of the legions
guarding the frontier and in a very few colonies. It especially
benefitted the individuality of each region. The native religions
retained all their prestige and independence. In their ancient
sanctuaries that took rank with the richest and most famous of the
world, a powerful clergy continued to practise ancestral devotions
according to barbarian rites, and frequently in a barbarian tongue. The
traditional liturgy, everywhere performed with scrupulous respect,
remained Egyptian or Semitic, Phrygian or Persian, according to the
locality.

Neither pontifical law nor augural science ever obtained credit outside
of the Latin world. It is a characteristic fact that the worship of the
deified emperors, the only official worship required of every one by the
government as a proof of loyalty, should have originated of its own
accord in Asia, received its inspiration from the purest monarchic
traditions, and revived in form and spirit the veneration accorded to
the Diadochi by their subjects.

Not only were the gods of Egypt and Asia never supplanted like those of
Gaul or Spain, but they soon crossed the seas and gained worshipers in
every Latin province. Isis and Serapis, Cybele and Attis, the Syrian
Baals, Sabazius and Mithra were honored by brotherhoods of believers as
far as the remotest limits of Germany. The Oriental reaction that we
perceive from the beginning of our era, in studying the history of art,
literature, and philosophy, manifested itself with incomparably greater
power in the religious sphere. First, there was a slow infiltration of
despised exotic religions, then, toward the end of the first century,

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

the Orontes, the Nile and the Halys, to use the words of Juvenal, flowed
into the Tiber, to the great indignation of the old Romans. Finally, a
hundred years later, an influx of Egyptian, Semitic and Persian beliefs
and conceptions took place that threatened to submerge all that the
Greek and Roman genius had laboriously built up. What called forth and
permitted this spiritual commotion, of which the triumph of Christianity
was the outcome? Why was the influence of the Orient strongest in the
religious field? These questions claim our attention. Like ail great
phenomena of history, this particular one was determined by a number of
influences that concurred in producing it. In the mass of half-known
particulars that brought it about, certain factors or leading causes, of
which every one has in turn been considered the most important, may be
distinguished.

If we yielded to the tendency of many excellent minds of to-day and
regarded history as the resultant of economic and social forces, it
would be easy to show their influence in that great religious movement.
The industrial and commercial preponderance of the Orient was manifest,
for there were situated the principal centers of production and export.
The ever increasing traffic with the Levant induced merchants to
establish themselves in Italy, in Gaul, in the Danubian countries, in
Africa and in Spain; in some cities they formed real colonies. The
Syrian emigrants were especially numerous. Compliant, quick and
diligent, they went wherever they expected profit, and their colonies,
scattered as far as the north of Gaul, were centers for the religious
propaganda of paganism just as the Jewish communities of the Diaspora
were for Christian preaching.

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Italy not only bought her grain from Egypt, she
imported men also; she ordered slaves from Phrygia, Cappadocia, Syria
and Alexandria to cultivate her depopulated fields and perform the
domestic duties in her palaces. Who can tell what influence chambermaids
from Antioch or Memphis gained over the minds of their mistresses? At
the same time the necessities of war removed officers and men from the
Euphrates to the Rhine or to the outskirts of the Sahara, and everywhere
they remained faithful to the gods of their far-away country. The
requirements of the government transferred functionaries and their
clerks, the latter frequently of servile birth, into the most distant
provinces. Finally, the ease of communication, due to the good roads,
increased the frequency and extent of travel.

Thus the exchange of products, men and ideas necessarily increased, and
it might be maintained that theocracy was a necessary consequence of the
mingling of the races, that the gods of the Orient followed the great
commercial and social currents, and that their establishment in the
Occident was a natural result of the movement that drew the excess
population of the Asiatic cities and rural districts into the less
thickly inhabited countries.

These reflections, which could be developed at some length, surely show
the way in which the Oriental religions spread. It is certain that the
merchants acted as missionaries in the seaports and places of commerce,
the soldiers on the frontiers and in the capital, the slaves in the city
homes, [2\_4](orrp15.htm#xref_2_4) in the rural districts and in public
affairs. But while this acquaints us with the means and the agents of
the diffusion of those religions,

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

it tells us nothing of the reasons for their adoption by the Romans. We
perceive the how, but not the why, of their sudden expansion. Especially
imperfect is our understanding of the reasons for the difference between
the Orient and the Occident pointed out above.

An example will make my meaning clear. A Celtic divinity,
Epona, [2\_5](orrp15.htm#xref_2_5) was held in particular honor as the
protectress of horses, as we all know. The Gallic horsemen worshiped her
wherever they were cantoned; her monuments have been found scattered
from Scotland to Transylvania. And yet, although this goddess enjoyed
the same conditions as, for instance, Jupiter *Dolichenus* whom the
cohorts of Commagene introduced into Europe, it does not appear that she
ever received the homage of many strangers; it does not appear, above
all, that druidism ever assumed the shape of "mysteries of Epona" into
which Greeks and Romans would have asked to be initiated. It was too
deficient in the intrinsic strength of the Oriental religions, to make
proselytes.

Other historians and thinkers of to-day prefer to apply the laws of
natural science to religious phenomena; and the theories about the
variation of species find an unforeseen application here. It is
maintained that the immigration of Orientals, of Syrians in particular,
was considerable enough to provoke an alteration and rapid deterioration
in the robust Italic and Celtic races. In addition, a social status
contrary to nature, and a bad political régime effected the destruction
of the strongest, the extermination of the best and the ascendancy of
the worst elements of the population. This multitude, corrupted by
deleterious cross-breeding and weakened by bad selection, became unable
to oppose

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

the invasion of the Asiatic chimeras and aberrations. A lowering of the
intellectual level and the disappearance of the critical spirit
accompanied the decline of morals and the weakening of character. In the
evolution of beliefs the triumph of the Orient denoted a regression
toward barbarism, a return to the remote origins of faith and to the
worship of natural forces. This is a brief outline of explanations
recently proposed and received with some
favor. [2\_6](orrp15.htm#xref_2_6)

It cannot be denied that souls and morals appear to have become coarser
during the Roman decline. Society as a whole was deplorably lacking in
imagination, intellect and taste. It seemed afflicted with a kind of
cerebral anemia and incurable sterility. The impaired reason accepted
the coarsest superstitions, the most extreme asceticism and most
extravagant theurgy. It resembled an organism incapable of defending
itself against contagion. All this is partly true; but the theories
summarized proceed from an incorrect conception of things; in reality
they are based on the illusion that Asia, under the empire, was inferior
to Europe. While the triumph of the Oriental religions sometimes assumed
the appearance of an awakening of savagery, these religions in reality
represented a more advanced type in the evolution of religious forms
than the ancient national devotions. They were less primitive, less
simple, and, if I may use the expression, provided with more organs than
the old Greco-Roman idolatry. We have indicated this on previous
occasions, and hope to bring it out with perfect clearness in the course
of these studies.

It is hardly necessary to state that a great religious conquest can be
explained only on moral grounds.

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Whatever part must be ascribed to the instinct
of imitation and the contagion of example, in the last analysis we are
always face to face with a series of individual conversions. The
mysterious affinity of minds is as much due to reflection as to the
continued and almost unconscious influence of confused aspirations that
produce faith. The obscure gestation of a new ideal is accomplished with
pangs of anguish. Violent struggles must have disturbed the souls of the
masses when they were torn away from their old ancestral religions, or
more often from indifference, by those exacting gods who demanded a
surrender of the entire person, a *devotion* in the etymological meaning
of the word. The consecration to Isis of the hero of Apuleius was the
result of a call, of an appeal, by the goddess who wanted the neophyte
to enlist in her sacred militia. [2\_7](orrp15.htm#xref_2_7)

If it is true that every conversion involves a psychological crisis, a
transformation of the intimate personality of the individual, this is
especially true of the propagation of the Oriental religions. Born
outside of the narrow limits of the Roman city, they grew up frequently
in hostility to it, and were international, consequently individual. The
bond that formerly kept devotion centered upon the city or the tribe,
upon the *gens* or the family, was broken. In place of the ancient
social groups communities of initiates came into existence, who
considered themselves brothers no matter where they came
from. [2\_8](orrp15.htm#xref_2_8) A god, conceived of as being
universal, received every mortal as his child. Whenever these religions
had any relation to the state they were no longer called upon to support
old municipal or social institutions, but to lend their strength to the

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

authority of a sovereign regarded as the eternal lord of the whole world
jointly with God himself. In the circles of the mystics, Asiatics
mingled with Romans, and slaves with high functionaries. The adoption of
the same faith made the poor freedman the equal and sometimes the
superior, of the decurion and the *clarissimus*. All submitted to the
same rules and participated in the same festivities, in which the
distinctions of an aristocratic society and the differences of blood and
country were obliterated. The distinctions of race and nationality, of
magistrate and father of a family, of patrician and plebeian, of citizen
and foreigner, were abolished; all were but men, and in order to recruit
members, those religions worked upon man and his character.

In order to gain the masses and the cream of Roman society (as they did
for a whole century) the barbarian mysteries had to possess a powerful
charm, they had to satisfy the deep wants of the human soul, and their
strength had to be superior to that of the ancient Greco-Roman religion.
To explain the reasons for their victory we must try to reveal the
nature of this superiority--I mean their superiority in the struggle,
without assuming innate superiority.

I believe that we can define it by stating that those religions gave
greater satisfaction first, to the senses and passions, secondly, to the
intelligence, finally, and above all, to the conscience.

In the first place, they appealed more strongly to the senses. This was
their most obvious feature, and it has been pointed out more often than
any other. Perhaps there never was a religion so cold and prosaic as the
Roman. Being subordinated to politics, it sought,

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

above all, to secure the protection of the gods for the state and to
avert the effects of their malevolence by the strict execution of
appropriate practices. It entered into a contract with the celestial
powers from which mutual obligations arose: sacrifices on one side,
favors on the other. The pontiffs, who were also magistrates, regulated
the religious practices with the exact precision of
jurists; [2\_9](orrp15.htm#xref_2_9) as far as we know the prayers were
all couched in formulas as dry and verbose as notarial instruments. The
liturgy reminds one of the ancient civil law on account of the
minuteness of its prescriptions. This religion looked suspiciously at
the abandonment of the soul to the ecstasies of devotion. It repressed,
by force if necessary, the exuberant manifestations of too ardent faith
and everything that was not in keeping with the grave dignity befitting
the relations of a *civis Romanus* with a god. The Jews had the same
scrupulous respect as the Romans for a religious code and formulas of
the past, "but in spite of their dry and minute practices, the legalism
of the Pharisees stirred the heart more strongly than did Roman
formalism." [2\_10](orrp15.htm#xref_2_10)

Lacking the recognized authority of official creeds, the Oriental
religions had to appeal to the passions of the individual in order to
make proselytes. They attracted men first by the disturbing
seductiveness of their mysteries, where terror and hope were evoked in
turns, and charmed them by the pomp of their festivities and the
magnificence of their processions. Men were fascinated by the
languishing songs and intoxicating melodies. Above all these religions
taught men how to reach that blissful state in which the soul was freed
from the tyranny of the body and of suffering,

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

and lost itself in raptures. They led to ecstasy either by means of
nervous tension resulting from continued maceration and fervent
contemplation or by more material means like the stimulation of
vertiginous dances and dizzy music, or even by the absorption of
fermented liquors after a long abstinence, [2\_11](orrp15.htm#xref_2_11)
as in the case of the priests of the Great Mother. In mysticism it is
easy to descend from the sublime to the vile.

Even the gods, with whom the believers thought they were uniting
themselves in their mystic outbursts, were more human and sometimes more
sensual than those of the Occident. The latter had that quietude of soul
in which the philosophic morality of the Greeks saw a privilege of the
sage; in the serenity of Olympus they enjoyed perpetual youth; they were
Immortals. The divinities of the Orient, on the contrary, suffered and
died, but only to revive again. [2\_12](orrp15.htm#xref_2_12) Osiris,
Attis and Adonis were mourned like mortals by wife or mistress, Isis,
Cybele or Astarte. With them the mystics moaned for their deceased god
and later, after he had revived, celebrated with exultation his birth to
a new life. Or else they joined in the passion of Mithra, condemned to
create the world in suffering. This common grief and joy were often
expressed with savage violence, by bloody mutilations, long wails of
despair, and extravagant acclamations. The manifestations of the extreme
fanaticism of those barbarian races that had not been touched by Greek
skepticism and the very ardor of their faith inflamed the souls of the
multitudes attracted by the exotic gods.

The Oriental religions touched every chord of sensibility and satisfied
the thirst for religious emotion that the austere Roman creed had been
unable to quench.

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

\[paragraph continues\] But at the same time they satisfied the,
intellect more fully, and this is my second point.

In very early times Greece--later imitated by Rome--became resolutely
rationalistic: her greatest originality lies here. Her philosophy was
purely laical; thought was unrestrained by any sacred tradition; it even
pretended to pass judgment upon these traditions and condemned or
approved of them. Being sometimes hostile, sometimes indifferent and
some times conciliatory, it always remained independent of faith. But
while Greece thus freed herself from the fetters of a superannuated
mythology, and openly and boldly constructed those systems of
metaphysics by means of which she claimed to solve the enigmas of the
universe, her religion lost its vitality and dried up because it lacked
the strengthening nourishment of reflection. It became a thing devoid of
sense, whose *raison d'être* was no longer understood; it embodied dead
ideas and an obsolete conception of the world. In Greece as well as at
Rome it was reduced to a collection of unintelligible rites,
scrupulously and mechanically reproduced without addition or omission
because they had been practised by the ancestors of long ago, and
formulas hallowed by the *mos maiorum*, that were no longer understood
or sincerely cherished. Never did a people of advanced culture have a
more infantile religion.

The Oriental civilizations on the contrary were sacerdotal in character.
As in medieval Europe, the scholars of Asia and Egypt were priests. In
the temples the nature of the gods and of man were not the only subjects
of discussion; mathematics, astronomy, medicine, philology and history
were also studied. The successors of Berosus, a priest from Babylonia,
and

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Manetho, a priest from Heliopolis, were
considered deeply versed in all intellectual disciplines as late as the
time of Strabo. [2\_13](orrp15.htm#xref_2_13)

This state of affairs proved detrimental to the progress of science.
Researches were conducted according to preconceived ideas and were
perverted through strange prejudices. Astrology and magic were the
monstrous fruit of a hybrid union. But all this certainly gave religion
a power it had never possessed either in Greece or Rome.

All results of observation, all conquests of thought, were used by an
erudite clergy to attain the principal object of their activities, the
solution of the problem of the destiny of man and matter, and of the
relations of heaven and earth. An ever enlarging conception of the
universe kept transforming the modes of belief. Faith presumed to
enslave both physics and metaphysics. The credit of every discovery was
given to the gods. Thoth in Egypt and Bel in Chaldea were the revealers
not only of theology and the ritual, but of all human
knowledge. [2\_14](orrp15.htm#xref_2_14) The names of the Oriental
Hipparchi and Euclids who solved the first problems of astronomy and
geometry were unknown; but a confused and grotesque literature made use
of the name and authority of Hermes Trismegistus. The doctrines of the
planetary spheres and the opposition of the four elements were made to
support systems of anthropology and of morality; the theorems of
astronomy were used to establish an alleged method of divination;
formulas of incantation, supposed to subject divine powers to the
magician, were combined with chemical experiments and medical
prescriptions.

This intimate union of erudition and faith continued

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

in the Latin world. Theology became more and more a process of
deification of the principles or agents discovered by science and a
worship of time regarded as the first cause, the stars whose course
determined the events of this world, the four elements whose innumerable
combinations produced the natural phenomena, and especially the sun
which preserved heat, fertility and life. The dogmas of the mysteries of
Mithra were, to a certain extent, the religious expression of Roman
physics and astronomy. In all forms of pantheism the knowledge of nature
appears to be inseparable from that of
God. [2\_15](orrp15.htm#xref_2_15) Art itself complied more and more
with the tendency to express erudite ideas by subtle symbolism, and it
represented in allegorical figures the relations of divine powers and
cosmic forces, like the sky, the earth, the ocean, the planets, the
constellations and the winds. The sculptors engraved on stone everything
man thought and taught. In a general way the belief prevailed that
redemption and salvation depended on the revelation of certain truths,
on a knowledge of the gods, of the world and of our person, and piety
became gnosis. [2\_16](orrp15.htm#xref_2_16)

But, you will say, since in the classic age philosophy also claimed to
lead to morality through instruction and to acquaint man with the
supreme good, why did it yield to Oriental religions that were in
reality neither original nor innovating? Quite right, and if a powerful
rationalist school, possessed of a good critical method, had led the
minds, we may believe that it would have checked the invasion of the
barbarian mysteries or at least limited their field of action. However,
as has frequently been pointed out, even in ancient Greece the
philosophic critics had very little hold on

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

popular religion obstinately faithful to its inherited superstitious
forms. But how many second century minds shared Lucian's skepticism in
regard to the dogmatic systems! The various sects were fighting each
other for ever so long without convincing one another of their alleged
error. The satirist of Samosata enjoyed opposing their exclusive
pretensions while he himself reclined on the "soft pillow of doubt." But
only intelligent minds could delight in doubt or surrender to it; the
masses wanted certainties. There was nothing to revive confidence in the
power of a decrepit and threadbare science. No great discovery
transformed the conception of the universe. Nature no longer betrayed
her secrets, the earth remained unexplored and the past inscrutable.
Every branch of knowledge was forgotten. The world cursed with
sterility, could but repeat itself; it had the poignant appreciation of
its own decay and impotence. Tired of fruitless researches, the mind
surrendered to the necessity of believing. Since the intellect was
unable to formulate a consistent rule of life faith alone could supply
it, and the multitudes gravitated toward the temples, where the truths
taught to man in earlier days by the Oriental gods were revealed. The
stanch adherence of past generations to beliefs and rites of unlimited
antiquity seemed to guarantee their truth and efficacy. This current was
so strong that philosophy itself was swept toward mysticism and the
neo-Platonist school became a theurgy.

The Oriental mysteries, then, could stir the soul by arousing admiration
and terror, pity and enthusiasm in turn. They gave the intellect the
illusion of learned depth and absolute certainty and finally--our third

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

point--they satisfied conscience as well as passion and reason. Among
the complex causes that guaranteed their domination, this was without
doubt the most effective.

In every period of their history the Romans, unlike the Greeks in this
respect, judged theories and institutions especially by their practical
results. They always had a soldier's and business man's contempt for
metaphysicians. It is a matter of frequent observation that the
philosophy of the Latin world neglected metaphysical speculations and
concentrated its attention on morals, just as later the Roman church
left to the subtle Hellenes the interminable controversies over the
essence of the divine logos and the double nature of Christ. Questions
that could rouse and divide her were those having a direct application
to life, like the doctrine of grace.

The old religion of the Romans had to respond to this demand of their
genius. Its poverty was honest. [2\_17](orrp15.htm#xref_2_17) Its
mythology did not possess the poetic charm of that of Greece, nor did
its gods have the imperishable beauty of the Olympians, but they were
more moral, or at least pretended to be. A large number were simply
personified qualities, like chastity and piety. With the aid of the
censors they imposed the practice of the national virtues, that is to
say of the qualities useful to society, temperance, courage, chastity,
obedience to parents and magistrates, reverence for the oath and the
law, in fact, the practice of every form of patriotism. During the last
century of the republic the pontiff Scaevola, one of the foremost men of
his time, rejected as futile the divinities of fable and poetry, as
superfluous or obnoxious those of the philosophers and the exegetists,

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

and reserved all his favors for those of the statesmen, as the only ones
fit for the people. [2\_18](orrp15.htm#xref_2_18) These were the ones
protecting the old customs, traditions and frequently even the old
privileges. But in the perpetual flux of things conservatism ever
carries with it a germ of death. just as the law failed to maintain the
integrity of ancient principles, like the absolute power of the father
of the family, principles that were no longer in keeping with the social
realities, so religion witnessed the foundering of a system of ethics
contrary to the moral code that had slowly been established. The idea of
collective responsibility contained in a number of beliefs is one
instance. If a vestal violated her vow of chastity the divinity sent a
pest that ceased only on the day the culprit was punished. Sometimes the
angry heavens granted victory to the army only on condition that a
general or soldier dedicate himself to the infernal gods as an expiatory
victim. However, through the influence of the philosophers and the
jurists the conviction slowly gained ground that each one was
responsible for his own misdeeds, and that it was not equitable to make
a whole city suffer for the crime of an individual. People ceased to
admit that the gods crushed the good as well as the wicked in one
punishment. Often, also, the divine anger was thought to be as
ridiculous in its manifestations as in its cause. The rural
superstitions of the country districts of Latium continued to live in
the pontifical code of the Roman people. If a lamb with two heads or a
colt with five legs was born, solemn supplications were prescribed to
avert the misfortunes foreboded by those terrifying
prodigies. [2\_19](orrp15.htm#xref_2_19)

All these puerile and monstrous beliefs that burdened

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

the religion of the Latins had thrown it into disrepute. Its morality no
longer responded to the new conception of justice beginning to prevail.
As a rule Rome remedied the poverty of her theology and ritual by taking
what she needed from the Greeks. But here this resource failed her
because the poetic, artistic and even intellectual religion of the
Greeks was hardly moral. And the fables of a mythology jeered at by the
philosophers, parodied on the stage and put to verse by libertine poets
were anything but edifying.

Moreover--this was its second weakness--whatever morality it demanded of
a pious man went unrewarded. People no longer believed that the gods
continually intervened in the affairs of men to reveal bidden crimes and
to punish triumphant vice, or that Jupiter would burl his thunderbolt to
crush the perjurer. At the time of the proscriptions and the civil wars
under Nero or Commodus it was more than plain that power and possessions
were for the strongest, the ablest or even the luckiest, and not for the
wisest or the most pious. The idea of reward or punishment beyond the
grave found little credit. The notions of future life were hazy,
uncertain, doubtful and contradictory. Everybody knows Juvenal's famous
lines: "That there are manes, a subterranean kingdom, a ferryman with a
long pole, and black frogs in the whirlpools of the Styx; that so many
thousand men could cross the waves in a single boat, to-day even
children refuse to believe." [2\_20](orrp15.htm#xref_2_20)

After the fall of the republic indifference spread, the temples were
abandoned and threatened to tumble into ruins, the clergy found it
difficult to recruit members, the festivities, once so popular, fell
into desuetude, and

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Varro, at the beginning of his *Antiquities*,
expressed his fear lest "the gods might perish, not from the blows of
foreign enemies, but from very neglect on the part of the
citizens." [2\_21](orrp15.htm#xref_2_21) It is well known that Augustus,
prompted by political rather than by religious reasons, attempted to
revive the dying religion. His religious reforms stood in close relation
to his moral legislation and the establishment of the imperial dignity.
Their tendency was to bring the people back to the pious practice of
ancient virtues but also to chain them to the new political order. The
alliance of throne and altar in Europe dates from that time.

This attempted reform failed entirely. Making religion an auxiliary to
moral policing is not a means of establishing its empire over souls.
Formal reverence for the official gods is not incompatible with absolute
and practical skepticism. The restoration attempted by Augustus is
nevertheless very characteristic because it is so consistent with the
Roman spirit which by temperament and tradition demanded that religion
should support morality and the state.

The Asiatic religions fulfilled the requirements. The change of régime,
although unwelcome, brought about a change of religion. The increasing
tendency of Cæsarism toward absolute monarchy made it lean more and more
upon the Oriental clergy. True to the traditions of the Achemenides and
the Pharaohs, those priests preached doctrines tending to elevate the
sovereign above humanity, and they supplied the emperors with dogmatic
justification for their despotism. [2\_22](orrp15.htm#xref_2_22)

It is a noteworthy fact that the rulers who most loudly proclaimed their
autocratic pretentions, like Domitian

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

and Commodus, were also those that favored foreign creeds most openly.

But his selfish support merely sanctioned a power already established.
The propaganda of the Oriental religions was originally democratic and
sometimes even revolutionary like the Isis worship. Step by step they
advanced, always reaching higher social classes and appealing to popular
conscience rather than to the zeal of functionaries.

As a matter of fact all these religions, except that of Mithra, seem at
first sight to be far less austere than the Roman creed. We shall have
occasion to note that they contained coarse and immodest fables and
atrocious or vile rites. The Egyptian gods were expelled from Rome by
Augustus and Tiberius on the charge of being immoral, but they were
called immoral principally because they opposed a certain conception of
the social order. They gave little attention to the public interest but
attached considerable importance to the inner life and consequently to
the value of the individual. Two new things, in particular, were brought
to Italy by the Oriental priests: mysterious methods of purification, by
which they claimed to wash away the impurities of the soul, and the
assurance that a blessed immortality would be the reward of
piety. [2\_23](orrp15.htm#xref_2_23)

These religions pretended to restore lost
purity [2\_24](orrp15.htm#xref_2_24) to the soul either through the
performance of ritual ceremonies or through mortifications and penance.
They had a series of ablutions and lustrations supposed to restore
original innocence to the mystic. He had to wash himself in the sacred
water according to certain prescribed forms. This was really a magic
rite, because bodily purity acted sympathetically upon the soul, or

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

else it was a real spiritual disinfection with the water driving out the
evil spirits that had caused pollution. The votary, again, might drink
or besprinkle himself with the blood of a slaughtered victim or of the
priests themselves, in which case the prevailing idea was that the
liquid circulating in the veins was a vivifying principle capable of
imparting a new existence. [2\_25](orrp15.htm#xref_2_25) These and
similar rites [2\_26](orrp15.htm#xref_2_26) used in the mysteries were
supposed to regenerate the [initiated](errata.htm#0) person and to
restore him to an immaculate and incorruptible
life. [2\_27](orrp15.htm#xref_2_27)

Purgation of the soul was not. effected solely by liturgic acts but also
by self-denial and suffering. [2\_28](orrp15.htm#xref_2_28) The meaning
of the term *expiatio* changed. Expiation, or atonement, was no longer
accomplished by the exact performance of certain ceremonies pleasing to
the gods and required by a sacred code like a penalty for damages, but
by privation and personal suffering. Abstinence, which prevented the
introduction of deadly elements into the system, and chastity, which
preserved man from pollution and debility, became means of getting rid
of the domination of the evil Powers and of regaining heavenly
favor. [2\_29](orrp15.htm#xref_2_29) Macerations, laborious pilgrimages,
public confessions, sometimes flagellations and mutilations, in fact all
forms of penance and mortifications uplifted the fallen man and brought
him nearer to the gods. In Phrygia a sinner would write his sin and the
punishment he suffered upon a stela for every one to see and would
return thanks to heaven that his prayer of repentance had been
heard. [2\_30](orrp15.htm#xref_2_30) The Syrian, who had offended his
goddess by eating her sacred fish, dressed in sordid rags, covered
himself with a sack and sat in the public highway humbly to proclaim his
misdeed in order to obtain forgiveness. [2\_31](orrp15.htm#xref_2_31)

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

\[paragraph continues\] "Three times, in the depths of winter," says
Juvenal, "the devotee of Isis will dive into the chilly waters of the
Tiber, and shivering with cold, will drag herself around the temple upon
her bleeding knees; if the goddess commands, she will go to the
outskirts of Egypt to take water from the Nile and empty it within the
sanctuary." [2\_32](orrp15.htm#xref_2_32) This shows the introduction
into Europe of Oriental asceticism.

But there were impious acts and impure passions that contaminated and
defiled the soul. Since this infection could be destroyed only by
expiations prescribed by the gods, the extent of the sin and the
character of the necessary penance had to be estimated. It was the
priest's prerogative to judge the misdeeds and to impose the penalties.
This circumstance gave the clergy a very different character from the
one it had at Rome. The priest was no longer simply the guardian of
sacred traditions, the intermediary between man or the state and the
gods, but also a spiritual guide. He taught his flock the long series of
obligations and restrictions for shielding their weakness from the
attacks of evil spirits. He knew how to quiet remorse and scruples, and
to restore the sinner to spiritual calm. Being versed in sacred
knowledge, he had the power of reconciling the gods. Frequent sacred
repasts maintained a spirit of fellowship among the mystics of Cybele,
Mithra or the Baals, [2\_33](orrp15.htm#xref_2_33) and a daily service
unceasingly revived the faith of the Isis worshipers. In consequence,
the clergy were entirely absorbed in their holy office and lived only
for and by their temples. Unlike the sacerdotal colleges of Rome in
which the secular and religious functions were not yet clearly
differentiated, [2\_34](orrp15.htm#xref_2_34) they were not an

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

administrative commission ruling the sacred affairs of the state under
the supervision of the senate; they formed what might almost be called a
caste of recluses distinguished from ordinary men by their insignia,
garb, habits and food, and constituting an independent body with a
hierarchy, formulary and even councils of their
own. [2\_35](orrp15.htm#xref_2_35) They did not return to every-day
duties as private citizens or to the direction of public affairs as
magistrates as the ancient pontiffs had done after the solemn festival
service.

We can readily understand that these beliefs and institutions were bound
to establish the Oriental religions and their priests on a strong basis.
Their influence must have been especially powerful at the time of the
Cæsars. The laxity of morals at the beginning of our era has been
exaggerated but it was real. Many unhealthy symptoms told of a profound
moral anarchy weighing on a weakened and irresolute society. The farther
we go toward the end of the empire the more its energy seems to fail and
the character of men to weaken. The number of strong healthy minds
incapable of a lasting aberration and without need of guidance or
comfort was growing ever smaller. We note the spread of that feeling of
exhaustion and debility which follows the aberrations of passion, and
the same weakness that led to crime impelled men to seek absolution in
the formal practices of asceticism. They applied to the Oriental priests
for spiritual remedies.

People flattered themselves that by performing the rites they would
attain a condition of felicity after death. All barbarian mysteries
pretended to reveal to their adherents the secret of blessed
immortality. Participation in the occult ceremonies of the sect was a

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

chief means of salvation. [2\_36](orrp15.htm#xref_2_36) The vague and
disheartening beliefs of ancient paganism in regard to life after death
were transformed into the firm hope of a well-defined form of
happiness. [2\_37](orrp15.htm#xref_2_37)

This faith in a personal survival of the soul and even of the body was
based upon a strong instinct of human nature, the instinct of
self-preservation. Social and moral conditions in the empire during its
decline gave it greater strength than it had ever possessed
before. [2\_38](orrp15.htm#xref_2_38) The third century saw so much
suffering, anguish and violence, so much unnecessary ruin and so many
unpunished crimes, that the Roman world took refuge in the expectation
of a better existence in which all the iniquity of this world would be
retrieved. No earthly hope brightened life. The tyranny of a corrupt
bureaucracy choked all disposition for political progress. Science
stagnated and revealed no more unknown truths. Growing poverty
discouraged the spirit of enterprise. The idea gained ground that
humanity was afflicted with incurable decay, that nature was approaching
her doom and that the end of world was
near. [2\_39](orrp15.htm#xref_2_39) We must remember all these causes of
discouragement and despondency to understand the power of the idea,
expressed so frequently, that the spirit animating man was forced by
bitter necessity to imprison itself in matter and that it was delivered
from its carnal captivity by death. In the heavy atmosphere of a period
of oppression and impotence the dejected soul longed with incredible
ardor to fly to the radiant abode of heaven.

To recapitulate, the Oriental religions acted upon the senses, the
intellect and the conscience at the same time, and therefore gained a
hold on the entire man.

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Compared with the ancient creeds, they appear to
have offered greater beauty of ritual, greater truth of doctrine and a
far superior morality. The imposing ceremonial of their festivities and
the alternating pomp and sensuality, gloom and exaltation of their
services appealed especially to the simple and the humble, while the
progressive revelation of ancient wisdom, inherited from the old and
distant Orient, captivated the cultured mind. The emotions excited by
these religions and the consolations offered strongly attracted the
women, who were the most fervent and generous followers and most
passionate propagandists [2\_40](orrp15.htm#xref_2_40) of the religions
of Isis and Cybele. Mithra was worshiped almost exclusively by men, whom
he subjected to a rigid moral discipline. Thus souls were gained by the
promise of spiritual purification and the prospect of eternal happiness.

The worship of the Roman gods was a civic duty, the worship of the
foreign gods the expression of a personal belief. The latter were the
objects of the thoughts, feelings and intimate aspirations of the
individual, not merely of the traditional and, one might say, functional
adoration of the citizen. The ancient municipal devotions were connected
with a number of earthly interests that helped to support each other.
They were one of various forms of family spirit and patriotism and
guaranteed the prosperity of the community. The Oriental mysteries,
directing the will toward an ideal goal and exalting the inner spirit,
were less mindful of economic utility, but they could produce that
vibration of the moral being that caused emotions, stronger than any
rational faculty, to gush forth from the depths of the soul. Through a
sudden illumination

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

they furnished the intuition of a spiritual life whose intensity made
all material happiness appear insipid and contemptible. This stirring
appeal of supernatural life made the propaganda irresistible. The same
ardent enthusiasm guaranteed at the same time the uncontested domination
of neo-Platonism among the philosophers. Antiquity expired and a new era
was born.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III. Asia Minor](orrp07)
