[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](orrp04)  [Next](orrp06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# ROME AND THE ORIENT.

WE are fond of regarding ourselves as the heirs of Rome, and we like to
think that the Latin genius, after having absorbed the genius of Greece,
held an intellectual and moral supremacy in the ancient world similar to
the one Europe now maintains, and that the culture of the peoples that
lived under the authority of the Cæsars was stamped forever by their
strong touch. It is difficult to forget the present entirely and to
renounce aristocratic pretensions. We find it hard to believe that the
Orient has not always lived, to some extent, in the state of humiliation
from which it is now slowly emerging, and we are inclined to ascribe to
the ancient inhabitants of Smyrna, Beirut or Alexandria the faults with
which the Levantines of to-day are being reproached. The growing
influence of the Orientals that accompanied the decline of the empire
has frequently been considered a morbid phenomenon and a symptom of the
slow decomposition of the ancient world. Even Renan does not seem to
have been sufficiently free from an old prejudice when he wrote on this
subject: [1\_1](orrp14.htm#xref_1_1) "That the oldest and most worn out
civilization should by its corruption subjugate the younger was
inevitable."

But if we calmly consider the real facts, avoiding the optical illusion
that makes things in our immediate

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

vicinity look larger, we shall form a quite different opinion. It is
beyond all dispute that Rome found the point of support of its military
power in the Occident. The legions from the Danube and the Rhine were
always braver, stronger and better disciplined than those from the
Euphrates and the Nile. But it is in the Orient, especially in these
countries of "old civilization," that we must look for industry and
riches, for technical ability and artistic productions, as well as for
intelligence and science, even before Constantine made it the center of
political power.

While Greece merely vegetated in a state of poverty, humiliation and
exhaustion; while Italy suffered depopulation and became unable to
provide for her own support; while the other countries of Europe were
hardly out of barbarism; Asia Minor, Egypt and Syria gathered the rich
harvests Roman peace made possible. Their industrial centers cultivated
and renewed all the traditions that had caused their former celebrity. A
more intense intellectual life corresponded with the economic activity
of these great manufacturing and exporting countries. They excelled in
every profession except that of arms, and even the prejudiced Romans
admitted their superiority. The menace of an Oriental empire haunted the
imaginations of the first masters of the world. Such an empire seems to
have been the main thought of the dictator Cæsar, and the triumvir
Antony almost realized it. Even Nero thought of making Alexandria his
capital. Although Rome, supported by her army and the right of might,
retained the political authority for a long time, she bowed to the fatal
moral ascendency of more advanced peoples. Viewed from this standpoint
the history of the empire

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

during the first three centuries may be summarized as a "peaceful
infiltration" of the Orient into the
Occident. [1\_2](orrp14.htm#xref_1_2) This truth has become evident
since the various aspects of Roman civilization are being studied in
greater detail; and before broaching the special subject of these
studies we wish to review a few phases of the slow metamorphosis of
which the propagation of the Oriental religions was one phenomenon.

In the first place the imitation of the Orient showed itself plainly in
political institutions. [1\_3](orrp14.htm#xref_1_3) To be convinced of
this fact it is sufficient to compare the government, of the empire in
the time of Augustus with what it had become under Diocletian. At the
beginning of the imperial régime Rome ruled the world but did not govern
it. She kept the number of her functionaries down to a minimum, her
provinces were mere unorganized aggregates of cities where she only
exercised police power, protectorates rather than annexed
countries. [1\_4](orrp14.htm#xref_1_4) As long as law and order were
maintained and her citizens, functionaries and merchants could transact
their business, Rome was satisfied. She saved herself the trouble of
looking after the public service by leaving broad authority to the
cities that had existed before her domination, or had been modeled after
her. The taxes were levied by syndicates of bankers and the public lands
rented out. Before the reforms instituted by Augustus, even the army was
not an organic and permanent force, but consisted theoretically of
troops levied before a war and discharged after victory.

Rome's institutions remained those of a city. It was difficult to apply
them to the vast territory she attempted to govern with their aid. They
were a clumsy

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

apparatus that worked only by sudden starts, a rudimentary system that
could not and did not last.

What do we find three centuries later? A strongly centralized state in
which an absolute ruler, worshiped like a god and surrounded by a large
court, commanded a whole hierarchy of functionaries; cities divested of
their local liberties and ruled by an omnipotent bureaucracy, the old
capital herself the first to be dispossessed of her autonomy and
subjected to prefects. Outside of the cities the monarch, whose private
fortune was identical with the state finances, possessed immense domains
managed by intendants and supporting a population of serf-colonists. The
army was composed largely of foreign mercenaries, professional soldiers
whose pay or bounty consisted of lands on which they settled. All these
features and many others caused the Roman empire to assume the likeness
of ancient Oriental monarchies.

It would be impossible to admit that like causes produce like results,
and then maintain that a similarity is not sufficient proof of an
influence in history. Wherever we can closely follow the successive
transformations of a particular institution, we notice the action of the
Orient and especially of Egypt. When Rome had become a great
cosmopolitan metropolis like Alexandria, Augustus reorganized it in
imitation of the capital of the Ptolemies. The fiscal reforms of the
Cæsars like the taxes on sales and inheritances, the register of land
surveys and the direct collection of taxes, were suggested by the very
perfect financial system of the Lagides, [1\_5](orrp14.htm#xref_1_5) and
it can be maintained that their government was the first source from
which those of modern Europe were derived, through the medium

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

of the Romans. The imperial *saltus*, superintended by a procurator and
cultivated by metayers reduced to the state of serfs, was an imitation
of the ones that the Asiatic potentates formerly cultivated through
their agents. [1\_6](orrp14.htm#xref_1_6) It would be easy to increase
this list of examples. The absolute monarchy, theocratic and
bureaucratic at the same time, that was the form of government of Egypt,
Syria and even Asia Minor during the Alexandrine period was the ideal on
which the deified Cæsars gradually fashioned the Roman empire.

One cannot however deny Rome the glory of having elaborated a system of
private law that was logically deduced from clearly formulated
principles and was destined to become the fundamental law of all
civilized communities. But even in connection with this private law,
where the originality of Rome is uncontested and her preeminence
absolute, recent researches have shown with how much tenacity the
Hellenized Orient maintained its old legal codes, and how much
resistance local customs, the woof of the life of nations, offered to
unification. In truth, unification never was realized except in
theory. [1\_7](orrp14.htm#xref_1_7) More than that, these researches
have proved that the fertile principles of that provincial law, which
was sometimes on a higher moral plane than the Roman law, reacted on the
progressive transformation of the old *ius civile*. And how could it be
otherwise? Were not a great number of famous jurists like Ulpian of Tyre
and Papinian of Hemesa natives of Syria? And did not the law-school of
Beirut constantly grow in importance after the third century, until
during the fifth century it became the most brilliant center of legal
education? Thus Levantines cultivated

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

even the patrimonial field cleared by Scaevola and
Labeo. [1\_8](orrp14.htm#xref_1_8)

In the austere temple of law the Orient held as yet only a minor
position; everywhere else its authority was predominant. The practical
mind of the Romans, which made them excellent lawyers, prevented them
from becoming great scholars. They esteemed pure science but little,
having small talent for it, and one notices that it ceased to be
earnestly cultivated wherever their direct domination was established.
The great astronomers, mathematicians, and physicians, like the
originators or defenders of the great metaphysical systems, were mostly
Orientals. Ptolemy and Plotinus were Egyptians, Porphyry and Iamblichus,
Syrians, Dioscorides and Galen, Asiatics. All branches of learning were
affected by the spirit of the Orient. The clearest minds accepted the
chimeras of astrology and magic. Philosophy claimed more and more to
derive its inspiration from the fabulous wisdom of Chaldea and Egypt.
Tired of seeking truth, reason abdicated and hoped to find it in a
revelation preserved in the mysteries of the barbarians. Greek logic
strove to coordinate into an harmonious whole the confused traditions of
the Asiatic religions.

Letters, as well as science, were cultivated chiefly by the Orientals.
Attention has often been called to the fact that those men of letters
that were considered the purest representatives of the Greek spirit
under the empire belonged almost without exception to Asia Minor, Syria
or Egypt. The rhetorician Dion Chrysostom came from Prusa in Bithynia,
the satirist Lucian from Samosata in Commagene on the borders of the
Euphrates. A number of other names could be cited.

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

\[paragraph continues\] From Tacitus and Suetonius down to Ammianus,
there was not one author of talent to preserve in Latin the memory of
the events that stirred the world of that period, but it was a Bithynian
again, Dion Cassius of Nicea, who, under the Severi, narrated the
history of the Roman people.

It is a characteristic fact that, besides this literature whose language
was Greek, others were born, revived and developed. The Syriac, derived
from the Aramaic which was the international language of earlier Asia,
became again the language of a cultured race with Bardesanes of Edessa.
The Copts remembered that they had spoken several dialects derived from
the ancient Egyptian and endeavored to revive them. North of the Taurus
even the Armenians began to write and polish their barbarian speech.
Christian preaching, addressed to the people, took hold of the popular
idioms and roused them from their long lethargy. Along the Nile as well
as on the plains of Mesopotamia or in the valleys of Anatolia it
proclaimed its new ideas in dialects that had been despised hitherto,
and wherever the old Orient had not been entirely denationalized by
Hellenism, it successfully reclaimed its intellectual autonomy.

A revival of native art went hand in hand with this linguistic
awakening. In no field of intellect has the illusion mentioned above
been so complete and lasting as in this one. Until a few years ago the
opinion prevailed that an "imperial" art had come into existence in the
Rome of Augustus and that thence its predominance had slowly spread to
the periphery of the ancient world. If it had undergone some special
modifications in Asia these were due to exotic influences, undoubtedly

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Assyrian or Persian. Not even the important
discoveries of M. de Vogüé in Hauran [1\_9](orrp14.htm#xref_1_9) were
sufficient to prove the emptiness of a theory that was supported by our
lofty conviction of European leadership.

To-day it is fully proven not only that Rome has given nothing or almost
nothing to the Orientals but also that she has received quite a little
from them. Impregnated with Hellenism, Asia produced an astonishing
number of original works of art in the kingdoms of the Diadochs. The old
processes, the discovery of which dates back to the Chaldeans, the
Hittites or the subjects of the Pharaohs, were first utilized by the
conquerors of Alexander's empire who conceived a rich variety of new
types, and created an original style. But if during the three centuries
preceding our era, sovereign Greece played the part of the demiurge who
creates living beings out of preexisting matter, during the three
following centuries her productive power became exhausted, her faculty
of invention weakened, the ancient local traditions revolted against her
empire and with the help of Christianity overcame it. Transferred to
Byzantium they expanded in a new efflorescence and spread over Europe
where they paved the way for the formation of the Romanesque art of the
early Middle Ages. [1\_10](orrp14.htm#xref_1_10)

Rome, then, far from having established her suzerainty, was tributary to
the Orient in this respect. The Orient was her superior in the extent
and precision of its technical. knowledge as well as in the inventive
genius and ability of its workmen. The Cæsars were great builders but
frequently employed foreign help. Trajan's principal architect, a
magnificent builder, was a Syrian, Apollodorus of
Damascus. [1\_11](orrp14.htm#xref_1_11)

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

Her Levantine subjects not only taught Italy the artistic solution of
architectonic problems like the erection of a cupola on a rectangular or
octagonal edifice, but also compelled her to accept their taste, and
they saturated her with their genius. They imparted to her their love of
luxuriant decoration, and of violent polychromy, and they gave religious
sculpture and painting the complicated symbolism that pleased their
abstruse and subtle minds.

In those times art was closely connected with industry, which was
entirely manual and individual. They learned from each other, they
improved and declined together, in short they were inseparable. Shall we
call the painters that decorated the architecturally fantastic and airy
walls of Pompeii in Alexandrian or perhaps Syrian taste artisans or
artists? And how shall we classify the goldsmiths, Alexandrians also,
who carved those delicate leaves, those picturesque animals, those
harmoniously elegant or cunningly animated groups that cover the phials
and goblets of Bosco Reale? And descending from the productions of the
industrial arts to those of industry itself, one might also trace the
growing influence of the Orient; one might show how the action of the
great manufacturing centers of the East gradually transformed the
material civilization of Europe; one might point out how the
introduction into Gaul [1\_12](orrp14.htm#xref_1_12) of exotic patterns
and processes changed the old native industry and gave its products a
perfection and a popularity hitherto unknown. But I dislike to insist
overmuch on a point apparently so foreign to the one now before us. It
was important however to mention this subject at the beginning because
in whatever direction scholars of

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

to-day pursue their investigations they always notice Asiatic culture
slowly supplanting that of Italy. The latter developed only by absorbing
elements taken from the inexhaustible reserves of the "old
civilizations" of which we spoke at the beginning. The Hellenized Orient
imposed itself everywhere through its men and 'its works; it subjected
its Latin conquerors to its ascendancy in the same manner as it
dominated its Arabian conquerors later when it became the civilizer of
Islam. But in no field of thought was its influence, under the empire,
so decisive as in religion, because it finally brought about the
complete destruction of the Greco-Latin
paganism. [1\_13](orrp14.htm#xref_1_13)

The invasion of the barbarian religions was so open, so noisy and so
triumphant that it could not remain unnoticed. It attracted the anxious
or sympathetic attention of the ancient authors, and since the
Renaissance modern scholars have frequently taken interest in it.
Possibly however they did not sufficiently understand that this
religious evolution was not an isolated and extraordinary phenomenon,
but that it accompanied and aided a more general evolution, just as that
aided it in turn. The transformation of beliefs was intimately connected
with the establishment of the monarchy by divine right, the development
of art, the prevailing philosophic tendencies, in fact with all the
manifestations of thought, sentiment and taste.

We shall attempt to sketch this religious movement with its numerous and
far-reaching ramifications. First we shall try to show what caused the
diffusion of the Oriental religions. In the second place we shall
examine those in particular that originated in Asia Minor, Egypt, Syria
and Persia, and we shall endeavor to distinguish

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

their individual characteristics and estimate their value. We shall see,
finally, how the ancient idolatry was transformed and what form it
assumed in its last struggle against Christianity, whose victory was
furthered by Asiatic mysteries, although they opposed its doctrine.

\*    \*    \*    \*

But before broaching this subject a preliminary question must be
answered. Is the study which we have just outlined possible? What items
will be of assistance to us in this undertaking? From what sources are
we to derive our knowledge of the Oriental religions in the Roman
empire?

It must be admitted that the sources are inadequate and have not as yet
been sufficiently investigated.

Perhaps no loss caused by the general wreck of ancient literature has
been more disastrous than that of the liturgic books of paganism. A few
mystic formulas quoted incidentally by pagan or Christian authors and a
few fragments of hymns in honor of the
gods [1\_14](orrp14.htm#xref_1_14) are practically all that escaped
destruction. In order to obtain an idea of what those lost rituals may
have been one must turn to their imitations contained in the chorus of
tragedies, and to the parodies comic authors sometimes made; or look up
in books of magic the plagiarisms that writers of incantations may have
committed. [1\_15](orrp14.htm#xref_1_15) But all this gives us only a
dim reflection of the religious ceremonies. Shut out from the sanctuary
like profane outsiders, we hear only the indistinct echo of the sacred
songs and not even in imagination can we attend the celebration of the
mysteries.

We do not know how the ancients prayed, we cannot penetrate into the
intimacy of their religious life,

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

and certain depths of the soul of antiquity we must leave unsounded. If
a fortunate windfall could give us possession of some sacred book of the
later paganism its revelations would surprise the world. We could
witness the performance of those mysterious dramas whose symbolic acts
commemorated the passion of the gods; in company with the believers we
could sympathize with their sufferings, lament their death and share in
the joy of their return to life, In those vast collections of archaic
rites that hazily perpetuated the memory of abolished creeds we would
find traditional formulas couched in obsolete language that was scarcely
understood, naive prayers conceived by the faith of the earliest ages,
sanctified by the devotion of past centuries, and almost ennobled by the
joys and sufferings of past generations. We would also read those hymns
in which philosophic thought found expression in sumptuous
allegories [1\_16](orrp14.htm#xref_1_16) or humbled itself before the
omnipotence of the infinite, poems of which only a few stoic effusions
celebrating the creative or destructive fire, or expressing a complete
surrender to divine fate can give us some
idea. [1\_17](orrp14.htm#xref_1_17)

But everything is gone, and thus we lose the possibility of studying
from the original documents the internal development of the pagan
religions.

We should feel this loss less keenly if we possessed at least the works
of Greek and Latin mythographers on the subject of foreign divinities
like the voluminous books published during the second century by
Eusebius and Pallas on the Mysteries of Mithra. But those works were
thought devoid of interest or even dangerous by the devout Middle Ages,
and they are not likely to have survived the fall of paganism. The

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

treatises on mythology that have been preserved deal almost entirely
with the ancient Hellenic fables made famous by the classic writers, to
the neglect of the Oriental religions. [1\_18](orrp14.htm#xref_1_18)

As a rule, all we find in literature on this subject are a few
incidental remarks and passing allusions. History is incredibly poor in
that respect. This poverty of information was caused in the first place
by a narrowness of view characteristic of the rhetoric cultivated by
historians of the classical period and especially of the empire.
Politics and the wars of the rulers, the dramas, the intrigues and even
the gossip of the courts and of the official world were of much higher
interest to them than the great economic or religious transformations.
Moreover, there is no period of the Roman empire concerning which we are
so little informed as the third century, precisely the one during which
the Oriental religions reached the apogee of their power. From
Herodianus and Dion Cassius to the Byzantines, and from Suetonius to
Ammianus Marcellinus, all narratives of any importance have been lost,
and this deplorable blank in historic tradition is particularly fatal to
the study of paganism.

It is a strange fact that light literature concerned itself more with
these grave questions. The rites of the exotic religions stimulated the
imagination of the satirists, and the pomp of the festivities furnished
the novelists with brilliant descriptive matter. Juvenal laughs at the
mortifications of the devotees of Isis; in his *Necromancy* Lucian
parodies the interminable purifications of the magi, and in the
*Metamorphoses* Apuleius relates the various scenes of an initiation
into the mysteries of Isis with the fervor of a neophyte and

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

the studied refinement of a rhetorician. But as a rule we find only
incidental remarks and superficial observations in the authors. Not even
the precious treatise *On the Syrian Goddess*, in which Lucian tells of
a visit to the temple of Hierapolis and repeats his conversation with
the priests, has any depth. What he relates is the impression of an
intelligent, curious and above all an ironical
traveler. [1\_19](orrp14.htm#xref_1_19)

In order to obtain a more perfect initiation and a less fragmentary
insight into the doctrines taught by the Oriental religions, we are
compelled to turn to two kinds of testimony, inspired by contrary
tendencies, but equally suspicious: the testimony of the philosophers,
and that of the fathers of the church. The Stoics and the Platonists
frequently took an interest in the religious beliefs of the barbarians,
and it is to them that we are indebted for the possession of highly
valuable data on this subject. Plutarch's treatise *Isis and Osiris* is
a source whose importance is appreciated even by Egyptologists, whom it
aids in reconstructing the legends of those
divinities. [1\_20](orrp14.htm#xref_1_20) But the philosophers very
seldom expounded foreign doctrines objectively and for their own sake.
They embodied them in their systems as a means of proof or illustration;
they surrounded them with personal exegesis or drowned them in
transcendental commentaries; in short, they claimed to discover their
own ideas in them. It is always difficult and sometimes impossible to
distinguish the dogmas from the self-confident interpretations which are
usually as incorrect as possible.

The writings of the ecclesiastical authors, although prejudiced, are
very fertile sources of information, but in perusing them one must guard
against another kind

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

of error. By a peculiar irony of fate those controversialists are to-day
in many instances our only aid in reviving the idolatry they attempted
to destroy. Although the Oriental religions were the most dangerous and
most persistent adversaries of Christianity, the works of the Christian
writers do not supply as abundant information as one might suppose. The
reason for this is that the fathers of the church often show a certain
reserve in speaking of idolatry, and affect to recall its monstrosities
only in guarded terms. Moreover, as we shall see later
on, [1\_21](orrp14.htm#xref_1_21) the apologists of the fourth century
were frequently behind the times as to the evolution of doctrines, and
drawing on literary tradition, from epicureans and skeptics, they fought
especially the beliefs of the ancient Grecian and Italian religions that
had been abolished or were dying out, while they neglected the living
beliefs of the contemporary world.

Some of these polemicists nevertheless directed their attacks against
the divinities of the Orient and their Latin votaries. Either they
derived their information from converts or they had been pagans
themselves during their youth. This was the case with Firmicus Maternus
who has written a bad treatise on astrology and finally fought the
*Error of the Profane Religions*. However, the question always arises as
to how much they can have known of the esoteric doctrines and the ritual
ceremonies, the secret of which was jealously guarded. They boast so
loudly of their power to disclose these abominations, that they incur
the suspicion that the discretion of the initiates baffled their
curiosity. In addition they were too ready to believe all the calumnies
that were circulated against the pagan mysteries,

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

calumnies directed against occult sects of all times and against the
Christians themselves.

In short, the literary tradition is not very rich and frequently little
worthy of belief. While it is comparatively considerable for the
Egyptian religions because they were received by the Greek world as
early as the period of the Ptolemies, and because letters and science
were always cultivated at Alexandria, it is even less important for
Phrygia, although Cybele was Hellenized and Latinized very early, and
excepting the tract by Lucian on the goddess of Hierapolis it is almost
nothing for the Syrian, Cappadocian and Persian religions.

The insufficiency of the data supplied by writers increases the value of
information furnished by epigraphic and archeological documents, whose
number is steadily growing. The inscriptions possess a certainty and
precision that is frequently absent in the phrases of the writers. They
enable one to draw important conclusions as to the dates of propagation
and disappearance of the various religions, their extent, the quality
and social rank of their votaries, the sacred hierarchy and sacerdotal
personnel, the constitution of the religious communities, the offerings
made to the gods, and the ceremonies performed in their honor; in short,
conclusions as to the secular and profane history of these religions,
and in a certain measure their ritual. But the conciseness of the
lapidary style and the constant repetition of stereotyped formulas
naturally render that kind of text hardly explicit and sometimes
enigmatical. There are dedications like the *Nama Sebesio* engraved upon
the great Mithra bas-relief preserved in the Louvre, that caused a
number of

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

dissertations to be written without any one explaining it. And besides,
in a general way, epigraphy gives us but little information about the
liturgy and almost nothing regarding the doctrines.

Archeology must endeavor to fill the enormous blanks left by the written
tradition; the monuments, especially the artistic ones, have not as yet
been collected with sufficient care nor interpreted with sufficient
method. By studying the arrangement of the temples and the religious
furniture that adorned them, one can at the same time determine part of
the liturgic ceremonies which took place there. On the other hand, the
critical interpretation of statuary relics enables us to reconstruct
with sufficient correctness certain sacred legends and to recover part
of the theology of the mysteries. Unlike Greek art, the religious art at
the close of paganism did not seek, or sought only incidentally, to
elevate the soul through the contemplation of an ideal of divine beauty.
True to the traditions of the ancient Orient, it tried to edify and to
instruct at the same time. [1\_22](orrp14.htm#xref_1_22) It told the
history of the gods and the world in cycles of pictures, or it expressed
through symbols the subtle conceptions of theology and even certain
doctrines of profane science, like the struggle of the four elements;
just as during the Middle Ages, so the artist of the empire interpreted
the ideas of the clergy, teaching the believers by means of pictures and
rendering the highest religious conceptions intelligible to the humblest
minds. But to read this mystic book whose pages are scattered in our
museums we must laboriously look for its key, and we cannot take for a
guide and exegetist some Vincent de Beauvais of Diocletian's
period [1\_23](orrp14.htm#xref_1_23) as when looking over the marvelous

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

sculptured encyclopedias in our Gothic cathedrals. Our position is
frequently similar to that of a scholar of the year 4000 who would
undertake to write the history of the Passion from the pictures of the
fourteen stations, or to study the veneration of the saints from the
statues found in the ruins of our churches.

But, as far as the Oriental religions are concerned, the results of all
the laborious investigations now being made in the classical countries
can be indirectly controlled, and this is a great advantage. To-day we
are tolerably well acquainted with the old religions of Egypt, Babylonia
and Persia. We read and translate correctly the hieroglyphics of the
Nile, the cuneiform tablets of Mesopotamia and the sacred books, Zend or
Pahlavi, of Parseeism. Religious history has profited more by their
deciphering than the history of politics or of civilization. In Syria
also, the discovery of Aramaic and Phœnician inscriptions and the
excavations made in temples have in a certain measure covered the
deficiency of information in the Bible or in the Greek writers on
Semitic paganism. Even Asia Minor, that is to say the uplands of
Anatolia, is beginning to reveal herself to explorers although almost
all the great sanctuaries, Pessinus, the two Comanas, Castabala, are as
yet buried underground. We can, therefore, even now form a fairly exact
idea of the beliefs of some of the countries that sent the Oriental
mysteries to Rome. To tell the truth, these researches have not been
pushed far enough to enable us to state precisely what form religion had
assumed in those regions at the time they came into contact with Italy,
and we should be likely to commit very strange errors, if we brought
together practices that may have been

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

separated by thousands of years. It is a task reserved for the future to
establish a rigorous chronology in this matter, to determine the
ultimate phase that the evolution of creeds in all regions of the Levant
had reached at the beginning of our era, and to connect them without
interruption of continuity to the mysteries practiced in the Latin
world, the secrets of which archeological researches are slowly bringing
to light.

We are still far from welding all the links of this long chain firmly
together; the orientalists and the classical philologists cannot, as
yet, shake hands across the Mediterranean. We raise only one corner of
Isis's veil, and scarcely guess a part of the revelations that were,
even formerly, reserved for a pious and chosen few. Nevertheless we have
reached, on the road of certainty, a summit from which we can overlook
the field that our successors will clear. In the course of these
lectures I shall attempt to give a summary of the essential results
achieved by the erudition of the nineteenth century and to draw from
them a few conclusions that will, possibly, be provisional. The invasion
of the Oriental religions that destroyed the ancient religions and
national ideals of the Romans also radically transformed the society and
government of the empire, and in view of this fact it would deserve the
historian's attention even if it had not foreshadowed and prepared the
final victory of Christianity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II. Why the Oriental Religions Spread](orrp06)
