[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](orrp06)  [Next](orrp08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

# ASIA MINOR.

THE first Oriental religion adopted by the Romans was that of the
goddess of Phrygia, whom the people of Pessinus and Mount Ida worshiped,
and who received the name of *Magna Mater deum Idea* in the Occident.
Its history in Italy covers six centuries, and we can trace each phase
of the transformation that changed it in the course of time from a
collection of very primitive nature beliefs into a system of
spiritualized mysteries used by some as a weapon against Christianity.
We shall now endeavor to outline the successive phases of that slow
metamorphosis.

This religion is the only one whose success in the Latin world was
caused originally by a mere chance circumstance. In 205 B. C., when
Hannibal, vanquished but still threatening, made his last stand in the
mountains of Bruttium, repeated torrents of stones frightened the Roman
people. When the books were officially consulted in regard to this
prodigy they promised that the enemy would be driven from Italy if the
Great Mother of Ida could be brought to Rome. Nobody but the Sibyls
themselves had the power of averting the evils prophesied by them. They
had come to Italy from Asia Minor, and in this critical situation their
sacred poem recommended the practice of their native religion as a
remedy. In token of his friendship,

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

\[paragraph continues\] King Attalus presented the ambassadors of the
senate with the black aerolite, supposed to be the abode of the goddess,
that this ruler had shortly before transferred from Pessinus to
Pergamum. According to the mandate of the oracle the stone was received
at Ostia by the best citizen of the land, an honor accorded to Scipio
Nasica--and carried by the most esteemed matrons to the Palatine, where,
hailed by the cheers of the multitude and surrounded by fumes of
incense, it was solemnly installed (Nones of April, 204). This triumphal
entry was later glorified by marvelous legends, and the poets told of
edifying miracles that had occurred during Cybele's voyage. In the same
year Scipio transferred the seat of war to Africa, and Hannibal,
compelled to meet him there, was beaten at Zama. The prediction of the
Sybils had come true and Rome was rid of the long Punic terror. The
foreign goddess was honored in recognition of the service she had
rendered. A temple was erected to her on the summit of the Palatine, and
every year a celebration enhanced by scenic plays, the *ludi
Megalenses*, commemorated the date of dedication of the sanctuary and
the arrival of the goddess (April 4th-10th).

What was this Asiatic religion that had suddenly been transferred into
the heart of Rome by an extraordinary circumstance? Even then it could
look back upon a long period of development. It combined beliefs of
various origin. It contained primitive usages of the religion of
Anatolia, some of which have survived to this day in spite of
Christianity and Islam. Like the Kizil-Bash peasants of to-day, the
ancient inhabitants of the peninsula met on the summits of mountains
covered with woods no ax had desecrated, and

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

celebrated their festal days. [3\_1](orrp16.htm#xref_3_1) They believed
that Cybele resided on the high summits of Ida and Berecyntus, and the
perennial pines, in conjunction with the prolific and early maturing
almond tree, were the sacred trees of Attis. Besides trees, the country
people worshiped stones, rocks or meteors that had fallen from the sky
like the one taken from Pessinus to Pergamum and thence to Rome. They
also venerated certain animals, especially the most powerful of them
all, the lion, who may at one time have been the totem of savage
tribes. [3\_2](orrp16.htm#xref_3_2) In mythology as well as in art the
lion remained the riding or driving animal of the Great Mother. Their
conception of the divinity was indistinct and impersonal. A goddess of
the earth, called Mi or Cybele, was revered as the fecund mother of all
things, the "mistress of the wild beasts" [3\_3](orrp16.htm#xref_3_3)
that inhabit the woods. A god Attis, or Papas, was regarded as her
husband, but the first place in this divine household belonged to the
woman, a reminiscence of the period of
matriarchy. [3\_4](orrp16.htm#xref_3_4)

When the Phrygians at a very early period came from Thrace and inserted
themselves like a wedge in the old Anatolian races, they adopted the
vague deities of their new country by identifying them with their own,
after the habit of pagan nations. Thus Attis became one with the
Dionysus-Sabazius of the conquerors, or at least assumed some of his
characteristics. This Thracian Dionysus was a god of vegetation. Foucart
has thus admirably pictured his savage nature: "Wooded summits, deep oak
and pine forests, ivy-clad caverns were at all times his favorite
haunts. Mortals who were anxious to know the powerful divinity ruling
these solitudes had to observe the life of his kingdom,

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

and to guess the god's nature from the phenomena through which he
manifested his power. Seeing the creeks descend in noisy foaming
cascades, or hearing the roaring of steers in the uplands and the
strange sounds of the wind-beaten forests, the Thracians thought they
heard the voice and the calls of the lord of that empire, and imagined a
god who was fond of extravagant leaps and of wild roaming over the
wooded mountains. This conception inspired their religion, for the
surest way for mortals to ingratiate themselves with a divinity was to
imitate him, and as far as possible to make their lives resemble his.
For this reason the Thracians endeavored to attain the divine delirium
that transported their Dionysus, and hoped to realize their purpose by
following their invisible yet ever-present lord in his chase over the
mountains." [3\_5](orrp16.htm#xref_3_5)

In the Phrygian religion we find the same beliefs and rites, scarcely
modified at all, with the one difference that Attis, the god of
vegetation, was united to the goddess of the earth instead of living "in
sullen loneliness." When the tempest was beating the forests of the
Berecyntus or Ida, it was Cybele traveling about in her car drawn by
roaring lions mourning her lover's death. A crowd of worshipers followed
her through woods and thickets, mingling their shouts with the shrill
sound of flutes, with the dull beat of tambourines, with the rattling of
castanets and the dissonance of brass cymbals. Intoxicated with shouting
and with uproar of the instruments, excited by their impetuous advance,
breathless and panting, they surrendered to the raptures of a sacred
enthusiasm. Catullus has left us a dramatic description of this divine
ecstasy. [3\_6](orrp16.htm#xref_3_6)

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

The religion of Phrygia was perhaps even more violent than that of
Thrace. The climate of the Anatolian uplands is one of extremes. Its
winters are rough, long and cold, the spring rains suddenly develop a
vigorous vegetation that is scorched by the hot summer sun. The abrupt
contrasts of a nature generous and sterile, radiant and bleak in turn,
caused excesses of sadness and joy that were unknown in temperate and
smiling regions, where the ground was never buried under snow nor
scorched by the sun. The Phrygians mourned the long agony and death of
the vegetation, but when the verdure reappeared in March they
surrendered to the excitement of a tumultuous joy. In Asia savage rites
that had been unknown in Thrace or practiced in milder form expressed
the vehemence of those opposing feelings. In the midst of their orgies,
and after wild dances, some of the worshipers voluntarily wounded
themselves and, becoming intoxicated with the view of the blood, with
which they besprinkled their altars, they believed they were uniting
themselves with their divinity. Or else, arriving at a paroxysm of
frenzy, they sacrificed their virility to the gods as certain Russian
dissenters still do to-day. These men became priests of Cybele and were
called Galli. Violent ecstasis was always an endemic disease in Phrygia.
As late as the Antonines, montanist prophets that arose in that country
attempted to introduce it into Christianity.

All these excessive and degrading demonstrations of an extreme worship
must not cause us to slight the power of the feeling that inspired it.
The sacred ecstasy, the voluntary mutilations and the eagerly sought
sufferings manifested an ardent longing for

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

deliverance from subjection to carnal instincts, and a fervent desire to
free the soul from the bonds of matter. The ascetic tendencies went so
far as to create a kind of begging monachism--the *métragyrtes*. They
also harmonized with some of the ideas of renunciation taught by Greek
philosophy, and at an early period Hellenic theologians took an interest
in this devotion that attracted and repelled them at the same time.
Timotheus the Eumolpid, who was one of the founders of the Alexandrian
religion of Serapis, derived the inspiration for his essays on religious
reform, among other sources, from the ancient Phrygian myths. Those
thinkers undoubtedly succeeded in making the priests of Pessinus
themselves admit many speculations quite foreign to the old Anatolian
nature worship. The votaries of Cybele began at a very remote period to
practise "mysteries" [3\_7](orrp16.htm#xref_3_7) in which the initiates
were made acquainted, by degrees, with a wisdom that was always
considered divine, but underwent peculiar variations in the course of
time.

\*    \*    \*

Such is the religion which the rough Romans of the Punic wars accepted
and adopted. Hidden under theological and cosmological doctrines it
contained an ancient stock of very primitive and coarse religious ideas,
such as the worship of trees, stones and animals. Besides this
superstitious fetichism it involved ceremonies that were both sensual
and ribald, including all the wild and mystic rites of the bacchanalia
which the public authorities were to prohibit a few years later.

When the senate became better acquainted with the divinity imposed upon
it by the Sibyls, it must have been quite embarrassed by the present of
King Attalus.

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

\[paragraph continues\] The enthusiastic transports and the somber
fanaticism of the Phrygian worship contrasted violently with the calm
dignity and respectable reserve of the official religion, and excited
the minds of the people to a dangerous degree. The emasculated Galli
were the objects of contempt and disgust and what in their own eyes was
a meritorious act was made a crime punishable by law, at least under the
empire. [3\_8](orrp16.htm#xref_3_8) The authorities hesitated between
the respect due to the powerful goddess that had delivered Rome from the
Carthaginians and the reverence for the *mos maiorum*. They solved the
difficulty by completely isolating the new religion in order to prevent
its contagion. All citizens were forbidden to join the priesthood of the
foreign goddess or to participate in her sacred orgies. The barbarous
rites according to which the Great Mother was to be worshiped were
performed by Phrygian priests and priestesses. The holidays celebrated
in her honor by the entire nation, the *Megalensia*, contained no
Oriental feature and were organized in conformity with Roman traditions.

A characteristic anecdote told by Diodorus [3\_9](orrp16.htm#xref_3_9)
shows what the public feeling was towards this Asiatic worship at the
end of the republic. In Pompey's time a high priest from Pessinus came
to Rome, presented himself at the forum in his sacerdotal garb, a golden
diadem and a long embroidered robe--and pretending that the statue of
his goddess had been profaned demanded public expiation. But a tribune
forbade him to wear the royal crown, and the populace rose against him
in a mob and compelled him to seek refuge in his house. Although
apologies were made later, this story shows how little the people of
that period felt

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

the veneration that attached to Cybele and her clergy after a century
had passed.

Kept closely under control, the Phrygian worship led an obscure
existence until the establishment of the empire. That closed the first
period of its history at Rome. It attracted attention only on certain
holidays, when its priests marched the streets in procession, dressed in
motley costumes, loaded with heavy jewelry, and beating tambourines. On
those days the senate granted them the right to go from house to house
to collect funds for their temples. The remainder of the year they
confined themselves to the sacred enclosure of the Palatine, celebrating
foreign ceremonies in a foreign language. They aroused so little notice
during this period that almost nothing is known of their practices or of
their creed. It has even been maintained that Attis was not worshiped
together with his companion, the Great Mother, during the times of the
republic, but this is undoubtedly wrong, because the two persons of this
divine couple must have been as inseparable in the ritual as they were
in the myths. [3\_10](orrp16.htm#xref_3_10)

But the Phrygian religion kept alive in spite of police surveillance, in
spite of precautions and prejudices; a breach had been made in the
cracked wall of the old Roman principles, through which the entire
Orient finally gained ingress.

Directly after the fall of the republic a second divinity from Asia
Minor, closely related to the Great Mother, became established in the
capital. During the wars against Mithridates the Roman soldiers learned
to revere Ma, the great goddess of the two Comanas, who was worshiped by
a whole people of hierodules in the ravines of the Taurus and along the
banks of the

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Iris. Like Cybele she was an ancient Anatolian
divinity and personified fertile nature. Her worship, however, had not
felt the influence of Thrace, but rather that of the Semites and the
Persians, [3\_11](orrp16.htm#xref_3_11) like the entire religion of
Cappadocia. It is certain that she was identical with the Anâhita of the
Mazdeans, who was of much the same nature.

The rites of her cult were even more sanguinary and savage than those of
Pessinus, and she had assumed or preserved a warlike character that gave
her a resemblance to the Italian Bellona. The dictator Sulla, to whom
this invincible goddess of combats had appeared in a dream, was prompted
by his superstition to introduce her worship into Rome. The terrible
ceremonies connected with it produced a deep impression. Clad in black
robes, her "fanatics," as they were called, would turn round and round
to the sound of drums and trumpets, with their long, loose hair
streaming, and when vertigo seized them and a state of anesthesia was
attained, they would strike their arms and bodies great blows with
swords and axes. The view of the running blood excited them, and they
besprinkled the statue of the goddess and her votaries with it, or even
drank it. Finally a prophetic delirium would overcome them, and they
foretold the future.

This ferocious worship aroused curiosity at first, but it never gained
great consideration. It appears that the Cappadocian Bellona joined the
number of divinities that were subordinated to the *Magna Mater* and, as
the texts put it, became her follower
(*pedisequa*). [3\_12](orrp16.htm#xref_3_12) The brief popularity
enjoyed by this exotic *Mâ* at the beginning of our era shows,
nevertheless, the growing

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

influence of the Orient, and of the religions of Asia Minor in
particular.

After the establishment of the empire the apprehensive distrust in which
the worship of Cybele and Attis had been held gave way to marked favor
and the original restrictions were withdrawn. Thereafter Roman citizens
were chosen for *archigalli*, and the holidays of the Phrygian deities
were solemnly and officially celebrated in Italy with even more pomp
than had been displayed at Pessinus.

According to Johannes Lydus, the Emperor Claudius was the author of this
change. Doubts have been expressed as to the correctness of the
statement made by this second-rate compiler, and it has been claimed
that the transformation in question took place under the Antonines. This
is erroneous. The testimony of inscriptions corroborates that of the
Byzantine writer. [3\_13](orrp16.htm#xref_3_13) In spite of his love of
archaism, it was Claudius who permitted this innovation to be made, and
we believe that we can divine the motives of his action.

Under his predecessor, Caligula, the worship of Isis had been authorized
after a long resistance. Its stirring festivities and imposing
processions gained considerable popularity. This competition must have
been disastrous to the priests of the *Magna Mater*, who were secluded
in their temple on the Palatine, and Caligula's successor could not but
grant to the Phrygian goddess, so long established in the city, the
favor accorded the Egyptian divinity who had been admitted into Rome but
very recently. In this way Claudius prevented too great an ascendency in
Italy of this second stranger and supplied a distributary to the current
of popular superstition. Isis must have been held under great

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

suspicion by a ruler who clung to old national
institutions. [3\_14](orrp16.htm#xref_3_14)

The Emperor Claudius introduced a new cycle of holidays that were
celebrated from March 15th to March 27th, the beginning of spring at the
time of the revival of vegetation, personified in Attis. The various
acts of this grand mystic drama are tolerably well known. The prelude
was a procession of *cannophori* or reed-bearers on the fifteenth;
undoubtedly they commemorated Cybele's discovery of Attis, who,
according to the legends, had been exposed while a child on the banks of
the Sangarius, the largest river of Phrygia, or else this ceremony may
have been the transformation of an ancient phallephory intended to
guarantee the fertility of the fields. [3\_15](orrp16.htm#xref_3_15) The
ceremonies proper began with the equinox. A pine was felled and
transferred to the temple of the Palatine by a brotherhood that owed to
this function its name of "tree-bearers" (*dendrophori*). Wrapped like a
corpse in woolen bands and garlands of violets, this pine represented
Attis dead. This god was originally only the spirit of the plants, and
the honors given to the "March-tree" [3\_16](orrp16.htm#xref_3_16) in
front of the imperial palace perpetuated a very ancient agrarian rite of
the Phrygian peasants. The next day was a day of sadness and abstinence
on which the believers fasted and mourned the defunct god. The
twenty-fourth bore the significant name of *Sanguis* in the calendars.
We know that it was the celebration of the funeral of Attis, whose manes
were appeased by means of libations of blood, as was done for any
mortal. Mingling their piercing cries with the shrill sound of flutes,
the Galli flagellated themselves and cut their flesh, and neophytes
performed the supreme

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

sacrifice with the aid of a sharp stone, being insensible to pain in
their frenzy. [3\_17](orrp16.htm#xref_3_17) Then followed a mysterious
vigil during which the mystic was supposed to be united as a new Attis
with the great goddess. [3\_18](orrp16.htm#xref_3_18) On March 25th
there was a sudden transition from the shouts of despair to a delirious
jubilation, the *Hilaria*. With springtime Attis awoke from his sleep of
death, and the joy created by his resurrection burst out in wild
merry-making, wanton masquerades, and luxurious banquets. After
twenty-four hours of an indispensable rest (*requietio*), the
festivities wound up, on the twenty-seventh, with a long and gorgeous
procession through the streets of Rome and surrounding country
districts. Under a constant rain of flowers the silver statue of Cybele
was taken to the river Almo, and bathed and purified according to an
ancient rite (*lavatio*).

The worship of the Mother of the Gods had penetrated into the Hellenic
countries long before it was received at Rome, but in Greece it assumed
a peculiar form and lost most of its barbarous character. The Greek mind
felt an unconquerable aversion to the dubious nature of Attis. The
*Magna Mater*, who is thoroughly different from her Hellenized sister,
penetrated into all Latin provinces and imposed herself upon them with
the Roman religion. This was the case in Spain, Brittany, the Danubian
countries, Africa and especially in Gaul. [3\_19](orrp16.htm#xref_3_19)
As late as the fourth century the car of the goddess drawn by steers was
led in great state through the fields and vineyards of Autun in order to
stimulate their fertility. [3\_20](orrp16.htm#xref_3_20) In the
provinces the *dendrophori*, who carried the sacred pine in the spring
festivities, formed associations recognized by the state. These
associations had charge of the work of our modern

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

fire departments, besides their religious mission. In case of necessity
these woodcutters and carpenters, who knew how to fell the divine tree
of Attis, were also able to cut down the timbers of burning buildings.
All over the empire religion and the brotherhoods connected with it were
under the high supervision of the quindecimvirs of the capital, who gave
the priests their insignia. The sacerdotal hierarchy and the rights
granted to the priesthood and believers were minutely defined in a
series of senate decrees. These Phrygian divinities who had achieved
full naturalization and had been placed on the official list of gods,
were adopted by the populations of the Occident as Roman gods together
with the rest. This propagation was clearly different from that of any
other Oriental religion, for here the action of the government aided the
tendencies that attracted the devout masses to these Asiatic divinities.

This popular zeal was the result of various causes. Ancient authors
describe the impression produced upon the masses by those magnificent
processions in which Cybele passed along on her car, preceded by
musicians playing captivating melodies, by priests wearing gorgeous
costumes covered with amulets, and by the long line of votaries and
members of the fraternities, all barefoot and wearing their insignia.
All this, however, created only a fleeting and exterior impression upon
the neophyte, but as soon as he entered the temple a deeper sensation
took hold of him. He heard the pathetic story of the goddess seeking the
body of her lover cut down in the prime of his life like the grass of
the fields. He saw the bloody funeral services in which the cruel death
of the young man was mourned,

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

and heard the joyful hymns of triumph, and the gay songs that greeted
his return to life. By a skilfully arranged gradation of feelings the
onlookers were uplifted to a state of rapturous ecstasy. Feminine
devotion in particular found encouragement and enjoyment in these
ceremonies, and the Great Mother, the fecund and generous goddess, was
always especially worshiped by the women.

Moreover, people founded great hopes on the pious practice of this
religion. Like the Thracians, the Phrygians began very early to believe
in the immortality of the soul. Just as Attis died and came to life
again every year, these believers were to be born to new life after
their death. One of the sacred hymns said: "Take courage, oh mystics,
because the god is saved; and for you also will come salvation from your
trials." [3\_21](orrp16.htm#xref_3_21) Even the funeral ceremonies were
affected by the strength of that belief. In some cities, especially at
Amphipolis in Macedonia, graves have been found adorned with earthenware
statuettes representing the shepherd
Attis; [3\_22](orrp16.htm#xref_3_22) and even in Germany the gravestones
are frequently decorated with the figure of a young man in Oriental
costume, leaning dejectedly upon a knotted stick (*pedum*), who
represented the same Attis. We are ignorant of the conception of
immortality held by the Oriental disciples of the Phrygian priests.
Maybe, like the votaries of Sabazius, they believed that the blessed
ones were permitted to participate with Hermes Psychopompos in a great
celestial feast, for which they were prepared by the sacred repasts of
the mysteries. [3\_23](orrp16.htm#xref_3_23)

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

Another agent in favor of this imported religion was, as we have stated
above, the fact of its official recognition. This placed it in a
privileged position among Oriental religions, at least at the beginning
of the imperial régime. It enjoyed a toleration that was neither
precarious nor limited; it was not subjected to arbitrary police
measures nor to coercion on the part of magistrates; its fraternities
were not continually threatened with dissolution, nor its priests with
expulsion. It was publicly authorized and endowed, its holidays were
marked in the calendars of the pontiffs, its associations of dendrophori
were organs of municipal life in Italy and in the provinces, and had a
corporate entity.

Therefore it is not surprising that other foreign religions, after being
transferred to Rome, sought to avert the dangers of an illicit existence
by an alliance with the Great Mother. The religion of the latter
frequently consented to agreements and compromises, from which it gained
in reality as much as it gave up. In exchange for material advantages it
acquired complete moral authority over the gods that accepted its
protection. Thus Cybele and Attis absorbed a majority of the divinities
from Asia Minor that had crossed the Ionian Sea. Their clergy
undoubtedly intended to establish a religion complex enough to enable
the emigrants from every part of the vast peninsula, slaves, merchants,
soldiers, functionaries, scholars, in short, people of all classes of
society, to find their national and favorite devotions in it. As a
matter of fact no other Anatolian god could maintain his independence
side by side with the deities of Pessinus. [3\_24](orrp16.htm#xref_3_24)

We do not know the internal development of the

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Phrygian mysteries sufficiently to give details
of the addition of each individual part. But we can prove that in the
course of time certain religions were added to the one that had been
practised in the temple of the Palatine ever since the republic.

In the inscriptions of the fourth century, Attis bears the cognomen of
*menotyrannus*. At that time this name was undoubtedly understood to
mean "lord of the months," because Attis represented the sun who entered
a new sign of the zodiac every month. [3\_25](orrp16.htm#xref_3_25) But
that was not the original meaning of the term. "*Mèn tyrannus*" appears
with quite a different meaning in many inscriptions found in Asia Minor.
*Tyrannos*, <span id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2) "lord," is a word taken by
the Greeks from the Lydian, and the honorable title of "tyrant" was
given to Mèn, an old barbarian divinity worshiped by all Phrygia and
surrounding regions. [3\_26](orrp16.htm#xref_3_26) The Anatolian tribes
from Caria to the remotest mountains of Pontus worshiped a lunar god
under that name who was supposed to rule not only the heavens but also
the underworld, because the moon was frequently brought into connection
with the somber kingdom of the dead. The growth of plants and the
increase of cattle and poultry were ascribed to his celestial influence,
and the villagers invoked his protection for their farms and their
district. They also placed their rural burial grounds under the
safeguard of this king of shadows. No god enjoyed greater popularity in
the country districts.

This powerful divinity penetrated into Greece at an early period. Among
the mixed populations of the Ægean seaports, in the Piræus, at Rhodes,
Delos and Thasos, religious associations for his worship were

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

founded. In Attica the presence of the cult can be traced back to the
fourth century, and its monuments rival those of Cybele in number and
variety. In the Latin Occident, however, no trace of it can be found,
because it had been absorbed by the worship of *Magna Mater*. In Asia
itself, Attis and Mèn were sometimes considered identical, and this
involved the Roman world in a complete confusion of those two persons,
who in reality were very different. A marble statue discovered at Ostia
represents Attis holding the lunar crescent, which was the
characteristic emblem of Mèn. His assimilation to the "tyrant" of the
infernal regions transformed the shepherd of Ida into a master of the
underworld, an office that he combined with his former one as author of
resurrection.

A second title that was given to him reveals another influence. A
certain Roman inscription is dedicated to Attis the
Supreme. [3\_27](orrp16.htm#xref_3_27) <span id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3)
This epithet is very significant. In Asia Minor "Hypsistos" was the
appellation used to designate the god of
Israel. [3\_28](orrp16.htm#xref_3_28) A number of pagan thiasi had
arisen who, though not exactly submitting to the practice of the
synagogue, yet worshiped none but the Most High, the Supreme God, the
Eternal God, God the Creator, to whom every mortal owed service. These
must have been the attributes ascribed to Cybele's companion by the
author of the inscription, because the verse continues: <span
id="fr_4"></span>[2](#fn_4) "To thee, who containest and maintainest all
things." [3\_29](orrp16.htm#xref_3_29) Must we then believe that Hebraic
monotheism had some influence upon the mysteries of the Great Mother?
This is not at all improbable. We know that numerous Jewish colonies
were established in Phrygia by the Seleucides, and that

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

these expatriated Jews agreed to certain compromises in order to
conciliate their hereditary faith with that of the pagans in whose midst
they lived. It is also possible that the clergy of Pessinus suffered the
ascendancy of the Biblical theology. Under the empire Attis and Cybele
became the "almighty gods" (*omnipotentes*) *par excellence*, and it is
easy to see in this new conception a leaning upon Semitic or Christian
doctrines, more probably upon Semitic
ones. [3\_30](orrp16.htm#xref_3_30)

We shall now take up the difficult question of the influence of Judaism
upon the mysteries during the Alexandrian period and at the beginning of
the empire. Many scholars have endeavored to define the influence
exercised by the pagan beliefs on those of the Jews; it has been shown
how the Israelitic monotheism became Hellenized at Alexandria and how
the Jewish propaganda attracted proselytes who revered the one God,
without, however, observing all the prescriptions of the Mosaic law. But
no successful researches have been made to ascertain how far paganism
was modified through an infiltration of Biblical ideas. Such a
modification must necessarily have taken place to some extent. A great
number of Jewish colonies were scattered everywhere on the
Mediterranean, and these were long animated with such an ardent spirit
of proselytism that they were bound to impose some of their conceptions
on the pagans that surrounded them. The magical texts which are almost
the only original literary documents of paganism we possess, clearly
reveal this mixture of Israelitic theology with that of other peoples.
In them we frequently find names like Iao (Yahveh), Sabaoth, or the
names of angels side by side with those of Egyptian or Greek divinities.
Especially in Asia

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Minor, where the Israelites formed a
considerable and influential element of the population, an intermingling
of the old native traditions and the religion of the strangers from the
other side of the Taurus must have occurred.

This mixture certainly took place in the mysteries of Sabazius, the
Phrygian Jupiter or Dionysus. [3\_31](orrp16.htm#xref_3_31) They were
very similar to those of Attis, with whom he was frequently confounded.
By means of an audacious etymology that dates back to the Hellenistic
period, this old Thraco-Phrygian divinity has been identified with
"Yahveh Zebaoth," the Biblical "Lord of Hosts." The corresponding
expression <span id="fr_5"></span>[1](#fn_5) in the Septuagint has been
regarded as the equivalent of the *kurios Sabazios* <span
id="fr_6"></span>[2](#fn_6) of the barbarians. The latter was worshiped
as the supreme, almighty and holy Lord. In the light of a new
interpretation the purifications practised in the mysteries were
believed to wipe out the hereditary impurity of a guilty ancestor who
had aroused the wrath of heaven against his posterity, much as the
original sin with which Adam's disobedience had stained the human race
was to be wiped out. The custom observed by the votaries of Sabazius of
dedicating votive hands which made the liturgic sign of benediction with
the first three fingers extended (the *benedictio latina* of the church)
was probably taken from the ritual of the Semitic temples through the
agency of the Jews. The initiates believed, again like the Jews, that
after death their good angel (*angelus bonus*) would lead them to the
banquet of the eternally happy, and the everlasting joys of these
banquets were anticipated on earth by the liturgic repasts. This
celestial feast can

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

be seen in a fresco painting on the grave of a priest of Sabazius called
Vincentius, who was buried in the Christian catacomb of Prætextatus, a
strange fact for which no satisfactory explanation has as yet been
furnished. Undoubtedly he belonged to a Jewish-pagan sect that admitted
neophytes of every race to its mystic ceremonies. In fact, the church
itself formed a kind of secret society sprung from the synagogue but
distinct from it, in which Gentiles and the Children of Israel joined in
a common adoration.

If it is a fact, then, that Judaism influenced the worship of Sabazius,
it is very probable that it influenced the cult of Cybele also, although
in this case the influence cannot be discerned with the same degree of
certainty. The religion of the Great Mother did not receive rejuvenating
germs from Palestine only, but it was greatly changed after the gods of
more distant Persia came and joined it. In the ancient religion of the
Achemenides, Mithra, the genius of light, was coupled with Anahita, the
goddess of the fertilizing waters. In Asia Minor the latter was
assimilated with the fecund Great Mother, worshiped all over the
peninsula, [3\_32](orrp16.htm#xref_3_32) and when at the end of the
first century of our era the mysteries of Mithra spread over the Latin
provinces, its votaries built their sacred crypts in the shadow of the
temples of the *Magna Mater*.

Everywhere in the empire the two religions lived in intimate communion.
By ingratiating themselves with the Phrygian priests, the priests of
Mithra obtained the support of an official institution and shared in the
protection granted by the state. Moreover, men alone could participate
in the secret ceremonies of the Persian liturgy, at least in the
Occident. Other mysteries,

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

to which women could be admitted, had therefore to be added in order to
complete them, and so the mysteries of Cybele received the wives and
daughters of the Mithraists.

This union had even more important consequences for the old religion of
Pessinus than the partial infusion of Judaic beliefs had had. Its
theology gained a deeper meaning and an elevation hitherto unknown,
after it had adopted some of the conceptions of Mazdaism.

The introduction of the taurobolium in the ritual of the *Magna Mater*,
where it appeared after the middle of the first century, was probably
connected with this transformation. We know the nature of this
sacrifice, of which Prudentius gives a stirring description based on
personal recollection of the proceeding. On an open platform a steer was
killed, and the blood dropped down upon the mystic, who was standing in
an excavation below. "Through the thousand crevices in the wood," says
the poet, "the bloody dew runs down into the pit. The neophyte receives
the falling drops on his head, clothes and body. He leans backward to
have his cheeks, his ears, his lips and his nostrils wetted; he pours
the liquid over his eyes, and does not even spare his palate, for he
moistens his tongue with blood and drinks it
eagerly." [3\_33](orrp16.htm#xref_3_33) After submitting to this
repulsive sprinkling he offered himself to the veneration of the crowd.
They believed that he was purified of his faults, and had become the
equal of the deity through his red baptism.

Although the origin of this sacrifice that took place in the mysteries
of Cybele at Rome is as yet shrouded in obscurity, recent discoveries
enable us to trace back

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

very closely the various phases of its development. In accordance with a
custom prevalent in the entire Orient at the beginning of history, the
Anatolian lords were fond of pursuing and lassoing wild buffalos, which
they afterwards sacrificed to the gods. Beasts caught during a hunt were
immolated, and frequently also prisoners of war. Gradually the savagery
of this primitive rite was modified until finally nothing but a circus
play was left. During the Alexandrian period people were satisfied with
organizing a *corrida* in the arena, in the course of which the victim
intended for immolation was seized. This is the proper meaning of the
terms taurobolium and criobolium, <span id="fr_7"></span>[1](#fn_7)
which had long been enigmas, [3\_34](orrp16.htm#xref_3_34) and which
denoted the act of catching a steer or a ram by means of a hurled
weapon, probably the thong of a lasso. Without doubt even this act was
finally reduced to a mere sham under the Roman empire, but the weapon
with which the animal was slain always remained a hunting weapon, a
sacred boar spear. [3\_35](orrp16.htm#xref_3_35)

The ideas on which the immolation was based were originally just as
barbarous as the sacrifice itself. It is a matter of general belief
among savage peoples that one acquires the qualities of an enemy slain
in battle or of a beast killed in the chase by drinking or washing in
the blood, or by eating some of the viscera of the body. The blood
especially has often been considered as the seat of vital energy. By
moistening his body with the blood of the slaughtered steer, the
neophyte believed that he was transfusing the strength of the formidable
beast into his own limbs.

This naive and purely material conception was soon

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

modified and refined. The Thracians brought into Phrygia, and the
Persian magi into Cappadocia, the fast spreading belief in the
immortality of mankind. Under their influence, especially under that of
Mazdaism, which made the mythical steer the author of creation and of
resurrection, the old savage practice assumed a more spiritual and more
elevated meaning. By complying with it, people no longer thought they
were acquiring the buffalo's strength; the blood, as the principle of
life, was no longer supposed to renew physical energy, but to cause a
temporary or even an eternal rebirth of the soul. The descent into the
pit was regarded as burial, a melancholy dirge accompanied the burial of
the old man who had died. When he emerged purified of all his crimes by
the sprinkling of blood and raised to a new life, he was regarded as the
equal of a god, and the crowd worshiped him from a respectful
distance. [3\_36](orrp16.htm#xref_3_36)

The vogue obtained in the Roman empire by the practice of this repugnant
rite can only be explained by the extraordinary power ascribed to it. He
who submitted to it was in *aeternum
renatus*, [3\_37](orrp16.htm#xref_3_37) according to the inscriptions.

We could also outline the transformation of other Phrygian ceremonies,
of which the spirit and sometimes the letter slowly changed under the
influence of more advanced moral ideas. This is true of the sacred
feasts attended by the initiates. One of the few liturgic formulas
antiquity has left us refers to these Phrygian banquets. One hymn says:
"I have eaten from the tambourine, I have drunk from the cymbal, I have
become a mystic of Attis." The banquet, which is found in several
Oriental religions, was sometimes simply the

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

external sign indicating that the votaries of the same divinity formed
one large family. Admitted to the sacred table, the neophyte was
received as the guest of the community and became a brother among
brothers. The religious bond of the thiasus or *sodalicium* took the
place of the natural relationship of the family, the *gens* or the clan,
just as the foreign religion replaced the worship of the domestic
hearth.

Sometimes other effects were expected of the food eaten in common. When
the flesh of some animal supposed to be of a divine nature was eaten,
the votary believed that he became identified with the god and that he
shared in his substance and qualities. In the beginning the Phrygian
priests probably attributed the first of these two meanings to their
barbarous communions. [3\_38](orrp16.htm#xref_3_38) Towards the end of
the empire, moral ideas were particularly connected with the
assimilation of sacred liquor and meats taken from the tambourine and
cymbal of Attis. They became the staff of the spiritual life and were to
sustain the votary in his trials; at that period he considered the gods
as especially "the guardians of his soul and
thoughts." [3\_39](orrp16.htm#xref_3_39)

As we see, every modification of the conception of the world and of man
in the society of the empire had its reflection in the doctrine of the
mysteries. Even the conception of the old deities of Pessinus was
constantly changing. When astrology and the Semitic religions caused the
establishment of a solar henotheism as the leading religion at Rome,
Attis was considered as the sun, "the shepherd of the twinkling stars."
He was identified with Adonis, Bacchus, Pan, Osiris and Mithra; he was
made a "polymorphous" [3\_40](orrp16.htm#xref_3_40) being in which all
celestial powers manifested them

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

selves in turn; a *pantheos* who wore the crown of rays and the lunar
crescent at the same time, and whose various emblems expressed an
infinite multiplicity of functions.

When neo-Platonism was triumphing, the Phrygian fable became the
traditional mould into which subtle exegetists boldly poured their
philosophic speculations on the creative and stimulating forces that
were the principles of all material forms, and on the deliverance of the
divine soul that was submerged in the corruption of this earthly world.
In his hazy oration on the Mother of the Gods, Julian lost all notion of
reality on account of his excessive use of allegory and was swept away
by an extravagant symbolism. [3\_41](orrp16.htm#xref_3_41)

Any religion as susceptible to outside influences as this one was bound
to yield to the ascendancy of Christianity. From the explicit testimony
of ecclesiastical writers we know that attempts- were made to oppose the
Phrygian mysteries to those of the church. It was maintained that the
sanguinary purification imparted by the taurobolium was more efficacious
than baptism. The food that was taken during the mystic feasts was
likened to the bread and wine of the communion; the Mother of the Gods
was undoubtedly placed above the Mother of God, whose son also had risen
again. A Christian author, writing at Rome about the year 375, furnishes
some remarkable information on this subject. As we have seen, a mournful
ceremony was celebrated on March 24th, the *dies sanguinis* in the
course of which the *galli* shed their blood and sometimes mutilated
themselves in commemoration of the wound that had caused Attis's death,
ascribing an expiatory and atoning power to the blood thus shed. The
pagans

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

claimed that the church had copied their most sacred rites by placing
her Holy Week at the vernal equinox in commemoration of the sacrifice of
the cross on which the divine Lamb, according to the church, had
redeemed the human race. Indignant at these blasphemous pretensions, St.
Augustine tells of having known a priest of Cybele who kept saying: *Et
ipse Pileatus christianus est*--"and even the god with the Phrygian cap
\[i.e., Attis\] is a Christian." [3\_42](orrp16.htm#xref_3_42)

But all efforts to maintain a barbarian religion stricken with moral
decadence were in vain. On the very spot on which the last taurobolia
took place at the end of the fourth century, in the *Phrygianum*, stands
to-day the basilica of the Vatican.

\*    \*    \*

There is no Oriental religion whose progressive evolution we could
follow at Rome so closely as the cult of Cybele and Attis, none that
shows so plainly one of the reasons that caused their common decay and
disappearance. They all dated back to a remote period of barbarism, and
from that savage past they inherited a number of myths the odium of
which could be masked but not eradicated by philosophical symbolism, and
practices whose fundamental coarseness had survived from a period of
rude nature worship, and could never be completely disguised by means of
mystic interpretations. Never was the lack of harmony greater between
the moralizing tendencies of theologians and the cruel shamelessness of
tradition. A god held up as the august lord of the universe was the
pitiful and abject hero of an obscene love affair; the taurobolium,
performed to satisfy man's most exalted aspirations for spiritual
purification and immortality, looked like a

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

shower bath of blood and recalled cannibalistic orgies. The men of
letters and senators attending those mysteries saw them performed by
painted eunuchs, ill reputed for their infamous morals, who went through
dizzy dances similar to those of the dancing dervishes and the
Aissaouas. We can imagine the repugnance these ceremonies caused in
everybody whose judgment had not been destroyed by a fanatical devotion.
Of no other pagan superstition do the Christian polemicists speak with
such profound contempt, and there is undoubtedly a reason for their
attitude. But they were in a more fortunate position than their pagan
antagonists; their doctrine was not burdened with barbarous traditions
dating back to times of savagery; and all the ignominies that stained
the old Phrygian religion must not prejudice us against it nor cause us
to slight the long continued efforts that were made to refine it
gradually and to mould it into a form that would fulfil the new demands
of morality and enable it to follow the laborious march of Roman society
on the road of religious progress.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2"></span>[61:1](orrp07.htm#fr_2) Τύραννος.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[62:1](orrp07.htm#fr_3) Ἄττει ὑψίστῳ.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[62:2](orrp07.htm#fr_4) καὶ συνέχοντι τὸ πᾶν.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[64:1](orrp07.htm#fr_5) κύριος Σαβαώθ.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[64:2](orrp07.htm#fr_6) κύριος Σαβάζιος.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[67:1](orrp07.htm#fr_7) ταυροβόλιον, κριοβόλιον.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IV. Egypt](orrp08)
