[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](orrp07)  [Next](orrp09.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

# EGYPT.

WE know more about the religion of the early Egyptians than about any
other ancient religion. Its development can be traced back three or four
thousand years; we can read its sacred texts, mythical narratives,
hymns, rituals, and the Book of the Dead in the original, and we can
ascertain its various ideas as to the nature of the divine powers and of
future life. A great number of monuments have preserved for our
inspection the pictures of divinities and representations of liturgic
scenes, while numerous inscriptions and papyri enlighten us in regard to
the sacerdotal organization of the principal temples. It would seem that
the enormous quantity of documents of all kinds that have been
deciphered in the course of nearly an entire century should have
dispelled every uncertainty about the creed of ancient Egypt, and should
have furnished exact information with regard to the sources and original
character of the worship which the Greeks and the Romans borrowed from
the subjects of the Ptolemies.

And yet, this is not the case. While of the four great Oriental
religions which were transplanted into the Occident, the religion of
Isis and Serapis is the one whose relation to the ancient belief of the
mother country we can establish with greatest accuracy, we

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

know very little of its first form and of its nature before the imperial
period, when it was held in high esteem.

One fact, however, appears to be certain. The Egyptian worship that
spread over the Greco-Roman world came from the Serapeum founded at
Alexandria by Ptolemy Soter, somewhat in the manner of Judaism that
emanated from the temple of Jerusalem. But the earliest history of that
famous sanctuary is surrounded by such a thick growth of pious legends,
that the most sagacious investigators have lost their way in it. Was
Serapis of native origin, or was he imported from Sinope or Seleucia, or
even from Babylon? Each of these opinions has found supporters very
recently. Is his name derived from that of the Egyptian god Osiris-Apis,
or from that of the Chaldean deity Sar-Apsi? *Grammatici
certant*. [4\_1](orrp17.htm#xref_4_1.md)

Whichever solution we may adopt, one fact remains, namely, that Serapis
and Osiris were either immediately identified or else were identical
from the beginning. The divinity whose worship was started at Alexandria
by Ptolemy was the god that ruled the dead and shared his immortality
with them. He was fundamentally an Egyptian god, and the most popular of
the deities of the Nile. Herodotus says that Isis and Osiris were
revered by every inhabitant of the country, and their traditional
holidays involved secret ceremonies whose sacred meaning the Greek
writer dared not reveal. [4\_2](orrp17.htm#xref_4_2.md)

Recognizing their Osiris in Serapis, the Egyptians readily accepted the
new cult. There was a tradition that a new dynasty should introduce a
new god or give a sort of preeminence to the god of its own district.
From time immemorial politics had changed the government

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

of heaven when changing that of earth. Under the Ptolemies the Serapis
of Alexandria naturally became one of the principal divinities of the
country, just as the Ammon of Thebes had been the chief of the celestial
hierarchy under the Pharaohs of that city, or as, under the sovereigns
from Sais, the local Neith had the primacy. At the time of the Antonines
there were forty-two Serapeums in Egypt. [4\_3](orrp17.htm#xref_4_3.md)

But the purpose of the Ptolemies was not to add one more Egyptian god to
the countless number already worshiped by their subjects. They wanted
this god to unite in one common worship the two races inhabiting the
kingdom, and thus to further a complete fusion. The Greeks were obliged
to worship him side by side with the natives. It was a clever political
idea to institute a Hellenized Egyptian religion at Alexandria. A
tradition mentioned by Plutarch [4\_4](orrp17.htm#xref_4_4.md) has it that
Manetho, a priest from Heliopolis, a man of advanced ideas, together
with Timotheus, a Eumolpid from Eleusis, thought out the character that
would best suit the newcomer. The result was that the composite religion
founded by the Lagides became a combination of the old creed of the
Pharaohs and the Greek mysteries.

First of all, the liturgic language was no longer the native idiom but
Greek. This was a radical change. The philosopher Demetrius of Phalerum,
who had been cured of blindness by Serapis, composed poems in honor of
the god that were still sung under the Cæsars several centuries
later. [4\_5](orrp17.htm#xref_4_5.md) We can easily imagine that the poets,
who lived on the bounty of the Ptolemies, vied with each other in their
efforts to celebrate their benefactors' god, and the old rituals that
were translated from the Egyptian were also enriched with

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

edifying bits of original inspiration. A hymn to Isis, found on a marble
monument in the island of Andros, [4\_6](orrp17.htm#xref_4_6.md) gives us
some idea of these sacred compositions, although it is of more recent
date.

In the second place, the artists replaced the old hieratic idols by more
attractive images and gave them the beauty of the immortals. It is not
known who created the figure of Isis draped in a linen gown with a
fringed cloak fastened over the breast, whose sweet meditative,
graciously maternal face is a combination of the ideals imagined for
Hera and Aphrodite. But we know the sculptor of the first statue of
Serapis that stood in the great sanctuary of Alexandria until the end of
paganism. This statue, the prototype of all the copies that have been
preserved, is a colossal work of art made of precious materials by a
famous Athenian sculptor named Bryaxis, a contemporary of Scopas. It was
one of the last divine creations of Hellenic genius. The majestic head,
with its somber and yet benevolent expression, with its abundance of
hair, and with a crown in the shape of a bushel, bespoke the double
character of a god ruling at the same time both the fertile earth and
the dismal realm of the dead. [4\_7](orrp17.htm#xref_4_7.md)

As we see, the Ptolemies had given their new religion a literary and
artistic shape that was capable of attracting the most refined and
cultured minds. But the adaptation to the Hellenic feeling and thinking
was not exclusively external. Osiris, the god whose worship was thus
renewed, was more adapted than any other to lend his authority to the
formation of a syncretic faith. At a very early period, in fact before
the time of Herodotus, Osiris had been identified with Dionysus, and
Isis with Demeter. M. Foucart has endeavored

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

to prove in an ingenious essay that this assimilation was not arbitrary,
that Osiris and Isis came into Crete and Attica during the prehistoric
period, and that they were mistaken for Dionysus and
Demeter [4\_8](orrp17.htm#xref_4_8.md) by the people of those regions.
Without going back to those remote ages, we shall merely say with him
that the mysteries of Dionysus were connected with those of Osiris by
far-reaching affinities, not simply by superficial and fortuitous
resemblances. Each commemorated the history of a god governing both
vegetation and the underworld at the same time, who was put to death and
torn to pieces by an enemy, and whose scattered limbs were collected by
a goddess, after which he was miraculously revived. The Greeks must have
been very willing to adopt a worship in which they found their own
divinities and their own myths again with something more poignant and
more magnificent added. It is a very remarkable fact that of all the
many deities worshiped by the Egyptian districts those of the immediate
neighborhood, or if you like, the cycle of Osiris, his wife Isis, their
son Harpocrates and their faithful servant Anubis, were the only ones
that were adopted by the Hellenic populations. All other heavenly or
infernal spirits worshiped by the Egyptians remained strangers to
Greece. [4\_9](orrp17.htm#xref_4_9.md)

In the Greco-Latin literature we notice two opposing attitudes toward
the Egyptian religion. It was regarded as the highest and the lowest of
religions at the same time, and as a matter of fact there was an abyss
between the always ardent popular beliefs and the enlightened faith of
the official priests. The Greeks and Romans gazed with admiration upon
the splendor of the temples and ceremonial, upon the fabulous antiquity

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

of the sacred traditions and upon the erudition of a clergy possessed of
a wisdom that had been revealed by divinity. In becoming the disciples
of that clergy, they imagined they were drinking from the pure fountain
whence their own myths had sprung. They were overawed by the pretensions
of a clergy that prided itself on a past in which it kept on living, and
they strongly felt the attraction of a marvelous country where
everything was mysterious, from the Nile that had created it to the
hieroglyphs engraved upon the walls of its gigantic
edifices. [4\_10](orrp17.htm#xref_4_10.md) At the same time they were
shocked by the coarseness of its fetichism and by the absurdity of its
superstitions. Above all they felt an unconquerable repulsion at the
worship of animals and plants, which had always been the most striking
feature of the vulgar Egyptian religion and which, like all other
archaic devotions, seems to have been practised with renewed fervor
after the accession of the Saite dynasty. The comic writers and the
satirists never tired of scoffing at the adorers of the cat, the
crocodile, the leek and the onion. Juvenal says ironically: "O holy
people, whose very kitchen-gardens produce
gods." [4\_11](orrp17.htm#xref_4_11.md) In a general way, this strange
people, entirely separated from the remainder of the world, were
regarded with about the same kind of feeling that Europeans entertained
toward the Chinese for a long time.

A purely Egyptian worship would not have been acceptable to the
Greco-Latin world. The main merit of the mixed creation of the political
genius of the Ptolemies consisted in the rejection or modification of
everything repugnant or monstrous like the phallophories of Abydos, and
in the retention of none but

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

stirring or attractive elements. It was the most civilized of all
barbarian religions; it retained enough of the exotic element to arouse
the curiosity of the Greeks, but not enough to offend their delicate
sense of proportion, and its success was remarkable.

It was adopted wherever the authority or the prestige of the Lagides was
felt, and wherever the relations of Alexandria, the great commercial
metropolis, extended. The Lagides induced the rulers and the nations
with whom they concluded alliances to accept it. King Nicocreon
introduced it into Cyprus after having consulted the oracle of the
Serapeum, [4\_12](orrp17.htm#xref_4_12.md) and Agathocles introduced it
into Sicily, at the time of his marriage with the daughter-in-law of
Ptolemy I (298). [4\_13](orrp17.htm#xref_4_13.md) At Antioch, Seleucus
Callinicus built a sanctuary for the statue of Isis sent to him from
Memphis by Ptolemy Euergetes. [4\_14](orrp17.htm#xref_4_14.md) In token of
his friendship Ptolemy Soter introduced his god Serapis into Athens,
where the latter had a temple at the foot of the
Acropolis [4\_15](orrp17.htm#xref_4_15.md) ever after, and Arsinoë, his
mother or wife, founded another at Halicarnassus, about the year
307. [4\_16](orrp17.htm#xref_4_16.md) In this manner the political activity
of the Egyptian dynasty was directed toward having the divinities, whose
glory was in a certain measure connected with that of their house,
recognized everywhere. Through Apuleius we know that under the empire
the priests of Isis mentioned the ruling sovereign first of all in their
prayers. [4\_17](orrp17.htm#xref_4_17.md) And this was simply an imitation
of the grateful devotion which their predecessors had felt toward the
Ptolemies.

Protected by the Egyptian squadrons, sailors and merchants propagated
the worship of Isis, the goddess of navigators, simultaneously on the
coasts of Syria,

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Asia Minor and Greece, in the islands of the
Archipelago, [4\_18](orrp17.htm#xref_4_18.md) and as far as the Hellespont
and Thrace. [4\_19](orrp17.htm#xref_4_19.md) At Delos, where the
inscriptions enable us to study this worship somewhat in detail, it was
not merely practised by strangers, but the very sacerdotal functions
were performed by members of the Athenian aristocracy. A number of
funereal bas-reliefs, in which the deified dead wears the *calathos* of
Serapis on his head, prove the popularity of the belief in future life
propagated by these mysteries. According to the Egyptian faith he was
identified with the god of the dead. [4\_20](orrp17.htm#xref_4_20.md)

Even after the splendor of the court of Alexandria had faded and
vanished; even after the wars against Mithridates and the growth of
piracy had ruined the traffic of the Ægean Sea, the Alexandrian worship
was too deeply rooted in the soil of Greece to perish, although it
became endangered in certain seaports like Delos. Of all the gods of the
Orient, Isis and Serapis were the only ones that retained a place among
the great divinities of the Hellenic world until the end of
paganism. [4\_21](orrp17.htm#xref_4_21.md)

\*    \*    \*

It was this syncretic religion that came to Rome after having enjoyed
popularity in the eastern Mediterranean. Sicily and the south of Italy
were more than half Hellenized, and the Ptolemies had diplomatic
relations with these countries, just as the merchants of Alexandria had
commercial relations with them. For this reason the worship of Isis
spread as rapidly in those regions as on the coasts of Ionia or in the
Cyclades. [4\_22](orrp17.htm#xref_4_22.md) It was introduced into Syracuse
and Catana during the earliest years of the third century by Agathocles.

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

\[paragraph continues\] The Serapeum of Pozzuoli, at that time the
busiest seaport of Campania, was mentioned in a city ordinance of the
year 105 B. C.23 About the same time an Iseum was founded at Pompeii,
where the decorative frescos attest to this day the power of expansion
possessed by the Alexandrian culture.

After its adoption by the southern part of the Italian peninsula, this
religion was bound to penetrate rapidly to Rome. Ever since the second
century before our era, it could not help but find adepts in the
chequered multitude of slaves and freedmen. Under the Antonines the
college of the *pastophori* recalled that it had been founded in the
time of Sulla. [4\_24](orrp17.htm#xref_4_24.md) In vain did the authorities
try to check the invasion of the Alexandrian gods. Five different times,
in 59, 58, 53, and 48 B. C., the senate ordered their altars and statues
torn down, [4\_25](orrp17.htm#xref_4_25.md) but these violent measures did
not stop the diffusion of the new beliefs. The Egyptian mysteries were
the first example at Rome of an essentially popular religious movement
that was triumphant over the continued resistance of the public
authorities and the official clergy.

Why was this Egyptian worship the only one of all Oriental religions to
suffer repeated persecutions? There were two motives, one religious and
one political.

In the first place, this cult was said to exercise a corrupting
influence perversive of piety. Its morals were loose, and the mystery
surrounding it excited the worst suspicions. Moreover, it appealed
violently to the emotions and senses. All these factors offended the
grave decency that a Roman was wont to maintain

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

in the presence of the gods. The innovators had every defender of the
*mos maiorum* for an adversary.

In the second place, this religion had been founded, supported and
propagated by the Ptolemies; it came from a country that was almost
hostile to Italy during the last period of the
republic; [4\_26](orrp17.htm#xref_4_26.md) it issued from Alexandria, whose
superiority Rome felt and feared. Its secret societies, made up chiefly
of people of the lower classes, might easily become clubs of agitators
and haunts of spies. All these motives for suspicion and hatred were
undoubtedly more potent in exciting persecution than the purely
theological reasons, and persecution was stopped or renewed according to
the vicissitudes of general politics.

As we have stated, the chapels consecrated to Isis were demolished in
the year 48 B. C. After Cæsar's death, the triumvirs decided in 43 B. C.
to erect a temple in her honor out of the public funds, undoubtedly to
gain the favor of the masses. This action would have implied official
recognition, but the project appears never to have been executed. If
Antony had succeeded at Actium, Isis and Serapis would have entered Rome
in triumph, but they were vanquished with Cleopatra; and when Augustus
had become the master of the empire, he professed a deep aversion for
the gods of his former enemies. Moreover, he could not have suffered the
intrusion of the Egyptian clergy into the Roman sacerdotal class, whose
guardian, restorer and chief he was. In 28 B. C. an ordinance was issued
forbidding the erecting of altars to the Alexandrian divinities inside
the sacred enclosure of the *pomerium*, and seven years later Agrippa
extended this prohibitive regulation to a radius of a thousand paces
around the

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

city. Tiberius acted on the same principle and in 19 A. D. instituted
the bloodiest persecution against the priests of Isis that they ever
suffered, in consequence of a scandalous affair in which a matron, a
noble and some priests of Isis were implicated.

All these police measures, however, were strangely ineffectual. The
Egyptian worship was excluded from Rome and her immediate neighborhood
in theory if not in fact, but the rest of the world remained open to its
propaganda. [4\_27](orrp17.htm#xref_4_27.md)

With the beginning of the empire it slowly invaded the center and the
north of Italy and spread into the provinces. Merchants, sailors,
slaves, artisans, Egyptian men of letters, even the discharged soldiers
of the three legions cantoned in the valley of the Nile contributed to
its diffusion. It entered Africa by way of Carthage, and the Danubian
countries through the great emporium of Aquileia. The new province of
Gaul was invaded through the valley of the Rhone. At that period many
Oriental emigrants went to seek their fortunes in these new countries.
Intimate relations existed between the cities of Arles and Alexandria,
and we know that a colony of Egyptian Greeks, established at Nimes by
Augustus, took the gods of their native country
thither. [4\_28](orrp17.htm#xref_4_28.md) At the beginning of our era there
set in that great movement of conversion that soon established the
worship of Isis and Serapis from the outskirts of the Sahara to the
vallum of Britain, and from the mountains of Asturias to the mouths of
the Danube.

The resistance still offered by the central power could not last much
longer. It was impossible to dam in this overflowing stream whose
thundering waves struck the

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

shaking walls of the *pomerium* from every side. The prestige of
Alexandria seemed invincible. At that period the city was more
beautiful, more learned, and better policed than Rome. She was the model
capital, a standard to which the Latins strove to rise. They translated
the works of the scholars of Alexandria, imitated her authors, invited
her artists and copied her institutions. It is plain that they had also
to undergo the ascendancy of her religion. As a matter of fact, her
fervent believers maintained her sanctuaries, despite the law, on the
very Capitol. Under Cæsar, Alexandrian astronomers had reformed the
calendar of the pontiffs, and Alexandrian priests soon marked the dates
of Isis holidays upon it.

The decisive step was taken soon after the death of Tiberius. Caligula
erected the great temple of Isis Campensis on the Campus Martius
probably in the year 38. [4\_29](orrp17.htm#xref_4_29.md) In order to spare
the sacerdotal susceptibilities, he founded it outside of the sacred
enclosure of the city of Servius. Later Domitian made one of Rome's most
splendid monuments of that temple. From that time Isis and Serapis
enjoyed the favor of every imperial dynasty, the Flavians as well as the
Antonines and the Severi. About the year 215 Caracalla built an Isis
temple, even more magnificent than that of Domitian, on the Quirinal, in
the heart of the city, and perhaps another one on the Coelian. As the
apologist Minucius Felix states, the Egyptian gods had become entirely
Roman. [4\_30](orrp17.htm#xref_4_30.md)

The climax of their power seems to have been reached at the beginning of
the third century; later on the popular vogue and official support went
to other divinities, like the Syrian Baals and the Persian Mithras.

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

\[paragraph continues\] The progress of Christianity also deprived them
of their power, which was, however, still considerable until the end of
the ancient world. The Isis processions that marched the streets of Rome
were described by an eye witness as late as the year
394, [4\_31](orrp17.htm#xref_4_31.md) but in 391 the patriarch Theophilus
had consigned the Serapeum of Alexandria to the flames, having himself
struck the first blow with an ax against the colossal statue of the god
that had so long been the object of a superstitious veneration. Thus the
prelate destroyed the "very head of idolatry," as Rufinus put
it. [4\_32](orrp17.htm#xref_4_32.md)

As a matter of fact, idolatry received its death blow. The worship of
the gods of the Ptolemies died out completely between the reigns of
Theodosius and Justinian, [4\_33](orrp17.htm#xref_4_33.md) and in
accordance with the sad prophecy of Hermes
Trismegistus [4\_34](orrp17.htm#xref_4_34.md) Egypt, Egypt herself, lost
her divinities and became a land of the dead. Of her religions nothing
remained but fables that were no longer believed, and the only thing
that reminded the barbarians who came to inhabit the country of its
former piety, were words engraved on stone.

\*    \*    \*

This rapid sketch of the history of Isis and Serapis shows that these
divinities were worshiped in the Latin world for more than five
centuries. The task of pointing out the transformations of the cult
during that long period, and the local differences there may have been
in the various provinces, is reserved for future researches. These will
undoubtedly find that the Alexandrian worship did not become Latinized
under the empire, but that its Oriental character became more and more
pronounced. When Domitian restored the Iseum of the Campus Martius and
that of Beneventum, he

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

transferred from the valley of the Nile sphinxes, cynocephali and
obelisks of black or pink granite bearing borders of hieroglyphics of
Amasis, Nectanebos or even Rameses II. On other obelisks that were
erected in the propyleums even the inscriptions of the emperors were
written in hieroglyphics. [4\_35](orrp17.htm#xref_4_35.md) Half a century
later that true dilettante, Hadrian, caused the luxuries of Canopus to
be reproduced, along with the vale of Tempe, in his immense villa at
Tibur, to enable him to celebrate his voluptuous feasts under the
friendly eyes of Serapis. He extolled the merits of the deified Antinous
in inscriptions couched in the ancient language of the Pharaohs, and set
the fashion of statues hewn out of black basalt in the Egyptian
style. [4\_36](orrp17.htm#xref_4_36.md) The amateurs of that period
affected to prefer the hieratic rigidity of the barbarian idols to the
elegant freedom of Alexandrian art. Those esthetic manifestations
probably corresponded to religious prejudices, and the Latin worship
always endeavored to imitate the art of temples in the Nile valley more
closely than did the Greek. This evolution was in conformity with all
the tendencies of the imperial period.

By what secret virtue did the Egyptian religion exercise this
irresistible influence over the Roman world? What new elements did those
priests, who made proselytes in every province, give the Roman world?
Did the success of their preaching mean progress or retrogression from
the standard of the ancient Roman faith? These are complex and delicate
questions that would require minute analysis and cautious treatment with
a constant and exact observation of shades. I am compelled to limit
myself to a rapid sketch, which, I

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

fear, will appear rather dry and arbitrary; like every generalization.

The particular doctrines of the mysteries of Isis and Serapis in regard
to the nature and power of the gods were not, or were but incidentally,
the reasons for the triumph of these mysteries. It has been said that
the Egyptian theology always remained in a "fluid
state," [4\_37](orrp17.htm#xref_4_37.md) or better in a state of chaos. It
consisted of an amalgamation of disparate legends, of an aggregate of
particular cults, as Egypt herself was an aggregate of a number of
districts. This religion never formulated a coherent system of generally
accepted dogmas. It permitted the coexistence of conflicting conceptions
and traditions, and all the subtlety of its clergy never accomplished,
or rather never began, the task of fusing those irreconcilable elements
into one harmonious synthesis. [4\_38](orrp17.htm#xref_4_38.md) For the
Egyptians there was no principle of contradiction. All the heterogeneous
beliefs that ever obtained in the various districts during the different
periods of a very long history, were maintained concurrently and formed
an inextricable confusion in the sacred books.

About the same state of affairs prevailed in the Occidental worship of
the Alexandrian divinities. In the Occident, just as in Egypt, there
were "prophets" in the first rank of the clergy, who learnedly discussed

religion, but never taught a theological system that found universal
acceptance. The sacred scribe Cheremon, who became Nero's tutor,
recognized the stoical theories in the sacerdotal traditions of his
country. [4\_39](orrp17.htm#xref_4_39.md) When the eclectic Plutarch speaks
of the character of the Egyptian gods, he finds it agrees surprisingly
with his own philosophy, [4\_40](orrp17.htm#xref_4_40.md) and when the
neo-Platonist Iamblichus

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

examines them, their character seems to agree with his doctrines. The
hazy ideas of the Oriental priests enabled every one to see in them the
phantoms he was pursuing. The individual imagination was given ample
scope, and the dilettantic men of letters rejoiced in molding these
malleable doctrines at will. They were not outlined sharply enough, nor
were they formulated with sufficient precision to appeal to the
multitude. The gods were everything and nothing; they got lost in a
*sfumato*. A disconcerting anarchy and confusion prevailed among them.
By means of a scientific mixture of Greek, Egyptian and Semitic elements
"Hermetism" [4\_41](orrp17.htm#xref_4_41.md) endeavored to create a
theological system that would be acceptable to all minds, but it seems
never to have imposed itself generally on the Alexandrian mysteries
which were older than itself, and furthermore it could not escape the
contradictions of Egyptian thought. The religion of Isis did not gain a
hold on the soul by its dogmatism.

It must be admitted, however, that, owing to its extreme flexibility,
this religion was easily adapted to the various centers to which it was
transferred, and that it enjoyed the valuable advantage of being always
in perfect harmony with the prevailing philosophy. Moreover, the
syncretic tendencies of Egypt responded admirably to those that began to
obtain at Rome. At a very early period henotheistic theories had been
favorably received in sacerdotal circles, and while crediting the god of
their own temple with supremacy, the priests admitted that he might have
a number of different personalities, under which he was worshiped
simultaneously. In this way the unity of the supreme being was affirmed
for the thinkers, and polytheism with its

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

intangible traditions maintained for the masses. In the same manner Isis
and Osiris had absorbed several local divinities under the Pharaohs, and
had assumed a complex character that was capable of indefinite
extension. The same process continued under the Ptolemies when the
religion of Egypt came into contact with Greece. Isis was identified
simultaneously with Demeter, Aphrodite, Hera, Semele, Io, Tyche, and
others. She was considered the queen of heaven and hell, of earth and
sea. She was "the past, the present and the
future," [4\_42](orrp17.htm#xref_4_42.md) "nature the mother of things, the
mistress of the elements, born at the beginning of the
centuries." [4\_43](orrp17.htm#xref_4_43.md) She had numberless names, an
infinity of different aspects and an inexhaustible treasure of virtues.
In short, she became a pantheistic power that was everything in one,
*una quae est omnia*. [4\_44](orrp17.htm#xref_4_44.md)

The authority of Serapis was no less exalted, and his field no less
extensive. He also was regarded as a universal god of whom men liked to
say that he was "unique." <span id="fr_8"></span>[1](#fn_8.md) In him all
energies were centered, although the functions of Zeus, of Pluto or of
Helios were especially ascribed to him. For many centuries Osiris had
been worshiped at Abydos both as author of fecundity and lord of the
underworld, [4\_45](orrp17.htm#xref_4_45.md) and this double character
early caused him to be identified with the sun, which fertilizes the
earth during its diurnal course and travels through the subterranean
realms at night. Thus the conception of this nature divinity, that had
already prevailed along the Nile, accorded without difficulty with the
solar pantheism that was the last form of Roman paganism. This
theological system, which did not gain the upper hand in the Occident
until the second

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

century of our era, was not brought in by Egypt. It did not have the
exclusive predominance there that it had held under the empire, and even
in Plutarch's time it was only one creed among
many. [4\_46](orrp17.htm#xref_4_46.md) The deciding influence in this
matter was exercised by the Syrian Baals and the Chaldean astrology.

The theology of the Egyptian mysteries, then, followed rather than led
the general influx of ideas. The same may be said of their ethics. It
did not force itself upon the world by lofty moral precepts, nor by a
sublime ideal of holiness. Many have admired the edifying list in the
Book of the Dead, that rightfully or otherwise sets forth the virtues
which the deceased claims to have practised in order to obtain a
favorable judgment from Osiris. If one considers the period in which it
appears, this ethics is undoubtedly very elevated, but it seems
rudimentary and even childish if one compares it with the principles
formulated by the Roman jurists, to say nothing of the minute
psychological analyses of the Stoic casuists. In this range of ideas
also, the maintenance of the most striking contrasts characterizes
Egyptian mentality, which was never shocked by the cruelties and
obscenities that sullied the mythology and the ritual. Like Epicurus at
Athens, some of the sacred texts actually invited the believers to enjoy
life before the sadness of death. [4\_47](orrp17.htm#xref_4_47.md)

Isis was not a very austere goddess at the time she entered Italy.
Identified with Venus, as Harpocrates was with Eros, she was honored
especially by the women with whom love was a profession. In Alexandria,
the city of pleasure, she had lost all severity, and at Rome this good
goddess remained very indulgent to human weaknesses. Juvenal harshly
refers to

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

her as a procuress, [4\_48](orrp17.htm#xref_4_48.md) and her temples had a
more than doubtful reputation, for they were frequented by young men in
quest of gallant adventures. Apuleius himself chose a lewd tale in which
to display his fervor as an initiate.

But we have said that Egypt was full of contradictions, and when a more
exacting morality demanded that the gods should make man virtuous, the
Alexandrian mysteries offered to satisfy that demand.

At all times the Egyptian ritual attributed considerable importance to
purity, or, to use a more adequate term, to cleanliness. Before every
ceremony the officiating priest had to submit to ablutions, sometimes to
fumigations or anointing, and to abstain from certain foods and from
incontinence for a certain time. Originally no moral idea was connected
with this purification. It was considered a means of exorcising
malevolent demons or of putting the priest into a state in which the
sacrifice performed by him could have the expected effect. It was
similar to the diet, shower-baths and massage prescribed by physicians
for physical health. The internal status of the officiating person was a
matter of as much indifference to the celestial spirits as the actual
worth of the deceased was to Osiris, the judge of the underworld. All
that was necessary to have him open the fields of Aalu to the soul was
to pronounce the liturgic formulas, and if the soul declared its
innocence in the prescribed terms its word was readily accepted.

But in the Egyptian religion, as in all the religions of
antiquity, [4\_49](orrp17.htm#xref_4_49.md) the original conception was
gradually transformed and a new idea slowly took its place. The
sacramental acts of purification were now expected

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

to wipe out moral stains, and people became convinced that they made man
better. The devout female votaries of Isis, whom
Juvenal [4\_50](orrp17.htm#xref_4_50.md) pictures as breaking the ice to
bathe in the Tiber, and crawling around the temple on their bleeding
knees, hoped to atone for their sins and to make up for their
shortcomings by means of these sufferings.

When a new ideal grew up in the popular conscience during the second
century, when the magicians themselves became pious and serious people,
free from passions and appetites, and were honored because of the
dignity of their lives more than for their white linen
robes, [4\_51](orrp17.htm#xref_4_51.md) then the virtues of which the
Egyptian priests enjoined the practice also became less external. Purity
of the heart rather than cleanliness of the body was demanded.
Renunciation of sensual pleasures was the indispensable condition for
the knowledge of divinity, which was the supreme
good. [4\_52](orrp17.htm#xref_4_52.md) No longer did Isis favor illicit
love. In the novel by Xenophon of Ephesus (about 280 A. D.) she protects
the heroine's chastity against all pitfalls and assures its triumph.
According to the ancient belief man's entire existence was a preparation
for the formidable judgment held by Serapis after death, but to have him
decide in favor of the mystic, it was not enough to know the rites of
the sect; the individual life had to be free from crime; and the master
of the infernal regions assigned everybody a place according to his
deserts. [4\_53](orrp17.htm#xref_4_53.md) The doctrine of future
retribution was beginning to develop.

However, in this regard, as in their conception of the divinity, the
Egyptian mysteries followed the general progress of ideas more than they
directed it. Philosophy

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

transformed them, but found in them little inspiration.

\*    \*    \*

How could a religion, of which neither the theology nor the ethics was
really new, stir up at the same time so much hostility and fervor among
the Romans? To many minds of to-day theology and ethics constitute
religion, but during the classical period it was different, and the
priests of Isis and Serapis conquered souls mainly by other means. They
seduced them by the powerful attraction of the ritual and retained them
by the marvelous promises of their doctrine of immortality.

To the Egyptians ritual had a value far superior to that we ascribe to
it to-day. It had an operative strength of its own that was independent
of the intentions of the officiating priest. The efficacy of prayer
depended not on the inner disposition of the believer, but on the
correctness of the words, gestures and intonation. Religion was not
clearly differentiated from magic. If a divinity was invoked according
to the correct forms, especially if one knew how to pronounce its real
name, it was compelled to act in conformity to the will of its priest.
The sacred words were an incantation that compelled the superior powers
to obey the officiating person, no matter what purpose he had in view.
With the knowledge of the liturgy men acquired an immense power over the
world of spirits. Porphyry was surprised and indignant because the
Egyptians sometimes dared to threaten the gods in their
orations. [4\_54](orrp17.htm#xref_4_54.md) In the consecrations the
priest's summons compelled the gods to come and animate their

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

statues, and thus his voice created
divinities, [4\_55](orrp17.htm#xref_4_55.md) as originally the almighty
voice of Thoth had created the world. [4\_56](orrp17.htm#xref_4_56.md)

The ritual that conferred such superhuman
power [4\_57](orrp17.htm#xref_4_57.md) developed in Egypt into a state of
perfection, completeness and splendor unknown in the Occident. It
possessed a unity, a precision and a permanency that stood in striking
contrast to the variety of the myths, the uncertainty of the dogmas and
the arbitrariness of the interpretations. The sacred books of the
Greco-Roman period are a faithful reproduction of the texts that were
engraved upon the walls of the pyramids at the dawn of history,
notwithstanding the centuries that had passed. Even under the Cæsars the
ancient ceremonies dating back to the first ages of Egypt, were
scrupulously performed because the smallest word and the least gesture
had their importance.

This ritual and the attitude toward it found their way for the most part
into the Latin temples of Isis and Serapis. This fact has long been
ignored, but there can be no doubt about it. A first proof is that the
clergy of those temples were organized just like those of Egypt during
the period of the Ptolemies. [4\_58](orrp17.htm#xref_4_58.md) There was a
hierarchy presided over by a high priest, which consisted of *prophetes*
skilled in the sacred science, *stolistes*, or
*ornatrices*, [4\_59](orrp17.htm#xref_4_59.md) whose office it was to dress
the statues of the gods, *pastophori* who carried the sacred temple
plates in the processions, and so on, just as in Egypt. As in their
native country, the priests were distinguished from common mortals by a
tonsure, by a linen tunic, and by their habits as well as by their garb.
They devoted themselves entirely to their ministry and had no other
profession. This sacerdotal

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

body always remained Egyptian in character, if not in nationality,
because the liturgy it had to perform remained so. In a similar manner
the priests of the Baals were Syrians, [4\_60](orrp17.htm#xref_4_60.md)
because they were the only ones that knew how to honor the gods of
Syria.

In the first place a daily service had to be held just as in the Nile
valley. The Egyptian gods enjoyed a precarious immortality, for they
were liable to destruction and dependent on necessities. According to a
very primitive conception that always remained alive, they had to be
fed, clothed and refreshed every day or else perish. From this fact
arose the necessity of a liturgy that was practically the same in every
district. It was practised for thousands of years and opposed its
unaltering form to the multiplicity of legends and local
beliefs. [4\_61](orrp17.htm#xref_4_61.md)

This daily liturgy was translated into Greek, perhaps later into Latin
also; it was adapted to the new requirements by the founders of the
Serapeum, and faithfully observed in the Roman temples of the
Alexandrian gods. The essential ceremony always was the opening
(*apertio*) [4\_62](orrp17.htm#xref_4_62.md) of the sanctuary. At dawn the
statue of the divinity was uncovered and shown to the community in the
*naos*, that had been closed and sealed during the
night. [4\_63](orrp17.htm#xref_4_63.md) Then, again as in Egypt, the priest
lit the sacred fire and offered libations of water supposed to be from
the deified Nile, [4\_64](orrp17.htm#xref_4_64.md) while he chanted the
usual hymns to the sound of flutes. Finally, "erect upon the
threshold"--I translate literally from Porphyry--"he awakens the god by
calling to him in the Egyptian language." [4\_65](orrp17.htm#xref_4_65.md)
As we see, the god was revived by the sacrifice and, as under the
Pharaohs, awoke from his slumber at the calling of

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

his name. As a matter of fact the name was indissolubly connected with
the personality; he who could pronounce the exact name of an individual
or of a divinity was obeyed as a master by his
slave. [4\_66](orrp17.htm#xref_4_66.md) This fact made it necessary to
maintain the original form of that mysterious word. There was no other
motive for the introduction of a number of barbarian appellatives into
the magical incantations.

It is also probable that the toilet of the statue was made every day,
that its body and head were dressed, [4\_67](orrp17.htm#xref_4_67.md) as in
the Egyptian ritual. We have seen that the *ornatrices* or *stolistes*
were especially entrusted with these duties. The idol was covered with
sumptuous raiment and ornamented with jewels and gems. An inscription
furnishes us with an inventory of the jewels worn by an Isis of ancient
Cadiz; [4\_68](orrp17.htm#xref_4_68.md) her ornaments were more brilliant
than those of a Spanish madonna.

During the entire forenoon, from the moment that a noisy acclamation had
greeted the rising of the sun, the images of the gods were exposed to
the silent adoration of the initiates. [4\_69](orrp17.htm#xref_4_69.md)
Egypt is the country whence contemplative devotion penetrated into
Europe. Then, in the afternoon, a second service was held to close the
sanctuary. [4\_70](orrp17.htm#xref_4_70.md)

The daily liturgy must have been very absorbing. This innovation in the
Roman paganism was full of consequences. No longer were sacrifices
offered to the god on certain occasions only, but twice a day elaborate
services were held. As with the Egyptians, whom Herodotus had termed the
most religious of all peoples, [4\_71](orrp17.htm#xref_4_71.md) devotion
assumed a tendency to fill out the whole existence and to dominate
private and public interests. The constant repetition of the same
prayers

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

kept up and renewed faith, and, we might say, people lived continually
under the eyes of the gods.

Besides the daily rites of the Abydos liturgy the holidays marking the
beginning of the different seasons were celebrated at the same date
every year. [4\_72](orrp17.htm#xref_4_72.md) It was the same in Italy. The
calendars have preserved the names of several of them, and of one, the
*Navigium Isidis*, the rhetorician
Apuleius [4\_73](orrp17.htm#xref_4_73.md) has left us a brilliant
description on which, to speak with the ancients, he emptied all his
color tubes. On March 5th, when navigation reopened after the winter
months, a gorgeous procession [4\_74](orrp17.htm#xref_4_74.md) marched to
the coast, and a ship consecrated to Isis, the protectress of sailors,
was launched. A burlesque group of masked persons opened the procession,
then came the women in white gowns strewing flowers, the *stolistes*
waving the garments of the goddess and the *dadophori* with lighted
torches. After these came the *hymnodes*, whose songs mingled in turn
with the sharp sound of the cross-flutes and the ringing of the brass
timbrels; then the throngs of the initiates, and finally the priests,
with shaven heads and clad in linen robes of a dazzling white, bearing
the images of animal-faced gods and strange symbols, as for instance a
golden urn containing the sacred water of the Nile. The procession
stopped in front of altars [4\_75](orrp17.htm#xref_4_75.md) erected along
the road, and on these altars the sacred objects were uncovered for the
veneration of the faithful. The strange and sumptuous magnificence of
these celebrations made a deep impression on the common people who loved
public entertainments.

But of all the celebrations connected with the worship of Isis the most
stirring and the most suggestive

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

was the commemoration of the "Finding of Osiris" (*Inventio*, Εὕρεσις).
Its antecedents date back to remote antiquity. Since the time of the
twelfth dynasty, and probably much earlier, there had been held at
Abydos and elsewhere a sacred performance similar to the mysteries of
our Middle Ages, in which the events of Osiris's passion and
resurrection were reproduced. We are in possession of the ritual of
those performances. [4\_76](orrp17.htm#xref_4_76.md) Issuing from the
temple, the god fell under Set's blows; around his body funeral
lamentations were simulated, and he was buried according to the rites;
then Set was vanquished by Horus, and Osiris, restored to life,
reentered his temple triumphant over death.

The same myth was represented in almost the same manner at Rome at the
beginning of each November. [4\_77](orrp17.htm#xref_4_77.md) While the
priests and the believers moaned and lamented, Isis in great distress
sought the divine body of Osiris, whose limbs had been scattered by
Typhon. Then, after the corpse had been found, rehabilitated and
revived, there was a long outburst of joy, an exuberant jubilation that
rang through the temples and the streets so loudly that it annoyed the
passers-by.

This mingled despair and enthusiasm acted as strongly upon the feelings
of the believers as did the spring-holiday ceremony in the Phrygian
religion, and it acted through the same means. Moreover, there was an
esoteric meaning attached to it that none but the pious elect
understood. Besides the public ceremonies there was a secret worship to
which one was admitted only after a gradual initiation. The hero of
Apuleius had to submit to the ordeal three times in order to obtain the
whole revelation. In Egypt the

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

clergy communicated certain rites and interpretations only upon a
promise not to reveal them. In fact this was the case in the worship of
Isis at Abydos and elsewhere. [4\_78](orrp17.htm#xref_4_78.md) When the
Ptolemies regulated the Greek ritual of their new religion, it assumed
the form of the mysteries spread over the Hellenic world and became very
like those of Eleusis. The hand of the Eumolpid Timotheus is noticeable
in this connection. [4\_79](orrp17.htm#xref_4_79.md)

But while the ceremonial of the initiations and even the production of
the liturgic drama were thus adapted to the religious habits of the
Greeks, the doctrinal contents of the Alexandrian mysteries remained
purely Egyptian. The old belief that immortality could be secured by
means of an identification of the deceased with Osiris or Serapis never
died out.

Perhaps in no other people did the epigram of Fustel de Coulanges find
so complete a verification as in the Egyptians: "Death was the first
mystery; it started man on the road to the other
mysteries." [4\_80](orrp17.htm#xref_4_80.md) Nowhere else was life so
completely dominated by preoccupation with life after death; nowhere
else was such minute and complicated care taken to secure and perpetuate
another existence for the deceased. The funeral literature, of which we
have found a very great number of documents, had acquired a development
equaled by no other, and the architecture of no other nation can exhibit
tombs comparable with the pyramids or the rock-built sepulchers of
Thebes.

This constant endeavor to secure an after-existence for one's self and
relatives manifested itself in various ways, but it finally assumed a
concrete form in the worship of Osiris. The fate of Osiris, the god who
died and returned to life, became the prototype of the

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

fate of every human being that observed the funeral rites. "As truly as
Osiris lives," says an Egyptian text, "he also shall live; as truly as
Osiris is not dead, shall he not die; as truly as Osiris is not
annihilated, shall he not be annihilated." [4\_81](orrp17.htm#xref_4_81.md)

If, then, the deceased had piously served Osiris-Serapis, he was
assimilated to that god, and shared his immortality in the underworld,
where the judge of the dead held forth. He lived not as a tenuous shade
or as a subtle spirit, but in full possession of his body as well as of
his soul. That was the Egyptian doctrine, and that certainly was also
the doctrine of the Greco-Latin mysteries. [4\_82](orrp17.htm#xref_4_82.md)

Through the initiation the mystic was born again, but to a superhuman
life, and became the equal of the
immortals. [4\_83](orrp17.htm#xref_4_83.md) In his ecstasy he imagined that
he was crossing the threshold of death and contemplating the gods of
heaven and hell face to face. [4\_84](orrp17.htm#xref_4_84.md) If he had
accurately followed the prescriptions imposed upon him by Isis and
Serapis through their priests, those gods prolonged his life after his
decease beyond the duration assigned to it by destiny, and he
participated eternally in their beatitude and offered them his homage in
their realm. [4\_85](orrp17.htm#xref_4_85.md) The "unspeakable pleasure" he
felt when contemplating the sacred images in the
temple [4\_86](orrp17.htm#xref_4_86.md) became perpetual rapture when he
was in the divine presence instead of in the presence of the image, and
drawn close to divinity his thirsting soul enjoyed the delights of that
ineffable beauty. [4\_87](orrp17.htm#xref_4_87.md)

When the Alexandrian mysteries spread over Italy under the republic, no
religion had ever brought to mankind so formal a promise of blest
immortality as these, and this, more than anything else, lent them an

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

irresistible power of attraction. Instead of the vague and contradictory
opinions of the philosophers in regard to the destiny of the soul,
Serapis offered certainty founded on divine revelation corroborated by
the faith of the countless generations that had adhered to it. What the
votaries of Orpheus had confusedly discovered through the veil of the
legends, and taught to Magna Grecia, [4\_88](orrp17.htm#xref_4_88.md)
namely, that this earthly life was a trial, a preparation for a higher
and purer life, that the happiness of an after-life could be secured by
means of rites and observances revealed by the gods themselves, all this
was now preached with a firmness and precision hitherto unknown. These
eschatological doctrines in particular, helped Egypt to conquer the
Latin world and especially the miserable masses, on whom the weight of
all the iniquities of Roman society rested heavily.

\*    \*    \*

The power and popularity of that belief in future life has left traces
even in the French language, and in concluding this study, from which I
have been compelled to exclude every picturesque detail, I would like to
point out how a French word of to-day dimly perpetuates the memory of
the old Egyptian ideas.

During the cold nights of their long winters the Scandinavians dreamed
of a Walhalla where the deceased warriors sat in well-closed brilliantly
illuminated halls, warming themselves and drinking the strong liquor
served by the Valkyries; but under the burning sky of Egypt, near the
arid sand where thirst kills the traveler, people wished that their dead
might find a limpid spring in their future wanderings to assuage the
heat that devoured them, and that they might be

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

refreshed by the breezes of the north
wind. [4\_89](orrp17.htm#xref_4_89.md) Even at Rome the adherents of the
Alexandrian gods frequently inscribed the following wish on their tombs:
"May Osiris give you fresh water." [4\_90](orrp17.htm#xref_4_90.md) Soon
this water became, in a figurative sense, the fountain of life pouring
out immortality to thirsting souls. The metaphor obtained such
popularity that in Latin *refrigerium* became synonymous with comfort
and happiness. The term retained this meaning in the liturgy of the
church, [4\_91](orrp17.htm#xref_4_91.md) and for that reason people
continue to pray for spiritual *rafraîchissement* of the dead although
the Christian paradise has very little resemblance to the fields of
Aalu.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_8"></span>[89:1](orrp08.htm#fr_8.md) Εἷς Ζεὺς Σάραπις.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: V. Syria](orrp09.md)
