[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](orrp09)  [Next](orrp11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

# PERSIA.

THE dominant historical fact in western Asia in ancient times was the
opposition between the Greco-Roman and Persian civilizations, which was
itself only an episode in the great struggle that was constantly in
progress between the Orient and the Occident in those countries. In the
first enthusiasm of their conquests, the Persians extended their
dominion as far as the cities of Ionia and the islands of the Ægean Sea,
but their power of expansion was broken at the foot of the Acropolis.
One hundred and fifty years later, Alexander destroyed the empire of the
Achemenides and carried Hellenic culture to the banks of the Indus.
After two and a half centuries the Parthians under the Arsacid dynasty
advanced to the borders of Syria, and Mithradates Eupator, an alleged
descendant of Darius, penetrated to the heart of Greece at the head of
his Persian nobility from Pontus.

After the flood came the ebb. The reconstructed Roman empire of Augustus
soon reduced Armenia, Cappadocia and even the kingdom of the Parthians
to a kind of vassalage. But after the middle of the third century the
Sassanid dynasty restored the power of Persia and revived its ancient
pretensions. From that time until the triumph of Islam it was one long

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

duel between the two rival states, in which now one was victorious and
now the other, while neither was ever decisively beaten. An ambassador
of king Narses to Galerius called these two states "the two eyes of the
human race." [6\_1](orrp19.htm#xref_6_1.md)

The "invincible" star of the Persians might wane and vanish, but only to
reappear in greater glory. The political and military strength displayed
by this nation through the centuries was the result of its high
intellectual and moral qualities. Its original culture was always
hostile to such an assimilation as that experienced in different degrees
by the Aryans of Phrygia, the Semites of Syria and the
[Hamites](errata.htm#1.md) of Egypt. Hellenism and Iranism--if I may use
that term--were two equally noble adversaries but differently educated,
and they always remained separated by instinctive racial hostility as
much as by hereditary opposition of interests.

Nevertheless, when two civilizations are in contact for more than a
thousand years, numerous exchanges are bound to occur. The influence
exercised by Hellenism as far as the uplands of Central Asia has
frequently been pointed out, [5\_2](orrp18.htm#xref_5_2.md) but the
prestige retained by Persia throughout the ages and the extent of area
influenced by its energy has not perhaps been shown with as much
accuracy. For even if Mazdaism was the highest expression of Persian
genius and its influence in consequence mainly religious, yet it was not
exclusively so.

After the fall of the Achemenides the memory of their empire long
haunted Alexander's successors. Not only did the dynasties which claimed
to be descended from Darius, and which ruled over Pontus, Cappadocia

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

and Commagene, cultivate political traditions that brought them nearer
to their supposed ancestors, but those traditions were partly adopted
even by the Seleucides and the Ptolemies, the legitimate heirs of the
ancient masters of Asia. People were fond of recalling the ideals of
past grandeur and sought to realize them in the present. In that manner
several institutions were transmitted to the Roman emperors through the
agency of the Asiatic monarchies. The institution of the *amici
Augusti*, for instance, the appointed friends and intimate counselors of
the rulers, adopted in Italy the forms in use at the court of the
Diadochi, who had themselves imitated the ancient organization of the
palace of the Great Kings. [6\_3](orrp19.htm#xref_6_3.md)

The custom of carrying the sacred fire before the Cæsars as an emblem of
the perpetuity of their power, dated back to Darius and with other
Persian traditions passed on to the dynasties that divided the empire of
Alexander. There is a striking similarity not only between the
observance of the Cæsars and the practice of the Oriental monarchs, but
also between the beliefs that they held. The continuity of the political
and religious tradition cannot be doubted. [6\_4](orrp19.htm#xref_6_4.md)
As the court ceremonial and the internal history of the Hellenistic
kingdoms become better known we shall be able to outline with greater
precision the manner in which the divided and diminished heritage of the
Achemenides, after generations of rulers, was finally left to those
Occidental sovereigns who called themselves the sacrosanct lords of the
world as Artaxerxes had done. [6\_5](orrp19.htm#xref_6_5.md) It may not be
generally known that the habit of welcoming friends with a kiss was a
ceremony in the

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Oriental formulary before it became a familiar
custom in Europe. [6\_6](orrp19.htm#xref_6_6.md)

It is very difficult to trace the hidden paths by which pure ideas
travel from one people to another. But certain it is that at the
beginning of our era certain Mazdean conceptions had already spread
outside of Asia. The extent of the influence of Parseeism upon the
beliefs of Israel under the Achemenides cannot be determined, but its
existence is undeniable. [6\_7](orrp19.htm#xref_6_7.md) Some of its
doctrines, as for instance those relating to angels and demons, the end
of the world and the final resurrection, were propagated everywhere in
the basin of the Mediterranean as a consequence of the diffusion of
Jewish colonies.

On the other hand, ever since the conquests of Cyrus and Darius, the
active attention of the Greeks had been drawn toward the doctrines and
religious practices of the new masters of the
Orient. [6\_8](orrp19.htm#xref_6_8.md) A number of legends representing
Pythagoras, Democritus and other philosophers as disciples of the magi
prove the prestige of that powerful sacerdotal class. The Macedonian
conquest, which placed the Greeks in direct relations with numerous
votaries of Mazdaism, gave a new impetus to works treating that
religion, and the great scientific movement inaugurated by Aristotle
caused many scholars to look into the doctrines taught by the Persian
subjects of the Seleucides. We know from a reliable source that the
works catalogued under the name of Zoroaster in the library of
Alexandria contained two million lines. This immense body of sacred
literature was bound to attract the attention of scholars and to call
forth the reflections of philosophers. The dim and dubious science that
reached

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

even the lower classes under the name of "magic" was to a considerable
extent of Persian origin, as its name indicates, and along with
physician's recipes and thaumaturgic processes it imparted some
theological doctrines in a confused fashion. [6\_9](orrp19.htm#xref_6_9.md)

This explains why certain institutions and beliefs of the Persians had
found imitators and adepts in the Greco-Oriental world long before the
Romans had gained a foothold in Asia. Their influence was indirect,
secret, frequently indiscernible, but it was certain. The most active
agencies in the diffusion of Mazdaism as of Judaism seem to have been
colonies of believers who had emigrated far from the mother country.
There was a Persian dispersion similar to that of the Israelites.
Communities of magi were established not only in eastern Asia Minor, but
in Galatia, Phrygia, Lydia and even in Egypt. Everywhere they remained
attached to their customs and beliefs with persistent
tenacity. [6\_10](orrp19.htm#xref_6_10.md)

When Rome extended her conquests into Asia Minor and Mesopotamia, the
influence of Persia became much more direct. Superficial contact with
the Mazdean populations began with the wars against Mithradates, but it
did not become frequent and lasting until the first century of our era.
During that century the empire gradually extended its limits to the
upper Euphrates, and thereby absorbed all the uplands of Anatolia and
Commagene south of the Taurus. The native dynasties which had fostered
the secular isolation of those distant countries in spite of the state
of vassalage to which they had been reduced disappeared one after
another. The Flavians constructed through those hitherto almost
inaccessible regions an immense network

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

of roads that were as important to Rome as the railways of Turkestan or
of Siberia are to modern Russia. At the same time Roman legions camped
on the banks of the Euphrates and in the mountains of Armenia. Thus all
the little Mazdean centers scattered in Cappadocia and Pontus were
forced into constant relation with the Latin world, and on the other
hand the disappearance of the buffer states made the Roman and Parthian
empires neighboring powers in Trajan's time (98-117 A. D.).

From these conquests and annexations in Asia Minor and Syria dates the
sudden propagation of the Persian mysteries of Mithra in the Occident.
For even though a congregation of their votaries seems to have existed
at Rome under Pompey as early as 67 B. C., the real diffusion of the
mysteries began with the Flavians, toward the end of the first century
of our era. They became more and more prominent under the Antonines and
the Severi, and remained the most important cult of paganism until the
end of the fourth century. Through them as a medium the original
doctrines of Mazdaism were widely propagated in every Latin province,
and in order to appreciate the influence of Persia upon the Roman
creeds, we must now give them our careful attention.

However, it must be said that the growing influence of Persia did not
manifest itself solely in the religious sphere. After the accession of
the Sassanid dynasty (228 A. D.) the country once more became conscious
of its originality, again resumed the cultivation of national
traditions, reorganized the hierarchy of its official clergy and
recovered the political cohesion which had been wanting under the
Parthians. It felt

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

and showed its superiority over the neighboring empire that was then
torn by factions, thrown upon the mercy of manifestoes, and ruined
economically and morally. The studies now being made in the history of
that period show more and more that debilitated Rome had become the
imitator of Persia.

In the opinion of contemporaries the court of Diocletian, prostrating
itself before a master who was regarded as the equal of God, with its
complicated hierarchy and crowd of eunuchs that disgraced it, was an
imitation of the court of the Sassanides. Galerius declared in
unmistakable terms that Persian absolutism must be introduced in his
empire, [6\_10](orrp19.htm#xref_6_10.md) and the ancient Cæsarism founded
on the will of the people seemed about to be transformed into a sort of
caliphate.

Recent discoveries also throw light upon a powerful artistic school that
developed in the Parthian empire and later in that of the Sassanides and
which grew up independently of the Greek centers of production. Even if
it took certain models from the Hellenic sculpture or architecture, it
combined them with Oriental motives into a decoration of exuberant
richness. Its field of influence extended far beyond Mesopotamia into
the south of Syria where it has left monuments of unequalled splendor.
The radiance of that brilliant center undoubtedly illuminated Byzantium,
the barbarians of the north, and even
China. [6\_12](orrp19.htm#xref_6_12.md)

The Persian Orient, then, exerted a dominant influence on the political
institutions and artistic tastes of the Romans as well as on their ideas
and beliefs. The propagation of the religion of Mithra, which always
proudly proclaimed its Persian origin, was accompanied by a number of
parallel influences of the

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

people from which it had issued. Never, not even during the Mohammedan
invasions, had Europe a narrower escape from becoming Asiatic than when
Diocletian officially recognized Mithra as the protector of the
reconstructed empire. [6\_13](orrp19.htm#xref_6_13.md) The time when that
god seemed to be establishing his authority over the entire civilized
world was one of the critical phases in the moral history of antiquity.
An irresistible invasion of Semitic and Mazdean conceptions nearly
succeeded in permanently overwhelming the Occidental spirit. Even after
Mithra had been vanquished and expelled from Christianized Rome, Persia
did not disarm. The work of conversion in which Mithraism had failed was
taken up by Manicheism, the heir to its cardinal doctrines, and until
the Middle Ages Persian dualism continued to cause bloody struggles in
the ancient Roman provinces.

\*    \*    \*

Just as we cannot understand the character of the mysteries of Isis and
Serapis without studying the circumstances accompanying their creation
by the Ptolemies, so we cannot appreciate the causes of the power
attained by the mysteries of Mithra, unless we go far back to their
origin.

Here the subject is unfortunately more obscure. The ancient authors tell
us almost nothing about the origin of Mithra. One point on which they
all agree is that he was a Persian god, but this we should know from the
Avesta even if they had not mentioned it. But how did he get to Italy
from the Persian uplands?

Two scant lines of Plutarch are the most explicit document we have on
the subject. He narrates incidentally that the pirates from Asia Minor
vanquished

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

by Pompey in 67 performed strange sacrifices on Olympus, a volcano of
Lycia, and practiced occult rites, among others those of Mithra which,
he says, "exist to the present day and were first taught by
them." [6\_14](orrp19.htm#xref_6_14.md) Lactantius Placidus, a commentator
on Statius and a mediocre authority, also tells us that the cult passed
from the Persians to the Phrygians and from the Phrygians to the
Romans. [6\_15](orrp19.htm#xref_6_15.md)

These two authors agree then in fixing in Asia Minor the origin of this
Persian religion that later spread over the Occident, and in fact
various indications direct us to that country. The frequency of the name
Mithradates, for instance, in the dynasties of Pontus, Cappadocia,
Armenia and Commagene, connected with the Achemenides by fictitious
genealogies, shows the devotion of those kings to Mithra.

As we see, the Mithraism that was revealed to the Romans at the time of
Pompey had established itself in the Anatolian monarchies during the
preceding period, which was an. epoch of intense moral and religious
unrest. Unfortunately we have no monuments of that period of its
history. The absence of direct testimony on the development of Mazdean
sects during the last three centuries before our era prevents us from
gaining exact knowledge of the Parseeism. of Asia Minor.

None of the temples dedicated to Mithra in that religion have been
examined. [6\_16](orrp19.htm#xref_6_16.md) The inscriptions mentioning his
name are as yet few and insignificant, so that it is only by indirect
means that we can arrive at conclusions about this primitive cult. The
only way to explain its distinguishing features in the Occident is to
study the environment in which it originated.

During the domination of the Achemenides eastern

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Asia Minor was colonized by the Persians. The
uplands of Anatolia resembled those of Persia in climate and soil, and
were especially adapted to the raising of
horses. [6\_17](orrp19.htm#xref_6_17.md) In Cappadocia and even in Pontus
the aristocracy who owned the soil belonged to the conquering nation.
Under the various governments which followed after the death of
Alexander, those landlords remained the real masters of the country,
chieftains of clans governing the canton where they had their domains,
and, on the outskirts of Armenia at least, they retained the hereditary
title of satraps through all political vicissitudes until the time of
Justinian, thus recalling their Persian
origin. [5\_18](orrp18.htm#xref_5_18.md) This military and feudal
aristocracy furnished Mithradates Eupator a considerable number of the
officers who helped him in his long defiance of Rome, and later it
defended the threatened independence of Armenia against the enterprises
of the Cæsars. These warriors worshiped Mithra as the protecting genius
of their arms, and this is the reason why Mithra always, even in the
Latin world, remained the "invincible" god, the tutelary deity of
armies, held in special honor by warriors.

Besides the Persian nobility a Persian clergy had also become
established in the peninsula. It officiated in famous temples, at Zela
in Pontus and Hierocæsarea in Lydia. Magi, called *magousaioi* or
*pyrethes* (firelighters) were scattered over the Levant. Like the Jews,
they retained their national customs and traditional rites with such
scrupulous loyalty that Bardesanes of Edessa cited them as an example in
his attempt to refute the doctrines of astrology and to show that a
nation can retain the same customs in different
climates. [6\_19](orrp19.htm#xref_6_19.md) We know their religion
sufficiently to be

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

certain that the Syrian author had good grounds for attributing that
conservative spirit to them. The sacrifices of the *pyrethes* which
Strabo observed in Cappadocia recall all the peculiarities of the
Avestan liturgy. The same prayers were recited before the altar of the
fire while the priest held the sacred fasces (*bareçman*); the same
offerings were made of milk, oil and honey; and the same precautions
were taken to prevent the priest's breath from polluting the divine
flame. Their gods were practically those of orthodox Mazdaism. They
worshiped Ahura Mazda, who had to them remained a divinity of the sky as
Zeus and Jupiter had been originally. Below him they venerated deified
abstractions (such as Vohumano, "good mind," and Ameretat,
"immortality") from which the religion of Zoroaster made its
Amshaspends, the archangels surrounding the Most
High. [6\_20](orrp19.htm#xref_6_20.md) Finally they sacrificed to the
spirits of nature, the Yazatas: for instance, Anahita or Anaites the
goddess of the waters--that made fertile the fields; Atar, the
personification of fire; and especially Mithra, the pure genius of
light.

Thus the basis of the religion of the magi of Asia Minor was Mazdaism,
somewhat changed from that of the Avesta, and in certain respects
holding closer to the primitive nature worship of the Aryans, but
nevertheless a clearly characterized and distinctive Mazdaism, which was
to remain the most solid foundation for the greatness of the mysteries
of Mithra in the Occident.

Recent discoveries [6\_21](orrp19.htm#xref_6_21.md) of bilingual
inscriptions have succeeded in establishing the fact that the language
used, or at least written, by the Persian colonies of Asia Minor was not
their ancient Aryan idiom, but

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Aramaic, which was a Semitic dialect. Under the
Achemenides this was the diplomatic and commercial language of all
countries west of the Tigris. In Cappadocia and Armenia it remained the
literary and probably also the liturgical language until it was slowly
supplanted by Greek during the Hellenistic period. The very name
*magousaioi* <span id="fr_16"></span>[1](#fn_16.md) given to the magi in
those countries is an exact transcription of a Semitic
plural. [6\_22](orrp19.htm#xref_6_22.md) This phenomenon, surprising at
first sight, is explained by the history of the *magousaioi* who
emigrated to Asia Minor. They did not come there directly from
Persepolis or Susa, but from Mesopotamia. Their religion had been deeply
influenced by the speculations of the powerful clergy officiating in the
temples of Babylon. The learned theology of the Chaldeans imposed itself
on the primitive Mazdaism, which was a collection of traditions and
rites rather than a body of doctrines. The divinities of the two
religions became identified, their legends connected, and the Semitic
astrology, the result of long continued scientific observations,
superimposed itself on the naturalistic myths of the Persians. Ahura
Mazda was assimilated to Bel, Anahita to Ishtar, and Mithra to Shamash,
the solar god. For that reason Mithra was commonly called *Sol invictus*
in the Roman mysteries, and an abstruse and a complicated astronomic
symbolism was always part of the teachings revealed to candidates for
initiation and manifested itself also in the artistic embellishments of
the temple.

In connection with a cult from Commagene we can observe rather closely
how the fusion of Parseeism with Semitic and Anatolian creeds took
place, because

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

in those regions the form of religious transformations was at all times
syncretic. On a mountain top in the vicinity of a town named Doliche, a
deity was worshiped who after a number of transformations became a
Jupiter Protector of the Roman armies. Originally this god, who was
believed to have discovered the use of iron, seems to have been brought
to Commagene by a tribe of blacksmiths, the Chalybes, who had come from
the north. [6\_23](orrp19.htm#xref_6_23.md) He was represented standing on
a steer and holding in his hand a two-edged ax, an ancient symbol
venerated in Crete during the Mycenean age and found also at Labranda in
Caria and all over Asia Minor. [6\_24](orrp19.htm#xref_6_24.md) The ax
symbolized the god's mastery over the lightning which splits asunder the
trees of the forest amidst the din of storms. Once established on Syrian
soil, this genius of thunder became identified with some local Baal and
his cult took up all the Semitic features. After the conquests of Cyrus
and the founding of the Persian domination, this "Lord of the heavens"
was readily confounded with Ahura Mazda, who was likewise "the full
circle of heaven," according to a definition of
Herodotus, [6\_25](orrp19.htm#xref_6_25.md) and whom the Persians also
worshiped on mountain tops. When a half Persian, half Hellenic dynasty
succeeded Alexander in Commagene, this Baal became a *Zeus
Oromasdes* <span id="fr_17"></span>[1](#fn_17) (Ahura Mazda.md) residing in
the sublime ethereal regions. A Greek inscription speaks of the
celestial thrones "on which this supreme divinity receives the souls of
its worshipers." [6\_26](orrp19.htm#xref_6_26.md) In the Latin countries
"Jupiter Caelus" remained at the head of the Mazdean
pantheon, [6\_27](orrp19.htm#xref_6_27.md) and in all the provinces the
temples of

.}

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

\[paragraph continues\] "Jupiter Dolichenus" were erected beside those
of Mithra, and the two remained in the closest
relations. [6\_28](orrp19.htm#xref_6_28.md)

The same series of transformations took place elsewhere with a number of
other gods. [6\_29](orrp19.htm#xref_6_29.md) The Mithra worship was thus
formed, in the main, by a combination of Persian beliefs with Semitic
theology, incidentally including certain elements from the native cults
of Asia Minor. The Greeks later translated the names of the Persian
divinities into their language and imposed certain forms of their
mysteries on the Mazdean cult. [6\_30](orrp19.htm#xref_6_30.md) Hellenic
art lent to the Yazatas that idealized form in which it liked to
represent the immortals, and philosophy, especially that of the Stoics,
endeavored to discover its own physical and metaphysical theories in the
traditions of the magi. But in spite of all these
[accommodations](errata.htm#2.md), adaptations and interpretations,
Mithraism always remained in substance a Mazdaism blended with
Chaldeanism, that is to say, essentially a barbarian religion. It
certainly was far less Hellenized than the Alexandrian cult of Isis and
Serapis, or even that of the Great Mother of Pessinus. For that reason
it always seemed unacceptable to the Greek world, from which it
continued to be. almost completely excluded. Even language furnishes a
curious proof of that fact. Greek contains a number of theophorous <span
id="fr_18"></span>[1](#fn_18) (god-bearing.md) names formed from those of
Egyptian or Phrygian gods, like Serapion, Metrodoros,
Metrophilos--Isidore is in use at the present day--but all known
derivations of Mithra are of barbarian formation. The Greeks never
admitted the god of their hereditary enemies, and the great centers of
Hellenic

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

civilization escaped his influence and he
theirs. [6\_31](orrp19.htm#xref_6_31.md) Mithraism. passed directly from
Asia into the Latin world.

There it spread with lightning rapidity from the time it was first
introduced. When the progressive march of the Romans toward the
Euphrates enabled them to investigate the sacred trust transmitted by
Persia to the magi of Asia Minor, and when they became acquainted with
the Mazdean beliefs which had matured in the seclusion of the Anatolian
mountains, they adopted them with enthusiasm. The Persian cult was
spread by the soldiers along the entire length of the frontiers towards
the end of the first century and left numerous traces around the camps
of the Danube and the Rhine, near the stations along the wall of
Britain, and in the vicinity of the army posts scattered along the
borders of the Sahara or in the valleys of the Asturias. At the same
time the Asiatic merchants introduced it in the ports of the
Mediterranean, along the great waterways and roads, and in all
commercial cities. It also possessed missionaries in the Oriental slaves
who were to be found everywhere, engaging in every pursuit, employed in
the public service as well as in domestic work, in the cultivation of
land as well as in financial and mining enterprises, and above all in
the imperial service, where they filled the offices.

Soon this foreign god gained the favor of high functionaries and of the
sovereign himself. At the end of the second century Commodus was
initiated into the mysteries, a conversion that had a tremendous effect.
A hundred years later Mithra's power was such that at one time he seemed
about to eclipse both Oriental and Occidental rivals and to dominate the

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

entire Roman world. In the year 307 Diocletian, Galerius and Licinius
met in a solemn interview at Carnuntum on the Danube and dedicated a
sanctuary there to Mithra, "the protector of their empire" (*fautori*
*imperii sui*).}

In previous works on the mysteries of Mithra we have endeavored to
assign causes for the enthusiasm that attracted humble plebeians and
great men of the world to the altars of this barbarian god. We shall not
repeat here what any one who has the curiosity may read either in a
large or a small book according to his
preferences, [6\_33](orrp19.htm#xref_6_33.md) but we must consider the
problem from a different point of view. Of all Oriental religions the
Persian cult was the last to reach the Romans. We shall inquire what new
principle it contained; to what inherent qualities it owed its
superiority; and through what characteristics it remained distinct in
the conflux of creeds of all kinds that were struggling for supremacy in
the world at that time.

The originality and value of the Persian religion lay not in its
doctrines regarding the nature of the celestial gods. Without doubt
Parseeism is of all pagan religions the one that comes closest to
monotheism, for it elevates Ahura Mazda high above all other celestial
spirits. But the doctrines of Mithraism are not those of Zoroaster. What
it received from Persia was chiefly its mythology and ritual; its
theology, which was thoroughly saturated with Chaldean erudition,
probably did not differ noticeably from the Syrian. At the head of the
divine hierarchy it placed as first cause an abstraction, deified Time,
the Zervan Akarana of the Avesta. This divinity regulated the
revolutions of the stars and in consequence was the absolute master of

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

all things. Ahura Mazda, whose throne was in the heavens, had become the
equivalent of *Ba‘al Samin*, and even before the magi the Semites had
introduced into the Occident the worship of the sun, the source of all
energy and light. Babylonian astrology and astrolatry inspired the
theories of the mithreums as well as of the Semitic temples, a fact that
explains the intimate connection of the two cults. This half religious,
half scientific system which was not peculiarly Persian nor original to
Mithraism was not the reason for the adoption of that worship by the
Roman world.

Neither did the Persian mysteries win the masses by their liturgy.
Undoubtedly their secret ceremonies performed in mountain caves, or at
any rate in the darkness of the underground crypts, were calculated to
inspire awe. Participation in the liturgical meals gave rise to moral
comfort and stimulation. By submitting to a sort of baptism the votaries
hoped to expiate their sins and regain an untroubled conscience. But the
sacred feasts and purifying ablutions connected with the same spiritual
hopes are found in other Oriental cults, and the magnificent suggestive
ritual of the Egyptian clergy certainly was more impressive than that of
the magi. The mythic drama performed in the grottoes of the Persian god
and culminating in the immolation of a steer who was considered as the
creator and rejuvenator of the earth, must have seemed less important
and affecting than the suffering and joy of Isis seeking and reviving
the mutilated body of her husband, or than the moaning and jubilation of
Cybele mourning over and reviving her lover Attis.

But Persia introduced dualism as a fundamental principle in religion. It
was this that distinguished

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Mithraism from other sects and inspired its
dogmatic theology and ethics, giving them a rigor and firmness unknown
to Roman paganism. It considered the universe from an entirely new point
of view and at the same time provided a new goal in life.

Of course, if we understand by dualism the antithesis of mind and
matter, of reason and intuition, it appeared at a considerably earlier
period in Greek philosophy, [6\_34](orrp19.htm#xref_6_34.md) where it was
one of the leading ideas of neo-Pythagoreanism and of Philo's system.
But the distinguishing feature of the doctrine of the magi is the fact
that it deified the evil principle, set it up as a rival to the supreme
deity, and taught that both had to be worshiped. This system offered an
apparently simple solution to the problem of evil, the stumbling block
of theologies, and it attracted the cultured minds as well as the
masses, to whom it afforded an explanation of their sufferings. just as
the mysteries of Mithra began to spread Plutarch wrote of them favorably
and was inclined himself to adopt them. [6\_35](orrp19.htm#xref_6_35.md)
From that time dates the appearance in literature of the
anti-gods, <span
id="fr_19"></span>[1](#fn_19) [6\_36](orrp19.htm#xref_6_36.md) under the
command of the powers of darkness [6\_37](orrp19.htm#xref_6_37.md) and
arrayed against the celestial spirits, messengers or
"angels" [6\_38](orrp19.htm#xref_6_38.md) of divinity. They were Ahriman's
*devas* struggling with the Yazatas of Ormuzd.

A curious passage in Porphyry [6\_39](orrp19.htm#xref_6_39.md) shows that
the earliest neo-Platonists had already admitted Persian demonology into
their system. Below the incorporeal and indivisible supreme being, below
the stars and the planets, there were countless
spirits. [6\_40](orrp19.htm#xref_6_40.md) Some of them, the gods of cities
and nations, received special names:

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

the others comprised a nameless multitude. They were divided into two
groups. The first were the benevolent spirits that gave fecundity to
plants and animals, serenity to nature, and knowledge to men. They acted
as intermediaries between gods and men, bearing up to heaven the homage
and prayers of the faithful, and down from heaven portents and warnings.
The others were wicked spirits inhabiting regions close to the earth and
there was no evil that they did not exert every effort to
cause. [6\_41](orrp19.htm#xref_6_41.md) At the same time both violent and
cunning, impetuous and crafty, they were the authors of all the
calamities that befell the world, such as pestilence, famine, tempests
and earthquakes. They kindled evil passions and illicit desires in the
hearts of men and provoked war and sedition. They were clever deceivers
rejoicing in lies and impostures. They encouraged the phantasmagoria and
mystification of the sorcerers [6\_42](orrp19.htm#xref_6_42.md) and gloated
over the bloody sacrifices which magicians offered to them all, but
especially to their chief.

Doctrines very similar to these were certainly taught in the mysteries
of Mithra; homage was paid to Ahriman (Arimanius) lord of the somber
underworld, and master of the infernal
spirits. [6\_43](orrp19.htm#xref_6_43.md) This cult has continued in the
Orient to the present day among the Yezidis, or devil worshipers.

In his treatise against the magi. Theodore of
Mopsuestia [6\_44](orrp19.htm#xref_6_44.md) speaks of Ahriman as
Satan. <span id="fr_20"></span>[1](#fn_20.md) At first sight there really
is a surprising resemblance between the two. Both are heads of a
numerous army of demons; both are spirits of error and falsehood,
princes of darkness,

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

tempters and corrupters. An almost identical picture of the pair could
be drawn, and in fact they are practically the same figure under
different names. It is generally admitted that Judaism took the notion
of an adversary of God [6\_45](orrp19.htm#xref_6_45.md) from the Mazdeans
along with portions of their dualism. It was therefore natural that
Jewish doctrine, of which Christianity is heir, should have been closely
allied to the mysteries of Mithra. A considerable part of the more or
less orthodox beliefs and visions that gave the Middle Ages their
nightmare of hell and the devil thus came from Persia by two channels:
on the one hand Judeo-Christian literature, both canonical and
apocryphal; and on the other, the remnants of the Mithra cult and the
various sects of Manicheism that continued to preach the old Persian
doctrines on the antagonism between the two world principles.

But a theoretical adherence of the mind to dogmas that satisfy it, does
not suffice to convert it to a new religion. There must be motives of
conduct and a basis for hope besides grounds for belief. The Persian
dualism was not only a powerful metaphysical conception; it was also the
foundation of a very efficacious system of ethics, and this was the
chief agent in the success of the mysteries of Mithra during the second
and third centuries in the Roman world then animated by unrealized
aspirations for more perfect justice and holiness.

A sentence of the Emperor Julian, [6\_46](orrp19.htm#xref_6_46.md)
unfortunately too brief, tells us that Mithra subjected his worshipers
to "commandments" <span id="fr_21"></span>[1](#fn_21.md) and rewarded
faithful observance both in this world and in the next. The importance

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

attached by the Persians to their peculiar ethics and the rigor with
which they observed its precepts, are perhaps the most striking features
of their national character as manifested in history. They were a race
of conquerors subject to a severe discipline, like the Romans, and like
them they realized the necessity of discipline in the administration of
a vast empire. Certain affinities between the two imperial nations
connected them directly without the mediation of the Greek world.
Mazdaism brought long awaited satisfaction to the old-time Roman desire
for a practical religion that would subject the individual to a rule of
conduct and contribute to the welfare of the
state. [6\_47](orrp19.htm#xref_6_47.md) Mithra infused a new vigor into the
paganism of the Occident by introducing the imperative ethics of Persia.

Unhappily the text of the Mithraic decalogue has not been preserved and
its principal commandments can be restored only by implication.

Mithra, the ancient spirit of light, became the god of truth and justice
in the religion of Zoroaster and retained that character in the
Occident. He was the Mazdean Apollo, but while Hellenism, with a finer
appreciation of beauty, developed the esthetic qualities in Apollo, the
Persians, caring more for matters of conscience, emphasized the moral
character in Mithra. [6\_48](orrp19.htm#xref_6_48.md) The Greeks,
themselves little scrupulous in that respect, were struck by the
abhorrence in which their Oriental neighbors held a lie. The Persians
conceived of Ahriman as the embodiment of deceit. Mithra was always the
god invoked as the guarantor of faith and protector of the inviolability
of contracts. Absolute fidelity to his oath had to be a cardinal virtue

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

in the religion of a soldier, whose first act upon enlistment was to
pledge obedience and devotion to the sovereign. This religion exalted
loyalty and fidelity and undoubtedly tried to inspire a feeling similar
to our modern idea of honor.

In addition to respect for authority it preached fraternity. All the
initiates considered themselves as sons of the same father owing to one
another a brother's affection. It is a question whether they extended
the love of neighbor to that universal charity taught by philosophy and
Christianity. Emperor Julian, a devoted mystic, liked to set up such an
ideal, and it is probable that the Mithraists of later paganism rose to
this conception of duty, [6\_49](orrp19.htm#xref_6_49.md) but they were not
its authors. They seemed to have attached more importance to the virile
qualities than to compassion and gentleness. The fraternal spirit of
initiates calling themselves soldiers was doubtless more akin to the
spirit of comradeship in a regiment that has *esprit de corps*, than to
the love of one's neighbor that inspires works of mercy towards all.

All primitive people imagine nature filled with unclean and wicked
spirits that corrupt and torture those who disturb their repose; but
dualism endowed this universal belief with marvelous power as well as
with a dogmatic basis. Mazdaism is governed throughout by ideas of
purity and impurity. "No religion on earth has ever been so completely
dominated by an ideal of purification." [6\_50](orrp19.htm#xref_6_50.md)
This kind of perfection was the goal of the aspiration and effort of
believers. They were obliged to guard with infinite precaution against
defiling the divine elements, for instance water or fire, or their own
persons, and to wipe out all pollution by

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

repeated lustrations. But, as in the Syrian cults of the imperial
period, these Mithraic rites did remain simply formal, mechanical and of
the flesh, inspired by the old idea of tabu. Mithraic baptism wiped out
moral faults; the purity aimed at had become spiritual.

This perfect purity distinguishes the mysteries of Mithra from those of
all other Oriental gods. Serapis is the brother and husband of Isis,
Attis the lover of Cybele, every Syrian Baal is coupled with a spouse;
but Mithra lives alone. Mithra is chaste, Mithra is holy
(*sanctus*), [6\_51](orrp19.htm#xref_6_51.md) and for the worship of
fecundity he substitutes a new reverence for continence.

However, although resistance to sensuality is laudable and although the
ideal of perfection of this Mazdean sect inclined towards the asceticism
to which the Manichean conception of virtue led, yet good does not
consist exclusively in abnegation and self-control, but also in action.
It is not sufficient for a religion to classify moral values, but in
order to be effective it must furnish motives for putting them into
practice. Dualism was peculiarly favorable for the development of
individual effort and human energy; here its influence was strongest. It
taught that the world is the scene of a perpetual struggle between two
powers that share the mastery; the goal to be reached is the
disappearance of evil and the uncontested dominion, the exclusive reign,
of the good. Animals and plants, as well as man, are drawn up in two
rival camps perpetually hostile, and all nature participates in the
eternal combat of the two opposing principles. The demons created by the
infernal spirit emerge constantly from the abyss and roam about the
earth; they penetrate everywhere carrying corruption, distress, sickness

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

and death. The celestial spirits and the supporters of piety are
compelled constantly to baffle their ever renewed enterprises. The
strife continues in the heart and conscience of man, the epitome of the
universe, between the divine law of duty and the suggestions of the evil
spirits. Life is a merciless war knowing no truce. The task of the true
Mazdean consisted in constantly fighting the evil in order to bring
about the gradual triumph of Ormuzd in the world. The believer was the
assistant of the gods in their work of purification and improvement.

The worshipers of Mithra did not lose themselves in a contemplative
mysticism like other sects. Their morality particularly encouraged
action, and during a period of laxness, anarchy and confusion, they
found stimulation, comfort and support in its precepts. Resistance to
the promptings of degrading instincts assumed the glamor and prestige of
warlike exploits in their eyes and instilled an active principle of
progress into their character. By supplying a new conception of the
world, dualism also gave a new meaning to life. This same dualism
determined the eschatological beliefs of the Mithraists. The antagonism
between heaven and hell was extended into the life
hereafter. [6\_52](orrp19.htm#xref_6_52.md) Mithra, the "invincible" god
who assisted the faithful in their struggle against the malignity of the
demons, was not only their strong companion in their human trials, but
as an antagonist of the infernal powers he insured the welfare of his
followers in the future life as well as on earth. When the genius of
corruption seizes the corpse after death, the spirits of darkness and
the celestial messengers struggle for the possession of the soul that
has left its corporeal prison. It stands

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

trial before Mithra, and if its merits outweigh its shortcomings in the
divine balance it is defended from Ahriman's agents that seek to drag it
into the infernal abyss. Finally it is led into the ethereal regions
where Jupiter-Ormuzd reigns in eternal light. The believers in Mithra
did not agree with the votaries of Serapis who held that the souls of
the just reside in the depths of the
earth. [6\_53](orrp19.htm#xref_6_53.md) To them that somber kingdom was the
domain of wrong-doers. The souls of the just live in the boundless light
that extends above the stars, and by divesting themselves of all
sensuality and all lust in passing through the planetary
spheres [6\_54](orrp19.htm#xref_6_54.md) they become as pure as the gods
whose company they enter.

However, when the world came to an end the body also was to share in
that happiness because it was believed as in Egypt that the whole person
would enjoy eternal life. After time had run its course Mithra would
raise all men from the dead, pouring out a marvelous beverage of
immortality for the good, but all evil doers would be annihilated by
fire together with Ahriman himself.

\*    \*    \*

Of all the Oriental cults none was so severe as Mithraism, none attained
an equal moral elevation, none could have had so strong a hold on mind
and heart. In many respects it gave its definite religious formula to
the pagan world and the influence of its ideas remained long after the
religion itself had come to a violent end. Persian dualism introduced
certain principles into Europe that have never ceased to exert an
influence. Its whole history proves the thesis with which we began, the
power of resistance and of influence

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

possessed by Persian culture and religion. These possessed an
originality so independent that after having resisted in the Orient the
power of absorption of Hellenism, and after having checked the Christian
propaganda, they even withstood the destructive power of Islam. Firdusi
(940-1020) glories in the ancient national traditions and the mythical
heroes of Mazdaism, and while the idolatry of Egypt, Syria and Asia
Minor has long since died out or degenerated, there are votaries of
Zoroaster at the present day who piously perform the sacred ceremonies
of the Avesta and practise genuine fire worship.

Another witness to the vitality of Mithraic Mazdaism is the fact that it
escaped becoming a kind of state religion of the Roman empire during the
third century. An oft-quoted sentence of Renan's
says: [6\_55](orrp19.htm#xref_6_55.md) "If Christianity had been checked in
its growth by some deadly disease, the world would have become
Mithraic." In hazarding that statement he undoubtedly conjured up a
picture of what would have been the condition of this poor world in that
case. He must have imagined, one of his followers would have us
believe, [6\_56](orrp19.htm#xref_6_56.md) that the morals of the human race
would have been but little changed, a little more virile perhaps, a
little less charitable, but only a shade different. The erudite theology
taught by the mysteries would obviously have shown a laudable respect
for science, but as its dogmas were based upon a false physics it would
apparently have insured the persistence of an infinity of errors.
Astronomy would not be lacking, but astrology would have been
unassailable, while the heavens would still be revolving around the
earth to accord with its doctrines. The greatest

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

danger, it appears to me, would have been that the Cæsars would have
established a theocratic absolutism supported by the Oriental ideas of
the divinity of kings. The union of throne and altar would have been
inseparable, and Europe would never have known the invigorating struggle
between church and state. But on the other hand the discipline of
Mithraism, so productive of individual energy, and the democratic
organization of its societies in which senators and slaves rubbed
elbows, contain a germ of liberty.

We might dwell at some length on these contrasting possibilities, but it
is hard to find a mental pastime less profitable than the attempt to
remake history and to conjecture on what might have been had events
proved otherwise. If the torrent of actions and reactions that carries
us along were turned out of its course what imagination could describe
the unknown regions through which it would flow?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_16"></span>[146:1](orrp10.htm#fr_16.md) μαγουσαϊοι.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[147:1](orrp10.htm#fr_17.md) Zeu\~c O?romásdhc

<span id="fn_18"></span>[148:1](orrp10.htm#fr_18.md) θεοφόρος.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[152:1](orrp10.htm#fr_19.md) ἀντίθεοι.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[153:1](orrp10.htm#fr_20.md) Σατανᾶς.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[154:1](orrp10.htm#fr_21.md) ἐντολαί.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VII. Astrology and Magic](orrp11.md)
