[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](orrp01)  [Next](orrp03.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_v">p. v</span>

# INTRODUCTION.

### THE SIGNIFICANCE OF FRANZ CUMONT'S WORK.

FRANZ CUMONT, born January 3, 1868, and educated at Ghent, Bonn, Berlin,
and Paris, resides in Brussels, and has been Professor in the University
of Ghent since 1892. His monumental work, *Textes et monuments figurés
relatifs aux mystères de Mithra*, published in 1896 and 1899 in two
volumes, was followed in 1902 by the separate publication, under the
title *Les Mystères de Mithra*, of the second half of Vol. I, the
*Conclusions* in which be interpreted the great mass of evidence
contained in the remainder of the work. The year following, this book
appeared in the translation of Thomas J. McCormack as *The Mysteries of
Mithra*, published by the Open Court Publishing Company. M. Cumont's
other work of prime interest to students of the ancient faiths, *Les
religions orientales dans le paganisme romain*, appeared in 1906, was
revised and issued in a second edition in 1909, and is now presented in
English in the following pages.

M. Cumont is an ideal contributor to knowledge in his chosen field. As
an investigator, he combines in one person Teutonic thoroughness and
Gallic intuition. As a writer, his virtues are no less pronounced.
Recognition of his mastery of an enormous array of detailed learning
followed immediately on the publication

<span id="page_vi">p. vi</span>

of *Textes et monuments*, and the present series of essays, besides a
numerous series of articles and monographs, makes manifest the same
painstaking and thorough scholarship; but he is something more than the
mere savant who has at command a vast and difficult body of knowledge.
He is also the literary architect who builds up his material into
well-ordered and graceful structure.

Above all, M. Cumont is an interpreter. In *The Mysteries of Mithra* he
put into circulation, so to speak, the coin of the ideas he had minted
in the patient and careful study of *Textes et Monuments*; and in the
studies of *The Oriental Religions* he is giving to the wider public the
interpretation of the larger and more comprehensive body of knowledge of
which his acquaintance with the religion of Mithra is only a part, and
against which as a background it stands. What his book *The Mysteries of
Mithra* is to his special knowledge of Mithraism, *The Oriental
Religions* is to his knowledge of the whole field. He is thus an example
of the highest type of scholar--the exhaustive searcher after evidence,
and the sympathetic interpreter who mediates between his subject and the
lay intellectual life of his time.

And yet, admirable as is M. Cumont's presentation in *The Mysteries of
Mithra* and *The Oriental Religions*, nothing is a greater mistake than
to suppose that his popularizations are facile reading. The few
specialists in ancient religions may indeed sail smoothly in the current
of his thought; but the very nature of a subject which ramifies so
extensively and so intricately into the whole of ancient life,
concerning itself with practically all the manifestations of ancient
civilization-

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

philosophy, religion, astrology, magic, mythology, literature, art, war,
commerce, government--will of necessity afford some obstacle to readers
unfamiliar with the study of religion.

It is in the hope of lessening somewhat this natural difficulty of
assimilating M. Cumont's contribution to knowledge, and above all, to
life, that these brief words of introduction are undertaken. The
presentation in outline of the main lines of thought which underlie his
conception of the importance of the Oriental religions in universal
history may afford the uninitiated reader a background against which the
author's depiction of the various cults of the Oriental group will be
more easily and clearly seen.

M. Cumont's work, then, transports us in imagination to a time when
Christianity was still--at least in the eyes of Roman pagans--only one
of a numerous array of foreign Eastern religions struggling for
recognition in the Roman world, and especially in the city of Rome. To
understand the conditions under which the new faith finally triumphed,
we should first realize the number of these religions, and the
apparently chaotic condition of paganism when viewed as a system.

"Let us suppose," says M. Cumont, "that in modern Europe the faithful
had deserted the Christian churches to worship Allah or Brahma, to
follow the precepts of Confucius or Buddha, or to adopt the maxims of
the Shinto; let us imagine a great confusion of all the races of the
world in which Arabian mullahs, Chinese scholars, Japanese bonzes,
Tibetan lamas and Hindu pundits should all be preaching fatalism and
predestination,

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

ancestor-worship and devotion to a deified sovereign, pessimism and
deliverance through annihilation--a confusion in which all those priests
should erect temples of exotic architecture in our cities and celebrate
their disparate rites therein. Such a dream, which the future may
perhaps realize, would offer a pretty accurate picture of the religious
chaos in which the ancient world was struggling before the reign of
Constantine."

But it is no less necessary to realize, in the second place, that, had
there not been an essential solidarity of all these different faiths,
the triumph of Christianity would have been achieved with much less
difficulty and in much less time. We are not to suppose that religions
are long-lived and tenacious unless they possess something vital which
enables them to resist. In his chapter on "The Transformation of Roman
Paganism," M. Cumont thus accounts for the vitality of the old faiths:
"The mass of religions at Rome finally became so impregnated by
neo-Platonism and Orientalism that paganism may be called a single
religion with a fairly distinct theology, whose doctrines were somewhat
as follows: adoration of the elements, especially the cosmic bodies; the
reign of one God, eternal and omnipotent, with messenger attendants;
spiritual interpretation of the gross rites yet surviving from primitive
times; assurance of eternal felicity to the faithful; belief that the
soul was on earth to be proved before its final return to the universal
spirit, of which it was a spark; the existence of an abysmal abode for
the evil, against whom the faithful must keep up an unceasing struggle;
the destruction of the universe,

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

the death of the wicked, and the eternal happiness of the good in a
reconstructed world." <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md)

If this formulation of pagan doctrine surprises those who have been told
that paganism was "a fashion rather than a faith," and are accustomed to
think of it in terms of Jupiter and Juno, Venus and Mars, and the other
empty, cold, and formalized deities that have so long filled literature
and art, it will be because they have failed to take into account that
between Augustus and Constantine three hundred years elapsed, and are
unfamiliar with the very natural fact that during all that long period
the character of paganism was gradually undergoing change and growth.
"The faith of the friends of Symmachus," M. Cumont tells us, "was much
farther removed from the religious ideal of Augustus, although they
would never have admitted it, than that of their opponents in the
senate."

To what was due this change in the content of the pagan ideal, so great
that the phraseology in which the ideal is described puts us in mind of
Christian doctrine itself? First, answers M. Cumont, to neo-Platonism,
which attempted the reconciliation of the antiquated religions with the
advanced moral and intellectual ideas of its own time by spiritual
interpretation of outgrown cult stories and cult practices. A second and
more vital cause, however, wrought to bring about the same result. This
was the invasion of the Oriental religions, and the slow working, from
the advent of the Great Mother of the Gods in B. C. 204 to the downfall
of paganism at the end of the fourth century

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

of the Christian era, of the leaven of Oriental sentiment. The cults of
Asia and Egypt bridged the gap between the old religions and
Christianity, and in such a way as to make the triumph of Christianity
an evolution, not a revolution. The Great Mother and Attis, with
self-consecration, enthusiasm, and asceticism; Isis and Serapis, with
the ideals of communion and purification; Baal, the omnipotent dweller
in the far-off heavens; Jehovah, the jealous God of the Hebrews,
omniscient and omnipresent; Mithra, deity of the sun, with the Persian
dualism of good and evil, and with after-death rewards and
punishments--all these, and more, flowed successively into the channel
of Roman life and mingled their waters to form the late Roman paganism
which proved so pertinacious a foe to the Christian religion. The
influence that underlay their pretensions was so real that there is some
warrant for the view of Renan that at one time it was doubtful whether
the current as it flowed away into the Dark Ages should be Mithraic or
Christian.

The vitalization of the evidence regarding these cults is M. Cumont's
great contribution. His perseverance in the accurate collection of
material is equalled only by his power to see the real nature and effect
of the religions of which he writes. Assuming that no religion can
succeed merely because of externals, but must stand on some foundation
of moral excellence, he shows how the pagan faiths were able to bold
their own, and even to contest the ground with Christianity. These
religions, he asserts, gave greater satisfaction first, to the senses
and passions, secondly, to the intelligence, finally, and above all, to
the conscience. "The spread of the Oriental religions"--again I quote

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

a summary from *Classical Philology*--"was due to merit. In contrast to
the cold and formal religions of Rome, the Oriental faiths, with their
hoary traditions and basis of science and culture, their fine
ceremonial, the excitement attendant on their mysteries, their deities
with hearts of compassion, their cultivation of the social bond, their
appeal to conscience and their promises of purification and reward in a
future life, were personal rather than civic, and satisfied the
individual soul. . . . With such a conception of latter-day paganism, we
may more easily understand its strength and the bitter rivalry between
it and the new faith, as well as the facility with which pagan society,
once its cause was proved hopeless, turned to Christianity." The
Oriental religions had made straight the way. Christianity triumphed
after long conflict because its antagonists also were not without
weapons from the armory of God. Both parties to the struggle had their
loins girt about with truth, and both wielded the sword of the spirit;
but the steel of the Christian was the more piercing, the breastplate of
his righteousness was the stronger, and his feet were better shod with
the preparation of the gospel of peace.

Nor did Christianity stop there. It took from its opponents their own
weapons, and used them; the better elements of paganism were transferred
to the new religion. "As the religious history of the empire is studied
more closely," writes M. Cumont, "the triumph of the church will, in our
opinion, appear more and more as the culmination of a long evolution of
beliefs. We can understand the Christianity of the fifth century with
its greatness and weaknesses, its spiritual exaltation and its puerile
superstitions, if we

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>

know the moral antecedents of the world in which it developed."

M. Cumont is therefore a contributor to our appreciation of the
continuity of history. Christianity was not a sudden and miraculous
transformation, but a composite of slow and laborious growth. Its four
centuries of struggle were not a struggle against an entirely unworthy
religion, else would our faith in its divine warrant be diminished; it
is to its own great credit, and also to the credit of the opponents that
succumbed to it, that it finally overwhelmed them. To quote Emil Aust:
"Christianity did not wake into being the religious sense, but it
afforded that sense the fullest opportunity of being satisfied; and
paganism fell because the less perfect must give place to the more
perfect, not because it was sunken in sin and vice. It had out of its
own strength laid out the ways by which it advanced to lose itself in
the arms of Christianity, and to recognize this does not mean to
minimize the significance of Christianity. We are under no necessity of
artificially darkening the heathen world; the light of the Evangel
streams into it brightly enough without this." <span
id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1.md)

Finally, the work of M. Cumont and others in the field of the ancient
Oriental religions is not an isolated activity, but part of a larger
intellectual movement. Their effort is only one manifestation of the
interest of recent years in the study of universal religion; other
manifestations of the same interest are to be seen in the histories of
the Greek and Roman religions by

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Gruppe, Farnell, and Wissowa, in the
anthropological labors of Tylor, Lang, and Frazer, in the publication of
Reinach's *Orpheus*, in the study of comparative religion, and in such a
phenomenon as a World's Parliament of Religions.

In a word, M. Cumont and his companion ancient Orientalists are but one
brigade engaged in the modern campaign for the liberation of religious
thought. His studies are therefore not concerned alone with paganism,
nor alone with the religions of the ancient past; in common with the
labors of students of modern religion, they touch our own faith and our
own times, and are in vital relation with our philosophy of living, and
consequently with our highest welfare. "To us moderns," says Professor
Frazer in the preface to his Golden Bough, "a still wider vista is
vouchsafed, a greater panorama is unrolled by the study which aims at
bringing home to us the faith and the practice, the hopes and the
ideals, not of two highly gifted races only, but of all mankind, and
thus at enabling us to follow the long march, the slow and toilsome
ascent, of humanity from savagery to civilization . . . . But the
comparative study of the beliefs and institutions of mankind is fitted
to be much more than a means of satisfying an enlightened curiosity and
of furnishing materials for the researches of the learned. Well handled,
it may become a powerful instrument to expedite progress. . . . "

It is possible that all this might disquiet the minds of those who have
been wont to assume perfection in the primitive Christian church, and
who assume also that present-day Christianity is the ultimate form of
the Christian religion. Such persons--if there are

<span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span>

such--should rather take heart from the whole-souled devotion to truth
everywhere to be seen in the works of scholars in ancient religion, and
from their equally evident sympathy with all manifestations of human
effort to establish the divine relation; but most of all from their
universal testimony that for all time and in all places and under all
conditions the human heart has felt powerfully the need of the divine
relation. From the knowledge that the desire to get right with God--the
common and essential element in all religions--has been the most
universal and the most potent and persistent factor in past history, it
is not far to the conviction that it will always continue to be so, and
that the struggle toward the divine light of religion pure and undefiled
will never perish from the earth.

GRANT SHOWERMAN.  
THE UNIVERSITY OF WISCONSIN.                   

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[ix:1](orrp02.htm#fr_0.md) This summary of M.
Cumont's chapter is quoted from my review of the first edition of *Les
religions orientales* in *Classical Philology*, III, 4, p. 467.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[xii:1](orrp02.htm#fr_1.md) *Die Religion der
Römer*, p. 116. For the significance of the pagan faiths, see an essay
on "The Ancient Religions in Universal History," *American Journal of
Philology*, XXIX 2, pp. 156-171.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Preface](orrp03.md)
