[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Yeats](../index)  [Celtic](../../celt/index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](twitoc)  [Next](twi03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0025VL14G/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Celtic Twilight*, by William Butler Yeats, \[1893, 1902\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# THIS BOOK

### I

I HAVE desired, like every artist, to create a little world out of the
beautiful, pleasant, and significant things of this marred and clumsy
world, and to show in a vision something of the face of Ireland to any
of my own people who would look where I bid them. I have therefore
written down accurately and candidly much that I have heard and seen,
and, except by way of commentary, nothing that I have merely imagined. I
have, however, been at no pains to separate my own beliefs from those of
the peasantry, but have rather let my men and women, dhouls and faeries,
go their way unoffended or defended by any argument of mine. The things
a man has heard and seen are threads of life, and if he pull them
carefully from the confused distaff of memory, any who will can weave
them into whatever garments of belief please them best. I too have woven
my garment like another,

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

but I shall try to keep warm in it, and shall be well content if it do
not unbecome me.

Hope and Memory have one daughter and her name is Art, and she has built
her dwelling far from the desperate field where men hang out their
garments upon forked boughs to be banners of battle. O beloved daughter
of Hope and Memory, be with me for a little.

1893\.

### II

I have added a few more chapters in the manner of the old ones, and
would have added others, but one loses, as one grows older, something of
the lightness of one's dreams; one begins to take life up in both hands,
and to care more for the fruit than the flower, and that is no great
loss per haps. In these new chapters, as in the old ones, I have
invented nothing but my comments and one or two deceitful sentences that
may keep some poor story-teller's commerce with the devil and his
angels, or the like,

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

from being known among his neighbours. I shall publish in a little while
a big book about the commonwealth of faery, and shall try to make it
systematical and learned enough to buy pardon for this handful of
dreams.

1902\.

W. B. YEATS.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: A Teller Of Tales](twi03)
