[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Yeats](../index)  [Celtic](../../celt/index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](twi05)  [Next](twi07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0025VL14G/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Celtic Twilight*, by William Butler Yeats, \[1893, 1902\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

# A VISIONARY

A YOUNG man came to see me at my lodgings the other night, and began to
talk of the making of the earth and the heavens and much else. I
questioned him about his life and his doings. He had written many poems
and painted many mystical designs since we met last, but latterly had
neither written nor painted, for his whole heart was set upon making his
mind strong, vigorous, and calm, and the emotional life of the artist
was bad for him, he feared. He recited his poems readily, however. He
had them all in his memory. Some indeed had never been written down.
They, with their wild music as of winds blowing in the reeds, <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) seemed to me the

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

very inmost voice of Celtic sadness, and of Celtic longing for infinite
things the world has never seen. Suddenly it seemed to me that he was
peering about him a little eagerly. 'Do you see anything, X-----?' I
said. 'A shining, winged woman, covered by her long hair, is standing
near the doorway,' he answered, or some such words. 'Is it the influence
of some living person who thinks of us, and whose thoughts appear to us
in that symbolic form?' I said; for I am well instructed in the ways of
the visionaries and in the fashion of their speech. 'No,' he replied;
'for if it were the thoughts of a person who is alive I should feel the
living influence in my living body, and my heart would beat and my
breath would fail. It is a spirit. It is some one who is dead or who has
never lived.'

I asked what he was doing, and found he was clerk in a large shop. His
pleasure, however, was to wander about upon the hills, talking to
half-mad and visionary

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

peasants, or to persuade queer and conscience-stricken persons to
deliver up the keeping of their troubles into his care. Another night,
when I was with him in his own lodging, more than one turned up to talk
over their beliefs and disbeliefs, and sun them as it were in the subtle
light of his mind. Sometimes visions come to him as he talks with them,
and he is rumoured to have told divers people true matters of their past
days and distant friends, and left them hushed with dread of their
strange teacher, who seems scarce more than a boy, and is so much more
subtle than the oldest among them.

The poetry he recited me was full of his nature and his visions.
Sometimes it told of other lives he believes himself to have lived in
other centuries, sometimes of people he had talked to, revealing them to
their own minds. I told him I would write an article upon him and it,
and was told in turn that I might do so if I did not mention his name,
for he wished to be

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

always 'unknown, obscure, impersonal.' Next day a bundle of his poems
arrived, and with them a note in these words: 'Here are copies of verses
you said you liked. I do not think I could ever write or paint any more.
I prepare myself for a cycle of other activities in some other life. I
will make rigid my roots and branches. It is not now my turn to burst
into leaves and flowers.'

The poems were all endeavours to capture some high, impalpable mood in a
net of obscure images. There were fine passages in all, but these were
often embedded in thoughts which have evidently a special value to his
mind, but are to other men the counters of an unknown coinage. To them
they seem merely so much brass or copper or tarnished silver at the
best. At other times the beauty of the thought was obscured by careless
writing as though he had suddenly doubted if writing was not a foolish
labour. He had frequently illustrated his verses with drawings,

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

in which an unperfect anatomy did not altogether hide extreme beauty of
feeling. The faeries in whom he believes have given him many subjects,
notably Thomas of Ercildoune sitting motionless in the twilight while a
young and beautiful creature leans softly out of the shadow and whispers
in his ear. He had delighted above all in strong effects of colour:
spirits who have upon their heads instead of hair the feathers of
peacocks; a phantom reaching from a swirl of flame towards a star; a
spirit passing with a globe of iridescent crystal--symbol of the
soul--half shut within his hand. But always under this largess of colour
lay some tender homily addressed to man's fragile hopes. This spiritual
eagerness draws to him all those who, like himself, seek for
illumination or else mourn for a joy that has gone. One of these
especially comes to mind. A winter or two ago he spent much of the night
walking up and down upon the

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

mountain talking to an old peasant who, dumb to most men, poured out his
cares for him. Both were unhappy: X----- because he had then first
decided that art and poetry were not for him, and the old peasant
because his life was ebbing out with no achievement remaining and no
hope left him. Both how Celtic! how full of striving after a something
never to be completely expressed in word or deed. The peasant was
wandering in his mind with prolonged sorrow. Once he burst out with 'God
possesses the heavens--God possesses the heavens--but He covets the
world'; and once he lamented that his old neighbours were gone, and that
all had forgotten him: they used to draw a chair to the fire for him in
every cabin, and now they said, 'Who is that old fellow there?' 'The
fret' \[Irish for doom\] 'is over me,' he repeated, and then went on to
talk once more of God and heaven. More than once also he said, waving
his arm towards the

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

mountain, 'Only myself knows what happened under the thorn-tree forty
years ago'; and as he said it the tears upon his face glistened in the
moonlight.

This old man always rises before me when I think of X-----. Both
seek--one in wandering sentences, the other in symbolic pictures and
subtle allegoric poetry--to express a something that lies beyond the
range of expression; and both, if X----- will forgive me, have within
them the vast and vague extravagance that lies at the bottom of the
Celtic heart. The peasant visionaries that are, the landlord duelists
that were, and the whole hurly-burly of legends--Cuchulain fighting the
sea for two days until the waves pass over him and he dies, Caolte
storming the palace of the gods, Oisin seeking in vain for three hundred
years to appease his insatiable heart with all the pleasures of
faeryland, these two mystics walking up and down upon the mountains
uttering the central dreams of their souls in no less dream-laden
sentences,

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

and this mind that finds them so interesting--all are a portion of that
great Celtic phantasmagoria whose meaning no man has discovered, nor any
angel revealed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[15:1](twi06.htm#fr_0) I wrote this sentence long
ago. This sadness now seems to me a part of all peoples who preserve the
moods of the ancient peoples of the world. I am not so pre-occupied with
the mystery of Race as I used to be, but leave this sentence and other
sentences like it unchanged. We once believed them, and have, it may be,
not grown wiser.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Village Ghosts](twi07)
