[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Yeats](../index)  [Celtic](../../celt/index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](twi03)  [Next](twi05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0025VL14G/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Celtic Twilight*, by William Butler Yeats, \[1893, 1902\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

# BELIEF AND UNBELIEF

THERE are some doubters even in the western villages. One woman told me
last Christmas that she did not believe either in hell or in ghosts.
Hell she thought was merely an invention got up by the priest to keep
people good; and ghosts would not be permitted, she held, to go 'trapsin
about the earth' at their own free will; 'but there are faeries,' she
added, 'and little leprechauns, and water-horses, and fallen angels.' I
have met also a man with a mohawk Indian tattooed upon his arm, who held
exactly similar beliefs and unbeliefs. No matter what one doubts one
never doubts the faeries, for, as the man with the mohawk Indian on his
arm said to me, 'they stand to reason.' Even the official mind does not
escape this faith.

A little girl who was at service in the village of Grange, close under
the seaward slopes of Ben Bulben, suddenly disappeared

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

one night about three years ago. There was at once great excitement in
the neighbourhood, because it was rumoured that the faeries had taken
her. A villager was said to have long struggled to hold her from them,
but at last they prevailed, and he found nothing in his hands but a
broomstick. The local constable was applied to, and he at once
instituted a house-to-house search, and at the same time advised the
people to burn all the *bucalauns* (ragweed) on the field she vanished
from, because *bucalauns* are sacred to the faeries. They spent the
whole night burning them, the constable repeating spells the while. In
the morning the little girl was found, the story goes, wandering in the
field. She said the faeries had taken her away a great distance, riding
on a faery horse. At last she saw a big river, and the man who had tried
to keep her from being carried off was drifting down it--such are the
topsy-turvydoms of faery glamour--in a cockleshell.

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> On the way her
companions had mentioned the names of several people who were about to
die shortly in the village.

Perhaps the constable was right. It is better doubtless to believe much
unreason and a little truth than to deny for denial's sake truth and
unreason alike, for when we do this we have not even a rush candle to
guide our steps, not even a poor sowlth to dance before us on the marsh,
and must needs fumble our way into the great emptiness where dwell the
mis-shapen dhouls. And after all, can we come to so great evil if we
keep a little fire on our hearths and in our souls, and welcome with
open hand whatever of excellent come to warm itself, whether it be man
or phantom, and do not say too fiercely, even to the dhouls themselves,
'Be ye gone'? When all is said and done, how do we not know but that our
own unreason may be better than another's truth? for it has been warmed

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

on our hearths and in our souls, and is ready for the wild bees of truth
to hive in it, and make their sweet honey. Come into the world again,
wild bees, wild bees!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mortal Help](twi05)
