[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Yeats](../index)  [Celtic](../../celt/index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](twi16)  [Next](twi18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0025VL14G/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Celtic Twilight*, by William Butler Yeats, \[1893, 1902\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

# ENCHANTED WOODS

### I

LAST summer, whenever I had finished my day's work, I used to go
wandering in certain roomy woods, and there I would often meet an old
countryman, and talk to him about his work and about the woods, and once
or twice a friend came with me to whom he would open his heart more
readily than to me, He had spent all his life lopping away the witch elm
and the hazel and the privet and the hornbeam from the paths, and had
thought much about the natural and supernatural creatures of the wood.
He has heard the hedgehog--'grainne oge,' he calls him--'grunting like a
Christian,' and is certain that he steals apples by rolling about under
an apple tree until there is an apple sticking to every quill. He is
certain too that the cats, of whom there are many in the woods, have a
language of their own--some kind of old Irish. He says, 'Cats were
serpents, and they were made into

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

cats at the time of some great change in the world. That is why they are
hard to kill, and why it is dangerous to meddle with them. If you annoy
a cat it might claw or bite you in a way that would put poison in you,
and that would be the serpent's tooth.' Sometimes he thinks they change
into wild cats, and then a nail grows on the end of their tails; but
these wild cats are not the same as the marten cats, who have been
always in the woods. The foxes were once tame, as the cats are now, but
they ran away and became wild. He talks of all wild creatures except
squirrels--whom he hates--with what seems an affectionate interest,
though at times his eyes will twinkle with pleasure as he remembers how
he made hedgehogs unroll themselves when he was a boy, by putting a wisp
of burning straw under them.

I am not certain that he distinguishes between the natural and
supernatural very clearly. He told me the other day that

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

foxes and cats like, above all, to be in the 'forths' and lisses after
nightfall; and he will certainly pass from some story about a fox to a
story about a spirit with less change of voice than when he is going to
speak about a marten cat--a rare beast now-a-days. Many years ago he
used to work in the garden, and once they put him to sleep in a
garden-house where there was a loft full of apples, and all night he
could hear people rattling plates and knives and forks over his head in
the loft. Once, at any rate, be has seen an unearthly sight in the
woods. He says, 'One time I was out cutting timber over in Inchy, and
about eight o'clock one morning when I got there I saw a girl picking
nuts, with her hair hanging down over her shoulders, brown hair, and she
had a good, clean face, and she was tall and nothing on her head, and
her dress no way gaudy but simple, and when she felt me coming she
gathered herself up and was gone as if the earth had swallowed

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

her up. And I followed her and looked for her, but I never could see her
again from that day to this, never again.' He used the word clean as we
would use words like fresh or comely.

Others too have seen spirits in the Enchanted Woods. A labourer told us
of what a friend of his had seen in a part of the woods that is called
Shanwalla, from some old village that was before the weed. He said, 'One
evening I parted from Lawrence Mangan in the yard, and he went away
through the path in Shanwalla, an’ bid me goodnight. And two hours
after, there he was back again in the yard, an' bid me light a candle
that was in the stable. An’ he told me that when he got into Shanwalla,
a little fellow about as high as his knee, but having a head as big as a
man's body, came beside him and led him out of the path an’ round about,
and at last it brought him to the lime-kiln, and then it vanished and
left him.'

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

A woman told me of a sight that she and others had seen by a certain
deep pool in the river. She said, 'I came over the stile from the
chapel, and others along with me; and a great blast of wind came and two
trees were bent and broken and fell into the river, and the splash of
water out of it went up to the skies. And those that were with me saw
many figures, but myself I only saw one, sitting there by the bank where
the trees fell. Dark clothes he had on, and he was headless.'

A man told me that one day, when he was a boy, he and another boy went
to catch a horse in a certain field, full of boulders and bushes of
hazel and creeping juniper and rock-roses, that is where the lake side
is for a little clear of the woods. He said to the boy that was with
him, 'I bet a button that if I fling a pebble on to that bush it will
stay on it,' meaning that the bush was so matted the pebble would not be
able to go through it. So he took up 'a pebble of cow-dung, and as

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

soon as it hit the bush there came out of it the most beautiful music
that ever was heard.' They ran away, and when they had gone about two
hundred yards they looked back and saw a woman dressed in white, walking
round and round the bush. 'First it had the form of a woman, and then of
a man, and it was going round the bush.'

### II

I often entangle myself in argument more complicated than even those
paths of Inchy as to what is the true nature of apparitions, but at
other times I say as Socrates said when they told him a learned opinion
about a nymph of the Illissus, 'The common opinion is enough for me.' I
believe when I am in the mood that all nature is full of people whom we
cannot see, and that some of these are ugly or grotesque, and some
wicked or foolish, but very many beautiful beyond any one

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

we have ever seen, and that these are not far away when we are walking
in pleasant and quiet places. Even when I was a boy I could never walk
in a wood without feeling that at any moment I might find before me
somebody or something I had long looked for without knowing what I
looked for. And now I will at times explore every little nook of some
poor coppice with almost anxious footsteps, so deep a hold has this
imagination upon me. You too meet with a like imagination, doubtless,
somewhere, wherever your ruling stars will have it, Saturn driving you
to the woods, or the Moon, it may be, to the edges of the sea. I will
not of a certainty believe that there is nothing in the sunset, where
our forefathers imagined the dead following their shepherd the sun, or
nothing but some vague presence as little moving as nothing. If beauty
is not a gateway out of the net we were taken in at our birth, it will
not long be beauty, and we will find it better to sit at home by the
fire and fatten a lazy

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

body or to run hither and thither in some foolish sport than to look at
the finest show that light and shadow ever made among green leaves. I
say to myself, when I am well out of that thicket of argument, that they
are surely there, the divine people, for only we who have neither
simplicity nor wisdom have denied them, and the simple of all times and
the wise men of ancient times have seen them and even spoken to them.
They live out their passionate lives not far off, as I think, and we
shall be among them when we die if we but keep our natures simple and
passionate. May it not even be that death shall unite us to all romance,
and that some day we shall fight dragons among blue hills, or come to
that whereof all romance is but

'Foreshadowings mingled with the images  
Of man's misdeeds in greater days than these,'

as the old men thought in *The Earthly Paradise* when they were in good
spirits.

1902

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Miraculous Creatures](twi18)
