[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Yeats](../index)  [Celtic](../../celt/index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](twi10)  [Next](twi12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0025VL14G/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Celtic Twilight*, by William Butler Yeats, \[1893, 1902\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

# THE SORCERERS

IN Ireland we hear but little of the darker powers, <span
id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3) and come across any who have seen them even
more rarely, for the imagination of the people dwells rather upon the
fantastic and capricious, and fantasy and caprice would lose the freedom
which is their breath of life, were they to unite them either with evil
or with good. And yet the wise are of opinion that wherever man is, the
dark powers who would feed his rapacities are there too, no less than
the bright beings who store their honey in the cells of his heart, and
the twilight beings who flit hither and thither, and that they encompass
him with a passionate and melancholy multitude. They hold, too, that he
who by long desire or through accident of birth possesses the power of
piercing into

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

their hidden abode can see them there, those who were once men or women
full of a terrible vehemence, and those who have never lived upon the
earth, moving slowly and with a subtler malice. The dark powers cling
about us, it is said, day and night, like bats upon an old tree; and
that we do not hear more of them is merely because the darker kinds of
magic have been but little practised. I have indeed come across very few
persons in Ireland who try to communicate with evil powers, and the few
I have met keep their purpose and practice wholly hidden from those
among whom they live. They are mainly small clerks and the like, and
meet for the purpose of their art in a room hung with black hangings.
They would not admit me into this room, but finding me not altogether
ignorant of the arcane science, showed gladly elsewhere what they would
do. 'Come to us,' said their leader, a clerk in a large flour-mill, 'and
we will show you spirits who will talk to you face

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

to face, and in shapes as solid and heavy as our own.'

I had been talking of the power of communicating in states of trance
with the angelical and faery beings,--the children of the day and of the
twilight--and he had been contending that we should only believe in what
we can see and feel when in our ordinary everyday state of mind. 'Yes,'
I said, 'I will come to you,' or some such words; 'but I will not permit
myself to become entranced, and will therefore know whether these shapes
you talk of are any the more to be touched and felt by the ordinary
senses than are those I talk of.' I was not denying the power of other
beings to take upon themselves a clothing of mortal substance, but only
that simple invocations, such as he spoke of, seemed unlikely to do more
than cast the mind into trance, and thereby bring it into the presence
of the powers of day, twilight, and darkness.

'But,' he said, 'we have seen them

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

move the furniture hither and thither, and they go at our bidding, and
help or harm people who know nothing of them.' I am not giving the exact
words, but as accurately as I can the substance of our talk.

On the night arranged I turned up about eight, and found the leader
sitting alone in almost total darkness in a small back room. He was
dressed in a black gown, like an inquisitor's dress in an old drawing,
that left nothing of him visible: except his eyes, which peered out
through two small round holes. Upon the table in front of him was a
brass dish of burning herbs, a large bowl, a skull covered with painted
symbols, two crossed daggers, and certain implements shaped like quern
stones, which were used to control the elemental powers in some fashion
I did not discover. I also put on a black gown, and remember that it did
not fit perfectly, and that it interfered with my movements
considerably. The sorcerer then took a

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

black cock out of a basket, and cut its throat with one of the daggers,
letting the blood fall into the large bowl. He opened a book and began
an invocation, which was certainly not English, and had a deep guttural
sound. Before he had finished, another of the sorcerers, a man of about
twenty-five, came in, and having put on a black gown also, seated
himself at my left band. I had the invoker directly in front of me, and
soon began to find his eyes, which glittered through the small holes in
his hood, affecting me in a curious way. I struggled hard against their
influence, and my head began to ache. The invocation continued, and
nothing happened for the first few minutes. Then the invoker got up and
extinguished the light in the hall, so that no glimmer might come
through the slit under the door. There was now no light except from the
herbs on the brass dish, and no sound except from the deep guttural
murmur of the invocation.

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

Presently the man at my left swayed himself about, and cried out, 'O
god! O god!' I asked him what ailed him, but he did not know he had
spoken. A moment after he said he could see a great serpent moving about
the room, and became considerably excited. I saw nothing with any
definite shape, but thought that black clouds were forming about me. I
felt I must fall into a trance if I did not struggle against it, and
that the influence which was causing this trance was out of harmony with
itself, in other words, evil. After a struggle I got rid of the black
clouds, and was able to observe with my ordinary senses again. The two
sorcerers now began to see black and white columns moving about the
room, and finally a man in a monk's habit, and they became greatly
puzzled because I did not see these things also, for to them they were
as solid as the table before them. The invoker appeared to be gradually
increasing in power, and I began to feel as if a tide of darkness was

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

pouring from him and concentrating itself about me; and now too I
noticed that the man on my left hand had passed into a death-like
trance. With a last great effort I drove off the black clouds; but
feeling them to be the only shapes I should see without passing into a
trance, and having no great love for them, I asked for lights, and after
the needful exorcism returned to the ordinary world.

I said to the more powerful of the two sorcerers--'What would happen if
one of your spirits had overpowered me?' 'You would go out of this
room,' he answered, 'with his character added to your own.' I asked
about the origin of his sorcery, but got little of importance, except
that he had learned it from his father. He would not tell me more, for
he had, it appeared, taken a vow of secrecy.

For some days I could not get over the feeling of having a number of
deformed and grotesque figures lingering about me. The Bright Powers are
always beautiful

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

and desirable, and the Dim Powers are now beautiful, now quaintly
grotesque, but the Dark Powers express their unbalanced natures in
shapes of ugliness and horror.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3"></span>[61:1](twi11.htm#fr_3) I know better now. We have
the dark powers much more than I thought, but not as much as the
Scottish, and yet I think the imagination of the people does dwell
chiefly upon the fantastic and capricious.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Devil](twi12)
