[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Yeats](../index)  [Celtic](../../celt/index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](twi28)  [Next](twi30) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0025VL14G/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Celtic Twilight*, by William Butler Yeats, \[1893, 1902\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

# DRUMCLIFF AND ROSSES

DRUMCLIFF and Rosses were, are, and ever shall be, please Heaven! places
of unearthly resort. I have lived near by them and in them, time after
time, and have gathered thus many a crumb of faery lore. Drumcliff is a
wide green valley, lying at the foot of Ben Bulben, the mountain in
whose side the square white door swings open at nightfall to loose the
faery riders on the world. The great St. Columba himself, the builder of
many of the old ruins in the valley, climbed the mountains on one
notable day to get near heaven with his prayers. Rosses is a little
sea-dividing, sandy plain, covered with short grass, like a green
tablecloth, and lying in the foam midway between the round cairn-headed
Knocknarea and 'Ben Bulben, famous for hawks':

'But for Benbulben and Knocknarea  
Many a poor sailor'd be cast away,'

as the rhyme goes.

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

At the northern corner of Rosses is a little promontory of sand and
rocks and grass: a mournful, haunted place. No wise peasant would fall
asleep under its low cliff, for he who sleeps here may wake 'silly,' the
'good people' having carried off his soul. There is no more ready
shortcut to the dim kingdom than this plovery headland, for, covered and
smothered now from sight by mounds of sand, a long cave goes thither
'full of gold and silver, and the most beautiful parlours and
drawing-rooms.' Once, before the sand covered it, a dog strayed in, and
was heard yelping helplessly deep underground in a fort far inland.
These forts or raths, made before modern history had begun, cover all
Rosses and all Columkille. The one where the dog yelped has, like most
others, an underground beehive chamber in the midst. Once when I was
poking about there, an unusually intelligent and 'reading' peasant who
had come with me, and waited outside, knelt down by the

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

opening, and whispered in a timid voice, 'Are you all right, sir?' I had
been some little while underground, and he feared I had been carried off
like the dog.

No wonder he was afraid, for the fort has long been circled by
ill-boding rumours. It is on the ridge of a small hill, on whose
northern slope lie a few stray cottages. One night a farmer's young son
came from one of them and saw the fort all flaming, and ran towards it,
but the 'glamour' fell on him, and he sprang on to a fence,
cross-legged, and commenced beating it with a stick, for he imagined the
fence was a horse, and that all night long he went on the most wonderful
ride through the country. In the morning he was still beating his fence,
and they carried him home, where he remained a simpleton for three years
before he came to himself again. A little later a farmer tried to level
the fort. His cows and horses died, and an manner of trouble overtook
him, and finally he himself was led home, and left useless with

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 'his head on his
knees by the fire to the day of his death.'

A few hundred yards southwards of the northern angle of Rosses is
another angle having also its cave, though this one is not covered with
sand. About twenty years ago a brig was wrecked near by, and three or
four fishermen were put to watch the deserted hulk through the darkness.
At midnight they saw sitting on a stone at the. cave's mouth two
red-capped fiddlers fiddling with all their might. The men fled. A great
crowd of villagers rushed down to the cave to see the fiddlers, but the
creatures had gone.

To the wise peasant the green hills and woods round him are full of
never-fading mystery. When the aged countrywoman stands at her door in
the evening, and, in her own words, 'looks at the mountains and thinks
of the goodness of God,' God is all the nearer, because the pagan powers
are not far: because northward in Ben Bulben, famous for hawks, the
white square

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

door swings open at sundown, and those wild unchristian riders rush
forth upon the fields, while southward the White Lady, who is doubtless
Maive herself, wanders under the broad cloud nightcap of Knocknarea. How
may she doubt these things, even though the priest shakes his head at
her? Did not a herd-boy, no long while since, see the White Lady? She
passed so close that the skirt of her dress touched him. 'He fell down,
and was dead three days.' But this is merely the small gossip of
faerydom--the little stitches that join this world and the other.

One night as I sat eating Mrs. H-----'s soda-bread, her husband told me
a longish story, much the best of all I heard in Rosses. Many a poor man
from Fin M'Cool to our own days has had some such adventure to tell of,
for those creatures, the 'good people,' love to repeat themselves. At
any rate the story-tellers do. 'In the times when we used to travel by
the canal,' he said, 'I was coming down from Dublin. When we

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

came to Mullingar the canal ended, and I began to walk, and stiff and
fatigued I was after the slowness. I had some friends with me, and now
and then we walked, now and then we rode in a cart. So on till we saw
some girls milking cows, and stopped to joke with them. After a while we
asked them for a drink of milk. "We have nothing to put it in here,"
they said, "but come to the house with us." We went home with them, and
sat round the fire talking. After a while the others went, and left me,
loath to stir from the good fire. I asked the girls for something to
eat. There was a pot on the fire, and they took the meat out and put it
on a plate, and told me to eat only the meat that came off the head.
When I had eaten, the girls went out, and I did not see them again. It
grew darker and darker, and there I still sat, loath as ever to leave
the good fire, and after a while two men came in, carrying between them
a corpse. When I saw them, coming I

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

hid behind the door. Says one to the other, putting the corpse on the
spit, "Who'll turn the spit? Says the other, "Michael H-----, come out
of that and turn the meat." I came out all of a tremble, and began
turning the spit. "Michael H------," says the one who spoke first, "if
you let it burn we'll have to put you on the spit instead"; and on that
they went out. I sat there trembling and turning the corpse till towards
midnight. The men came again, and the one said it was burnt, and the
other said it was done right. But having fallen out over it, they both
said they would do me no harm that time; and, sitting by the fire, one
of them cried out: "Michael H-----, can you tell me a story?" "Divil a
one," said I. On which he caught me by the shoulder, and put me out like
a shot. It was a wild blowing night. Never in all my born days did I see
such a night--the darkest night that ever came out of the heavens. I did
not know where I was

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

for the life of me. So when one of the men came after me and touched me
on the shoulder, with a "Michael H----, can you tell a story now?" "I
can," says I. In he brought me; and putting me by the fire, says:
"Begin." "I have no story but the one," says I, "that I was sitting
here, and you two men brought in a corpse and put it on the spit, and
set me turning it." "That will do," says he; "ye may go in there and lie
down on the bed." And I went, nothing loath; and in the morning where
was I but in the middle of a green field!'

'Drumcliff' is a great place for omens. Before a prosperous fishing
season a herring-barrel appears in the midst of a storm-cloud; and at a
place called Columkille's Strand, a place of marsh and mire, an ancient
boat, with St. Columba himself, comes floating in from sea on a
moonlight night: a portent of a brave harvesting. They have their dread
portents too. Some few seasons ago a fisherman saw,

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

far on the horizon, renowned Hy Brazel, where he who touches shall find
no more labour or care, nor cynic laughter, but shall go walking about
under shadiest boscage, and enjoy the conversation of Cuchullin and his
heroes. A vision of Hy Brazel forebodes national troubles.

Drumcliff and Rosses are chokeful of ghosts. By bog, road, rath,
hillside, sea-border they gather in all shapes: headless women, men in
armour, shadow hares, fire-tongued hounds, whistling seals, and so on. A
whistling seal sank a ship the other day. At Drumcliff there is a very
ancient graveyard. *The Annals of the Four Masters* have this verse
about a soldier named Denadhach, who died in 871: 'A pious soldier of
the race of Con lies under hazel crosses at Drumcliff.' Not very long
ago an old woman, turning to go into the churchyard at night to pray,
saw standing before her a man in armour, who asked her where she was
going. It was the 'pious soldier of the race of Con,'

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

says local wisdom, still keeping watch, with his ancient piety, over the
graveyard. Again, the custom is still common hereabouts of sprinkling
the doorstep with the blood of a chicken on the death of a very young
child, thus (as belief is) drawing into the blood the evil spirits from
the too weak soul. Blood is a great gatherer of evil spirits. To cut
your hand on a stone on going into a fort is said to be very dangerous.

There is no more curious ghost in Drumcliff or Rosses than the
snipe-ghost. There is a bush behind a house in a village that I know
well: for excellent reasons I do not say whether in Drumcliff or Rosses
or on the slope of Ben Bulben, or even on the plain round Knocknarea.
There is a history concerning the house and the bush. A man once lived
there who found on the quay of Sligo a package containing three hundred
pounds in notes. It

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

was dropped by a foreign sea captain. This my man knew, but said
nothing. It was money for freight, and the sea captain, not daring to
face his owners, committed suicide in mid-ocean. Shortly afterwards my
man died. His soul could not rest. At any rate, strange sounds were
heard round his house, though that had grown and prospered since the
freight money. The wife was often seen by those still alive out in the
garden praying at the bush I have spoken of, for the shade of the dead
man appeared there at times. The bush remains to this day: once portion
of a hedge, it now stands by itself, for no one dare put spade or
pruning-knife about it. As to the strange sounds and voices, they did
not cease till a few years ago, when, during some repairs, a snipe flew
out of the solid plaster and away; the troubled ghost, say the
neighbours, of the note-finder was at last dislodged.

My forebears and relations have lived near Rosses and Drumcliff these
many years. A few miles northward I am wholly a stranger, and can find
nothing.

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> When I ask for
stories of the faeries, my answer is some such as was given me by a
woman who lives near a white stone fort--one of the few stone ones in
Ireland--under the seaward angle of Ben Bulben: 'They always mind their
own affairs and I always mind mine': for it is dangerous to talk of the
creatures. Only friendship for yourself or knowledge of your forebears
will loosen these cautious tongues. My friend, 'the sweet Harp-String'
(I give no more than his Irish name for fear of gaugers), has the
science of unpacking the stubbornest heart, but then he supplies the
*potheen*-makers with grain from his own fields. Besides, he is
descended from a noted Gaelic magician who raised the 'dhoul' in Great
Eliza's century, and he has a kind of prescriptive right to hear tell of
all kind of other-world creatures. They are almost relations of his, if
all people say concerning the parentage of magicians be true.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Thick Skull Of The Fortunate](twi30)
