[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Yeats](../index)  [Celtic](../../celt/index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](twi24)  [Next](twi26.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0025VL14G/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Celtic Twilight*, by William Butler Yeats, \[1893, 1902\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

# THE OLD TOWN

I FELL, one night some fifteen years ago, into what seemed the power of
faery.

I had gone with a young man and his sister--friends and relations of my
own--to pick stories out of an old countryman; and we were coming home
talking over what he had told us. It was dark, and our imaginations were
excited by his stories of apparitions, and this may have brought us,
unknown to us, to the threshold, between sleeping and waking, where
Sphinxes and Chimæras sit open-eyed and where there are always
murmurings and whisperings. I cannot think that what we saw was an
imagination of the waking mind. We had come under some trees that made
the road very dark, when the girl saw a bright light moving slowly
across the road. Her brother and myself saw nothing, and did not see
anything until we had walked for about half-an-hour

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

along the edge of the river and down a narrow lane to some fields where
there was a ruined church covered with ivy, and the foundations of what
was called "the Old Town," which had been burned down, it was said, in
Cromwell's day. We had stood for some few minutes, so far as I can
recollect, looking over the fields full of stones and brambles and
elder-bushes, when I saw a small bright light on the horizon, as it
seemed, mounting up slowly towards the sky; then we saw other faint
lights for a minute or two, and at last a bright flame like the flame of
a torch moving rapidly over the river. We saw it all in such a dream,
and it seems all so unreal, that I have never written of it until now,
and hardly ever spoken of it, and even when thinking, because of some
unreasoning impulse, I have avoided giving it weight in the argument.
Perhaps I have felt that my recollections of things seen when the sense
of reality was weakened must be

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

untrustworthy. A few months ago, however, I talked it over with my two
friends, and compared their somewhat meagre recollections with my own.
That sense of unreality was all the more wonderful because the next day
I heard sounds as unaccountable as were those lights, and without any
emotion of unreality, and I remember them with perfect distinctness and
confidence. The girl was sitting reading under a large old-fashioned
mirror, and I was reading and writing a couple of yards away, when I
heard a sound as if a shower of peas had been thrown against the mirror,
and while I was looking at it I heard the sound again, and presently,
while I was alone in the room, I heard a sound as if something much
bigger than a pea had struck the wainscoting beside my head. And after
that for some days came other sights and sounds, not to me but to the
girl, her brother, and the servants. Now it was a bright light, now it
was letters of

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

fire that vanished before they could be read, now it was a heavy foot
moving about in the seemingly empty house. One wonders whether creatures
who live, the country people believe, wherever men and women have lived
in earlier times, followed us from the ruins of the old town? or did
they come from the banks of the river by the trees where the first light
had shone for a moment?

1902\.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Man And His Boots](twi26.md)
