[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Yeats](../index)  [Celtic](../../celt/index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](twi37)  [Next](twi39) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0025VL14G/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Celtic Twilight*, by William Butler Yeats, \[1893, 1902\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

# THE QUEEN AND THE FOOL

I HAVE heard one Hearne, a witch-doctor, who is on the border of Clare
and Galway, say that in 'every household' of faery 'there is a queen and
a fool,' and that if you are 'touched' by either you never recover,
though you may from the touch of any other in faery. He said of the fool
that he was 'maybe the wisest of all,' and spoke of him as dressed like
one of the 'mummers that used to be going about the country.' Since then
a friend has gathered me some few stories of him, and I have heard that
he is known, too, in the highlands. I remember seeing a long, lank,
ragged man sitting by the hearth in the cottage of an old miller not far
from where I am now writing, and being told that he was a fool; and I
find from the stories that my friend has gathered that he is believed to
go to faery in his sleep; but whether he becomes an *Amadán-na-Breena*,
a fool of the forth,

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

and is attached to a household there, I cannot tell. It was an old woman
that I know well, and who has been in faery herself, that spoke of him.
She said, 'There are fools amongst them, and the fools we see, like that
*Amadán* of Ballylee, go away with them at night, and so do the woman
fools that we call *Oinseachs* (apes).' A woman who is related to the
witch-doctor on the border of Clare, and who can Cure people and cattle
by spells, said, 'There are some cures I can't do. I can't help any one
that has got a stroke from the queen or the fool of the forth. I knew of
a woman that saw the queen one time, and she looked like any Christian.
I never heard of any that saw the fool but one woman that was walking
near Gort, and she called out, 'There's the fool of the forth coming
after me.' So her friends that were with her called out, though they
could see nothing, and I suppose he went away at that, for she got no
harm. He was like a big strong

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

man, she said, and half naked, and that is all she said about him. I
have never seen any myself, but I am a cousin of Hearne, and my uncle
was away twenty-one years.' The wife of the old miller said, 'It is said
they are mostly good neighbours, but the stroke of the fool is what
there is no cure for; any one that gets that is gone. The
*Amadán-na-Breena* we call him!' And an old woman who lives in the Bog
of Kiltartan, and is very poor, said, 'It is true enough, there is no
cure for the stroke of the *Amadán-na-Breena*. There was an old man I
knew long ago, he had a tape, and he could tell what diseases you had
with measuring you; and he knew many things. And he said to me one time,
'What month of the year is the worst?' and I said, 'The month of May, of
course.' 'It is not,' he said; 'but the month of June, for that's the
month that the *Amadán* gives his stroke!' They say he looks like any
other man, but he's leathan (wide),

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

and not smart. I knew a boy one time got a great fright, for a lamb
looked over the wall at him with a beard on it, and he knew it was the
*Amadán*, for it was the month of June. And they brought him to that man
I was telling about, that had the tape, and when he saw him he said,
'Send for the priest, and get a Mass said over him.' And so they did,
and what would you say but he's living yet and has a family! A certain
Regan said, 'They, the other sort of people, might be passing you close
here and they might touch you. But any that gets the touch of the
*Amadán-na-Breena* is done for.' It's true enough that it's in the month
of June he's most likely to give the touch. I knew one that got it, and
he told me about it himself. He was a boy I knew well, and he told me
that one night a gentleman came to him, that had been his landlord, and
that was dead. And he told him to come along with him, for he wanted him
to fight another man. And when he

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

went he found two great troops of them, and the other troop had a living
man with them too, and he was put to fight him. And they had a great
fight, and he got the better of the other man, and then the troop on his
side gave a great shout, and he was left home again. But about three
years after that he was cutting bushes in a wood and he saw the *Amadán*
coming at him. He had a big vessel in his arms, and it was shining, so
that the boy could see nothing else; but he put it behind his back then
and came running, and the boy said he looked wild and wide, like the
side of the hill. And the boy ran, and he threw the vessel after him,
and it broke with a great noise, and whatever came out of it, his head
was gone there and then. He lived for a while after, and used to tell us
many things, but his wits were gone. He thought they mightn't have liked
him to beat the other man, and he used to be afraid something would come
on him.' And an old woman

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

in a Galway workhouse, who had some little knowledge of Queen Maive,
said the other day, 'The *Amadán-na-Breena* changes his shape every two
days. Sometimes he comes like a youngster, and then he'll come like the
worst of beasts, trying to give the touch he used to be. I heard it said
of late he was shot, but I think myself it would be hard to shoot him.'

I knew a man who was trying to bring before his mind's eye an image of
Ængus, the old Irish god of love and poetry and ecstasy, who changed
four of his kisses into birds, and suddenly the image of a man with a
cap and bells rushed before his mind's eye, and grew vivid and spoke and
called itself 'Ængus’ messenger.' And I knew another man, a truly great
seer, who saw a white fool in a visionary garden, where there was a tree
with peacocks' feathers instead of leaves, and flowers that opened to
show little human faces when the white fool had touched them with his
coxcomb, and he saw at

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

another time a white fool sitting by a pool and smiling and watching the
images of many fair women floating up from the pool.

What else can death be but the beginning of wisdom and power and beauty?
and foolishness may be a kind of death. I cannot think it wonderful that
many should see a fool with a shining vessel of some enchantment or
wisdom or dream too powerful for mortal brains in 'every household of
them.' It is natural, too, that there should be a queen to every
household of them, and that one should hear little of their kings, for
women come more easily than men to that wisdom which ancient peoples,
and all wild peoples even now, think the only wisdom. The self, which is
the foundation of our knowledge, is broken in pieces by foolishness, and
is forgotten in the sudden emotions of women, and therefore fools may
get, and women do get of a certainty, glimpses of much that sanctity
finds at the end of

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

its painful journey. The man who saw the white fool said of a certain
woman, not a peasant woman, 'If I had her power of vision I would know
all the wisdom of the gods, and her visions do not interest her.' And I
know of another woman, also not a peasant woman, who would pass in sleep
into countries of an unearthly beauty, and who never cared for anything
but to be busy about her house and her children; and presently an herb
doctor cured her, as he called it. Wisdom and beauty and power may
sometimes, as I think, come to those who die every day they live, though
their dying may not be like the dying Shakespeare spoke of. There is a
war between the living and the dead, and the Irish stories keep harping
upon it. They will have it that when the potatoes or the wheat or any
other of the fruits of the earth decay, they ripen in faery, and that
our dreams lose their wisdom when the sap rises in the trees, and that
our dreams can make the trees

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

wither, and that one hears the bleating of the lambs of faery in
November, and that blind eyes can see more than other eyes. Because the
soul always believes in these, or in like things, the cell and the
wilderness shall never be long empty, or lovers come into the world who
will not understand the verse--

Heardst thou not sweet words among  
That heaven-resounding minstrelsy?  
Heardst thou not that those who die  
Awake in a world of ecstasy?  
How love, when limbs are interwoven,  
And sleep, when the night of life is cloven,  
And thought to the world's dim boundaries clinging,  
And music when one's beloved is singing,  
Is death?

1901\.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Friends Of The People Of Faery](twi39)
