[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Yeats](../index)  [Celtic](../../celt/index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](twi40)  [Next](twi42.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0025VL14G/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Celtic Twilight*, by William Butler Yeats, \[1893, 1902\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

# BY THE ROADSIDE

LAST night I went to a wide place on the Kiltartan road to listen to
some Irish songs. While I waited for the singers an old man sang about
that country beauty who died so many years ago, and spoke of a singer he
had known who sang so beautifully that no horse would pass him, but must
turn its head and cock its ears to listen. Presently a score of men and
boys and girls, with shawls over their heads, gathered under the trees
to listen. Somebody sang *Sa Muirnín Díles*, and then somebody else
*Jimmy Mo Mílestór*, mournful songs of separation, of death, and of
exile. Then some of the men stood up and began to dance, while another
lilted the measure they danced to, and then somebody sang *Eiblín a
Rúin*, that glad song of meeting which has always moved me more than
other songs, because the lover who made it sang it to his sweetheart
under the shadow of a mountain I looked at every

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

day through my childhood. The voices melted into the twilight and were
mixed into the trees, and when I thought of the words they too melted
away, and were mixed with the generations of men. Now it was a phrase,
now it was an attitude of mind, an emotional form, that had carried my
memory to older verses, or even to forgotten mythologies. I was carried
so far that it was as though I came to one of the four rivers, and
followed it under the wall of Paradise to the roots of the trees of
knowledge and of life. There is no song or story handed down among the
cottages that has not words and thoughts to carry one as far, for though
one can know but a little of their ascent, one knows that they ascend
like medieval genealogies through unbroken dignities to the beginning of
the world. Folk art is, indeed, the oldest of the aristocracies of
thought, and because it refuses what is passing and trivial, the merely
clever and pretty, as certainly as the vulgar and insincere, and because
it

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

has gathered into itself the simplest and most unforgetable thoughts of
the generations, it is the soil where all great art is rooted. Wherever
it is spoken by the fireside, or sung by the roadside, or carved upon
the lintel, appreciation of the arts that a single mind gives unity and
design to, spreads quickly when its hour is come.

In a society that has cast out imaginative tradition, only a few
people--three or four thousand out of millions--favoured by their own
characters and by happy circumstance, and only then after much labour,
have understanding of imaginative things, and yet 'the imagination is
the man himself.' The churches in the Middle Age won all the arts into
their service because men understood that when imagination is
impoverished, a principal voice--some would say the only voice--for the
awakening of wise hope and durable faith, and understanding charity, can
speak but in broken words, if it does not fall silent. And so it has
always seemed to me that

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

we, who would re-awaken imaginative tradition by making old songs live
again, or by gathering old stories into books, take part in the quarrel
of Galilee. Those who are Irish and would spread foreign ways, which,
for all but a few, are ways of spiritual poverty, take part also. Their
part is with those who were of Jewry, and yet cried out, 'If thou let
this man go thou art not Cæsar's friend.'

1901\.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Into The Twilight](twi42.md)
