<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cha01)  [Next](cha03) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Works of Stephen Charnock*, \[1628-1680\] at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### A Discourse of the Word, the Instrument of Regeneration

###### by

#### Stephen Charnock

*Of his own will begot he us with the word of truth, that we should be a
kind of first-fruits of his creatures.*—James 1:18.

I have chosen this text to treat of the instrument of the new birth.

The apostle having advised them (verse 13, 'But let no man say when he
is tempted, I am tempted of God: for God cannot be tempted to evil,
neither tempts he any man') not to charge God as the author of any
temptation to evil, showing it to be contrary to the nature of God, who
is infinite goodness and righteousness; for as he cannot be tempted with
evil, so neither ca he tempt any man; and declaring the true cause and
spring of all evil to be inherent in ourselves, even that lust which is
riveted in our nature, which he calls our own lust, - verse 14, 'But
every man is tempted, when he is drawn away of his own lust, and
enticed,' - he takes occasion from thence to show the order of sin's
working. Sin is first conceived by that original corruption in our
nature, and formed and brought forth into action; and when it is
finished, and grows into a habit, it 'brings forth death,' verse 15. To
remove this error, which some in those days had sucked in out of a
natural self-love that man has to excuse himself, and remove the cause
of sin far from him, the apostle shows that God is the author and
fountain of all the good we have: ver. 17, 'Every good gift and every
perfect gift is from above, and comes down from the Father of lights,
with whom is no variableness, nor shadow of change.' God being the
infinite Father of lights, who has no eclipses or decreases, no shadows
or mixtures of darkness, but always shines with a constant and settled
brightness, of this goodness has given a great evidence, in conferring
the choicest mercy upon us, even a new begetting through the gospel, and
thereby the relation of children to him, that we might be consecrated to
him as the first fruits and a peculiar portion. Of his own will,
"bouletheis; by his mere motion, induced by no cause but the goodness in
his own breast. (1.) To distinguish it from the generation of the Son,
which is natural, this voluntary; of his own will, not naturally, as he
begot his Son from eternity. (2.) Not necessarily, by a necessity of
nature, as the sun, to which he had compared God before, does enlighten,
and enliven, when matter is prepared to receive his quickening beams;
but by an arbitrariness of grace. (3.) Not by any obligation from the
creature; the will of God is opposed to the merit of man. The new
creation answers to election; the first purpose was free, the bringing
that purpose to execution is free whatsoever obligation there is,
results not from the creature, but from himself, his own immutable
nature, which has no variableness, nor shadow of change. "Begot us,'
"apekuesen", or brought us forth, for the same word "apokuei", ver. 15,
is translated 'brings forth.' 'By the word of truth', a title given to
the gospel both in the Old and New Testament: in the Old, Ps. xiv. 4,
'And in thy majesty ride prosperously, because of truth,' or 'upon thy
word of truth,' in the New Testament, Eph. i. 13, 'In whom you also
trusted, after you heard the word of truth, the gospel of your
salvation.' So 2 Cor. vi. 7, and 2 Tim. ii. 15. And it is called truth
by way of excellency, as paramount to all other truth. (1.) Either, by
an Hebraism, the word of truth; that is, the true word. (2.) Or rather,
by way of eminency, as containing a higher truth, more excellent in
itself, more advantageous for the creature, than any other divine truth;
wherein the highest glory of God, the sure and everlasting happiness of
the creature, is set forth; a word which he has 'magnified above all his
name,' Ps. cxxxviii. 2.

And called the word of truth.

1\. In regard of the author, truth itself; and the publisher, he who was
'the way, the truth, and the life.'

2\. In opposition to all false doctrines, which can never be the
instruments of conversion; for error to convert to truth, is the same
thing as for darkness to diffuse light, or water to kindle fire.

3\. In opposition to the windy and flashy conceits of men, which can no
more be instrumental in the begetting a Christian, than mere wind can
beget a man.

4\. In opposition to the legal shadows; the gospel declares the truth of
those types. Both the law and prophecy were but as a dim candle 'in a
dark place,' 2 Peter i. 19, but this as a sun shining out at noonday.
All other discourses did stream to this as their great ocean, wherein
they were to be swallowed up. The law was the word of truth, but
referred to the gospel as the great end of it. This contains the whole
and ultimate purpose of God, for saving men by Jesus Christ, and in him
enriching them with all spiritual blessings, and not by the works of the
law, and thus the Spirit, which enlightens and seals instruction upon
our souls, is called 'the Spirit of truth,' John xiv. 17, as it is
called a Spirit of holiness, as it makes us holy, a Spirit of grace, as
it makes us gracious, or as it declares the grace of God. Some by *the
word of truth* understand Christ, the essential and uncreated "logos",
Word, as it is understood by some in 1 Peter i. 23, 25, 'By the Word of
God, which lives and abides for ever; and this is the Word which by the
gospel is preached to you.' Possibly it may be meant of Christ, who by
the gospel is declared and preached to be the mediator between God and
man, appointed to raise up those that are given to him. Others by *the
word* there, mean the will of God of giving grace in Christ, which is
manifest in, and expressed by, the gospel. But here it is evidently
meant of the gospel, because of the inference the apostle makes: ver.
19, 'Be swift to hear;' that is, prize the word, wait upon the means
with all readiness; 'slow to speak,' to utter your judgment of it, or be
wise in your own conceit, whereof a readiness to speak peremptorily in
divine truth is sometimes an evidence; 'slow to wrath' and passion,
which hinder any profit by the word. 'That we should be a kind of first
fruits of his creatures;' the chief among his creatures. The first
fruits were the best of every kind to be offered to God, whereby they
acknowledged God's gift of them, and desired his blessing upon them, and
were given as God's peculiar right and portion. It was commanded in the
law, Deut. xviii. 4. It was a custom among many of the heathens. To
offer them was a token of thankfulness; not to offer them, was accounted
a sign of atheism and profaneness. The new creature is God's peculiar
portion taken out of mankind; and it bespeaks duty too: being
consecrated to God by a new begetting, they should serve God with a new
spirit, new thankfulness, new frames.

We see here,

1\. The efficient of regeneration, God; 'he,' the Father of lights.

2\. The impulsive or moving cause, 'his own will.'

3\. The instrumental cause 'with the word of truth.'

4\. The final cause, 'that we may be a kind of first fruits.'

The doctrine I am to handle is,

Doctrine. That the gospel is the instrument whereby God brings the soul
forth in a new birth.

The Scripture does distinguish the efficient and instrumental cause by
the prepositions "ek", or, "eks", and "dia". When we are said to be
'born of the Spirit,' it is, John iii. 5, "ek pneumatos"; 1 John iii. 9,
v. 1, "ek Theou"; never "dia pneumatos", or "dia Theou:" but we are
nowhere said to be born *of* the word, or begotten *of* the word, but
"dia logou", *by* or *with* the word, 1 Peter i. 23; and "dia
euangeliou", 1 Cor. iv. 15, I have begotten you 'through the gospel.'
The preposition "ek" or "eks", usually notes the efficient or material
cause; "dia", the instrumental or means by which a thing is wrought. Sin
entered into the heart of Eve by the word of the devil, grace enters
into the heart by the word of God; that entered by a word of error, this
by a word of truth: 'Ye are clean through the word I have spoken to you,
John xv. 3, whereby our Saviour means the word outwardly preached by
him, for it is the word spoken by him. Not that it had this efficacy of
itself, but as an instrument of their sanctification, rendering them
ready to every good work. The holiness, therefore, which it begets, is
called the holiness of truth, Eph. iv. 24, opposed to the "epithumiai
tes apates", 'lusts of deceit,' ver. 22. Lusts grow up from error and
deceit, and holiness of the new man grows up from truth. The gospel
administration, in regard of the effects of it, is called 'the kingdom
of God,' Mark i. 14; it erects the kingdom of God in the world and in
the hearts of men, and called the regeneration: Mat. xix. 28, 'Ye which
have followed me in the regeneration;' the gospel administration being a
creating of 'new heavers and a new earth,' Isa. lxv. 17. This is the
triumphal chariot, wherein Christ rides majestically to the conquest of
hearts: Ps. xiv. 4, 'And in thy majesty ride prosperously, because of
truth,' "'al dvar 'emut", a psalm the Jews themselves understand of the
Messiah. The word of his truth is the support of his kingdom, whereby he
awes sinners into submission. Peace from heaven, and the health of our
nature, is 'the fruit of the lips,' though of God's creation, Isa. lvii.
19. It is like the dew or mist which watered the ground, and prepared
the earth for the formation of Adam's body, into which God breathed
afterwards a living soul, Gen. ii. 6. 7.

I. For explication, take some propositions:

1\. It is not the law that is this instrument. The law, taken in general
for the legal administration prescribed to the Jews, was instrumental
for renewing, because there was a typical gospel in that Judaic
administration: Heb. iv. 2, 'For to us was the gospel preached as well
as unto them.' They were evangelised, "Euangelismenoi", as the word
signifies. The Judaic administration was composed of law and gospel: the
moral law, as a covenant of works; the ceremonial law, representing the
covenant of grace. The law of God, or gospel among them, is said to
convert the soul, Ps. xix. 7. But the law, taken as a covenant of works,
was not appointed for renewing the soul, otherwise what need had there
been of enacting another law for that work? And those that say the law
is instrumental in conversion, or inflaming our affections to obedience,
say that all the benefits by it are to be ascribed to the covenant of
grace in Christ. It is true, the law considered in itself is preparatory
to cast men down, and show them their distance from God and contrariety
to his command; but the law without the gospel never brought any man to
Christ. Whatsoever it does in this case is not of itself, but by the
mingling the gospel with it, which spirits it to such an end. Though the
law did not encourage sin, yet it gave no help against it, but left the
soul under the dominion of it, which is evident by the apostle's
inference: Rom. vi. 14, 'Sin shall not have dominion over you; for you
are not under the law, but under grace.' Hence the property of the law,
which is meant by 'the letter,' 2 Cor. iii. 6, is to kill, but 'the
Spirit' gives life; that leaves under the severity of justice, after sin
had entered; but the spiritual administration, wherein the Spirit works,
is to quicken and renew the soul, and make it able to get above the
guilt and power of sin. The apostle, therefore, wholly excludes the law:
Gal. iii. 2, 'Received you the Spirit by the works of the law, or by the
hearing of faith?' that is, the word of faith, as the gospel is called,
Rom. x. 8. By Spirit is meant, says Calvin, the grace of regeneration,
as by faith is meant the doctrine of faith. I might have preached (as if
the apostle had said) the works of the law till my lungs had been worn
out, and the renewing Spirit would never have entered into you by that
fire, but it descended upon you in the sweet gospel dew. The gospel is
therefore called the 'ministration of the Spirit,' and the 'ministration
of righteousness,' 2 Cor. iii. 8, 9. It is the chariot or *vehiculum*
wherein the Spirit rides, the proclamation by which it is declared, the
channel through which it is conveyed. The law discovers the
righteousness of God as well as the gospel; but that demands a
righteousness from the creature, the gospel confers a righteousness upon
the creature; the law shows us God's righteousness in his nature, the
gospel shows us God's righteousness in his nature and grace. The law is
a hammer to break us, the gospel God's oil to cure us; the law makes sin
live and our souls die,—Rom. vii. 9, 'When the commandment came, sin
revived, and I died,—the gospel makes sin die and our souls live; the
law awakens the lion, the gospel lets out his blood. At the best, the
terrors of the law do chain up our furious affections, but the sweetness
of gospel mercy changes them. The law prepares the matter, the gospel
brings the new form. That was appointed for the rule of our walk, not
for the restoration of our life. And they are the promises of mercy
which are the motives to return; rebels will not submit to their prince
as long as they know they shall have no quarter. Hue and cry makes the
thief fly away the faster. By the 'great and precious promises;' we 'are
made partakers of the divine nature,' 2 Peter i. 4. The promises of the
law being conditional, belong not to us without fulfilling the
condition, of which we are incapable of ourselves. The law, therefore,
since the fall, is destructive, the gospel restorative, and the promises
of it the cords whereby God draws us.

2\. The gospel is this instrument. It is an instrument to unlock the
prison doors, and take them off the hinges, strike off the fetters, and
draw out the soul to a glorious liberty. It is by the voice of the
archangel men shall rise in their bodies; it is by the voice of the Son
of God in the word that men rise in their souls. Nothing else ever
wrought such miraculous changes. To make lions become lambs, Isa. vi. 6,
Hosea iv. 13; beloved idols to be cast away with indignation; to make
its entrance like fire, and consume old lusts in a short time: these
have been undeniable realities, which have created affection and
astonishment in some enemies as well as friends. It has a more excellent
instrumentality in it than other providences of God, because it is a
higher manifestation. Every creature conducts us to the knowledge of
God, by giving us notice of his power, wisdom, and goodness, Rom. i. 20.
The declaration of his works in the world is instrumental to make men
seek him, Acts xvii. 27. Every day's providence declares his patience,
every shower of rain his merciful provision for mankind, Acts xiv. 17,
every day's preservation of the world under a load of sin manifests his
mercy. The heavens have a tongue, and the rod has a voice; the design of
all is to lead men to repentance, Rom. ii. 4. If these, therefore, be
some kind of instruments upon the hearts of considering men, the gospel
being a discovery superior to all these, in manifesting not only a God
of nature, but a God of grace, must be designed to a choicer and nobler
work. The heavens and providence are instruments to instruct us, this to
renew us.

It is an instrument; but,

(1.) It is not a natural instrument, to work by any natural efficacy, as
food does nourish, the sun shines, or the air and water cools, or as a
sharp knife cuts if it be applied to fit matter. If it were thus
natural, it would not be of grace. Though the shining of the sun, or the
healing by a plaster, are acts of the goodness and mercy of God, yet the
Scripture calls them not by that higher title of acts of grace. If the
operation were natural, the gospel would never be without its effect
wherever it were preached; as the sun, wherever it shines in any land,
does both enlighten and warm. Our Saviour then would have had more
success, since the gospel could not have greater natural efficacy than
from his lips; yet the number of his converts were probably not much
above five hundred, for so many he appeared to after his resurrection, 1
Cor. xv. 6, when many thousands in that land heard his voice, and saw
his miracles. Christ, who was always able to give himself success, would
not, perhaps for this among many other reasons, to advance his spiritual
above his corporal presence, and to prevent any thoughts of any natural
virtue in the word, without the power of the Spirit working by it. Every
day teaches us, that though many see the glass of the gospel, yet few
see the glory of God in that gospel. Were it natural, then, that all
that hear it were not renewed, would be more miraculous than that any
are; as it was more a miracle that the sun should stand still in
Joshua's time, against its natural course of motion, than that it moves
every day in the heavens. If it were a natural instrument, it must then
have life in itself, but how can the voice of a man, or the words and
syllables in a book, be capable of receiving spiritual life, which they
must have before they can naturally convey it to others? Were it a
natural instrument, it would have the same effect upon the soul at one
time as at another. But does not daily experience witness, that the word
shines at some particular times upon the soul with a clearer ray than at
other times, that such a soul has thought itself in another world (as it
were), and that too when it has been much clouded by the weakness of the
instrument declaring it? Lastly were it natural, the wisest men, men of
the sharpest understandings, could not resist it, no man can hinder the
sun's shining upon him, when he is under the beams of it, it would warm
him whether he would or no, yet have not such been the most desperate
opposers of it in all ages of the world, as well as in the times of the
apostles? It is not then a natural, but a moral instrument, which will
follow afterwards, when we come to consider how it works.

(2.) It is the only instrument appointed by God to this end in an
ordinary way. God has made a combination between hearing and believing,
Rom. x. 14, 17, so that believing comes not without hearing. The waters
of the sanctuary run only through the channels of the gospel; the mines
of grace are found only in the climates of the word. Why does not air
nourish? Because God did not set that, but meat, apart for each an end.
Though God could by his almighty power bless air to this end, yet in an
ordinary way he has fixed his blessing on these natural causes of his
own ordaining. God has appointed second causes for natural operations;
if we would be warm, God has appointed fire and sun to warm us; he could
do it immediately, by spreading a lively heat in every member, as well
as he gave at first a power to fire to burn; but he uses natural
instruments in natural effects, and likewise spiritual instruments in
spiritual productions. God may blow in an extraordinary way upon the
soul by a divine breath without any instrument, as he did immediately
upon the prophets, or as he gave light to the world the three first days
of the creation without a sun, but since only by the sun and stars. But
God seems here to have fixed his power: Rom. i. 16, the gospel is 'the
power of God to salvation;' not that his power shall always attend it,
but that he will exert his power, at least ordinarily, only by it; no
other organ through which the wind of the Spirit shall blow, no other
sword which the Spirit shall manage but this, Eph. vi. 13. Though our
Saviour prayed upon the cross for some of his greatest enemies, who had
their hands embrued in his precious blood, though he was heard, yet his
prayer was not answered but through Peter's ministry, to grace the first
spiritual discovery of the gospel. Nothing else can have that efficacy.
Had every man in Israel made a brazen serpent, and looked upon it when
they had been stung, they might have looked till they had groaned their
last, before they had met with any cure, because only one was of God's
appointing. To a cast of an eye upon that, he had only promised his
healing virtue, in that only then he had lodged his power.

(3.) It is therefore a necessary instrument.

\[1.\] In regard of the reasonable creature there must be some
declaration. God does not ordinarily work but by means, and does not
produce anything without them which may be done with them. God does not
maintain the creatures by a daily creation, but by generation; he
maintains that faculty of generation in them by the means of health and
nourishment, and that by the means of the fruits of the earth, and does
all this according to the ordinance he fixed at the creation, when he
appointed every kind of creatures their proper food, and bestowed his
blessing upon them, 'Increase and multiply.' So according to the method
God has set of men's actions, it is necessary that this regeneration
should be by some word as an instrument, for God has given understanding
and will to man. We cannot understand anything, or will anything, but
what is proposed to us by some external object; as our eye can see
nothing but what is without us, our hand take nothing but what is
without us, so it is necessary that God by the word should set before us
those things which our understandings may apprehend, and our wills
embrace. Now we believe things as we conceive them true, or not believe
them as we conceive them false. We love, desire, delight in things, as
we conceive them honest or profitable; we hate, we refuse, or grieve, as
we conceive them dishonest, or troublesome, or hurtful to us; whatever
we are changed by in our understandings, wills, and affections, is
represented to us under some of these considerations. To make an
alteration in us according to our nature of understanding, will, and
affection, it is necessary there should be some declaration of things
under those considerations of true, good, delightful, &c., in the
highest manner, to make a choice change in every faculty of the soul,
and without this a man cannot be changed as a rational creature; he will
otherwise have a change he knows not why, nor to what end, nor upon what
consideration, which is an inconceivable change in a rational creature.

\[2.\] It is necessary the revelation of this gospel we have should be
made. There is a necessity of some revelation, for no man can see that
which is not visible, or hear that which has no sound, or know that
which is not declared. There is also a necessity of the revelation of
this gospel, since faith is a great part of this work. How can any man
believe that God is good in Christ, without knowing that he has so
declared himself? Since the Spirit takes of Christ's, and shows it to
us, there must be a revelation of Christ, and the goodness of God in
Christ, before we can believe. Though the manner of this revelation may
be different, and the Spirit may renew in an extraordinary manner, yet
this is the instrument whereby all spiritual begettings are wrought; the
manner may be by visions, dreams, by reading or hearing, yet still it is
the gospel which is revealed; the matter revealed is the same, though
the formal revelation or manner may be different. Paul's regeneration
was by a vision, for at that vision of the light, and that voice of
Christ, I suppose him to be renewed, because of that full resignation of
his will to Christ, Acts ix. 6, yet the matter of the revelation was the
same, that Christ was the Messiah, for so Paul understands it, in giving
him the title of Lord. Though God may communicate himself without the
written word to some that have it not, yet according to his appointment,
not without a revelation of what is in that word.

\[3.\] This necessity will further appear, if we consider that it always
was so. Adam and Eve were the first after the fall wherein God did
constitute his church, whose regeneration and conversion were wrought by
that promise of the seed of the woman made to them in paradise; God
surely putting an enmity in the heart of those to whom this first
promise of an enmity was made, upon which promise a sacrifice followed,
which some ground on Gen. iii. 21, 'God made them coats of skins' of
beasts, which the word "'od" signifies, and is never taken in Scripture
otherwise than for the outward skin of a beast. And, indeed, it is not
likely that 129 years should be between the promise and the first
sacrifice, for some think Abel was killed by Cain in the 129th year
after the creation, for it is certain 130 years after the creation Seth
was born, Gen. v. 3. And this is confirmed, Heb. ix. 32, 'Neither the
first testament was dedicated without blood.' The first testament was of
more ancient date than the Jewish service ordained by Moses; and some
ceremonies, as sacrifices, and distinction of clean and unclean beasts,
were in use before, Gen. viii. 20, so that there seems to be a sacrifice
representing the Messiah for the dedication of the first testament,
which Adam had received from God and transmitted to Abel, whom he taught
the way of sacrificing. What regeneration Adam had was by this word of
the gospel. Had not Adam believed it, he would not have delivered it to
Abel; and Abel had not sacrificed, unless he had been taught so by his
father, or immediately by God; but most likely by his father, because
God does not use extraordinary means, when ordinary will serve. And Abel
was regenerate, for it is said 'by faith he offered' this sacrifice,
Heb. xi. 4: and it was faith in Christ, faith in the promised seed, for
all of them in that catalogue, Heb. xi., did eye Christ by faith, as
well as Moses. of whom it is particularly expressed, ver. 26, that 'he
esteemed the reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures of
Egypt.' Considering all this, it is evident, that the ancient
restoration was by the revelation of Christ and the gospel as the only
necessary means. Abraham, it is likely, had some external word in his
father Terah's family, by tradition from the patriarchs, and had the
revelation of the promise made to him by God, Gen. xviii. 19. And it was
wrought then in an ordinary way by instruction, for, for that Abraham is
commended, and no doubt but Isaac and Jacob did the same, so that all
along this change of the heart was wrought by a declaration of the word
of the gospel.

(4.) It seems to be the standing instrument of it to the end of the
world. Some indeed think the conversion of the Jews shall not be by the
declarations of the word in a way of preaching and instruction, as the
Gentiles were brought in, but by a visible appearance of Christ, which
they ground upon Zech. xii. 10, 'They shall look upon him whom they have
pierced,' they shall see Christ in the clouds as pierced by them, and
understand Paul's conversion by an extraordinary light shining round
about him, and a voice from heaven, to be a type and pattern of God's
manner of the future conversion of the Jews, which is intimated, 1 Tim.
i. 16, that the mercy he obtained was 'a pattern for them which should
hereafter believe on him to life everlasting'. Whether this be so or no,
yet however the conversion is by a revelation of that which is the
matter and substance of the gospel, it is the revelation of Christ
himself; and if, like Paul's conversion, by a voice, as well as by
sight, by instruction as well as apparition; but it seems to me to be
the perpetual standing means of regeneration. The fruits of our
Saviour's ascension shall endure to the end of the world, and the
enduing men with gifts for the building him a spiritual house is a great
end of his ascension, Ps. lxviii. 18, compared with Eph. iv. 8, 9, 'Thou
hast ascended on high, thou hast led captivity captive, thou hast
received gifts for men; yea, for the rebellious also, that the Lord
might dwell among them.' He receives gifts upon his ascension, for the
subduing and changing the hearts of the rebellious, that they may be a
fit habitation for God, who dwells in them by his Spirit; these gifts
being the fruit of so glorious an ascension, and a rich donative to him
for the accomplishment of his undertaking in the world, and being given
for the smoothing, polishing, and fitting rude stones to combine
together for a temple for the Lord to dwell in (which is the reason why
he keeps up the world). As long therefore as God has a temple, and any
stone to polish, these gifts will remain in the ministry of the word,
and be exercised in order to so great a building; and we may infer also
by the way, that it is not likely that God does dwell in any, but such
who are so subdued and formed by the ministry of the word, which is the
fruit of Christ's ascension. It seems also to have an more ancient date,
and founded upon the covenant of redemption between the Father and the
Son. All that prayer in the 17th of John seems to me to run upon those
articles agreed on between them. Those that were given to Christ were
given to keep his word: John xvii. 6, 'Thou gave them me, and they have
kept thy word.' Which word was given to Christ by God in order to be
given to them: ver. 8, 'I have given them the word which thou gave me.'
And in his prayer for their sanctification, her. 17, he seems to
intimate that this was the ordinary method then subscribed to by both,
and the settled means of sanctification; he does not only propose his
desire for their sanctification, but the means, 'through thy truth,' and
specifies what he means by truth, 'thy word is truth.' And what he did
here pray for, for them that were then with him, he did for all that
should hereafter believe, ver. 20; and though this be meant of a further
sanctification of those that were already regenerate, yet it will, I
think, evidently follow that if the word by agreement between the Father
and the Son be the instrument of every degree of sanctification, it must
be also of the first; since there can be no faith, but refers to the
object believed, and the ground why it is believed, whence 'belief of
the truth' is joined with the 'sanctification of the Spirit,' 2 Thes.
ii. 13; besides, ver. 20, all belief for the future was to be through
the word, 'through their word.' Let me add another inference from this;
what an excellent argument is this to plead in prayer, before you go to
hear or read the word; Lord, was not this an article of agreement
between thee and thy Son? Was not this the desire of our Saviour, who
knew the best means of sanctifying?

\[5.\] It is necessary, by God's appointment, for all the degrees of the
new birth, and all the appendixes to it. When God shows his own glory
for a further change, he represents the species of it in the glass of
the gospel: 2 Cor. iii. 18, 'Beholding as in a glass the glory of the
Lord, are changed into the same image, from glory to glory.' It is the
ministration of the Spirit in all the acts of the spirit. If the Spirit
quicken, it is by some gospel precept; if it comforts, it is by some
gospel promise; if it startles, it is by some threatening in the word.
Whatsoever working there is in a Christian's heart, it is by some word
or other dropping upon it. If any temptation which assaults us be
baffled, it is by the word, which is the sword of the Spirit. The life
of a Christian is made up of increasing light, refreshing comforts,
choicer inclinations of the heart towards God. By the same law whereby
the soul is converted the heart is rejoiced, and the eyes further
enlightened: Ps. xix. 7, 8, 'The law of the Lord is perfect, converting
the soul, making wise the simple, rejoicing the heart, enlightening the
eyes.' The Spirit makes the word not only the fire to kindle the soul,
but the bellows to blow; it is first life, then liveliness to the soul.
It is through the word he begets us, and through the word he quickens
us: Thy word has quickened me,' Ps. cxix. 50, 93. It is by the word God
gathers a church in the world; by the same word he sanctifies it to
greater degrees, Eph. v. 26. It is the seed whereby we are born, the dew
whereby we are refreshed. As it is the seed of our birth, so it is the
milk of our growth, 1 Peter ii. 2. Faith comes by hearing, and salvation
after faith by the 'foolishness of preaching,' 1 Cor. i. 21. It helps us
after we have believed through grace, Acts xviii. 27. Our fruitfulness
depends upon our plantation by this river's side. The influence of other
ordinances depends upon it. Sacraments that nourish and increase, are
not efficacious, but by virtue of the word; they have their dependence
on the word, as seals upon the covenant. The word is operative without
sacraments; sacraments are not operative without the influence of the
word, they are only assistants to it. This quickens and increases
habitual grace, as well as it was the instrument first to usher it into
the heart: Eph. v. 26 'That he might sanctify and cleanse it with the
washing of water by the word.' As God will have the mediation of his Son
honoured in the whole progress and perfection of grace as the
meritorious cause, the efficacy of the Spirit as the efficient cause, so
he will have the word in every step to heaven honoured as the
instrumental cause; that as Jesus Christ is all in all, as the chief, so
the word may be all in all as the means. As God created the world by the
word of his power, and by the word of his providence bid the creatures
increase and multiply, so by the word of the gospel he lays the
foundation, and rears the building, of his spiritual house.

4\. As it is not a natural instrument, but the only instrument appointed
by God, and therefore, upon these and upon other accounts, a necessary
instrument, so it is an instrument which makes mightily for God's glory.
The meaner the appearance of the instrument, the more evident the power
and skill of the workman. It would be miraculous for a man to raise up
another from death, by a composition of medicines syringed down the
throat, but a greater miracle to raise him by speaking a word. In the
new birth there is nothing sensible to man but the word, the other
causes are secret; like the wind, you know not whence it comes, nor
whither it goes. The instrument being weak in itself, none can claim any
share with God in the glory of the work. But were there a natural
strength in the means, much of the honour would be pared from God, and
assumed by the creature. It is like the trumpet in the right hand of
Gideon's soldiers, and a pitcher with a lamp in the left. Upon the
blowing of the trumpet and the breaking of the pitcher, the enemies
fled; and God would have the means but small, but three hundred of
thirty-two thousand, that Israel might not vaunt, and say, Mine own arm
has saved me, Judges vii. 2. It had not been so admirable for Samson to
have killed so many with a sword or spear, or if the walls of Jericho
had fallen flat by the force of some battering engine; but it was
wonderful to see them tumble at the blast of ram's horns. Is it not the
same to see strong-holds, high thoughts, Goliath-like corruptions, and
spiritual death itself, fly before the voice of the word? To see a man
like the Babel-builders, swelling and rearing up his own confidences
against God, to have all the former language of his soul confounded by a
word; to think of other objects, speak in another strain, descend from
self to dust, deny pleasure, embrace a crucified Christ; that carnal
reason should be silenced, legions of devils driven out, a messy Dagon
fall before an ark of wood, that has nothing in it but the rod of Aaron
and the pot of manna: in such weak means is the power of God exalted,
and no other cry can reasonably be heard but 'This is the Lord's doing,
and it is marvellous in our eyes.' So it was more glorious for our
Saviour to turn many of the Jews to him after his death than in his
life, to bring them to believe by a Word, upon a person they had
crucified as a malefactor, than if he had brought them to believe while
he was attended with a train of miracles. The power of his miracles
might seem in their eyes to be extinct with his death, since he that
delivered others did not deliver himself from the hands of his
murderers. He now honours both his own words and their faith, in
bringing them to believe by the preaching of men, who did not believe by
the Word from his lips, attended with the seals of so many glorious
miracles.

5\. Consider, as it is an instrument, so but an instrument. God begets
by the word; the chief operation depends upon the Spirit of God. No
sword can cut without a hand to manage it, no engine batter without a
force to drive it. The Word is objective in itself, operative by the
power of the Spirit; instrumental in itself, efficacious by the Holy
Ghost. The Word of Christ is first spirit and then life. 'The words that
I speak unto you, they are spirit and they are life,' John vi. 63. The
word is the chariot of the Spirit, the Spirit the guider of the word;
there is a gospel comes in word, and there is a gospel comes in power, 1
Thes. i. 5. There is a publishing of the gospel, and there is the
'fullness of the blessing of the gospel,' Rom. xv. 29. 'There was the
truth of God spoken by Peter and Paul, and God in that truth working in
the heart: Gal. ii. 8, 'He that wrought effectually in Peter to the
apostleship of the circumcision, the same was mighty in me towards the
Gentiles.' The gospel in itself is like Christ's voice; the gospel with
the Spirit is like Christ's power raising Lazarus; other men might have
spoken the same words, but the power of rising must come from above. It
is then successful when an inward unction drops with the outward dew,
when the veil is taken from the heart, and the curtain from the word,
and both meet together, both word and heart; when Christ kisses with the
kisses of his mouth, and the man embraces it with the affections of his
heart. The light in the air is the instrument by which we read, but the
principle of that light is in the sun in the heavens. The word is a rod,
a breath, but efficacious in smiting and slaying the old man, as it is
the rod of Christ's mouth, the breath of his lips, Isa. xi. 3; a rod
like that of Moses to charm us, but as it is the rod of his strength,
Ps. cx. 2; a weapon, but only 'mighty through God,' 2 Cor. x. 4; a seed,
but brings not forth a plant but by the influence of the sun. The word
has this efficacy from the bleeding wounds and dying groans of Christ.
It is by making his soul an offering for sin that he sees the travail of
his soul in his new born creatures. By his blood are all the promises of
grace confirmed; by his blood they are operative. The word whereby we
are begotten was appointed by God, confirmed by Christ, and the Spirit
which begets us was purchased by the same blood. To conclude: the word
declares Christ, and the Spirit excites the heart to accept him; the
word shows his excellency, and the Spirit stirs up strong cries after
him; the word declares the promises, and the Spirit helps us to plead
them; the word administers reasons against our reasonings, and the
Spirit edges them, the word shows the way, and the Spirit enables to
walk in it; the word is the seed of the Spirit, and the Spirit the
quickener of the word; the word is the graft, and the Spirit the
engrafter; the word is the pool of water, and the Spirit stirs it to
make it healing.

II\. Quest. How does the word work?

1\. Objectively, as it is a declaration of God's will, as it does
propose to the understanding what is to be known, in order to salvation
hereafter and practice here, as it does declare the purpose of God to
save only by Jesus Christ the Mediator, and by him to deliver us from
sin, Satan, and whatsoever is contrary to everlasting happiness; and
thus is significative of something to our minds and understandings. The
Spirit gave us an eye to see, and the word is the light which discovers
the object to the eye. The Spirit gives us an organ, but something must
be proposed for that organ to exercise itself about, otherwise there is
no use of the understanding in any rational operation; which certainly
there is, for though the object is supernatural, and the inward work
upon the mind supernatural, yet the proposal of the object to the mind
is made in a rational manner. The word does objectively propose life and
death in a way suitable to the nature of man, that he may rationally
choose life: 'I have set before you life and death, blessing and
cursing, therefore choose life,' Deut. xxx. 19. Both the blessings of
the gospel and the curses of the law are presented in the word, that the
one may be chosen, the other avoided. The word is proposed under various
notions: as *true*, and so it is the object of the speculative
understanding; as *good*, so it is the object of the practical
understanding and will; as *profitable*, so it is the object of the
appetite and affections. When it is received into the speculative
understanding, it is a preparation to the new birth; when it is received
into the practical understanding and will, it is the new birth. It
discovers the wonders in God's own heart, his Son, and his promise; the
Spirit demonstrates it, and gives power to embrace it. It first presents
the promise and then answers the pleas the stubborn heart makes against
it, yet by the same gospel, it fetches demonstrative arguments from that
quiver to satisfy a cavilling understanding, and motives from thence to
overcome a resisting will, it silences the fears, points to the way,
excites the soul to an acceptance of Christ, all by this gospel, and so
draws us, as a man draws a child, by presenting some alluring object to
him. The Spirit immediately himself touches the soul, but by the word,
as an instrument proposing the object, and drawing out the soul into an
actual believing. The two chief parts of the word are,

(1.) The discovery of our misery by nature. The heart is ripped open,
our putrefied condition in our blood evidenced, our deplorable state
unfolded, and thereby the conscience awakened to sensible reflections.
It dissects the heart, discovers the secret reserves, unravels the
thoughts, pursues sin to its fastnesses, and pulls and brings it out, as
Joshua the kings to execution: 1 Cor. xiv. 26, 'And thus are the secrets
of his heart made manifest, and so falling down on his face he will
worship God, and report that God is in you of a truth.' It opens sin to
the very bowels, discovers the inward filth, takes off its beautiful
disguise, its silken covering, and shows the running ulcer under it. It
discovers the forlorn estate by nature, and the insufficiency of flesh
and blood to inherit the kingdom of God. Let the word be whispered by
the Spirit in the ears of a ruffling sinner, and the curtains which
obscured his sin from his eye drawn open, that he may see what a nest of
devils he has, what astonishment will it raise in him! How will he stand
amazed at his own folly! How will he loathe that self which before he so
vehemently loved!

(2.) A second discovery is of the necessity and existence of another
bottom. It discovers our misery by nature, and our remedy by Christ, the
plague brought upon the world by the first Adam, the cure brought to the
world by the second. It proclaims a peace, concluded between God and the
humbled sinner, by his Son, the great ambassador, confirmed by his
blood, assured by his resurrection. It shows him the fountain of death
in his sin, the fountain of life in Christ, the free streams and
gracious communications of it. The promise discovers the gracious nature
of God, his kindness to man, the openness of his arms to receive him,
and thus bring the soul off from itself to the foot of God and the
bottom of the cross. When the word like fire and the heart like tinder
come close together, the heart catches the spark and burns. From the
word reconciliation and peace step out and meet the soul, it finds the
kisses of Christ's mouth inspiring it with life, the box of the gospel
promises broke open, the window of the gospel ark opened, and the dove
flying out of it into the desert heart. The word proposes things as they
are in reality, and the soul knows things as it ought to know, 1 Cor.
viii. 2. It understands the unavoidable necessity and the infallible
excellency of the things proposed; it sees the rocks and shelves wherein
the danger lies, and a compass whereby to steer, a road wherein to lie
safe at anchor; whereupon he relents for his sin, is astonished at
divine kindness, rejoices at the promise as before he trembled at the
threatening, and has far other thoughts of God than he had before, in
which act divine life is breathed into the soul.

2\. The word seems to have an active force upon the will, though the
manner of it be very hard to conceive. It is operative in the hand of
God for sanctification. The petition of our Saviour, John xvii. 17,
'Sanctify them through thy truth, thy word is truth,' seems to intimate
more than a bare objective relation to this work; it both shows us our
spots and cleanses them. It is a seed. Seed, though small, is active, no
part of the plant retains a greater efficacy; all the glory and strength
of the plant, in its buds, blossoms, and fruit, are hidden in it. The
word is this seed, which being settled in the heart by the power of the
Spirit, brings forth this new creature. It is a glass that not only
represents the image of God, but by the Spirit changes us into it, 2
Cor. iii. 18. A word that pierces the heart, Heb. iv. 12, ye, 'sharper
than a two-edged sword, dividing asunder the soul and spirit.' It is a
fire to burn. The Spirit does so edge the word that it cuts the quick,
discerns the very thoughts, insinuates into the depths of the heart, and
rakes up the small sands from the bottom, as a fierce wind does from the
bowels of the sea. It is God's ordinance to batter down strongholds.
Though it be not a natural instrument to work necessarily, yet it is
likened to natural instruments, which are active under the efficiency of
the agent which manages them; and this also, in the hands of the Spirit,
works mighty effects. The 'sanctification of the Spirit and belief of
the truth ' are joined together, one subordinate to another, 2 Thes. ii.
13. The Spirit efficiently infusing holy habits; the word objectively
and actively—objectively, as outwardly proposed; actively, as inwardly
engrafted;—it at least excites the new infused gracious principle, and
produces our actual conversion and believing. As the pronouncing
excommunication in the primitive times filled the person with terror;
and no question but upon the same account the authoritative pronouncing
the pardon of sin by the apostles, though only declarative, might have a
mighty operation upon the soul in filling it with joy; yet both, as
managed by the Spirit, concurring with his own ordinance. So that the
word is mighty in operation as well as clear in representation; for an
activity seems to be ascribed to it by the Scripture metaphors. The
chief activity of it is seen in that likeness which it produces in the
soul to itself. Seeds have an efficacious virtue to produce plants of
the same kind with that whose seeds they are; so the word produces
qualities in the heart like itself. The law in the heart is the law in
the word transcribed in the soul; a graft which changes a crabbed stock
into a sweet tree, James i. 21; like a seal it leaves a likeness and
impression of itself; it works a likeness to God as he is revealed in
the gospel, for we are changed into the same image. What image? The same
image which we behold in that glass, 2 Cor. iii. 18; not his essential
image, but the image of his glory represented in the gospel for our
imitation. The word is the glory of God in a glass, and imprints the
image of the glory of God in the heart. It is a softening word, and
produces a mollified heart; an enlightening word, and causes an
enlightened soul; a divine word, and engenders a divine nature; it is a
spiritual word, and produces a spiritual frame; as it is God's will, it
subdues our will; it is a sanctifying truth, and so makes a sink of sin
to become the habitation of Christ. To conclude: this is certain: the
promise in the word breeds principles in the heart suitable to itself;
it shows God a father, and raises up principles of love and reverence;
it shows Christ a mediator, and raises up principles of' faith and
desire. Christ in the word conceives Christ in the heart; Christ in the
word, the beginning of grace, conceives Christ in the soul, the hope of
glory.

III\. The Use. 1. Information.

1\. How admirable, then, is the power of the gospel! It is a quickening
word, not a dead; a powerful word, not a weak; a sharp-edged word, not
dull; a piercing word, not cutting only skin deep, Heb. iv. 12. That
welcome work does it make, when a door of utterance and a door of
entrance are both opened together! It has a mighty power to out-wrestle
the principalities of hell, and demolish the strongholds of sin in the
heart. It is a word of which it may be said, as the psalmist of the sun,
Ps. xix. 6, 'His circuit is to the ends of the earth, and there is
nothing hid from the heat thereof.' To part of the soul is hidden from a
new birth by the warm beams of it, when directed by God to the soul.
What a powerful breath is that which can make a dead man stand upon his
feet and walk! If you should find your faces, by looking in a glass,
transformed into an angelical beauty, would you not imagine some strange
and secret virtue in that glass? How powerful is this gospel word, which
changes a beast into a man, a devil into an angel, a clod of earth into
a star of heaven!

(1.) It is above the power of all moral philosophy The wisdom of the
heathens never equalled the gospel in such miracles; the political
government of the best states never made such alterations in the hearts
of men. How excellent is that gospel which has done that for the
renewing of millions of souls, which all the wit and wisdom of the
choicest philosophers could never effect upon one heart! All other
lectures can do no more than allay the passions, not change them; bring
them into an order fit for human society, not beget them for a divine
fellowship; not draw them forth out of a principle of love to God, and
fix them upon so high an end as the glory of God that is invisible. This
is the glorious begetting by the gospel, which enables not only to moral
actions, but inspires with divine principles and ends, and makes men
highly delight in the ways they formerly abhorred. What are a few
sprinklings of changes moral philosophy has wrought in the lives of men,
to the innumerable ones the gospel has wrought, which were such
undeniable realities, that they were never openly contradicted by any of
the most violent persecutors of the Christian religion, and were always
the most urged argument for the truth of the gospel in the ancient
apologies for it? How long may we read and hear mere moral discourses,
and arrive no higher than some reformation of life, with unchanged
hearts: have sin beaten from the outworks, yet retain the great fort,
the heart!

(2.) Above the power of the law. The natural law sees not Christ, the
Mosaical law dimly shows him afar off; the gospel brings him near, to be
embraced by us, and us to be divinely changed by him. The natural law
makes the model and frame of a man, the Mosaical adds some colours and
preparations, and the gospel conveys spirit into them. The natural law
begets us for the world, the Mosaical kills us for God, and the gospel
raises up to life. The natural law makes us serve God by reason, the
Mosaical by fear, and the gospel by love. It is by this, and not by the
law, those three graces which are the main evidences of life are settled
in the soul. It begets faith, whereby we are taken off from the stock of
Adam, and inserted in Christ; hope, whereby we flourish; and love,
whereby we fructify. By faith, we have life; by hope, strength; by love,
liveliness and activity. All these are the fruits of the gospel
administration.

(3.) Its power appears in the subjects it has been instrumental to
change. Souls bemired in the filthiest lusts, have been made
miraculously clean; it has changed the hands of rapine into instruments
of charity, hearts full of filth into vessels of purity; it has brought
down proud reason to the obedience of faith, and made active lusts to
die at the foot of the cross; it has struck off Satan's chains, and
snatched away his captives into the liberty of God's service; it has
changed the most stubborn hearts. The conversion of a great company of
those Jewish priests that were most violent against it and the author of
it, is ascribed to the power of the word: Acts vi. 7, 'And the word of
God increased, and a great company of the priests were obedient to the
faith.' How many were raised to life by Peter's sermon! More souls
turned than words spoken upon record. It subdues the will, which cannot
be conquered but by its own consent. Light can dart in upon the
understanding whether a wan will or no, and flash in his face though he
keep it in unrighteousness. Conscience will awaken and rouse them,
though men use all the arts they can to still it. The will cannot be
forced to any submission against its own consent; the power of the
gospel is seen in the conquest of the will, and putting new inclinations
into that.

(4.) The power of it is seen in the suddenness of its operation. In a
moment, in the twinkling of an eye, like the change at the last
resurrection: 1 Cor. xv. 51, 52, 'We shall all be changed, in a moment,
at the last trumpet.' How have troops of unmastered lusts fled at the
voice of the gospel trumpet, like a flock of frightened birds, and left
their long-possessed mansion! How have the affections, which have
sheltered so many enemies against God, been on the sudden weary of their
residence, and abhorred what they loved, and loved what the moment
before they abhorred! How have welcome temptations been upon this sudden
change rejected, a despised Saviour dearly embraced, a furious soul
tamed, a darling self crucified, and a soul open to every temptation
strongly fortified against it! How frequent are the examples, in the
first times of Christianity, of men that have been almost as bad as
devils one day, one hour, and joyful martyrs the next; and as soon as
ever they have been begotten by it, asserted the power of it in another
new birth by flames!

(5.) And this has been done many times by one part, one particle of the
word. One word of the gospel, a single sentence, has erected a heavenly
trophy in a soul, which all the volumes of the choicest mere reason
could never erect; one plain scripture has turned a face to heaven that
never looked that way before, and made a man fix his eye there against
his carnal interest. One plain scripture has killed a man's sins, and
quickened his heart with eternal life; one word of Christ, remembered by
Peter, made him weep bitterly, and two or three scriptures, pressed by
the same Peter upon his hearers, pricked their hearts to the quick. How
has hell flashed in the face of a sinner, out of a small cloud of a
threatening, and heaven shot into the soul from one little diamond spark
of a promise! A little seed of the word, like a grain of mustard seed,
changed the soul from a dwarfish to a tall stature! This the experience
of every eye can testify.

(6.) And this power appears in the simplicity of it. Savonarola
observes, that when he neglected the preaching of the Scripture, and
applied himself to discourses of philosophy, he gained little upon the
hearts of people; but when he came to illustrate and explain the
Scripture, the minds of people were wonderfully inflamed and excited to
a serious flame; and that when he discoursed in a philosophical manner,
there was a non-attention, not only of the more ignorant, but the more
learned sort too; but when he preached Scripture truths, he found the
minds of men mightily delighted, sting with divine truth, brought to
compunction, and a reformation of their lives, which shows, says he, the
power of the word, acting more vigorously than all human reason in the
world. And indeed Scripture, and Scripture reason, is the wisdom of God;
all other reason is the wisdom of man. God will depress man's wisdom and
advance his own. It works as it is 'the word of God which lives and
abides for ever', 1 Peter i. 23. To wrap a fine piece of silk about a
sword, or gild a diamond, is to hinder the edge of the one, and the
lustre of the other.

2\. Information. The gospel is then certainly of divine authority, since
in this 'God has set a tabernacle for the Sun of righteousness to move
in, as the heavens are the tabernacle for the material sun, Ps. xix. 4.
That word that raises the dead, must needs be the word of no less than
God. Our Saviour's discovery of men's thoughts argued his deity. The
word's discovery of the inward workings of the heart, and the alteration
it makes there, evidences a divine stamp upon it. God would never have
made a lie so successful in the world, or blessed it in making those
alterations in men, so comely in the eye of moral nature, so
advantageous to human society, as the principles it instils into the
minds of men are. A lie would never have been blessed to be an
instrument of so much virtue and truth; it would not consist with the
righteousness of God's government, or his goodness and truth as
governor, to bring the hearts of men into so beautiful an order by a
deceitful gospel. What word ever had such trophies! What engine ever
battered so many strongholds! If the lame walk by the strength of it, if
the dead are raised by the power of it, if lepers are cleansed by the
virtue of it, if impure souls are sanctified, dead souls enlivened, are
we to question its divine authority? Should a word work such wonderful
effects for so many ages, that had no stamp of divine authority upon it?
Would all those witnesses be given by God to a mere imposture? Let the
victories it has gained evidence the arm that wields it. What sword was
used at the first conquest of the world through grace, but this of the
Spirit? How soon was the devil, with all his heap of idols, fain to fly
before it! How soon was the devil, with all his pack of lusts, forced to
leave his habitation in the hearts of men! Is not that of divine
authority that so routs the enemies of God, puts sin to flight, expels
spiritual death, breaking the bands of that worst king of terrors; that
had skill to find out sin in its lurking holes, and power to dispossess
that, and introduce spiritual life into the soul? Can that be a thing
less than divine, that restores man to his due place as a creature
respecting his Creator, referring all things to his glory; that implants
the love, fear, hope of God in the mind; that makes man, of a miserable
corrupt creature, to become divine; that roots out the vices of hell,
and stores the soul with the virtues of heaven? Can such a gospel be
termed less than a divine word of truth? If there be any word that can
so change the nature, and transform wolves into lambs, let it have the
honour and due praise when it is found out; but whatsoever the atheism
of the world is, that never felt the powerful efficacy of it, you surely
that have felt it a mighty weapon to conquer the devils that once
possessed you, and an instrument to new beget you when you lay in your
blood, should entertain no whisper against the divine authority of it,
but count it the power and wisdom of God as, indeed, it is in itself,
and in its effects upon souls, Rom. i. 16. It is said there to be 'the
power of God to salvation.' Upon that account the apostle was not
ashamed of it; neither should we, but conclude as the same apostle says,
'If I be not an apostle, yet to you I am an apostle.' So if the gospel
be not in itself the gospel of God, surely it is so to you who have been
renewed.

3\. Information. It shows us the reason why the gospel is so much
opposed by Satan in the world. It begets those for heaven whom he had
begotten for hell. It pulls down his image and sets up God's; it pulls
the crown off his head, the sceptre from his hand, snatches subjects
from his empire, straitens his territories, and demolishes his forts,
breaks his engines, outwits his subtilty, makes his captives his
conquerors, and himself, the conqueror, a captive; it pulls men 'out of
the kingdom of darkness, and translates them into a kingdom of light,'
Col. i. 13. And all this, as it is a word of truth, opposed to his word
of deceit, whereby he has cheated mankind and deceived the nations; that
we may well say of him, as the apostle of death, 'O death, where is thy
sting?' 1 Cor. xv. 55. O hell, where is thy sting? O Satan, where is thy
victory? This slays Satan and revives the soul.

4\. We see then how injurious they are to God, who would obstruct the
progress of the gospel in the world; that, as the papists, would hinder
the reading and the preaching of the word. Whose seed are they, but the
seed of that dragon, that would as well hinder the new birth as devour a
divine-begotten babe 'as soon as ever it were born,' Rev. xii. 4. Such
would hinder the greatest and most excellent work of God upon the souls
of men, would have no spiritual generations for God in the world. Such
envy Christ a seed, and God a family, they would despoil him of a family
on earth, though they cannot of a family in heaven. In banishing the
word, they would banish the grace of God out of the world, and leave no
place in a world drowned with ignorance, where this dove should set her
foot. Those that would take away the seed, would not have a spiritual
harvest, but reduce souls to a deplorable famine, lock them up in the
grave, and keep them under the bands of a spiritual death.

5\. It informs us, that the gospel shall then endure in the world, as
long as God has any to beget. Men may puff at it, but they cannot
extinguish it, it is a word of truth, and truth is mighty, and will
prevail. It was a mighty wind wherein the Spirit came upon the apostles,
to show not only the quick and speedy progress of the gospel, as upon
the wings of the wind, but the mighty force of it, that men can no more
silence the sound of the gospel than they can the blustering of the
wind. It shall prevail in all places, where God has a seed to bring in,
a people to beget. Those given to Christ shall come from far: 'from the
east,' Isa. xlix. 12, 'and from the west, and from the land of Sinim'
(now, I think, called Damiata, in Egypt). The word, being the
instrument, shall sound everywhere, where he has sons and daughters to
beget for Christ. As long as Christ does retain his royalty, 'his mouth
shall be a sharp sword,' Isa. xlix. 2. That is the first thing concluded
on between God and Christ, before they come to any further treaty, which
is expressed in that chapter. As Christ shall be his salvation to the
ends of the earth, so shall the word be the instrument of it to the end
of the world: the 'polished shaft' is 'hid in his quiver.' As he is a
light to the Gentiles, so the golden candlestick of this gospel wherein
this light is set, shall endure in spite of men and devils. Since his
promise of a seed to Christ stands sure, the word, whereby he begets a
generation for him, is as sure as the promise, and shall not return
void: Isa. lv. 11, 'but it shall accomplish that which he pleases, and
it shall prosper in the things whereto he sent it.' Never fear then the
removal of the gospel out of the world, though it be removed out of a
particular place, since it is a word of truth, and an instrument
ordained to so glorious an end.

6\. It is a sign, then, God has some to beget, when he brings his gospel
to any place. He has a pleasure to accomplish, and it shall not return
unto him void. Prosperity is entailed upon it for the doing the work
whereto he sent it. Since then it is appointed an instrument, in the
hand of the Spirit, for a new begetting, it will be efficacious upon
some souls where it comes, for the wise God would not send it, but to
attain its main end upon some hearts. God never sends his word to any
place, but it is received and relished by some as the savour of life. It
looses the bands of spiritual death in some, and binds them harder upon
obstinate sinners, to them that perish it is the savour of death. In
every place the gospel was savoury to some: 2 Cor. ii. 14, 15, 'God made
manifest the savour of his knowledge,' by the apostles, 'in every
place.' Wherever this seed is sown, the harvest has been reaped, either
more or less. It is fruitful at Corinth, for there God had much people,
Acts xviii. 10. It is not fruitless at Athens, though the harvest was
less; most mocked, but some believed, and but one man of learning and
worldly wisdom, Acts xvii. 32, 34. When God sends John in a way of
righteousness, if the Pharisees believe not, God will make a conquest of
publicans and harlots: Mat. xxi. 32, 'John came to you in the way of
righteousness, and you believed not: but the publicans and harlots
believed him.' The net of the gospel is not cast wholly in vain, but
from the time of its coming, to the time of its removal, some souls have
been caught, though not of the most delicious fish, yet of the worst
sort.

7\. It informs us, what an excellent thing is a new birth! The end is
more desirable than the means, this is the chief end of all the
ordinances of God in the world. The gospel had never been revealed but
for this intent, this is the 'design of the Spirit's operation in any
gospel administration. All the lines of the word are to draw the
lineaments of grace in the heart. This must be a noble and excellent
thing, for which chiefly the oracles of God sound in the world, for
which so great a light is set up in the gospel. All the love of Christ
breathes in the gospel; the whole Testament is sealed by his blood; the
perpetual workings of the Holy Ghost, the preaching of the word, the
celebration of the sacraments, are in subservience to this end, the one
to make us live, the other to make us grow. How inconceivably excellent
is that, how valuable in the eye of God, how advantageous to the
happiness of men, that is, the design wherein so many divine operations
meet!

8\. What a lamentable thing is it, that so few should be new begotten by
the word of truth! How many are there among us that understand not what
a new begetting and birth is, no more than Nicodemus when he discoursed
with our Saviour! What a deplorable thing is it that the word should be
preached, and so little regarded! that not only an hour's, but many
years' discourses should pass away (as the Psalmist speaks of our lives)
'like a tale that is told!' Ps. xc. 9. How miserable is that man that
has the objective cause of the new birth, without the effective! It is
the word of truth. What will become of you, if you prefer a word of
error before it; if you prefer the devil's killing suggestions before
God's reviving, oracles? What does the word of truth move you to, but to
a new birth? Why will any man struggle against it? Every resistance of
the word is a resistance of God himself. It is God hews by the prophets,
Hos. vi. 5; it is God offers to beget by the word; every reluctance then
against the word is a reluctance against God. The word will either bring
in a new form of grace, or a new form of torment. If the working of the
one be rejected, the in-working of the other cannot be avoided; it will
either cut the bands of a spiritual death, or cut the sinews of our
souls. That piece of timber that has not its knots cut off for the
building, shall be cut in pieces for the fire. A new life waits for them
that obey the gospel; an endless death for them that reject it; they
that obey not the gospel, know not God, 2 Thess. i 8. And what is
reserved for such, but revenging flames in another world? It would be
happy for such, that they had never heard of a renewing gospel. Every
gospel discourse that might have been the cause of a spiritual life, and
a divine cordial, if sucked in, rejected, will be a bitter drug in that
potion which shall be drunk in an eternal fever.

9\. Hereby you may examine whether you are new begotten. It is the word
of truth whereby God befits. In this word he opens the glory of his
grace, and through this he conveys the power of his grace. The conquests
of Christ were to be made by the word, and it was so settled at the
first constitution of him as Mediator and Redeemer: Isa. xlix. 2, 'He
has made my mouth like a sharp sword.' It was by this the hearts of men
were to be conquered. And what heart is not subdued by the sword of his
mouth, is not subdued by the power of his arms. Some word or other was
the instrument to beget you (I speak of people grown up). The apostle's
interrogation is a strong negative. There is no believing without
hearing, Rom. x. 14. Hearing goes before believing; he lays it down as a
certain conclusion from his former arguing: 'So then faith comes by
hearing, and hearing by the word of God.' If you conclude yourselves new
begotten, how came you by it? Is it by the word, or no? That is God's
ordinary means. If you be not renewed by this, it is not likely you are
renewed at all; no other instrument has God ordinarily appointed to this
end. Afflictions may plough men for it, but the word is the only seed
that renews the face of the earth. All false notions or presumptions of
the new birth must be brought to this touchstone; it is a misshapen and
monstrous birth, that is not by a seed of the same kind; the law in the
heart has no seed of the same nature with it to engender it, but the law
in the word, that word which we properly call gospel; the word of truth,
not the word of philosophy, which is a word of uncertainty; God's word,
not Plato's word. If a thousand beasts had been consumed by common fire,
not one of them had been an holocaust, a grateful sacrifice, unless
consumed by the fire of the altar which came down from heaven. Moral
wisdom is not that fire, has not that eminent descent from heaven; it is
not that speech from heaven whereby our Saviour is said yet to speak,
Heb. sit. 26. A little spark kindled by the voice of Christ from heaven,
from whence he yet speaks in the gospel, is more worth than all the
bonfires in the world, kindled by the sparks of moral wisdom. Those
qualifications which grow of their own accord, without the word, are
like the herbs which sprout in wild places without any tillage, which
are of a different kind than what are planted and watered in a garden,
and overlooked by the care of man. If your dispositions you boast of
were not planted by the word, how fair soever they may look, they are
but a wild kind of fruit; therefore, it concerns you to look back upon
yourselves, think what word it was whereby you were begotten. If no
particular word can be remembered, if your regeneration were wrought
insensibly in your younger years, examine what suitableness there is
between the word and your souls, whether your hearts are turned into the
nature of it. The measures of grace are according to the measures of the
word. If you cannot remember the first glorious entrance of it, you must
see for the rich dwelling of it. An inhabitant may enter into our houses
unseen, but he cannot dwell there without our knowledge; the lines of
the word will be seen in the heart, though the particular pencil whereby
they were wrought may not be remembered.

10\. It instructs ministers how to preach. It is the word of truth, the
gospel, that must be the main matter of our preaching; and those things
in the gospel that have the greatest tendency to the new begetting men,
and working this great change in them, and driving it on to greater
maturity. The instrument of conversion is not barely the letter of the
word, but the sense and meaning of it, rationally impressed upon the
understanding, and closely applied to the conscience. The opening the
word is the life of it, and the true means of regeneration. If any man
would turn his servant or child from a course of sin, would he discourse
to them of the nature of the of the sun and stars, their magnitude,
motions, numbers, and qualities? This would be nothing to the purpose;
his way would be to show them the deformity and danger of their sin. The
word of truth is God's instrument, and it should be ours; what is the
end of the word, should be the end of our preaching. It was through the
gospel the apostle begot the Corinthians; not that the preaching of the
law is excluded, but it must be preached in order to the gospel as a
preparation to it. Whatsoever in the word of truth does prepare for the
new birth, produce it, cherish it, preserve it, centre in one and the
same end. How careful and industrious should we be to beget children to
God, that we may present them, and say, 'Here am I, and the children,
which thou hast given me.' The new birth will be your joy, and crown and
you will be ours, 1 Thess. ii. 19,20. Aaron's sons are called the
generations of Moses, as well as Aaron, Num. iii. 1, though none of his
natural sons are reckoned; Aaron's by natural generation, Moses' perhaps
by a spiritual regeneration and instruction.

Use 2. Of exhortation.

1\. Highly glorify God for the word of truth, which is so great an
instrument. How thankful should we be for an intention, to secure our
estates from consuming, houses from burning. bodies from dying! The
gospel, the word of truth, does much more than this: it is an instrument
to beget a soul for God; an instrument whereby God makes himself our
Father, and us his children. It is but an instrument; let not the glory
be given to the instrument, but to the agent. As it is an instrument,
let it have part of your affections, but nothing of the glory that
belongs to God; love the truth, but glorify and bless the God of truth,
that has ordained it to be so excellent an instrument.

(1.) Bless God in your hearts. \[1.\] That ever you had the word of
truth made known to you. How many millions sit in a spiritual darkness,
without so much as the means of a new begetting! Millions never heard
the sound of it, nor ever will. \[2.\] Much more that it has been
successful to any of' you. Have you any thing in your spirits that bears
witness to the truth of it? When you read or hear it, do you find
something of kin to it in your souls, and feel something within you rise
up and call it blessed? How should you read and hear it, with eruptions
of thankfulness to God for it, hearty embraces for it, and fervent
ejaculations to God to work more in you by the power of it! Why has the
word grappled with any of our souls, and not with others; arrested any
of you in a course of sin, and left others to walk in their own ways, to
ran down silently like the streams of' a river, till swallowed up in an
ocean of death? The apostle Paul heard the voice, others with him only a
sound of words, Acts ix. 9, 7, xxii. 9; some have heard a sound of
words, without the voice of God in it, while others have heard a divine
voice in a human sound. The wind has blown upon many, God in that wind
only upon few; some have received air, whilst others have received
Spirit and life; some have only the body of the word, while others feel
the spirit and power of it in their hearts. Shall not God be glorified
for this? Had it not been for him, and his Spirit, words had been only
words and wind to all as well as to some.

(2.) Glorify God in your lives. As you feel the power of it in your
hearts, let others see the brightness and efficacy of it in your
actions. The new born creature should principally aim at the glory of
God, since the instrument whereby he is begotten was first published for
the 'glory of God in the highest,' Luke ii. 14. What is produced by the
efficacy of such an instrument must have the same end, viz. the glory of
God in the practice of holiness. A holy gospel imprinted can never leave
the heart and life unholy. A gospel coined for the glory of God, when
wrought in the heart, can never suffer the soul to aim chiefly at self;
but at the great end for which the gospel was first discovered. The
gospel of holiness and truth in the heart will engender sincerity and
holiness in the life.

2\. Prize the word of truth, which works such great effects in the soul.
Value that as long as you live, which is the cord whereby God has drawn
any of you out of the dungeon of death. Never count that foolishness by
which God has inspired you with the choicest wisdom, and never count
that weakness which has made any of you of death, living; and of
darkness, light; and of miserable, happy by grace. If a soul be worth a
world, and therefore to he prized, how precious ought that to be which
is an instrument to let a soul for the felicity of another world! How
should the law of God's mouth be better to us than thousands of gold and
silver! Ps. cxix. 72. How should we prize that word whereby any of us
have seen the glory of God in his sanctuary, the glory of God in our
souls! When corruptions are strong, it is an engine to batter them; when
our hearts are hard, it is a hammer to break them; when our spirits are
impostumated, it is a sword to cut them; when our hearts are cold, it is
a fire to inflame them; when our souls are faint, it is a cordial to
refresh them, it begins a new birth and maintains it. It is the seed
from whence we spring, 1 Peter i. 23, the glass wherein we see the glory
of God, 2 Cor. iii. 18. By the waters of the sanctuary, we have both
meat for nourishment, and medicines for cure, from the tree that grows
by its streams: Ezek. xlvii. 12, 'The fruit thereof shall be for meat,
and the leaf for medicine.' Have a great regard to it, keep it in the
midst of your hearts, for it is life, Prov. iv. 21, 22.

3\. Pray and endeavour for the preservation and success of the word of
truth. Were there a medicine that could preserve life, how chary should
we be in preserving that? The gospel is the tree, whose leaves cure the
nations, Rev. xxii. 2. It was a blessing God endued the creatures with,
when he bid them increase and multiply, Gen. i. 22. It was an evidence
that he intended to preserve the world. If the gospel get ground in the
hearts of men, it is an evidence it shall continue in spite of the
oppositions of men or devils.

4\. Wait upon God in the word. Where there is a revelation on God's
part, there must be a hearing on ours. Sit down therefore at the feet of
God, and receive of his words, Dent. xxxiii. 3. (1.) Despise it not; he
that contemns it never intends to be new begotten, since he slights the
means of God's appointment; he that intends an end, will use all means
proportionately to his desires for that end; he that contemns it never
was renewed. Habitual grace being wrought by it, cannot, but in its own
nature, have a great affection to it. He that loves Christ cannot but
love all the methods of his operations. (2.) Despise it not because it
is but an instrument: say not, because God is the chief agent, therefore
you need not come to the word. Our Saviour knew that 'man did not live
by bread alone, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of
God,' Mat. iv. 4. Did he therefore neglect means for preserving his
life? Because God gives the increase, should not the husbandman plough
and sow? If God does not work upon you by the means, you can have no
rational hopes he will do it any other way. What though ministers can
only speak to the ear? John Baptist could do no more, whose ministry was
notwithstanding glorious, in being the forerunner of Christ. To neglect
it, therefore, is to double-bar your hearts against the entrance of
grace, and slight the truth which Christ brought down from the bosom of
God.

(1.) Never did God appoint any other way but this. Miracles were never
appointed but as attendants upon this. Miracles come after teachings in
the great gifts to the church, 1 Cor. xii. 7-10. First, the
'manifestation of the Spirit," the word of wisdom and the word of
knowledge,' then 'gifts of healing and miracles.' Miracles are ceased,
as being not absolutely necessary; but the ministry of the word will
last to the end of the world. By the prophets God brings souls out of a
state of bondage, and by the prophets he preserves them in a state of
grace: Hosea xii. 13, 'By a prophet the Lord brought Israel out of
Egypt, and by a prophet was he preserved.' Miracles and the resurrection
of one from the dead, was never appointed under the legal
administration, but Moses and the prophets, Luke xvi. 13. These were the
ordinary means, and if these did not work, miracles were inefficacious.

(2.) God never made any promise but in this way. God promised to
circumcise their hearts to love him with all their soul, but in the way
of hearing his voice, and observing his statutes, Deut. xxx 6, 10, 11.
He meets souls only that remember him in his way, Isa. lxiv. 5. And to
the preaching of the gospel only, our Saviour promised his presence to
the end of the world, Mat. xxviii. 20; the promise is perpetually and
immovably throughout all ages of the world fixed to this command. The
promising his presence to the preaching of the gospel, implies that his
presence shall be enjoyed only by attendance on the gospel. The gracious
workings of the Spirit are by this, they are the words of Christ brought
to remembrance by him, whereby he does so mightily operate.

(3.) No other way did God apparently work by formerly. In the time when
God did especially manifest himself to his people by visions, dreams,
and apparitions of angels, and in those days made revelations to them,
he converted not any either from a state of nature, or from a particular
fall, but by the word. Manasseh's conversion was by the word of the
seers, 2 Chron. xxxiii. 18; nor was David reclaimed after his fall by an
immediate vision, but by the ministry of Nathan; Peter by a look, which
revived the word spoken to him, Luke xxii. 61. The angel that attended
the eunuch, Acts viii. 26, made no impressions upon him, but was ordered
to direct Philip thither to explain to him the mystery of the gospel;
and the Spirit particularly orders him to go near the chariot, ver. 29,
but makes no impression upon him but by the ministry of the word. An
angel is sent to direct Philip, but Philip is sent to discover Christ.
An angel is sent to Cornelius, not to preach the gospel, but to direct
him where to send for a teacher, Acts x..3, 5, 6, the Spirit prepares
Peter to go, verse 19, 20, and 1ikewise prepares Cornelius for his
reception; God prepares the jailer by an earthquake, but renews him not
but by the ministry of Paul, Acts xvi. 26, 32. In the times of the
gospel there was first to be a teaching of God's law, before a walking
in his paths, Isa. iii. 3. The arm that made heaven and earth makes the
new heart and new spirit, but by a word as well as them. The net of the
gospel is only appointed to catch the fish, though the fish that had the
tribute-money in its mouth was immediately for the service of Christ,
yet he would not use his power to bring it to the shore, without Peter's
casting out the net. Christ first brings souls to the net, and by the
net to himself.

(4.) God has always blessed this more or less. Moses' rod in Moses his
hand has brought miracles, Christ's rod in the Spirit's hand has wrought
greater; the new creations have been always by it, and the
after-breathings of the Spirit through it. By this he makes men
righteous, holy, sincere, in a way of eminency, as the morning light
which increases to a perfect day, and no longer as a morning cloud which
quickly vanishes, Hosea vi. 5, which some understand of a gospel promise
mixed with that discourse. How has the light of the beauty and
excellency of God, flashing upon the understanding from the glass of the
gospel, filled the will and affections of many with desire and love to
that glory it represents, and that state it offers! The very leaves of
it, the profession has healed nations, and brought human societies into
order, and the fruit of it has been the cure of many a soul. Wait
therefore for the falling of this fruit. Grace is a beam from the Sun of
righteousness, but darted through the medium of gospel air; a pearl
engendered by the blood of Christ, but only in the gospel sea. It has
not been without its blessing to others, it has raised men from death to
life. Is the virtue of the seed expired? or the strength of the Lord
grown feeble? If ever therefore you could have the image of God in
inward impressions of grace, and outward expressions of holiness, you
must look for your transformation in and by the gospel. All the other
knowledge in the world cannot give a man a right notion of the new
birth, much less produce it. Look not after enthusiasms, nor expect it
in new ways, 'to the law and to the testimony,' ways of God's
appointment. The Jews could not expect an angel to bring them soundness
of limbs, but by the pool; nor we the Spirit to infuse grace into us,
but by the word. It is from the mercy-seat only God speaks to Israel;
wisdom's gates are the places where to expect her alms, Prov. viii. 34.
Wait therefore upon the word, Herein the Spirit of God travails with
souls.

Quest. How shall we wait upon the Lord, so as that we may be new
begotten by it?

1\. Wait upon the word frequently. Be often in reading and hearing, and
meditating on it. Men set upon these works as if they were afraid they
should be new born too soon, or prejudiced in their concerns and
contentments in the world, as if they feared the mighty wind of the
Spirit should blow away their beloved dross too fast, as if it were a
matter of indifference to be like their Maker. If you had gold not
thoroughly refined, would you not cast it again and again into the fire?
If filth not wholly purged, would you not use the fountain again and
again? Those that are in the sun are coloured and heated by it, and have
things more visible; those that are much in the word, see more of the
wonders, feel more of the warmth, receive deeper impressions, are endued
with the grace and holiness of truth, have a purer flame in their
affections for heaven. How do you know but an opportunity missed, might
have been the best market? How do you know but the Spirit might have
joined himself to the word, as Philip to the eunuch's chariot, while he
was reading? 'While Peter yet spake those words (it is said), the Holy
Ghost fell upon all them which heard the word,' Acts x. 44. What words?
Even the marrow of the gospel, ver. 43, 'that through his name,
whosoever believes in him shall receive remission of sins.' God may have
a portion ready for us, and we go without it, because we are not ready
to receive it. We must not expect a raven to bring us food upon a bed of
sluggishness. Do it the rather, because you may live to see such times,
wherein Bibles may be as much shut as they are now open, wherein (as in
former times) you may be willing to give a large parcel of your goods
for one chapter of it. We read of some that have given a load of hay for
one chapter of St James. Be frequent in waiting upon the word.

2\. Let your hearts be fixed upon that which is the great end of the
word. New begettings are the end of the gospel. Come, then, with minds
fixed upon this end, and desires for it. Regard it not as a mere sound
of words, but as an instrument of the noblest operations in the soul. If
this be the great work of the gospel, we ought to read and hear it, with
desires to be enlivened where we are dead, quickened where we are dull,
be made new creatures where we are yet but old, taller creatures where
we are yet but of a low stature; not only to have our understandings
instructed, but our hearts changed; to inquire after God to behold the
beauty of the Lord, Ps. xxvii. 4, that we may be transformed into it; to
look for God, who is in the word of a truth, for the kingdom of God
comes nigh to you in the gospel. That was that word that Christ, when he
sent his disciples out first to preach, bid them speak unto men, Luke
xii. Men usually get more than they come to seek. He that goes to
market, intending only to lay out his money upon some trifle, returns
for the most part with no better commodity. Zacchaeus got upon the tree
to meet with Christ, and so noble an end wanted not an excellent
success: that day came salvation into his house, Luke xix. 9. When the
Jews did not mind the end of sacrifices, and regarded not the things God
principally looked for in then, God slighted them, and they went without
any divine operations upon their souls by them, Isa. i. 11, 18, 14. When
our ends suit the gospel, then are we like to feel gospel influences. We
come with wrong ends, and, therefore, return with unchanged hearts; we
come for a sound, and go away with no more. One end therefore in coming
should be to gain this new begetting, or increase the growth of the new
creature; our ends are not else conformable to the ends of God in it;
therefore, as the earth sucks in the rain, and the roots in the earth
attract it unto themselves that they may bring forth fruit, so should we
open our hearts to receive the showers of the word with an aim at a new
birth, or a further growth. As this is *finis operis*, so it should be
*finis* *operantis*.

3\. Mind the word in the simplicity of it, and that in it which tends to
that end. Some men are more taken with colours than truth, more
enamoured with words than matter, fill themselves only with air, and
neglect the substance. Such are like those that are pleased with the
colours of the rainbow, more than with the light reflected, or the
covenant of God represented by it. No man is renewed by phrases and
fancies; those are only as the oil to make the nails of the sanctuary
drive in the easier: in Eccles. xii. 11, 'Acceptable words,' joined with
'words of truth,' are as the ' fastening of the nails,' both 'given by
one shepherd.' Words there must be to make things intelligible;
illustrations to make things delightfully intelligible, but the seminal
virtue lies not in the husk and skin, but in the kernel; the rest dies,
but the substance of the seed lives, and brings forth fruit; separate,
therefore, between the husk and the seed. The word does not work as it
is elegant, but as it is divine, as it is a word of truth. Illustrations
are but the ornaments of the temple, the glory of it is in the ark and
mercy-seat. It is not the engraving upon the sword cuts, but the edge;
nor the key, as it is gilded, opens, but as fitted to the wards. Your
faith must not stand in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God, 1
Cor. ii. 5. It is the juice of the meat, and not the garnishings of the
dish, that nourishes. Was it the word as a pleasant song, or as a divine
seed, that changed the souls of old, made martyrs smile in the midst of
flames? It was the knowledge of the excellency of the promise, and not
worldly eloquence, made them with so much courage slight gibbets,
stakes, executioners; they had learned the truth as it is in Jesus.

4\. Mind the word as the word of truth. Take it not upon the account of
persons, value it for its own sake, as it is a word of truth. It is
neither Paul nor Apollos, but God that gives the increase. Value it not
by men; it is no matter what the pipe is, whether gold or lead, so the
water be the water of life; the word has an edge, because it is the word
of God, not because it is whetted upon this or that grindstone. Some
will scarce receive a truth, but from one they fancy; as if a man should
be so foolish as to refuse a medicine which will preserve his life,
because it is not presented to him in a glass which he has a particular
esteem of. To receive or refuse any truth upon the account of the
person, is a sign of carnality, and the way to remain carnal; upon this
account the apostle pronounces the Corinthians again and again carnal, 1
Cor. iii. 4. Despise not the meanest instrument. Our Saviour in his
agony was comforted by an angel, much more inferior to him who was the
Lord of angels, than any minister can be to a hearer. Mr Peacock, being
fellow of a college, in great despair, when some minister had been
discoursing with him, and prevailing nothing, offering to pray with him,
No, says he; dishonour not God so much, as to pray for such a reprobate.
A young scholar of his standing by, answered, Surely a reprobate could
not be so tender of God's honour; which cords prevailed more to the
bringing him to believe than all that the other had spoken. When men
turn their backs upon the word, because the mouth does not please them,
they turn their backs upon God, John xiii. 20, and perhaps upon their
own mercy. When any have respect to the man more than the word, God will
leave them to the operation of the man, and withdraw his own.

5\. Attend upon the word with an eye to God. Look not for the new birth
only from the word. It was the folly of the Jews to think to find life
in the Scriptures without Christ; life in the letter, without the
original of life, John v. 39, 40. 'Except the Lord build the house'
(that is the temple), 'they labour in vain that build it,' Ps. cxxvii.
1. Without God all our endeavours to build a spiritual temple are like
the strivings to wash a blackamore white. No believing the word, though
preached a thousand times, without God's revealing his arm, Isa. liii.
1. It is not the file that makes the watch, but the artist by it. No
instrument can act without the virtue of some superior agent. It is the
altar that sanctifies the gold, and Christ that sanctifies the
ordinances. Paul may plant by his doctrine and miracles; Apollos may
water by his affectionate eloquence; but God alone can give the increase
by his almighty breath. Man sows the seed, but God only can make it
fructify. The richest showers cannot make the ground fruitful, but as
instruments under God's blessing. It is not said the prophets did hew
them, but God by his prophets, Hosea vi. 5. Then have your eyes fixed
upon God. It is the word of his lips, not of man's, whereby any are
snatched out of the paths of the destroyer, as well as kept from them.
Man's teachings direct us to Christ; God's teachings bring us to Christ;
man brings the gospel, at most, to the heart, the Spirit only brings the
gospel into the heart, man puts the key in the lock, God only turns it,
and opens the heart by it, man brings the word of truth, and God the
truth of the word into the soul, man brings the objective word of grace,
God alone the attractive grace of the word. If where there is already
the new birth, the soul must he fixed on God for further openings, much
more where it is not yet wrought. David had an excellent knowledge, yet
cries out for the opening of his eyes to see the wonders in God's law.
It is God only can knock off the fetters of a spiritual death, and open
the iron gates, that the King of glory may enter with spiritual life. If
any, therefore, will regard the word more than as an instrument, as a
partner with God in his operation, he may justly leave you to the
weakness of that, and deny the influx of his own strength.

Therefore let the word be attended with prayer.

(1.) Before you wait upon God in any ordinance, plead with him as Moses
did in another case, 'To what purpose should I go, unless thy presence
go with me?' What can the letter do without the Spirit, or words without
that powerful wind to blow them into my heart? None can have life by the
bread of the word, without the blessing of God. As man brings the graft,
desire God to insert it. As God has promised gifts to his church, so he
promised his own teachings: Heb. viii. 11, 'All shall know me, from the
least to the greatest.' Urge God with his own promise, desire him to
open his mouth, and to open your hearts; his mouth to breathe, and your
hearts to receive. When men overlook God, he makes a separation between
the word and his own quickening presence. The end does not necessarily
arise from the means; and, therefore, in the use of them, there must be
a fiduciary recourse to the grace of God. In the time, too, of waiting
upon God, let there be ejaculations; let your hearts be continually
lifted up to God; let your expectations be from him. We should be like
Jacob's ladder; though the feet stand in Bethel, the house of God, our
heads should reach to heaven in all our attendances.

(2.) After you have been at the word. God is the great seer, Christ the
great prophet; we should go to him for the repetition of things upon our
hearts; we may have that wind afterwards by prayer, which we felt not so
stiff at hearing. The operations of truth, as well as the knowledge of
it, are best fetched out upon our knees by earnest prayer. How do you
know but, while you are praying, the fire may descend from heaven, and
transform you into a divine likeness? Thus you will make God the *Alpha*
and *Omega* of his own ordinances, in your acknowledgement of him, as
well as he is so in himself.

(3.) Rest not in bare hearing. Look for God in the ordinances as he is
the living God, who lives in himself and gives life to men and means:
Ps. xxxiv. 2, 'My soul longs for the living God,' there is a strength
and glory of God to be longed for in the sanctuary; no means are to be
rested in or used, but as to lead to such an end for which they are
fitted. To rest in the word heard, or read, is to make that our end,
which God has appointed only as the means. The word is sweet, but as it
is the pipe through which God and his image, God and his grace, which is
sweeter and higher than all ordinances, stream to the soul. Rejoice in
the word, but only as the wise men did in the star, as it led them to
Christ. The word of Christ is precious; but nothing more precious than
himself, and his formation in the soul. Rest not in the word, but look
through it to Christ.

6\. Attend upon the word submissively. It is not the hearer, but the
humble hearer, shall find the power of the word working in him; as it is
not the speaking a prayer, but the wrestling and struggling of the heart
with God in prayer, receives a gracious answer. The humble are the
fittest subjects for grace, those that lie upon the ground with their
mouth close to the pipe. 'He gives grace to the humble.' Resign
yourselves up to the word, struggle not against the battery it makes,
nor the wind that blows; receive every stroke till you see the frame of
the new creature. Let a silence be imposed upon the flesh, and self
bowed down to the dust, while Christ the great prophet speaks. Be not
peevish, not expostulate with God's sovereignty, as they did: Isa.
lviii. 3, 'Wherefore have we fasted, and thou seest not? Wherefore have
we afflicted our soul, and thou takes no knowledge?' Acknowledge God a
free agent, submit to his sovereign pleasure. A truly humble bow to God
will prevail more than all the saucy expostulations of proud flesh. In
hearing the word, pick not here a part, and there a part, as suits your
humour, but consider what really is God's will, and submit to it.
Cornelius was of this resigning temper when the Spirit descended upon
him: Acts x. 33, 'We are here present before God, to hear all things
that are commanded thee of God.' An humble soul, says Kempis, by the
grace of God, understands more the reasons of eternal truch in a trice,
than a man that has studied many years in the schools, because he has
the operations of them in his heart.

7\. Receive the word with faith. I mean, not the faith which is a part
of the new creature, but an assent. There is a rational belief that it
is the word of truth, which is in many men that have no justifying
faith. Actuate this. The believing the word to be so, to be the word of
God, is the first step to the receiving advantage by it. No man will
ever comply with that which he believes not to be true, or believes not
himself to be concerned in. It is said by the apostle, Heb. iv. 1, 2,
'The word profited not, because it was not mixed with faith.' There was
truth in the word, but no firm assent to it in their hearts. There can
never be a full compliance with Christ, in order to a new birth, if
there be not first an assent to the word. Where there is a defect in the
first concoction, there will also be a defect in the second and third.
If you do not believe with Naaman, that the waters of Jordan are
appointed by God for this end, and not those of Abana and Pharpar, you
will never be rid of the spiritual death, no more than he would have
been of his leprosy. You never see God in his sanctuary, nor feel God in
his power for want of this. Surely as this made our Saviour suspend the
power of his miracles, by the same reason it makes him suspend the power
of his word: Mat. xiii. 58, 'He did not many mighty works there, because
of their unbelief.' If men did believe there were a place where they
might enjoy all earthly delights in a higher measure, at an easier rate,
how ambitious would they be of putting themselves into a state to enjoy
them? If men did believe the report of the gospel, would they not be
full of great undertakings for the enjoyment of the proffers of it? But
the gospel, more is the pity, has not naturally that credit with men
that a fiction has.

8\. Observe much the motions upon your hearts while you are attending
upon God. If the sails be not skilfully ordered to catch and hold, and
make the best improvement of the wind that blows, much of the wind will
pass beside it, and the ship lag many leagues behind, or lie wind-bound
a long time before it receive a like gale. God has particular seasons:
Heb. iv. 7, 'Today if you will hear his voice.' Sometimes the Spirit is
more urging than at another time, and sends his motions thicker upon the
heart; let those times be observed, and when there are motions on the
Spirit's part, let there be compliance on yours. Catch a promise when
the Spirit opens; bind yourselves to an observance of the precept when
the Spirit shows it; let God's drawing be answered with the soul's
running; observe what precious oil is dropped through the golden pipes
upon the heart, and spill it not; take notice of what sparks light upon
you, and lose not the warmth they may convey to your hearts; what beam
of light breaks in, let it not be puffed out by a temptation or
diversion; observe what is afforded to make your hearts burn, and your
corruptions and sinful inclinations cool. Regard not so much your
affections, as what touches are upon your wills. Affections may arise
from a natural constitution of the body, some tempers being more easily
excited to exert affections than others, yet they are not always, nor
altogether, to be disregarded, nor are they always to be looked upon as
ciphers; but, especially, see what influence the word has upon the
understanding and will chiefly, as well as upon the affections. Judge of
yourselves by the inward power and might, by the breakings in of the
light, and the sprightly strain of your wills. The might of the Spirit
works in the inner man, Eph. iii. 16; not in a part of the inner man,
but in every faculty. See what compunction there is in your souls, what
strong desires in the will. Bare affections are but like a sponge, which
will by a light compression let out that water which it so easily sucked
up. Men may 'receive the word with gladness' without having any root of
spiritual grace, Mark iv. 16, 17. When men regard only particular
affections, they usually sit down in those sparks of their own kindling,
and look not after a thorough change. Or if you find such affections see
whether those affections are raised rather by the truth than the dress;
whether they be kindled by the consideration of those attributes of God,
his mercy, goodness, wisdom, holiness, which have a great hand in the
new birth, whether by the deep consideration of our Saviour's death and
resurrection, the great designs of the gospel; whether the motion be
orderly, first, understanding, then will, and afterwards affections.
This is a genuine flame kindled by a fire which comes down from heaven,
working upon all the parts of the soul. A bare work upon the affections
is rather a strange and carnal fire. Observe, therefore, what tender
blades bud and shoot forth in the higher faculties of your souls.

9\. Press the word much upon your hearts after hearing. How great is the
neglect of this application of the word of truth! Men will spend hours
in hearing, and not one minute in serious reflections, as if the word in
their ears, or a receipt in their pockets, could cure the disease in the
heart. This is the worm at the root of all our spiritual advantages.
What is only dashed upon the fancy, or lightly coloured, may soon be
washed off. The soil must be made tenacious of the seed by the harrow of
meditation, which hides it in the heart, and covers it with earth; for
want of being laid deep, and branded by serious meditation, the seed
takes no root, because there is not much earth about it, Mark iv. 5, 6,
16. How can food nourish your body, unless it be concocted by natural
heat? or spiritual food enliven you, unless concocted by meditation? The
shepherds, after they had heard the news of Christ's incarnation from
the mouth of the angel, reflected upon their duty, Luke ii. 14,15. Words
must be kept some time upon the mind, and rolled over and over again,
before they can work any sensible change, because the heart naturally
has an averseness to God and his word; as the strongest physic must be
in the body some time, and be wrought upon by the stomach, before it can
work upon the humours. How do you know, but while you are musing, a
divine fire may sparkle in your souls, and Christ rise in your hearts?
Grapes must be pressed to get out the wine that will cheer the heart.
Put the question to your soul, in every part you can remember, as our
Saviour did to Martha, John xi. 25, 26, 'I am the resurrection and the
life. Believest thou this?' There is such a thing as the new birth:
believest thou this? It is necessary to be had: believest thou this? God
only can work it: believest thou this? And so for every divine truth.
Leave not thy soul to its vagaries, hold it on to the work, press it to
give a positive answer whether it believe this or that truth. Put not
yourselves off with a slight answer to the question, but examine the
reasons of your belief of it. Look upon yourselves as really concerned
in the word you hear, otherwise it will no more affect you than if you
should tell an ambitious ma, gaping after preferment in England, of a
wealthy place fallen in Spain, which will not engage his thoughts, as
being out of his sphere and at too great a distance. To have a
listlessness to such duties, or any spiritual duty, after hearing the
word, which is the food of the soul, shows a great corruption within, as
the heaviness in the body, and corrupt vapours in the mouth, show the
badness of concoction.

10\. Labour to have the savour of truth upon your spirits, as well as
the notions of it in your heads. The kingdom of God consists not in
word, but in power: the new birth consists not in a bare notion but in
spiritual savour. The highest notional knowledge comes far short of
experimental; the knowledge a blind man has of light and colours, by
hearing a lecture upon it, is but mere ignorance to the knowledge he
would have if his eyes were opened. Endeavour to have the savour of
Christ's ointments, Cant. i. 8, and inward sense exercised, Heb. v. 14.
The apostle distinguishes knowledge and judgement, Philip. i. 9.
Knowledge is a notion in the head, judgement, or "aisthesis", is the
sense or savour of it in the heart. What a miserable thing is it to
spend our lives without a taste! Knowledge is but as a cloud that
intercepts the beams of the sun and does not advantage the earth, unless
melted into drops, and falling down into the bosom of it; let the
knowledge of the word of truth drop down in a kindly shower upon your
hearts, let it be a knowledge of the word heated with love.

I might have added more; bring plain hearts to the word, put off all
disguises. Moses took off his veil when he went into the presence of
God. Bring not flesh and blood as your counsellors; these are no friends
to a new birth. And come with love; love makes the strongest impressions
upon the soul.

It might here be also worth the inquiry, why so few are renewed by the
word of truth in this age; why the gospel has no more powerful effect
among us, as in former ages? It is a wonder to see a man begotten by the
word, as it was a wonder for the woman to bring forth a man-child, Rev.
xii. When our Saviour was brought into the temple, not a man but Simeon
knew him; no question but many pharisees, doctors, and gentlemen were
walking there, but none but Simeon knew him, to whom he was revealed,
Luke ii. 22, 25, the rest looked upon him as an ordinary child. Formerly
men flocked to Christ as the doves to the windows. The sword of the
Spirit was never unsheathed, but it cut some hearts, the word seems now
to have lost its edge and efficacy, which ought to be considered and
laid to heart.

Many causes may be rendered; I will only hint a few.

(1.) Taking religion upon trust. Old customs are hardly to be parted
with: 'Every man will walk in the name of his God,' Micah iv. 5. To root
out false conceptions in religion, which either education, fancy, or
humour have rooted, is very difficult.

(2.) A conceit of the meanness of the word, whereby there is a secret
contempt of it, and so a formal and customary use of it.

(3.) A conceit of men, that they are new born already. Many think their
condition good, because of their civil honesty. Though that be a very
comely and commendable thing, yet security in it kills its thousands.
Many, because they are free from the common pollutions of the world, and
possessed with many amiable virtues, never consider how much their
hearts are stored with an enmity against God. Such count their
righteousness their gain, and think it a sufficient bribe for God's
mercy.

(4.) A conceit that to be new born is but to change an opinion. A change
of opinion may look like faith, as presumption does, but it is not
faith. The devil holds some men in the chain of sublimated speculations,
which hinder the working of the most spiritual and influential truths.

(5.) Pride of reason, frequency of disputes. It is a rational age, an
age overgrown with reason, and the Scripture tells us, 'not many wise,'
&c. The truths of God are very much turned into scepticism.

(6.) The common atheism that so much prevails among us. How should men
regard a discourse of the new birth, a begetting to God, when they
scarce believe there is a God at all, but their own lusts, to be like
unto? How should they be wrought upon by the word of God, that scarce
believe there is any God to reveal a word, and that there is no word of
God?

(7.) Hardness of heart, occasioned (through the just judgment of God) by
the frequency and unprofitable hearing of' the word. The word is most
operative when it comes first into a nation or town. When the heart is
not broken by hearing the word of truth, it becomes more hardened and
compact in sin. Many other reasons might be rendered, but I have held
you too long upon this subject.

End of *A Discourse of the Word, the Instrument of Regeneration.*

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Necessity of Regeneration](cha03)

</div>
