[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Yoga](../../hin/yoga/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ryo03) 
[Next](ryo05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B000FCG7RS/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Raja Yoga*, by Yogi Ramacharaka (William Walker Atkinson), \[1906\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

### THE SECOND LESSON.

#### THE EGO'S MENTAL TOOLS.

In the First Lesson we gave instruction and exercises designed to awaken
the consciousness of the Candidate to a realization of the real "I." We
confined our instructions to the preliminary teachings or the reality of
the "I," and the means whereby the Candidate might be brought to a
realization of his real Self, and its independence from the body and the
things of the flesh. We tried to show you how you might awaken to a
consciousness of the reality of the "I"; its real nature; its
independence of the body; its immortality; its invincibility and
invulnerability. How well we have succeeded may be determined only by
the experience of each Candidate, for we can but point out the way, and
the Candidate must do the real work himself.

But there is more to be said and done in this matter of awakening to a
realization of the "I." So far, we have but told you how to distinguish
between the material coverings of the Ego and the "I" itself. We have
tried to show you that you had a real "I," and then to show you what it
was, and how it was independent of the material coverings, etc. But
there is still another step in this self analysis—a more difficult step.
Even when the Candidate has awakened to a realization of his
independence of the body, and material coverings, he often confounds the
''I" with the lower principles of the mind. This is a mistake. The

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Mind, in its
various phases and planes, is but a tool and instrument of the "I," and
is far from being the "I" itself. We shall try to bring out this fact in
this lesson and its accompanying exercises. We shall avoid, and pass by,
the metaphysical features of the case, and shall confine ourselves to
the Yogi Psychology. We shall not touch upon theories, nor attempt to
explain the cause, nature and purpose of the Mind—the working tool of
the Ego—but instead shall attempt to point out a way whereby you may
analyze the Mind and then determine which is the "not I" and which is
the real "I." It is useless to burden you with theories or metaphysical
talk, when the way to prove the thing is right within your own grasp. By
using the mind, you will be able to separate it into its parts, and
force it to give you its own answer to the questions touching itself.

In the second and third lessons of our "*Fourteen Lessons*," we pointed
out to you the fact that man had three Mental Principles, or
subdivisions of mind, all of which were below the plane of Spirit. The
"I" is Spirit, but its mental principles are of a lower order. Without
wishing to unduly repeat ourselves, we think it better to run hastily
over these three Principles in the mind of Man.

First, there is what is known as the Instinctive Mind, which man shares
in common with the lower animals. It is the first principle of mind that
appears in the scale of evolution. In its lowest phases, consciousness
is but barely perceptible, and mere sensation

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

is apparent. In its higher stages it almost reaches the plane of Reason
or Intellect, in fact, they overlap each other, or, rather, blend into
each other. The Instinctive Mind does valuable work in the direction of
maintaining animal life in our bodies, it having charge of this part of
our being. It attends to the constant work of repair; replacement;
change digestion; assimilation; elimination, etc., all of which work is
performed below the plane of consciousness.

But this is but a small part of the work of the Instinctive Mind. For
this part of the mind has stored up all the experiences of ourselves and
ancestors in our evolution from the lower forms of animal life into the
present stage of evolution. All of the old animal instincts (which were
all right in their place, and quite necessary for the well-being of the
lower forms of life) have left traces in this part of the mind, which
traces are apt to come to the front under pressure of unusual
circumstances, even long after we think we have outgrown them. In this
part of the mind are to be found traces of the old fighting instinct of
the animal; all the animal passions; all the hate, envy, jealousy, and
the rest of it, which are our inheritances from the past. The
Instinctive Mind is also the "habit mind" in which is stored up all the
little, and great, habits of many lives, or rather such as have not been
entirely effaced by subsequent habits of a stronger nature. The
Instinctive Mind is a queer storehouse, containing quite a variety of
objects, many of them very good in their way, but others of which are
the worst kind of old junk and rubbish.

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

This part of the mind also is the seat of the appetites; passions;
desires; instincts; sensations; feelings and emotions of the lower
order, manifested in the lower animals; primitive man; the barbarian;
and the man of today, the difference being only in the degree of control
over them that has been gained by the higher parts of the mind. There
are higher desires, aspirations, etc., belonging to a higher part of the
mind, which we will describe in a few minutes, but the "animal nature"
belongs to the Instinctive Mind. To it also belong the "feelings"
belonging to our emotional and passional nature. All animal desires,
such as hunger and thirst; sexual desires (on the physical plane); all
passions, such as physical love; hatred; envy; malice; jealousy;
revenge, etc., are part of this part of the mind. The desire for the
physical (unless a means of reaching higher things) and the longing for
the material, belong to this region of the mind. The "lust of the flesh;
the lust of the eyes; the pride of life," belong to the Instinctive
Mind.

Take note, however, that we are not condemning the things belonging to
this plane of the mind. All of them have their place—many were necessary
in the past, and many are still necessary for the continuance of
physical life. All are right in their place, and to those in the
particular plane of development to which they belong, and are wrong only
when one is mastered by them, or when he returns to pick up an unworthy
thing that has been cast off in the unfoldment of the individual. This
lesson has nothing to do with the

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

right and wrong of these things (we have treated of that elsewhere) and
we mention this part of the mind that you may understand that you have
such a thing in your mental make-up, and that you may understand the
thought, etc., coming from it, when we start in to analyze the mind in
the latter part of this lesson. All we will ask you to do at this stage
of the lesson is to realize that this part of the mind, while
*belonging* to you, is *not* You, yourself. It is *not* the "I" part of
you.

Next in order, above the Instinctive Mind, is what we have called the
Intellect, that part of the mind that does our reasoning, analyzing;
"thinking," etc. You are using it in the consideration of this lesson.
But note this: You are *using* it, but it is *not* You, any more than
was the Instinctive Mind that you considered a moment ago. You will
begin to make the, separation, if you will think but a moment. We will
not take up your time with a consideration of Intellect or Reason. You
will find a good description of this part of the mind in any good
elementary work on Psychology. Our only idea in mentioning it is that
you may make the classification, and that we may afterward show you that
the Intellect is but a tool of the Ego, instead of being the real "I"
itself, as so many seem to imagine.

The third, and highest, Mental Principle is what is called the Spiritual
Mind, that part of the mind which is almost unknown to many of the race,
but which has developed into consciousness with nearly all who read

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

this lesson, for the fact that the subject of this lesson attracts you
is a proof that this part of your mental nature is unfolding into
consciousness. This region of the mind is the source of that which we
call "genius," "inspiration," "spirituality," and all that we consider
the "highest" in our mental make-up. All the great thoughts and ideas
float into the field of consciousness from this part of the mind. All
the great unfoldment of the race comes from there. All the higher mental
ideas that have come to Man in his upward evolutionary journey, that
tend in the direction of nobility; true religious feeling; kindness;
humanity; justice; unselfish love; mercy; sympathy, etc., have come to
him through his slowly unfolding Spiritual Mind. His love of God and of
his fellow man have come in this way. His knowledge of the great occult
truths reach him through this channel. The mental realization of the
"I," which we are endeavoring to teach in these lessons, must come to
him by way of the Spiritual Mind unfolding its ideas into his field of
consciousness.

But even this great and wonderful part of the mind is but a tool—a
highly finished one, it is true, but still a tool—to the Ego, or "I."

We propose to give you a little mental drill work, toward the end that
you may be able more readily to distinguish the "I" from the mind, or
mental states. In this connection we would say that every part, plane,
and function of the mind is good, and necessary, and the student must
not fall into the error of

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

supposing that because we tell him to set aside first this part of the
mind, and then that part, that we are undervaluing the mind, or that we
regard it as an encumbrance or hindrance. Far from this, we realize that
it is *by the use* of the mind that Man is enabled to arrive at a
knowledge of his true nature and Self, and that his progress through
many stages yet will depend upon the unfolding of his mental faculties.

Man is now using but the lower and inferior parts of his mind, and he
has within his mental world great unexplored regions that far surpass
anything of which the human mind has dreamed. In fact, it is part of the
business of "Raja Yoga" to aid in unfolding these higher faculties and
mental regions. And so far from decrying the Mind, the "Raja Yoga"
teachers are chiefly concerned in recognizing the Mind's power and
possibilities, and directing the student to avail himself of the latent
powers that are inherent in his soul.

It is only by the mind that the teachings we are now giving you may be
grasped and understood, and used to your advantage and benefit. We are
talking direct to your mind now, and are making appeals to it, that it
may be interested and may open itself to what is ready to come into it
from its own higher regions. We are appealing to the Intellect to direct
its attention to this great matter, that it may interpose less
resistance to the truths that are waiting to be projected from the
Spiritual Mind, which knows the Truth.

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

#### MENTAL DRILL.

Place yourself in a calm, restful condition, that you may be able to
meditate upon the matters that we shall place before you for
consideration. Allow the matters presented to meet with a hospitable
reception from you, and hold a mental attitude of willingness to receive
what may be waiting for you in the higher regions of your mind.

We wish to call your attention to several mental impressions or
conditions, one after another, in order that you may realize that they
are merely something *incident* to you, and *not* YOU yourself—that you
may set them aside and consider them, just as you might anything that
you have been using. You cannot set the "I" aside and so consider it,
but the various forms of the "not I" may be so set aside and considered.

In the First Lesson you gained the perception of the "I" as independent
from the body, the latter merely being an instrument for use. You have
now arrived at the stage when the "I" appears to you to be a mental
creature—a bundle of thoughts, feelings, moods, etc. But you must go
farther. You must be able to distinguish the "I" from these mental
conditions, which are as much tools as is the body and its parts.

Let us begin by considering the thoughts more closely connected with the
body, and then work up to the higher mental states.

The sensations of the body, such as hunger; thirst; pain; pleasurable
sensations; physical desires, etc.,

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

etc., are not apt to be mistaken for essential qualities of the "I" by
many of the Candidates, for they have passed beyond this stage, and have
learned to set aside these sensations, to a greater or lesser extent, by
an effort of the Will, and are no longer slaves to them. Not that they
do not experience these sensations, but they have grown to regard them
as incidents of the physical life—good in their place—but useful to the
advanced man only when he has mastered them to the extent that he no
longer regards them as close to the "I." And yet, to some people, these
sensations are so closely identified with their conception of the "I"
that when they think of themselves they think merely of a bundle of
these sensations. They are not able to set them aside and consider them
as things apart, to be used when necessary and proper, but as things not
fastened to the "I." The more advanced a man becomes the farther off
seem these sensations. Not that he does not feel hungry, for instance.
Not at all, for he recognizes hunger, and satisfies it within reason,
knowing that his physical body is making demands for attention, and that
these demands should be heeded. But—mark the difference—instead of
feeling that the *"I"* is hungry the man feels that "*my body*" is
hungry, just as he might become conscious that his horse or dog was
crying for food insistently. Do you see what we mean? It is that the man
no longer identifies himself—the "I"—with the body, consequently the
thoughts which are most closely allied to the physical

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

life seem comparatively "separate" from his "I" conception. Such a man
thinks "my stomach, this," or "my leg, that," or "my body, thus,"
instead of "'I,' this," or "'I' that." He is able, almost automatically,
to think of the body and its sensations as things of him, and
*belonging* to him, which require attention and care, rather than as
real parts of the "I." He is able to form a conception of the "I" as
existing without any of these things—without the body and its
sensations—and so he has taken the first step in the realization of the
"I."

Before going on, we ask the students to stop a few moments, and mentally
run over these sensations of the body. Form a mental image of them, and
realize that they are merely incidents to the present stage of growth
and experience of the "I," and that they form no real part of it. They
may, and will be, left behind in the Ego's higher planes of advancement.
You may have attained this mental conception perfectly, long since, but
we ask that to give yourself the mental drill at this time, in order to
fasten upon your mind this first step.

In realizing that you are able to set aside, mentally, these
sensations—that you are able to hold them out at arm's length and
"consider" them as an "outside" thing, you mentally determine that they
are "not I" things, and you set them down in the "not I" collection—the
first to be placed there. Let us try to make this still plainer, even at
the risk of wearying you by repetitions (for you must get this idea
firmly fixed

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

in your mind). To be able to say that a thing is "not I," you must
realize that there are two things in question (1) the "not I" thing, and
(2) the "I" who is regarding the "not I" thing just as the "I" regards a
lump of sugar, or a mountain. Do you see what we mean? Keep at it until
you do.

Next, consider some of the emotions, such as anger; hate; love, in its
ordinary forms; jealousy; ambition; and the hundred and one other
emotions that sweep through our brains. You will find that you are able
to set each one of these emotions or feelings aside and study it;
dissect it; analyze it; consider it. You will be able to understand the
rise, progress and end of each of these feelings, as they have come to
you, and as you recall them in your memory or imagination, just as
readily as you would were you observing their occurrence in the mind of
a friend. You will find them all stored away in some parts of your
mental make-up, and you may (to use a modern American slang phrase)
"make them trot before you, and show their paces." Don't you see that
they are not "You"—that they are merely something that you carry around
with you in a mental bag. You can imagine yourself as living without
them, and still being "I," can you not?

And the very fact that you are able to set them aside and examine and
consider them is a proof that they are "not I" things—for there are two
things in the matter (1) *You* who are examining and considering them,
and (2) the thing itself which is the *object* 

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

of the examination and consideration at mental arm's length. So into the
"not I" collection go these emotions, desirable and undesirable. The
collection is steadily growing, and will attain quite formidable
proportions after a while.

Now, do not imagine that this is a lesson designed to teach you how to
discard these emotions, although if it enables you to get rid of the
undesirable ones, so much the better. This is not our object, for we bid
you place the desirable (at this time) ones in with the opposite kind,
the idea being to bring you to a realization that the "I" is higher,
above and independent of these mental somethings, and then when you have
realized the nature of the "I," you may return and use (as a Master) the
things that have been using you as a slave. So do not be afraid to throw
these emotions (good and bad) into the "not I" collection. You may go
back to them, and use the good ones, after the Mental Drill is over. No
matter how much you may think that you are bound by any of these
emotions, you will realize, by careful analysis, that it is of the "not
I" kind, for the "I" existed before the emotion came into active play,
and it will live long after the emotion has faded away. The principal
proof is that you are able to hold it out at arm's length and examine
it—a proof that it is "not I.'

Run through the entire list of your feelings; emotions; moods; and what
not, just as you would those Hof a well-known friend or relative, and
you will see

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

that each one—every one—is a "not I" thing, and you will lay it aside
for the time, for the purpose of the scientific experiment, at least.

Then passing on to the Intellect, you will be able to hold out for
examination each mental process and principle. You don't believe it, you
may say. Then read and study some good work on Psychology, and you will
learn to dissect and analyze every intellectual process—and to classify
it and place it in the proper pigeon-hole. Study Psychology by means of
some good text-book, and you will find that one by one every
intellectual process is classified, and talked about and labeled, just
as you would a collection of flowers. If that does not satisfy you, turn
the leaves of some work on Logic, and you will admit that you may hold
these intellectual processes at arm's length and examine them, and talk
about them to others. So that these wonderful tools of Man—the
Intellectual powers may be placed in the "not I" collection, for the "I"
is capable of standing aside and viewing them—it is able to detach them
from itself. The most remarkable thing about this is that in admitting
this fact, you realize that the "I" is using these very intellectual
faculties to pass upon themselves. Who is the Master that compels these
faculties to do this to themselves? The Master of the Mind—The "I."

And reaching the higher regions of the mind—even the Spiritual Mind, you
will be compelled to admit that the things that have come into
consciousness from that region may be considered and studied, just

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

as may be any other mental thing, and so even these high things must be
placed in the "not I" collection. You may object that this does not
prove that all the things in the Spiritual Mind may be so treated—that
there may be "I" things there that can not be so treated. We will not
discuss this question, for you know nothing about the Spiritual Mind
except as it has revealed itself to you, and the higher regions of that
mind are like the mind of a God, when compared to what you call mind.
But the evidence of the Illumined—those in whom the Spiritual Mind has
wonderfully unfolded tell us that even in the highest forms of
development, the Initiates, yea, even the Masters, realize that above
even their highest mental states there is always that eternal "I"
brooding over them, as the Sun over the lake; and that the highest
conception of the "I" known even to advanced souls, is but a faint
reflection of the "I" filtering through the Spiritual Mind, although
that Spiritual Mind is as clear as the clearest crystal when compared
with our comparatively opaque mental states. And the highest mental
state is but a tool or instrument of the "I," and is not the "I" itself.

And yet the "I" is to be found in the faintest forms of consciousness,
and animates even the unconscious life. The "I" is always the same, but
its apparent growth is the result of the mental unfoldment of the
individual. As we described it in one of the lessons of the "*Advanced
Course*" it is like an electric lamp that is encased in many wrappings
of cloth. As cloth after

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

cloth is removed, the light seems to grow brighter and stronger, and yet
it has changed not, the change being in the removal of the confining and
bedimming coverings. We do not expect to make you realize the "I" in all
its fullness—that is far beyond the highest known to man of to-day—but
we do hope to bring you to a realization of the highest conception of
the "I," possible to each of you in your present stage of unfoldment,
and in the process we expect to cause to drop from you some of the
confining sheaths that you have about outgrown. The sheaths are ready
for dropping, and all that is required is the touch of a friendly hand
to cause them to fall fluttering from you. We wish to bring you to the
fullest possible (to you) realization of the "I," in order to make an
Individual of you—in order that you may understand, and have courage to
take up the tools and instruments lying at your hand, and do the work
before you.

And now, back to the Mental Drill. After you have satisfied yourself
that about everything that you are capable of thinking about is a "not
I" thing—a tool and instrument for your use—you will ask, "And now, what
is there left that should not be thrown in the "not I" collection. To
this question we answer "THE 'I' ITSELF." And when you demand a proof we
say, "Try to set aside the 'I' for consideration!" You may try from now
until the passing away of infinities of infinities, and you will never
be able to set aside the real "I" for consideration. You may think you
can, but a little reflection will show you that

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

you are merely setting aside some of your mental qualities or faculties.
And in this process what is the "I" doing? Simply setting aside and
considering things. Can you not see that the "I" cannot be both the
*considerer* and the thing considered—the *examiner* and the thing
examined? Can the sun shine upon itself by its own light? You may
consider the "I" of some other person, but it is *your* "I" that is
considering. But you cannot, as an "I," stand aside and see yourself as
an "I." Then what evidence have we that there is an "I" to us? This:
that you are always conscious of being the considerer and examiner,
instead of the considered and examined thing—and then, you have the
evidence of your consciousness. And what report does this consciousness
give us? Simply this, and nothing more: "I AM." That is all that the "I"
is conscious of, regarding its true self: "I AM," but that consciousness
is worth all the rest, for the rest is but "not I" tools that the "I"
may reach out and use.

And so at the final analysis, you will find that there is something that
refuses to be set aside and examined by the "I." And that something is
the "I" itself—that "I" eternal, unchangeable—that drop of the Great
Spirit Ocean—that spark from the Sacred Flame.

Just as you find it impossible to imagine the "I" as dead, so will you
find it impossible to set aside the "I" for consideration—all that comes
to you is the testimony: "I AM."

If you were able to set aside the "I" for consideration, who would be
the one to consider it? Who could

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

consider except the "I" itself, and if it be *here*, how could it be
*there?* The "I" cannot be the "not I" even in the wildest flights of
the imagination—the imagination with all its boasted freedom and power,
confesses itself vanquished when asked to do this thing.

Oh, students, may you be brought to a realization of what you are. May
you soon awaken to the fact that you are sleeping gods—that you have
within you the power of the Universe, awaiting your word to manifest in
action. Long ages have you toiled to get this far, and long must you
travel before you reach even the first Great Temple, but you are now
entering into the conscious stage of Spiritual Evolution. No longer will
your eyes be closed as you walk the Path. From now on you will begin to
see clearer and clearer each step, in the dawning light of
consciousness.

You are in touch with all of life, and the separation of your "I" from
the great Universal "I" is but apparent and temporary. We will tell you
of these things in our Third Lesson, but before you can grasp that you
must develop the "I" consciousness within you. Do not lay aside this
matter as one of no importance. Do not dismiss our weak explanation as
being "merely words, words, words," as so many are inclined to do. We
are pointing out a great truth to you. Why not follow the leadings of
the Spirit which even now—this moment while you read—is urging you to
walk The Path of Attainment? Consider the teachings of this lesson, and
practice the Mental Drill until your mind has grasped its significance,
then let it sink deep

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

down into your inner consciousness. Then will you be ready for the next
lessons, and those to follow.

Practice this Mental Drill until you are fully assured of the *reality*
of the "I" and the *relativity* of the "not "I" in the mind. When you
once grasp this truth, you will find that you will be able to use the
mind with far greater power and effect, for you will recognize that it
is your tool and instrument, fitted and intended to do your bidding. You
will be able to master your moods, and emotions when necessary, and will
rise from the position of a slave to a Master.

Our words seem cheap and poor, when we consider the greatness of the
truth that we are endeavoring to convey by means of them. For who can
find words to express the inexpressible? All that we may hope to do is
to awaken a keen interest and attention on your part, so that you will
practice the Mental Drill, and thus obtain the evidence of your own
mentality to the truth. Truth is not truth to you until you have proven
it in your own experience, and once so proven you cannot be robbed of
it, nor can it be argued away from you.

You must realize that in every mental effort You—the "I"—are behind it.
You bid the Mind work, and it obeys your Will. You are the Master, and
not the slave of your mind. You are the Driver, not the driven. Shake
yourself loose from the tyranny of the mind that has oppressed you for
so long. Assert yourself, and be free. We will help you in this
direction during the course of these lessons, but you must first

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

assert yourself as a Master of your Mind. Sign the mental Declaration of
Independence from your moods, emotions, and uncontrolled thoughts, and
assert your Dominion over them. Enter into your Kingdom, thou
manifestation of the Spirit!

While this lesson is intended primarily to bring clearly into your
consciousness the fact that the "I" is a reality, separate and distinct
from its Mental Tools, and while the control of the mental faculties by
the Will forms a part of some of the future lessons, still, we think
that this is a good place to point out to you the advantages arising
from a realization of the true nature of the "I" and the relative aspect
of the Mind.

Many of us have supposed that our minds were the masters of ourselves,
and we have allowed ourselves to be tormented and worried by thoughts
"running away" with us, and presenting themselves at inopportune
moments. The Initiate is relieved from this annoyance, for he learns to
assert his mastery over the different parts of the mind, and controls
and regulates his mental processes, just as one would a fine piece of
machinery. He is able to control his conscious thinking faculties, and
direct their work to the best advantage, and he also learns how to pass
on orders to the subconscious mental region and bid it work for him
while he sleeps, or even when he is using his conscious mind in other
matters. These subjects will be considered by us in due time, during the
course of lessons.

In this connection it may be interesting to read what Edward Carpenter
says of the power of the individual

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

to control his thought processes. In his book "*From Adam's Peak to
Elephanta*," in describing his experience while visiting a Hindu Gnani
Yogi, he says:

"And if we are unwilling to believe in this internal mastery over the
body, we are perhaps almost equally unaccustomed to the idea of mastery
over our own inner thoughts and feelings. That a man should be a prey to
any thought that chances to take possession of his mind, is commonly
among us assumed as unavoidable. It may be a matter of regret that he
should be kept awake all night from anxiety as to the issue of a lawsuit
on the morrow, but that he should have the power of determining whether
he be kept awake or not seems an extravagant demand. The image of an
impending calamity is no doubt odious, but its very odiousness (we say)
makes it haunt the mind all the more pertinaciously and it is useless to
try to expel it.

"Yet this is an absurd position—for man, the heir of all the ages:
hag-ridden by the flimsy creatures of his own brain. If a pebble in our
boot torments us, we expel it. We take off the boot and shake it out.
And once the matter is fairly understood it is just as easy to expel an
intruding and obnoxious thought from the mind. About this there ought to
be no mistake, no two opinions. The thing is obvious, clear and
unmistakable. It should be as easy to expel an obnoxious thought from
your mind as it is to shake a stone out of your shoe; and till a man can
do that it is just nonsense to talk about his ascendancy over Nature,
and all the rest of it. He is a mere slave, and prey to the

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

bat-winged phantoms that flit through the corridors of his own brain.

"Yet the weary and careworn faces that we meet by thousands, even among
the affluent classes of civilization, testify only too clearly how
seldom this mastery is obtained. How rare indeed to meet a *man!* How
common rather to discover a creature hounded on by tyrant thoughts (or
cares or desires), cowering, wincing under the lash—or perchance priding
himself to run merrily in obedience to a driver that rattles the reins
and persuades him that he is free—whom we cannot converse with in
careless *tete-a-tete* because that alien presence is always there, on
the watch.

"It is one of the most prominent doctrines of Raja Yoga that the power
of expelling thoughts, or if need be, killing them dead on the spot,
*must* be attained. Naturally the art requires practice, but like other
arts, when once acquired there is no mystery or difficulty about it. And
it is worth practice. It may indeed fairly be said that life only begins
when this art has been acquired. For obviously when instead of being
ruled by individual thoughts, the whole flock of them in their immense
multitude and variety and capacity is ours to direct and dispatch and
employ where we list ('for He maketh the winds his messengers and the
flaming fire His minister.), life becomes a thing so vast and grand
compared with what it was before, that its former condition may well
appear almost antenatal.

"If you can kill a thought dead, for the time being,

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

you can do anything else with it that you please. And therefore it is
that this power is so valuable. And it not only frees a man from mental
torment (which is nine-tenths at least of the torment of life), but it
gives him a concentrated power of handling mental work absolutely
unknown to him before. The two things are co-relative to each other. As
already said this is one of the principles of Raja Yoga.

"While at work your thought is to be absolutely concentrated in it,
undistracted by anything whatever irrelevant to the matter in
hand—pounding away like a great engine, with giant power and perfect
economy—no wear and tear of friction, or dislocation of parts owing to
the working of different forces at the same time. Then when the work is
finished, if there is no more occasion for the use of the machine, it
must stop equally, absolutely—stop entirely—no *worrying* (as if a
parcel of boys were allowed to play their devilments with a locomotive
as soon as it was in the shed)—and the man must retire into that region
of his consciousness where his true self dwells.

"I say the power of the thought-machine itself is enormously increased
by this faculty of letting it alone on the one hand, and of using it
singly and with concentration on the other. It becomes a true tool,
which a master-workman lays down when done with, but which only a
bungler carries about with him all the time to show that he is the
possessor of it."

We ask the students to read carefully the above quotations from Mr.
Carpenter's book, for they are full

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

of suggestions that may be taken up to advantage by those who are
emancipating themselves from their slavery to the unmastered mind, and
who are now bringing the mind under control of the Ego, by means of the
Will.

Our next lesson will take up the subject of the relationship of the "I"
to the Universal "I," and will be called the "Expansion of the Self." It
will deal with the subject, not from a theoretical standpoint, but from
the position of the teacher who is endeavoring to make his students
actually *aware* in their consciousness of the truth of the proposition.
In this course we are not trying to make our students past-masters of
*theory*, but are endeavoring to place them in a position whereby they
may *know* for themselves, and actually experience the things of which
we teach.

Therefore we urge upon you not to merely rest content with reading this
lesson, but, instead, to study and meditate upon the teachings mentioned
under the head of "Mental Drill," until the distinctions stand out
clearly in your mind, and until you not only *believe* them to be true,
but actually are *conscious* of the "I" and its Mental Tools. Have
patience and perseverance. The task may be difficult, but the reward is
great. To become conscious of the greatness, majesty, strength and power
of your real being is worth years of hard study. Do you not think so?
Then study and practice hopefully, diligently and earnestly.

Peace be with you.

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

# MANTRAMS (AFFIRMATIONS)

# FOR THE SECOND LESSON.

"I" am an entity—my mind is my instrument of expression.

"I" exist independent of my mind, and am not dependent upon it for
existence or being.

"I" am Master of my mind, not its slave.

"I" can set aside my sensations, emotions, passions, desires,
intellectual faculties, and all the rest of my mental collection of
tools, as "not I" things—and still there remains something—and that
something is "I," which cannot be set aside by me, for it is my very
self; my only self; my real self—"I." That which remains after all that
may be set aside is set aside is the "I''—Myself—eternal, constant,
unchangeable.

<span id="img_04600"></span> ![I am](img/04600.jpg)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Lesson III. The Expansion of the Self](ryo05)
