[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Yoga](../../hin/yoga/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ryo08.md) 
[Next](ryo10.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B000FCG7RS/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Raja Yoga*, by Yogi Ramacharaka (William Walker Atkinson), \[1906\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

### THE SEVENTH LESSON.

#### THE UNFOLDMENT OF CONSCIOUSNESS.

We have thought it well to make a slight change in the arrangement of
these lessons—that is, in the order in which they should appear. We had
contemplated making this Seventh Lesson a series of Mental Drills,
intended to develop certain of the mental faculties, but we have decided
to postpone the same until a later lesson, believing that by so doing a
more logical sequence or order of arrangement will be preserved. In this
lesson we will tell you of the unfoldment of consciousness in Man, and
in the next lesson, and probably in the one following it, we shall
present to you a clear statement regarding the states of mind, below and
over consciousness—a most wonderful region, we assure you, and one that
has been greatly misunderstood and misinterpreted. This will lead up to
the subject of the cultivation of the various faculties—both conscious
and outside of consciousness, and the series will be concluded by three
lessons going right to the heart of this part of the subject, and giving
certain rules and instruction calculated to develop Man's wonderful
"thought-machine" that will be of the greatest interest and importance
to all of our students. When the lessons are concluded

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

you will see that the present arrangement is most logical and proper.

In this lesson we take up the subject of "The Unfoldment of
Consciousness"—a most interesting subject. Many of us have been in the
habit of identifying "consciousness" with mind, but as we proceed with
this series of lessons we will see that that which is called
"consciousness" is but a small portion of the mind of the individual,
and even that small part is constantly changing its states, and
unfolding new states undreamed of.

"Consciousness" is a word we use very often in considering the science
of the Mind. Let us see what it means. Webster defines it as one's
"knowledge of sensations and mental operations, or of what passes in
one's own mind." Halleck defines it as "that undefinable characteristic
of mental states which causes one to be aware of them." But, as Halleck
states, "Consciousness is incapable of definition. To define anything we
are obliged to describe it in terms of something else. And there is
nothing else in the world like consciousness, hence we can define it
only in terms of itself, and that is very much like trying to lift one's
self by one's own boot straps. Consciousness is one of the greatest
mysteries that confronts us."

Before we can understand what Consciousness really is, we must know just
what "Mind" really is—and that knowledge is lacking, notwithstanding the
many

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

ingenious theories evolved in order to explain the mystery. The
metaphysicians do not throw much light on the subject, and as for
materialistic science, listen to what Huxley says: "How it comes about
that anything so remarkable as a state of consciousness comes about by
the result of irritating nervous tissue, is just as unaccountable as the
appearance of the genii when Aladdin rubbed his lamp."

To many persons the words "consciousness" and "mental process," or
"thought" are regarded as synonymous. And, in fact, psychologists so
held until quite recently. But now it is generally accepted as a fact
that mental processes are not limited to the field of consciousness, and
it is now generally taught that the field of sub-consciousness (that is,
"under" conscious) mentation, is of a much greater extent than that of
conscious mentation.

Not only is it true that the mind can hold in consciousness but one fact
at any one instant, and that, consequently, only a very small fraction
of our knowledge can be in consciousness at any one moment, but it is
also true that the consciousness plays but a very small part in the
totality of mental processes, or mentation. The mind is not conscious of
the greater portion of its own activities—Maudsley says that only ten
per cent comes into the field of consciousness. Taine has stated it in
these words: "Of the world which makes up our being, we only perceive
the highest

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

points—the lighted up peaks of a continent whose lower levels remain in
the shade."

But it is not our intention to speak of this great subconscious region
of the mind at this point, for we shall have much to do with it later
on. It is mentioned here in order to show that the enlargement or
development of consciousness is not so much a matter of "growth" as it
is an "unfoldment"—not a new creation or enlargement from outside, but
rather an enfoldment outward from within.

From the very beginning of Life—among the Particles of Inorganic
Substance, may be found traces of something like Sensation, and response
thereto. Writers have not cared to give to this phenomenon the name of
"sensation," or "sensibility," as the terms savored too much of
"senses," and "sense-organs." But Modern Science has not hesitated to
bestow the names so long withheld. The most advanced scientific writers
do not hesitate to state that in reaction, chemical response, etc., may
be seen indications of rudimentary sensation. Haeckel says: "I cannot
imagine the simplest chemical and physical process without attributing
the movement of the material particles to unconscious sensation. The
idea of Chemical Affinity consists in the fact that the various chemical
elements perceive the qualitative differences in other elements, and
experience 'pleasure' or 'revulsion' at contacts with them, and execute
their specific movements on this ground." He also speaks of the
sensitiveness of

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "plasm," or the
substance of "living bodies," as being "only a superior degree of the
general irritability of substance."

Chemical reaction, between atoms, is spoken of by chemists as a
"sensitive" reaction. Sensitiveness is found even in the Particles of
Inorganic Substance, and may be regarded as the first glimmerings of
thought. Science recognizes this when it speaks of the unconscious
sensation of the Particles as *æthesis* or "feeling," and the
unconscious Will that responds thereto, as *tropesis*, or "inclination."
Haeckel says of this that "Sensation perceives the different qualities
of the stimuli, and feeling the quantity," and also, "We may ascribe the
feeling of pleasure and pain (in the contact with qualitatively
differing atoms) to all atoms, and so explain the elective affinity in
chemistry (attraction of loving atoms, inclination; repulsion of hating
atoms, disinclination).

It is impossible to form a clear or intelligent idea of the phenomenon
of chemical affinity, etc., unless we attribute to the Atoms something
akin to Sensation. It is likewise impossible to understand the actions
of the Molecules, unless we think of them as possessing something akin
to Sensation. The Law of Attraction is based upon Mental States in
Substance. The response of Inorganic Substance to Electricity and
Magnetism is also another evidence of Sensation and the response
thereto.

In the movements and operations of crystal-life we

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

obtain evidences of still a little higher forms of Sensation and
response thereto. The action of crystallization is very near akin to
that of some low forms of plasmic action. In fact, the "missing link"
between plant life and the crystals is claimed to have been found in
some recent discoveries of Science, the connection being found in
certain crystals in the interior of plants, composed of carbon
combinations, and resembling the inorganic crystals in many ways.

Crystals grow along certain lines and forms up to a certain size. Then
they begin to form "baby-crystals" on their surfaces, which then take on
the growth—the processes being almost analogous to cell-life. Processes
akin to fermentation have been detected among chemicals. In many ways it
may be seen that the beginning of Mental Life must be looked for among
the Minerals and Particles—the latter, be it remembered, composing not
only inorganic, but also Organic Substance.

As we advance in the scale of life, we are met with constantly
increasing unfoldment of mentation, the simple giving place to the
complex manifestations. Passing by the simple vital processes of the
monera, or single-celled "things," we notice the higher forms of cell
life, with growing sensibility or sensation. Then we come to the
cell-groups, in which the individual cells manifest sensation of a kind,
coupled with a community-sensation. Food is distinguished, selected and
captured, and movements exercised in pursuit of the same. The living
thing is beginning to manifest more

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

complex mental states. Then the stage of the lower plants is reached,
and we notice the varied phenomena of that region, evidencing an
increased sensitiveness, although there are practically no signs of
special organs of sense. Then we pass on to the higher plant life, in
which begin to manifest certain "sensitive-cells," or groups of such
cells, which are rudimentary sense organs. Then the forms of animal
life, and considered with rising degrees of sensations and growing sense
apparatus, or sense organs, gradually unfolding into something like
nervous systems.

Among the lower animal forms there are varying degrees of mentation with
accompanying nerve centers and sense-organs, but little or no signs of
consciousness, gradually ascending until we have dawning consciousness
in the reptile kingdom, etc., and fuller consciousness and a degree of
intelligent thought in the still higher forms, gradually increasing
until we reach the plane of the highest mammals, such as the horse, dog,
elephant, ape, etc., which animals have complex nervous systems, brains
and well developed consciousness. We need not further consider the forms
of mentation in the forms of life below the Conscious stage, for that
would carry us far from our subject.

Among the higher forms of animal life, after a "dawn period" or
semi-consciousness, we come to forms of life among the lower animals
possessing a well developed degree of mental action and Consciousness,

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

the latter being called by psychologists "Simple Consciousness," but
which term we consider too indefinite, and which we will term "Physical
Consciousness," which will give a fair idea of the thing itself. We use
the word "Physical" in the double sense of "External," and "Relating to
the material structure of a living being," both of which definitions are
found in the dictionaries. And that is just what Physical Consciousness
really is—an "awareness" in the mind, or a "consciousness" of the
"external" world as evidenced by the senses; and of the "body" of the
animal or person. The animal or person thinking on the plane of Physical
Consciousness (all the higher animals do, and many men seem unable to
rise much higher), identifies itself with the physical body, and is
conscious only of thoughts of that body and the outside world. It
"knows," but not being conscious of mental operations, or of the
existence of its mind, it does not "know that it knows." This form of
consciousness, while infinitely above the mentation of the non-conscious
plane of "[sensation](errata.htm#3.md)," is like a different world of
thought from the consciousness of the highly developed intellectual man
of our age and race.

It is difficult for a man to form an idea of the Physical Consciousness
of the lower animals and savages, particularly as he finds it difficult
to understand his own consciousness except by the act of being
conscious. But observation and reason have given us a fair degree of
understanding of what this Physical

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Consciousness of
the animal is like—or at least in what respect it differs from our own
consciousness. Let us take a favorite illustration. A horse standing out
in the cold sleet and rain undoubtedly *feels* the discomfort, and
possibly pain, for we know by observation that animals feel both. But he
is not able to analyze his mental states and wonder when his master will
come out to him—think how cruel it is to keep him out of the warm
stable—wonder whether he will be taken out in the cold again
tomorrow—feel envious of other horses who are indoors—wonder why he is
compelled to be out cold nights, etc., etc.,—in short, he does not think
as would a reasoning man under such circumstances. He is aware of the
discomfort, just as would be the man—and he would run home if he could
just as would the man. But he is not able to pity himself, nor to think
about his personality as would the man, nor does he wonder whether such
a life is worth living, after all. He "knows," but is not able to think
of himself as knowing—he does not "know that he knows," as we do. He
experiences the physical pain and discomfort, but is spared the mental
discomfort and concern arising from the physical, which man so often
experiences.

The animal cannot shift its consciousness from the sensations of the
outer world to the inner states of being. It is not able to "know
itself." The difference may be clumsily illustrated by the example of a
man feeling, seeing or hearing something that gives him

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

a pleasurable sensation, or the reverse. He is conscious of the feeling
or sensation, and that it is pleasurable or otherwise. That is Physical
Consciousness, and the animal may share it with him. But it stops right
there with the animal. But the man may begin to wonder *why* the
sensation is pleasurable and to associate it with other things and
persons; or speculate *why* he dislikes it, what will follow, and so
on—that is Mental Consciousness, because he recognizes an inward self,
and is turning his attention *inward*. He may see another man and
experience a feeling or sensation of attraction or aversion—like or
dislike. This is Physical Consciousness, and an animal also may
experience the sensation. But the man goes further than the animal, and
wonders just what there is about the man he likes or detests, and may
compare himself to the man and wonder whether the latter feels as he
does, and so on—this is Mental Consciousness.

In animals the mental gaze is freely directed outward, and never returns
upon itself. In man the mental gaze may be directed inward, or may
return inward after its outward journey. The animal "knows"—the man not
only "knows," but he "knows that he knows," and is able to investigate
that "knowing" and speculate about it. We call this higher consciousness
Mental Consciousness. The operation of Physical Consciousness we call
Instinct—the operation of Mental Consciousness we call Reason.

The Man who has Mental Consciousness not only

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "feels" or
"senses" things, but he has words or mental concepts of these feelings
and sensations and may think of himself as experiencing them, separating
himself, the sensation or feeling, and the thing felt or sensed. The man
is able to think: "I feel; I hear; I see; I smell; I taste; I desire; I
do," etc., etc. The very words indicate Mental Consciousness recognizing
mental states and giving them names, and also recognizing something
called "I" that experiences the sensations. This latter fact has caused
psychologists to speak of this stage as "Self-consciousness," but we
reserve this idea of the "I" consciousness for a higher stage.

The animal experiences something that gives it the impressions or
feeling that we call "pain," "hurt," "pleasant," "sweet," "bitter,"
etc., all being forms of sensation, but it is unable to think of them in
words. The pain seems to be a part of itself, although possibly
associated with some person or thing that caused it. The study of the
unfoldment of consciousness in a young baby will give one a far better
idea of the grades and distinctions than can be obtained from reading
mere words.

Mental Consciousness is a growth. As Halleck says, "Many persons never
have more than a misty idea of such a mental attitude. They always take
themselves for granted, and never turn the gaze inward." It has been
doubted whether the savages have developed Self-consciousness, and even
many men of our own

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

race seem to be but little above the animals in intellect and
consciousness. They do not seem able to "know themselves" even slightly.
To them the "I" seems to be a purely physical thing—a body having
desires and feeling but little more. They are able to feel an act, but
scarcely more. They are not able to set aside any physical "not—I,"
being utterly unable to think of themselves as anything else but a Body.
The "I" and the Body are one with them, and they seem incapable of
distinguishing between them.

Then comes another stage in which mental-consciousness proper sets in.
The man begins to realize that he has "a mind." He is able to "know
himself" as a mental being, and to turn the gaze inward a little. This
period of development may be noticed in young children. For a time they
speak of themselves as a third person, until finally they begin to say
"I." Then a little later comes the ability to know their own mental
states as such—they know that they have a mind, and are able to
distinguish between it and the body. It is related that some children
experience a feeling of terror when they pass into this stage. They
exhibit signs of bashfulness and what is commonly termed
"self-consciousness" in that sense. Some tell us in after years that
when they became aware of themselves as an entity they were overcome
with alarm, as if by a sense of loneliness and apartness from the
Universe. Young people often feel this way for several years. There
seems to be a distinct feeling that

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

the Universe is antagonistic to and set apart from them.

And, although this feeling of separateness and apartness grows less
acute as the man grows older, yet it is always present to a greater or
less degree until a still higher stage—the Ego-consciousness is reached,
when it disappears as we shall see. And this mental-conscious stage is a
hard one for many. They are entangled in a mass of mental states which
the man thinks is "himself," and the struggle between the real "I" and
its confining sheaths is painful. And it becomes still more painful as
the end is neared, for as man advances in mental-consciousness and
knowledge he feels more keenly and suffers accordingly. Man eats the
fruit of the Tree of Knowledge and begins to suffer, and is driven out
of the Garden of Eden of the child and primitive races, who live like
the birds of the air and concern themselves not about mental states and
problems. But there is deliverance ahead in the shape of a higher
consciousness, although but few realize it and still fewer have gained
it. Perhaps this lesson may point out the way for you.

With the birth of mental-consciousness comes the knowledge that there is
a mind in others. Man is able to speculate and reason about the mental
states of other men, because he recognizes these states within himself.
As man advances in the Mental Consciousness he begins to develop a
constantly increasing degree and grade of Intellect, and accordingly he
attaches

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

the greatest importance to that part of his nature. Some men worship
Intellect as a God, ignoring its limitations which other thinkers have
pointed out. Such people are apt to reason that because the human
intellect (in its present state of development) reports that such a
thing *must* be, or *cannot* possibly be, that the matter is forever
settled. They ignore the fact that it is possible that Man's Intellect,
in its present state of unfoldment, may be able to take cognizance of
only a very small part of the Universal Fact, and that there play be
regions upon regions of Reality and Fact of which he cannot even dream,
so far are they removed from his experience. The unfoldment of a new
sense would open out a new world and might bring to light facts that
would completely revolutionize our entire world of conceptions by reason
of the new information it would give us.

But, nevertheless, from this Mental Consciousness has come the wonderful
work of Intellect, as shown in the achievements of Man up to this time,
and while we must recognize its limitations, we gladly join in singing
its praises. Reason is the tool with which Man is digging into the mine
of Facts, bringing to light new treasures every day. This stage of
Mental Consciousness is bringing to Man knowledge of himself—knowledge
of the Universe—that is well worth the price he pays for it. For Man
*does* pay a price for entrance into this stage—and he pays an
increasing price as he advances in its territory, for the higher he

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

advances the more keenly he feels and suffers, as well as enjoys.
Capacity for pain is the price Man pays for Attainment, up to a certain
stage. His pain passes from the Physical to the Mental consciousness,
and he becomes aware of problems that he never dreamt existed, and the
lack of an intelligent answer produces mental suffering. And the mental
suffering that comes to him from unsatisfied longings, disappointment,
the pain of others whom he loves, etc., is far worse than any physical
suffering.

The animal lives its animal life and is contented, for it knows no
better. If it has enough to eat—a place to sleep—a mate—it is happy. And
some men are likewise. But others find themselves involved in a world of
mental discomfort. New wants arise, and the lack of satisfaction brings
pain. Civilization becomes more and more complex, and brings its new
pains as well as new pleasures. Man attaches himself to "things," and
each day creates for himself artificial wants, which he must labor to
meet. His Intellect may not lead him upward, but instead may merely
enable him to invent new and subtle means and ways of gratifying his
senses to a degree impossible to the animals. Some men make a religion
of the gratification of their sensuality—their appetites—and become
beasts magnified by the power of Intellect. Others become vain,
conceited and puffed up with a sense of the importance of their
Personality (the false "I"). Others become morbidly introspective, and
spend their time analyzing and

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

dissecting their moods, motives, feelings, etc. Others exhaust their
capacity for pleasure and happiness, but looking outside for it instead
of within, and become *blase*, bored, *ennuied* and an affliction to
themselves. We mention these things not in a spirit of Pessimism, but
merely to show that even this great Mental Consciousness has a reverse
and ugly side as well as the bright face that has been ascribed to it.

As man reaches the higher stages of this Mental Consciousness, and the
next higher stage begins to dawn upon him, he is apt to feel more keenly
than ever the insufficiency of Life as it appears to him. He is unable
to understand Himself—his origin, destiny, purpose and nature—and he
chafes against the bars of the cage of Intellect in which he is
confined. He asks himself the question, "Whence come I—Whither go I—What
is the object of my Existence?" He becomes dissatisfied with the answers
the world has to give him to these questions, and he cries aloud in
despair—and but the answer of his own voice comes back to him from the
impassable walls with which he is surrounded. He does not realize that
his answer must come from Within—but so it is.

Psychology stops when it reaches the limits of Mental Consciousness, or
as it calls it "Self-Consciousness," and denies that there is anything
beyond—any unexplored regions of the Mind. It laughs at the reports that
come from those who have penetrated farther

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

within the recesses of their being, and dismisses the reports as mere
"dreams," "fantasies," "illusions," "ecstatic imaginings," "abnormal
states," etc., etc. But, nevertheless, there are schools of thought that
teach of these higher states, and there are men of all ages and races
that have entered them and have reported concerning them. And we feel
justified in asking you to take them into consideration.

There are two planes of Consciousness, of which we feel it proper to
speak, for we have obtained more or less information regarding them.
There are still higher planes, but they belong to higher phases of life
than are dealt with here.

The first of these planes or states of Consciousness, above the
"Self-Consciousness" of the psychologists (which we have called "Mental
Consciousness") may be called "Ego-consciousness," for it brings an
"awareness" of the Reality of the Ego. This "awareness" is far above the
Self-consciousness of the man who is able to distinguish "I" from "You,"
and to give it a name. And far above the consciousness that enables a
man, as he rises in the scale, to distinguish the "I" from faculty after
faculty of the mind, which he is able to recognize as "not—I," until he
finds left a mental something that he cannot set aside, which he calls
"I"—although this stage alone is very much higher than that of the
average of the race, and is a high degree of Attainment itself. It is
akin to this last stage, and yet still fuller and more complete. In

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

the dawning of Ego Consciousness the "I" recognizes itself still more
clearly and, more than this, is fully imbued with a sense and
"awareness" of its own *Reality*, unknown to it before. This awareness
is not a mere matter of reasoning—it is a "consciousness," just as is
Physical Consciousness and Mental Consciousness something different from
an "intellectual conviction." It is a Knowing, not a Thinking or
Believing. The "I" *knows* that it is Real—that it has its roots in the
Supreme Reality underlying all the Universe, and partakes of its
Essence. It does not know what this Reality is, but it knows that it is
Real, and something different from anything in the world of name, form,
number, time, space, cause and effect—something Transcendental and
surpassing all human experience. And knowing this, it knows that it
cannot be destroyed or hurt; cannot die, but is immortal; and that there
is Something which is the very essence of Good behind of, underneath and
even in itself. And in this certainty and consciousness is there Peace,
Understanding and Power. When it fully bursts upon one, Doubt, Fear,
Unrest and Dissatisfaction drop from him like wornout garments and he
finds himself clothed in the Faith that Knows; Fearlessness;
Restfulness; Satisfaction. Then he is able to say understandingly and
with meaning "I AM."

This Ego Consciousness is coming to many as a dawning knowledge—the
light is just rising from behind the hills. To others it has come
gradually and

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

slowly, but fully, and they now live in the full light of the
consciousness. Others it has burst upon like a flash, or vision—like a
light falling from the clear sky, almost blinding them at first, but
leaving them changed men and women, possessed of that something that
cannot be understood by or described to those who have not experienced
it. This last stage is called "Illumination" in one of its forms.

The man of the Ego Consciousness may not understand the Riddle of the
Universe or be able to give an answer to the great Questions of Life—but
he has ceased to worry about them—they now disturb him not. He may use
his intellect upon them as before, but never with the feeling that in
their intellectual solution rests his happiness or peace of mind. He
knows that he stands on solid rock, and though the storms of the world
of matter and force may beat upon him, he will not be hurt. This and
other things he knows. He cannot prove these things to others, for they
are not demonstrable by argument—he himself did not get them in that
way. And so he says but little about it—but lives his life as if he knew
them not, so far as outward appearances go. But inwardly he is a changed
man—his life is different from that of his brothers, for while their
souls are wrapped in slumber or are tossing in troubled dreams, his Soul
has awakened and is gazing upon the world with bright and fearless eyes.
There are, of course, different stages or degrees of this Consciousness,
just as there

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

are in the lower planes of consciousness. Some have it to a slight
degree, while others have it fully. Perhaps this lesson will tell some
of its readers just what is the thing that has "happened" to them and
which they hesitate to speak of to their closest friend or life
companion. To others it may open the way to a fuller realization. We
sincerely trust so, for one does not begin to Live until he knows the
"I" as Reality.

There is a stage still higher than this last mentioned, but it has come
to but very few of the race. Reports of it come from all times, races,
countries. It has been called "Cosmic Consciousness," and is described
as an awareness of the Oneness of Life—that is, a consciousness that the
Universe is filled with One Life—an actual perception and "awareness"
that the Universe is full of Life, Motion and Mind, and that there is no
such thing as Blind Force, or Dead Matter, but that All is alive,
vibrating and intelligent. That is, of course, that the *Real Universe*,
which is the Essence or background of the Universe of Matter, Energy and
Mind, is as they describe. In fact, the description of those who have
had glimpses of this state would indicate that they see the Universe as
All Mind—that All is Mind at the last. This form of consciousness has
been experienced by men here and there—only a few—in moments of
"Illumination," the period lasting but a very short space of time, then
fading away, leaving but a memory. In the moment of the "Illumination"
there came to those experiencing it a sense of. "in-touch-ness"

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

with Universal Knowledge and Life, impossible to describe, accompanied
by a Joy beyond understanding.

Regarding this last, "Cosmic Consciousness," we would state that it
means more than an intellectual conviction, belief or realization of the
facts as stated, for an actual *vision* and *consciousness* of these
things came in the moment of Illumination. Some others report that they
have a deep abiding sense of the reality of the facts described by the
report of the Illumined, but have not experienced the "vision" or
ecstasy referred to. These last people seem to have with them always the
same mental state as that possessed by those who had the "vision" and
passed out of it, carrying with them the remembrance and feeling, but
not the actual consciousness attained at the moment. They agree upon the
essential particulars of the reports. Dr. Maurice Bucke, now passed out
of this plane of life, wrote a book entitled "Cosmic Consciousness," in
which he describes a number of these cases, including his own, Walt
Whitman's and others, and in which he holds that this stage of
consciousness is before the race and will gradually come to it in the
future. He holds that the manifestation of it which has come to some few
of the race, as above stated, is but the first beams of the sun which
are flashing upon us and which are but prophecies of the appearance of
the great body of light itself.

We shall not here consider at length the reports of

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

certain great religious personages of the past, who have left records
that in moments of great spiritual exaltation they became conscious of
"being in the presence of the Absolute," or perhaps within the radius of
"the light of Its countenance." We have great respect for these reports,
and have every reason for believing many of them authentic,
notwithstanding the conflicting reports that have been handed down to us
by those experiencing them. These reports are conflicting because of the
fact that the minds of those who bad these glimpses of consciousness
were not prepared or trained to fully understand the nature of the
phenomena. They found themselves in the spiritual presence of Something
of awful grandeur and spiritual rank, and were completely dazed and
bewildered at the sight. They did not understand the nature of the
Absolute, and when they had sufficiently recovered they reported that
they had been in the "presence of God"—the word "God" meaning their
particular conception of Deity—that is, the one appearing as Deity in
their own particular religious creed or school. They saw nothing to
cause them to identify this Something with their particular conception
of Deity, except that they thought that "it *must* be God," and knowing
no other God except their own particular conception, they naturally
identifying the Something with "God" as they conceived Him to be. And
their reports naturally were along these lines.

Thus the reports of all religions are filled with accounts

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

of the so-called miraculous occurrences. The Catholic saint reports that
he "saw of light of God's countenance," and the non-Catholic reports
likewise regarding God as he knows him. The Mohammedan reports that he
caught a glimpse of the face of Allah, and the Buddhist tells us that he
saw Buddha under the tree. The Brahman has seen the face of Brahma, and
the various Hindu sects have men who give similar reports regarding
their own particular deities. The Persians have given similar reports,
and even the ancient Egyptians have left records of similar occurrences.
These conflicting reports have led to the belief, on the part of those
who did not understand the nature of the phenomena, that these things
were "all imagination" and fancy, if indeed not rank falsehood and
imposture. But the Yogis know better than this. They know that
underneath all these varying reports there is a common ground of truth,
which will be apparent to anyone investigating the matter. They know
that all of these reports (except a few based upon fraudulent imitation
of the real phenomenon) are based upon truth and are but the bewildered
reports of the various observers. They know that these people were
temporarily lifted above the ordinary plane of consciousness and were
made aware of the existence of a Being or Beings higher than mortal. It
does not follow that they saw "God" or the Absolute, for there are many
Beings of high spiritual growth and development that would appear to the
ordinary

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

mortal as a very God. The Catholic doctrine of Angels and Arch-angels is
corroborated by those among the Yogis who have been "behind the Veil,"
and they give us reports of the "Devas" and other advanced Beings. So
the Yogi accepts these reports of the various mystics, saints and
inspired ones, and accounts for them all by laws perfectly natural to
the students of the Yogi Philosophy, but which appear as supernatural to
those who have not studied along these lines.

But we cannot speak further of this phase of the subject in this lesson,
for a full discussion of it would lead us far away from the phase of the
general subject before us. But we wish to be understood as saying that
there are certain centers in the mental being of Man from which may come
light regarding the existence of the Absolute and higher order of
Beings. In fact, from these centers come to man that part of his mental
"feelings" that he calls "the religious instinct or intuition." Man does
not arrive at that underlying consciousness of "Something Beyond" by
means of his Intellect—it is the glimmer of light coming from the higher
centers of the Self. He notices these gleams of light, but not
understanding them, he proceeds to erect elaborate theological and
creedal structures to account for them, the work of the Intellect,
however, always lacking that "feeling" that the intuition itself
possesses. True religion, no matter under what name it may masquerade,
comes from the "heart" and is not

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

comforted or satisfied with these Intellectual explanations, and hence
comes that unrest and craving for satisfaction which comes to Man when
the light begins to break through.

But we must postpone a further discussion of this part of the subject
for the present. We shall consider it again in a future lesson in
connection with other matters. As we have said, our next two lessons
will take upon the inquiry regarding the regions outside of the
consciousness of the ordinary man. You will find it a most fascinating
and instructive inquiry and one that will open up new fields of thought
for many of you.

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

# MANTRAM (AFFIRMATION.)

I Am a Being far greater and grander than I have as yet conceived. I am
unfolding gradually but surely into higher planes of consciousness. I am
moving Forward and Upward constantly. My goal is the Realization of the
True Self, and I welcome each stage of Unfoldment that leads me toward
my aim. I am a manifestation of REALITY. I *AM*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Lesson VIII. The Highlands and Lowlands of Mind](ryo10.md)
