[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Yoga](../../hin/yoga/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ryo10.md) 
[Next](ryo12.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B000FCG7RS/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Raja Yoga*, by Yogi Ramacharaka (William Walker Atkinson), \[1906\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

### THE NINTH LESSON.

#### THE MENTAL PLANES.

In our last lesson we told you something about the operation of the mind
outside of the field of consciousness. In this lesson we will attempt to
classify these out-of-consciousness planes, by directing your attention
to the several mental planes above and below the plane of consciousness.
As we stated in the last lesson, over 90 per cent of our mental
operations are conducted outside of the field of consciousness, so that
the consideration of the planes is seen to be an important subject.

Man is a Centre of Consciousness in the great One Life of the Universe.
His soul has climbed a great many steps before it reached its present
position and stage of unfoldment. And it will pass through many more
steps until it is entirely free and delivered from the necessity of its
swaddling clothes.

In his mental being man contains traces of all that has gone before—all
the experiences of himself and the great race movement of which he is a
part. And, likewise, his mind contains faculties and mental planes which
have not as yet unfolded into consciousness, and of the existence of
which he is but imperfectly aware. All of these mental possessions,
however. are useful and valuable to him—even the lowest. The lowest may
be used to advantage, under proper mastery, and are only dangerous to
the man who allows them to

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

master him instead of serving him as they should, considering his
present stage of development.

In this consideration of the several mental planes we shall not confine
ourselves to the technical occult terms given to these several planes,
but will place them in general groups and describe the features and
characteristics of each, rather than branch off into long explanations
of the growth and reason of the several planes, which would take us far
away from the practical consideration of the subject.

Beginning at the lowest point of the scale we see that man has a body.
The body is composed of minute cells of protoplasm. These cells are
built up of countless molecules, atoms and particles of matter—precisely
the same matter that composes the rocks, trees, air, etc., around him.
The Yogi philosophy tells us that even the atoms of matter have life and
an elementary manifestation of mind, which causes them to group together
according to the law of attraction, forming different elements,
combinations, etc. This law of attraction is a mental operation, and is
the first evidence of mental choice, action and response. Below this is
Prana or Force, which, strictly speaking, is also a manifestation of
mind, although for convenience we designate it as a separate
manifestation of the Absolute.

And therefore we find that this law of attraction between the atoms and
particles of matter is a mental action, and that it belongs to man's
mental kingdom, because he has a body and this mental action is
continually

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

going on in his body. So therefore this is the lowest mental plane to be
considered in the make-up of the man, This plane is, of course, far
sunken beneath the plane of consciousness, and is scarcely identified
with the personality of the man at all, but rather belongs to the life
of the whole, manifest in the rock as well as in the man.

But after these atoms have been grouped by the law of attraction and
have formed molecules of matter, they are taken possession of by a
higher mental activity and built up into cells by the mental action of
the plant. The life impulse of the plant begins by drawing to it certain
particles of inorganic matter—chemical elements—and then building them
into a single cell. Oh, mystery of the cell! The intellect of man is
unable to duplicate this wonderful process. The Mind Principle on the
Vegetative Plane, however, knows exactly how to go to work to select and
draw to itself just the elements needed to build up the single cell.
Then taking up its abode in that cell—using it as a basis of operations,
it proceeds to duplicate its previous performance, and so cell after
cell is added, by the simple reproductive process of di, vision and
subdivision—the primitive and elemental sex process—until the mighty
plant is built up. From the humblest vegetable organism up to the
greatest oak the process is the same.

And it does not stop there. The body of man is also built up in just
this way, and he has this vegetative mind also within him, below the
plane of consciousness,

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

of course. To many this thought of a vegetative mind may be somewhat
startling. But let us remember that every part of our body has been
built up from the vegetable cell. The unborn child starts with the
coalition of two cells. These cells begin to build up the new body for
the occupancy of the child—that is, the mind principle in the cells
directs the work, of course—drawing upon the body of the mother for
nourishment and supplies. The nourishment in the mother's blood, which
supplies the material for the building up of the child's body, is
obtained by the mother eating end assimilating the vegetable cells of
plants, directly or indirectly. If she eats fruit, nuts, vegetables,
etc., she obtains the nourishment of the plant life directly—if she eats
meat she obtains it indirectly, for the animal from which the meat was
taken built up the meat from vegetables. There is no two ways about
this—all nourishment of the animal and human kingdom is obtained from
the vegetable kingdom, directly or indirectly.

And the cell action in the child is identical with the cell action in
the plant. Cells constantly reproducing themselves and building
themselves up into bodily organs, parts, etc., under the direction and
guidance of the mind principle. The child grows in this way until the
hour of birth. It is born, and then the process is but slightly changed.
The child begins to take nourishment either from the mother's milk or
from the milk of the cow, or other forms of food. And as it grows larger
it partakes of many different

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

varieties of food. But always it obtains building material from the cell
life of the plants.

And this great building up process is intelligent, purposeful, to a
wonderful degree. Man with his boasted intellect cannot explain the real
"thingness" of the process. A leading scientist who placed the egg of a
small lizard under microscopical examination and then watched it slowly
develop has said that it seemed as if some hand was tracing the outlines
of the tiny vertebræ, and then building up around it. Think for a moment
of the development of the germ within the egg of the humming-bird, or
the ant, or the gnat, or the eagle. Every second a change may be
noticed. The germ cell draws to itself nourishment from the other part
of the egg, and then it grows and reproduces another cell. Then both
cells divide—then subdivide until there are millions and millions and
millions of cells. And all the while the building up process continues,
and the bird or insect assumes shape and form, until at last the work is
accomplished and the young bird emerges from the egg.

And the work thus commenced continues until the death of the animal. For
there is a constant using-up and breaking-down of cell and tissue, which
the organism must replace. And so the vegetative mind of the plant, or
insect, or animal, or man, is constantly at work building up new cells
from the food, throwing out worn-out and used-up material from the
system. Not only this, but it attends to the circulation of the blood in
order that the materials for the

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

building up may be carried to all parts of the system. It attends to the
digestion and assimilation of the food—the wonderful work of the organs
of the body. It attends to the healing of wounds, the fight against
disease, the care of the physical body. And all this out of the plane of
consciousness—in the infant man, the animal world, the vegetable
kingdom—ever at work, untiring, intelligent, wonderful. And this plane
of mind is in man as well as in the plant, and it does its work without
aid from the conscious part of man, although man may interfere with it
by adverse conscious thought, which seems to paralyze its efforts.
Mental Healing is merely the restoring of normal conditions, so that
this part of the body may do its work without the hindrance of adverse
conscious thought.

On this plane of the mind is found all of the vital functions and
operations. The work is done out-of-consciousness, and the consciousness
is aware of this part of the mind only when it makes demands upon the
conscious for food, etc. On this plane also resides the elementary
instinct that tends toward reproduction and sexual activity. The demand
of this part of the mind is always "increase and multiply," and
according to the stage of growth of the individual is the mandate
carried out, as we shall see presently. The elementary impulses and
desires that we find rising into the field of consciousness come from
this plane of the mind. Hunger, thirst and the reproductive desires are
its messages to the higher

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

parts of the mind. And these messages are natural and free from the
abuses and prostitution often observed attached to them by the intellect
of man in connection with his unrestrained animal impulses. Gluttony and
unnatural lust arise not from the primitive demand of this plane of the
mind-for the lower animals even are free from them to a great extent—but
it is reserved for man to so prostitute these primitive natural
tendencies, in order to gratify unnatural and artificial appetites,
which serve to frustrate nature rather than to aid her.

As Life advanced in the scale and animal forms appeared on the scene new
planes of mind were unfolded, in accordance to the necessity of the
living forms. The animal was compelled to hunt for his food—to prey upon
other forms, and to avoid being preyed upon by others. He was compelled
to struggle for the unfoldment of latent powers of his mind that would
give him means to play his part in the scheme of life. He was compelled
to do certain things in order to live and reproduce his kind. And he
demanded not in vain. For there came to him slowly an unfolding
knowledge of the things necessary for the requirements of his life. We
call this Instinct. But, pray remember, by Instinct we do not mean the
still higher something that is really rudimentary Intellect that we
notice in the higher animals. We are speaking now of the unreasoning
instinct observed in the lower animals, and to a certain degree in man.
This Instinctive plane of mentality causes the bird

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

to build its nest before its eggs are laid, which instructs the animal
mother how to care for its young when born, and after birth; which
teaches the bee to construct its cell and to store up its honey. These
and countless other things in animal life, and in the higher form of
plant life, are manifestations of Instinct—that great plane of the mind.
In fact, the greater part of the life of the animal is instinctive,
although the higher forms of animals have developed something like
rudimentary Intellect or Reason, which enables them to meet new
conditions where Intellect alone fails them.

And man has this plane of mind within him, below consciousness. In fact
the lower forms of human life manifest but little Intellect, and live
almost altogether according to their Instinctive impulses and desires.

Every man has this Instinctive mental region within him and from it are
constantly arising impulses and desires to perplex and annoy him, as
well as to serve him occasionally. The whole secret consists in whether
the man has Mastery of his lower self or not.

From this plane of the mind arise the hereditary impulses coming down
from generations of ancestors, reaching back to the cavemen, and still
further back into the animal kingdom. A queer storehouse is this. Animal
instincts—passions, appetites, desires, feelings, sensations, emotions,
etc., are there. Hate, envy. jealousy, revenge, the lust of the animal
seeking the gratification of his sexual impulses, etc., etc., are

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

there, and are constantly intruding upon our attention until we have
asserted our mastery. And often the failure to assert this mastery comes
from an ignorance of the nature of the desire, etc. We have been taught
that these thoughts were "bad" without being told *why*, and we have
feared them and thought then, the promptings of an impure nature, or a
depraved mind, etc. This is all wrong. These things are not "bad" of
themselves—they came to us honestly—they are our heritage from the past.
They belong to the animal part of our nature, and were necessary to the
animal in his stage of development. We have the whole menagerie within
us, but that does not mean that we should turn the beasts loose upon
ourselves or others. It was necessary for the animal to be fierce, full
of fight, passionate, regardless of the rights of others, etc., but we
have outgrown that stage of development, and it is ignoble for us to
return to it, or to allow it to master us.

This lesson is not intended as a discourse upon Ethics or morals. We do
not intend going into a discussion of the details of "Right and Wrong,"
for we have touched upon that phase of the subject in other works. But
we feel justified in calling your attention to the fact that the human
mind intuitively recognizes the "Rightness" of the living up to that
which comes to us from the highest parts of the mind—the highest product
of our unfoldment. And it likewise intuitively recognizes the
"Wrongness" of the falling back into that which belongs to the lower
stages of our mentality—

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

to the animal part of us, that is our heritage from the past and that
which has gone before.

While we may be puzzled about many details of morals and ethics and may
not be able to "explain" why we consider certain things right or wrong,
we still intuitively feel that the highest "Right" of which we are
capable is the acting out of that which is coming to us from the highest
pole of our mental being, and that the lowest "Wrong" consists in doing
that which carries us back to the life of the lower animals, in so far
as mentality is concerned. Not because there is anything absolutely
"Wrong" in the mental processes and consequent of the animals in
themselves—they are all right and perfectly natural in the animals—but
we intuitively recognize that for us to fall back to the animal stage is
a "going backward" in the scale of evolution. We intuitively shrink at
an exhibition of brutality and animality on the part of a man or woman.
We may not know just why, but a little reflection will show us that it
is a sinking in the evolutionary scale, against which the spiritual part
of us revolts and protests.

But this must not be construed to mean that the advanced soul looks upon
the animal world with disgust or horror. On the contrary, there is
nowhere to be found a higher respect for animal life and being than
among the Yogi and other advanced souls. They delight in watching the
animals filling their places in life—playing out their parts in the
divine scheme of life. Their animal passions and desires are

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

actions viewed sympathetically and lovingly by the advanced soul, and
nothing "Wrong" or disgusting is seen there. And even the coarseness and
brutality of the savage races are so regarded by these advanced souls.
They see everything as natural according to the grade and degree of
development of these people.

It is only when these advanced souls view the degeneracies of
"civilized" life that they feel sorrow and pain. For here they see
instances of devolution instead of evolution—degeneration instead of
regeneration and advancement. And not only do they know this to be the
fact, but the degenerate specimens of mankind themselves feel and know
it. Compare the expression of the animal or savage going through their
natural life actions and performances. See how free and natural are
their expressions, how utterly apart are evidences of wrong doing. They
have not as yet found out the fatal secret of Good and Evil—they have
not as yet eaten the forbidden fruit. But, on the contrary, look into
the faces of the degenerates and fallen souls of our civilized life. See
the furtive glance and the self-consciousness of "Wrong" evident in
every face. And this consciousness of "Wrong" bears heavily upon these
people—it is heavier than the punishments heaped upon them That nameless
something called "conscience" may be smothered for a while, but sooner
or later it comes to light and demands the pound of flesh from its
victim.

And yet you will say that it seems hard to think

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

that the same thing can be Right in one person and Wrong in another.
This seems like a hard saying and a dangerous doctrine, but it is the
Truth. And man instinctively recognizes it. He does not expect the same
sense of moral responsibility in a young child, or in a savage, that he
does in a mature, developed, civilized man. He may restrain the child
and the savage, for self-protection and the welfare of all, but he
realizes the distinction, or at least should do so. And not only is this
true, but as man advances in the scale he casts off many ideas of
"Wrong" that he once held, having outgrown the old ideas and having
grown into new conceptions. And the tendency is always upward and
onward. The tendency is constantly from Force and Restraint toward Love
and Freedom. The ideal condition would be one in which there were no
laws and no necessity for them—a condition in which men had ceased to do
wrong because they had outgrown the desire rather than from fear or
restraint or force. And while this condition as yet seems afar off,
there is constantly going on an enfoldment of higher planes and
faculties of the mind, which when once fully manifest in the race will
work a complete revolution in ethics and laws and government—and for the
better, of course. In the meantime Mankind moves along, doing the best
it can, making a steady though slow progress.

There is another plane of the mind which is often called the "Instinct,"
but which is but a part of the plane of the Intellect, although its
operations are,

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

largely below the field of consciousness. We allude to what may be
called the "Habit Mind," in order to distinguish it from the Instinctive
Plane. The difference is this: The Instinctive plane of mind is made up
of the ordinary operations of the mind below the plane of the Intellect,
and yet above the plane of the Vegetative mind—and also of the acquired
experiences of the race, which have been transmitted by heredity, etc.
But the "Habit Mind" contains only that which has been placed there by
the person himself and which he has acquired by experience, habit, and
observation, repeated so often until the mind knows it so well that it
is carried below the field of consciousness and becomes "second nature,"
and akin to Instinct.

The text books upon psychology are filled with illustrations and
examples of the habit phase or plane of the mental operations, and we do
not think it necessary to repeat instances of the same kind here.
Everyone is familiar with the fact that tasks which at first are learned
only by considerable work and time soon become fixed in some part of the
mind until their repetition calls for little or no exercise of conscious
mental operation. In fact, some writers have claimed that no one really
"learns" how to perform a task until he can perform it almost
automatically. The pupil who in the early stages of piano playing finds
it most difficult to control and manage his fingers, after a time is
able to forget all about his fingering and devote his entire attention
to the pages of his

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

music, and after this he is able to apparently let his fingers play the
entire piece of music by themselves, without a thought on his part. The
best performers have told us that in the moments of their highest
efforts they are aware that the out-of-conscious portion of their mind
is doing the work for them, and they are practically standing aside and
witnessing the work being done. So true is this that in some cases it is
related that if the performer's conscious mind attempts to take up the
work the quality is impaired and the musician and the audience notice
the difference.

The same thing is true in the case of the woman learning to operate the
sewing machine. It is quite difficult at first, but gradually it grows
to "run itself." Those who have mastered the typewriter have had the
same experience. At first each letter had to be picked out with care and
effort. After a gradual improvement the operator is enabled to devote
her entire attention to the "copy" and let the fingers pick out the keys
for themselves. Many operators learn rapid typewriting by so training
the habit mind that it picks out the letter-keys by reason of their
position, the letters being covered over in order to force the mind to
adapt itself to the new requirements. A similar state of affairs exists
wherever men or women have to use tools of any kind. The tool soon is
recognized by the mind and used as if it were a part of the body, and no
more conscious thought is devoted to the manipulation than we devote to
the operation of

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

walking, which, by the way, is learned by the child only by the
expenditure of time and labor. It is astonishing how many things we do
"automatically" in this way. Writers have called our attention to the
fact that the average man cannot consciously inform you how he puts on
his coat in the morning—which arm goes in first, how the coat is held,
etc. But the habit mind knows—knows very well. Let the student stand up
and put on his coat in the regular way, following the leadings of the
habit mind. Then, after removing it, let him attempt to put it on by
inserting the other arm first, for instance. He will be surprised to
find out how awkward it will be for him, and how completely he has been
depending upon the habit mind. And tomorrow morning let him find out
which shoe the habit mind has been putting on him first and then try to
reverse the order and notice how flurried and disturbed the habit mind
will become, and how frantically it will signal to the conscious mind:
"Something wrong up there!" Or try to Dutton on your collar, reversing
the order in which the tabs are placed over the button—right before
left, or left before right, as the case may be, and notice the
involuntary protest. Or, try to reverse the customary habit in walking
and attempt to swing your right arm with the movement of your right leg,
and so on, and you will find it will require the exercise of great will
power. Or, try to "change hands" and use your knife and fork. But we
must stop giving examples and illustrations. Their number is countless.

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

Not only does the habit mind attend to physical actions, etc., but it
also takes a hand in our mental operations. We soon acquire the habit of
ceasing to consciously consider certain things, and the habit mind takes
the matter for granted, and thereafter we will think automatically on
those particular questions, unless we are shaken out of the habit by a
rude jolt from the mind of someone else, or from the presentation of
some conflicting idea occasioned by our own experience or reasoning
processes. And the habit mind hates to be disturbed and compelled to
revise its ideas. It fights against it, and rebels, and the result is
that many of us are slaves to old outgrown ideas that we realize are
false and untrue, but which we find that we "cannot exactly get rid of."
In our future lessons we will give methods to get rid of these old
outgrown ideas.

There are other planes of mind which have to do with the phenomena known
as "psychic," by which is meant the phases of psychic phenomena known as
clairvoyance, psychometry, telepathy, etc., but we shall not consider
them in this lesson, for they belong to another part of the general
subject. We have spoken of them in a general way in our "Fourteen
Lessons in Yogi Philosophy, etc."

And now we come to the plane of mind known to us as Intellect or the
Reasoning Faculties. Webster defines the word Intellect as follows: The
part or faculty of the human soul by which it knows, as distinguished
from the power to feel and to will; thy.

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

thinking faculty; the understanding. The same authority defines the word
Reason as follows: "The faculty or capacity of the human mind by which
it is distinguished from the intelligence of the inferior animals." We
shall not attempt to go into a consideration of the conscious Intellect,
for to do so we would be compelled to take up the space of the remaining
lessons of the course, and besides, the student may find extended
information on this subject in any of the text books on psychology.
Instead we will consider other faculties and planes of mind which the
said text books pass by rapidly, or perhaps deny. And one of these
planes is that of Unconscious Reasoning, or Intellect. To many this term
will seem paradoxical, but students of the unconscious will understand
just what is meant.

Reasoning is not necessarily conscious in its operations, in fact, a
greater part of the reasoning processes are performed below or above the
conscious field. In our last lesson we have given a number of examples
proving this fact, but a few more remarks may not be out of place, nor
without interest to the student.

In our last lesson you will see many instances stated in which the
sub-conscious field of the Intellect worked out problems, and then after
a time handed to the conscious reason the solution of the matter. This
has occurred to many of us, if not indeed to all of us. Who has not
endeavored to solve a problem or question of some sort and after "giving
it up" has had it suddenly answered and flashed into consciousness

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

when least expected. The experience is common to the race. While the
majority of us have noticed these things; we have regarded them as
exceptional and out of the general rule. Not so, however, with students
of the mental planes. The latter have recognized these planes of reason,
and have availed themselves of their knowledge by setting these
unconscious faculties to work for them. In our next lesson we will give
directions to our students regarding this accomplishment, which may
prove of the greatest importance to those who will take the trouble to
practice the directions given. It is a plan that is known to the
majority of men who have "done things" in the world, the majority of
them, however, having discovered the plan for themselves as the result
of a need or demand upon the inner powers of mind.

The plane of mind immediately above that of Intellect is that known as
Intuition. Intuition is defined by Webster as follows: "Direct
apprehension or cognition; immediate knowledge, as in perception or
consciousness, involving no reasoning process; quick or ready insight or
apprehension." It is difficult to explain just what is meant by
Intuition, except to those who have experienced it—and these people do
not need the explanation. Intuition is just as real a mental faculty as
is Intellect—or, to be more exact, is just as much a collection of
mental faculties. Intuition is above. the field of consciousness, and
its messages are passed downward, though its processes are hidden. The
race is gradually unfolding into the

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

mental plane of Intuition, and the race will some day pass into full
consciousness on that plane. In the meantime it gets but flashes and
glimpses from the hidden region. Many of the best things we have come
from that region. Art, music, the love of the beautiful and good poetry,
the higher form of love, spiritual insight to a certain degree,
intuitive perception of truth, etc., etc., come from this region. These
things are not reasoned out by the intellect, but seem to spring full
born from some unknown region of the mind.

In this wonderful region dwells Genius. Many, if not all of the great
writers, poets, musicians, artists and other examples of genius have
felt that their power came to them from some higher source. Many have
thought that it emanated from some being kindly to them, who would
inspire them with power and wisdom. Some transcendent power seemed to
have been called into operation, and the worker would feel that his
product or creation was not his handiwork, but that of some outside
intelligence. The Greeks recognized this something in man, and called it
man's "Daemon." Plutarch in his discourse on the daemon that guided
Socrates speaks of the vision of Timarchus, who, in the case of
Trophonius, saw spirits which were partly attached to human bodies, and
partly over and above them, shining luminously over their heads. He was
informed by the oracle that the part of the spirit which was immersed in
the body was called the "soul," but that the outer and unimmersed
portion

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

was called the "daemon." The oracle also informed him that every man had
his daemon, whom he is bound to obey; those who implicitly follow that
guidance are the prophetic souls, the favorites of the gods. Goethe also
spoke of the daemon as a power higher than the will, and which inspired
certain natures with miraculous energy.

We may smile at these conceptions, but they are really very close to the
truth. The higher regions of the mind, while belonging to the
individual, and a part of himself, are so far above his ordinary
consciousness that to all intents and purposes messages from them are as
orders from another and higher soul. But still the voice is that of the
"I," speaking through its sheaths as best it is able.

This power belongs to every one of us, although it manifests only in the
degree that we are able to respond to it. It grows by faith and
confidence, and closes itself up, and withdraws into its recesses when
we doubt it and would question its veracity and reality. What we call
"originality" comes from this region. The Intuitive faculties pass on to
the conscious mind some perception of truth higher than the Intellect
has been able to work out for itself, and to! it is called the work of
genius.

The advanced occultist knows that in the higher regions of the mind are
locked up intuitive perceptions of all truth, and that he who can gain
access to these regions will know everything intuitively, and as a
matter of clear sight, without reasoning or explanation.

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The race has not
as yet reached the heights of Intuition—it is just beginning to climb
the foothills. But it is moving in the right direction. It will. be well
for us if we will open ourselves to the higher inner guidance, and be
willing to be "led by the Spirit." This is a far different thing from
being led by outside intelligence, which may, or may not, be qualified
to lead. But the Spirit within each of us has our interests at heart and
is desirous of our best good, and is not only ready but willing to take
us by the hand and lead us on. The Higher Self is doing the best it can
for our development and welfare, but is hampered by the confining
sheaths. And alas, many of us glory in these sheaths and consider them
the highest part of ourselves. Do not be afraid to let the light of the
Spirit pierce through these confining sheaths and dissolve them. The
Intuition, however, is not the Spirit, but is one of its channels of
communication to us. There are other and still higher planes of mind,
but the Intuition is the one next in the line of unfoldment, and we
should open ourselves to its influence and welcome its unfoldment.

Above the plane of Intuition is that of the Cosmic Knowing, upon which
we will find the consciousness of the Oneness of All. We have spoken of
this plane in our lesson on the Unfoldment of Consciousness. When one is
able to "conscious" on this plane—this exalted plane of mind—he is able
to see fully, plainly and completely that there is One Great Life
underlying all the countless forms and shapes of manifestation.

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> He is able to see
that separateness is only "the working fiction of the Universe." He is
able to see that each Ego is but a Centre of Consciousness in the great
Ocean of Life—all in pursuance of the Divine Plan, and that he is moving
forward toward higher and higher planes of manifestation, power and
individuality, in order to take a greater and grander part in the
Universal work and plans.

The Cosmic Knowing in its fulness has come to but few of the race, but
many have had glimpses, more or less clear, of its transcendent wonder,
and others are on the borderland of this plane. The race is unfolding
gradually, slowly but surely, and those who have had this wonderful
experience are preparing others for a like experience. The seed is being
sown, and the harvest will come later. This and other phases of the
higher forms of consciousness are before the race. The individuals who
read this lesson are perhaps nearer to it than they think; their
interest in the lessons is an indication of that hunger of the soul
which is a prophecy of the satisfaction of the cry for spiritual bread.
The Law of Life heeds these cries for aid and nourishment and responds
accordingly, but along the lines of the highest wisdom and according to
the *real requirements* of the individual.

Let us close this lesson with a quotation from "Light on the Path,"
which bears directly upon the concluding thought. Read it carefully and
let it sink down deep into your inner consciousness, and you will feel
the

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

thrill of joy that comes to him who is nearing the goal.

"Look for the flower to bloom in the silence that follows the storm; not
till then.

"It shall grow, it will shoot up, it will make branches and leaves, and
form buds while the storm lasts. But not until the entire personality of
the man is dissolved and melted—not until it is held by the divine
fragment which has created it, as a mere subject for grave experiment
and experience—not until the whole nature has yielded and become subject
unto its higher self, can the bloom open. Then will come a calm such as
comes in a tropical country after the heavy rain, when nature works so
swiftly that one may see her action. Such a calm will come to the
harassed spirit. And in the deep silence the mysterious event will occur
which will prove that the way has been found. Call it by whatever name
you will. It is a voice that speaks where there is none to speak, it is
a messenger that comes—a messenger without form or substance—or it is
the flower of the soul that has opened. It cannot be described by any
metaphor. But it can be felt after, looked for, and desired, even among
the raging of the storm. The silence may last a moment of time, or it
may last a thousand years. But it will end. Yet you will carry its
strength with you. Again and again the battle must be fought and won. It
is only for an interval that nature can be still."

\*          \*          \*          \*          \*

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

The concluding three lessons of this series will be devoted to a
practical course of instruction in the development of the hidden planes
of the mind, or rather, in the development of the power of the
individual to master the same and make use of them in his life. He will
be taught to master the lower principles, not only in the surmounting of
them, but in the transmitting of the elemental forces toward his higher
ends. Power may be obtained from this part of the mind, under the
direction of the Will. And the student will be told how to set the
unconscious Intellect to work for him. And he will be told how to
develop and train the Will. We have now passed the line between the
theoretical and the practical phases of the subject, and from now on it
will be a case of train, develop, cultivate and apply. Knowing what lies
back of it all, the student is now prepared to receive the instructions
which he might have misused before. Peace be with thee all.

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

# MANTRAM (AFFIRMATION).

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

I AM THE MASTER OF MY SOUL.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Lesson X. Sub-consciousing](ryo12.md)
