[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Yoga](../../hin/yoga/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ryo09.md) 
[Next](ryo11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B000FCG7RS/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Raja Yoga*, by Yogi Ramacharaka (William Walker Atkinson), \[1906\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

### THE EIGHTH LESSON.

#### THE HIGHLANDS AND LOWLANDS OF MIND.

The Self of each of us has a vehicle of expression which we call the
Mind, but which vehicle is much larger and far more complex than we are
apt to realize. As a writer has said "Our Self is greater than we know;
it has peaks above, and lowlands below the plateau of our conscious
experience." That which we know as the "conscious mind" is not the Soul.
The Soul is not a part of that which we know in consciousness, but, on
the contrary, that which we know in consciousness is but a small part of
the Soul—the conscious vehicle of a greater Self, or "I."

The Yogis have always taught that the mind has many planes of
manifestation and action—and that many of its planes operated above and
below the plane of consciousness. Western science is beginning to
realize this fact, and its theories regarding same may be found in any
of the later works on psychology. But this is a matter of recent
development in Western science. Until very recently the text books held
that Consciousness and Mind were synonymous, and that the Mind was
conscious of all of its activities, changes and modifications.

[Leibnitz](errata.htm#4.md) was one of the first Western philosophers to
advance the idea that there were planes of mental activity outside of
the plane of consciousness, and

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

since his time the leading thinkers have slowly but surely moved forward
to his position.

At the present time it is generally conceded that at least ninety per
cent of our mental operations take place in the out-of-conscious realm.
Prof. Elmer Gates, the well known scientist, has said: "At least ninety
per cent of our mental life is sub-conscious. If you will analyze your
mental operations you will find that conscious thinking is never a
continuous line of consciousness, but a series of conscious data with
great intervals of subconscious. We sit and try to solve a problem, and
fail. We walk around, try again, and fail. Suddenly an idea dawns that
leads to the solution of the problem. The subconscious processes were at
work. We do not volitionally create our own thinking. It takes place in
us. We are more or less passive recipients. We cannot change the nature
of a thought, or of a truth, but we can, as it were, *guide the ship by
a moving of the helm*. Our mentation is largely the result of the great
Cosmic Whole upon us."

Sir William Hamilton says that the sphere of our consciousness is only a
small circle in the center of a far wider sphere of action and thought,
of which we are conscious through its effects.

Taine says: "Outside of a little luminous circle, lies a large ring of
twilight, and beyond this an indefinite night; but the events of this
twilight and this night are as real as those within the luminous
circle."

Sir Oliver Lodge, the eminent English scientist,

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

speaking of the planes of the mind, says: "Imagine an iceberg glorying
in its crisp solidity, and sparkling pinnacles, resenting attention paid
to its submerged self, or supporting region, or to the saline liquid out
of which it arose, and into which in clue course it will some day
return. Or, reversing the metaphor, we might liken our present state to
that of the hulls of ships submerged in a dim ocean among strange
monsters, propelled in a blind manner through space; proud perhaps of
accumulating many barnacles as decoration; only recognizing our
destination by bumping against the clock-wall; and with no cognizance of
the deck and cabins above us, or the spars and sails—no thought of the
sextant, and the compass, and the captain—no perception of the lookout
on the mast—of the distant horizon. With no vision of objects far
ahead—dangers to be avoided—destinations to be reached—other ships to be
spoken to by means other than by bodily contact—a region of sunshine and
cloud, of space, or perception, and of intelligence utterly inaccessible
to parts below the waterline."

We ask our students to read carefully the above expression of Sir Oliver
Lodge, for it gives one of the clearest and most accurate figures of the
actual state of affairs concerning the mental planes that we have seen
in Western writings.

And other Western writers have noted and spoken of these
out-of-conscious realms. Lewes has said: "It is very certain that in
every conscious volition—every act that is so characterized—the larger
part of

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

it is quite unconscious. It is equally certain that in every perception
there are unconscious processes of reproduction and inference. There is
a middle distance of sub-consciousness, and a background of
unconsciousness."

Taine has told us that: "Mental events imperceptible to consciousness
are far more numerous than the others, and of the world that makes up
our being we only perceive the highest points—the lighted-up peaks of a
continent whose lower levels remain in the shade. Beneath ordinary
sensations are their components, that is to say, the elementary
sensations, which must be combined into groups to reach our
[consciousness](errata.htm#5.md)."

Maudsley says: "Examine closely and without bias the ordinary mental
operations of daily life, and you will find that consciousness has not
one-tenth part of the function therein which it is commonly assumed to
have. In every conscious state there are at work conscious,
sub-conscious, and infra-conscious energies, the last as indispensable
as the first."

Oliver [Wendell](errata.htm#6.md) Holmes said: "There are thoughts that
never emerge into consciousness, which yet make their influence felt
among the perceptible mental currents, just as the unseen planets sway
the movements of those that are watched and mapped by the astronomer."

Many other writers have given us examples and instances of the operation
of the out-of-consciousness planes of thought. One has written that when
the

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

solution of a problem he had long vainly dealt with, flashed across his
mind, he trembled as if in the presence of another being who had
communicated a secret to him All of us have tried to remember a name or
similar thing without success, and have then dismissed the matter from
our minds, only to have the missing name or thought suddenly presented
to our conscious mind a few minutes, or hours, afterwards. Something in
our mind was at work hunting up the missing word, and when it found
it it presented it to us.

A writer has mentioned what he called "unconscious rumination," which
happened to him when he read books presenting new points of view
essentially opposed to his previous opinions. After days, weeks, or
months, he found that to his great astonishment the old opinions were
entirely rearranged, and new ones lodged there. Many examples of this
unconscious mental digestion and assimilation are mentioned in the books
on the subject written during the past few years.

It is related of Sir W. R. Hamilton that he discovered quarternions one
day while walking with his wife in the observatory at Dublin. He relates
that he suddenly felt "the galvanic circle of thought" close, and the
sparks that fell from it was the fundamental mathematical relations of
his problem, which is now an important law in mathematics.

Dr. Thompson has written: "At times I have had a feeling of the
uselessness of all voluntary effort, and

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

also that the matter was working itself clear in my mind. It has many
times seemed to me that I was really a passive instrument in the hands
of a person not myself. In view of having to wait for the results of
these unconscious processes, I have proved the habit of getting together
material in advance, and then leaving the mass to digest itself till I
am ready to write about it. I delayed for a month the writing of my book
'System of Psychology,' but continued reading the authorities. I would
not try to think about the book. I would watch with interest the people
passing the windows. One evening when reading the paper, the substance
of the missing part of the book flashed upon my mind, and I began to
write. This is only a sample of many such experiences."

Berthelot, the founder of Synthetic Chemistry has said that the
experiments leading to his wonderful discoveries have never been the
result of carefully followed trains of thought—of pure reasoning
processes—but have come of themselves, so to speak, from the clear sky.

Mozart has written: "I cannot really say that I can account for my
compositions. My ideas flow, and I cannot say whence or how they come. I
do not hear in my imagination the parts successively, but I hear them,
as it were, all at once. The rest is merely an attempt to reproduce what
I have heard."

Dr. Thompson, above mentioned, has also said: "In writing this work I
have been unable to arrange my knowledge of a subject for days and
weeks, until I

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

experienced a clearing up of my mind, when I took my pen and
unhesitatingly wrote the result. I have best accomplished this by
leading the (conscious) mind as far away as possible from the subject
upon which I was writing."

Prof. Barrett says: "The [mysteriousness](errata.htm#7.md) of our being is
not confined to subtle physiological processes which we have in common
with all animal life. There are higher and more capacious powers wrapped
up in our human personality than are expressed even by what we know of
consciousness, will, or reason. There are supernormal and transcendental
powers of which, at present, we only catch occasional glimpses; and
behind and beyond the supernormal there are fathomless abysses, the
Divine ground of the soul; the ultimate reality of which our
consciousness is but the reflection or faint perception. Into such lofty
themes I do not propose to enter, they must be, forever beyond the scope
of human inquiry; nor is it possible within the limits of this paper to
give any adequate conception of those mysterious regions of our complex
personality, which are open to, and beginning to he disclosed by,
scientific investigation."

Rev. Dr. Andrew Murray has written: "Deeper down than where the soul
with its consciousness can enter there is spirit matter linking man with
God; and deeper down than the mind and feelings or will—in the unseen
depths of the hidden life—there dwells the Spirit of God." This
testimony is remarkable, coming from that source, for it corroborates
and reiterates

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

the Yogi teachings of the Indwelling Spirit.

Schofield has written: "Our conscious mind, as compared with the
unconscious mind, has been likened to the visible spectrum of the sun's
rays, as compared to the invisible part which stretches indefinitely on
either side. We know now that the chief part of heat comes from the
ultra-red rays that show no light; and the main part of the chemical
changes in the vegetable world are the results of the ultra-violet rays
at the other end of the spectrum, which are equally invisible to the
eye, and are recognized only by their potent effects. Indeed as these
invisible rays extend indefinitely on both sides of the visible
spectrum, so we may say that the mind includes not only the visible or
conscious part, and what we have termed the sub-conscious, that which
lies below the red line, but the supraconscious mind that lies at the
other end—all those regions of higher soul and spirit life, of which we
are only at times vaguely conscious, but which always exist, and link us
on to eternal verities, on the one side, as surely as the sub-conscious
mind links us to the body on the other."

We know that our students will appreciate the above testimony of Dr.
Schofield, for it is directly in the line of our teachings in the Yogi
Philosophy regarding the Planes of the Mind (see "Fourteen Lessons").

We feel justified in quoting further from Dr. Schofield, for he voices
in the strongest manner that which the Yogi Philosophy teaches as
fundamental truths regarding the mind. Dr. Schofield is an English

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

writer on Psychology, and so far as we know has no tendency toward
occultism, his views having been arrived at by careful scientific study
and investigation along the lines of Western psychology, which renders
his testimony all the more valuable, showing as it does, how the human
mind will instinctively find its way to the Truth, even if it has to
blaze a new trail through the woods, departing from the beaten tracks of
other minds around it, which lack the courage or enterprise to strike
out for themselves.

Dr. Schofield writes: "The mind, indeed, reaches all the way, and while
on the one hand it is inspired by the Almighty, on the other it
energizes the body, all whose purposive life it originates. We may call
the supra-conscious mind the sphere of the spirit life, the
sub-conscious the sphere of the body life, and the conscious mind the
middle region where both meet."

Continuing, Dr. Schofield says: "The Spirit of God is said to dwell in
believers, and yet, as we have seen, His presence is not the subject of
direct consciousness. We would include, therefore, in the
supra-conscious, all such spiritual ideas, together with conscience—the
voice of God, as Max [Müller](errata.htm#8.md) calls it—which is surely a
half-conscious faculty. Moreover, the supra-conscious, like the
sub-conscious, is, as we have said, best apprehended when the conscious
mind is not active. Visions, meditations, prayers, and even dreams have
been undoubtedly occasions of spiritual revelations, and many instances
may be adduced as illustrations of the workings of the Spirit apart from
the action

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

of reason or mind. The truth apparently is that the mind as a whole is
an unconscious state, by that its middle registers, excluding the
highest spiritual and lowest physical manifestations, are fitfully
illuminated in varying degree by consciousness; and that it is to this
illuminated part of the dial that the word "mind," which rightly
appertains to the whole, has been limited."

Oliver Wendell Holmes has said: "The automatic flow of thought is often
singularly favored by the fact of listening to a weak continuous
discourse, with just enough ideas in it to keep the (conscious) mind
busy. The induced current of thought is often rapid and brilliant in
inverse ratio to the force of the inducing current."

Wundt says: "The unconscious logical processes are carried on with a
certainty and regularity which would be impossible where there exists
the possibility of error. Our mind is so happily designed that it
prepares for us the most important foundations of cognition, whilst we
have not the slightest apprehension of the *modus operandi*. This
unconscious soul, like a benevolent stranger, works and makes provisions
for our benefit, pouring only the mature fruits into our laps."

A writer in an English magazine interestingly writes: "Intimations reach
our consciousness from unconsciousness, that the mind is ready to work,
is fresh, is full of ideas." "The grounds of our judgment are often
knowledge so remote from consciousness

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

that we cannot bring them to view." "That the human mind includes an
unconscious part; that unconscious events occurring in that part are
proximate causes of consciousness; that the greater part of human
intuitional action is an effect of an unconscious cause; the truth of
these propositions is so deducible from ordinary mental events, and is
so near the surface that the failure of deduction to forestall induction
in the discerning of it may well excite wonder." "Our behavior is
influenced by unconscious assumptions respecting our own social and
intellectual rank, and that of the one we are addressing. In company we
unconsciously assume a bearing quite different from that of the home
circle. After being raised to a higher rank the whole behavior subtly
and unconsciously changes in accordance with it." And Schofield adds to
the last sentence: "This is also the case in a minor degree with
different styles and qualities of dress and different environments.
Quite unconsciously we change our behavior, carriage, and style, to suit
the circumstance."

Jensen writes: "When we reflect on anything with the whole force of the
mind, we may fall into a state of entire unconsciousness, in which we
not only forget the outer world, but also know nothing at all of
ourselves and the thoughts passing within us after a time. We then
suddenly awake as from a dream, and usually at the same moment the
result of our meditations appears as distinctly in consciousness without
our knowing how we reached it."

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

Bascom says: "It is inexplicable how premises which lie below
consciousness can sustain conclusions in consciousness; how the mind can
wittingly take up a mental movement at an advanced stage, having missed
its primary steps."

Hamilton and other writers have compared the mind's action to that of a
row of billiard balls, of which one is struck and the impetus
transmitted throughout the entire row, the result being that only the
last ball actually moves, the others remaining in their places. The last
ball represents the conscious thought—the other stages in the
unconscious mentation. Lewes, speaking of this illustration, says:
"Something like this, Hamilton says, seems often to occur in a train of
thought, one idea immediately suggesting another into consciousness—this
suggestion passing through one or more ideas which do not themselves
rise into consciousness. This point, that we are not conscious of the
formation of groups, but only of a formed group, may throw light on the
existence of unconscious judgments, unconscious reasonings, and
unconscious registrations of experience."

Many writers have related the process by which the unconscious mentation
emerges gradually into the field of consciousness, and the discomfort
attending the process. A few examples may prove interesting and
instructive.

Maudsley says: "It is surprising how uncomfortable a person may be made
by the obscure idea of something which he ought to have said or done,
and which

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

he cannot for the life of him remember. There is an effort of the lost
idea to get into consciousness, which is relieved directly the idea
bursts into consciousness."

Oliver Wendell Holmes said: "There are thoughts that never emerge into
consciousness, and which yet make their influence felt among the
perceptive mental currents, just as the unseen planets sway the
movements of the known ones." The same writer also remarks: "I was told
of a business man in Boston who had given up thinking of an important
question as too much for him. But he continued so uneasy in his brain
that he feared he was threatened with palsy. After some hours the
natural solution of the question came to him, worked out, as he
believed, in that troubled interval."

Dr. Schofield mentions several instances of this phase of the workings
of the unconscious planes of the mind. We mention a couple that seem
interesting and to the point:

"Last year," says Dr. Schofield, "I was driving to Phillmore Gardens to
give some letters to a friend. On the way, a vague uneasiness sprang up,
and a voice seemed to say, 'I doubt if you have those letters.'
Conscious reason rebuked it, and said, 'Of course you have; you took
them out of the drawer specially.' The vague feeling was not satisfied,
but could not reply. On arrival I found the letters were in none of my
pockets. On returning I found them on the hall

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

table, where they had been placed a moment while putting on my gloves."

"The other day I had to go to see a patient in Folkestone, in
Shakespeare Terrace. I got there very late, and did not stay but drove
down to the Pavilion for the night, it being dark and rainy. Next
morning at eleven I walked up to find the house, knowing the general
direction, though never having walked there before. I went up the main
road, and, after passing a certain turning, began to feel a vague
uneasiness coming into consciousness, that I had passed the terrace. On
asking the way, I found it was so; and the turning was where the
uneasiness began. The night before was pitch dark, and very wet, and
anything seen from a close carriage was quite unconsciously impressed on
my mind."

Prof. Kirchener says: "Our consciousness can only grasp one quite clear
idea at once. All other ideas are for the time somewhat obscure. They
are really existing, but only potentially for consciousness, *i.e.*,
they hover, as it were, on our horizon, or beneath the threshold of
consciousness. The fact that former ideas suddenly return to
consciousness is simply explained by the fact that they have continued
psychic existence; and attention is sometimes voluntarily or
involuntarily turned away from the present, and the appearance of former
ideas is thus made possible."

Oliver Wendell Holmes says: "Our different ideas are stepping-stones;
how we get from one to another we do not know; something carries us. We
(our conscious

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

selves) do not take the step. The creating and informing spirit, which
is *within* us and not *of* us, is recognized everywhere in real life.
It comes to us as a voice that will be heard; it tells us what we must
believe; it frames our sentences and we wonder at this visitor who
chooses our brain as his dwelling place."

Galton says: "I have desired to show how whole states of mental
operation that have lapsed out of ordinary consciousness, admit of being
dragged into light."

Montgomery says: "We are constant') aware that feelings emerge
unsolicited by any previous mental state, directly from the dark womb of
unconsciousness. Indeed all our most vivid feelings are thus mystically
derived. Suddenly a new irrelevant, unwilled, unlooked-for presence
intrudes itself into consciousness. Some inscrutable power causes it to
rise and enter the mental presence as a sensorial constituent. If this
vivid dependence on unconscious forces has to be conjectured with regard
to the most vivid mental occurrences, how much more must such a
sustaining foundation be postulated for those faint revivals of previous
sensations that so largely assist in making up our complex mental
presence!"

Sir Benjamin Brodie says: "It has often happened to me to have
accumulated a store of facts, but to have been able to proceed no
further. Then after an interval of time, I have found the obscurity and
confusion to have cleared away; the facts to have settled

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

in their right places, though I have not been sensible of having made
any effort for that purpose."

Wundt says: "The traditional opinion that consciousness is the entire
field of the internal life cannot be accepted. In consciousness, psychic
acts are very distinct from one another, and observation itself
necessarily conducts to unity in psychology. But the agent of this unity
is outside of consciousness, which knows only the result of the work
done in the unknown laboratory beneath it. Suddenly a new thought
springs into being. Ultimate analysis of psychic processes shows that
the unconscious is the theater of the most important mental phenomena.
The conscious is always conditional upon the unconscious."

Creighton says: "Our conscious life is the sum of these entrances and
exits. Behind the scenes, as we infer, there lies a vast reserve which
we call 'the unconscious,' finding a name for it by the simple device of
prefixing the negative article. The basis of all that lies behind the
scene is the mere negative of consciousness."

Maudsley says: "The process of reasoning adds nothing to knowledge (in
the reasoner). It only displays what was there before, and brings to
conscious possession what before was unconscious." And again: "Mind can
do its work without knowing it. Consciousness is the light that lightens
the process, not the agent that accomplishes it."

Walstein says: "It is through the sub-conscious self that Shakespeare
must have perceived, without effort,

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

great truths which are hidden from the conscious mind of the student;
that Phidias painted marble and bronze; that Raphael painted Madonnas,
and Beethoven composed symphonies."

Ribot says: "The mind receives from experience certain data, and
elaborates them unconsciously by laws peculiar to itself, and the result
merges into consciousness."

Newman says: "When the unaccustomed causes surprise, we do not perceive
the thing and then feel the surprise; but surprise comes first, and then
we search out the cause; so the theory must have acted on the
unconscious mind to create the feeling, before being perceived in
consciousness."

A writer in an English magazine says: "Of what transcendent importance
is the fact that the unconscious part of the mind bears to the conscious
part such a relation as the magic lantern bears to the luminous disc
which it projects; that the greater part of the intentional action, the
whole practical life of the vast majority of men, is an effect of events
as remote from consciousness as the motion of the planets."

Dr. Schofield says: "It is quite true that the range of the unconscious
mind must necessarily remain indefinite; none can say how high or low it
may reach . . . . As to how far the unconscious powers of life that, as
has been said, can make eggs and feathers out of Indian corn, and milk
and beef and mutton out of grass, are to be considered within or beyond
the lowest limits of unconscious mind, we do not therefore

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

here press. It is enough to establish the fact of its existence; to
point out its more important features; and to show that in all respects
it is as worthy of being called mind as that which works in
consciousness. We therefore return to our first definition of Mind, as
'the sum of psychic action in us, whether conscious or unconscious.'"

Hartmann calls our attention to a very important fact when he says: "The
unconscious does not fall ill, the unconscious does not grow weary, but
all conscious mental activity becomes fatigued."

Kant says: "To have ideas and yet not be conscious of them—therein seems
to lie a contradiction. However, we may still be immediately aware of
holding an idea, though we are not directly conscious of it."

Maudsley says: "It may seem paradoxical to assert not merely that ideas
may exist in the mind without any consciousness of them, but that an
idea, or a train of associated ideas, may be quickened into action and
actuate movements without itself being attended to. When an idea
disappears from consciousness it does not necessarily disappear
entirely; it may remain latent below the horizon of consciousness.
Moreover it may produce an effect upon movement, or upon other ideas,
when thus active below the horizon of consciousness."

[Leibnitz](errata.htm#9.md) says: "It does not follow that because we do
not perceive thought that it does not exist. It is a great source of
error to believe that there is no perception in the mind but that of
which it is conscious."

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

Oliver Wendell Holmes says: "The more we examine the mechanism of
thought the more we shall see that anterior unconscious action of the
mind that enters largely into all of its processes. People who talk most
do not always think most. I question whether persons who think most—that
is who have most conscious thought pass through their mind—necessarily
do most mental work. Every new idea planted in a real thinker's mind
grows when he is least conscious of it."

Maudsley says: "It would go hard with mankind indeed, if they must act
wittingly before they acted at all. Men, without knowing why, follow a
course for which good reasons exist. Nay, more. The practical instincts
of mankind often work beneficially in actual contradiction to their
professed doctrines."

The same writer says: "The best thoughts of an author are the unwilled
thoughts which surprise himself; and the poet, under the influence of
creative activity, is, so far as consciousness is concerned, being
dictated to."

A writer in an English magazine says: "When waiting on a pier for a
steamer, I went on to the first, which was the wrong one. I came back
and waited. losing my boat, which was at another part of the pier, on
account of the unconscious assumption I had made, that this was the only
place to wait for the steamer. I saw a man enter a room, and leave by
another door. Shortly after, I saw another man exactly like him do the
same. It was the same man; but I said it must be

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

his twin brother, in the unconscious assumption that there was no exit
for the first man but by the way he came (that by returning)."

Maudsley says: "The firmest resolve or purpose sometimes vanishes
issueless when it comes to the brink of an act, while the true will,
which determines perhaps a different act, springs up suddenly out of the
depths of the unconscious nature, surprising and overcoming the
conscious."

Schofield says: "Our unconscious influence is the projection of our
unconscious mind and personality unconsciously over others. This acts
unconsciously on their unconscious centers, producing, effects in
character and conduct, recognized in consciousness. For instance, the
entrance of a good man into a room where foul language is used, will
unconsciously modify and purify the tone of the whole room. Our minds
cast shadows of which we are as unconscious as those cast by our bodies,
but which affect for good or evil all who unconsciously pass within
their range. This is a matter of daily experience, and is common to all,
though more noticeable with strong personalities."

Now we have given much time and space to the expressions of opinion of
various Western writers regarding this subject of there being a plane or
planes of the mind outside of the field of consciousness. We have given
space to this valuable testimony, not alone because of its intrinsic
value and merit, but because we wished to impress upon the minds of our
students that

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

these out-of-conscious planes of mind are now being recognized by the
best authorities in the Western world, although it has been only a few
years back when the idea was laughed at as ridiculous, and as a mere
"dream of the Oriental teachers." Each writer quoted has brought out
some interesting and valuable point of the subject, and the student will
find that his own experiences corroborate the points cited by the
several writers. In this way we think the matter will be made plainer,
and will become fixed in the mind of those who are studying this course
of lessons.

But we must caution our students from hastily adopting the several
theories of Western writers, advanced during the past few years,
regarding these out-of-conscious states. The trouble has been that the
Western writers dazzled by the view of the subconscious planes of
mentation that suddenly burst upon the Western thought, hastily adopted
certain theories, which they felt would account for all the phenomena
known as "psychic," and which they thought would fully account for all
the problems of the subject. These writers while doing a most valuable
work, which has helped thousands to form new ideas regarding the nature
and workings of the mind, nevertheless did not sufficiently explore the
nature of the problem before them. A little study of the Oriental
philosophies might have saved them and their readers much confusion.

For instance, the majority of these writers hastily assumed that because
there was an out-of-conscious

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

plane of mentation, therefore all the workings of the mind might be
grouped under the head of "conscious" and "sub-conscious," and that all
the out-of-conscious phenomena might be grouped under the head of
"subconscious mind," "subjective mind," etc., ignoring the fact that
this class of mental phenomena embraced not only the highest but the
lowest forms of mentation. In their newly found "mind" (which they
called "subjective" or "sub-conscious"), they placed the lowest traits
and animal passions; insane impulses; delusions; bigotry; animal-like
intelligence, etc., etc., as well as the inspiration of the poet and
musician, and the high spiritual longings and feelings that one
recognizes as having come from the higher regions of the soul.

This mistake was a natural one, and at first reading the Western world
was taken by storm, and accepted the new ideas and theories as Truth.
But when reflection came, and analysis was applied there arose a feeling
of disappointment and dissatisfaction, and people began to feel that
there was something lacking. They intuitively recognized that their
higher inspirations and intuitions came from a different part of the
mind than the lower emotions, passions, and other sub-conscious feelings
and instincts.

A glance at the Oriental philosophies will give one the key to the
problem at once. The Oriental teachers have always held that the
conscious mentation was hut a small fraction of the entire volume of
thought, hut they have always taught that just as there was a field of
mentation *below* consciousness, so was there

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

a field of mentation *above* consciousness as much higher than Intellect
as the other was lower than it. The mere mention of this fact will prove
a revelation to those who have not heard it before, and who have become
entangled with the several "dual-mind" theories of the recent Western
writers. The more one has read on this subject the more he will
appreciate the superiority of the Oriental theory over that of the
Western writers. It is like the chemical which at once clears the
clouded liquid in the test-tube.

In our next lesson we shall go into this subject of the above-conscious
planes, and the below-conscious planes, bringing out the distinction
clearly, and adding to what we have said on the subject in previous
books.

And all this is leading us toward the point where we may give you
instruction regarding the training and cultivation—the retraining and
guidance of these out-of-conscious faculties. By retraining the lower
planes of mentation to their proper work, and by stimulating the higher
ones, man may "make himself over," mentally, and may acquire powers of
which he but dreams now. This is why we are leading you up to the
understanding of this subject, step by step. We advise you to acquaint
yourself with each phase of the matter, that you may he able to apply
the teachings and instructions to follow in later lessons of the course.

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

# MANTRAM (AFFIRMATION).

I recognize that my Self is greater than it seems—that above and below
consciousness are planes of mind—that just as there are lower planes of
mind which belong to my past experience in ages past and over which I
must now assert my Mastery—so are there planes of mind into which I am
unfolding gradually, which will bring me wisdom, power, and joy. I Am
Myself, in the midst of this mental world—I am the Master of my Mind—I
assert my control of its lower phases, and I demand of its higher all
that it has in store for me.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Lesson IX. The Mental Planes](ryo11.md)
