[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hm01)  [Next](hm03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

# PREFACE

THIS guide to the native mythology of Hawaii has grown out of a
childhood and youth spent within sound of the hula drum at the foot of
the domelike House of the Sun on the windy island of Maui. There,
wandering along its rocky coast and sandy beaches, exploring its
windward gorges, riding above the cliffs by moonlight when the surf was
high or into the deep forests at midday, we were aware always of a life
just out of reach of us latecomers but lived intensely by the kindly,
generous race who had chanced so many centuries ago upon its shores.

Not before 1914 did the actual shaping of the work begin. The study
covers, as any old Hawaiian will discover, less than half the story, but
it may serve to start specific answers to the problems here raised and
to distinguish the molding forces which have entered into the recasting
of such traditional story-telling as has survived the first hundred
years of foreign contact.

To the general student of mythology the number and length of proper
names in an unfamiliar tongue may seem confusing. Hawaiian proper names
are rarely made up of a single word but rather form a series of words
recalling some incident or referring to some characteristic significant
of the person or place designated. To a personal name an epithet may be
affixed, such as "o ka lani" which means literally "of the heavens" but
is translated by Hawaiians by the term "heavenly" as a title of
endearment or adoration. The name of the parent is often added with the
causal possessive "a" meaning "child of," as in Umi-a-Liloa, which may
be read "Umi, child of Liloa." In many cases the definite article "ka"
becomes a part of the name and hence the preponderance in Hawaiian of
names beginning with this syllable. Since recognition of its composition
is essential to its proper accent, in cases where this is known with a
good degree of probability through native

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

informants, the name has been hyphenated upon its first appearance and
occasionally throughout.

With the analysis of the name in mind, the pronunciation offers little
difficulty. There are no silent letters. Theoretically at least, each
vowel represents a distinct sound; each consonant is voiced as a
distinct syllable ending in a vowel sound. Words written alike but
different in meaning are to be distinguished, however, only by their
spoken accent, as Ka-u', The-breast, which names a district on Hawaii,
and ka‘u for the summer season. A third form, ka‘u, for the possessive
pronoun of the first person singular, pronounced with a glottal stop, is
written with the inverted apostrophe called a hamzah, indicative of a
lost consonant sound in the *k* range. Besides the five vowel sounds,
pronounced as in Italian, only seven consonants were recognized in the
reduction of the language to writing by the early American missionaries
and these do not differ from the same signs in English; the shifting of
*l* to *r*, *k* to *t*, *p* to *f*, and *w* to *v* characteristic of
various Polynesian dialects and recognized in the oral speech of old
Hawaiians is hence ignored in the written form.

The effect upon Hawaiian speech of this melodious heaping up of sound
without articulation is altogether pleasing and lends itself easily to
the chanting of long poetical recitations such as Hawaiians of the old
days delighted in, as in the shorter and more varied poetry of dance and
celebration.

My thanks are here rendered to the trustees, director, and staff of the
Bishop Museum in Honolulu for their aid and co-operation; to the
president, trustees, and faculty of Vassar College for their interest in
and recognition of the work of the Folklore Foundation under which,
since 1920, this work has been carried on; and to Professors Franz Boas
and William Witherle Lawrence of Columbia University, whose
encouragement and advice have been so often and so generously given.

There are also many names to be recalled with grateful remembrance of
those who have contributed directly toward the making of this book:
Joseph Emerson, Stephen Desha, Mary Pukui and her mother Mrs. Wiggin,
Emma Olmsted, Laura Green, Pokini Robinson, Ernest and Pearl Beaglehole,
Kenneth Emory, Katharine Luomala, Frank Stimson, David

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Malo Kupihea, Peter Buck, Edward Handy, Margaret
Titcomb, Thomas Wahiako, Daniel Ho‘olapa, Hattie Saffrey Rhinehardt,
Emma Taylor, Rachel Kekela Kaiwiaia, Jonah Kaiwiaia, Kilinahi Kaleo,
William Pogue, Hezekiah Ikoa, Lyle Dickey, Ethel Damon, Marie Neal,
Lahilahi Webb.

Finally, thanks are especially due for the unstinting care of the
publishers under whose expert hands the laborious task of setting up so
composite a mass of material in convenient form for reference has been
successfully achieved.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I. Coming of the Gods](hm03)
