[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hm06)  [Next](hm08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

### V

### KANE AND KANALOA

IN his character as a culture god the name of Kane is generally coupled
with that of Kanaloa. About Kanaloa as a god apart from Kane there is
very little information. He is god of the squid, called in the Kumulipo
Ka-he‘e-hauna-wela (The evil-smelling squid). A prayer quoted by Emerson
invokes Kanaloa in this character to heal one under the influence of
sorcery:

Kanaloa, god of the squid,  
Here is your sick man,

and ends with an excellent objective description of squid
catching. <span id="fr_81"></span>[1](#fn_81) In the Kumulipo
genealogical chant there appear, during the eighth era which ushers in
the period of human life (ao) as distinguished from the period of the
gods (po), the woman La‘ila‘i and the three males, Kane, a god, Ki‘i, a
man, and Kanaloa, the great octopus. Fishermen still solicit his
protection, but on the whole the squid is today looked upon with
distrust as an aumakua.

This attitude is reflected in a tendency by Hawaiian antiquarians to
equate Kanaloa with the Christian devil. His name is associated with
various legends of strife against Kane in which Kanaloa and his spirits
rebel and are sent down to the underworld. In the legend of Hawaii-loa
belonging to the Kumu-honua epic account of the Kane tradition, Kanaloa
is the leader of the first company of spirits placed on earth after
earth was separated from heaven. These spirits are "spit out by the
gods." They rebel, led by Kanaloa, because they are not allowed to drink
awa, but are defeated and cast down to the underworld, where Kanaloa,
otherwise known as Milu, becomes ruler of the dead.

The legend places Kane and Kanaloa in opposition as the

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

good and evil wishers of mankind. When Kane draws the figure of a man in
the earth, Kanaloa makes one also; Kane's lives but Kanaloa's remains
stone. Kanaloa is angry and curses man to die. He makes all kinds of
poisonous things. It is he who seduces the wife of the first man in this
version. Kanaloa of the great white albatross of Kane is the name given
to him as responsible for driving the first man and the first woman out
of the garden spot the gods have provided for them. <span
id="fr_82"></span>[2](#fn_82)

In similar stories of opposing creators reported by Codrington from New
Hebrides, Tagaro is the good, Suqe the evil wisher of mankind. In
Aurora, Tagaro makes things and tosses them in the air; what he catches
is good for mankind, what Suqe catches is evil. <span
id="fr_83"></span>[3](#fn_83) On Whitsuntide island, whatever Tagaro did
or made was right; Suqe was always wrong. <span
id="fr_84"></span>[4](#fn_84) On Lepers' island Suqe shares the creation
with Tagaro, but makes things wrong. <span id="fr_85"></span>[5](#fn_85)
In the Banks islands the same stories are told of Qat and Marawa the
spider:

Qat and Marawa (Spider) each makes a man. Qat makes his live after six
days, but Marawa, after bringing his to life, buries him again and he
rots, and this is the origin of death. <span
id="fr_86"></span>[6](#fn_86)

Kanaloa, like Kahoali‘i, is also associated with the underworld, as in
the chant in which Hawaii is spoken of as "fished up from the very
depths of Kanaloa." <span id="fr_87"></span>[7](#fn_87) Tangaroa is god
of the ocean in the South Seas, Tane of land and of plant and animal
life. The use of salt water for purification is, however, ascribed to
Kane in Hawaii and such water is called "tapu water of Kane" (wai tapu a
Kane), the particle *a* instead of *o* denoting direct handiwork rather
than simple possession. <span id="fr_88"></span>[8](#fn_88) To Kane is
ascribed the bringing of food plants to Hawaii. The heiau of Ka-mau-ai
(The heap of vegetable food) at Keauhou, Kona, dedicated to Kane, is
said to be the site of the

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

introduction of cultivated food plants. <span
id="fr_89"></span>[9](#fn_89) Pigs, coconuts, breadfruit, awa, and the
wauke plant from which bark cloth is made are sacred to Kane.

In these culture activities, however, Kane is generally coupled with
Kanaloa, and there exists a vast amount of popular and mythical lore in
which the two gods are named together. Both are invoked by canoe men,
Kane for the canoe building, Kanaloa for its sailing. <span
id="fr_90"></span>[10](#fn_90) In a chant consecrating a new canoe in
which "Kanaloa the awa-drinker" is specified, both gods are invoked as
"active" (he miki oe). <span id="fr_91"></span>[11](#fn_91) Both are
deities of the heiau of the po‘okanaka class called Hauola at Hoea,
Waiawa, on Kauai. <span id="fr_92"></span>[12](#fn_92) They are
worshiped as gods at Kohala and a temple is built for them. <span
id="fr_93"></span>[13](#fn_93) The east is spoken of as the "high road
traveled by Kane" or the "red road of Kane," the west as the
"resting-place of Kane," or the "much-traveled road of Kanaloa." The
northern limit of the sun in the celestial ecliptic is called the "black
shining road of Kane" and the southern limit on the celestial ecliptic
that of Kanaloa. The celestial equator is the "road to the navel of
Wakea" (ala i ka piko o Wakea) and "red road of the spider" (alaula a ke
ku‘uku‘u). <span id="fr_94"></span>[14](#fn_94)

Prayers accompanying the bringing of offerings couple the names of the
gods: "O Kane, O Kanaloa, here is the taro, the bananas, here is the
sugar-cane, the awa. See, we are eating it now." <span
id="fr_95"></span>[15](#fn_95) Or: "Here is food, O Gods, Kane and
Kanaloa! here is food for us. Give life to us and our family. Life for
the parents feeble with age. Life for all in the household. When digging
and planting our land, life for us." <span
id="fr_96"></span>[16](#fn_96)

Kane and Kanaloa are described in legend as cultivators, awa drinkers,
and water finders, who migrated from Kahiki and traveled about the
islands. One account says that they lived at Alakahi in Waipio valley on
Hawaii with some of

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

the lesser gods, Maliu, Kaekae, Ouli (Uli), where they cultivated
bananas and led a simple life. Kanaloa was tall and fair, Kane was dark,
with curly hair and thick lips. <span id="fr_97"></span>[17](#fn_97)
According to Lyons, <span id="fr_98"></span>[18](#fn_98) "Kane and
Kanaloa were from Kahiki (foreign gods). They came traveling on the
surface of the sea and first caused plants for the food of man to grow."
Kamakau says that they "came from Kahiki in the shape of human beings,"
were sighted off Keei, landed on Maui. The time was that of "Wakalana,
father of the Maui brothers." Their coming was coincident with that of
Haumea, and she "gave birth to strange noisy creatures," perhaps with
reference to the introduction of pigs to Hawaii, an animal sacred to the
Kane worship. <span id="fr_99"></span>[19](#fn_99)

The two are also connected with fishponds. Ke-awa-nui and Ke-awa-iki who
live at Mokapu point are visited by Kane and Kanaloa, and they build the
Paohua fishpond. <span id="fr_100"></span>[20](#fn_100) There is a
famine on Lanai. A fisher boy comes daily to a little hut he has erected
for his god and lays a bit of fish there, saying, "O god, here is a bit
of fish for you." Kane and Kanaloa are so pleased with his piety that
they bring the famine to an end. <span id="fr_101"></span>[21](#fn_101)
They are said to have been followed from Kahiki by the ama-ama fish
(mullet), and when an old Hawaiian visited the mainland a few years ago
and found mullet there, she was convinced that Kane and Kanaloa must
have traveled in that country. Fish altars are set up to Kane-ko‘a along
streams to increase the catch of oopu fish. Kane and Kanaloa are said to
have been worshiped with awa and whitefish (aholehole) on their arrival
from Kahiki.

It is as awa drinkers that the water-finding activities of these gods
are employed in some stories, because awa is their principal food and
they must have water with which to mix it. "Awa-iku" are said to be
beneficent spirits that act as messengers for Kane to ward off the evil
influences of the

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

\[paragraph continues\] "mu" spirits and manage the winds, rains, and
other things useful to man. <span id="fr_102"></span>[22](#fn_102) An
old hula song danced today alludes to this awa-drinking propensity of
the god:

Ua maona a Kane i ka awa,  
Ua kau ke kaha i ka uluna,  
Ke hiolani a la i ka moena,  
Kipu i ke kapa a ka noe.

"Kane has drunk awa,  
He has placed his head on a pillow  
And fallen asleep on a mat,  
Wrapped in a blanket of mist." <span id="fr_103"></span>[23](#fn_103)

\[paragraph continues\] Fragmentary legends point to a struggle among
the gods for the privileges of awa drinking. Both Maui and Kaulu rob the
garden patch of the gods.

Local legends abound in which the gods Kane and Kanaloa are represented
as traveling about the country establishing springs of water and seeing
that they are kept clear for drinking purposes or for uses of the
chiefs. Here "Kanaloa acts as the urge, Kane as the executor."

### LEGENDS OF KANE AND KANALOA AS WATER FINDERS

Kane and Kanaloa go into the precipitous mountains back of Keanae on
Maui and lack water. They discuss whether it can be obtained at this
height. "Oi-ana (Let it be seen)!" says Kanaloa; so Kane thrusts in his
staff made of heavy, close-grained kauila wood (*Alphitonia excelsa*)
and water gushes forth. They open the fishpond of Kanaloa at Luala‘ilua
and possess the water of Kou at Kaupo. They kill the kahuna Koino at
Kiko‘o in Kipahulu because he is guilty of defilement at mealtime. They
cause sweet waters to flow at Waihee, Kahakuloa, and at Waikane on
Lanai, Punakou on Molokai, Kawaihoa on Oahu. <span
id="fr_104"></span>[24](#fn_104) On Kauai they leave few springs because
they are not recognized as gods. The impress of their forms as they
slept is left on the rock

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

above the pool of Mauhili in the Waikomo stream in Koloa district where,
on the cliff below, are two pointed rocks named Waihanau and
Ka-elelo-o-kahawau. <span id="fr_105"></span>[25](#fn_105) Two holes are
pointed out just below the road across Ohia gulch beyond Keanae on Maui
where Kane dug his spear first into one hole and then into the other
with the words, "This is for you, that for me." The water gushing from
these apertures is called "the water of Kane and Kanaloa." <span
id="fr_106"></span>[26](#fn_106) The gods land at Hanauma on Oahu and
springs flow at various places where the two mix awa on their way to
Waolani in Nu‘uanu valley. In Manoa valley they see a pretty girl and
both gods try to seize her. The attendant changes into a great rock in
their path, a spring of water trickles where the girl stood, and over it
lean two ohia trees, symbols of the gods. This is the spring called
"Water of the gods," which was sacred to Kamehameha. <span
id="fr_107"></span>[27](#fn_107)

 

It was at the time of the migration of Kane and Kanaloa from Kahiki that
the "stones of Kane" were set up and the "waters of Kane" were "brought
forth from hills, cliffs, and rocks." Emerson quotes from Kauai a hula
song composed in the popular question-and-answer repetitive form,
beginning,

"A query, a question  
I put to you,  
Where is the water of Kane?"  
"At the Eastern Gate  
'Where the sun comes in at Ha‘eha‘e (easternmost point of Hawaii),  
There is the water of Kane."

\[paragraph continues\] The stories of the spring-finding activities of
the gods are not to be interpreted as alluding to the skill with which
irrigation was applied to taro plantings in upland or in wet taro
cultivation. The legends make no mention of such uses for the water
springs which the gods caused to gush out of rocks. They simply express
the mystery which even to an old Hawaiian today belongs to such a
phenomenon. The native who

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

accompanied us to the outlet of a tunnel just put through in the back
country of Ka-u district on Hawaii to bring water from the upper valleys
showed an excitement which scarcely a Niagara or a Boulder Dam could
arouse in our own country. Such places are celebrated as sacred spots
(wahi pana). It is said that the heiau of Kau-maka-ula (Thy red eyes)
built by the chief Kamehaikaua after the flood of Ka-hina-li‘i was
repaired by the kahuna Kahonu for the young chief Kekua-o-ka-lani and a
house erected for him at Maliko where he was reared at the "waters of
Kane and of Kanaloa" in the Puna-lu‘u division of the Koolauloa district
on Oahu. The strange thing about the heiau was that the eyes of all the
pigs in the district turned red as the tapu nights approached, and
during the tapu nights of Kane and of Kanaloa the sound of piping and
whistling and drumming could be heard at the heiau.

The man-fishing net of Lono,  
The braided net of Kamehaikaua,

runs the chant, with reference, Thrum says, to the "fish" sacrificed at
the Makahiki, and the division of the heiau area called the "net"
(upena) where the victim was snared. <span
id="fr_108"></span>[28](#fn_108) Kane as the spear thruster and god of
gushing waters has phallic symbolism. The thruster is the male, the
spring of water, which Hawaiians think of as the source of life, is the
female in the generative process. Hence Kane's aspect as "Kane of the
water of life."

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_81"></span>[60:1](hm07.htm#fr_81) Malo, 149-150 note.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[61:2](hm07.htm#fr_82) For. Col. 6: 267-268;
Kamakau, *Ke Au Okoa*, October 21, 1869; Westervelt, *Honolulu*, 70-74.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[61:3](hm07.htm#fr_83) Codrington, 168.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[61:4](hm07.htm#fr_84) 169.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[61:5](hm07.htm#fr_85) 171.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[61:6](hm07.htm#fr_86) 157-158.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[61:7](hm07.htm#fr_87) For. Pol. Race 2: 18.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[61:8](hm07.htm#fr_88) For. Col. 6: 273; *AA*
28: 176, 180.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[62:9](hm07.htm#fr_89) *HAA* 1908, 72-75.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[62:10](hm07.htm#fr_90) Bastian, *Heilige Sage*,
131.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[62:11](hm07.htm#fr_91) Malo, 173.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[62:12](hm07.htm#fr_92) *HAA* 1907, 39.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[62:13](hm07.htm#fr_93) Westervelt, *Honolulu*,
37.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[62:14](hm07.htm#fr_94) For. Pol. Race 1: 42-43,
127.

<span id="fn_95"></span>[62:15](hm07.htm#fr_95) Rice, 117.

<span id="fn_96"></span>[62:16](hm07.htm#fr_96) Westervelt, Honolulu,
33.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[63:17](hm07.htm#fr_97) Thrum, *More Tales*,
259-260.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[63:18](hm07.htm#fr_98) *JPS* 2: 174.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[63:19](hm07.htm#fr_99) *Ke Au Okoa*, March 31,
1870.

<span id="fn_100"></span>[63:20](hm07.htm#fr_100) McAllister, *Bul.*
104: 185.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[63:21](hm07.htm#fr_101) Bastian, *Heilige
Sage*, 131-133.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[64:22](hm07.htm#fr_102) Malo, 140-141 note 10.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[64:23](hm07.htm#fr_103) N. B. Emerson, "Hula,"
130.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[64:24](hm07.htm#fr_104) Kamakau, *Kuokoa*,
January 12, 1867.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[65:25](hm07.htm#fr_105) *HAA* 1907, 92.

<span id="fn_106"></span>[65:26](hm07.htm#fr_106) Local information.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[65:27](hm07.htm#fr_107) Green and Pukui,
112-115; Westervelt, *Honolulu*, 32-37; Bastian, *Heilige Sage*,
132-133; McAllister, *Bul.* 104: 152.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[66:28](hm07.htm#fr_108) Thrum, *More Tales*,
117-120.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VI. Mythical Lands of the Gods](hm08)
