[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hm13)  [Next](hm15.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

### XII

### THE PELE SISTERS

IN the Hi‘iaka myth Pele's messenger is represented as an expert in
sorcery and the hula, arts of which the Pele family as gods of
generation are special patrons. The whole Pele and Hi‘iaka cycle of
stories is rehearsed episodically in the hula dance. Even the smallest
incident may furnish a theme for the dance. The hula songs are not
composed by mortals but taught by the Pele spirits to worshipers of
Pele. Those who learn the dances are supposed to be possessed by the
spirit of the Pele goddess of the dance. An error in the step shows that
the patroness has rejected the dancer. Since Hi‘iaka is the supreme
patroness of the hula, all prayer chants for the hula ceremonies are
"named under" Hi‘iaka, even those dedicated to Ku and Hina. A chant that
is "named" to a person becomes that person's property, no matter if it
was composed in honor of another person, just as any other piece of
property may be passed on to another. All prayer chants (mele pule)
dedicated to Hi‘iaka are prayers of the ancients.

Training in the hula does not include the whole art of sorcery but every
hula master must know the prayers to ward off sorcery (pule pale) and
each pupil learns such a prayer for his protection. Even as late as
Kalakaua's time kahunas were educated as priests of Pele. Some who
wished to study sorcery would stay for a year or more at the volcano,
make sacrifice, and dream a chant. This chant they would dedicate to
Pele or Hi‘iaka. In offering sacrifice the kahuna must get all four gods
to "work" with him by invoking each in prayer. He must include also the
ancestral gods (kumu-akua), the guardian gods (aumakua), the deified
gods (unihi). He would call upon "All the original ancestors of chiefs"
(Na kumu-ali‘i a pau loa o ka po), "The descendants of chiefs"
(Na-lala-ali‘i), "The chiefs who were last of their line"
(Na-welau-ali‘i). <span id="fr_444"></span>[1](#fn_444.md)

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

Dance motives are directly incorporated into the Pele and Hi‘iaka story.
One such is drawn about the figure of Hopoe, the beloved girl friend of
Hi‘iaka.

Hopoe is first seen by Hi‘iaka dancing a hula beside the sea Nanahuki in
Puna district. Hi‘iaka takes her for a favorite. For her Hi‘iaka plants
the forests of red and white blossoming lehua to be found in that
region. A flowering lehua tree is hence her emblem. When she is
overwhelmed by Pele's impatient wrath she becomes changed into a rock,
which used to stand balanced like a dancing figure just as the girl was
caught by the lava, but is now fallen and lies near Keaau in Puna. <span
id="fr_445"></span>[2](#fn_445.md)

Another dance incident is that of the maimed spirit who inspired the
affection of Wahine-omao, a scene represented in the hula mu‘umu‘u (cut
off). <span id="fr_446"></span>[3](#fn_446.md) A third is the reference to
Kilinoe, the famous hula teacher of Kauai whose "unike, or sign of an
expert," is essential to one who would dance the hula in public on
Kauai. <span id="fr_447"></span>[4](#fn_447.md) Rice makes her the sister
of Lohiau, Emerson connects her with the sirens who steal away Lohiau's
body. A Malo note <span id="fr_448"></span>[5](#fn_448.md) gives the name
to a (male) god of cliffs.

The most complete of these dance motives is to be found in the episode
at Pele-ula's home in Nu‘uanu valley where the two women compete in
dance and chanted improvisation for the possession of a lover. The land
of Pele-ula on Oahu has been placed by McAllister where Vineyard street
crosses the Nu‘uanu stream. <span id="fr_449"></span>[6](#fn_449.md) The
soft rain that comes down the valley only as far as the present Judd
street is still called "the rain of Wa‘ahila of Nu‘uanu" (ka ua
Wa‘ahila-o-Nu‘uanu) after a chiefess whose name is commemorated in a
hula in which she excelled and which was a favorite of Pele-ula. <span
id="fr_450"></span>[7](#fn_450.md) The competition is represented as taking
place during a kilu game, a

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

popular pastime of chiefs comparable to our own kissing games but a step
more erotic, and including exhibitions of dance and song which called
for the highest development of skill in these arts. The scene is placed
on Oahu during Hi‘iaka's return trip after the restoration of Lohiau in
Kauai, but there is reason to suppose that it belongs actually after
Pele's outburst of anger and the second restoration of Lohiau, and
represents Pele's final effort to win back her lover from her younger
sister. This supposition is supported by the fact that in Rice's version
Hi‘iaka and Lohiau meet at Pele-ula's home on Oahu after Lohiau's second
restoration to life. Originally perhaps the incident belonged to Kauai,
where Pele in her spirit body competes with his sister Kilinoe for the
embraces of her lover while her human body lies in trance. It may be
that a shift of interest in the characters of the story has brought
about the change of scene and actors.

As for the scene itself, there is no doubt that it was drawn from life.
Malo gives a detailed description of the games of ume and kilu as
practised in upper-class circles, ume a frankly sexual game in which two
lovers are sent out by the master of ceremonies to satisfy their desire;
kilu a sort of quoits in which a gourd is spun to hit a stake in the
form of a wooden cone placed in front of the desired lover among the
players of the opposite sex, as they sit ranged, one on one side, the
other on the other side, of the space cleared for the game. A score of
ten hits entitles the player to the favors of the lover for the night
unless bought off with a gift of land or other coveted commodity. This
form of courting was, we are told, a great favorite in the circles to
which the chiefs belonged, but from which all not members of the chief
class were carefully excluded. <span id="fr_451"></span>[8](#fn_451.md)

The theme of the kilu game seems to have been a favorite with composers
of romance and is frankly realistic in treatment. The Pukui version of
the Hainakolo romance represents the sister of the abandoned Hainakolo
winning back Keaunini to her sister in a kilu contest in which she
competes successfully in dance with the girl who has charmed him away

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

and in song recalls his mind to the scenes of natural beauty which he
has shared with his former wife, phrased no doubt to include the erotic
allusions so dear to Hawaiian ears but which escape the foreign
interpreter. It is at a kilu game at the court of Kakuhihewa that
Lono-i-ka-makahiki wins the companionship of the visiting chiefess from
Kauai and turns the occasion to account by learning from her the chant
called Mirage of Mana which he later asserts was composed as his
name-song from childhood. Both Kawelo and Halemano, after finding the
arts of fishing and farming, which their elders prescribe, insufficient
to win the love of ladies, become experts in the hula and at a kilu game
Halemano turns once more the heart of the much wooed beauty of Puna to
her former husband. An episode in the romance of Laie-i-ka-wai shows the
beauty of Hana, Hina-i-ka-malama, competing with a rival for her lover's
favors.

A similar theme occurs in other groups. Stimson tells the story from
Anaa in the Tuamotus of Gana, Huri-te-papa, and the princess Faumea,
where Gana is the suitor of Faumea in Tahiti-nui, but Huri-te-papa wins
her by his dancing. So in the story of Mehara the beauty is won by the
best dancer. <span id="fr_452"></span>[9](#fn_452.md) In Grey's story from
the Maori, Kahureremoa comes as a stranger to the dance hall and awakens
love by her dancing. <span id="fr_453"></span>[10](#fn_453.md) Te Ponga
wins an ally whose heart he has stirred by his graceful dancing. <span
id="fr_454"></span>[11](#fn_454.md)

Such descriptions prove the popularity of the theme, in which both
individual dancing and organized games with competitive dancing between
experts are employed with the romantic object of arousing the passion of
love or of winning back an estranged lover or one tempted to infidelity.
The scene is drawn from life and gives an excellent idea of social life
in upper-class circles in the old days. It must be observed that in
every instance decorum was strictly preserved and a punctilious
etiquette guarded the whole affair. No such scenes of general license
occurred as are described as taking place at the mourning ceremonies of
a chief.

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

The second element brought out in the episodes of the story, that of
sorcery, is softened in the rationalized romance. Hi‘iaka has obtained
from her sister all her powers and is able to compete with her opponents
in magic, prophetic vision, and healing power. Peleula is a famous
makaula or seer, but Hi‘iaka prevails over her. Waihinano, the pert
sorceress who defies her on Maui, has been brought up by Kapo and Pua,
but Hi‘iaka catches and crushes to death the soul of the Maui chief for
which they both contend. The kahuna who sends after her to conciliate
her she deceives by transformations. She sees through the sorcery of her
opponents, like that of the false bridge. She has, besides, power to
heal and to restore the spirit to the body. She works through the
application of fragrant herbs and through chanting. Here the theme of
communal religious dancing is brought out in the nine days during which
the whole community take part in a hula ceremonial while Hi‘iaka is
engaged in chanting prayers to restore the spirit to Lohiau's body.

A character whose part in the hula cycle is not very clear is that of
Lohiau's friend Kaleiopaoa. Emerson makes him throughout a faithful
friend and one to whom Lohiau's spirit flutters after death to acquaint
him with the spot where his body lies and bid him go to Pele, presumably
to induce her to restore his body to life. Paoa vows vengeance upon Pele
and seeks her at Kilauea, where he finds an old woman surrounded by
beautiful girls and pleases her by picking her out from among them by
the heat of her hand. He avoids the poisoned food she offers. Pele
becomes young and beautiful and the two become lovers. Rice's version,
though briefer, tells a similar story but differs in conclusion. Pele
gives Hi‘iaka to Paoa as his wife and he returns with her to Kauai, but
during the marriage feast Lohiau, restored to life, reveals himself at
the kilu game and claims Hi‘iaka, and Paoa casts himself into the sea
for shame. The heiau with stepped platform whose ruins are to be seen at
Kee, Haena, on Kauai, and which Emory calls "the famous court of
Lohiau," is given by Thrum the name Kilioe and by Dickey that of
Ka-ulu-o-Paoa. <span id="fr_455"></span>[12](#fn_455.md) Paoa is

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

the name of Pele's digging stick with which she makes so many fruitless
(paoa) attempts to dig a pit for her island home. <span
id="fr_456"></span>[13](#fn_456.md) Emerson calls the paoa "Pele's divining
rod." <span id="fr_457"></span>[14](#fn_457.md) The name is singularly like
that of the Kaleipahoa (Cut with a stone axe), the famous poison god
fashioned from the supernatural trees on Molokai which were entered by
the three Pele sorcerers Kane-i-kaulana-ula, Ka-huila-o-ka-lani, and
Kapo. It is probable that Paoa once occupied a more important place than
he holds today in the Pele legend.

The prayers used in the hula dance are seldom addressed to Pele, but to
Laka as patron of the hula and to Kapo in her character as "Red
eel-woman" (Kapo-ula-kina‘u) and "Red Kapo of the myriad gods"
(-kini-akua) and Hai(Nina-ai)-ka-malama. Kapo is said to be the child of
Haumea and the god of the sorcery kahuna, Kua-ha-ilo (To breed maggots
in the back), equivalent to Ku-waha-ilo, and Laka is the child of Kapo,
"not in the ordinary sense but rather as a breath or emanation." The two
are "one in spirit though their names are two." <span
id="fr_458"></span>[15](#fn_458.md) Laka and Kapo therefore must be thought
of as different forms of the reproductive energy, possibly Kapo in its
passive, Laka in its active form, and their mother Haumea as the great
source of female fertility. In Laka all the goddesses of vegetation
reappear. She is invoked at the altar in the dance house as follows:

Thou art Laka,  
God of the a‘ali‘i plant (deep-rooted),  
Laka from the uplands,  
Laka from the lowlands,  
Bring the i-e vine that grows in the wildwood,  
The maile that wreaths the forest,  
Red-beaked kiele flower of the god,  
The joyous rhythm of the dance,  
In honor of Hina-ai-ka-malama,  
The eel-woman,  
Red Kapo the eel-woman, <span id="page_186">p. 186</span>  
Laka art thou,  
God of the altar here,  
Come back, come back, dwell here at thine altar,  
Bring it good luck. <span id="fr_459"></span>[16](#fn_459.md)

According to Daniel Ho‘olapa, the prayer to the goddess Alalalahe is
addressed to Laka, goddess of fruitfulness, represented (lines 12-19) as
"the woman suspended in air, face upward, tossing this way and that, her
limbs outspread, her voice choked. She is the fondled sacred one, the
earth left over in the making. Her womb holds multitudes upon multitudes
in the uplands and the sea. It is a single family that springs from her
womb. She is the impregnated one, the fertilized, from whom descend
generations of offspring, the family of Laka, fruitful as the stalk." In
other words, Laka or Alalahe (Many-branching one) is the goddess of
love, "the shining one" (alohi), the "beloved" (aloha). <span
id="fr_460"></span>[17](#fn_460.md)

Kapo is said to have been born of Papa (or Haumea) while she was living
up Kalihi valley on Oahu with Wakea her husband. Some say that she was
born from the eyes of Papa. She is of high rank and able to assume many
shapes at will. <span id="fr_461"></span>[18](#fn_461.md)

Poepoe version. Kapo-ula-kina‘u, Ka-moho-ali‘i, Pele-honua-mea are the
three wonderful ones who came from Wakea and Papa. "A very sacred tapu
of the gods rests upon her." Birds never sing about her tapu home up
Kalihi valley. There at noon when the sun is shining brightly she may be
seen on the hillside beyond the upland of Kilohana where stands her tapu
stone into which she entered, shaped like a house in front, like a
fish's tail behind. <span id="fr_462"></span>[19](#fn_462.md)

Kapo's power to separate her female sexual organ from her body gives her
the name of Kapo-kohe-lele (Kapo with the traveling vagina) called also
Kapo-mai-ele. <span id="fr_463"></span>[20](#fn_463.md)

When Kamapua‘a attacked Pele near Kalapana, Kapo sent this kohe as a
lure and he left Pele and followed the kohe lele as far as Koko Head on
Oahu, where it rested upon the hill, leaving an impression to this day
on the Makapu‘u side. Then she withdrew it and hid it in Kalihi. When
the Hawaiians dream of a woman without a vagina it is Kapo. Since Kapo
does not like this part of the body, unless a medium possessed by Kapo
wears a ti leaf protection she is in danger of having this part of her
body torn at. <span id="fr_464"></span>[21](#fn_464.md)

As goddess of sorcery Kapo is worshiped principally on Maui where she
acts as an akua noho or god who possesses the deified dead and gives
commands or foretells events through their worshipers. Pua has a similar
position on Molokai. These gods have power to bring diseases that can be
cured only by placating the god or by appealing to a more powerful
sorcery. <span id="fr_465"></span>[22](#fn_465.md) In the legend of the
Kalaipahoa, Kapo is one of the three gods who enter the trees out of
which the poison god is carved. In the Hi‘iaka romance, she is living at
Wailuku on Maui, and she is associated with Puanui in rearing Waihinano,
the sorceress who is unable to defend her patron against Hi‘iaka, whom
she has flouted; possibly to be identified with Waialani, daughter of
Kaohelo, whom Pele has offended by giving her berries to eat which are
the body of her dead mother.

The myth of the deification of Pele's sister Ka-ohelo tells how the
ohelo berries which grow in profusion about the volcano became sacred to
Pele and why no one plucks and eats them without first making an
offering to her. The story starts with a version of the migration
legend.

### LEGEND OF KAOHELO

The four sisters Pele, Hi‘iaka, Malulani, and Kaohelo are born in
Nu‘umealani but migrate to Hawaii after the arrival of Aukelenuiaiku.
Malulani settles on Lanai, the other three go on to Hawaii. Kaohelo
instructs her son Kiha to bury her when she dies "on the navel of your
grandmother at Kilauea" and out of her

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

flesh springs the creeping ohelo, out of her bones the ohelo bush; other
parts of her body are thrown to Maui, Oahu, Kauai, and become ohelo
bushes on those islands. The head Pele retains as the smoldering fire in
the volcano and Kaohelo becomes one of Pele's gods.

Kaohelo's spirit forms a marriage with the spirit of the handsome Heeia
on Oahu, who abandons her later for another woman. The little hills
about the district of Heeia (the land division adjoining Kaneohe in
Koolau) are formed by her from the body of Malulani, who has hanged
herself out of grief for her sister. Kaohelo's spirit daughter Waialani
comes to visit her relatives on Hawaii and is given some of the berries
to eat which are the body of her mother. Blood flows from them as she
eats and she vows never to see Pele again on earth. <span
id="fr_466"></span>[23](#fn_466.md)

### MYTH OF PU‘U-HELE

(*a*) Pu‘u-hele (Traveling hill) is a child born in the form of a bloody
foetus to Ka hina li‘i, mother of Pele and Hi‘iaka. The sisters throw it
away. The child crosses the channel of Alanuihaha between Hawaii and
Maui and lands at Nu‘u in Kaupo in the form of a beautiful woman. She
passes on without speaking to Nu‘u and makes friends with the beautiful
Pu‘u-o-maiai. Manawai-nui recognizes her and calls her by name. Kanahaha
sees her and falls dead and a spring gushes to this day from the hill of
that name. Leho-ula follows her as she continues her route along the
coast. At Wanana-lua Pu‘u-hele vows to remain. When Kai-hua-lele
reproves her for trespass she dies and through her power as a god her
spirit body lives on in the form of the hill Kauiki at the seashore. The
spirit body of her opposer lives in the form of the hill Kai-hua-kala in
the uplands above Kauiki. From the fact that it is generally covered
with clouds, this hill is used as a sign of fair weather in the often
quoted lines of the chant,

Fair weather on Maui  
when Kai-hua-kala is clear,  
Kai-hua-kala in the uplands,  
Kauiki beside the sea.

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

(*b*) The child Pu‘u-hele is brought from Koloa, Kauai, by Lalawalu. She
is peevish and bites at her nurse's breasts when a halt comes in the
journey, until they reach Hana, where the child is satisfied to be
left. <span id="fr_467"></span>[24](#fn_467.md)

 

Other stories occur which account for cone-shaped hills or rock islands
of Maui as the bodies of members of the Pele family, often such as are
transformed through the jealous wrath of the goddess.

### MYTHS OF SACRED HILLS

The two hills beyond Maalaea bay on Maui are named Pu‘u-hele and
Pu‘u-o-kali. They are mo‘o beings and their first child is a daughter
born of Pu‘u-o-kali and named Pu‘u-o-inaina. She is placed on the sacred
island of Kahoolawe, called at that time Kohe-malamalama. She becomes
the wife of the two sons of the kahuna of Hua, Kaakakai and Kaanahua,
who take the form of birds and retreat to Hana-ula when the great
drought comes and there alone rain falls. Pu‘u-o-inaina takes Lohiau for
her husband while he is living at Maalaea. Pele is angry and cuts her in
two in the middle. The tail becomes the hill Pu‘u-o-lai at Makena, the
head becomes the rock islet of Molokini. <span
id="fr_468"></span>[25](#fn_468.md)

Northwest of Lahainaluna is the hill Pu‘u-laina, 647 feet in height.
Pu‘u-laina is the son of Eeke and Lihau (names of the summit crater of
West Maui and the high peak back of Olowalu). These two are husband and
wife. Eeke falls in love with Lihau's younger sister Pu‘u-wai-o-hina
from Kauaula and Lihau is about to kill Pu‘u-laina but he is saved by
the father. The god Hina-i-ka-uluau places a tapu on the two lovers but
they break the tapu and are changed into two mountain ridges. Lihau
gives Pu‘ulaina to Molokini for a husband. One of Pele's younger sisters
desires him and when Molokini refuses to give him up she changes
Molokini into an islet. Pele in anger transforms both mother and son
into hills. <span id="fr_469"></span>[26](#fn_469.md)

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_444"></span>[180:1](hm14.htm#fr_444.md) N. Emerson, *Pele*;
also, "Hula"; Helen Roberts, *Bul.* 29; <span id="page_181">p.
181</span> Green, 2-5; Malo, 155-157; For. Col. 6: 68-74; J. Emerson,
*HHS Reports* 26: 17-39; Kamakau, *Ke Au Okoa*, July 21 to August 11,
1870.

<span id="fn_445"></span>[181:2](hm14.htm#fr_445.md) Emerson, *Pele*,
11-14, 162-163, 227; For. Col. 6: 343-344; Rice, 10; Westervelt,
*Volcanoes*, 87-95; local information.

<span id="fn_446"></span>[181:3](hm14.htm#fr_446.md) N. Emerson, "Hula,"
212-215.

<span id="fn_447"></span>[181:4](hm14.htm#fr_447.md) Rice, 14.

<span id="fn_448"></span>[181:5](hm14.htm#fr_448.md) 119.

<span id="fn_449"></span>[181:6](hm14.htm#fr_449.md) *Bul.* 104: 83.

<span id="fn_450"></span>[181:7](hm14.htm#fr_450.md) N. Emerson, Pele, 170
note.

<span id="fn_451"></span>[182:8](hm14.htm#fr_451.md) Malo, 281-287.

<span id="fn_452"></span>[183:9](hm14.htm#fr_452.md) Stimson MS.

<span id="fn_453"></span>[183:10](hm14.htm#fr_453.md) 164-165.

<span id="fn_454"></span>[183:11](hm14.htm#fr_454.md) 188-189.

<span id="fn_455"></span>[184:12](hm14.htm#fr_455.md) *HAA* 1929, 84-94.

<span id="fn_456"></span>[185:13](hm14.htm#fr_456.md) Westervelt,
*Volcanoes*, 9-11.

<span id="fn_457"></span>[185:14](hm14.htm#fr_457.md) *Pele*, xiv, xvi.

<span id="fn_458"></span>[185:15](hm14.htm#fr_458.md) N. Emerson, "Hula,"
47.

<span id="fn_459"></span>[186:16](hm14.htm#fr_459.md) Emerson, "Hula," 42.

<span id="fn_460"></span>[186:17](hm14.htm#fr_460.md) Kepelino, 182-183; N.
Emerson, "Hula," 23-48.

<span id="fn_461"></span>[186:18](hm14.htm#fr_461.md) Westervelt,
*Honolulu*, 29-30.

<span id="fn_462"></span>[186:19](hm14.htm#fr_462.md) BPBM MS. col. quoted
in McAllister, *Bul.* 104: 89.

<span id="fn_463"></span>[186:20](hm14.htm#fr_463.md) For. Col. 6: 344.

<span id="fn_464"></span>[186:21](hm14.htm#fr_464.md) From Mary Pukui.

<span id="fn_465"></span>[186:22](hm14.htm#fr_465.md) *Malo*, 155-156.

<span id="fn_466"></span>[188:23](hm14.htm#fr_466.md) For. Col. 5: 576-580.

<span id="fn_467"></span>[189:24](hm14.htm#fr_467.md) For. Col. 5: 544-549;
*Ke Alakai o Hawaii*, May 29, July 9, 1930.

<span id="fn_468"></span>[189:25](hm14.htm#fr_468.md) For. Col. 5: 514-519.

<span id="fn_469"></span>[189:26](hm14.htm#fr_469.md) *Ibid*. 532-535.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XIII. Pele Legends](hm15.md)
