[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hm23)  [Next](hm25) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_314">p. 314</span>

### XXII

### ERA OF OVERTURNING

TWELVE generations from the beginning of the race, on the genealogy of
Kumuhonua, during the so-called Era-of-overturning (Po-au-hulihia),
occurs the name of Nu‘u, called also Nana-nu‘u, Lana-nu‘u, Nu‘u-mea,
Nu‘u-mehani. He is called "a great kahuna" and in his time came the
flood known as Kai-a-ka-hina-li‘i, which may be translated as "Sea
caused by Kahinali‘i" or as "Sea that made the chiefs (ali‘i) fall down
(hina)." Nu‘u himself is called Ka-hinali‘i from this catastrophe, and
after the flood he is known as Ku-kapuna, his wife as Ku-kekoa, and
their three sons have names of winds that bring rain (nalu).

The story of Nu‘u as told to the missionaries shows a decided tendency
to strain after biblical analogy.

(*a*) *Fornander version*. Nu‘u builds "a large vessel and a house on
top of it" called Wa‘a-halau-ali‘i-o-ka-moku. In this he is saved from
the flood and after its subsidence Kane, Ku, and Lono enter the house
and send him outside, where he finds himself on the summit of Maunakea
on Hawaii at a place where there is a cave named after his wife
Lili-noe. He worships the moon with offerings of awa, pig, and coconuts,
thinking this is the god who has saved him. Kane descends (some say on a
rainbow) and explains his mistake and accepts his offerings. In this
version, as told on the island of Hawaii, he has three sons and his wife
is named Lilinoe. Others say her name is Nu‘umealani. Some think he
lands in Kahiki-honua-kele, "a large and extensive country." <span
id="fr_776"></span>[1](#fn_776)

(*b*) *Kepelino version*. Nu‘u, called Nu‘u-pule (Praying Nu‘u) because
he makes sacrifice to God, lives in the land Kahiki-honua-kele, in the
mountains where Kumuhonua was made by God. This is after the flood,
which came as a punishment for the sin

<span id="page_315">p. 315</span>

of Kumuhonua. He built a Wa‘a-halau-ali‘i-o-ka-moku and survived the
flood, in which his brother-in-law and those others who jeered at him
perished. <span id="fr_777"></span>[2](#fn_777)

Although Hawaiian tradition knows of the flood of Kahinali‘i and the
term Wa‘a-halau-ali‘i-o-ka-moku is familiar to old Hawaiians and may be
translated "Canoe like a chief's house," the idea of a houseboat such as
the legend describes is not a native tradition. Old people on Hawaii
told Ellis that "they were informed by their fathers that all the land
had once been overflowed by the sea, except a small peak on Maunakea,
where two human beings were preserved from the destruction that overtook
the rest, but they said they had never heard of a ship or of Noah,
having always been accustomed to call it the Kai-a-kahinarii." <span
id="fr_778"></span>[3](#fn_778)

The story of a flood in which two are saved on the summit of Mauna-kea
has been told in connection with the myth of the underseas woman drawn
up to become wife of a chief of Hawaii. Her father is Kahinali‘i and her
mother is named after the waves of the ocean. The brothers in the form
of oopu fishes make the ocean waters rise to cover all mountain-tops
except that of Mauna-kea, where the chief, his wife, and his family are
saved. The name of Kahinali‘i is to be recalled as that of the father
(or mother) of Pele in the flood version of her migration myth, when the
mother accompanies her in the form of a wave and the brothers shout at
the appearance of a sea that covers the flat island of Kahoolawe. It is
natural to suppose that such a legend would arise about a volcanic deity
whose activities are likely to be accompanied by inundations. Among the
Maori the mythical mother of the Pacific Ocean is a deity known by the
name of Para-whenua-mea, an epithet said to refer to the devastation due
to flood and closely resembling Pele's familiar chant name of
Pele-honua-mea.

A biblical version of a flood story recorded by White from the Maori
gives the name to a prophet who survives the flood on a raft upon which
a house has been built, and elaborate flood stories outside the
Polynesian area lay stress upon this house building.

<span id="page_316">p. 316</span>

*White* (*Maori*) *version*. Para-whenua-mea and his son Tupu-nui-a-uta
build a raft and put a house upon it with food of fern-root, sweet
potato, and dogs, and they pray for rain and all are drowned except
those in the raft. After pitching about on the sea for eight moons they
land on dry earth at Hawaiki and pay homage to the god. <span
id="fr_779"></span>[4](#fn_779)

 

*Qat* (*Banks islands*) *version*. Qat takes his departure from the
world Gana. Here he builds a great canoe on the plain. His brothers
laugh at him and ask how he will ever get it down to the sea: He takes
into the canoe his own family and living creatures of the island, "even
those so small as ants," and shuts himself inside while he prays for
rain. A deluge follows which tears a channel to the sea and he makes
off, taking with him the best things of the island and leaving a lake
where the plain had been. He is expected to return and foreigners
arriving at the island have been taken for Qat and his brethren. <span
id="fr_780"></span>[5](#fn_780)

 

*Thomson* (*Fiji*) *version*. The twin grandnephews of Ndengei, the
serpent god of the Kauvandra mountain on Viti-levu to whom men are
indebted for fire, good crops, rain, and victory in war, have a pet
pigeon which is their delight. During their absence Ndengei secures the
pigeon to waken him in the morning with its cooing. The boys are angry
and shoot the pigeon dead with the bow called "summer lightning."
Ndengei proclaims war but Rokolo, head of the carpenters' clan, builds
an impregnable fortress. Ndengei's seer dreams that if a vungayabi tree
that stands near the wall is cut down the fortress can be taken. A flood
follows the cutting of the tree, the fort capitulates, and the
carpenters are exiled. They sail away and establish their craft on Rewa.
For the boys Rokolo builds a wonderful boat called Na-wa‘a-nawanawa (The
lifeboats) and they sail westward and are never heard of again, although
it is prophesied that they will return. <span
id="fr_781"></span>[6](#fn_781)

 

Brewster gives a song-and-dance version of the myth called the Meke of
Turukawa (Song of the pigeon). He adds that

<span id="page_317">p. 317</span>

it is because of the scattering of the carpenters over the islands that
Fiji outrigger canoes and Fiji woodwork excel throughout the Pacific.
Tongans learned the art from the Fijians. The place is shown where the
"ark" was built by Rokolo. The river Rewa gushed from the roots of the
sacred myrtle when an arrow was shot into it. In the Lau islands it is
said that the god of carpenters shot Ndengei's cock with an arrow and
Ndengei sent a flood. In Tonga the story goes that Tangaloa Tufunga, god
of carpenters, who fished up the Tonga group, <span
id="fr_782"></span>[7](#fn_782) came down with his son from heaven and
built on Fiji an impregnable fort. A Fijian god sent rain and floated
the fort away with the carpenters inside, and thus the carpenters came
to be scattered over the earth. In Dobu a magic mango tree closes up
when an attempt is made to fell it, but when finally felled its fall is
followed by a flood. <span id="fr_783"></span>[8](#fn_783) A myth of a
tree rooted in the waters of the underworld is reported also for Hawaii
by Mrs. Pukui, who had it from Ka-wahine-hula of Waipio valley:

### FLOOD-TREE MYTH

Up Waipio valley is a kupua kawau tree which grows over the waters of
Ra-wai-o-ulu (The water of growth \[life\]) and holds these waters
together with its great roots. Were it not for this tree the water would
fill the valleys of Waipio and Waimanu.

 

In the Marquesas a tree is planted over Tohe-tika's head to prevent his
ever rising again. He causes it to rain and washes away the tree and
drowns all the people. <span id="fr_784"></span>[9](#fn_784)

No natural catastrophe of this kind occurs in Polynesia without an
explanation in the vengeance of an aggrieved god. Para-whenua-mea prayed
for the flood because men would not listen to the teachings of Tane. The
Maori say that in the days of Mataiho (Mataaho), Puta caused the land to
be turned upside down so that all were destroyed because they would not
listen to his teaching. <span id="fr_785"></span>[10](#fn_785) Another
Maori story says

<span id="page_318">p. 318</span>

that a woman lifts a bit of tongue from a tapu oven and eats it and in
consequence the whole two thousand of her tribe are overwhelmed in a
flood to appease the wrath of the sea monster (taniwha) who is the
guardian of the fishing ground. <span id="fr_786"></span>[11](#fn_786)
In the Tuamotus, the spirit of the murdered Temahage, called
Overturner-of-earth, is aided by his grandfather to submerge the island
of Taiero, whose people were responsible for his death, and the
neighboring islands. <span id="fr_787"></span>[12](#fn_787) Tana-oa
overturns the island Fatu-uku and drowns everybody upon it because he
overhears himself criticized by his wife's family; only he himself and
his wife escape. <span id="fr_788"></span>[13](#fn_788)

The escape of a single couple or of a family group who have heeded the
god's warning is a common ending to South Sea flood stories. A
particular turn is given to some Tahitian versions where the husband
proposes a more likely place of escape and the wife insists upon
following the god's advice. The type is found on the island of Maui,
where a low hill on the southwest side of the island which has escaped
flooding by an old lava stream is explained as the place where a couple
took refuge on the insistence of the wife during a volcanic
eruption. <span id="fr_789"></span>[14](#fn_789)

*Maori*. Rua-tapu, child of Ue-nuku at Aotea, is angry because his
father places the brother born of a royal mother ahead of himself, who
is born of a slave mother. He takes a boatload of young chiefs far out
to sea and drowns them all; only Paikea escapes. Rua-tapu promises to
return "in the great nights of the eighth moon" and bids the people
retire to the mountain in order to escape destruction. At the appointed
time he comes upon the land in the form of a rushing tidal wave and all
are drowned who have remained by the sea. <span
id="fr_790"></span>[15](#fn_790)

 

*Tahiti*. Two friends go to fish and disturb the spot sacred to a sea
deity called Rua-hatu-tini-rau in whose hair the hook is tangled. He is
appeased by their prayers and bids them assemble all the royal family on
a little reef as the land is to be submerged

<span id="page_319">p. 319</span>

in revenge for the breaking of his tapu. Some scoff, but all the royal
family are saved. <span id="fr_791"></span>[16](#fn_791)

Ruahatu, asleep in the sea bottom, is caught in the hair by a
fisherman's hook and in anger sends a flood, but, pacified by the
fisherman's offerings, tells him and his wife that they will be safe if
they go to Toamarama islet. The man suggests climbing the mountain but
the wife dissuades him and they alone are saved. <span
id="fr_792"></span>[17](#fn_792)

Long ago Tahiti-nui and Tahiti-iki were submerged and, except for the
birds and insects preserved by the gods, only a single couple and the
things they saved survived. The man proposes fleeing to the lofty peak
of Orohena, the woman foresees that it will be flooded and directs their
way to Pito-hiti. This is the only land that emerges between Tahiti and
Moorea. After ten nights the rain ceases. They remain in a cave in the
mountain until the heavens are calm and clear. Nothing but bare earth
remains on the land and they have nothing to eat but fish and red earth.
Twins are born, and the third day a third child. Eventually Tahiti and
Moorea are repeopled and plants and trees grow up and bear fruit and
cover the ground. <span id="fr_793"></span>[18](#fn_793)

 

*Andaman*. Minni Cara once broke some firewood in the evening. A great
storm came and killed many people and turned them into birds and fishes.
The water rose up over the trees. Minni Cara and Minni Kota took the
fire in a cooking pot and went up the hill to a cave where the fire was
kept alight until the storm was over. <span
id="fr_794"></span>[19](#fn_794)

 

The form of the name Kai-a-Kahinali‘i is used by the Maori in speaking
of Te-tai-o-Uenuku, or -o-Ruatapu, son of Uenuku. <span
id="fr_795"></span>[20](#fn_795) Uenuku was "a very celebrated high
priest and ancestor of many Maoris, living in Ra‘iatea, Tahiti, and
Rarotonga at the time of the great migration to New Zealand in the 14th
century." <span id="fr_796"></span>[21](#fn_796) He stopped civil war,
bloodshed, and cannibalism, says Skinner. <span
id="fr_797"></span>[22](#fn_797) A tidal wave in the Marquesas

<span id="page_320">p. 320</span>

is called Tai-Toko, possibly from the ancestor Toko from two of whose
twelve sons the Marquesans claim descent.

In myth it is difficult to say in individual cases whether terms like
Kai-a-kahinali‘i refer literally to an inundation or tidal wave sweeping
the land, a catastrophe which occurs all too often in the South Seas, or
are to be taken figuratively as an invasion of some sort, the downfall
of one leading family and its gods and the rise of another. Although
tidal waves on the high islands are not so disastrous as the myth would
represent, a small inhabited coral island is subject at irregular
intervals to a complete inundation from which a small remnant may escape
by clinging to the tops of the coconut trees. Churchill records an
earthquake which sunk the land where two thousand lived, <span
id="fr_798"></span>[23](#fn_798) and there are records throughout the
South Seas of occasions in which whole islands have disappeared utterly.
In the Hawaiian group the sinking of populated coastal areas due to
earthquakes or other volcanic phenomena must have left its traces upon
old tradition. Such an area on the Hilo coast still shows the tops of
submerged coconut trees which once grew on firm land. Another important
area pointed out by tradition is the coast about the hill Kauiki in
Hana, East Maui, where Kane and Kanaloa are supposed to have made their
home. It is possible that the subsidence of this thickly populated area
at a time of volcanic eruption resulted in the rise of a rival power on
Hawaii under a reorganized priesthood which sought cooperation with the
goddess Pele.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_776"></span>[314:1](hm24.htm#fr_776) For. Col. 6: 269-270,
335; Pol. Race 1:91-95.

<span id="fn_777"></span>[315:2](hm24.htm#fr_777) 34-43.

<span id="fn_778"></span>[315:3](hm24.htm#fr_778) *Tour*, 333.

<span id="fn_779"></span>[316:4](hm24.htm#fr_779) 3: 172-181.

<span id="fn_780"></span>[316:5](hm24.htm#fr_780) Codrington, 166-167.

<span id="fn_781"></span>[316:6](hm24.htm#fr_781) Thomson, 134-140.

<span id="fn_782"></span>[317:7](hm24.htm#fr_782) *Bul.* 61: 290.

<span id="fn_783"></span>[317:8](hm24.htm#fr_783) T. Williams, 252-254;
Brewster, 255-258; Fison, 27-31; Hocart, 180, 201-203; Gifford, *Bul.*
8: 201; Fortune, 263-266.

<span id="fn_784"></span>[317:9](hm24.htm#fr_784) Handy, *Bul.* 69: 109.

<span id="fn_785"></span>[317:10](hm24.htm#fr_785) White 3: 168, 181.

<span id="fn_786"></span>[318:11](hm24.htm#fr_786) *JPS* 10: 68-70.

<span id="fn_787"></span>[318:12](hm24.htm#fr_787) Montiton, 343.

<span id="fn_788"></span>[318:13](hm24.htm#fr_788) *Bul.* 69: 96.

<span id="fn_789"></span>[318:14](hm24.htm#fr_789) Oral information.

<span id="fn_790"></span>[318:15](hm24.htm#fr_790) White 3: 9-13, 23-31,
36-41, 48-58.

<span id="fn_791"></span>[319:16](hm24.htm#fr_791) Henry, 445-448.

<span id="fn_792"></span>[319:17](hm24.htm#fr_792) Ellis, *Researches*
1: 389-391.

<span id="fn_793"></span>[319:18](hm24.htm#fr_793) Ahnne 44 (1932):
84-87; Henry, 448-452; Ellis, *Researches*, 1: 387-389.

<span id="fn_794"></span>[319:19](hm24.htm#fr_794) Brown, 206-212.

<span id="fn_795"></span>[319:20](hm24.htm#fr_795) Smith, *MPS* 3:
166-167.

<span id="fn_796"></span>[319:21](hm24.htm#fr_796) *JPS* 29: 32.

<span id="fn_797"></span>[319:22](hm24.htm#fr_797) *Mem.* 9: 42.

<span id="fn_798"></span>[320:23](hm24.htm#fr_798) Sissano, 13.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXIII. Mu and Menehune People](hm25)
