[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hm31)  [Next](hm33) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_430">p. 430</span>

### XXX

### TRICKSTER STORIES

TRICKSTER stories are generally in the form of contests with the spirits
who peopled the islands before  the coming of man to Hawaii, and are
only occasion-ally told of animal figures. In early days the southern
islands of the group were all peopled by spirits, each with its chief
spirit, Kani-ka‘a of Hawaii, Keoloewa or Ke-ahu-ali‘i of Maui, Pahulu of
Lanai, Kaunolu of Molokai, Halali‘i of Oahu. Lanai and Kahoolawe were
long avoided by settlers through fear of the spirits who were their sole
inhabitants. The Kaulu-laau of Lahaina who cleared Lanai of spirits has
never been connected with the voyager Kaulu but may be a namesake. The
tendency is to be seen on the one hand of centering such exploits about
a single figure, on the other hand of a local detachment which gives
rise to a distinct hero cycle on each island or even from district to
district, hence a multiplication of trickster figures each with his own
cycle of ad-ventures, sometimes borrowed from district to district. Most
of the stories on record are of wide distribution and must be referred
to late foreign or south Polynesian sources. What original jests they
supersede it is perhaps not too late to. discover. The demigod Maui is
archtrickster throughout Polynesia, but his deeds are rather typical of
the kupua than of the trickster hero.

Pupuhuluena(-ana, Kupuahuluena, Puluana) is said to have been a kahuna
who introduced food plants into the Hawaiian group, or, in localized
versions, into Kohala district on Hawaii, by tricking the persons or
"spirits" who owned the plants.

### STORY OF PUPUHULUENA

(*a*) Pupu-huluena (Tuft of red feathers) lives along the steep cliffs
east of Kohala where no food plants grow; the spirits have hidden them
at Kalae in Ka-u district. He goes out

<span id="page_431">p. 431</span>

fishing and follows the shoals of fish until off the Kona coast he sees
Ieiea and Poopalu, fishermen of Makali‘i, letting down a large-mouthed
fishnet from their canoe. He makes friends with them by giving them oily
kukui nuts in place of the sea beans (mohihi) they have been using to
chew and spread on the water in order to see the fish entering the net.
In return they help him get slips of food plants, which can be had only
from the spirits ashore, since all their own food is cooked. The spirits
must be made to believe that he has supernatural knowledge or they will
never give up their food plants. He carves an image of wiliwili wood to
set up as a god and weaves a basket of ieie vine in which he hides one
of the fishermen. Brought ashore thus concealed, the native whispers to
him the way in which to meet the tests by which those who have the food
plants on shore attempt to put off the strangers. He is hence able to
come ashore at the proper place and to name all the plants correctly as
if revealed by his god. After he has stood some of them on their heads
in a competitive game, they are glad to be rid of him. The tubers he
planted are still to be seen growing at the foot of the cliffs east of
Mohala. <span id="fr_1036"></span>[1](#fn_1036)

 

(*b*) Kula-uka lives above Kaumana on Oahu. At Lelepua lives the
grandchild of Wailoa and Haumea named Kapahu. Kula-uka quarrels with his
brother Kula-kai and, weaving a bird-form disguise out of ieie vine
covered with feathers, he carries away Kapahu. When Haumea pursues, he
throws out a stone which Haumea takes for her grandchild and which
thunders when she tries to catch it. Haumea in revenge seizes the food
from all the islands and retires to Nu‘umealani.

Oahu, Kauai, Maui, Hawaii are afflicted by drought. Pupuhuluana and
Kapala, strong men and swift runners of Kauai, come to Oahu seeking food
and at Kailua in the land of Maunawili find Haumea's attendants, the men
Olomana, Ahiki, Pakui, and the women Makawao and Hauli, living on popolo
and ti plant left by the angry goddess for the subsistence of her own
people. Olomana sends the swift runner Pakui with the Kauai men to
Ololo-i-mehani, the land of Makali‘i eastward of Oahu. They carve
lifelike images of Ieiea and Poopalu, fishermen of

<span id="page_432">p. 432</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Makali‘i, with humped backs like the uhu
fishermen, real hair, eyes made of oyster shell. They bring back
potatoes, taro, bananas, sugar cane, ape plant, ti, yams, hoi, arrowroot
(pia), breadfruit, mountain apples (ohia), coconuts, and edible ferns.
Thus these foods came to the islands. <span
id="fr_1037"></span>[2](#fn_1037)

 

(*c*) There is a famine on the islands because Haumea has taken away the
food. Pupuhuluana sails east to the land of Makali‘i and on his return
lands at Kalae in Ka-u district on Hawaii with food plants. His canoe,
the "net of Maeha," and the fishermen of Makali‘i, Poopalu and Ieiea,
are to be seen there turned into stone. <span
id="fr_1038"></span>[3](#fn_1038)

 

(*d*) It is Aukele-nui-aiku and his brother (Kane-)Apua who bring the
first coconut to Hawaii. The first time Apua and his brother come from
Kahiki they do not bring slips of food plants because they expect to
find them growing here. Being almost famished, they return to Kahiki
after plantings, and appear off Kaula-(u)ka's place in Kahiki with a
load of pretended food in the shape of coral rock. Their not landing is
laid to the rough surf. Of each plant they are shown they declare that
it "germinates, sprouts, bears leaves and fruits in Hawaii," and hold up
a piece of coral resembling the shape of the plant. The owners of the
food plants cast all away as worthless and the voyagers gather them into
the canoes and carry them back to plant in Hawaii. The first coconuts in
Hawaii are planted at Kahaualea (where stands the heiau of Waha-ula) and
at Kalapana in Puna district, Hawaii. <span
id="fr_1039"></span>[4](#fn_1039)

 

(*e*) Kupua-huluena is a famous kupua who travels to foreign lands,
names vegetables introduced at Keauhou, Hawaii, offers them upon the
altars of the heiau of Kamauai erected to Kane, and distributes them for
planting. Thus vegetable foods are introduced into these islands. <span
id="fr_1040"></span>[5](#fn_1040)

<span id="page_433">p. 433</span>

The device of a basket in which an accomplice is concealed as a
pretended "god" occurs in the Pikoi-a-ka-alala legend, in which Pikoi is
secretly conveyed to Hawaii concealed in such a basket as the god of his
friend Kauakahi. In the Kaulu legend, the kupua's presence in the land
of the gods is concealed by his hiding in a basket, where he acts as the
pretended "god" of his brother and has to be properly fed to be
effective. A bird disguise is woven by Maui when he goes in search of
his wife who has been stolen by the eight-eyed bat. <span
id="fr_1041"></span>[6](#fn_1041)

A few similar incidents are found in other groups, based on common
customs or a common tradition. The use of oil to clear waters is noted
in New Zealand. <span id="fr_1042"></span>[7](#fn_1042) Compare also the
incident in Marquesan stories of emptying a gourdful of oil into the sea
in order to look down to the sea bottom, or "into Havai‘i." <span
id="fr_1043"></span>[8](#fn_1043) The trick of pretending acquaintance
with some coveted culture gift in order that its owners may not know how
eagerly the stranger desires it occurs in other Polynesian travel
stories. In Pukapuka, Wue travels. At Rakahanga he pretends that only
children use swings in his country, and thus gets samples of this
novelty to take home with him. So with other games which he learns at
the different islands he visits. <span id="fr_1044"></span>[9](#fn_1044)

A similar famine story occurs in the legend of Makali‘i.

(*a*) *Kepelino version*. Makali‘i, the famous steersman of Hawaii-loa,
is a great farmer who gathers up the food from Kahiki: bananas, yam,
sugar cane, starch plant, hoi berry, and the gourd vines from which food
calabashes and water bottles are made. But he is stingy and keeps all
fast in a net (koko) until a rat nibbles the cord and lets them fall
out. When the land is troubled by drought, rats (some of them
two-legged) scatter his horde. Hence the saying, "But for the rat who
spread these things broadcast over the group . . ." (E ole ka iole, laha
ai no mea kanu ma keia mau pae-aina).

 

(*b*) *Fornander version* (1). In the Moikeha-Kila legend Makali‘i,
younger brother of Moikeha, remains in Kahiki as ruler

<span id="page_434">p. 434</span>

over the land when his brother sails to Hawaii. He is good-looking,
powerful, and brave, has the foreknowledge of a seer, and wields his war
club Naulu-kohe-lewalewa with such force that its stroke forms a deep
furrow in the earth. Foreseeing Kila's arrival, he has gathered up all
the food of the land into a net called Makali‘i and hung it up out of
reach. "The net of Makali‘i is drawn up above" (Huhui koko a Makali‘i
iluna) is the saying. Kila's grandaunt (or uncle), Kane-pohihi, climbs
up in rat form and gnaws the strings of the net so that all the food is
scattered over the land. Makali‘i comes down from his home in the clouds
to do battle with Kila, but Kila dodges the swing of his club and gives
him a stunning blow, after recovery from which he crawls away thankfully
to his home in the clouds and never returns to earth.

 

(*c*) *Fornander version* (2). Makali‘i is a mythical ruler in
Kapakapaua-a-Kane who in time of plenty stores up food which in time of
famine he hangs out of reach in a net. The rats travel over the earth in
search of food and find nothing. They look up to heaven and see the net.
One climbs thither on clouds and rainbow and nibbles the ropes of the
net at the center. The food falls and restocks the earth.

 

(*d*) Emerson version. Makali‘i has hung up the vegetable food in a net
attached to a cloud at Kaipaku, Hanalei, on Kauai. Puluena comes from
Kohala seeking food and puts the rat into the net. A division of land in
Kohala district is called Iole after this friendly rat. The chant runs,

Hiu ai la Kaupaku Hanalei  
I na mapuna wai a ka naulu.

"Hung up on the ridgepole of Hanalei,  
To the water springs of the rain cloud." <span
id="fr_1045"></span>[10](#fn_1045)

 

References to the famine in the days of Makali‘i are not uncommon. In
Green's version of the Anaelike story the chiefess

<span id="page_435">p. 435</span>

of the Rolling island visits Hawaii at a time when Makali‘i has hung up
the food in his net and there is little for man to eat; later in the
story the rat nibbles at the net and there is food. <span
id="fr_1046"></span>[11](#fn_1046) The famine myth is generally placed
in a distant land. Only in Emerson's version is Makali‘i said to belong
to Kauai and the havoc of his horde to have taken place on the southern
coast of Hawaii. At the southernmost point of that island, at Kalae in
Ka-u district, rock formations are locally ascribed to objects in the
legend: "the stars of Makali‘i \[Pleiades\], the house of Makali‘i, his
net, and the rat." The string figure to which the chant belongs shows
the net with its eight compartments, each of which holds a single kind
of vegetable food--taro, sweet potato, plantain, yam, arrowroot,
fernroot, smilax, and another. The point at which the rat nibbled the
cord is one which, if cut, will cause the whole figure to fall apart.

One of the ceremonies of the Makahiki festival consisted in shaking a
netful of food out upon the ground to foretell what the crop would be
like that season; if anything clung to the net it was a sign of
scarcity. The ceremony, says a note, commemorated the time when "the
kupua Waia let down from heaven a net whose four corners pointed to the
North, South, East and West, and which was filled with all sorts of
food, animal and vegetable (i‘a and ai). This done he shook the net and
the food was scattered over the land for the benefit of the starving
people." In the prayer offered at this time for the net (ka pule koko),
Uli is invoked as a god, and Kane and Kanaloa as the "life giver" and
the "wonder worker." To this net Malo gives the name of Maoloha. <span
id="fr_1047"></span>[12](#fn_1047) It is moreover from Makali‘i that
Kaulu (Kula-uka?) gets the net of Maoleha in order to snare and kill
Haumea. Now Haumea in one version of the Pupuhuluana legend is the one
who has caused the famine which has started the quest after food plants.
In Emerson's version of the net of Makali‘i, Puluena is the man who
comes seeking food. The names are evidently variants, and the food
famine is thus closely connected with the stories of both Kaulu and
Pupuhuluana. In the Kaulu legend Makali‘i

<span id="page_436">p. 436</span>

is represented as the seer of the gods Kane and Kanaloa and lives in the
heaven above Kuaihelani, where lies the vegetable garden of the gods.
Kaulu wrecks this food plot by the trick familiar to folktale of
appearing as a puny fellow and then gathering up the entire crop when
told to take "all he can carry away." The same device of the chewed
kukui nut to clarify the water with which Pupuhuluana bribes the
"fisher-men of Makali‘i" to help him secure the food plants from the
spirits is employed in the Kaulu story by Makali‘i himself, under
compulsion, in order to clear the ocean surface and find out where the
fishes have hidden Kaulu's brother. <span
id="fr_1048"></span>[13](#fn_1048)

Ka-ulu (The breadfruit) is known to Hawaiian legend as "son of Kalana"
and a great voyager in the South Seas; to Hawaiian mythical fiction as a
great trickster who wrecks the vegetable garden of Kane and Kanaloa,
slays their pet shark whose spirit is accordingly placed in the Milky
Way, terrorizes Makali‘i into giving up the net Maoleha in order to
snare Haumea, and kills Lono-ka-eho with the eight foreheads and his dog
Ku-ilio-loa, who rule the north side of Oahu.

### STORY OF KAULU

Ka-ulu is the youngest son of Ku-ka-ohia-laka and Hina-ulu-ohia born at
Kailua, Koolau, on Oahu. Since an older brother Kamano has threatened
his death as soon as he is born, he fears to take human form and appears
in the shape of a rope, which is put up on a shelf and guarded by a
kindly brother Kaeha (or Kaholeha) until he becomes a human being. Kaeha
is carried away to lands in the sky called Lewa-nu‘u and Lewa-lani (or
Kuaihelani) where Kane and Kanaloa live and Kaulu voyages thither to
find him. Kaulu's strength lies in his hands; each obstacle he
encounters is overcome by means of their strength alone. These obstacles
are strong waves, which he breaks up and hence the surf of today; long
and short waves; the dog Ku-ilio-loa, which he breaks in pieces and
hence the small dogs of today (and in another version the tides Keaumiki
and Keauka, and gods and ghosts).

<span id="page_437">p. 437</span>

Kaeha hides him in a loulu palm leaf from which he speaks with the voice
of a god and demands the awa cup given to his brother. The seer Makali‘i
warns the gods that Kaulu is among them and is all-powerful, but they
fail to find him. He plays tricks on the spirits by putting stones into
their sleeping places; they retaliate by refusing food to the brother
and telling him to get it for himself. Kaulu "flies up" to the gods'
provision ground; the guards turn it over and shake him off into space
but he recovers footing and teases the guards into giving him "anything
he wants." He takes everything they have, even to the rays of the sun,
and they have to beg a piece of each to restock the land.

The gods endeavor to get rid of Kaeha by tempting him out surf riding,
where he is swallowed by the chief of the sharks Kukama-ulu-nui-akea (or
Kalake‘e-nui-a-Kane). Kaulu first drains the sea to find his brother,
then spits it out (and hence the sea is salt today) and seeks Makali‘i.
The thunderstone Ikuwa which Koeleele (or Kaaona) hurls at him he
catches on his forefinger. Makali‘i chews kukui nut to oil the surface
of the sea and points out the chief shark to Kaulu. Kaulu teases the
shark until it opens its jaws, then tears the jaws apart with his strong
hands and out comes his brother with hair all worn away. The spirits
again try to kill Kaeha in a swing, but Kaeha kills them instead by
pretending to swing them. Those who survive catch Kaeha and hide him in
a mussel (opihi) shell, but Kaulu urinates upon it and forces it to open
its shell, hence that species of mussel is bitter today.

Kaulu returns with his brother to Papakolea in Moanalua and himself goes
on to Kapalama, where he kills Haumea by trapping her in the Maoleha
nets obtained from Makali‘i; then to Kailua where he kills Lono-ka-eho
with the eight foreheads and his dog Kuilioloa at Kualoa, and assumes
the chief ship over Koolau. <span id="fr_1049"></span>[14](#fn_1049)

 

In this legend of Ka-ulu's birth and his fabulous adventures when he
goes to find his brother in the land of Kane and Kanaloa, the trickster
element is uppermost. As a kupua his own two hands are his "god" and,
although the voyage and

<span id="page_438">p. 438</span>

the adventures in the land of the gods contain elements similar to other
such travel tales, the emphasis of the story is upon the tricks he plays
upon the spirits in contests of power.

\(A\) Birth in the form of a rope.

\(B\) Voyage in which obstacles are sent by the gods to obstruct the
way.

\(C\) Tricking of the spirits in the land of the gods; (C1) disguise as
a god; (C2) rough handling of the spirits until they are glad to be rid
of the visitor.

\(D\) Carrying away food plants; (D1) all the food there is.

\(E\) Avoiding thunderbolts.

\(F\) Killing the gods' shark, which is thrown up into the Milky Way.

Similar stories of contests with spirits in order to win food plants
from the gods come from Samoa.

*Lele‘asapai*. The flying gods (aitu) in Alele have stolen all the chief
of Samata's yam planting. He sends his grandson Lele‘asapai to the
spirits' land to the westward of Savai‘i to bring them back. On the way
Lele lands at Pulotu, where the ruling chief Savea Si‘uleo pretends
friendship and asks him where they sleep at night, intending to destroy
them. His guardian god Saolevao sets a watch and guards them against the
plot. Si‘uleo sends him after kava, but misdirects him; again Saolevao
sets him right. The spirits poison the kava they give him to drink, but
Saolevao drinks the poison for him. Now allowed to go on to Alele, he
hides at the spring and first kills the bearers who bring the chief of
the flying spirits, then forces the chief to give him the yam
plantings. <span id="fr_1050"></span>[15](#fn_1050)

 

*Lefanoga*. The young son follows his father Tagaloa-ui and his brother
Tae-o-Tagaloa to the family gathering in the heavens. The family are
shocked and give him the poisonous kava to kill him. He avoids the
poison, uproots the whole plant, and brings it down to the Tagaloa
people on earth. <span id="fr_1051"></span>[16](#fn_1051)

<span id="page_439">p. 439</span>

*Losi*. Losi sets out (usually with a boatload of god-like companions)
after food plants and brings taro, coconuts, bread-fruit, and the kava
ritual from the Tagaloa in the heavens by outwitting the gods in all the
tests they set him and defeating them in battle, teasing and bullying
them until they will give him anything he asks in order to be rid of
him. The tests consist in kava drinking, eating (sometimes poisonous
food), surf riding, diving, catching fruit shaken from a tree, or in
more magical feats like setting back the sun or stopping rain. <span
id="fr_1052"></span>[17](#fn_1052) A similar story from Tonga tells of
the voyage to Bulotu, the tests under-taken, and the food plants with
which the voyagers escape from the spirits of Bulotu. <span
id="fr_1053"></span>[18](#fn_1053)

 

The king shark of Kane and Kanaloa in Lewa-lani, called
Ku-kama-ulu-nui-akea or Kalake‘e-nui-a-Kane, whom Kaulu slays in this
legend and whose spirit flies up to the Milky Way, has its prototype in
the South Seas. In the Tuamotus the Milky Way is the sacred ocean of
Kiho-tumu; the dark rift in the Milky Way is his sacred ship, called
The-long-shark. <span id="fr_1054"></span>[19](#fn_1054) In New Zealand
the Milky Way (Te Mangaroa) is called The-fish-of-Maui
(Te-ika-Maui). <span id="fr_1055"></span>[20](#fn_1055) In Rarotonga
Maui kills Te-Mokoroa-i-ata, the water monster who insulted Maui's
father Tangaroa, and Mokoroa becomes the Milky Way. <span
id="fr_1056"></span>[21](#fn_1056) In Tahiti Ire, "the handsome blue
shark, be-loved of Ta‘aroa," frolics with the children until the gods of
the sea warn the brothers Tahi-a-nu‘u and Tahi-a-ra‘i that there is
danger of its becoming a man-eater. One breaks his spear between its
jaws, the other aims at its heart. They are about to cut it up when
Ta‘aroa and Tu snatch away their pet to the Wai-ola-o-Tane and it bathes
in the Milky Way. <span id="fr_1057"></span>[22](#fn_1057)

Kaulu and his wife Kekele, a quiet, handsome woman who loves all
fragrant plants and who planted the hala groves of Koolau and used to
wear wreaths of sweet-smelling pandanus

<span id="page_440">p. 440</span>

about her, are not named upon the genealogical line to which Kaulu's
forefathers belong but remain mythical figures. In the story of his
adventures his parents are woodland deities. His own name refers to
plant growth, especially the breadfruit, and is used in referring to a
young person before puberty.

The theft of the awa plant from the garden of the gods connects Kaulu's
exploits as a trickster with those of Maui as recounted in the Kumulipo.
The arrangement of the strata of the heavens in which Kane and Kanaloa
drink awa and surf with the spirits in the lower heaven (Lewa-nu‘u)
while their vegetable garden is tended in the heaven above (Lewalani)
corresponds with a fishing chief's establishment who lives by the sea
and has his vegetable food brought from the uplands. The looting of the
patch corresponds with Maui's early exploit. Hina-the-tapa-beater, wife
of the Nanamaoa who is represented on the Ulu line as son of the
trickster Maui-a-kalana, is called the grandmother of Kaulu the
voyager. <span id="fr_1058"></span>[23](#fn_1058)

Two traditions remain from the legend of Kaulu's voyages: one that he
brought to Hawaii "the edible soil of Kawainui" called alaea, used
medicinally by old Hawaiians and resorted to in Tahiti in time of
famine; <span id="fr_1059"></span>[24](#fn_1059) the other that he
visited the maelstrom called Moana-wai-kai-o-o, or Mimilo-o-Nolewai, an
adventure, says Emory, often depicted in Tuamotuan tradition where
actual whirlpools are common within the group, one within the lagoon of
Takaroa "into which canoes are drawn, disappear from sight, and emerge
again some distance beyond." <span id="fr_1060"></span>[25](#fn_1060)
Lands visited by Kaulu in circling Kahiki are recited in a name chant:

I am Kaulu, Offspring of Kalana,  
He who visited Wawau (Borabora)  
       .       .       .       .       .       .  
Upolo (Taha‘a), little Pukalia,  
Great Pukalia and Alala, <span id="page_441">p. 441</span>  
Pelua, Palana, and Holani,  
The isthmus (kuina) of Ulunui, Uliuli,  
Melemele, Hi‘ikua, Hi‘ilalo, Hakalauai;  
Spanned the heavens,  
Spanned the night, spanned the day,  
Made the circuit of Kahiki,  
Kahiki is completely circled by Kaulu. <span
id="fr_1061"></span>[26](#fn_1061)

### STORY OF KAULULAAU

(*a*) *Fornander version*. Ka-ulu-laau (The grove of trees), son of
Kakaalaneo and Kanikani-ula, is brought up at Lahaina (called Lele) on
Maui, where his father lives and rules the whole island of Maui. All the
children born on the same day are brought to the chief's place to be the
boy's companions. Each day he leads them into mischief, finally pulling
up the breadfruit plantings. The boys are sent home and Kaululaau exiled
to Lanai, which is inhabited by spirits. In vain these man-eating
spirits try to discover the place which his god has given him to sleep
in. Each night they tire themselves out running to a new place to which
he has directed them, while he sleeps pleasantly somewhere else, until
all die of exhaustion except Pahulu and a few others, who escape to
Kahoolawe. The chief sees how his son's fire burns each night on Lanai,
is pleased with his courage, and sends a canoe to fetch him home. <span
id="fr_1062"></span>[27](#fn_1062)

 

(*b*) *Emerson version*. To trick the spirits, Ka-ulu-laau proposes a
swimming test to a rock at which he takes his stand and as they swim up
to the rock one at a time, he holds the head of each under water until
he is drowned. The remaining spirits he makes drunk in a feast house,
gums their eyes while they sleep, and then sets fire to the house. Only
three or four escape. One he ends with a mock club, another by tricking
him to dive for his own reflection in the water and then jumping in on
top of him and putting an end to him. <span
id="fr_1063"></span>[28](#fn_1063)

<span id="page_442">p. 442</span>

(*c*) *Kalakaua version*. Further adventures recounted of Kaulu-laau
include the possession of a magic spear point with which he is able to
sink into the ground a demon mo‘o called Mo‘oaleo, protect himself from
Pele, and kill a giant bird which harries Oahu and is possessed by the
spirit of Hilo-a-Lakapu, f chief of Hawaii who invaded Oahu during the
rule of Maili-ku kahi and was slain at Waimano and his head placed on a
pole for the birds to feed upon near Honouliuli. Of akua blood, his
spirit enters the monster and is driven forth only by pronouncing his
name. This spurious version gives Kaululaau a half-sister Wao and a
half-brother Kaihiwalua, father of Luaia. The kahuna Waolani is his
friend. His land on Maui is called Kauaula. His wife from Oahu is named
Laiea-a-Ewa. <span id="fr_1064"></span>[29](#fn_1064)

The motive of hiding from the spirits occurs in the Banks islands and in
Samoa.

(*a*) Qat and his brothers go to the village of Qasavara and to escape
death at the hands of the spirits hide each night through Qat's magic in
a different crevice of the house, which the fool brother the next day
points out. <span id="fr_1065"></span>[30](#fn_1065)

(*b*) In Samoa, Lele‘asapai is sent to recover yams stolen by the flying
god of Alele. He comes to Bulotu and, helped by his guardian spirit
Saolevao, avoids the plots laid against him, first by giving wrong
information as to where he will sleep; second, by keeping awake all
night; third, by climbing into the heavens and bringing down kava to
drink; fourth, by avoiding drinking the poisoned kava. He then proceeds
to Alele and kills the demon, but not the king for whom the demon stole
them. <span id="fr_1066"></span>[31](#fn_1066)

Besides these two arch tricksters of Hawaiian tradition, similar tricks
are told of other trickster figures who contend with the early spirit
inhabitants of the islands.

### STORY OF LEPE

A trickster (of Hilo, Hawaii) fools the spirits by feeding them salt
dung, while himself only pretending to eat. When they play

<span id="page_443">p. 443</span>

hide and seek, Lepe conceals himself by standing on his head, and then
plays them a vulgar trick. When they play sand digging he conceals dung
in the sand so that they smear their hands. He goes to their feast
painted black to escape recognition. He invites them to visit him in
return, but as they approach he rattles gourds and sings, as if to
companions, "Wake up! here come the spirits, our favorite food!" and all
run away. <span id="fr_1067"></span>[32](#fn_1067)

### STORY OF PUNIA

The artful son of Hina in Kohala, Hawaii, tricks the sharks who guard
the cave of lobsters by throwing in a stone which the sharks all make
for, supposing that he has himself leaped in, then diving in another
place after the lobsters and escaping unharmed. Meanwhile the sharks
quarrel as to which shark is his accomplice, and kill each other until
the king of sharks alone remains.

To kill this king shark Punia prepares a long sharp stick, two fire
sticks, kindling wood, food, salt, and a mussel shell and assures the
shark that if it bites him and the blood flows it will rise to the
surface and he will live again, but if it swallows him whole he will
die. The shark accordingly swallows him whole and for ten days he lives
inside the shark by making a fire and cooking the food he has brought
and the meat which he scrapes out of the inside of the shark. When the
shark becomes weak and makes for shore, he tricks it into carrying him
to the sandy beach, where the fish is stranded and people come and dig
out Punia.

On his way back to Kohala, Punia escapes the spirits by pretending that
this fishing ground is familiar to him and thus enticing the spirits out
to sea by ones and twos where they are at his mercy. Thus he kills all
but one wary spirit. <span id="fr_1068"></span>[33](#fn_1068)

 

The first incident occurs in Samoa, where spirits called Alele rob the
yams of the Tui Samata. He sends his grand-child La-le‘a-sapai to
recover them. The boy throws a club into their bathing pool and the
spirits fight each other until

<span id="page_444">p. 444</span>

all are killed. <span id="fr_1069"></span>[34](#fn_1069) The second
motive, that of destroying a monster by being swallowed whole and
cutting the way out, is of worldwide distribution. The third occurs in
the Emerson version of Kaululaau. <span
id="fr_1070"></span>[35](#fn_1070)

### STORY OF HANAAUMOE

(*a*) *Fornander version*. Hanaaumoe, the great flatterer of the spirits
of Oahu who devoured men, used to invite travelers from Kauai ashore
with a chant warning of the dangers to be met from spirits of other
islands and praising the safety of his own island. When the deceived
voyagers came ashore, the spirits would give them a great feast and when
they were sound asleep would kill and eat them. None escaped to warn
other travelers. Finally the double canoe of Kahao-o-ka-moku, friend of
the ruling, chief of Kauai, is tempted ashore and the whole party killed
and eaten in this manner; "one smack and the people disappeared, all
eaten up by the spirits." A lame man, however, has suspected danger and
kept awake as long as he could in order to answer the guards who came to
find if all were sleeping. Finally he goes to sleep in a hole under the
door-step and escapes detection. He returns to Kauai and reports the
matter. The chief comes with a party to avenge his friend. Wooden images
take their place in the Long House while the Kauai men conceal
themselves. The spirits find the images tough eating. When all the
spirits have fallen asleep, the house is burned over their heads and all
consumed except the flatterer, who manages to escape. <span
id="fr_1071"></span>[36](#fn_1071)

 

(*b*) *Rice version*. Kauai and Ni‘ihau fishermen are eaten by the gods
who live at one end of Ni‘ihau. The fishermen make wooden images with
eyes of mussel shell and place them in the Long House. While the gods
are trying to eat the images, the

<span id="page_445">p. 445</span>

fishermen close the door and burn all to the ground with the gods
inside. <span id="fr_1072"></span>[37](#fn_1072)

### STORY OF WAKAINA

A cunning spirit of Waiapuka in North Kohala named Wakaina pleases the
people by his singing, then deceives them into dressing him in a feather
cloak, helmet, and native garment, and giving him a bamboo flute and
other ornaments in which he promises to show them a new dance, and flies
away with the whole costume. <span id="fr_1073"></span>[38](#fn_1073)

Wakaina accompanies Pumaia on one of his sightseeing tours on Maui. The
people see them coming and to test whether they are spirits or not
spread ape leaves for them to walk upon, since a human foot will tear
the leaves but a spirit's will leave them untorn. Pumaia saves his
friend by walking ahead and bidding him follow in the torn footprints.
As they cross Lama‘oma‘o a prophet sees them coming and gives chase. The
great owl of Kona (Pueo-nui-o-Kona) fights the prophet and his entrails
become spread over the akolea ferns that used to grow in that
place. <span id="fr_1074"></span>[39](#fn_1074) \[Hence the name of
"intestines of the prophet" for the endemic species of the dodder,
called pololo and used for love charms, whose yellow stems form a tangle
over bushes in some parts of the islands (*Cuscuta sandwichiana*).\]

 

The trick of escaping with valuables while giving an exhibition of skill
in dancing occurs in many South Sea groups. In Mangaia, Ngana the crafty
persuades (H)ina to let him try on her ornaments, then flies up in the
air with them through a chink in the wall. <span
id="fr_1075"></span>[40](#fn_1075) In Maori, Whakaturia is taken captive
and hung up in Uenuku's big house while the captors dance and sing.
Tama-te-kupua suggests to him a way of escape by boasting of his own
skill until he is released to dance and sing. He makes his escape
through the doorway, which is then quickly closed and fire is set to the
house. <span id="fr_1076"></span>[41](#fn_1076) A god caught stealing in
the witch woman's sweet-potato store-house is about to be cooked and
eaten when he offers to dance

<span id="page_446">p. 446</span>

and flies away with the witch's grandchild. <span
id="fr_1077"></span>[42](#fn_1077) In Nukufetau of the Ellice islands a
captive is released to dance. He leaps as high as the roof and is hence
taken outside to show his skill, when he promptly flies away. <span
id="fr_1078"></span>[43](#fn_1078) In the Lau islands, the tricky gods
are tied and left in charge of the children. Freed to teach a new dance,
they sing a magic song which sinks the ship and the children all perish
while the gods disappear. <span id="fr_1079"></span>[44](#fn_1079) In
Florida the incident is part of an animal story in which the turtle has
saved the life of the heron and the heron reciprocates. The turtle is
caught and tied in the house of his captors. By dancing for the children
while their elders are away the heron distracts their attention from the
escaping turtle. He then flies away with the ornaments he has borrowed
from them for the dance. <span id="fr_1080"></span>[45](#fn_1080)

### STORY OF IWA

The clever thief Iwa, son of Kukui, who "stole while he was yet in his
mother's womb," lives at Kaalaea, Koolau, Oahu. Keaau seeks him to
recover his lucky cowries used for squid fishing, which Umi has taken
from him. Iwa dives under the hook, detaches the cowries, and fastens
the hook to a bank of coral while he makes his escape. Afterwards he
betrays the trick to Umi and steals back the shells from Keaau.

To test his skill as a thief Umi sets him two tests: to steal his tapu
axe which hangs suspended to the middle of a cord passed about the necks
of two old women in the temple of Pakaalana in Waipio while a crier
makes the circuit five times each night of the tapued district, and to
contend six to one with professional thieves in filling six houses with
stolen treasure in a single night. Iwa personates the crier and asks the
old women to let him touch the axe to make sure of its safety, then
makes off with it so swiftly that no one can catch him. For the second
test, he waits until the six professionals have filled their six houses
and gone to sleep, then steals everything out of them and fills his own.
He even steals the sheets from under Umi as he lies sleeping.

<span id="page_447">p. 447</span>

Iwa owns a paddle named Ka-pahi (The scatterer), with four strokes of
which he can cover the distance between Ni‘ihau and Hawaii (the
easternmost and the westernmost of the group). <span
id="fr_1081"></span>[46](#fn_1081)

Stories of the clever thief Iwa do not strictly belong to this group.
The tricks he plays are upon human combatants and resemble those told in
Hawaii of such legendary heroes as Kua-paka‘a in the court of
Keawe-nui-a-Umi rather than of Laka and Kaha‘i in southern cycles, who
may be regarded as the great eastern Polynesian examples of tricksters
in spirit land, as Lele‘asapai is in western Polynesia. Iwa is the name
of a bay below Kapoho in Puna district. Hiro (Hilo) is god of thieves in
Tahiti, Iro in Mangaia and Rarotonga, Whiro among the Maori, not to be
confused with the navigator of that name. In Tahiti the dragonfly is his
agent. His "sky of the prophets" is below the "water of life of Tane" or
Milky Way. Among the Maori he is one of the sons of Rangi, lord of
darkness, as opposed to Tane, god of light. In Mangaia the
will-of-the-wisp Uti is invoked to light the world against his
thefts. <span id="fr_1082"></span>[47](#fn_1082)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1036"></span>[431:1](hm32.htm#fr_1036) For. Col. 4:
570-573.

<span id="fn_1037"></span>[432:2](hm32.htm#fr_1037) *HAA* 1926, 92-95;
*Kuokoa*, August 12, 1865.

<span id="fn_1038"></span>[432:3](hm32.htm#fr_1038) Kamakau, *Kuokoa*,
January 5, 1867.

<span id="fn_1039"></span>[432:4](hm32.htm#fr_1039) For. Col. 5:
590-595.

<span id="fn_1040"></span>[432:5](hm32.htm#fr_1040) *HAA* 1908, 72-73.

<span id="fn_1041"></span>[433:6](hm32.htm#fr_1041) Thrum, *More Tales*,
252-259.

<span id="fn_1042"></span>[433:7](hm32.htm#fr_1042) Taylor, 245, 280.

<span id="fn_1043"></span>[433:8](hm32.htm#fr_1043) Handy, *Bul.* 69:
42, 68, 132.

<span id="fn_1044"></span>[433:9](hm32.htm#fr_1044) Beaglehole MS.

<span id="fn_1045"></span>[434:10](hm32.htm#fr_1045) Kepelino, 78-79;
For. Col. 6: 272; 4: 122-125, 160-165, 168-171; J. Emerson, *VCFL* 5:
3-4, 10-11.

<span id="fn_1046"></span>[435:11](hm32.htm#fr_1046) 116, 118.

<span id="fn_1047"></span>[435:12](hm32.htm#fr_1047) Malo, 197-198 and
note 27.

<span id="fn_1048"></span>[436:13](hm32.htm#fr_1048) For. Col. 4:
526-529; 5: 364-369.

<span id="fn_1049"></span>[437:14](hm32.htm#fr_1049) For. Col. 4:
522-533; 5: 364-371.

<span id="fn_1050"></span>[438:15](hm32.htm#fr_1050) Krämer 1: 115-116.

<span id="fn_1051"></span>[438:16](hm32.htm#fr_1051) *Ibid*. 416-418;
Buck, *Bul.* 75: 147.

<span id="fn_1052"></span>[439:17](hm32.htm#fr_1052) Krämer 1: 392;
Stuebel 4: 142, 143; Turner, 105-107; Fraser, *RSNSW* 26: 275-282; Buck,
*Bul.* 75: 551.

<span id="fn_1053"></span>[439:18](hm32.htm#fr_1053) Gifford, *Bul.* 8:
155-170; Collocott, *Bul.* 46: 14, 15-16.

<span id="fn_1054"></span>[439:19](hm32.htm#fr_1054) Stimson, *Bul.*
111:8.

<span id="fn_1055"></span>[439:20](hm32.htm#fr_1055) *JPS* 7: 239-240;
8: 109.

<span id="fn_1056"></span>[439:21](hm32.htm#fr_1056) *Ibid*. 7: 240; 8:
73.

<span id="fn_1057"></span>[439:22](hm32.htm#fr_1057) Henry, 403-404.

<span id="fn_1058"></span>[440:23](hm32.htm#fr_1058) For. Pol. Race 1:
200-202.

<span id="fn_1059"></span>[440:24](hm32.htm#fr_1059) Henry, 423.

<span id="fn_1060"></span>[440:25](hm32.htm#fr_1060) Kamakau, *Kuokoa*,
December 29, 1866.

<span id="fn_1061"></span>[441:26](hm32.htm#fr_1061) Emerson, *HHS
Papers* 5: 13-14, whose translation is here for the most part followed;
For. Col. 6: 321. The parenthetical identifications are Emory's.

<span id="fn_1062"></span>[441:27](hm32.htm#fr_1062) Col. 4: 486-489; 5:
542-543.

<span id="fn_1063"></span>[441:28](hm32.htm#fr_1063) *HHS Reports* 29:
16-19.

<span id="fn_1064"></span>[442:29](hm32.htm#fr_1064) 213-225.

<span id="fn_1065"></span>[442:30](hm32.htm#fr_1065) Codrington,
163-164.

<span id="fn_1066"></span>[442:31](hm32.htm#fr_1066) Krämer 1: 115-116.

<span id="fn_1067"></span>[443:32](hm32.htm#fr_1067) For. Col. 5:
422-425.

<span id="fn_1068"></span>[443:33](hm32.htm#fr_1068) *Ibid*. 294-301.

<span id="fn_1069"></span>[444:34](hm32.htm#fr_1069) Fraser, *RSNSW* 24:
203-205.

<span id="fn_1070"></span>[444:35](hm32.htm#fr_1070) Dixon, 69 and
notes. Add MAORI: *JPS* 13: 95-98; Taylor, 157-161. SAMOA: Turner,
245-247. TONGA: *Bul.* 8: 79, 81-83. TOKELAU: Burrows, 172-173. NEW
HEBRIDES: Turner, 337; Neuhauss, 550-551.

<span id="fn_1071"></span>[444:36](hm32.htm#fr_1071) Col. 4: 476-483.

<span id="fn_1072"></span>[445:37](hm32.htm#fr_1072) 68.

<span id="fn_1073"></span>[445:38](hm32.htm#fr_1073) For. Col. 5: 418.

<span id="fn_1074"></span>[445:39](hm32.htm#fr_1074) *Ibid*. 550-555.

<span id="fn_1075"></span>[445:40](hm32.htm#fr_1075) Gill, 88-90.

<span id="fn_1076"></span>[445:41](hm32.htm#fr_1076) Grey, 78-80;
Taylor, 272-275.

<span id="fn_1077"></span>[446:42](hm32.htm#fr_1077) White 2: 59-61.

<span id="fn_1078"></span>[446:43](hm32.htm#fr_1078) Turner, 286-287;
*JPS* 29: 144-145.

<span id="fn_1079"></span>[446:44](hm32.htm#fr_1079) Hocart, 208.

<span id="fn_1080"></span>[446:45](hm32.htm#fr_1080) Codrington,
357-359.

<span id="fn_1081"></span>[447:46](hm32.htm#fr_1081) For. Col. 5:
284-293; Westervelt, *Honolulu*, 148-156.

<span id="fn_1082"></span>[447:47](hm32.htm#fr_1082) Henry, 391; Gill,
124-126.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXXI. Voyage to the Land of the Gods](hm33)
