[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hm36)  [Next](hm38.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_489">p. 489</span>

### XXXV

### ROMANCE OF THE SWIMMER

IN Hawaiian romantic fiction the treatment of kupua figures differs from
that employed in the hero story, where exaggerated feats of prowess,
often humorously treated, keep the level of the story above that of
ordinary life. In romance the atmosphere changes. Love and marriage are
always the theme, and chiefs of unexceptionable rank--hence of divine
ancestry--the actors, with family gods as their protectors and animate
nature to aid and applaud their moments of apotheosis. The world in
which such persons live in actual society, built up as it is out of
fictional illusion, is here represented in all the complexity of natural
form with which their island world keeps them constantly surrounded.
Lands beyond the horizon, dimly remembered as once within the range of
voyagers, are here transmuted into dwellings in the air--a more direct
reality to an island-isolated people because of the shapes and movements
of clouds ever shifting into imitations of earth, of the flights of
birds in the air and the swaying of wind in the treetops, and the
indescribable sharpness of cliff lines and mountain slopes which at
sunrise and sunset send their shadows across from island to neighboring
island, or the roar of thunder, the patter of hail, and the sheet of
lightning from the sky, and the constant sound of the sea broken into so
many changing voices. The abundant life of the sea and the myriad forms
of the forest are all worked into the living pattern of a society of
endowed beings whose emotional reactions and solutions of problems of
action are undoubtedly based upon those of the men and women who were
their prototypes in actual life. Certain motives which recur, like the
transformation forms with which a divinity attempts to frighten a wooer,
may be fairy-tale embellishments, but they belong to the philosophy of
life according to which natural forms are believed to be born into
family

<span id="page_490">p. 490</span>

lines, and hence to belong, as a living impersonation, to their
descendants.

Some characteristics of kupua hero tales are here also, such as
localization, place and family names. Themes are Polynesian in character
and incident and whole tales are found duplicated in South Sea groups.
But the Pele cycle certainly dominates these romances, if not that of
Papa or Haumea. As in the Pele romances woman plays a leading role. She
is the desired one, set apart from her fellows by supreme rank; the
problem ever foremost is to find a suitable parent for her firstborn. Or
she may be the helpful sister, virgin and gifted with special powers of
sorcery or of foresight. Romantic as is the general tone of the story,
the composer often passes into essentially novelistic treatment in
passages so close to realism that the divinity is lost in the woman and
the god in the human. Always, however, it is necessary to remember that,
according to the fiction, if you will, of old Hawaiian life, rank is an
actual acknowledgment of divinity and the human is the god.

The romantic tale of Aukelenuiaiku is said to have originated in Kahiki
and to be one of the most noted of all Hawaiian stories. It tells of the
wooing of Namakaokaha‘i, older sister of Pele and related to the family
of gods who rule the heavens, by a stranger chief who is aided by a mo‘o
ancestor to cross the seas, escape the jealousy of his brothers and
every attack launched upon him by the goddess and her relatives, and
finally to become her husband and rule over her desolated land. Later he
becomes enamored of her younger sister and eventually leaves the land
and arrives ultimately at Hawaii.

### ROMANCE OF AUKELENUIAIKU

(*a*) *Fornander version*. Aukele-nui-a-iku (Far-swimming son of Iku) is
the eleventh and favorite son of Iku and Kapapaiakea in Kuaihelani. His
ten older brothers, Ke-kama-kahi-nui-aiku, Ku-aiku, Noho-aiku,
Hele-aiku, Kapukapu-aiku, Hea-aiku, Lono-ea-aiku, Na-aiku, Noi-aiku,
Iku-mai-lani, are all great boxers, able to overcome at a single blow
Kealohi-kikaupea, champion boxer of Kauai; the three champions of Oahu

<span id="page_491">p. 491</span>

named Kaikipa‘a-nanea, Kupukupu-kehai-ka-lani, Kupukupu-kehai-iaku; and
Kakaalaneo, champion of Maui; but they are afraid to meet Kepakailiula
of Hawaii and return home to boast of their achievements.

They hate Aukele because their father has given to him the inheritance
of the kingdom instead of to his older brothers. When he approaches the
games they break up his arrow, which they recognize as made differently
from their own arrows, and attempt to kill him, but he wrestles with and
overcomes one brother after another. They throw him into the pit of the
ancestress Ka-mo‘o-inanea who eats men, but she spares her young
relative, describes to him the vacant land ruled over by
Na-maka-o-kaha‘i (The eyes of Kaha‘i) whose inhabitants, with the
exception of her immediate family, have been devoured by spirits, and
gives him a food-providing leaf, an axe, a knife, a bit of her tail
which contains her "real body" (kino maoli), her feather skirt (pa-u)
and kahili, which have the power to protect him from flames and to
reduce his enemies to ashes, and a box containing the god Lonoikouali‘i
to warn him of approaching danger. She then lifts him up out of the pit
and he returns to his brothers. A second attempt upon his life is made
by leaving him in a water hole with a stone rolled over the top, but a
kind-hearted brother releases him.

The brothers determine to leave the land of Kuaihelani. He insists upon
accompanying them and on the voyage the food-providing leaf keeps them
from starving. Arrived at Namakaokaha‘i's country the brothers are rash
enough to declare war and are all reduced to ashes when she turns her
skirt against them; only Aukele is saved by swimming ashore. Taught by
his god, he is able to win over the rat and mo‘o servants Upoho and
Haapuainanea whom he first encounters and to persuade the four bird
brothers Kanemoe, Kaneapua, Leapua, and Kahaumana to promise him their
sister in marriage. At the goddess's house he reduces the dog Moela to
ashes with his ancestor's skirt, and avoids the poisoned food set before
him, eating instead out of the bird brothers' food containers. Finally
he prays to them all by name and the goddess calls him to her, but he
avoids approaching her until she has first come to him. The goddess
shows him all her forms and teaches him her magic powers

<span id="page_492">p. 492</span>

except the art of flying, and she makes him ruler over all her land.

He is however obliged to exert his power to overcome other dangerous
relatives. The bird Halulu carries him to his nest on the cliff and
keeps him there to be devoured, but he cuts off one wing after the other
with his magic knife and finally the head, and the bird's mate lets him
down on a rainbow to earth. Namaka sends him to the heavens to make
acquaintance with her relatives. The bird brothers have taught him to
fly, and he out-distances his escort and has a successful tussle with
Kuwahailo, who hurls lightning and thunder rocks against him.

The son of Aukele's oldest brother, Kau-mai-iluna-o-holani-ku (Rising
above Holani-ku), was a playmate of his. He was a boy so sacred that
nothing he asked could be denied and it was through his intercession
that Aukele was allowed to join the sailing party. Aukele now mourns his
death and his wife sends him after the water of life to restore his dead
relatives to life. It is kept by Ka-moho-ali‘i in a deep pit reached by
flying eastward to the place where the sun comes up and then descending
noiselessly, directed by his granduncles Kane-naenae and Kane-naiau
stationed at the brink of the pit, by Hawewe and Kuemanu farther down,
and by an old blind grandaunt at the bottom, called old woman Kaikapu,
sister of Kamo‘o-inanea and Lono-ikouali‘i, whose eyes he heals with two
coconut shoots. She blackens his hands to look like Kamohoali‘i's and
the people below hand up the gourd Huawai-a-ka-ola (Water gourd of life)
inside the net Palea-i-keahe-lanalana. He picks up the stick
Ho‘oleheleheki‘i, and returns too swiftly to be overtaken by the angry
owner. His own attempt to use the water to restore his brothers and
nephew is unsuccessful, but, with the few drops remaining, his wife
brings them all to life and he shares the rule with them and even gives
them his wife as well.

Finally Aukele's little son Ka-uila-nui-makaeha-i-ka-lani gets a box on
the head from his sacred cousin, son of the oldest brother. The angry
child curses him, his father, and uncles as "food of maggots rotting at
the sea bottom." Enraged at the insult, the brothers set sail with their
son and are drowned at sea.

As time passes Aukele is attracted by his wife's young cousins

<span id="page_493">p. 493</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Pele and Hi‘iaka and pretends to go fishing in
order to meet them. His wife discovers this and drives them from the
country. They migrate first to Kauai, whence they are driven again, and
flee from island to island until they finally reach Hawaii. Soon after,
Aukele decides to return to his old home. Kanemoe makes a spirit body to
remain with his sister and himself accompanies Aukele. They pass to
Kuaihelani and find the place empty. Kamo‘o-inanea informs them that the
family have gone to Kauai to live and they go on to the Hawaiian group.
At Kauai, Iku first defeated Ku-koae and became ruler over the island,
but later a battle was fought over Aukele's pretty sister, Kaomea-aiku,
and Ku-koae won the contest. <span id="fr_1195"></span>[1](#fn_1195.md)

 

(*b*) *Westervelt version*. Kukali is born at Kalapana on Hawaii, the
son of a kahuna. Ku is his god. His father teaches him magic until he
becomes a powerful kahuna and gives him a magic banana skin always full
of fruit. He sets out on distant travels. He is thrown into a pit with
others and kills the bird Halulu which sweeps the pit with its wing to
devour men. He descends the bottomless pit containing the water of life
and is warned by the wizard guardian -against eating ripe fruit. He
finds Na-maka-eha (Four eyes), the sister of Halulu, success-fully meets
tests of strength, and returns to his old home on Hawaii. <span
id="fr_1196"></span>[2](#fn_1196.md)

 

(*c*) *Dibble version*. Waikele-nui-aiku is the favorite son of the ten
sons of Waiku. They have one sister. His brothers are jealous and cast
him into a pit belonging to Holonae-ole, but the kindly older brother
charges her to take care of her relative and he escapes. He flees to the
country of Ka-moho-ali‘i, where he is thrown into a pit with others but
escapes by interpreting their dreams (contamination with the Joseph
story). <span id="fr_1197"></span>[3](#fn_1197.md)

 

Analysis of the Aukele romance shows it to belong to a type of worldwide
distribution known as the Jason type. The familiar story is that of a
hero who, having incurred the enmity of his family at home, travels to a
far country and, after

<span id="page_494">p. 494</span>

meeting successfully a number of dangerous tests, secures a sorceress as
wife whom he later abandons for another woman. Analysis:

\(A\) The hero leaves home (A1) after escaping death at the hands of his
brothers.

\(B\) He is protected by a family deity, (B1) by magic objects, (B2) by
magic powers.

\(C\) In a far land he secures a sorceress as wife.

\(D\) He overcomes dangers, such as (D1) guards of the chiefess, (D2)
dangerous food, (D3) a giant bird, (D4) gods of the heavens, (D5)
transformation tests.

\(E\) He makes a journey to the underworld after (E1) the water of life,
(E2) sun, moon, and stars, (E3) the spirit of a dead friend.

\(F\) He becomes enamored of a younger relative.

\(G\) He leaves the land, (G1) is driven out, (G2) is killed.

The names of the characters in this story have very old genealogical
associations. The title aiku in Tahiti is almost equivalent to the
Hawaiian akua, implying divinity or divine rank. In Hawaii two classes
of chiefs are named: one the Iku-pau, descended from Kane or Kumuhonua
and classed as high chiefs; the other the Iku-nu‘u, or ordinary
chiefs. <span id="fr_1198"></span>[4](#fn_1198.md) Kapapaiakea, mother of
Aukele, is Kapapaiakele, wife of Laka on the genealogy of Hulihonua.
Ke-alohi-kikaupea, one of the contemporaries named as champion in a
wrestling match, appears on the genealogies as a chief of Kauai
contemporary with the Kakuhihewa family of Oahu, from whom Kauai is
called in chant "island of Ke-alohi-kikaupea."

A number of incidents are common to other Hawaiian romances. The main
pattern belongs to a group of similar stories centering about the Pele
family and the wooing of a daughter of Kuwahailo, the man-eating god in
the heavens. The shaken skirt (pau), which reduces all to ashes, occurs
again in the Laieikawai romance and connects the actor directly with the
Pele family. The mo‘o ancestress of both parties in a marriage is a
feature common to many other Hawaiian romances. The son
Lightning-flashing-in-the-heavens

<span id="page_495">p. 495</span>

reappears in an explanatory folktale from Ka-u district on Hawaii which
tells how the wiliwili trees on the beach of Paula came to have their
shape and why there are mackerel in the sea.

### STORY OF MOHO-LANI

Moho-lani (Divine mo‘o) is the firstborn of four sisters and the only
one to have a husband. The sisters are accordingly jealous. Two sirens
of the sea lure away the husband and the sister goes from one to another
begging to know what has become of him, but they turn her away with
insulting words. Moho-lani appeals to the guardian gods of her son and
he comes to her rescue in his lightning body. It glances over the sea
bottom, cuts in pieces the sirens (from whose bodies spring mackerel),
and restores the lost husband. The ungracious sisters are transformed
into the crooked, spare-leafed trees that grow upon the beach. <span
id="fr_1199"></span>[5](#fn_1199.md)

The mo‘o woman in this story would seem to bear close relation to the
goddess of the mo‘o family wooed by Aukele, and the rescue of the
husband from the toils of the sirens to be another form of the
infidelity theme, in which, as in the Aukele story, vengeance is wrought
upon the ladies of whose charms he has been made the victim.

Na-maka-o-kaha‘i, the heroine of the story, appears in the Pele cycle as
an older sister of the fire goddess. She is daughter of Ku-waha-ilo and
Haumea in Holaniku, to whom also are born Pele-honua-mea, the Hi‘iaka
sisters, the Kama brothers, and the bird Halulu. Aukelenuiaiku becomes
her husband in Kahiki, then later the husband of Pele, and it is because
of this quarrel that Pele, the Hi‘iaka sisters, Malulani, and Kaohelo
migrate to Hawaii. <span id="fr_1200"></span>[6](#fn_1200.md) In Thrum's
Kanehuna-moku myth she is called the chiefess of the Mu and Menehune
people when they are summoned to build the watercourse for Kikiaola at
Waimea on Kauai, and in that

<span id="page_496">p. 496</span>

story she disappears on the land of Kane-huna-moku. <span
id="fr_1201"></span>[7](#fn_1201.md) Her brothers in the Aukele legend have
bodies of rock and her child by Aukele has two bodies, one of rock and
one human. She herself has three supernatural bodies, a fire, a cliff
(pali), a sea, besides the power of flying, of coming to life again if
cut up into bits, and of reducing others to ashes by turning her skirt
(pa-u) upon them. The land where she lives is called
Ka-la-ke‘e-nui-a-Kane (Great crooked sun of Kane) and is devoid of human
life.

The name of the stranger is variously written as Aukele, Waikele,
Kukali. Waukele (or Aukele) means "excellence in swimming" and, as his
wife knows him by the name of "Man of the sea" (Kanaka-o-kai), as in the
related Anaelike story, this seems to be its derivation. "Slayer of the
great bird Ha-lulu" seems, from its mention in Andrews's early
dictionary, to be the feat for which Aukele is most famous. Halulu is
the name of an ancient heiau situated on the coast of Kaunolu district
on the island of Lanai and the man-devouring nature of the bird Halulu
may refer to the human sacrifices demanded by the deity of the heiau. On
the plateau above the heiau is a place called Namakaokaha‘i. The rock
islet on the east side of the Kaholo cliff off the west bank of Kaunolu
has the name of Kaneapua, one of the bird brothers in the romance, and
two carved stones worshiped by fishermen of Lanai have the names
Rae(Lea?)- and Kane-apua. It is at Kaunolu that Kaneapua intercepts
Wahanui on his voyage to the land of Kane and Kanaloa. <span
id="fr_1202"></span>[8](#fn_1202.md) This identity of names between places
on Lanai and the figures in the romance suggests that the composer has
in mind the Lanai background in working up his romance. Lanai was
thought of as a land of spirits ruled by the goddess Pahulu until they
were finally driven out and obliged to flee to other islands. If the
name of Aukele the swimmer is equivalent to that of Kelekele-iaku,
grandchild of Kamaunuaniho, whose family dominated Molokai, and brother
of Kamapua‘a, the affair of the hog-man with Pele may have had its
prototype in the highly elaborated and ancient tale of Aukele's winning
of Namakaokaha‘i. If

<span id="page_497">p. 497</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Lono is the god of the Kamaunu family, a
connection with that family may be suggested by the name
Lono-i-kou-ali‘i given to Aukele's god which he has from his mo‘o
ancestress. It is the same as the god Lono-i-ka-ou-ali‘i said to be
brought by La‘a from Ra‘iatea and taken into the heiau at Wailua on
Kauai when he landed, <span id="fr_1203"></span>[9](#fn_1203.md) and of the
god Lono-i-ke-au-ali‘i (Lono in the period of chiefs) listed by Kalakaua
among the gods worshiped in the heiau on Oahu. <span
id="fr_1204"></span>[10](#fn_1204.md) The name of the goddess herself in
connection with temple worship may be translated
"The-eyes-of-the-sacrificed-one" (ka ha‘i) and hence may have reference
to the custom of offering the eyes of man or fish in a cup of kava in
honor of Kahoali‘i, who is probably identical with Ka-ou-ali‘i and
Kou-ali‘i of the Aukele story.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1195"></span>[493:1](hm37.htm#fr_1195.md) Col. 4: 32-111.

<span id="fn_1196"></span>[493:2](hm37.htm#fr_1196.md) *Gods and Ghosts*,
66-73.

<span id="fn_1197"></span>[493:3](hm37.htm#fr_1197.md) 17.

<span id="fn_1198"></span>[494:4](hm37.htm#fr_1198.md) For. Pol. Race 1:
41-42.

<span id="fn_1199"></span>[495:5](hm37.htm#fr_1199.md) Green, 96-99.

<span id="fn_1200"></span>[495:6](hm37.htm#fr_1200.md) N. Emerson, *Pele*,
ix, xiv-xv; Westervelt, *Volcanoes*, 7-13; Thrum, *More Tales*, 104-107;
For. Col. 5: 576.

<span id="fn_1201"></span>[496:7](hm37.htm#fr_1201.md) *HAA* 1929, 93-96.

<span id="fn_1202"></span>[496:8](hm37.htm#fr_1202.md) Emory, *Bul.* 12:
12-13.

<span id="fn_1203"></span>[497:9](hm37.htm#fr_1203.md) For. Pol. Race 2:
60.

<span id="fn_1204"></span>[497:10](hm37.htm#fr_1204.md) 50.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXXVI. Romance of the Island of Virgins](hm38.md)
