[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hm39)  [Next](hm41) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_519">p. 519</span>

### XXXVIII

### ROMANCES OF THE DANCE

THE group of romances just considered center about the marriage
relations between a chief family resident in the Hawaiian group and a
related family but of superior rank localized in Kahiki or on one of the
other islands of the group or merely in a neighboring district.
Specifically it refers to the Moikeha-Olopana marriage with Lu‘ukia of
the Hikapoloa family of chiefs who early settled Kohala district on
Hawaii. In the long romance of Kalino from which Fornander summarized
from Kamakau the story of Kaumailiula, Lu‘ukia appears consistently as
the granddaughter of Hikapoloa and his wife Maile lau li‘i. The story
provides Maile lau li‘i, as in the Hainakolo romance, with a band of
sisters whose kupua power lies in their fragrance and who are dominated
by a younger sister represented as gifted with special powers of sorcery
or merely of good sense, courage, and character. This figure is worked
up more fully in the romance of Ke-ao-melemele (Golden cloud) which
follows. Here she is represented as remaining unwed as a means to
supernatural attainments, and as becoming skilled in medicine and in the
hula dance. The Hainakolo theme of a propitious marriage made between
two children of Ku and Hina who have been brought up separately, broken
by the infidelity of the husband, centers, in this romance, about the
girl Paliula and her brother, who is the firstborn of Ku and Hina, but
brought up by the gods Kane and Kanaloa in Waolani. Ke-ao-melemele
appears on the genealogical line of chiefs as wife of Ka-la-lili
(Ka-lau-palili?), tenth or eleventh in descent from Kumuhonua.

### ROMANCE OF KEAOMELEMELE

The guardian mo‘o named Mo‘oinanea who cares for the gods in Kuaihelani
arranges a marriage with Ku for her grandchild Hina, and three children
are born, a boy and two girls. The boy

<span id="page_520">p. 520</span>

is at once conveyed to Oahu to be brought up at the heiau of Waolani in
Nu‘uanu valley under the care of the gods Kane and Kanaloa and is given
the name Ka-hanai-a-ke-akua (Adopted by the gods). The little eepa
beings called Nana-mu and Nana-wa act as his servants. The older girl
named Paliula is carried to the uplands between Puna and Hilo districts
on Hawaii and placed under the care of Waka. Two trees, Makalei which
brings fish and Kalala-i-ka-wai (The branch in the water) or Maku‘u-kao
(Supplying endless abundance) which produces vegetable food, are planted
in her garden to keep her provided with abundance of food. The third
girl is brought up in a revolving house called Ke-alohi-lani in
Nu‘umealani where she is waited upon by clouds until she eventually
follows her brother and sister to Hawaii. She is named Ke-ao-melemele
(Golden cloud).

Ku and Hina travel about other islands of the heavens and take each a
new spouse. By the chiefess Ku has a red-skinned son named Kaumailiula
and Hina has by Olopana a daughter Kaulana-iki-poki‘i (Beloved little
one of the sunset) who is adopted by Ku and while Hina and Olopana take
the boy to rear. Kane and Kanaloa finally summon these two children also
to Waolani.

Paliula has meanwhile become the wife of her brother Kahanai on Hawaii
and been deserted by him for the beautiful kupua Poliahu who lives on
the snow-covered summit of Maunakea. She travels to Oahu and wanders
crazed in the heights of Manoa valley, then goes to Waianae, where she
takes lessons in hula and, becoming an expert, travels on to Kauai and
learns the dances of that island. Her sister Ke-ao-melemele in cloudland
hears her chanting the hula and longs to join her sister. With Kapo,
sister of the poison gods of Maunaloa as her teacher, Ke-ao-melemele
becomes an expert. When her younger brother and sister arrive, she
teaches Kaulana the dances until she is equally adept. Kaulana is also
given instruction in herb medicine. The boy Kahanai has already freed
himself from Poliahu, made a visit to his parents, and returned to
Waolani, where he becomes an expert kahuna with knowledge of sorcery and
sacrifice. Paliula becomes reconciled with him. Ke-ao-melemele takes
Kaumailiula as her husband and the food-providing trees are brought from
Hawaii for the marriage feast, but the fish tree is broken

<span id="page_521">p. 521</span>

and hence fish become dispersed about the islands. Ke-ao-melemele and
her husband rule the islands. Kane sends for Ku and Hi‘ilei, Hina and
Olopana, and the guardian mo‘o to come and live on Oahu, and Mo‘oinanea
shuts up forever the lands where they lived and brings all her mo‘o
family with the chiefs to Hawaii. Kane-huna-moku that hidden land is
called. Kaumailiula and Ke-ao-melemele long rule over the islands and
leave their signs in the heavens to their descendants. <span
id="fr_1244"></span>[1](#fn_1244)

 

Throughout the romance the signs of divinity established for chiefs of
divine rank in Hawaii form the machinery of the story. At the birth of
the firstborn chief appear clouds and fog, thunder and lightning, red
torrents down the cliff-sides, strong winds and bending trees, high seas
rolling land-ward. The rainbow (anuenue) sister of Kane and Kanaloa acts
as their messenger or hovers over the child of godlike rank. The great
bird Iwa bears the messengers of the gods overseas. The marriage of the
divine firstborn son to his sister by the same father and mother is the
highest form of union to which Hawaiian bluebloods can aspire; the issue
of such a union is a god (akua).

Other allusions to Kahanai in Hawaiian legend call him chief of Waolani
and make him the ward of Kahano and Newa, that Kahano who is said to
have brought over the Kana-mu and Kana-wa on his own arm as on a bridge
as servants for his ward Kapawa. In traditional history he appears as a
chief of high rank who comes from afar and whose family colonize the
island.

Ke-ao-melemele (Golden cloud) is born from the head of Hina and not in
the ordinary way. Ku-ke-ao-loa (Ku long cloud) is her messenger;
Ka-onohi-o-ka-la (Eyeball of the sun) is her seer; Ke-ao-opua-loa
(Living cloud) is her sorcerer. On nights of full moon one can see the
Ali‘i-wahine-o-ka-malu (Chiefess of the shade) against the moon. Her
messenger reveals to Ku and Hina all the lore of cloud forms, how they
meet, move, or separate; how the stars appear through them and the
course of the winds among the clouds; the meaning of each change so
intimately connected in Hawaiian

<span id="page_522">p. 522</span>

thought with the lives of chiefs. <span
id="fr_1245"></span>[2](#fn_1245) It is because Ku sees in the clouds
the form of a beautiful woman that he is led to take the journey
northward during which he weds a new wife and Hina a new husband.

Closely connected with the knowledge thus gained of the shape and
motions of clouds is that which governs the art of the hula or dance.
The movements of the dance are definitely related in this nature romance
to the motions of leaves and blossoms swaying in various ways according
to the particular wind that blows. It is by watching the dancing trees,
the shifting clouds, and the shadows which they cast that the girl
learns their motions. Hi‘i-lani wai teaches the hula to girls at
Waianae; Malu-aka teaches on Kauai. Kapo, sister of the poison-tree gods
of Maunaloa and proficient in the arts of herb medicine and sorcery,
teaches Ke-ao-melemele on the dancing field near Waolani in Nu‘uanu
valley until she can dance in the skies and over the sea. Clearly these
are the Pele sisters, Hi‘iaka, Laka, and Kapo, all three goddesses of
the woodland and invoked in the hula dance. The Hi‘iaka sisters of Pele
are called "shadow bearers" by Westervelt <span
id="fr_1246"></span>[3](#fn_1246) and her brothers are gods of sorcery.
Hence the story seems to be definitely connected with the Pele family
and its guardian mo‘o and to represent the Kane worship established
during the time of the ascendancy of that god, which persisted down to
the time of the breakup caused during the wars of chiefs, and retained
its hold upon the people up to the coming of the white men.

Equally interesting with this close relation of forms of nature with the
movements of the dance is their employment in the action of a love
story, as illustrated in the account of the birth and marriage of
Lau-ka-ieie (Leaf of the trailing pandanus), goddess of the wildwood and
sister to the wind god of love, Makani-kau, and to the Hi‘ilawe who was
transformed at death, his body into a stone and his spirit into the mist
of that waterfall in Waipio valley which is called after his name, of
which Hawaiian poets love to sing. The romance tells of the kupua beings
of the forest, associating plants, land shells,

<span id="page_523">p. 523</span>

winds, streams, rainbows, and the red-feathered birds in a single family
line.

### ROMANCE OF LAUKAIEIE

Hi‘ilawe is born to Ka-kea (The white) and Ka-holo (The runner),
children of the cliffs, and is wrapped in moss and flung away by the
mother. Hina-ulu-ohia sees that the bundle contains a child and she
recognizes the signs of a chief and takes the child as her own. The
father's sister Po-kahi (First night) has for husband the bird catcher
Kau-kini. Hina knows that she has longed for the child, hence she brings
her a beautiful girl perfect in form, who is named Lau-ka-ieie. The
adopted parents bring her up secretly with birds and flowers and singing
shells as playmates. When she reaches marriageable age she dreams of the
handsome chief Kawelona (Sunset) at Lihue, Kauai, and her brother
Makani-kau goes to seek him, choosing as his shell carrier Pupu-kani-oi
(Singing shell) because when all the sisters raise their hands her
fingers are the longest. She takes a husband on the way, but the wind
chief goes on to the islet of Lehua, where red iiwi birds have conveyed
Kawelona, and finds him willing to accompany the messenger because he
too has dreamed of the girl and is eager to wed her. Many kupua join the
marriage party as they proceed, Makani-kau in his shell boat and
Kawelona in his cloud boat. These kupua have leaf, flower, bird, plant,
shell, cloud, wind, fish, shark, sea-moss, stone, or cliff bodies. The
feast is celebrated in Waipio near the heiau Kahuku-welowelo with music
and dancing. Hina takes the body of a lehua tree, and the girl after her
death becomes the ieie vine which wreaths the body of the forest
goddess. <span id="fr_1247"></span>[4](#fn_1247)

Another romance in which the art of the hula is used to win back a lover
is that of Halemano and Kamalalawalu, the beauty of Puna.

### ROMANCE OF HALEMANO

Halemano is born at Halemano in Waianae on Oahu. Wahiawa and Kukaniloko
are his parents. He has five brothers and

<span id="page_524">p. 524</span>

sisters, but only one, a sorceress sister Laenihi, enters in any way
into the story. He is brought up by his grandmother and becomes
faultless in beauty. Kamalalawalu is the beauty of Puna at this time.
She has been brought up in seclusion with her favorite brother Kumukahi
as her only companion and eight hundred dogs to guard and serve her.
Huaa and Kulukulua, chiefs of Puna and Hilo respectively, court her in
vain. She has seen the face of Halemano in dream and will have none but
him. He too has dreamed of her and dies of love for her, but Laenihi
restores him to life and teaches him how to lure the beauty of Puna to
his canoe. Together they flee to Ukoa in Waialua, Oahu, and a great gift
giving (ho‘okupu) is held to celebrate the marriage.

Aikanaka who rules Oahu hears of her beauty and the two are obliged to
flee. They live as castaways until the daughter of Kukuipahu, ruling
chief of Kohala, becomes enamored of Halemano's beauty and entertains
them royally. Several times the wife leaves Halemano for a new lover. He
dies of grief, but again the sister comes to his rescue and proposes
that he learn the hula in order to win back his wife's affection. The
method succeeds. During a kilu game he chants eight compositions
recalling to his wife their days of wandering together and the love they
have enjoyed, and her heart is touched. She returns to him only to find
that now he is weary of her love. Her former lovers finally come with a
great fleet and carry her back to her home island. <span
id="fr_1248"></span>[5](#fn_1248)

 

The story contains, besides the excellent picture of a kilu contest, a
good example of the part played by the supernatural sister in Hawaiian
stories in furthering the cause of a favorite brother, one brought up
under the tapus of a god and whose wishes are never to be thwarted. Her
sexual seclusion would seem to be imposed in order to cultivate her
kupua power. Twice she brings Halemano back to life. She goes to Puna in
the form of a fish. Her progress is accompanied by signs such as rain,
lightning, thunder, earthquake, freshets that carry red earth into the
sea. Coupled with these supernatural qualities are those also of
practical wisdom. She recognizes

<span id="page_525">p. 525</span>

the woman of his dream by a description of the wreaths about her neck.
The plot for bringing the lovers together and that for winning back an
estranged wife are shrewdly conceived and without magical machinery. The
love story, told as it is with great detail, concludes on the familiar
note of Hawaiian romance, that of a pair of estranged lovers. Stories
which end with a happy married life must be suspected as a foreign
innovation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1244"></span>[521:1](hm40.htm#fr_1244) Westervelt, *Gods
and Ghosts*, 116-151.

<span id="fn_1245"></span>[522:2](hm40.htm#fr_1245) Westervelt, *Gods
and Ghosts*, 128-132.

<span id="fn_1246"></span>[522:3](hm40.htm#fr_1246) Volcanoes, 69-70.

<span id="fn_1247"></span>[523:4](hm40.htm#fr_1247) Westervelt, *Gods
and Ghosts*, 36-48.

<span id="fn_1248"></span>[524:5](hm40.htm#fr_1248) For. Col. 5:
228-263.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXXIX. Wooing Romances](hm41)
