[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hm40)  [Next](hm42) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_526">p. 526</span>

### XXXIX

### WOOING ROMANCES

THE romance of Laie-i-ka-wai (Laie in the water) is the story of a high
tapu chiefess concealed at birth in a cave reached by diving through a
pool of water and later reared under tapu in an earthly paradise
prepared for her in Paliuli in the uplands of Puna by her mo‘o guardian
Waka, who hopes to gain wealth and position by arranging a marriage for
her to some high chief. An impostor steps in on the eve of marriage and
she is abandoned by Waka and her twin sister substituted in her place.
Through a group of guardian girls, the abandoned sisters of a rejected
suitor who has tried to use their kupua powers to win the chiefess and
has then attempted to storm her tapu house by force, she wins a very
high tapu chief from the heavens as a husband, her foes are punished,
and she herself goes to dwell in the heavens with her husband. He proves
unfaithful, his parents cast him out, and his wife joins her sister and
is worshiped today as a goddess.

### ROMANCE OF LAIEIKAWAI

Laie-i-ka-wai and her twin sister Laie-lohelohe are born at Laie on Oahu
of Kahauokapaka the father, chief of the northern lands of the island,
and Malaekahana the mother. Since the father has vowed to let no
daughter born to his wife live until she bears him a son, the mother
conceals the birth of the twins and gives them to her own relatives to
rear, Laie-lohelohe to Ka-puka-i-haoa to bring up at the heiau at
Ku-kani-loko, and Laie-i-ka-wai to Waka, who first hides her in a cave
near Laie which can be reached only by diving into the pool which
conceals the entrance, and then takes her to the uplands of Puna. Here
she builds a tapu house for her ward thatched with bird feathers, and
gives her birds to wait upon her and mists to hide her from the sight of
men until such time as a suitable lover shall appear to make her his
wife.

<span id="page_527">p. 527</span>

The first whose suit seems acceptable is Kauakahi-ali‘i, ruling chief of
Kauai and husband of Ka-ili-o-ka-lau-o-ke-koa (Skin like the leaf of the
koa). The reappearance of his wife whom he had mourned for dead prevents
the appointed meeting, but on his return to Kauai he relates the
adventure and the young chiefs of that island are stirred by the story.
Aiwohikupua meets her nightly in dream and goes to woo her, but even the
presence of his four sweet-scented kupua sisters, named after the four
varieties of maile vine whose scent they inherit, cannot shake her
refusal. Enraged by the insult, he abandons the sisters in the forest.
His fifth and favorite sister, Ka-hala-o-mapuana (The fragrant hala
blossom) refuses to abandon them. Through her clever management she
attracts the attention of Laie-i-ka-wai and the five are adopted as
sisters and made the guardians of Paliuli. They drive off their brother
upon his second attempt to win the chiefess, and a guardian mo‘o named
Kiha-nui-lulu-moku (Great mo‘o shaking the island) completes his
discomfiture. Another and more favored young chief from Kauai named
Hauailike is also expelled by the watchful youngest sister.

Waka now arranges a match with Ke-kalukalu-o-ke-wa, younger brother of
Ka-ili-o-ka-lau-o-ke-koa and successor with her to Kauakahi as ruling
chief of Kauai. Just as the formal marriage (hoao) is about to be
consummated, a young rascal from Puna named Hala-aniani, aided by his
sorceress sister, carries her off on his surfboard in place of the
legitimate lover. Waka finds them sleeping together and abandons the
girl in a rage, stripping her of mist and bird guardians and of the
house thatched with feathers whose protection her loose conduct has
forfeited. The five sisters and the great mo‘o, however, refuse to
abandon their mistress. Since the Kauai chief has made her twin sister
Laie-lohelohe his wife in place of their disgraced mistress, they
determine to retrieve her fortunes by providing a more splendid match,
and the clever youngest sister is despatched, with the great mo‘o as
carrier, to fetch their oldest brother who lives as a god in a tapu
house in the very center of the sun in the highest heavens. While she is
away on this errand the group leave Paliuli and travel about the island
and, meeting an old family guardian and seer named Hulu-maniani, make
their home with him as adopted daughters at Honopuwai-akua on Kauai.

<span id="page_528">p. 528</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Throughout the course of the story this old seer
(kaula) has been following around the islands after the rainbow sign
which hovers over the place where Laie-i-ka-wai is hidden, determined to
make this new divinity his chief and thus provide for his own old age.

Ka-onohi-o-ka-la (Eyeball of the sun) looks favorably upon his sister's
proposal and, putting off his nature as a god, he descends to earth,
strips the enemies of Laie-i-ka-wai of their lands and power and,
leaving Ke-kalukalu-o-ke-wa and the twin sister rulers over Kauai, gives
to each of the sisters rule over one of the other islands of the group
and takes Laie-i-ka-wai up on a rainbow to live with him in
Ka-hakaekaea. All goes well until, on one of his visits to earth to see
that all goes well there, he notices the budding beauty of his
sister-in-law. He presses his attentions and succeeds in securing her.
His wife in the heavens wonders what important affairs keep him so long
on earth. In the temple at Kahakaekaea stands the gourd Lau-ka-palili
which reveals to one who looks within what is going on below.
Laie-ika-wai discovers her husband's infidelity and reports him to his
parents, who live with her in the heavens. They banish him to become a
wandering spirit, the first lapu (ghost) in Hawaii. Laie-i-ka-wai
returns to earth and lives like a god with her sister. Today she is
worshiped as Ka-wahine-o-ka-liula (Lady of the twilight, mist, or
mirage). <span id="fr_1249"></span>[1](#fn_1249)

 

The story may be analyzed as follows:

\(A\) A girl child is rescued at birth and brought up (A1) by relatives,
(A2) by divinities.

\(B\) She journeys from one place to another (B1) accompanied by signs.

\(C\) She is isolated under tapu to await marriage (C1) in a specially
prepared house, (C2) with kupua guardians, (C3) in the midst of a group
of maidens.

\(D\) She is visited by an unsuccessful suitor (D1) who attempts to win
her in battle.

<span id="page_529">p. 529</span>

\(E\) She breaks her tapu for an unknown suitor, who turns out to be
(E1) a high chief, (E2) of low birth.

\(F\) She secures a high chief for a husband.

\(G\) She is deserted for a younger relative.

The early publication of this romance has fixed its form as Haleole
printed it; there are no variants. Westervelt's story of Paliula's
marriage to her highborn brother in the romance of Ke-ao-melemele is
obviously composed out of similar material. In both stories the mo‘o
guardian Waka (Waha) prepares for her ward a house thatched with
feathers and a garden of plenty in the uplands of Puna in which she
awaits a suitable husband. In both the girl is deserted for another
woman. Poliahu plays a similar seductive role in both stories although
of a minor character in the Laieikawai romance. Kahanai's journey to his
bride in the form of lightning may be compared to Aiwohikupua's use of
the lightning stroke at the boxing match in which he engages on the way
to woo the beauty of Paliuli.

But the treatment of the two stories is entirely different. Haleole is
novelistic in his handling of character. The supernatural character of
the youngest sister of the Maile group becomes rationalized into a
quick-witted and charming young person whose resources never fail under
the most trying circumstances. Had her brother given her a chance, there
is no doubt she would have won over the chiefess. When he proposes to
take her home with him, she has spirit enough to refuse to abandon her
sisters. She it is who keeps up their morale, devises ingenious methods
for winning the attention of the chiefess, and brings it about that she
and her sisters become her guardians. She it is who drives away unworthy
suitors whom her softer-hearted sisters would have admitted, and when
the chiefess whom she serves is won by an impostor and is stripped of
her position of rank, it is she who makes the dangerous journey to a
distant land to fetch back a bridegroom of sufficient rank to restore
her mistress to honor. When the husband proves unfaithful, before daring
to indulge his fresh passion it is her watchful eye of which he must rid
himself. How human in fact is all this intrigue! How excellent a picture
of the perfect chaperon!

<span id="page_530">p. 530</span>

From a rationalized wooing story the romance suddenly changes to a
traditional pattern in recounting the messenger's journey to the
heavens, an episode corresponding with that employed in the Kaanaelike
romance where the girl on the island of virgins ascends to consult her
parent Ku-waha-ilo about her marriage with the stranger. In Haleole's
romance the members of the family dwell at different levels according to
their rank as divinities. After voyaging for four months and ten days
within the great mouth of the mo‘o the girl messenger reaches
Ke-alohi-lani (The shining heaven). Above is the garden of Nu‘umealani,
above this the heaven of Kahakaekaea to which she climbs by a spider
web, although beaten back by hot sun and cold rain sent by her mother.
There she finds her father lying face upward and, throwing herself upon
his breast, makes herself known by chanting the family names. The
cooperation of her mother, who lives above with her son but comes down
during her monthly period to occupy her tapu house below, she forces by
the artifice of securing the bloody garment which her mother has laid
aside for the bath of purification at the end of her tapu period. The
context makes it clear that the goddess wife fears lest the possession
of this garment by her husband will in some way work her harm, a motive
which suggests, in primitive form, the clothes-stealing incident in the
swan-maiden story.

The actors in the story are not invented by the composer but drawn from
familiar sources mythical or genealogical. The four sweet-scented Maile
sisters, often accompanied by a fifth and favorite younger sister who
has special powers of a god and by brothers who play a more or less
active part in the story, are said to be even more popular figures in
Hawaiian romance than the examples here brought together would argue. In
the forests, wherever this fragrant myrtle vine (*Alyxia myrtillifolia*)
abounds, is laid the scene of their wanderings. Their names are those
given to the four varieties of maile which Hawaiians distinguish <span
id="fr_1250"></span>[2](#fn_1250) The kupua power of fragrance which
they possess is entirely in accord with old

<span id="page_531">p. 531</span>

belief, and the association of women with flowers and of goddesses with
fragrance in giving romance names to such kupua figures is no doubt
ancient and is logically borne out in this instance. Maile is associated
with worship of the gods. Old Hawaiians declare that the subtle
pervasive scent of maile still clings to those sites where ancient
heiaus stood. Especially is the maile noted among the plants used for
decorating the altar to the gods of the hula.

O Laka ke akua pule ikaika,  
Ua ku ka maile a Laka a imua,  
Ua lu ka hua o ka maile. . . .

"The prayer to the goddess Laka has power,  
The maile of Laka stands foremost,  
The goddess inspires her pupil as the maile scatters its fragrance. . .
. "

runs the chant. <span id="fr_1251"></span>[3](#fn_1251) Hence the Maile
sisters in story may be a modern replacement of an older family of
sisters who group about the figure of the volcano goddess and have as
pet younger sister the Hi‘iaka-i-ka-poli-o-pele who plays so large a
part in the Pele legend and acts as patroness of the hula dance.

Laie-i-ka-wai herself has some qualities of a volcano goddess. The
course of her wanderings from Oahu, where she is born, to Hawaii, where
she makes her home, corresponds with Pele's, who also establishes
herself on the slopes of the same mountain. Her garden paradise of
Paliuli resembles the Fern-house (Hale-ma‘uma‘u) which Pele makes cool
and fresh within the flames of the volcano, in which to receive her
lover. The scene in which Laie appears to defend her guardian's boast of
her power, when her skirt laid upon the altar brings thunder and
lightning, corresponds with the use, made by other heroines connected
with the Pele family, of the sacred skirt (pa-u) to reduce their foes to
ashes: with that of Namaka, who overwhelms the brothers of Aukele, and
of Hi‘iaka who destroys her mo‘o enemies. This journey of the

<span id="page_532">p. 532</span>

young guardian to the heavens to secure a husband for her mistress
corresponds with that of Hi‘iaka to seek Lohiau. The story ends in the
infidelity of the husband and his affair with another sister, punished
by his exile and disgrace while she herself becomes a goddess and is
worshiped as "the lady of the twilight." So Aukele makes love to the
Pele sisters. Kaohelo's lover turns to Hi‘iaka. Kaanaelike's husband
dallies with her young sister and like Lohiau is overwhelmed in a stream
of fire. Leimakani is unfaithful to Lu‘ukia. Keanini abandons Hainakolo.
It looks as if a story so full of human interest as that of Pele's
jealousy of Hi‘iaka had fixed the infidelity motive inexorably as an
ending to Hawaiian romantic fiction. Possibly the situation should be
referred back still farther to Wakea's infidelity with Papa.

The name Laie is probably to be analyzed as La(u)-‘ie, "Leaf of the ‘ie
vine," since the equivalent name of a Maui chiefess Laie-lohelohe refers
to the "Drooping ‘ie vine." This red-spiked climbing pandanus
(*Freycinetia Arnotti*) which wreaths forest trees of the uplands is
sacred to the gods of the wild wood, patrons of the hula dance, of whom
Laka is chief. The epithet -i-ka-wai (in the water) belongs also to the
food-producing tree Ka-lala-i-ka-wai planted in Paliula's garden. Love
affairs of kupua beings often end in Hawaiian folktale in the
transformation of lady into pool of water and wooer into a tree at its
source, symbol of the act of reproduction, and the food-producing tree
Ka-lala-i-ka-wai is another symbol for the reproductive energy of male
and female which fills the land with offspring. This seems a more
plausible explanation of the name of this important romantic figure than
that generally given as derived from the watery home of the girl hidden
in her infancy in a pool at a place on Oahu called Laie, which is still
visited as the traditional scene of the incident.

Such an analysis would agree well also with the plant names of other
women who figure in the story. The clever youngest sister of the Maile
girls bears the name of a plant sacred to the hula dance and one of the
most prized for its odor, the fragrant pandanus blossom. In other
stories she is called Kaulana, equivalent to Ka-ula-wena (The redness in
the sky),

<span id="page_533">p. 533</span>

which is a sacred name today in the Pele family. Kamakau writes that
Mapuna-ia-aala (Springing up of fragrance), called also Ka-ula-wena,
(Red light in the sky), was the daughter of Haumea when she came from
over the sea with Kane and Kanaloa and lived on Maui and was taken to
wife by Kahele-i-po, one of the two men of Maui who saw the party land.
Local tradition calls Kahala-o-mapuana "one of a family of gods who
lived on Kauiki in old days." An old pandanus (hala) tree on Kauai which
bore red fruit instead of the customary yellow is pointed out today
under the name of Kahalamapuana. Kaha-ula (Kaha\[la\]-ula?) is one of
the gods invoked by Hi‘iaka to bring Lohiau back to life. <span
id="fr_1252"></span>[4](#fn_1252) According to Kalawe's chant, Kaha-ula
is the god to whom the maile vine is dedicated in the hula dance. <span
id="fr_1253"></span>[5](#fn_1253) The clever little sister of the
Laieikawai romance called Kahalaomapuana is the same as the youngest
sister of the Ke-ao-melemele story, Kaulana-iki-poki‘i, she who remains
virgin and becomes an expert in medicine, that is, in sorcery--a sorcery
which she puts into practice in the Kaulana-poki‘i and Kaumailiula
romances by bringing the dead to life and entangling her enemy in
growing vines. She may thus be regarded as representing the deity of the
Maile family of sisters as she would appear in her human form for
purposes of romance. Westervelt's translation of the chant to
Kaulanapoki‘i in the romance of Golden Cloud reads,

A stranger perhaps is outside,  
A woman whose sign is the fog,  
A stranger and yet my young sister,  
The flower of the divine homeland,  
The wonderful land of the setting sun  
Going down into the deep blue sea.  
You belong to the white ocean of Kane,  
You are Kaulana-iki-poki‘i,  
The daughter of the sunset,  
The woman coming in the mist,  
In the thunder and the flash of the lightning,  
Quivering in the sky above. . . .

<span id="page_534">p. 534</span>

But this is not the whole story. In an invocation to Laka used in every
hula ceremony, Laka is addressed as Kaulanaula, translatable as "Sacred
one above":

A aloha mai ia makou e Kaulana-ula  
Eia no ka ula la,  
He ula leo, he kanaenae aloha na makou ia oe, e Laka,  
E Laka e ho‘oulu ia.

"Grant us love, O Kaulana-ula,  
Here is the sacred gift,  
A gift given by the voice, a chant of affection from us to you, O
Laka,  
O Laka, inspire us."

\[paragraph continues\] The charming figure of the wise woman in the
Laieikawai romance and in that of Golden Cloud and of Kaumailiula
represents at least a namesake of the goddess of the A-lala-lahe chant,
"The woman of Hilihili-lau-ka-maile," who is Laka, the fecund goddess of
the upland forests worshiped in the hula dance.

Many other details of the romance may be matched with Polynesian custom,
symbolic value, or traditional theme. It is justly called the
masterpiece of Hawaiian romantic fiction. The garden paradise, which
appears also in the closely corresponding romance of Golden Cloud,
represents the life of a favorite child of high ranking chiefs brought
up under tapu, waited upon by relatives of lower station, and allowed to
do nothing for himself. The early care for virginity was for the purpose
of insuring for such a child a match of equivalent rank, preferably that
of a brother and sister, in order that the offspring might be of the
highest possible sacredness or even attain the rank of god (akua) and
thus lift the family to wealth and fame. All the relatives of such a
child were concerned in the matter. It was the guardians themselves who
were the matchmakers. Although the custom of virginity for life has not
been reported for Hawaii, the idea is stressed in the story.
Kahala-o-mapuana is such a virgin figure. Malio, kupua sister of the
Puna rascal, lives in solitude apart from

<span id="page_535">p. 535</span>

men. The Maile girls remain virgin "at the command of our parents."
Laieikawai loses her value for her royal suitor by her scandalous affair
with the wrong husband and her kupua attendants fall away from her with
the giving up of virginity.

In some Polynesian groups a virgin isolation is continued through life
with the idea that virginity increases power with the gods and hence
brings success in foresight or sorcery. Such an advocate with the
supernatural world is prized in a family. Among the Maori a practice
called puhi prohibited the firstborn daughter of a chief from marrying
or doing any work except to sew, with the idea of making her an
important person in the tribe. <span id="fr_1254"></span>[6](#fn_1254)
In Samoa virginity is highly prized in a prospective bride. The leaves
of the pandanus vine (‘ie) were used to make the finely plaited skirt
called ‘ie-sina which became a special red garment worn only on the
occasion of testing a girl's virginity. <span
id="fr_1255"></span>[7](#fn_1255) Until this time the "village maid,"
called taupou, was isolated with a group of girl friends and kept apart
from men until a suitable match could be arranged for her. In Tonga a
"taupoou" goddess whom two lovers tried to approach at night is to be
seen changed into a mound beside the road with her two lovers similarly
transformed on the ridge at the back. <span
id="fr_1256"></span>[8](#fn_1256) In the Lau islands girls were
carefully kept in retirement before marriage and the custom of a
virginity test is reported. <span id="fr_1257"></span>[9](#fn_1257)

The wooing value of fragrance, like the flower names of the women in the
story, marks the love story, especially one which originally took shape,
as it is said, in the mind of a composer from the Kauiki end of Maui
where the girl Springing-up-in-fragrance was born to Haumea. The virgin
period of the chiefess of Paliuli is thus surrounded by fragrance. In
Tahiti an inauguration of the national marae is described at which
"first born young virgins of the royal family of the kingdom represented
their respective district" garlanded with fragrant single gardenia
blossoms (tiere) as a sign of virginity. Brown says that in the Andaman
islands a girl is,

<span id="page_536">p. 536</span>

at coming of age, given the name of the odoriferous flower in blossom
when she reaches puberty. This name she uses until after the birth of
her first child. <span id="fr_1258"></span>[10](#fn_1258) In Tonga,
flower names are given as nicknames to lovers. Love songs are called
songs of sweet-smelling flowers, just as wooing is represented under the
image of "hunting the pigeon" or "fishing." <span
id="fr_1259"></span>[11](#fn_1259) In Hawaii, where the "fishing" symbol
is common, a stick of sweet-smelling wood is used as a lure in actual
fishing. <span id="fr_1260"></span>[12](#fn_1260) Association of
fragrance with marriage occurs in the Kaulu story where the voyager
takes a handsome wife named Kekele, a "quiet" woman whose favorite
plants are the fragrant hala and maile vine, the ‘ie‘ie and other
aromatic plants. Marquesans say that fragrant plants were first brought
to Nukuhiva enclosed in a gourd to attract a husband for the
sweet-scented girl Tahia-noho-uu of Hivaoa. <span
id="fr_1261"></span>[13](#fn_1261) In a Tonga story a chief's rock
crowned with sweet-scented plants is floated away to Hina's sleeping
house by her wooer, <span id="fr_1262"></span>[14](#fn_1262) and there
are innumerable references to scented plants in wooing stories
throughout Polynesia.

The house thatched with bird feathers as an exaggerated symbol of the
rank of its owner occurs also in Samoa in the house thatched with red
feathers which the rats build for Alo, son of a rat-headed woman, and
his wife Meto. <span id="fr_1263"></span>[15](#fn_1263)

The Halaaniani episode of the displaced suitor has a Tonga parallel in
the story of Vaenuku who wins the love of the beauty of Tongatabu,
daughter of the Tui Tonga:

He follows her to the bathing pool and she sees his golden hair and the
dove tattooed on his back and arranges to flee with him. His rival
overhears and in the darkness of night takes the place of Vaenuku and
carries off the lady. At the marriage ceremony, although the trickster
is given the lady, to Vaenuku is given the "virgin mat" because it is he
who had won her consent. <span id="fr_1264"></span>[16](#fn_1264)

<span id="page_537">p. 537</span>

The terms of Aiwohikupua's punishment are strictly in accordance with
Polynesian custom. Mariner tells of such an occurrence in Tonga. When
the case comes up of a chief who has revolted, the "king" is represented
as saying that

it was not the custom at Tonga to kill those of whom one has no reason
to be afraid, and that he did not think it worth his while to destroy a
mere butterfly. . . . He then desired the culprit to consider himself
for the future as divested of all power and rank--no longer to be the
commander of men, but a single and unprotected individual; that his
chiefship from that moment was null; and that consequently, he was never
more to take his seat as a chief, at the cava ceremonies.

\[paragraph continues\] The result of the sentence was that, although
his actual rank could not be taken from him, he was thereafter ignored
by everyone. <span id="fr_1265"></span>[17](#fn_1265)

The idea that the sex of a child may be determined before birth depends
upon the belief that the wish of the child is active within the mother
while still unborn. In the Andaman islands the sex is determined by the
side of the mother on which the child is felt, a male on the left
because men hold the bow with the left hand, a female on the right
because the woman uses her right for the net. <span
id="fr_1266"></span>[18](#fn_1266)

The closest parallels to the incident of the rescued twins at the
opening of the Laieikawai story come from outside the Polynesian area.
The common custom of infanticide, as described by Ellis, often had in a
chief's family, especially if the mother was of higher rank than her
husband, some bearing upon rank and was not a merely arbitrary
matter. <span id="fr_1267"></span>[19](#fn_1267)

*Philippines*. Long ago the Sun had to leave the Moon to go to another
town. He knew that his wife, the Moon, was expecting the birth of a
child and before going away he said to her, "When your baby is born, if
it is a boy, keep it; if a girl, kill it." The Moon hid the baby girl
but later the Sun found it and cut it into pieces and made the
stars. <span id="fr_1268"></span>[20](#fn_1268)

<span id="page_538">p. 538</span>

*Bantu*. A father decrees the death of girl babies. A girl hidden away
beside a pool changes into a bird. <span
id="fr_1269"></span>[21](#fn_1269)

In the romance of Ka-ili-lau-o-ke-koa (With skin like the leaf of the
koa tree), a betrothed chiefess at the seacoast escapes from her guards
to seek a stranger hidden away in a tapu house in the uplands, who woos
her with a musical instrument new to her and with a song. Her indignant
family seize the lover and would have starved him to death but for a
friendly younger brother of the chiefess who feeds him secretly until
his high rank is made known. His rival, defended by the owl god and a
mo‘o kupua, attempts to kill him, but his wife saves his life with her
throwing stick and Pele with her lightnings routs the foe.

### ROMANCE OF KAILILAUOKEKOA

(*a*) *Dickey version*. Ka-ili-lau-o-ke-koa is the granddaughter of
Moikeha and Ho‘oipo-i-ka-malanai, high chiefs of Kauai, and daughter of
La‘a. At her home by the sea at Kapa‘a she rides the curving surf of
Makaiwa and develops skill in the game of konane. Twice she defeats a
handsome stranger named Heakekoa from Molokai. She is betrothed by her
father to Keli‘ikoa from Kona district. Far up the Wailua river at
Pihana-ka-lani in a house woven of flowering lehua branches and bird
feathers, with birds as his companions, lives Kauakahi-ali‘i, the
adopted son of the sorceress Waha, with his sister Ka-hale-lehua (House
of lehua). He invents the nose-flute (ohe), the sound of whose magic
notes attracts the attention of the chiefess by the sea. Stealing out of
the house at night with her attendant and a little white dog, she climbs
the ridge called Kua-mo‘o-loa-a-Kane (Long lizard-back of Kane), is
beaten back by rain and mist sent by his sister, and presents herself at
the home of her wooer. Here she finds a garden of plenty and a
well-stocked fish-pond, is hospitably received, and becomes his wife.
Twice a band of fighting men attempt to storm her retreat but are driven
back by rain and mist. Finally the parents accept the match and send
gifts and an invitation to visit them at the seacoast,

<span id="page_539">p. 539</span>

whereupon the two appear splendidly dressed in feather mantles and
attended by birds.

Keli‘ikoa, however, plots to kill his rival. He lures him to a lonely
place and would have made an end of him had not his wife followed, hit
his enemy with a stone, and carried home her wounded husband. The angry
rival engages as his ally Pi‘ikalalau, the mo‘o kupua who lives on the
summit of an inaccessible cliff and can take the form of a mo‘o or of a
gigantic man with hog-like tusks. Again the wife rescues her husband by
entangling the kupua with her throwing stick. Pele comes to the aid of
Kauakahi with her lightnings, the owl to that of Pi‘i. There is a great
battle of aumakua which ends with the defeat of Pi‘i, who escapes up the
perpendicular cliff in mo‘o form.

Kauakahi next goes to visit all the other islands in order to see
whether there is another girl who can match his wife in beauty. None
pleases him until he comes to Hawaii, where he makes an appointment with
Laieikawai. The island of Kanehuna-moku appears off Wailua and he
embarks upon it and does not return. Keli‘ikoa makes another effort
against La‘a, but is again defeated by means of the throwing stick. At
La‘a's death Ka-ili-lau-o-ke-koa becomes ruler over Kauai and Ni‘ihau.

In the Thrum, Rice, and Green versions the episode of the rival suitor
does not appear and the story follows that of the Dickey version up to
the reception at Kauakahi's house. From here on some variations occur.

(*b*) *Thrum version*. . . . At Kauakahi's house an identification test
is presented in the form of a handsome stranger whom the girl
successfully avoids for the true lover whose song she has followed. The
girl's family carry the chiefess home and take her lover prisoner and
shut him up without food or drink, where he would have starved had not a
young brother of the chiefess named Kekalukalu-o-ke-wa cared for him
secretly, until his rank is established and the kahunas give consent to
the marriage. The couple rule over Puna district of Kauai. The brother
becomes the young chief's favorite. At the point of death, he bequeaths
to him the wooing flute and advises him to seek Laieikawai as his wife.

<span id="page_540">p. 540</span>

(*c*) *Green version*. . . . When the girl comes to seek her wooer,
Kauakahi's sister, a sorceress who can take the form of a lehua tree or
of a woman, conceals him for three months in the boughs of her tree
form. At the marriage, signs in the heavens appear such as belong to the
marriage of high chiefs. After a few months Ka-ili-lau-o-ke-koa falls
into a magic sleep and is believed dead. Kauakahiali‘i has two magic
pipes called Kanikawi and Kanikawa. The latter he leaves with the body
of his wife and with the other travels about the islands to find a girl
similar in beauty. A meeting is arranged with Laieikawai, but just as
she enters the chief's house the restored chiefess appears and pipes the
magic song with which he has once lured her to him.

 

(*d*) *Westervelt version*. Many years after Pele's exile from Kauai,
two high chiefs of that island quarrel. Koa is filled with hatred for
Kau and engages the mo‘o kupua Pi‘i-ka-lalau dwelling on the precipice
Lalau to seize Kau. Pi‘i in his human form is twelve feet in height with
eyes as big as a man's fist and great tusks. Kau is lured far from home
and attacked by this giant. His warriors flee but his wife throws her
pikoi snare and Kau escapes, wounded. Pele now joins the fight in Kau's
behalf and Pueo (Owl) in Pi‘i's defence. Pi‘i is defeated and, changing
into mo‘o form, he escapes up the precipice. Koa is later slain in
battle.

 

(*e*) *Haleole version* (*in Laieikawai*). Kauakahi's wife
Ka-ilio-ka-lau-o-ke-koa falls into a magic sleep and he believes her
dead. He travels about the islands to find another wife equally
beautiful. Laieikawai of Paliuli, who dwells among the birds, at last
measures up to the pattern and he has arranged a meeting with her, to be
heralded by the notes of forest birds, when his wife awakes and appears
in the house just as Laie stands on the threshold. \[The story concludes
as in Thrum's version.\]

 

(*f*) *Malo and Dickey* (2) *versions*. Kauakahi lives at Pihana-ka-lani
near the source of the north fork of the Wailua river in a beautiful
house filled with birds arranged in four tiers, one above the other. One
day he sees a water deity in the form of a

<span id="page_541">p. 541</span>

woman combing her hair on a rock by the ocean and falls in love with
her. He carves her likeness from memory and hides behind it, making
gestures and speaking in so lifelike a way that the goddess comes out of
the water and approaches the image, when he presents himself and
persuades her to come to the mountains with him, and to be his wife. Her
name is Uli-poai-o-ka-moku; the image he carves he names Ono‘ilele.
Arrived at his home at Pihana he transforms himself into an image like
many others and obliges his bride to pick him out correctly, Kahihikolo,
an old female relative, having shown her the room where he is to be
found.

Warned by his friend, the god Kilioe at Haena, never to part from this
image of himself lest his wife drag him after her into the water and he
be drowned, he manages to substitute the image for himself when she
plunges with him into the Wailua river, and his bird guardians carry him
back to Pihana. <span id="fr_1270"></span>[22](#fn_1270)

 

The story is composed of three parts: first, the wooing of the girl by a
high tapu chief; second, the fight with a rival suitor; third the
infidelity of the husband, in some versions softened by the belief that
the wife is dead. All three motives occur in the closely related story
of Laieikawai. There is a male counterpart of the ladylove isolated in a
tapu house and dwelling among birds. The anger of the parents until the
wooer's rank is proved is worked out in the Laieikawai in the form of an
actual affair with an unworthy suitor, atoned for by marriage with a
high tapu chief from the heavens. The chief Koa takes the place of the
militant Aiwohikupua in the Laie romance. The episode of the konane
match occurs in both romances without motivating influence upon the
central love story. Both composers evidently had in mind some common
traditional source in representing the Kauai chief Kauakahi as one of
the wooers of the beauty of Puna, an episode which occurs as a mere
inthrust in the case of both romances. The popular songs connected with
each romance--that which

<span id="page_542">p. 542</span>

describes Laieikawai seated on the wings of birds in Paliuli, with its
characteristic closing jibe for the scandal connected with her name, and
the charming wooing song in the Kaili romance with its refrain: "O
Kaili! Kaili! with skin like the leaf of the koa tree!" to words
improvised by each reciter--were still to be heard some thirty years ago
sung by old men who had belonged to the group about the king's court in
the days when such song making was practised. Kauakahi's pipe song
resembles the wooing song with which, in Marquesan story, Tana-oa,
disguised as a little scab-covered fellow, woos the beauty of Fatu-uku
who has resisted all other suitors:

O Meto, O Meto!  
Like a crimson ray, O Meto!  
Shining like a whale's tooth, O Meto! <span
id="fr_1271"></span>[23](#fn_1271)

A famous Maori story uses the unfamiliar music of the pipe to gain a
sweetheart in a somewhat similar fashion to that employed by Kauakahi.

Tu-kane-kai lives on the island of Mokoia. He builds a platform on the
slope of the hill and at night he and his friend Tiki go up there and
play instruments, he the horn, Tiki the pipe. The sounds are borne to
Rotorua and across the lake to the beautiful Hine-moa. She swims across
the lake and hides in his bathing pool. A prominent rock on the
southwest end of the Horohoro mountain at Rotorua is called by her
name. <span id="fr_1272"></span>[24](#fn_1272)

Such a traditional wooing story seems to be the core of the romance of
Kaililauokekoa. Different reciters wove into it incidents, out of a
traditional stock of story material, which compare more closely with
related romances. The departure of Kauakahi on the floating land of
Kane-huna-moku and the identification test in the mermaid version
resemble the Anaelike romance. The manner of the lure in this mermaid
version corresponds with the device used by Konikonia to lure the
underseas woman to his home. The skill of the wife with the throwing
stick suggests another Kauai hero, Kawelo, and his warrior wife. In the
Pikoi-a-ka-alala story

<span id="page_543">p. 543</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Kauakahi is the friend who smuggled Pikoi over
to Hawaii and Pikoi is, in the fullest version of the bird-shooting
ad-venture, a native of Kauai. Heakekoa, whom the chiefess defeats in a
konane match, is the name of the lover of Lono-ika-makahiki's wife
Kaikilani, and it is his song from the hills while the husband and wife
are playing konane that brings about the quarrel between the two and
subsequent war between Lono and the chiefs of Ka-iki's family on Hawaii.
It is the sound of the hula pipe also which lures Pele to her lover
Lohiau on Kauai. A jealous sister in some versions impedes Hi‘iaka's
search. On the other hand, relatives place difficulties in the way of
the goddess taking a mere mortal as husband. Here the Pele figure is
seen once more drawn into relation with popular romance.

It is now possible to affirm that a dominating theme which runs through
all Hawaiian romantic fiction and is used to motivate much of its action
is the power of music to attract and of chanted song to awaken love.
Equally dominant is sweet scent, so strongly associated with a former
loved one or stirring the senses with its novelty. Both these elements
attained formalized expression in the development of the hula dance,
heightened emotionally by the religious setting which surrounded it. Nor
are the movements of the dance in their old form to be interpreted as
purely erotic imitations of the orgasms of love. Their appeal was often,
as represented in these romances, to the imagination of the wanderer
from home or of one estranged from friend or lover in recalling scenes
of natural beauty which belonged to the old association and arousing in
him love and longing. In the swaying movements of the dancers, their
gestures of hand or fingertip, the onlooker saw, through the
conventionalized symbol, the waving motion of leaves, the rise of a
cliff side, the fall of water, the patter of rain, the movement of
clouds across the sky. His senses were meanwhile filled with scent and
sound, urging him to reawakened love for the scene itself or for the
beloved friend or lover with whom it had been shared.

Romantic story-telling makes use of similar devices. Its great
motivating force, like that of the related hula dance, is the background
furnished by actual contact with the conflict

<span id="page_544">p. 544</span>

between the fertility of the damp wild forest which furnished food to
the early peoples and the fiery destruction wrought by volcanic
outbursts. Both forces were apotheosized in the conception of a single
goddess in her productive and in her wrathful manifestation as Laka or
as Pele-i-ke-ahi. The loves and adventures of the Pele family, wrought
as they were into religious rites and offerings, danced to with song and
woven into wreaths of sweet-smelling plants, played an important part in
shaping the treatment of love themes already traditional in memory or
learned during the years of intercourse with southern groups. The more
modern treatment of the story does not conceal the figures of those
nature deities from whom the composer, through long convention, drew his
pattern. The type remains, although the gods reveal themselves in the
lives and loves of mortals.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1249"></span>[528:1](hm41.htm#fr_1249) Haleole, *Ka Moolelo
o Laieikawai* (The story of Laieikawai); translation, *RBAE* 33:
285-666; synopsis by William D. Alexander, contributed by John Rae,
*JAFL* 13: 241-260; Kalakaua, 453-480; For. Col. 5: 406-417; *HAA* 1928,
79-87.

<span id="fn_1250"></span>[530:2](hm41.htm#fr_1250) For. Col. 5:
614-619.

<span id="fn_1251"></span>[531:3](hm41.htm#fr_1251) N. Emerson, "Hula,"
32.

<span id="fn_1252"></span>[533:4](hm41.htm#fr_1252) For. Col. 6: 344.

<span id="fn_1253"></span>[533:5](hm41.htm#fr_1253) Green, 3.

<span id="fn_1254"></span>[535:6](hm41.htm#fr_1254) Best, *TNZI* 36: 33;
Mühlmann, 44.

<span id="fn_1255"></span>[535:7](hm41.htm#fr_1255) Buck, *Bul.* 75:
275, 316-317.

<span id="fn_1256"></span>[535:8](hm41.htm#fr_1256) Gifford, *Bul.* 61:
303.

<span id="fn_1257"></span>[535:9](hm41.htm#fr_1257) Hocart, 155-159.

<span id="fn_1258"></span>[536:10](hm41.htm#fr_1258) 93, 312.

<span id="fn_1259"></span>[536:11](hm41.htm#fr_1259) Gifford, *Bul.* 6:
234; Collocott, *Bul.* 46: 63-65.

<span id="fn_1260"></span>[536:12](hm41.htm#fr_1260) Malo, 279 note 8.

<span id="fn_1261"></span>[536:13](hm41.htm#fr_1261) Handy, *Bul.* 69:
26 ff.

<span id="fn_1262"></span>[536:14](hm41.htm#fr_1262) Collocott, *Bul.*
46: 27-28.

<span id="fn_1263"></span>[536:15](hm41.htm#fr_1263) Buck, *Bul.* 75:
65.

<span id="fn_1264"></span>[536:16](hm41.htm#fr_1264) Collocott, *Bul.*
46: 46-50.

<span id="fn_1265"></span>[537:17](hm41.htm#fr_1265) 1: 174-175.

<span id="fn_1266"></span>[537:18](hm41.htm#fr_1266) Brown, 90.

<span id="fn_1267"></span>[537:19](hm41.htm#fr_1267) *Researches* (1829)
1: 333-340.

<span id="fn_1268"></span>[537:20](hm41.htm#fr_1268) Laura Benedict,
*JAFL* 26 (1913): 17-18.

<span id="fn_1269"></span>[538:21](hm41.htm#fr_1269) Torrend, *Specimens
of Bantu Folk-lore from Northern Rhodesia*, 93-94, 146-150.

<span id="fn_1270"></span>[541:22](hm41.htm#fr_1270) Dickey, *HHS
Reports* 25: 26-28, 35-36; Thrum, *More Tales*, 123-135; Rice, 106-108;
Green, 50-54; Haleole in Beckwith, *Laieikawai*, 368-371; Westervelt,
*Volcanoes*, 14-18; Malo, 117-119 note 17.

<span id="fn_1271"></span>[542:23](hm41.htm#fr_1271) Handy, *Bul.* 69:
93-96.

<span id="fn_1272"></span>[542:24](hm41.htm#fr_1272) *JPS* 1: 152.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: References](hm42)
