[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rvw10)  [Next](rvw12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XI

To summarize and to repeat:

1\. A state criminal abortion statute of the current Texas type, that
excepts from criminality only a life-saving procedure on behalf of the
mother, without regard to pregnancy stage and without recognition of the
other interests involved, is violative of the Due Process Clause of the
Fourteenth Amendment.

\(a\) For the stage prior to approximately the end of the first
trimester, the abortion decision and its effectuation must be left to
the medical judgment of the pregnant woman's attending physician.

\(b\) For the stage subsequent to approximately the end of the first
trimester, the State, in promoting its interest in the health of the
mother, may, if it chooses, regulate the abortion procedure in ways that
are reasonably related to maternal health.

\(c\) For the stage subsequent to viability, the State in promoting its
interest in the potentiality of human life \[410 U.S. 113, 165\] may, if
it chooses, regulate, and even proscribe, abortion except where it is
necessary, in appropriate medical judgment, for the preservation of the
life or health of the mother.

2\. The State may define the term "physician," as it has been employed
in the preceding paragraphs of this Part XI of this opinion, to mean
only a physician currently licensed by the State, and may proscribe any
abortion by a person who is not a physician as so defined.

In Doe v. Bolton, post, p. 179, procedural requirements contained in one
of the modern abortion statutes are considered. That opinion and this
one, of course, are to be read together. [67](rvw13.htm#xref_67)

This holding, we feel, is consistent with the relative weights of the
respective interests involved, with the lessons and examples of medical
and legal history, with the lenity of the common law, and with the
demands of the profound problems of the present day. The decision leaves
the State free to place increasing restrictions on abortion as the
period of pregnancy lengthens, so long as those restrictions are
tailored to the recognized state interests. The decision vindicates the
right of the physician to administer medical treatment according to his
professional judgment up to the points where important \[410 U.S. 113,
166\] state interests provide compelling justifications for
intervention. Up to those points, the abortion decision in all its
aspects is inherently, and primarily, a medical decision, and basic
responsibility for it must rest with the physician. If an individual
practitioner abuses the privilege of exercising proper medical judgment,
the usual remedies, judicial and intra-professional, are available.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section XII](rvw12)
