[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Age of Reason](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[II. Linear Perspective Index](dvs001.md)  
  [Previous](0064)  [Next](0066.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486225720/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Da Vinci Notebooks at Intangible Textual Heritage*

### 65.

### PERSPECTIVE.

The air is filled with endless images of the objects distributed in it;
and all are represented in all, and all in one, and all in each, whence
it happens that if two mirrors are placed in such a manner as to face
each other exactly, the first will be reflected in the second and the
second in the first. The first being reflected in the second takes to it
the image of itself with all the images represented in it, among which
is the image of the second mirror, and so, image within image, they go
on to infinity in such a manner as that each mirror has within it a
mirror, each smaller than the last and one inside the other. Thus, by
this example, it is clearly proved that every object sends its image to
every spot whence the object itself can be seen; and the converse: That
the same object may receive in itself all the images of the objects that
are in front of it. Hence the eye transmits through the atmosphere its
own image to all the objects that are in front of it and receives them
into itself, that is to say on its surface, whence they are taken in by
the common sense, which considers them and if they are pleasing commits
them to the memory. Whence I am of opinion: That the invisible images in
the eyes are produced towards the object, as the image of the object to
the eye. That the images of the objects must be disseminated through the
air. An instance may be seen in several mirrors placed in a circle,
which will reflect each other endlessly. When one has reached the other
it is returned to the object that produced it, and thence--being
diminished--it is returned again to the object and then comes back once
more, and this happens endlessly. If you put a light between two flat
mirrors with a distance of 1 braccio between them you will see in each

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

of them an infinite number of lights, one smaller than another, to the
last. If at night you put a light between the walls of a room, all the
parts of that wall will be tinted with the image of that light. And they
will receive the light and the light will fall on them, mutually, that
is to say, when there is no obstacle to interrupt the transmission of
the images. This same example is seen in a greater degree in the
distribution of the solar rays which all together, and each by itself,
convey to the object the image of the body which causes it. That each
body by itself alone fills with its images the atmosphere around it, and
that the same air is able, at the same time, to receive the images of
the endless other objects which are in it, this is clearly proved by
these examples. And every object is everywhere visible in the whole of
the atmosphere, and the whole in every smallest part of it; and all the
objects in the whole, and all in each smallest part; each in all and all
in every part.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 66.](0066.md)
