[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Age of Reason](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[II. Linear Perspective Index](dvs001.md)  
  [Previous](0069)  [Next](0071.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486225720/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Da Vinci Notebooks at Intangible Textual Heritage*

### 70.

<span class="margnote"> The function of the eye as explained by the
camera obscura (70. 71).</span>If the object in front of the eye sends
its image to the eye, the eye, on the other hand, sends its image to the
object, and no portion whatever of the object is lost in the images it
throws off, for any reason either in the eye or the object. Therefore we
may rather believe it to be the nature and potency of our luminous
atmosphere which absorbs the images of the objects existing in it, than
the nature of the objects, to send their images through the air. If the
object opposite to the eye were to send its image to the eye, the eye
would have to do the same to the object, whence it might seem that these
images were an emanation. But, if so, it would be necessary \[to admit\]
that every object became rapidly smaller; because each object appears by
its images in the surrounding atmosphere. That is: the whole object in
the whole atmosphere, and in each part; and all the objects in the whole
atmosphere and all of them in each part; speaking of that atmosphere
which is able

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

to contain in itself the straight and radiating lines of the images
projected by the objects. From this it seems necessary to admit that it
is in the nature of the atmosphere, which subsists between the objects,
and which attracts the images of things to itself like a loadstone,
being placed between them.

### PROVE HOW ALL OBJECTS, PLACED IN ONE POSITION, ARE ALL EVERYWHERE AND ALL IN EACH PART.

I say that if the front of a building--or any open piazza or
field--which is illuminated by the sun has a dwelling opposite to it,
and if, in the front which does not face the sun, you make a small round
hole, all the illuminated objects will project their images through that
hole and be visible inside the dwelling on the opposite wall which may
be made white; and there, in fact, they will be upside down, and if you
make similar openings in several places in the same wall you will have
the same result from each. Hence the images of the illuminated objects
are all everywhere on this wall and all in each minutest part of it. The
reason, as we clearly know, is that this hole must admit some light to
the said dwelling, and the light admitted by it is derived from one or
many luminous bodies. If these bodies are of various colours and shapes
the rays forming the images are of various colours and shapes, and so
will the representations be on the wall.

 <span id="fr_39"></span>[37](#fn_39.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_39"></span>[44:37](0070.htm#fr_39.md) : 70. 15--23. This
section has already been published in the "*Saggio delle Opere di
Leonardo da Vinci*" Milan 1872, pp. 13, 14. G. Govi observes upon it,
that Leonardo is not to be regarded as the inventor of the Camera
obscura, but that he was the first to explain by it the structure of the
eye. An account of the Camera obscura first occurs in CESARE CESARINI's
Italian version of Vitruvius, pub. 1523, four years after Leonardo's
death. Cesarini expressly names Benedettino Don Papnutio as the inventor
of the Camera obscura. In his explanation of the function of the eye by
a comparison with the Camera obscura Leonardo was the precursor of G.
CARDANO, Professor of Medicine at Bologna (died 1576) and it appears
highly probable that this is, in fact, the very discovery which Leonardo
ascribes to himself in section 21 without giving any further details.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 71.](0071.md)
