[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Age of Reason](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[III. Six Books on Light and Shade Index](dvs002.md)  
  [Previous](0110)  [Next](0112.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486225720/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Da Vinci Notebooks at Intangible Textual Heritage*

### 111.

### INTRODUCTION.

<span class="margnote"> Scheme of the books on Light and
shade.</span>\[Having already treated of the nature of shadows and the
way in which they are cast  <span id="fr_56"></span>[54](#fn_56.md) , I
will now consider the places on which they fall; and their curvature,
obliquity, flatness or, in short, any character I may be able to detect
in them.\]

Shadow is the obstruction of light. Shadows appear to me to be of
supreme importance in perspective, because, without them opaque and
solid bodies will be ill defined; that which is contained within their
outlines and their boundaries themselves will be ill-understood unless
they are shown against a background of a different tone from themselves.
And therefore in my first proposition concerning shadow I state that
every opaque body is surrounded and its whole surface enveloped in
shadow and light. And on this proposition I build up the first Book.
Besides this, shadows have in themselves various degrees of darkness,
because they are caused by the absence of a variable amount of the
luminous rays; and these I call Primary shadows because they are the
first, and inseparable from the object to which they belong. And on

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

this I will found my second Book. From these primary shadows there
result certain shaded rays which are diffused through the atmosphere and
these vary in character according to that of the primary shadows whence
they are derived. I shall therefore call these shadows Derived shadows
because they are produced by other shadows; and the third Book will
treat of these. Again these derived shadows, where they are intercepted
by various objects, produce effects as various as the places where they
are cast and of this I will treat in the fourth Book. And since all
round the derived shadows, where the derived shadows are intercepted,
there is always a space where the light falls and by reflected
dispersion is thrown back towards its cause, it meets the original
shadow and mingles with it and modifies it somewhat in its nature; and
on this I will compose my fifth Book. Besides this, in the sixth Book I
will investigate the many and various diversities of reflections
resulting from these rays which will modify the original \[shadow\] by
\[imparting\] some of the various colours from the different objects
whence these reflected rays are derived. Again, the seventh Book will
treat of the various distances that may exist between the spot where the
reflected rays fall and that where they originate, and the various
shades of colour which they will acquire in falling on opaque bodies.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_56"></span>[69:54](0111.htm#fr_56.md) 2: *Avendo io
tractato.*--We may suppose that he here refers to some particular MS.,
possibly Paris C.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 112.](0112.md)
