[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Age of Reason](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[III. Six Books on Light and Shade Index](dvs002)  
  [Previous](0172)  [Next](0174) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486225720/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Da Vinci Notebooks at Intangible Textual Heritage*

### 173.

These bodies standing apart in a room lighted by a single window will
have derivative shadows more or less short according as they are more or
less opposite to the window. Among the shadows cast by bodies of equal
mass but at unequal distances from the opening by which they are
illuminated, that shadow will be the longest of the body which is least
in the light. And in proportion as one body is better illuminated than
another its shadow will be shorter than another. The proportion *n m*
and *e v k* bear to *r t* and *v x* corresponds with that of the shadow
*x* to 4 and *y*.

The reason why those bodies which are placed most in front of the middle
of the window throw shorter shadows than those obliquely situated
is:--That the window appears in its proper form and to the obliquely
placed ones it appears foreshortened; to those in the middle, the window
shows its full size, to the oblique ones it appears smaller; the one in
the middle faces the whole hemisphere that is *e f* and those on the
side have only a strip; that is *q r* faces *a b*;

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

and *m n* faces *c d*; the body in the middle having a larger quantity
of light than those at the sides is lighted from a point much below its
centre, and thus the shadow is shorter. And the pyramid *g* 4 goes into
*l y* exactly as often as *a b* goes into *e f*. The axis of every
derivative shadow passes through 6 1/2  <span
id="fr_78"></span>[76](#fn_78) and is in a straight line with the centre
of the primary shadow, with the centre of the body casting it and of the
derivative light and with the centre of the window and, finally, with
the centre of that portion of the source of light which is the celestial
hemisphere, *y h* is the centre of the derived shade, *l h* of the
primary shadow, *l* of the body throwing it, *l k* of the derived light,
*v* is the centre of the window, *e* is the final centre of the original
light afforded by that portion of the hemisphere of the sky which
illuminates the solid body.

 <span id="fr_79"></span>[77](#fn_79)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_78"></span>[98:76](0173.htm#fr_78) 31: *passa per* 6 1/2
(passes through 6 1/2). The meaning of these words is probably this:
Each of the three axes of the derived shadow intersects the centre
(*mezzo*) of the primary shadow (*ombra originale*) and, by prolongation
upwards crosses six lines.

This is self evident only in the middle diagram; but it is equally true
of the side figures if we conceive of the lines 4 *f*, *x n v m*, *y l k
v*, and 4 *e*, as prolonged beyond the semicircle of the horizon.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[98:77](0173.htm#fr_79) : Compare the diagram on
[Pl. IV](p1004.htm#img_pl004), No. 3. In the original this drawing is
placed between lines 3 and 22; the rest, from line 4 to line 21, is
written on the left hand margin.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 174.](0174)
