[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Age of Reason](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[VI. Perspective of Colour and Aerial Perspective Index](dvs006)  
  [Previous](0304)  [Next](0306) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486225720/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Da Vinci Notebooks at Intangible Textual Heritage*

### 305.

In the morning the mist is denser above than below, because the sun
draws it upwards; hence tall buildings, even if the summit is at the
same distance as the base have the summit invisible. Therefore, also,
the sky looks darkest \[in colour\] overhead, and towards the horizon it
is not blue but rather between smoke and dust colour.

The atmosphere, when full of mist, is quite devoid of blueness, and only
appears of the colour of clouds, which shine white when the weather is
fine. And the more you turn to the west the darker it will be, and the
brighter as you look to the east. And the verdure of the fields is
bluish in a thin mist, but grows grey in a dense one.

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

The buildings in the west will only show their illuminated side, where
the sun shines, and the mist hides the rest. When the sun rises and
chases away the haze, the hills on the side where it lifts begin to grow
clearer, and look blue, and seem to smoke with the vanishing mists; and
the buildings reveal their lights and shadows; through the thinner
vapour they show only their lights and through the thicker air nothing
at all. This is when the movement of the mist makes it part
horizontally, and then the edges of the mist will be indistinct against
the blue of the sky, and towards the earth it will look almost like dust
blown up. In proportion as the atmosphere is dense the buildings of a
city and the trees in a landscape will look fewer, because only the
tallest and largest will be seen.

Darkness affects every thing with its hue, and the more an object
differs from darkness, the more we see its real and natural colour. The
mountains will look few, because only those will be seen which are
farthest apart; since, at such a distance, the density increases to such
a degree that it causes a brightness by which the darkness of the hills
becomes divided and vanishes indeed towards the top. There is less
\[mist\] between lower and nearer hills and yet little is to be
distinguished, and least towards the bottom.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 306.](0306)
