[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Age of Reason](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[IX. The Practice of Painting Index](dvs010)  
  [Previous](0542)  [Next](0544) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486225720/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Da Vinci Notebooks at Intangible Textual Heritage*

### 543.

### A PICTURE OF OBJECTS IN PERSPECTIVE WILL LOOK MORE LIFELIKE WHEN SEEN FROM THE POINT FROM WHICH THE OBJECTS WERE DRAWN.

If you want to represent an object near to you which is to have the
effect of nature, it is impossible that your perspective should not look
wrong, with every false relation and disagreement of proportion that can
be imagined in a wretched work, unless the spectator, when he looks at
it, has his eye at the very distance and height and direction where the
eye or the point of sight was placed in doing this perspective. Hence it
would be necessary to make a window, or rather a hole, of the size of
your face through which you can look at the work; and if you do this,
beyond all doubt your work, if it is correct as to light and shade, will
have the effect of nature; nay you will hardly persuade yourself that
those objects are painted; otherwise do not trouble yourself about it,
unless indeed you make your view

<span id="page_272">p. 272</span>

at least 20 times as far off as the greatest width or height of the
objects represented, and this will satisfy any spectator placed anywhere
opposite to the picture.

If you want the proof briefly shown, take a piece of wood in the form of
a little column, eight times as high as it is thick, like a column
without any plinth or capital; then mark off on a flat wall 40 equal
spaces, equal to its width so that between them they make 40 columns
resembling your little column; you then must fix, opposite the centre
space, and at 4 braccia from the wall, a thin strip of iron with a small
round hole in the middle about as large as a big pearl. Close to this
hole place a light touching it. Then place your column against each mark
on the wall and draw the outline of its shadow; afterwards shade it and
look through the hole in the iron plate.

 <span id="fr_258"></span>[256](#fn_258)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_258"></span>[272:256](0543.htm#fr_258) : In the original
there is a wide space between lines 3 and 4 in which we find two
sketches not belonging to the text. It is unnecessary to give prominence
to the points in which my reading differs from that of M. RAVAISSON or
to justify myself, since they are all of secondary importance and can
also be immediately verified from the photograph facsimile in his
edition.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 544.](0544)
