[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Age of Reason](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[IX. The Practice of Painting Index](dvs010)  
  [Previous](0550)  [Next](0552) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486225720/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Da Vinci Notebooks at Intangible Textual Heritage*

### 551.

<span id="page_278">p. 278</span>

### HOW LIGHT SHOULD BE THROWN UPON FIGURES.

The light must be arranged in accordance with the natural conditions
under which you wish to represent your figures: that is, if you
represent them in the sunshine make the shadows dark with large spaces
of light, and mark their shadows and those of all the surrounding
objects strongly on the ground. And if you represent them as in dull
weather give little difference of light and shade, without any shadows
at their feet. If you represent them as within doors, make a strong
difference between the lights and shadows, with shadows on the ground.
If the window is screened and the walls white, there will be little
difference of light. If it is lighted by firelight make the high lights
ruddy and strong, and the shadows dark, and those cast on the walls and
on the floor will be clearly defined and the farther they are from the
body the broader and longer will they be. If the light is partly from
the fire and partly from the outer day, that of day will be the stronger
and that of the fire almost as red as fire itself. Above all see that
the figures you paint are broadly lighted and from above, that is to say
all living persons that you paint; for you will see that all the people
you meet out in the street are lighted from above, and you must know
that if you saw your most intimate friend with a light \[on his face\]
from below you would find it difficult to recognise him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 552.](0552)
