[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Age of Reason](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[IX. The Practice of Painting Index](dvs010.md)  
  [Previous](0566)  [Next](0568.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486225720/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Da Vinci Notebooks at Intangible Textual Heritage*

### 567.

### WHY FACES \[SEEN\] AT A DISTANCE LOOK DARK.

<span class="margnote"> The methods of aerial (567--570).</span>We see
quite plainly that all the images of visible objects that lie before us,
whether large or small, reach our sense by the minute aperture of the
eye; and if, through so small a passage the image can pass of the vast
extent of sky and earth, the face of a man--being by comparison with
such large images almost nothing by reason of the distance which
diminishes it,--fills up so little of the eye that it is
indistinguishable. Having, also, to be transmitted from the surface to
the sense through a dark medium, that is to say the crystalline lens
which looks dark, this image, not being strong in colour becomes
affected by this darkness on its passage, and on reaching the sense it
appears dark; no other reason can in any way be assigned. If the point
in the eye is black, it is because it is full of a transparent humour as
clear as air and acts like a perforation in a board; on looking into it
it appears dark and the objects seen through the bright air and a dark
one become confused in this darkness.

### WHY A MAN SEEN AT A CERTAIN DISTANCE IS NOT RECOGNISABLE.

The perspective of diminution shows us that the farther away an object
is the smaller it looks. If you look at a man at a distance

<span id="page_285">p. 285</span>

from you of an arrow's flight, and hold the eye of a small needle close
to your own eye, you can see through it several men whose images are
transmitted to the eye and will all be comprised within the size of the
needle's eye; hence, if the man who is at the distance of an arrow's
flight can send his whole image to your eye, occupying only a small
space in the needle's eye how can you \[expect\] in so small a figure to
distinguish or see the nose or mouth or any detail of his person? and,
not seeing these you cannot recognise the man, since these features,
which he does not show, are what give men different aspects.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 568.](0568.md)
