[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Age of Reason](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[IX. The Practice of Painting Index](dvs010)  
  [Previous](0600)  [Next](0602) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486225720/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Da Vinci Notebooks at Intangible Textual Heritage*

### 601.

<span id="page_301">p. 301</span>

### V.

### SUGGESTIONS FOR COMPOSITIONS.

### OF THE WAY OF REPRESENTING A BATTLE.

<span class="margnote"> Of painting battle pieces (601-603).</span>First
you must represent the smoke of artillery mingling in the air with the
dust and tossed up by the movement of horses and the combatants. And
this mixture you must express thus: The dust, being a thing of earth,
has weight; and although from its fineness it is easily tossed up and
mingles with the air, it nevertheless readily falls again. It is the
finest part that rises highest; hence that part will be least seen and
will look almost of the same colour as the air. The higher the smoke
mixed with the dust-laden air rises towards a certain level, the more it
will look like a dark cloud; and it will be seen that at the top, where
the smoke is more separate from the dust, the smoke will assume a bluish
tinge and the dust will tend to its colour. This mixture of air, smoke
and dust will look much lighter on the side whence the light comes than
on the opposite side. The more the combatants are in this turmoil the
less will they be seen, and the less contrast will there be in their
lights and shadows. Their faces and figures and their appearance, and
the musketeers as well as those near them you must make of a glowing
red. And this glow will diminish in proportion as it is remote from its
cause.

<span id="page_302">p. 302</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The figures which
are between you and the light, if they be at a distance, will appear
dark on a light background, and the lower part of their legs near the
ground will be least visible, because there the dust is coarsest and
densest \[19\]. And if you introduce horses galloping outside the crowd,
make the little clouds of dust distant from each other in proportion to
the strides made by the horses; and the clouds which are furthest
removed from the horses, should be least visible; make them high and
spreading and thin, and the nearer ones will be more conspicuous and
smaller and denser \[23\]. The air must be full of arrows in every
direction, some shooting upwards, some falling, some flying level. The
balls from the guns must have a train of smoke following their flight.
The figures in the foreground you must make with dust on the hair and
eyebrows and on other flat places likely to retain it. The conquerors
you will make rushing onwards with their hair and other light things
flying on the wind, with their brows bent down,

 <span id="fr_280"></span>[278](#fn_280)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_280"></span>[302:278](0601.htm#fr_280) : 19--23. Compare
608. 57--75.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 602.](0602)
