[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Age of Reason](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[IX. The Practice of Painting Index](dvs010)  
  [Previous](0601)  [Next](0603) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486225720/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Da Vinci Notebooks at Intangible Textual Heritage*

### 602.

and with the opposite limbs thrust forward; that is where a man puts
forward the right foot the left arm must be advanced. And if you make
any one fallen, you must show the place where he has slipped and been
dragged along the dust into blood stained mire; and in the half-liquid
earth arround show the print of the tramping of men and horses who have
passed that way. Make also a horse dragging the dead body of his master,
and leaving behind him, in the dust and mud, the track where the body
was dragged along. You must make the conquered and beaten pale, their
brows raised and knit, and the skin above their brows furrowed with
pain, the sides of the nose with wrinkles going in an arch from the
nostrils to the eyes, and make the nostrils drawn up--which is the cause
of the lines of which I speak--, and the lips arched upwards and
discovering the upper teeth; and the teeth apart as with crying out

<span id="page_303">p. 303</span>

and lamentation. And make some one shielding his terrified eyes with one
hand, the palm towards the enemy, while the other rests on the ground to
support his half raised body. Others represent shouting with their
mouths open, and running away. You must scatter arms of all sorts among
the feet of the combatants, as broken shields, lances, broken swords and
other such objects. And you must make the dead partly or entirely
covered with dust, which is changed into crimson mire where it has
mingled with the flowing blood whose colour shows it issuing in a
sinuous stream from the corpse. Others must be represented in the
agonies of death grinding their teeth, rolling their eyes, with their
fists clenched against their bodies and their legs contorted. Some might
be shown disarmed and beaten down by the enemy, turning upon the foe,
with teeth and nails, to take an inhuman and bitter revenge. You might
see some riderless horse rushing among the enemy, with his mane flying
in the wind, and doing no little mischief with his heels. Some maimed
warrior may be seen fallen to the earth, covering himself with his
shield, while the enemy, bending over him, tries to deal him a
deathstroke. There again might be seen a number of men fallen in a heap
over a dead horse. You would see some of the victors leaving the fight
and issuing from the crowd, rubbing their eyes and cheeks with both
hands to clean them of the dirt made by their watering eyes smarting
from the dust and smoke. The reserves may be seen standing, hopeful but
cautious; with watchful eyes, shading them with their hands and gazing
through the dense and murky confusion, attentive to the commands of
their captain. The captain himself, his staff raised, hurries towards
these auxiliaries, pointing to the spot where they are most needed. And
there may be a river into which horses are galloping, churning up the
water all round them into turbulent waves of foam and water, tossed into
the air and among the legs and bodies of the horses. And there must not
be a level spot that is not trampled with gore.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 603.](0603)
