[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Age of Reason](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[IX. The Practice of Painting Index](dvs010.md)  
  [Previous](0653)  [Next](0655.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486225720/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Da Vinci Notebooks at Intangible Textual Heritage*

### 654.

And if the poet gratifies the sense by means of the ear, the painter
does so by the eye--the worthier sense; but I will say no more of this
but that, if a good painter represents the fury of a battle, and if a
poet describes one, and they are both together put before the public,
you will see where most of the spectators will stop, to which they will
pay most attention, on which they will bestow most praise, and which
will satisfy them best. Undoubtedly painting being by a long way the
more intelligible and beautiful,

<span id="page_328">p. 328</span>

will please most. Write up the name of God \[Christ\] in some spot and
setup His image opposite and you will see which will be most reverenced.
Painting comprehends in itself all the forms of nature, while you have
nothing but words, which are not universal as form is, and if you have
the effects of the representation, we have the representation of the
effects. Take a poet who describes the beauty of a lady to her lover and
a painter who represents her and you will see to which nature guides the
enamoured critic. Certainly the proof should be allowed to rest on the
verdict of experience. You have ranked painting among the mechanical
arts but, in truth, if painters were as apt at praising their own works
in writing as you are, it would not lie under the stigma of so base a
name. If you call it mechanical because it is, in the first place,
manual, and that it is the hand which produces what is to be found in
the imagination, you too writers, who set down manually with the pen
what is devised in your mind. And if you say it is mechanical because it
is done for money, who falls into this error--if error it can be
called--more than you? If you lecture in the schools do you not go to
whoever pays you most? Do you do any work without pay? Still, I do not
say this as blaming such views, for every form of labour looks for its
reward. And if a poet should say: "I will invent a fiction with a great
purpose," the painter can do the same, as Apelles painted Calumny. If
you were to say that poetry is more eternal, I say the works of a
coppersmith are more eternal still, for time preserves them longer than
your works or ours; nevertheless they have not much imagination \[29\].
And a picture, if painted on copper with enamel colours may be yet more
permanent. We, by our arts may be called the grandsons of God. If poetry
deals with moral philosophy, painting deals with natural philosophy.
Poetry describes the action of the mind, painting considers what the
mind may effect by the motions \[of the body\]. If poetry can terrify
people by hideous fictions, painting can do as much by depicting the
same things in action. Supposing that a poet applies himself to
represent beauty, ferocity, or a base, a foul

<span id="page_329">p. 329</span>

or a monstrous thing, as against a painter, he may in his ways bring
forth a variety of forms; but will the painter not satisfy more? are
there not pictures to be seen, so like the actual things, that they
deceive men and animals?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 655.](0655.md)
