[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Age of Reason](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[IX. The Practice of Painting Index](dvs010.md)  
  [Previous](0655)  [Next](0657.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486225720/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Da Vinci Notebooks at Intangible Textual Heritage*

### 656.

We know very well that a really experienced and good painter will not
make such mistakes; on the contrary, with sound rules he will remove so
little at a time that he will bring his work to a good issue. Again the
sculptor if working in clay or wax, can add or reduce, and when his
model is finished it can easily be cast in bronze, and this is the last
operation and is the most permanent form of sculpture. Inasmuch as that
which is merely of marble is liable to ruin, but not bronze. Hence a
painting done on copper which as I said of painting may be added to or
altered, resembles sculpture in bronze, which, having first been made in
wax could then be altered or added to; and if sculpture in bronze is
durable, this work in copper and enamel is absolutely imperishable.
Bronze is but dark and rough after all, but this latter is covered with
various and lovely colours in infinite variety, as has been said above;
or if you will have me only speak of painting on panel, I am content to
pronounce between it and sculpture; saying that painting is the more
beautiful and the more imaginative and the more copious, while sculpture
is the more durable but it has nothing else. Sculpture shows with little
labour what in painting appears a miraculous thing to do; to make what
is impalpable appear palpable, flat objects appear in relief, distant
objects seem close. In fact painting is adorned with infinite
possibilities which sculpture cannot command.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 657.](0657.md)
