[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Age of Reason](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[X. Studies and Sketches for Pictures and Decorations Index](dvs011.md)  
  [Previous](dv10738)  [Next](0664.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486225720/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Da Vinci Notebooks at Intangible Textual Heritage*

### 663.

<span id="page_342">p. 342</span>

<span id="img_v134200"></span>

[![](tn/v134200.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/v134200.jpg.md)

<span id="page_343">p. 343</span>

<span class="margnote"> On Madonna pictures.</span>\[In the autumn of\]
1478 I began the two Madonna \[pictures\].

<span id="page_344">p. 344</span>

<span id="img_v134400"></span>

[![](tn/v134400.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/v134400.jpg.md)

 <span id="fr_301"></span>[299](#fn_301.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_301"></span>[344:299](0663.htm#fr_301.md) : Photographs of
this page have been published by BRAUN, No. 439, and PHILPOT, No. 718.

1\. *Incominciai*. We have no other information as to the two pictures
of the Madonna here spoken of. As Leonardo here tells us that he had
begun two Madonnas at the same time, the word '*incominciai*' may be
understood to mean that he had begun at the same time preparatory
studies for two pictures to be painted later. If this is so, the
non-existence of the pictures may be explained by supposing that they
were only planned and never executed. I may here mention a few studies
for pictures of the Madonna which probably belong to this early time;
particularly a drawing in silver-point on bluish tinted paper at
Windsor--see [Pl. XL](pl040.htm#img_pl040.md), No. 3--, a drawing of which
the details have almost disappeared in the original but have been
rendered quite distinct in the reproduction; secondly a slight pen and
ink sketch in, the Codex VALLARDI, in the Louvre, fol. 64, No. 2316;
again a silver point drawing of a Virgin and child drawn over again with
the pen in the His de la Salle collection also in the Louvre, No. 101.
(See Vicomte BOTH DE TAUZIA, *Notice des dessins de la collection His de
la Salle, exposes au Louvre*. Paris 1881, pp. 80, 81.) This drawing is,
it is true, traditionally ascribed to Raphael, but the author of the
catalogue very justly points out its great resemblance with the sketches
for Madonnas in the British Museum which are indisputably Leonardo's.
Some of these have been published by Mr. HENRY WALLIS in the Art
Journal, New Ser. No. 14, Feb. 1882. If the non-existence of the two
pictures here alluded to justifies my hypothesis that only studies for
such pictures are meant by the text, it may also be supposed that the
drawings were made for some comrade in VERROCCHIO'S atelier. (See
VASARI, Sansoni's ed. Florence 1880. Vol. IV, p. 564): "*E perche a
Lerenzo piaceva fuor di modo la maniera di Lionardo, la seppe cosi bene
imitare, che niuno fu che nella pulitezza e nel finir l'opere con
diligenza l'imitasse più di lui*." Leonardo's notes give me no
opportunity of discussing the pictures executed by him in Florence,
before he moved to Milan. So the studies for the unfinished picture of
the Adoration of the Magi--in the Uffizi, Florence--cannot be described
here, nor would any discussion about the picture in the Louvre "*La
Vierge aux Rochers*" be appropriate in the absence of all allusion to it
in the MSS. Therefore, when I presently add a few remarks on this
painting in explanation of the Master's drawings for it, it will be not
merely with a view to facilitate critical researches about the picture
now in the National Gallery, London, which by some critics has been
pronounced to be a replica of the Louvre picture, but also because I
take this opportunity of publishing several finished studies of the
Master's which, even if they were not made in Florence but later in
Milan, must have been prior to the painting of the Last Supper. The
original picture in Paris is at present so disfigured by dust and
varnish that the current reproductions in photography actually give
evidence more of the injuries to which the picture has been exposed than
of the original work itself. The wood-cut given on p. 344, is only
intended to give a general notion of the composition. It must be
understood that the outline and expression of the heads, which in the
picture is obscured but not destroyed, is here altogether missed. The
facsimiles which follow are from drawings which appear to me to be
studies for "*La Vierge aux Rochers*."

1\. A drawing in silver point on brown toned paper of a woman's head
looking to the left. In the Royal Library at Turin, apparently a study
from nature for the Angel's head ([Pl. XLII](pl042.htm#img_pl042).md).

2\. A study of drapery for the left leg of the same figure, done with
the brush, Indian ink on greenish paper, the lights heightened with
white.

The original is at Windsor, No. 223. The reproduction [Pl.
XLIII](pl043.htm#img_pl043.md) is defective in the shadow on the upper part
of the thigh, which is not so deep as in the original; it should also be
observed that the folds of the drapery near the hips are somewhat
altered in the finished work in the Louvre, while the London copy shows
a greater resemblance to this study in that particular.

3\. A study in red chalk for the bust of the Infant Christ--No. 3 in the
Windsor collection ([Pl. XLIV](pl044.htm#img_pl044).md). The well-known
silver-point drawing on pale green paper, in the Louvre, of a boy's head
(No. 363 in REISET, *Notice des dessins, Ecoles d'Italie*) seems to me
to be a slightly altered copy, either from the original picture or from
this red chalk study.

4\. A silver-point study on greenish paper, for the head of John the
Baptist, reproduced on p. 342. This was formerly in the Codex Vallardi
and is now exhibited among the drawings in the Louvre. The lights are,
in the original, heightened with white; the outlines, particularly round
the head and ear, are visibly restored.

There is a study of an outstretched hand--No. 288 in the Windsor
collection--which was published in the Grosvenor Gallery Publication,
1878, simply under the title of: "No. 72 Study of a hand, pointing"
which, on the other hand, I regard as a copy by a pupil. The action
occurs in the kneeling angel of the Paris picture and not in the London
copy.

These four genuine studies form, I believe, a valuable substitute in the
absence of any MS. notes referring to the celebrated Paris picture.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 664.](0664.md)
