[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Age of Reason](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[X. Studies and Sketches for Pictures and Decorations Index](dvs011)  
  [Previous](0663)  [Next](0665) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486225720/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Da Vinci Notebooks at Intangible Textual Heritage*

### 664.

<span id="page_345">p. 345</span>

<span class="margnote"> Bernardo di Bandino's Portrait.</span>A
tan-coloured small cap, A doublet of black serge, A black jerkin lined A
blue coat lined, with fur of foxes' breasts, and the collar of the
jerkin covered with black and white stippled velvet Bernardo di Bandino
Baroncelli; black hose.

 <span id="fr_302"></span>[300](#fn_302)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_302"></span>[345:300](0664.htm#fr_302) : These eleven lines
of text are by the side of the pen and ink drawing of a man hanged--[Pl.
LXII](pl062.htm#img_pl062), No. 1. This drawing was exhibited in 1879 at
the *Ecole des Beaux-Arts* in Paris and the compilers of the catalogue
amused themselves by giving the victim's name as follows: "*Un pendu,
vetu d'une longue robe, les mains liées sur le dos ... Bernardo di
Bendino Barontigni, marchand de pantalons*" (see *Catalogue descriptif
des Dessins de Mailres anciens exposes a l'Ecole des Beaux Arts*, Paris
1879; No. 83, pp. 9-10). Now, the criminal represented here, is none
other than Bernardino di Bandino Baroncelli the murderer of Giuliano
de'Medici, whose name as a coadjutor in the conspiracy of the Pazzi has
gained a melancholy notoriety by the tragedy of the 26th April 1478.
Bernardo was descended from an ancient family and the son of the man
who, under King Ferrante, was President of the High Court of Justice in
Naples. His ruined fortunes, it would seem, induced him to join the
Pazzi; he and Francesco Pazzi were entrusted with the task of murdering
Giuliano de'Medici on the fixed day. Their victim not appearing in the
cathedral at the hour when they expected him, the two conspirators ran
to the palace of the Medici and induced him to accompany them. Giuliano
then took his place in the chancel of the Cathedral, and as the
officiating priest raised the Host--the sign agreed upon--Bernardo
stabbed the unsuspecting Giuliano in the breast with a short sword;
Giuliano stepped backwards and fell dead. The attempt on Lorenzo's life
however, by the other conspirators at the same moment, failed of
success. Bernardo no sooner saw that Lorenzo tried to make his escape
towards the sacristy, than he rushed upon him, and struck down Francesco
Nori who endeavoured to protect Lorenzo. How Lorenzo then took refuge
behind the brazen doors of the sacristy, and how, as soon as Giuliano's
death was made known, the further plans of the conspirators were
defeated, while a terrible vengeance overtook all the perpetrators and
accomplices, this is no place to tell. Bernardo Bandini alone seemed to
be favoured by fortune; he hid first in the tower of the Cathedral, and
then escaped undiscovered from Florence. Poliziano, who was with Lorenzo
in the Cathedral, says in his 'Conjurationis Pactianae Commentarium':
"*Bandinus fugitans in Tiphernatem incidit, a quo in aciem receptus
Senas pervenit*." And Gino Capponi in summing up the reports of the
numerous contemporary narrators of the event, says: "*Bernardo Bandini
ricoverato in Costantinopoli, fu per ordine del Sultano preso e
consegnato a un Antonio di Bernardino dei Medici, che Lorenzo aveva
mandato apposta in Turchia: così era grande la potenza di quest' uomo e
grande la voglia di farne mostra e che non restasse in vita chi aveagli
ucciso il fratello, fu egli applicato appena giunto*" (*Storia della
Republica di Firenze II*, 377, 378). Details about the dates may be
found in the *Chronichetta di Belfredello Strinati Alfieri*: "*Bernardo
di Bandino Bandini sopradetto ne venne preso da Gostantinopoti a dì 14.
Dicembre 1479 e disaminato, che fu al Bargello, fu impiccato alle
finestre di detto Bargello allato alla Doana a dì 29. Dicembre
MCCCCLXXIX che pochi dì stette*." It may however be mentioned with
reference to the mode of writing the name of the assassin that, though
most of his contemporaries wrote Bernardo Bandini, in the *Breve
Chronicon Caroli Petri de Joanninis* he is called Bernardo di Bandini
Baroncelli; and, in the *Sententiae Domini Matthaei de Toscana*,
Bernardus Joannis Bandini de Baroncellis, as is written on Leonardo's
drawing of him when hanged. Now VASARI, in the life of *Andrea del
Castagno* (Vol. II, 680; ed. Milanesi 1878), tells us that in 1478 this
painter was commissioned by order of the Signoria to represent the
members of the Pazzi conspiracy as traitors, on the facade of the
Palazzo del Podestà--the Bargello. This statement is obviously founded
on a mistake, for Andrea del Castagno was already dead in 1457. He had
however been commissioned to paint Rinaldo degli Albizzi, when declared
a rebel and exiled in 1434, and his adherents, as hanging head
downwards; and in consequence he had acquired the nickname of Andrea
degl' Impiccati. On the 21st July 1478 the Council of Eight came to the
following resolution: "*item servatis etc. deliberaverunt et
santiaverunt Sandro Botticelli pro ejus labore in pingendo proditores
flor. quadraginta largos*" (see G. MILANESI, *Arch. star. VI* (1862) p.
5 note.)

As has been told, Giuliano de' Medici was murdered on the 26th April
1478, and we see by this that only three months later Botticelli was
paid for his painting of the "*proditores*". We can however hardly
suppose that all the members of the conspiracy were depicted by him in
fresco on the facade of the palace, since no fewer than eighty had been
condemned to death. We have no means of knowing whether, besides
Botticelli, any other painters, perhaps Leonardo, was commissioned, when
the criminals had been hanged in person out of the windows of the
Palazzo del Podestà to represent them there afterwards in effigy in
memory of their disgrace. Nor do we know whether the assassin who had
escaped may at first not have been provisionally represented as hanged
in effigy. Now, when we try to connect the historical facts with this
drawing by Leonardo reproduced on [Pl. LXII](pl062.htm#img_pl062), No.
I, and the full description of the conspirator's dress and its colour on
the same sheet, there seems to be no reasonable doubt that Bernardo
Bandini is here represented as he was actually hanged on December 29th,
1479, after his capture at Constantinople. The dress is certainly not
that in which he committed the murder. A long furred coat might very
well be worn at Constantinople or at Florence in December, but hardly in
April. The doubt remains whether Leonardo described Bernardo's dress so
fully because it struck him as remarkable, or whether we may not rather
suppose that this sketch was actually made from nature with the
intention of using it as a study for a wall painting to be executed. It
cannot be denied that the drawing has all the appearance of having been
made for this purpose. Be this as it may, the sketch under discussion
proves, at any rate, that Leonardo was in Florence in December 1479, and
the note that accompanies it is valuable as adding one more
characteristic specimen to the very small number of his MSS. that can be
proved to have been written between 1470 and 1480.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 665.](0665)
