[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Age of Reason](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[X. Studies and Sketches for Pictures and Decorations Index](dvs011.md)  
  [Previous](0668)  [Next](0670.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486225720/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Da Vinci Notebooks at Intangible Textual Heritage*

### 669.

<span id="page_348">p. 348</span>

  On the battle of Anghiari.  
  Florentine  
  Neri di Gino Capponi  
  Bernardetto de' Medici  
  Micheletto,  
  Niccolo da Pisa  
  Conte Francesco  
                         Pietro Gian Paolo  
                         Guelfo Orsino,  
                         Messer Rinaldo degli  
                                      Albizzi  

Begin with the address of Niccolo Piccinino to the soldiers and the
banished Florentines among whom are Messer Rinaldo degli Albizzi and
other Florentines. Then let it be shown how he first mounted on
horseback in armour; and the whole army came after him--40 squadrons of
cavalry, and 2000 foot soldiers went with him. Very early in the morning
the Patriarch went up a hill to reconnoitre the country, that is the
hills, fields and the valley watered by a river; and from thence he
beheld Niccolo Picinino coming from Borgo San Sepolcro with his people,
and with a great dust; and perceiving them he returned to the camp of
his own people and addressed them. Having spoken he prayed to God with
clasped hands, when there appeared a cloud in which Saint Peter appeared
and spoke to the Patriarch.--500 cavalry were sent forward by the
Patriarch to hinder or check the rush of the enemy. In the foremost
troop Francesco the son of Niccolo Piccinino \[24\] was the first to
attack the bridge which was held by the Patriarch and the Florentines.
Beyond the bridge to his left he sent forward some infantry to engage
ours, who drove them back, among

<span id="page_349">p. 349</span>

whom was their captain Micheletto \[29\] whose lot it was to be that day
at the head of the army. Here, at this bridge there is a severe
struggle; our men conquer and the enemy is repulsed. Here Guido and
Astorre, his brother, the Lord of Faenza with a great number of men,
re-formed and renewed the fight, and rushed upon the Florentines with
such force that they recovered the bridge and pushed forward as far as
the tents. But Simonetto advanced with 600 horse, and fell upon the
enemy and drove them back once more from the place, and recaptured the
bridge; and behind him came more men with 2000 horse soldiers. And thus
for a long time they fought with varying fortune. But then the
Patriarch, in order to divert the enemy, sent forward Niccolo da Pisa
\[44\] and Napoleone Orsino, a beardless lad, followed by a great
multitude of men, and then was done another great feat of arms. At the
same time Niccolo Piccinino urged forward the remnant of his men, who
once more made ours give way; and if it had not been that the Patriarch
set himself at their head and, by his words and deeds controlled the
captains, our soldiers would have taken to flight. The Patriarch had
some artillery placed on the hill and with these he dispersed the
enemy's infantry; and the disorder was so complete that Niccolo began to
call back his son and all his men, and they took to flight towards
Borgo. And then began a great slaughter of men; none escaped but the
foremost of those who had fled or who hid themselves. The battle
continued until sunset, when the Patriarch gave his mind to recalling
his men and burying the dead, and afterwards a trophy was erected.

 <span id="fr_308"></span>[306](#fn_308.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_308"></span>[349:306](0669.htm#fr_308.md) : 669. This passage
does not seem to me to be in Leonardo's hand, though it has hitherto
been generally accepted as genuine. Not only is the writing unlike his,
but the spelling also is quite different. I would suggest that this
passage is a description of the events of the battle drawn up for the
Painter by order of the Signoria, perhaps by some historian commissioned
by them, to serve as a scheme or programme of the work. The whole tenor
of the style seems to me to argue in favour of this theory; and besides,
it would be in no way surprising that such a document should have been
preserved among Leonardo's autographs.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 670.](0670.md)
