[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Age of Reason](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[XIV. Anatomy, Zoology and Physiology Index](dvs016)  
  [Previous](0796)  [Next](0798) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486225739/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Da Vinci Notebooks at Intangible Textual Heritage*

### 797.

### OF THE ORDER OF THE BOOK.

<span class="margnote"> Plans and suggestions for the arrangement of
materials (797-802).</span>This work must begin with the conception of
man, and describe the nature of the womb and how the foetus lives in it,
up to what stage it resides there, and in what way it quickens into life
and feeds. Also its growth and what interval there is between

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

one stage of growth and another. What it is that forces it out from the
body of the mother, and for what reasons it sometimes comes out of the
mother's womb before the due time.

Then I will describe which are the members, which, after the boy is
born, grow more than the others, and determine the proportions of a boy
of one year.

Then describe the fully grown man and woman, with their proportions, and
the nature of their complexions, colour, and physiognomy.

Then how they are composed of veins, tendons, muscles and bones. This I
shall do at the end of the book. Then, in four drawings, represent four
universal conditions of men. That is, Mirth, with various acts of
laughter, and describe the cause of laughter. Weeping in various aspects
with its causes. Contention, with various acts of killing; flight, fear,
ferocity, boldness, murder and every thing pertaining to such cases.
Then represent Labour, with pulling, thrusting, carrying, stopping,
supporting and such like things.

Further I would describe attitudes and movements. Then perspective,
concerning the functions and effects of the eye; and of hearing--here I
will speak of music--, and treat of the other senses.

And then describe the nature of the senses.

This mechanism of man we will demonstrate in ... figures; of which the
three first will show the ramification of the bones; that is: first one
to show their height and position and shape: the second will be seen in
profile and will show the depth of the whole and of the parts, and their
position. The third figure will be a demonstration of the bones of the
backparts. Then I will make three other figures from the same point of
view, with the bones sawn across, in which will be shown their thickness
and hollowness. Three other figures of the bones complete, and of the
nerves which rise from the nape of the neck, and in what limbs they
ramify. And three others of the bones and veins, and where they ramify.
Then three figures with the muscles and three with the skin, and their
proper proportions; and three of woman, to illustrate the womb and the
menstrual veins which go to the breasts.

 <span id="fr_82"></span>[416](#fn_82)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_82"></span>[109:416](0797.htm#fr_82) : The meaning of the
word *nervo* varies in different passages, being sometimes used for
*muscolo* (muscle).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 798.](0798)
