[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Age of Reason](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[XIV. Anatomy, Zoology and Physiology Index](dvs016.md)  
  [Previous](0837)  [Next](0839.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486225739/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Da Vinci Notebooks at Intangible Textual Heritage*

### 838.

### HOW THE FIVE SENSES ARE THE MINISTERS OF THE SOUL.

<span class="margnote"> On the relations of the soul to the organs of
sense.</span>The soul seems to reside in the judgment, and the judgment
would seem to be seated in that part where all the senses meet; and this
is called the Common Sense and is not all-pervading throughout the body,
as many have thought. Rather is it entirely in one part. Because, if it
were all-pervading and the same in every part, there would have been no
need to make the instruments of the senses meet in one centre and in one
single spot; on the contrary it would have sufficed that the eye should
fulfil the function of its sensation on its surface only, and not
transmit the image of the things seen, to the sense, by means of the
optic nerves, so that the soul--for the reason given above--may perceive
it in the surface of the eye. In the same way as to the sense of
hearing, it would have sufficed if the voice had merely

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

sounded in the porous cavity of the indurated portion of the temporal
bone which lies within the ear, without making any farther transit from
this bone to the common sense, where the voice confers with and
discourses to the common judgment. The sense of smell, again, is
compelled by necessity to refer itself to that same judgment. Feeling
passes through the perforated cords and is conveyed to this common
sense. These cords diverge with infinite ramifications into the skin
which encloses the members of the body and the viscera. The perforated
cords convey volition and sensation to the subordinate limbs. These
cords and the nerves direct the motions of the muscles and sinews,
between which they are placed; these obey, and this obedience takes
effect by reducing their thickness; for in swelling, their length is
reduced, and the nerves shrink which are interwoven among the particles
of the limbs; being extended to the tips of the fingers, they transmit
to the sense the object which they touch.

The nerves with their muscles obey the tendons as soldiers obey the
officers, and the tendons obey the Common \[central\] Sense as the
officers obey the general. \[27\] Thus the joint of the bones obeys the
nerve, and the nerve the muscle, and the muscle the tendon and the
tendon the Common Sense. And the Common Sense is the seat of the soul
\[28\], and memory is its ammunition, and the impressibility is its
referendary since the sense waits on the soul and not the soul on the
sense. And where the sense that ministers to the soul is not at the
service of the soul, all the functions of that sense are also wanting in
that man's life, as is seen in those born mute and blind.

 <span id="fr_101"></span>[435](#fn_101.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_101"></span>[128:435](0838.htm#fr_101.md) : The peculiar use
of the words *nervo*, *muscolo*, *corda*, *senso comune*, which are here
literally rendered by nerve, muscle cord or tendon and Common Sense may
be understood from lines 27 and 28.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 839.](0839.md)
