[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Age of Reason](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[XVI. Physical Geography Index](dvs019)  
  [Previous](0940)  [Next](0942) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486225739/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Da Vinci Notebooks at Intangible Textual Heritage*

### 941.

### OF THE HEAT THAT IS IN THE WORLD.

<span class="margnote"> Theory of the elevation of water within the
mountains.</span>Where there is life there is heat, and where vital heat
is, there is movement of vapour. This is proved, inasmuch as we see that
the element of fire by its heat always draws to itself damp vapours and
thick mists as opaque clouds, which it raises from seas as well as lakes
and rivers and damp valleys; and these being drawn by degrees as far as
the cold region, the first portion stops, because heat and moisture
cannot exist with cold and dryness; and where the first portion stops
the rest settle, and thus one portion after another being added, thick
and dark clouds are formed. They are often wafted about and borne by the
winds from one region to another, where by their density they become so
heavy that they fall in thick rain; and if the heat of the sun is added
to the power of the element of fire, the clouds are drawn up higher
still and find a greater degree of cold, in which they form ice and fall
in storms of hail. Now the same heat which holds up so great a weight of
water as is seen to rain from the clouds, draws them from below upwards,
from the foot of the mountains, and leads and holds them within the
summits of the mountains, and these, finding some fissure, issue
continuously and cause rivers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 942.](0942)
