[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Age of Reason](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[XVI. Physical Geography Index](dvs019)  
  [Previous](0986)  [Next](0988) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486225739/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Da Vinci Notebooks at Intangible Textual Heritage*

### 987.

### OF THE DELUGE AND OF MARINE SHELLS.

<span class="margnote"> That marine shells could not go up the
mountains.</span>

If you were to say that the shells which are to be seen within the
confines of Italy now, in our days, far from the sea and at such
heights, had been brought there by the deluge which left them there, I
should answer that if you believe that this deluge rose 7 cubits above
the highest mountains-- as he who measured it has written--these shells,
which always live near the sea-shore, should have been left on the
mountains; and not such a little way from the foot of the mountains; nor
all at one level, nor in layers upon layers. And if you were to say that
these shells are desirous of remaining near to the margin of the sea,
and that, as it rose in height, the shells quitted their first home, and
followed the increase of the waters up to their highest level; to this I
answer, that the cockle is an animal of not more rapid movement than the
snail is out of water, or even somewhat

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

slower; because it does not swim, on the contrary it makes a furrow in
the sand by means of its sides, and in this furrow it will travel each
day from 3 to 4 braccia; therefore this creature, with so slow a motion,
could not have travelled from the Adriatic sea as far as Monferrato in
Lombardy  <span id="fr_187"></span>[521](#fn_187) , which is 250 miles
distance, in 40 days; which he has said who took account of the time.
And if you say that the waves carried them there, by their gravity they
could not move, excepting at the bottom. And if you will not grant me
this, confess at least that they would have to stay at the summits of
the highest mountains, in the lakes which are enclosed among the
mountains, like the lakes of Lario, or of Como and il Maggiore  <span
id="fr_188"></span>[522](#fn_188) and of Fiesole, and of Perugia, and
others.

And if you should say that the shells were carried by the waves, being
empty and dead, I say that where the dead went they were not far removed
from the living; for in these mountains living ones are found, which are
recognisable by the shells being in pairs; and they are in a layer where
there are no dead ones; and a little higher up they are found, where
they were thrown by the waves, all the dead ones with their shells
separated, near to where the rivers fell into the sea, to a great depth;
like the Arno which fell from the Gonfolina near to Monte Lupo  <span
id="fr_189"></span>[523](#fn_189) , where it left a deposit of gravel
which may still be seen, and which has agglomerated; and of stones of
various districts, natures, and colours and hardness, making one single
conglomerate. And a little beyond the sandstone conglomerate a tufa has
been formed, where it turned towards Castel Florentino; farther on, the
mud was deposited in which the shells lived, and which rose in layers
according to the levels at which the turbid Arno flowed into that sea.
And from time to time the bottom of the sea was raised, depositing these
shells in layers, as may be seen in the cutting at Colle Gonzoli, laid
open by

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

the Arno which is wearing away the base of it; in which cutting the said
layers of shells are very plainly to be seen in clay of a bluish colour,
and various marine objects are found there. And if the earth of our
hemisphere is indeed raised by so much higher than it used to be, it
must have become by so much lighter by the waters which it lost through
the rift between Gibraltar and Ceuta; and all the more the higher it
rose, because the weight of the waters which were thus lost would be
added to the earth in the other hemisphere. And if the shells had been
carried by the muddy deluge they would have been mixed up, and separated
from each other amidst the mud, and not in regular steps and layers-- as
we see them now in our time.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_187"></span>[210:521](0987.htm#fr_187) : *Monferrato di
Lombardia*. The range of hills of Monferrato is in Piedmont, and Casale
di Monferrato belonged, in Leonardo's time, to the Marchese di Mantova.

<span id="fn_188"></span>[210:522](0987.htm#fr_188) : *Lago di Lario.*
Lacus Larius was the name given by the Romans to the lake of Como. It is
evident that it is here a slip of the pen since the the words in the MS.
are: *"Come Lago di Lario o'l Magare e di Como,"* In the MS. after line
16 we come upon a digression treating of the weight of water; this has
here been omitted. It is 11 lines long.

<span id="fn_189"></span>[210:523](0987.htm#fr_189) : *Monte Lupo*,
compare 970, 13; it is between Empoli and Florence.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 988.](0988)
