[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Age of Reason](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[XVI. Physical Geography Index](dvs019.md)  
  [Previous](0987)  [Next](0989.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486225739/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Da Vinci Notebooks at Intangible Textual Heritage*

### 988.

<span class="margnote"> The marine shells were not produced away from
the sea.</span>As to those who say that shells existed for a long time
and were born at a distance from the sea, from the nature of the place
and of the cycles, which can influence a place to produce such
creatures--to them it may be answered: such an influence could not place
the animals all on one line, except those of the same sort and age; and
not the old with the young, nor some with an operculum and others
without their operculum, nor some broken and others whole, nor some
filled with sea-sand and large and small fragments of other shells
inside the whole shells which remained open; nor the claws of crabs
without the rest of their bodies; nor the shells of other species stuck
on to them like animals which have moved about on them; since the traces
of their track still remain, on the outside, after the manner of worms
in the wood which they ate into. Nor would there be found among them the
bones and teeth of fish which some call arrows and others serpents'
tongues, nor would so many  <span id="fr_190"></span>[524](#fn_190.md)

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

portions of various animals be found all together if they had not been
thrown on the sea shore. And the deluge cannot have carried them there,
because things that are heavier than water do not float on the water.
But these things could not be at so great a height if they had not been
carried there by the water, such a thing being impossible from their
weight. In places where the valleys have not been filled with salt sea
water shells are never to be seen; as is plainly visible in the great
valley of the Arno above Gonfolina; a rock formerly united to Monte
Albano, in the form of a very high bank which kept the river pent up, in
such a way that before it could flow into the sea, which was afterwards
at its foot, it formed two great lakes; of which the first was where we
now see the city of Florence together with Prato and Pistoia, and Monte
Albano. It followed the rest of its bank as far as where Serravalle now
stands. From the Val d'Arno upwards, as far as Arezzo, another lake was
formed, which discharged its waters into the former lake. It was closed
at about the spot where now we see Girone, and occupied the whole of
that valley above for a distance of 40 miles in length. This valley
received on its bottom all the soil brought down by the turbid waters.
And this is still to be seen at the foot of Prato Magno; it there lies
very high where the rivers have not worn it away. Across this land are
to be seen the deep cuts of the rivers that have passed there, falling
from the great mountain of Prato Magno; in these cuts there are no
vestiges of any shells or of marine soil. This lake was joined with that
of Perugia  <span id="fr_191"></span>[525](#fn_191.md)

A great quantity of shells are to be seen where the rivers flow into the
sea, because on such shores the waters are not so salt owing to the
admixture of the fresh water, which is poured into it. Evidence of this
is to be seen where, of old, the Appenines poured their rivers into the
Adriatic sea; for there in most places great quantities of shells are to
be found, among the mountains, together

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

with bluish marine clay; and all the rocks which are torn off in such
places are full of shells. The same may be observed to have been done by
the Arno when it fell from the rock of Gonfolina into the sea, which was
not so very far below; for at that time it was higher than the top of
San Miniato al Tedesco, since at the highest summit of this the shores
may be seen full of shells and oysters within its flanks. The shells did
not extend towards Val di Nievole, because the fresh waters of the Arno
did not extend so far.

That the shells were not carried away from the sea by the deluge,
because the waters which came from the earth although they drew the sea
towards the earth, were those which struck its depths; because the water
which goes down from the earth, has a stronger current than that of the
sea, and in consequence is more powerful, and it enters beneath the sea
water and stirs the depths and carries with it all sorts of movable
objects which are to be found in the earth, such as the above-mentioned
shells and other similar things. And in proportion as the water which
comes from the land is muddier than sea water it is stronger and heavier
than this; therefore I see no way of getting the said shells so far in
land, unless they had been born there. If you were to tell me that the
river Loire  <span id="fr_192"></span>[526](#fn_192.md) ,which traverses
France covers when the sea rises more than eighty miles of country,
because it is a district of vast plains, and the sea rises about 20
braccia, and shells are found in this plain at the distance of 80 miles
from the sea; here I answer that the flow and ebb in our Mediterranean
Sea does not vary so much; for at Genoa it does not rise at all, and at
Venice but little, and very little in Africa; and where it varies little
it covers but little of the country.

The course of the water of a river always rises higher in a place where
the current is impeded; it behaves as it does where it is reduced in
width to pass under the arches of a bridge.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_190"></span>[211:524](0988.htm#fr_190.md) : I. Scilla argued
against this hypothesis, which was still accepted in his days; see: *La
vana Speculazione, Napoli* 1670.

<span id="fn_191"></span>[212:525](0988.htm#fr_191.md) : See [Pl.
CXIII](pl113.htm#img_pl113.md).

<span id="fn_192"></span>[213:526](0988.htm#fr_192.md) : Leonardo has
written Era instead of Loera or Loira--perhaps under the mistaken idea
that *Lo* was an article.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 989.](0989.md)
