[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Age of Reason](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[XVI. Physical Geography Index](dvs019.md)  
  [Previous](0988)  [Next](0990.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486225739/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Da Vinci Notebooks at Intangible Textual Heritage*

### 989.

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

### A CONFUTATION OF THOSE WHO SAY THAT SHELLS MAY HAVE BEEN CARRIED TO A DISTANCE OF MANY DAYS' JOURNEY FROM THE SEA BY THE DELUGE, WHICH WAS SO HIGH AS TO BE ABOVE THOSE HEIGHTS.

<span class="margnote"> Further researches (989-991).</span>I say that
the deluge could not carry objects, native to the sea, up to the
mountains, unless the sea had already increased so as to create
inundations as high up as those places; and this increase could not have
occurred because it would cause a vacuum; and if you were to say that
the air would rush in there, we have already concluded that what is
heavy cannot remain above what is light, whence of necessity we must
conclude that this deluge was caused by rain water, so that all these
waters ran to the sea, and the sea did not run up the mountains; and as
they ran to the sea, they thrust the shells from the shore of the sea
and did not draw them to wards themselves. And if you were then to say
that the sea, raised by the rain water, had carried these shells to such
a height, we have already said that things heavier than water cannot
rise upon it, but remain at the bottom of it, and do not move unless by
the impact of the waves. And if you were to say that the waves had
carried them to such high spots, we have proved that the waves in a
great depth move in a contrary direction at the bottom to the motion at
the top, and this is shown by the turbidity of the sea from the earth
washed down near its shores. Anything which is lighter than the water
moves with the waves, and is left on the highest level of the highest
margin of the waves. Anything which is heavier than the water moves,
suspended in it, between the surface and the bottom; and from these two
conclusions, which will be amply proved in their place, we infer that
the waves of the surface cannot convey shells, since they are heavier
than water.

If the deluge had to carry shells three hundred and four hundred miles
from the sea, it would have carried them mixed with various other
natural objects heaped together; and we see at such distances oysters
all together, and sea-snails, and cuttlefish, and all the other shells
which congregate together,

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

all to be found together and dead; and the solitary shells are found
wide apart from each other, as we may see them on sea-shores every day.
And if we find oysters of very large shells joined together and among
them very many which still have the covering attached, indicating that
they were left here by the sea, and still living when the strait of
Gibraltar was cut through; there are to be seen, in the mountains of
Parma and Piacenza, a multitude of shells and corals, full of holes, and
still sticking to the rocks there. When I was making the great horse for
Milan, a large sack full was brought to me in my workshop by certain
peasants; these were found in that place and among them were many
preserved in their first freshness.

Under ground, and under the foundations of buildings, timbers are found
of wrought beams and already black. Such were found in my time in those
diggings at Castel Fiorentino. And these had been in that deep place
before the sand carried by the Arno into the sea, then covering the
plain, had heen raised to such a height; and before the plains of
Casentino had been so much lowered, by the earth being constantly
carried down from them.

 <span id="fr_193"></span>[527](#fn_193.md)

And if you were to say that these shells were created, and were
continually being created in such places by the nature of the spot, and
of the heavens which might have some influence there, such an opinion
cannot exist in a brain of much reason; because here are the years of
their growth, numbered on their shells, and there are large and small
ones to be seen which could not have grown without food, and could not
have fed without motion--and here they could not move  <span
id="fr_194"></span>[528](#fn_194.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_193"></span>[215:527](0989.htm#fr_193.md) : These lines are
written in the margin.

<span id="fn_194"></span>[215:528](0989.htm#fr_194.md) : These lines are
written in the margin.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 990.](0990.md)
