[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Age of Reason](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[XVI. Physical Geography Index](dvs019)  
  [Previous](0989)  [Next](0991) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486225739/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Da Vinci Notebooks at Intangible Textual Heritage*

### 990.

That in the drifts, among one and another, there are still to be found
the traces of the worms which crawled upon them when they were not yet
dry. And all marine clays still contain shells, and the shells are
petrified together with the clay. From their firmness and unity some
persons will have it that these animals were carried up to

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

places remote from the sea by the deluge. Another sect of ignorant
persons declare that Nature or Heaven created them in these places by
celestial influences, as if in these places we did not also find the
bones of fishes which have taken a long time to grow; and as if, we
could not count, in the shells of cockles and snails, the years and
months of their life, as we do in the horns of bulls and oxen, and in
the branches of plants that have never been cut in any part. Besides,
having proved by these signs the length of their lives, it is evident,
and it must be admitted, that these animals could not live without
moving to fetch their food; and we find in them no instrument for
penetrating the earth or the rock where we find them enclosed. But how
could we find in a large snail shell the fragments and portions of many
other sorts of shells, of various sorts, if they had not been thrown
there, when dead, by the waves of the sea like the other light objects
which it throws on the earth? Why do we find so many fragments and whole
shells between layer and layer of stone, if this had not formerly been
covered on the shore by a layer of earth thrown up by the sea, and which
was afterwards petrified? And if the deluge before mentioned had carried
them to these parts of the sea, you might find these shells at the
boundary of one drift but not at the boundary between many drifts. We
must also account for the winters of the years during which the sea
multiplied the drifts of sand and mud brought down by the neighbouring
rivers, by washing down the shores; and if you chose to say that there
were several deluges to produce these rifts and the shells among them,
you would also have to affirm that such a deluge took place every year.
Again, among the fragments of these shells, it must be presumed that in
those places there were sea coasts, where all the shells were thrown up,
broken, and divided, and never in pairs, since they are found alive in
the sea, with two valves, each serving as a lid to the other; and in the
drifts of rivers and on the shores of the sea they are found in
fragments. And within the limits of the separate strata of rocks they
are found, few in number and in pairs like those which were left by the
sea, buried alive in the mud, which subsequently dried up and, in time,
was petrified.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 991.](0991)
