[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Age of Reason](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[XVII. Topographical Notes Index](dvs020)  
  [Previous](1029)  [Next](1031) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486225739/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Da Vinci Notebooks at Intangible Textual Heritage*

### 1030.

### LAKE OF COMO. VALLEY OF CHIAVENNA.

Above the lake of Como towards Germany is the valley of Chiavenna where
the river Mera flows into this lake. Here are barren and very high
mountains, with huge rocks. Among these mountains are to be found the
water-birds called gulls. Here grow fir trees, larches and pines. Deer,
wildgoats, chamois, and terrible bears. It is impossible to climb them
without using hands and feet. The peasants go there at the time of the
snows with great snares to make the bears fall down these rocks. These
mountains which very closely approach each other are parted by the
river. They are to the right and left for the distance of 20 miles
throughout of the same nature. From mile to mile there are good inns.
Above on the said river there are waterfalls of 400 braccia in height,
which are fine to see; and there is good living at 4 soldi the
reckoning. This river brings down a great deal of timber.

### VAL SASINA.

Val Sasina runs down towards Italy; this is almost the same form and
character. There grow here many *mappello* and there are great ruins and
falls of water  <span id="fr_219"></span>[553](#fn_219) .

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

### VALLEY OF INTROZZO.

This valley produces a great quantity of firs, pines and larches; and
from here Ambrogio Fereri has his timber brought down; at the head of
the Valtellina are the mountains of Bormio, terrible and always covered
with snow; marmots (?) are found there.

### BELLAGGIO.

Opposite the castle Bellaggio there is the river Latte, which falls from
a height of more than 100 braccia from the source whence it springs,
perpendicularly, into the lake with an inconceivable roar and noise.
This spring flows only in August and September.

### VALTELLINA.

Valtellina, as it is called, is a valley enclosed in high and terrible
mountains; it produces much strong wine, and there is so much cattle
that the natives conclude that more milk than wine grows there. This is
the valley through which the Adda passes, which first runs more than 40
miles through Germany; this river breeds the fish *temolo* which live on
silver, of which much is to be found in its sands. In this country every
one can sell bread and wine, and the wine is worth at most one soldo the
bottle and a pound of veal one soldo, and salt ten dinari and butter the
same and their pound is 30 ounces, and eggs are one soldo the lot.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_219"></span>[237:553](1030.htm#fr_219) 14: The meaning of
*mappello* is unknown.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1031.](1031)
