[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Age of Reason](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[XIX. Philosophical Maxims. Morals. Polemics and Speculations
Index](dvs022.md)  
  [Previous](1212)  [Next](1214.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486225739/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Da Vinci Notebooks at Intangible Textual Heritage*

### 1213.

Of all human opinions that is to be reputed the most foolish which deals
with the belief in Necromancy, the sister of Alchemy, which gives birth
to simple and natural things. But it is all the more worthy of
reprehension than alchemy, because it brings forth nothing but what is
like itself, that is, lies; this does not happen in Alchemy which deals
with simple products of nature and whose function cannot be exercised by
nature itself, because it has no organic instruments with which it can
work, as men do by means of their hands, who have produced, for
instance, glass &c but this Necromancy the flag and flying banner, blown
by the winds, is the guide of the stupid crowd which is constantly
witness to the dazzling and endless effects of this art; and there are
books full, declaring that enchantments and spirits can work and speak
without tongues and without organic instruments-- without which it is
impossible to speak-- and can carry heaviest weights and raise storms
and rain; and that men can be turned into cats and wolves and other
beasts, although indeed it is those who affirm these things who first
became beasts.

And surely if this Necromancy did exist, as is believed by small wits,
there is nothing on the earth that would be of so much importance alike
for the detriment and service of men, if it were true that there were in
such an art a power to disturb the calm serenity of the air, converting
it into darkness and making coruscations or winds, with terrific thunder
and lightnings rushing through the darkness, and with violent

<span id="page_305">p. 305</span>

storms overthrowing high buildings and rooting up forests; and thus to
oppose armies, crushing and annihilating them; and, besides these
frightful storms may deprive the peasants of the reward of their
labours.--Now what kind of warfare is there to hurt the enemy so much as
to deprive him of the harvest? What naval warfare could be compared with
this? I say, the man who has power to command the winds and to make
ruinous gales by which any fleet may be submerged, --surely a man who
could command such violent forces would be lord of the nations, and no
human ingenuity could resist his crushing force. The hidden treasures
and gems reposing in the body of the earth would all be made manifest to
him. No lock nor fortress, though impregnable, would be able to save any
one against the will of the necromancer. He would have himself carried
through the air from East to West and through all the opposite sides of
the universe. But why should I enlarge further upon this? What is there
that could not be done by such a craftsman? Almost nothing, except to
escape death. Hereby I have explained in part the mischief and the
usefulness, contained in this art, if it is real; and if it is real why
has it not remained among men who desire it so much, having nothing to
do with any deity? For I know that there are numberless people who
would, to satisfy a whim, destroy God and all the universe; and if this
necromancy, being, as it were, so necessary to men, has not been left
among them, it can never have existed, nor will it ever exist according
to the definition of the spirit, which is invisible in substance; for
within the elements there are no incorporate things, because where there
is no body, there is a vacuum; and no vacuum can exist in the elements
because it would be immediately filled up. Turn over.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1214.](1214.md)
