[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Age of Reason](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[XIX. Philosophical Maxims. Morals. Polemics and Speculations
Index](dvs022)  
  [Previous](1213)  [Next](1215) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486225739/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Da Vinci Notebooks at Intangible Textual Heritage*

### 1214.

### OF SPIRITS.

We have said, on the other side of this page, that the definition of a
spirit is a power conjoined to a body; because it cannot

<span id="page_306">p. 306</span>

move of its own accord, nor can it have any kind of motion in space; and
if you were to say that it moves itself, this cannot be within the
elements. For, if the spirit is an incorporeal quantity, this quantity
is called a vacuum, and a vacuum does not exist in nature; and granting
that one were formed, it would be immediately filled up by the rushing
in of the element in which the vacuum had been generated. Therefore,
from the definition of weight, which is this--Gravity is an accidental
power, created by one element being drawn to or suspended in another--it
follows that an element, not weighing anything compared with itself, has
weight in the element above it and lighter than it; as we see that the
parts of water have no gravity or levity compared with other water, but
if you draw it up into the air, then it would acquire weight, and if you
were to draw the air beneath the water then the water which remains
above this air would acquire weight, which weight could not sustain
itself by itself, whence collapse is inevitable. And this happens in
water; wherever the vacuum may be in this water it will fall in; and
this would happen with a spirit amid the elements, where it would
continuously generate a vacuum in whatever element it might find itself,
whence it would be inevitable that it should be constantly flying
towards the sky until it had quitted these elements.

### AS TO WHETHER A SPIRIT HAS A BODY AMID THE ELEMENTS.

We have proved that a spirit cannot exist of itself amid the elements
without a body, nor can it move of itself by voluntary motion unless it
be to rise upwards. But now we will say how such a spirit taking an
aerial body would be inevitably melt into air; because if it remained
united, it would be separated and fall to form a vacuum, as is said
above; therefore it is inevitable, if it is to be able to remain
suspended in the air, that it should absorb a certain quantity of air;
and if it were mingled with the air, two difficulties arise; that is to
say: It must rarefy that portion of the air with which it mingles; and
for this cause the rarefied air must fly up of itself and will not

<span id="page_307">p. 307</span>

remain among the air that is heavier than itself; and besides this the
subtle spiritual essence disunites itself, and its nature is modified,
by which that nature loses some of its first virtue. Added to these
there is a third difficulty, and this is that such a body formed of air
assumed by the spirits is exposed to the penetrating winds, which are
incessantly sundering and dispersing the united portions of the air,
revolving and whirling amidst the rest of the atmosphere; therefore the
spirit which is infused in this

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1215.](1215)
