[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Age of Reason](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[XX. Humorous Writings Index](dvs024.md)  
  [Previous](1271)  [Next](1273.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486225739/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Da Vinci Notebooks at Intangible Textual Heritage*

### 1272.

### A FABLE.

The razor having one day come forth from the handle which serves as its
sheath and having placed himself in the sun, saw the sun reflected in
his body, which filled him with great pride. And turning it over in his
thoughts he began to say to himself: "And shall I return again to that
shop from which I have just come? Certainly not; such splendid beauty
shall not, please God, be turned to such base uses. What folly it would
be that could lead me to shave the lathered beards of rustic peasants
and perform such menial service! Is this body destined for such work?
Certainly not. I will hide myself in some retired spot and

<span id="page_339">p. 339</span>

there pass my life in tranquil repose." And having thus remained hidden
for some months, one day he came out into the air, and issuing from his
sheath, saw himself turned to the similitude of a rusty saw while his
surface no longer reflected the resplendent sun. With useless repentance
he vainly deplored the irreparable mischief saying to himself: "Oh! how
far better was it to employ at the barbers my lost edge of such
exquisite keenness! Where is that lustrous surface? It has been consumed
by this vexatious and unsightly rust."

The same thing happens to those minds which instead of exercise give
themselves up to sloth. They are like the razor here spoken of, and lose
the keenness of their edge, while the rust of ignorance spoils their
form.

### A FABLE.

A stone of some size recently uncovered by the water lay on a certain
spot somewhat raised, and just where a delightful grove ended by a stony
road; here it was surrounded by plants decorated by various flowers of
divers colours. And as it saw the great quantity of stones collected
together in the roadway below, it began to wish it could let itself fall
down there, saying to itself: "What have I to do here with these plants?
I want to live in the company of those, my sisters." And letting itself
fall, its rapid course ended among these longed for companions. When it
had been there sometime it began to find itself constantly toiling under
the wheels of the carts the iron-shoed feet of horses and of travellers.
This one rolled it over, that one trod upon it; sometimes it lifted
itself a little and then it was covered with mud or the dung of some
animal, and it was in vain that it looked at the spot whence it had come
as a place of solitude and tranquil place.

Thus it happens to those who choose to leave a life of solitary
comtemplation, and come to live in cities among people full of infinite
evil.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1273.](1273.md)
