[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Age of Reason](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[XX. Humorous Writings Index](dvs024.md)  
  [Previous](1278)  [Next](1280.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486225739/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Da Vinci Notebooks at Intangible Textual Heritage*

### 1279.

The hapless willow, finding that she could not enjoy the pleasure of
seeing her slender branches grow or attain to the height she wished, or
point to the sky, by reason of the vine and whatever other trees that
grew near, but was always maimed and lopped and spoiled, brought all her
spirits together and gave and devoted itself entirely to imagination,
standing plunged in long meditation and seeking, in all the world of
plants, with which of them she might ally herself and which could not
need the help of her withes. Having stood for some time in this prolific
imagination, with a sudden flash the gourd presented itself to her
thoughts and tossing all her branches with extreme delight, it seemed to
her that she had found the companion suited to her purpose, because the
gourd is more apt to bind others than to need binding; having come to
this conclusion

<span id="page_345">p. 345</span>

she awaited eagerly some friendly bird who should be the mediator of her
wishes. Presently seeing near her the magpie she said to him: "O gentle
bird! by the memory of the refuge which you found this morning among my
branches, when the hungry cruel, and rapacious falcon wanted to devour
you, and by that repose which you have always found in me when your
wings craved rest, and by the pleasure you have enjoyed among my boughs,
when playing with your companions or making love--I entreat you find the
gourd and obtain from her some of her seeds, and tell her that those
that are born of them I will treat exactly as though they were my own
flesh and blood; and in this way use all the words you can think of,
which are of the same persuasive purport; though, indeed, since you are
a master of language, I need not teach you. And if you will do me this
service I shall be happy to have your nest in the fork of my boughs, and
all your family without payment of any rent." Then the magpie, having
made and confirmed certain new stipulations with the willow,--and
principally that she should never admit upon her any snake or polecat,
cocked his tail, and put down his head, and flung himself from the
bough, throwing his weight upon his wings; and these, beating the
fleeting air, now here, now there, bearing about inquisitively, while
his tail served as a rudder to steer him, he came to a gourd; then with
a handsome bow and a few polite words, he obtained the required seeds,
and carried them to the willow, who received him with a cheerful face.
And when he had scraped away with his foot a small quantity of the earth
near the willow, describing a circle, with his beak he planted the
grains, which in a short time began to grow, and by their growth and the
branches to take up all the boughs of the willow, while their broad
leaves deprived it of the beauty of the sun and sky. And not content
with so much evil, the gourds next began, by their rude hold, to drag
the ends of the tender shoots down towards the earth, with strange
twisting and distortion.

<span id="page_346">p. 346</span>

Then, being much annoyed, it shook itself in vain to throw off the
gourd. After raving for some days in such plans vainly, because the firm
union forbade it, seeing the wind come by it commended itself to him.
The wind flew hard and opened the old and hollow stem of the willow in
two down to the roots, so that it fell into two parts. In vain did it
bewail itself recognising that it was born to no good end.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1280.](1280.md)
