[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Age of Reason](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[XX. Humorous Writings Index](dvs024.md)  
  [Previous](1281)  [Next](1283.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486225739/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Da Vinci Notebooks at Intangible Textual Heritage*

### 1282.

<span id="page_348">p. 348</span>

Wine, the divine juice of the grape, finding itself in a golden and
richly wrought cup, on the table of Mahomet, was puffed up with pride at
so much honour; when suddenly it was struck by a contrary reflection,
saying to itself: "What am I about, that I should rejoice, and not
perceive that I am now near to my death and shall leave my golden abode
in this cup to enter into the foul and fetid caverns of the human body,
and to be transmuted from a fragrant and delicious liquor into a foul
and base one. Nay, and as though so much evil as this were not enough, I
must for a long time lie in hideous receptacles, together with other
fetid and corrupt matter, cast out from human intestines." And it cried
to Heaven, imploring vengeance for so much insult, and that an end might
henceforth be put to such contempt; and that, since that country
produced the finest and best grapes in the whole world, at least they
should not be turned into wine. Then Jove made that wine drunk by
Mahomet to rise in spirit to his brain; and that in so deleterious a
manner that it made him mad, and gave birth to so many follies that when
he had recovered himself, he made a law that no Asiatic should drink
wine, and henceforth the vine and its fruit were left free.

As soon as wine has entered the stomach it begins to ferment and swell;
then the spirit of that man begins to abandon his body, rising as it
were skywards, and the brain finds itself parting from the body. Then it
begins to degrade him, and make him rave like a madman, and then he does
irreparable evil, killing his friends.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1283.](1283.md)
