[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Age of Reason](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[XXI. Letters. Personal Records. Dated Notes Index](dvs025.md)  
  [Previous](1345)  [Next](1347.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486225739/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Da Vinci Notebooks at Intangible Textual Heritage*

### 1346.

<span class="margnote"> Draft of letter to be sent to Piacenza (1346.
1347).</span>Magnificent Commissioners of Buildings I, understanding
that your Magnificencies have made up your minds to make certain great
works in bronze, will remind you of certain things: first that you
should not be so hasty or so quick to give the commission, lest by this
haste it should become impossible to select a good model and a good
master; and some man of small merit may be chosen, who by his
insufficiency may cause you to

 <span id="fr_374"></span>[680](#fn_374.md)

<span id="page_401">p. 401</span>

be abused by your descendants, judging that this age was but ill
supplied with men of good counsel and with good masters; seeing that
other cities, and chiefly the city of the Florentines, has been as it
were in these very days, endowed with beautiful and grand works in
bronze; among which are the doors of their Baptistery. And this town of
Florence, like Piacenza, is a place of intercourse, through which many
foreigners pass; who, seeing that the works are fine and of good
quality, carry away a good impression, and will say that that city is
well filled with worthy inhabitants, seeing the works which bear witness
to their opinion; and on the other hand, I say seeing so much metal
expended and so badly wrought, it were less shame to the city if the
doors had been of plain wood; because, the material, costing so little,
would not seem to merit any great outlay of skill...

Now the principal parts which are sought for in cities are their
cathedrals, and of these the first things which strike the eye are the
doors, by which one passes into these churches.

Beware, gentlemen of the Commission, lest too great speed in your
determination, and so much haste to expedite the entrusting of so great
a work as that which I hear you have ordered, be the cause that that
which was intended for the honour of God and of men should be turned to
great dishonour of your judgments, and of your city, which, being a
place of mark, is the resort and gathering-place of innumerable
foreigners. And this dishonour would result if by your lack of diligence
you were to put your trust in some vaunter, who by his tricks or by
favour shown to him here should obtain such work from you, by which
lasting and very great shame would result to him and to you. Thus I
cannot help being angry when I consider what men those are who have
conferred with you as wishing to undertake this great work without
thinking of their sufficiency for it, not to say more. This one is a
potter, that one a maker of cuirasses, this one is a

<span id="page_402">p. 402</span>

bell-founder, another a bell ringer, and one is even a bombardier; and
among them one in his Lordship's service, who boasted that he was the
gossip of Messer Ambrosio Ferrere  <span
id="fr_375"></span>[681](#fn_375.md) , who has some power and who has made
him some promises; and if this were not enough he would mount on
horseback, and go to his Lord and obtain such letters that you could
never refuse \[to give\] him the work. But consider where masters of
real talent and fit for such work are brought when they have to compete
with such men as these. Open your eyes and look carefully lest your
money should be spent in buying your own disgrace. I can declare to you
that from that place you will procure none but average works of inferior
and coarse masters. There is no capable man,--\[33\] and you may believe
me,--except Leonardo the Florentine, who is making the equestrian statue
in bronze of the Duke Francesco and who has no need to bring himself
into notice, because he has work for all his life time; and I doubt,
whether being so great a work, he will ever finish it \[34\].

The miserable painstakers ... with what hope may they expect a reward of
their merit?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_374"></span>[400:680](1346.htm#fr_374.md) : 1346. 1347.
Piacenza belonged to Milan. The Lord spoken of in this letter, is no
doubt Lodovico il Moro. One may infer from the concluding sentence (No.
1346, l. 33. 34 and No. 1347), that Leonardo, who no doubt compiled this
letter, did not forward it to Piacenza himself, but gave it to some
influential patron, under whose name and signature a copy of it was sent
to the Commission.

<span id="fn_375"></span>[402:681](1346.htm#fr_375.md) 26: Messer Ambrogio
Ferrere was Farmer of the Customs under the Duke. Piacenza at that time
belonged to Milan.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1347.](1347.md)
