[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Age of Reason](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[XXI. Letters. Personal Records. Dated Notes Index](dvs025)  
  [Previous](1357)  [Next](1359) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486225739/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Da Vinci Notebooks at Intangible Textual Heritage*

### 1358.

And in this case I know that I shall make few enemies seeing that no one
will believe what I can say of him; for they are but

 <span id="fr_383"></span>[689](#fn_383)

<span id="page_413">p. 413</span>

few whom his vices have disgusted, and he only dislikes those men whose
natures are contrary to those vices. And many hate their fathers, and
break off friendship with those who reprove their vices; and he will not
permit any examples against them, nor any advice.

If you meet with any one who is virtuous do not drive him from you; do
him honour, so that he may not have to flee from you and be reduced to
hiding in hermitages, or caves or other solitary places to escape from
your treachery; if there is such an one among you do him honour, for
these are our Saints upon earth; these are they who deserve statues from
us, and images; but remember that their images are not to be eaten by
you, as is still done in some parts of India  <span
id="fr_384"></span>[690](#fn_384) where, when the images have according
to them, performed some miracle, the priests cut them in pieces, being
of wood, and give them to all the people of the country, not without
payment; and each one grates his portion very fine, and puts it upon the
first food he eats; and thus believes that by faith he has eaten his
saint who then preserves him from all perils. What do you think here,
Man, of your own species? Are you so wise as you believe yourselves to
be? Are these things to be done by men?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_383"></span>[412:689](1358.htm#fr_383) : Below this text we
read gusstino--Giustino and in another passage on the same page Justin
is quoted (No. 1210, 1. 48). The two have however no real connection.

<span id="fn_384"></span>[413:690](1358.htm#fr_384) 15: In explanation
of this passage I have received the following communication from Dr. G.
W. LEITNER of Lahore: "So far as Indian customs are known to us, this
practice spoken of by Leonardo as 'still existing in some parts of
India' is perfectly unknown; and it is equally opposed to the spirit of
Hinduism, Mohammedanism and Sikhism. In central Thibet the ashes of the
dead, when burnt, are mixed with dough, and small figures--usually of
Buddha--are stamped out of them and some are laid in the grave while
others are distributed among the relations. The custom spoken of by
Leonardo may have prevailed there but I never heard of it." Possibly
Leonardo refers here to customs of nations of America.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1359.](1359)
