[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Age of Reason](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[XII. Architectural Designs Index](dvs014.md)  
  [Previous](0769)  [Next](0770.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486225739/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Da Vinci Notebooks at Intangible Textual Heritage*

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

XIII\. Theoretical writings on Architecture.

Leonardo's original writings on the theory of Architecture have come
down to us only in a fragmentary state; still, there seems to be no
doubt that he himself did not complete them. It would seem that Leonardo
entertained the idea of writing a large and connected book on
Architecture; and it is quite evident that the materials we possess,
which can be proved to have been written at different periods, were
noted down with a more or less definite aim and purpose. They might all
be collected under the one title: "Studies on the Strength of
Materials". Among them the investigations on the subject of fissures in
walls are particularly thorough, and very fully reported; these passages
are also especially interesting, because Leonardo was certainly the
first writer on architecture who ever treated the subject at all. Here,
as in all other cases Leonardo carefully avoids all abstract argument.
His data are not derived from the principles of algebra, but from the
laws of mechanics, and his method throughout is strictly experimental.

Though the conclusions drawn from his investigations may not have that
precision which we are accustomed to find in Leonardo's scientific
labours, their interest is not lessened. They prove at any rate his deep
sagacity and wonderfully clear mind. No one perhaps, who has studied
these questions since Leonardo, has combined with a scientific mind
anything like the artistic delicacy of perception which gives interest
and lucidity to his observations.

I do not assert that the arrangement here adopted for the passages in
question is that originally intended by Leonardo; but their distribution
into five groups was suggested by the titles, or headings, which
Leonardo himself prefixed to most of these notes. Some of the longer
sections perhaps should not, to be in strict agreement with this
division,

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

*have been reproduced in their entirety in the place where they occur.
But the comparatively small amount of the materials we possess will
render them, even so, sufficiently intelligible to the reader; it did
not therefore seem necessary or desirable to subdivide the passages
merely for the sake of strict classification.*

*The small number of chapters given under the fifth class, treating on
the centre of gravity in roof-beams, bears no proportion to the number
of drawings and studies which refer to the same subject. Only a small
selection of these are reproduced in this work since the majority have
no explanatory text.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 770.](0770.md)
