[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1120012)  [Next](1120014) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.x"></span>

<span id="iv.x-p1"></span> <span id="page_49">p. 49</span> <span
id="iv.x-Page_49"></span><span class="c16"><span
id="iv.x-p1.1"></span>Homily IX.</span>

<span id="iv.x-p2"></span><span id="iv.x-p2.1"></span><span
class="c1"><span id="iv.x-p2.2"></span>[1 Cor. iii.
12-15](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#012)<span
id="iv.x-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.x-p3"></span>If any man build upon this foundation gold,
silver, costly stones, wood, hay, stubble; each man’s work shall be made
manifest: for the day shall declare it, because it is revealed in fire;
and the fire shall prove each man’s work of what sort it is. If any
man’s work abide which he built thereon, he shall receive a reward. If
any man’s work shall be burned, he shall suffer loss: but he himself
shall be saved; yet so as through fire.

<span id="iv.x-p4"></span><span class="c18"><span
id="iv.x-p4.1"></span>This</span> is no small subject of enquiry which
we propose, but rather about things which are of the first necessity and
which all men enquire about; namely, whether hell fire have any end. For
that it hath no end Christ indeed declared when he said, “Their fire
shall not be quenched, and their worm shall not die.” \[[Mark
8:44](../../../bib/kjv/mar008.htm#044),
[46](../../../bib/kjv/mar008.htm#046),
[48](../../../bib/kjv/mar008.htm#048)<span id="iv.x-p4.2"></span>.\]

<span id="iv.x-p5"></span>Well: I know that a chill comes over you
(<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.x-p5.1"></span>ναρκᾶτε</span>) on
hearing these things; but what am I to do? For this is God’s own
command, continually to sound these things in your ears, where He says,
“Charge this people; (Fors. [Exod.
19:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#010),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#020)<span id="iv.x-p5.2"></span>. <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.x-p5.3"></span>διαμαρτύραι</span>, Sept. here
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.x-p5.4"></span>διάστειλαι</span>,) and
ordained as we have been unto the ministry of the word, we must give
pain to our hearers, not willingly but on compulsion. Nay rather, if you
will, we shall avoid giving you pain. For saith He, ([Rom. xiii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#003)<span id="iv.x-p5.5"></span>, in
substance.) “if thou do that which is good, fear not:” so that it is
possible for you to hear me not only without ill-will, but even with
pleasure.

<span id="iv.x-p6"></span>As I said then; that it hath no end, Christ
has declared. Paul also saith, in pointing out the eternity of the
punishment, that the sinners “shall pay the penalty of destruction, and
that for ever” ([2 Thess. i. 9](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#009)<span
id="iv.x-p6.1"></span>.) And again, ([1 Cor. vi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#009)<span id="iv.x-p6.2"></span>.) “Be
not deceived; neither fornicators. nor adulterers, nor effeminate, shall
inherit the kingdom of God.” And also unto the Hebrews he saith, ([Heb.
xii. 14](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#014)<span id="iv.x-p6.3"></span>.)
“Follow peace with all men, and the sanctification without which no man
shall see the Lord.” And Christ also, to those who said, “In thy Name we
have done many wonderful works,” saith, “Depart from Me, I know you not,
ye workers of iniquity” (St. [Matt. vii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#022)<span id="iv.x-p6.4"></span>.) And
the virgins too who were shut out, entered in no more. And also about
those who gave Him no food, He saith, (St. [Matt. xxv.
46](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#046)<span id="iv.x-p6.5"></span>.) “They
shall go away into everlasting punishment.”

<span id="iv.x-p7"></span>\[2.\] And say not unto me, “where is the rule
of justice preserved entire, if the punishment hath no end?” Rather,
when God doeth any thing, obey His decisions and submit not what is said
to human reasonings. But moreover, how can it be any thing else than
just for one who hath experienced innumerable blessings from the
beginning, and then committed deeds worthy of punishment, and neither by
threat nor benefit improved at all, to suffer punishment? For if thou
enquire what is absolute justice; it was meet that we should have
perished immediately from the beginning, according to the definition of
strict justice. Rather not even then according to the rule of justice
only; for the result would have had in it kindness too, if we had
suffered this also. For when any one insults him that hath done him no
wrong, according to the rule of justice he suffers punishment: but when
it is his benefactor, who, bound by no previous favor, bestowed
innumerable kindnesses, who alone is the Author of his being, who is
God, who breathed his soul into him, who gave ten thousand gifts of
grace, whose will is to take him up into heaven;—when, I say, such an
one, after so great blessings, is met by insult, daily insult, in the
conduct of the other party; how can that other be thought worthy of
pardon? Dost thou not see how He punished Adam for one single sin?

<span id="iv.x-p8"></span>“Yes,” you will say; “but He had given him
Paradise and caused him to enjoy much favor.” Nay, surely it is not all
as one, for a man to sin in the enjoyment of security and ease, and in a
state of great affliction. In fact, this is the dreadful circumstance
that thy sins are the sins of one not in any Paradise but amid the
innumerable evils of this life; that thou art not sobered even by
affliction, as though one in prison should still practise his crime.
However, unto thee He hath promised things yet greater than Paradise.
But neither hath He given them now, least He should unnerve thee in the
season of conflicts; nor hath He been silent about them, lest He should
quite cast thee down with thy labors. As for Adam, he committed but
<span id="page_50">p. 50</span> <span id="iv.x-Page_50"></span>one sin
and brought on himself certain death; whereas we commit ten thousand
transgressions daily. Now if he by that one act brought on himself so
great an evil and introduced death; what shall not we suffer who
continually live in sins, and instead of Paradise, have the expectation
of heaven?

<span id="iv.x-p9"></span>The argument is irksome and pains the hearer:
were it only by my own feelings, I know this. For indeed my heart is
troubled and throbs; and the more I see the account of hell confirmed,
the more do I tremble and shrink through fear. But it is necessary to
say these things lest we fall into hell. What thou didst receive was not
paradise, nor trees and plants, but heaven and the good things in the
heavens. Now if he that had received less was condemned, and no
consideration exempted him, much more shall we who have sinned more
abundantly, and have been called unto greater things, endure the woes
without remedy.

<span id="iv.x-p10"></span>Consider, for example, how long a time, but
for one single sin, our race abides in death. Five thousand years <span
id="fr_51"></span>[52](#fn_51) and more have passed, and death hath not
yet been done away, on account of one single sin. And we cannot even say
that Adam had heard prophets, that he had seen others punished for sins,
and it was meet that he should have been terrified thereby and
corrected, were it only by the example. For he was at that time first,
and alone; but nevertheless he was punished. But thou canst not have
anything of this sort to advance, who after so many examples art become
worse; to whom so excellent a Spirit hath been vouch-safed, and yet thou
drawest upon thyself not one sin, nor two, nor three, but sins without
number!  For do not, because the sin is committed in a small moment,
calculate that therefore the punishment also must be a matter of a
moment. Seest thou not those men, who for a single theft or a single act
of adultery, committed in a small moment of time, oftentimes have spent
their whole life in prisons, and in mines, struggling with continual
hunger and every kind of death?  And there was no one to set them at
liberty, or to say, “The offence took place in a small moment of time;
the punishment too should have its time equivalent to that of the sin.”

<span id="iv.x-p12"></span>\[3.\] But, “They are men,” some one will
say, “who do these things; as for God, He is loving unto men.” Now,
first of all, not even men do these things in cruelty, but in humanity.
And God Himself, as “He is loving unto men,” in the same character doth
He punish sins. ([Sirac. xvi. 12](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#012)<span
id="iv.x-p12.1"></span>.) “For as His mercy is great, so also is His
reproof.” When therefore thou sayest unto me, “God is loving unto men,”
then thou tellest me of so much the greater reason for punishing:
namely, our sinning against such a Being. Hence also Paul said, ([Heb.
x. 31](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#031)<span id="iv.x-p12.2"></span>.)
“It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.” Endure
I beseech you, the fiery force of the words, for perhaps—perhaps you
will have some consolation from hence!  Who among men can punish as God
has punished? when He caused a deluge and entire destruction of a race
so numerous; and again, when, a little while after, He rained fire from
above, and utterly destroyed them all? What punishment from men can be
like that? Seest thou not that the punishment even in this world is
almost eternal? Four thousand years have passed away, and the punishment
of the Sodomites abideth at its height. For as His mercy is great, so
also is His punishment.

<span id="iv.x-p13"></span>Again: if He had imposed any burdensome or
impossible things, one might perhaps have been able to urge difficulty
of the laws: but if they be extremely easy, what can we say for our not
regarding even these? Suppose thou art unable to fast or to practice
virginity; although thou art able if thou wilt, and they who have been
able are a condemnation to us. But, however, God hath not used this
strictness towards us; neither hath He enjoined these things nor laid
them down as laws, but left the choice to be at the discretion of the
hearers. Nevertheless, thou art able to be chaste in marriage; and thou
art able to abstain from drunkenness. Art thou unable to empty thyself
of all thy goods? Nay surely thou art able; and they who have done so
prove it. But nevertheless He hath not enjoined this, but hath commanded
not to be rapacious, and of our means to assist those who are in want.
But if a man say, I cannot even be content with a wife only, he
deceiveth himself and reasoneth falsely; and they condemn him who
without a wife lives in chastity. But how, tell me, canst thou help
using abusive words? canst thou not help cursing? Why, the doing these
things is irksome, not the refraining from them. What excuse then have
we for not observing precepts so easy and light? We cannot name any at
all. That the punishment then is eternal is plain from all that hath
been said.

<span id="iv.x-p14"></span>\[4.\] But since Paul’s saying appears to
some to tell the other way, come let us bring it forward also and search
it out thoroughly. For having said, “If any man’s work abide which he
hath built thereon, he shall receive a reward; and if any man’s work
shall be burned, he shall suffer loss,” he adds, “but himself shall be
saved, yet so as through fire.” What shall we <span id="page_51">p.
51</span> <span id="iv.x-Page_51"></span>say then to this?  Let us
consider first what is “the Foundation,” and what “the gold,” and what
“the precious stones,” and what “the hay,” and what the “stubble.”

<span id="iv.x-p15"></span>“The Foundation,” then, he hath himself
plainly signified to be Christ, saying, “For other foundation can no man
lay than that which is laid, which,” he saith “is Jesus Christ.”

<span id="iv.x-p16"></span>Next, the building seems to me to be actions.
Although some maintain that this also is spoken concerning teachers and
disciples and concerning corrupt heresies: but the reasoning doth not
admit it. For if this be it, in what sense, while “the work is
destroyed,” is the “builder” to be “saved,” though it be “through fire?”
Of right, the author ought rather of the two to perish; but now it will
be found that the severer penalty is assigned to him who hath been built
into the work. For if the teacher was the cause of the wickedness, he is
worthy to suffer severer punishment: how then shall he be “saved?” If,
on the contrary, he was not the cause but the disciples became such
through their own perverseness, he is no whit deserving of punishment,
no, nor yet of sustaining loss: he, I say, who builded so well. In what
sense then doth he say, “he shall suffer loss?”

<span id="iv.x-p17"></span>From this it is plain that the discourse is
about actions. For since he means next in course to put out his strength
against the man who had committed fornication, he begins high up and
long beforehand to lay down the preliminaries. For he knew how while
discussing one subject, in the very discourse about that thing to
prepare the grounds of another to which he intends to pass on. For so in
his rebuke for not awaiting one another at their meals, he laid the
grounds of his discourse concerning the mysteries. And also because now
he is hastening on towards the fornicator, while speaking about the
“Foundation,” he adds, “Know ye not that ye are the Temple of God? and
that the Spirit of God dwelleth in you? If any man destroy (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.x-p17.1"></span>Φθείρη</span>, rec. version,
“defile.”) the Temple of God, him will God destroy.” Now these things,
he said, as beginning now to agitate with fears the soul of him that had
been unchaste.

<span id="iv.x-p18"></span>\[5.\] [1 Cor.
3.12](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#012)<span id="iv.x-p18.1"></span>. “If
any man build upon this foundation, gold, silver, costly stones, wood,
hay, stubble.” For after the faith there is need of edification:  and
therefore he saith elsewhere, “Edify one another with these words.”
(perhaps [1 Thess. 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#011), [1 Thess.
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#005)<span id="iv.x-p18.2"></span>.) 
For both the artificer and the learner contribute to the edifying.
Wherefore he saith, “But let every man take heed how he buildeth
thereon.” ([1 Cor. iii. 10](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#010)<span
id="iv.x-p18.3"></span>.) But if faith had been the subject of these
sayings, the thing affirmed is not reasonable. For in the faith all
ought to be equal, since “there is but one faith;” ([Ephes. iv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#005)<span id="iv.x-p18.4"></span>.) but
in goodness of life it is not possible that all should be the same.
Because the faith is not in one case less, in another more excellent,
but the same in all those who truly believe. But in life there is room
for some to be more diligent, others more slothful; some stricter, and
others more ordinary; that some should have done well in greater things,
others in less; that the errors of some should have been more grievous,
of others less notable. On this account he saith, “Gold, silver, costly
stones, wood, hay, stubble,—every man’s work shall be made
manifest:”—his conduct; that is what he speaks of here:—“If any man’s
work abide which he built thereupon, he shall receive a reward; if any
man’s work shall be burned, he shall suffer loss.” Whereas, if the
saying related to disciples and teachers, he ought not to “suffer loss”
for disciples refusing to hear. And therefore he saith, “Every man shall
receive his own reward according to his own labor” not according to the
result, but according to “the labor.” For what if the hearers gave no
heed? Wherefore this passage also proves that the saying is about
actions.

<span id="iv.x-p19"></span>Now his meaning is this: If any man have an
ill life with a right faith, his faith shall not shelter him from
punishment, his work being burnt up. The phrase, “shall be burned up,”
means, “shall not endure the violence of the fire.” But just as if a man
having golden armor on were to pass through a river of fire, he comes
from crossing it all the brighter; but if he were to pass through it
with hay, so far from profiting, he destroys himself besides; so also is
the case in regard of men’s works. For he doth not say this as if he
were discoursing of material things being burnt up, but with a view of
making their fear more intense, and of shewing how naked of all defence
he is who abides in wickedness. Wherefore he said, “He shall suffer
loss:” lo, here is one punishment: “but he himself shall be saved, but
so as by fire;” lo, again, here is a second. And his meaning is, “He
himself shall not perish in the same way as his works, passing into
nought, but he shall abide in the fire. <span
id="fr_52"></span>[53](#fn_52)

<span id="iv.x-p21"></span>\[6.\] “He calleth it, however, “Salvation,”
you will say; why, that is the cause of his adding, “so as by fire:”
since we also used to say, “It is preserved in the fire,” when we speak
of those substances which do not immediately burn up and become ashes.
For do not at sound of the word fire imagine that <span id="page_52">p.
52</span> <span id="iv.x-Page_52"></span>those who are burning pass into
annihilation. And though he call such punishment Salvation, be not
astonished. For his custom is in things which have an ill sound to use
fair expressions, and in good things the contrary. For example, the word
“Captivity” seems to be the name of an evil thing, but Paul has applied
it in a good sense, when he says, “Bringing into captivity every thought
to the obedience of Christ.” ([2 Cor. x.
5](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#005)<span id="iv.x-p21.1"></span>.) And
again, to an evil thing he hath applied a good word, saying, “Sin
reigned,” ([Rom. v. 21](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#021)<span
id="iv.x-p21.2"></span>.) here surely the term “reigning” is rather of
auspicious sound. And so here in saying, “he shall be saved,” he hath
but darkly hinted at the intensity of the penalty: as if he had said,
“But himself shall remain forever in punishment.” He then makes an
inference, saying,

<span id="iv.x-p22"></span>\[7.\] [1 Cor.
3.16](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#016)<span id="iv.x-p22.1"></span>.
“Know ye not that ye are the Temple of God?” For since he had discoursed
in the section before, concerning those who were dividing the Church, he
thenceforward attacks him also who had been guilty of uncleanness; not
indeed as yet in plain terms but in a general way; hinting at his
corrupt mode of life and enhancing the sin, by the Gift which had been
already given to him. Then also he puts all the rest to shame, arguing
from these very blessings which they had already:  for this is what he
is ever doing, either from the future or from the past, whether grievous
or encouraging. First, from things future; “For the day shall declare
it, because it is revealed by fire.” Again, from things already come to
pass; “Know ye not that ye are the Temple of God, and the Spirit of God
dwelleth in you?”

<span id="iv.x-p23"></span>[1 Cor.
3.17](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#017)<span id="iv.x-p23.1"></span>. “If
any man destroy the Temple of God, him will God destroy.” Dost thou mark
the sweeping vehemence of his words? However, so long as the person is
unknown, what is spoken is not so invidious, all dividing among
themselves the fear of rebuke.

<span id="iv.x-p24"></span>“Him will God destroy,” that is, will cause
him to perish. And this is not the word of one denouncing a curse, but
of one that prophesieth.

<span id="iv.x-p25"></span>“For the Temple of God is holy:” but he that
hath committed fornication is profane.

<span id="iv.x-p26"></span>Then, in order that he might not seem to
spend his earnestness upon that one, in saying, “for the Temple of God
is holy,” he addeth, “which ye are.”

<span id="iv.x-p27"></span>\[8.\] [1 Cor.
3.18](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#018)<span id="iv.x-p27.1"></span>.
“Let no man deceive himself.” This also is in reference to that person,
as thinking himself to be somewhat and flattering himself on wisdom. But
that he might not seem to press on him at great length in a mere
digression; he first throws him into a kind of agony and delivers him
over unto fear, and then brings back his discourse to the common fault,
saying, “If any man among you seemeth to be wise in this world, let him
become a fool, that he may become (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.x-p27.2"></span>γένηται</span>. rec. vers. “be.”) wise.” And
this <span id="fr_53"></span>[54](#fn_53) he doth afterwards with great
boldness of speech, as having sufficiently beaten them down <span
id="fr_54"></span>[55](#fn_54) , and shaken with that fear the mind not
of that unclean person only, but of all the hearers also: so accurately
does he measure the reach of what he has to say. For what if a man be
rich, what if he be noble; he is viler than all the vile, when made
captive by sin. For as if a man were a king and enslaved to barbarians,
he is of all men most wretched, so also is it in regard to sin: since
sin is a barbarian, and the soul which hath been once taken captive she
knoweth not how to spare, but plays the tyrant to the ruin of all those
who admit her.

<span id="iv.x-p30"></span>\[9.\] For nothing is so inconsiderate as
sin: nothing so senseless, so utterly foolish and outrageous. All is
overturned and confounded and destroyed by it, wheresoever it may
alight. Unsightly to behold, disgusting and grievous. And should a
painter draw her picture <span id="fr_55"></span>[56](#fn_55) , he would
not, methinks, err in fashioning her after this sort. A woman with the
form of a beast, savage, breathing flames, hideous, black; such as the
heathen poets depict their Scyllas. For with ten thousand hands she lays
hold of our thoughts, and comes on unexpected, and tears everything in
pieces, like those dogs that bite slily.

<span id="iv.x-p32"></span>But rather, what need of the painter’s art,
when we should rather bring forward those who are made after sin’s
likeness?

<span id="iv.x-p33"></span>Whom then will ye that we should portray
first?  The covetous and rapacious? And what more shameless than those
eyes? What more immodest, more like a greedy dog? For no dog keeps his
ground with such shameless impudence as he when he is grasping at all
men’s goods. What more polluted than those hands? What more audacious
than that mouth, swallowing all down and not satisfied? Nay, look not on
the countenance and the eyes as being a man’s. For such looks belong not
to the eyes of men. He seeth not men as men; he seeth not the heaven as
heaven. He does not even lift up his head unto the Lord; but all is
money in his account. The eyes of men are wont to look upon poor persons
in affliction, and to be softened; but these of the rapacious man, at
sight of the poor, glare like wild beasts’. The eyes of men do not
behold other men’s goods as if they were their own, but rather their
<span id="page_53">p. 53</span> <span id="iv.x-Page_53"></span>own as
others; and they covet not the things given to others, but rather
exhaust upon others their own means: but these are not content unless
they take all men’s property. For it is not a man’s eye which they have,
but a wild beast’s. The eyes of men endure not to see their own body
stripped of clothing, (for it is their own, though in person it belong
to others,) but these, unless they strip every one and lodge all men’s
property in their own home, are never cloyed; yea rather they never have
enough. Insomuch that one might say that their hands are not wild
beasts’ only, but even far more savage and cruel than these. For bears
and wolves when they are satiated leave off their kind of eating:  but
these know not any satiety. And yet for this cause God made us hands, to
assist others, not to plot against them. And if we were to use them for
that purpose, better had they been cut off and we left without them. But
thou, if a wild beast rend a sheep, art grieved; but when doing the same
unto one of thine own flesh and blood, thinkest thou that thy deed is
nothing atrocious? How then canst thou be a man? Seest thou not that we
call a thing humane, when it is full of mercy and loving-kindness? But
when a man doth any thing cruel or savage, inhuman is the title we give
to such a one. You see then that the stamp of man as we portray him is
his showing mercy; of a beast the contrary; according to constant
saying, “Why, is a man a wild beast, or a dog?” (vid. [2 Kings viii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2008.htm#013)<span id="iv.x-p33.1"></span>.) For
men relieve poverty; they do not aggravate it. Again these men’s mouths
are the mouths of wild beasts; yea rather these are the fiercer of the
two. For the words also, which they utter, emit poison, more than the
wild beasts’ teeth, working slaughter. And if one were to go through all
particulars, one should then see clearly how inhumanity turns those who
practise it from men into beasts.

<span id="iv.x-p34"></span>\[10.\] But were he to search out the mind
also of that sort of people, he would no longer call them beasts only,
but demons. For first, they are full of great cruelty and of hatred
against their “fellow-servant: (St. [Matt. xviii.
33](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#033)<span id="iv.x-p34.1"></span>.) and
neither is love of the kingdom there, nor fear of hell; no reverence for
men, no pity, no sympathy: but shamelessness and audacity, and contempt
of all things to come. And unto them the words of God concerning
punishment seem to be a fable, and His threats mirth. For such is the
mind of the covetous man. Since then within they are demons, and
without, wild beasts; yea, worse than wild beasts; where are we to place
such as they are? For that they are worse even than wild beasts, is
plain from this. The beasts are such as they are by nature: but these,
endowed by nature with gentleness, forcibly strive against nature to
train themselves to that which is savage. The demons too have the
plotters among men to help them, to such an extent that if they had no
such aid, the greater part of their wiles against us would be done away:
but these, when such as they have spitefully entreated are vying with
them, still try to be more spiteful then they. Again, the devil wages
war with man, not with the demons of his own kind: but he of whom we
speak is urgent in all ways to do harm to his own kindred and family,
and doth not even reverence nature.

<span id="iv.x-p35"></span>I know that many hate us because of these
words; but I feel no hatred towards them; rather I pity and bewail those
who are so disposed. Even should they choose to strike, I would gladly
endure it, if they would but abstain from this their savage mind. For
not I alone, but the prophet also with me, banisheth all such from the
family of men saying, ([Ps. xlix.
20](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#020)<span id="iv.x-p35.1"></span>. Sept.
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.x-p35.2"></span>τοῖς ἀνοήτοις</span>)
“Man being in honor hath no understanding, but is like unto the
senseless beasts.”

<span id="iv.x-p36"></span>Let us then become men at last, and let us
look up unto heaven; and that which is according to His image, ([Colos.
iii. 10](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#010)<span id="iv.x-p36.1"></span>.)
let us receive and recover: that we may obtain also the blessings to
come through the grace and loving-kindness of our Lord Jesus Christ,
with Whom to the Father and the Holy Spirit be glory, power, honor, now
and always, and unto everlasting ages. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_51"></span>[50:52](1120013.htm#fr_51) <span
id="iv.x-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x-p11"></span> According to the reckoning of the LXX, in
[Gen. 5](../../../bib/kjv/gen005.htm#000)<span id="iv.x-p11.1"></span>.
which adding 100 years to the five first generations, and also to the
seventh, and making some slight difference in the lives of Methuselah
and Lamech, brings the date of the flood to A.M. 2242, and that of our
Lord’s birth to 5500.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[51:53](1120013.htm#fr_52) <span
id="iv.x-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x-p20"></span> \[Few accept this singular explanation. The
common view of the clause is that it means that the man is saved, but as
if through the very flames, i.e., with the greatest difficulty. [1 Pet.
iv. 18](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#018)<span id="iv.x-p20.1"></span>.
C.\]

<span id="fn_53"></span>[52:54](1120013.htm#fr_53) <span
id="iv.x-p27.3"></span>

<span id="iv.x-p28"></span> i.e. “reproving them for their common
fault.”

<span id="fn_54"></span>[52:55](1120013.htm#fr_54) <span
id="iv.x-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x-p29"></span> From this to the end of the sentence is not
in Benedictine, but in Savile’s margin, evidently from some <span
class="c18"><span id="iv.x-p29.1"></span> ms</span>. It seems to
complete the connection of the sentences. \[But Dr. Field omits it.\]

<span id="fn_55"></span>[52:56](1120013.htm#fr_55) <span
id="iv.x-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x-p31"></span> Compare G. Herbert, *Remains*, p. 110. ed.
1824.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily X](1120014)
