[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1120055)  [Next](1120057) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.vii"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="v.vii-p1.1"></span>Homily VII.</span>

<span id="v.vii-p2"></span><span id="v.vii-p2.1"></span><span
class="c1"><span id="v.vii-p2.2"></span>[2 Cor.
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#008)<span id="v.vii-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="v.vii-p3"></span>But if the ministration of death, written and
engraven in stones, came with glory, so that the children of Israel
could not look steadfastly upon the face of Moses, for the glory of his
face; which glory was passing away: how shall not rather the
ministration of the Spirit be with glory?

<span id="v.vii-p4"></span><span class="c18"><span
id="v.vii-p4.1"></span>He</span> said that the tables of Moses were of
stone, as \[also\] they were written with letters; and that these were
of flesh, I mean the hearts of the Apostles, and had been written on by
the Spirit; and that the letter indeed killeth, but the Spirit giveth
life. There was yet wanting to this comparison the addition of a further
and not trifling particular, that of the glory of Moses; such as in the
case of the New Covenant none saw with the eyes of the body. And even
for this cause it appeared a great thing in that the glory was perceived
by the senses; (for it was seen by the bodily eyes, even though it might
not be approached;) but that of the New Covenant is perceived by the
understanding. For to the weaker sort the apprehension of such a
superiority is not clear; but the other did more take them, and turn
them unto itself. Having then fallen upon this comparison and being set
upon showing the superiority \[in question\], which yet was exceedingly
difficult because of the dulness of the hearers; see what he does, and
with what method <span id="fr_576"></span>[577](#fn_576) he proceeds in
it, first by arguments placing the difference before them, and
constructing these out of what he had said before.

<span id="v.vii-p6"></span>For if that ministration were of death, but
this of life, doubtless, saith he, the latter glory is also greater than
the former. For since he could not exhibit it to the bodily eyes, by
this logical inference he established its superiority, saying,

<span id="v.vii-p7"></span>[2 Cor.
3.8](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#008)<span id="v.vii-p7.1"></span>. “But
if the ministration of death came with glory, how shall not rather the
ministration of the Spirit be with glory?”

<span id="v.vii-p8"></span>Now by “ministration of death” he means <span
id="page_310">p. 310</span> <span id="v.vii-Page_310"></span>the Law.
And mark too how great the caution he uses in the comparison so as to
give no handle to the heretics; for he said not, ‘which causeth death,’
but, “the ministration of death;” for it ministereth unto, but was not
the parent of, death; for that which caused death was sin; but \[the
Law\] brought in the punishment, and showed the sin, not caused it. For
it more distinctly revealed the evil and punished it:  it did not impel
unto the evil: and it ministered not to the existence of sin or death,
but to the suffering of retribution by the sinner. So that in this way
it was even destructive of sin. For that which showeth it to be so
fearful, it is obvious, maketh it also to be avoided. As then he that
taketh the sword in his hands and cutteth off the condemned, ministers
to the judge that passeth sentence, and it is not he that is his
destruction, although he cutteth him off; nay, nor yet is it he who
passeth sentence and condemneth, but the wickedness of him that is
punished; so truly here also it is not that <span
id="fr_577"></span>[578](#fn_577) destroyeth, but sin. This did both
destroy and condemn, but that by punishing undermined its strength, by
the fear of the punishment holding it back. But he was not content with
this consideration only in order to establish the superiority \[in
question\]; but he addeth yet another, saying, “written, and engraven on
stones.” See how he again cuts at the root of the Jewish arrogancy. For
the Law was nothing else but letters: a certain succor was not found
leaping forth from out the letters and inspiring them that combat, as is
the case in Baptism; but pillars and writings bearing death to those who
transgress the letters. Seest thou how in correcting the Jewish
contentiousness, by his very expressions even he lessens its authority,
speaking of stone and letters and a ministration of death, and adding
that it was engraven? For hereby he declareth nothing else than this,
that the Law was fixed in one place; not, as the Spirit, was present
everywhere, breathing great might into all; or that the letters breathe
much threatening, and threatening too which can not be effaced but
remaineth for ever, as being engraved in stone. Then even whilst seeming
to praise the old things, he again mixeth up accusation of the Jews. For
having said, “written and engraven in stones, came with glory,” he
added, “so that the children of Israel could not look steadfastly upon
the face of Moses;” which was a mark of their great weakness and
grovelling spirit. And again he doth not say, ‘for the glory of the
tables,’ but, “for the glory of his countenance, which glory was passing
away;” for he showeth that he who beareth them is made glorious, and not
they. For he said not, ‘because they could not look steadfastly upon the
tables,’ but, “the face of Moses;” and again, not, ‘for the glory of the
tables,’ but, “for the glory of his face.” Then after he had extolled
it, see how again he lowers it, saying, “which was passing away.” Not
however that this is in accusation, but in diminution; for he did not
say, ‘which was corrupt, which was evil,’ but, ‘which ceaseth and hath
an end.’

<span id="v.vii-p10"></span>“How shall not rather the ministration of
the Spirit be with glory?” for henceforth with confidence he extolleth
the things of the New \[Covenant\] as indisputable. And observe what he
doth. He opposed ‘stone’ to ‘heart,’ and ‘letter’ to ‘spirit.’ Then
having shown the results of each, he doth not set down the results of
each; but having set down the work of the latter, namely, death and
condemnation, he setteth not down that of the spirit, namely, life and
righteousness; but the Spirit Itself; which added greatness to the
argument. For the New Covenant not only gave life, but supplied also
‘The Spirit’ Which giveth the life, a far greater thing than the life.
Wherefore he said, “the ministration of the Spirit.” Then he again
reverts to the same thing, saying,

<span id="v.vii-p11"></span>[2 Cor.
3.9](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#009)<span id="v.vii-p11.1"></span>.
“For if the ministration of condemnation is glory.”

<span id="v.vii-p12"></span>Also, he interprets more clearly the meaning
of the words, “The letter killeth,” declaring it to be that which we
have said above, namely, that the Law showed sin, not caused it.

<span id="v.vii-p13"></span>“Much rather doth the ministration of
righteousness exceed in glory.” For those Tables indeed showed the
sinners and punished them, but this not only did not punish the sinners,
but even made them righteous: for this did Baptism confer.

<span id="v.vii-p14"></span>\[2.\] [2 Cor.
3.10](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#010)<span id="v.vii-p14.1"></span>.
“For verily that which hath been made glorious hath not been made
glorious in this respect, by reason of the glory that surpasseth.”

<span id="v.vii-p15"></span>Now in what has gone before, indeed, he
showed that this also is with glory; and not simply is with glory, but
even exceedeth in it: for he did not say, “How shall not the
ministration of the Spirit be rather in glory?” but, “exceed in glory;”
deriving the proof from the arguments before stated. Here he also shows
the superiority, how great it is, saying, ‘if I compare this with that,
the glory of the Old Covenant is not glory at all;’ not absolutely
laying down that there was no glory, but in view of the comparison.
Wherefore also he added, “in this respect,” that is, in respect of the
comparison. Not that this doth disparage the Old Covenant, yea rather it
highly commendeth it: for comparisons are wont to be made between things
which are the same in kind. Next, he sets on foot yet another argument
to prove the superiority also from a fresh ground. <span
id="page_311">p. 311</span> <span id="v.vii-Page_311"></span>What then
is this argument? That based upon duration, saying,

<span id="v.vii-p16"></span>[2 Cor.
3.11](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#011)<span id="v.vii-p16.1"></span>.
“For if that which passeth away was with glory, much more that which
remaineth is in glory.”

<span id="v.vii-p17"></span>For the one ceased, but the other abideth
continually.

<span id="v.vii-p18"></span>[2 Cor.
3.12](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#012)<span id="v.vii-p18.1"></span>.
“Having therefore such a hope, we use great boldness of speech.”

<span id="v.vii-p19"></span>For since when he had heard so many and so
great things concerning the New \[Covenant,\] the hearer would be
desirous of seeing this glory manifested to the eye, mark whither he
hurleth him, \[even\] to the world to come. Wherefore also he brought
forward the “hope,” saying, “Having therefore such a hope.” Such? Of
what nature? That we have been counted worthy of greater things than
Moses; not we the Apostles only, but also all the faithful. “We use
great boldness of speech.” Towards whom? tell me. Towards God, or
towards the disciples?  Towards you who are receiving instruction, he
saith; that is, we speak every where with freedom, hiding nothing,
withholding nothing, mistrusting nothing, but speaking openly; and we
have not feared lest we should wound your eyesight, as Moses did that of
the Jews. For that he alluded to this, hear what follows; or rather, it
is necessary first to relate the history, for he himself keeps dwelling
upon it. What then is the history? When, having received the Tables a
second time, Moses came down, a certain glory darting from his
countenance shone so much that the Jews were not able to approach and
talk with him until he put a veil over his face. And thus it is written
in Exodus, ([Exod. 34:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#029),
[34](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#034)<span id="v.vii-p19.1"></span>.)
“When Moses came down from the Mount, the two Tables \[were\] in his
hands.  And Moses wist not that the skin of his countenance was made
glorious to behold. And they were afraid to come nigh him. And Moses
called them, and spake unto them. And when <span
id="fr_578"></span>[579](#fn_578) Moses had done speaking with them, he
put a veil over his face. But when he went in before the Lord to speak
\[with Him\], he took the veil off until he came out.”

<span id="v.vii-p21"></span>Putting them in mind then of this history,
he says,

<span id="v.vii-p22"></span>[2 Cor.
3.13](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#013)<span id="v.vii-p22.1"></span>.
“And not as Moses, who put a veil upon his face, so that the children of
Israel should not look steadfastly on the end of that which was passing
away.”

<span id="v.vii-p23"></span>Now what he says is of this nature. There is
no need for us to cover ourselves as Moses did; for ye are able to look
upon this glory which we are encircled with, although it is far greater
and brighter than the other. Seest thou the advance? For he that in the
former Epistle said, “I have fed you with milk, not with meat;” saith
here, “We use great boldness of speech.” And he produces Moses before
them, carrying forward the discourse by means of comparison, and thus
leading his hearer upwards.

<span id="v.vii-p24"></span>And for the present he sets them above the
Jews, saying that ‘we have no need of a veil as he <span
id="fr_579"></span>[580](#fn_579) had with those he governed;’ but in
what comes afterwards he advances them even to the dignity itself of the
Lawgiver, or even to a much greater.

<span id="v.vii-p26"></span>Mean time, however, let us hear what follows
next.

<span id="v.vii-p27"></span>[2 Cor.
3.14](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#014)<span id="v.vii-p27.1"></span>.
“But their minds were hardened, for until this day remaineth the same
veil in the reading of the Old Covenant, \[it\] not being revealed to
them <span id="fr_580"></span>[581](#fn_580) that it is done away in
Christ.”

<span id="v.vii-p29"></span>See what he establisheth by this. For what
happened then once in the case of Moses, the same happeneth continually
in the case of the Law. What is said, therefore, is no accusation of the
Law, as neither is it of Moses that he then veiled himself, but only the
senseless Jews. For the law hath its proper glory, but they were unable
to see it. ‘Why therefore are ye perplexed,’ he saith, ‘if they are
unable to see this glory of the Grace, since they saw not that lesser
one of Moses, nor were able to look steadfastly upon his countenance?
And why are ye troubled that the Jews believe not Christ, seeing at
least that they believe not even the Law? For they were therefore
ignorant of the Grace also, because they knew not even the Old Covenant
nor the glory which was in it. For the glory of the Law is to turn
\[men\] unto Christ.’

<span id="v.vii-p30"></span>\[3.\] Seest thou how from this
consideration also he takes down the inflation of the Jews? By that in
which they thought they had the advantage, namely, that Moses’ face
shone, he proves their grossness and groveling nature. Let them not
therefore pride themselves on that, for what was that to Jews who
enjoyed it not? Wherefore also he keeps on dwelling upon it, saying one
while, “The same veil in the reading of the old covenant remaineth,” it
“not being revealed that it is done away in Christ:” another while, that
“unto this day when Moses is read,” ([2 Cor.
3.15](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#015)<span id="v.vii-p30.1"></span>.)
the same “veil lieth upon their heart; “showing that the veil lieth both
on the reading and on their heart; and above, “So that the children of
Israel could not look steadfastly upon the face of Moses for the glory
of his countenance; which” ([2 Cor.
3.7](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#007)<span id="v.vii-p30.2"></span>)
glory “was passing away.” Than which what could mark less worth in them?
Seeing that even of a glory that is to be done away, or rather is in
comparison no glory at all, they are not able to be spectators, but it
is covered from <span id="page_312">p. 312</span> <span
id="v.vii-Page_312"></span>them, “so that they could not steadfastly
look on the end of that which was passing away;” that is, of the law,
because it hath an end; “but their minds were hardened.” ‘And what,’
saith one, ‘hath this to do with the veil then?’ Because it prefigured
what would be. For not only did they not then perceive; but they do not
even now see the Law. And the fault lies with themselves, for the
hardness is that of an unimpressible and perverse judgment. So that it
is we who know the law also; but to them not only Grace, but this as
well is covered with a shadow; “For until this day the same veil upon
the reading of the old covenant remaineth,” he saith, it “not being
revealed that it is done away in Christ.” Now what he saith is this.
This very thing they cannot see, that it is brought to an end, because
they believe not Christ. For if it be brought to an end by Christ, as in
truth it is brought to an end, and this the Law said by anticipation,
how will they who receive not Christ that hath done away the Law, be
able to see that the Law is done away?  And being incapable of seeing
this, it is very plain that even of the Law itself which asserted these
things, they know not the power nor the full glory. ‘And where,’ saith
one, ‘did it say this that it is done away in Christ?’ It did not say it
merely, but also showed it by what was done. And first indeed by
shutting up its sacrifices and its whole ritual <span
id="fr_581"></span>[582](#fn_581) in one place, the Temple, and
afterwards destroying this. For had He not meant to bring these to an
end and the whole of the Law concerning them, He would have done one or
other of two things; either not destroyed the Temple, or having
destroyed it, not forbidden to sacrifice elsewhere. But, as it is, the
whole world and even Jerusalem itself He hath made forbidden ground for
such religious rites; having allowed and appointed for them only the
Temple. Then having destroyed this itself afterwards He showed
completely even by what was done that the things of the Law are brought
to an end by Christ; for the Temple also Christ destroyed. But if thou
wilt see in words as well how the Law is done away in Christ, hear the
Lawgiver himself speaking thus; “A Prophet shall the Lord raise up unto
you of your brethren, like unto me; ([Deut.
17:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#015),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#019)<span id="v.vii-p31.3"></span>.)
Him shall ye hear in all things whatsoever He shall command you. And it
shall come to pass, that every soul which will not hear that Prophet
shall be utterly destroyed <span id="fr_582"></span>[583](#fn_582) .”
([Acts 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#022),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#023)<span id="v.vii-p32.1"></span>.)
Seest thou how the Law showed that it is done away in Christ? For this
Prophet, that is, Christ according to the flesh, Whom Moses commanded
them to hear, made to cease both sabbath and circumcision and all the
other things. And David too, showing the very same thing, said
concerning Christ, “Thou art a Priest after the order of Melchizedek,”
([Ps. cx. 4](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#004)<span
id="v.vii-p32.2"></span>;) not after the order of Aaron. Wherefore also
Paul, giving a clear interpretation of this, says, “The priesthood being
changed, there is made of necessity a change also of the Law.” ([Heb.
vii. 12](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#012)<span
id="v.vii-p32.3"></span>.) And in another place also he says again,
“Sacrifice and offering thou wouldst not. In whole burnt offerings and
sacrifices for sin Thou hadst had no pleasure: then said I, Lo, I come.”
 ([Heb. 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#005),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#007)<span id="v.vii-p32.4"></span>.) And
other testimonies far more numerous than these may be adduced out of the
Old Testament, showing how the Law is done away by Christ. So that when
thou shalt have forsaken the Law, thou shalt then see the Law clearly;
but so long as thou holdest by it and believest not Christ, thou knowest
not even the Law itself. Wherefore also he added, to establish this very
thing more clearly;

<span id="v.vii-p33"></span>[2 Cor.
3.15](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#015)<span id="v.vii-p33.1"></span>.
“But even unto this day, whensoever Moses is read, a veil lieth upon
their heart.”

<span id="v.vii-p34"></span>For since he said that in the reading of the
Old Testament the veil remaineth, lest any should think that this that
is said is from the obscurity of the Law, he both by other things showed
even before what his meaning was, (for by saying, “their minds were
hardened,” he shows that the fault was their own,) and, in this place
too, again. For he said not, ‘The veil remaineth on the writing,’ but
“in the reading;” (now the reading is the act of those that read;) and
again, “When Moses is read.” He showed this however with greater
clearness in the expression which follows next, saying unreservedly,
“The veil lieth upon their heart.” For even upon the face of Moses it
lay, not because of Moses, but because of the grossness and carnal mind
of these.

<span id="v.vii-p35"></span>\[4.\] Having then suitably <span
id="fr_583"></span>[584](#fn_583) accused them, he points out also the
manner of their correction. And what is this?

<span id="v.vii-p37"></span>[2 Cor.
3.16](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#016)<span id="v.vii-p37.1"></span>.
“Nevertheless when \[one\] shall turn to the Lord,” which is, to forsake
the Law, “the veil is taken away <span id="fr_584"></span>[585](#fn_584)
.”

<span id="v.vii-p39"></span>Seest thou that not over the face of Moses
was there that veil, but over the eyesight of the <span id="page_313">p.
313</span> <span id="v.vii-Page_313"></span>Jews? For it was done, not
that the glory of Moses might be hidden, but that the Jews might not
see. For they were not capable. So that in them was the deficiency, for
it <span id="fr_585"></span>[586](#fn_585) caused not him to be ignorant
of any thing, but them. And he did not say indeed, “when thou shalt let
go the Law,” but he implied it, for “when thou shalt turn to the Lord,
the veil is taken away.” To the very last he <span
id="fr_586"></span>[587](#fn_586) kept to the history. For when Moses
talked with the Jews he kept his face covered; but when he turned to God
it was uncovered. Now this was a type of that which was to come to pass,
that when we have turned to the Lord, then we shall see the glory of the
Law, and the face of the Lawgiver bare; yea rather, not this alone, but
we shall then be even in the same rank with Moses. Seest thou how he
inviteth the Jew unto the faith, by showing, that by coming unto Grace
he is able not only to see Moses, but also to stand in the very same
rank with the Lawgiver. ‘For not only,’ he saith, ‘shalt thou look on
the glory which then thou sawest not, but thou shalt thyself also be
included in the same glory; yea rather, in a greater glory, even so
great that that other shall not seem glory at all when compared with
this.’ How and in what manner? ‘Because that when thou hast turned to
the Lord and art included in the grace, thou wilt enjoy that glory, unto
which the glory of Moses, if compared, is so much less as to be no glory
at all. But still, small though it be and exceedingly below that other,
whilst thou art a Jew, even this will not be vouchsafed thee <span
id="fr_587"></span>[588](#fn_587) ; but having become a believer, it
will then be vouchsafed thee to behold even that which is far greater
than it.’ And when he was addressing himself to the believers, he said,
that “that which was made glorious had no glory;” but here he speaks not
so; but how? “When one shall turn to the Lord, the veil is taken away:”
leading him up by little and little, and first setting him in Moses’
rank, and then making him partake of the greater things. For when thou
hast seen Moses in glory, then afterwards thou shalt also turn unto God
and enjoy this greater glory.

<span id="v.vii-p43"></span>\[5.\] See then from the beginning, how many
things he has laid down, as constituting the difference and showing the
superiority, not the enmity or contradiction, of the New Covenant in
respect to the old. That, saith he, is letter, and stone, and a
ministration of death, and is done away: and yet the Jews were not even
vouchsafed this glory. (Or, the glory of this.) This table is of the
flesh, and spirit, and righteousness, and remaineth; and unto all of us
is it vouchsafed, not to one only, as to Moses of the lesser then. ([2
Cor. 3.18](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#018)<span
id="v.vii-p43.1"></span>.) “For,” saith he, “we all with unveiled face
reflecting <span id="fr_588"></span>[589](#fn_588) as a mirror the glory
of the Lord,” not that of Moses. But since some maintain that the
expression, “when one shall turn to the Lord,” is spoken of the Son, in
contradiction to what is quite acknowledged; let us examine the point
more accurately, having first stated the ground on which they think to
establish this. What then is this? Like, saith one, as it is said, “God
is a Spirit;” ([John iv. 24](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#024)<span
id="v.vii-p44.2"></span>.) so also here, ‘The Lord is a Spirit.’ But he
did not say, ‘The Lord is a Spirit,’ but, “The Spirit is the Lord.” And
there is a great difference between this construction and that. For when
he is desirous of speaking so as you say, he does not join the article
to the predicate. And besides, let us review all his discourse from the
first, of whom hath he spoken? for instance, when he said, “The letter
killeth, but the Spirit giveth life:” ([2 Cor.
3.6](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#006)<span id="v.vii-p44.3"></span>.)
and again, “Written not with ink, but with the Spirit of the living
God;” ([2 Cor. 3.3](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#003)<span
id="v.vii-p44.4"></span>.) was he speaking of God, or of the Spirit? It
is very plain that it was of the Spirit; for unto It he was calling them
from the letter. For lest any, hearing of the Spirit, and then
reflecting that Moses turned unto the Lord, but himself unto the Spirit,
should think himself to have the worse, to correct such a suspicion as
this, he says,

<span id="v.vii-p45"></span>[2 Cor.
3.17](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#017)<span id="v.vii-p45.1"></span>.
“Now the Spirit is the Lord.” This too is Lord, he says. And that you
may know that he is speaking of the Paraclete, he added,

<span id="v.vii-p46"></span>“And where the Spirit of the Lord is, there
is liberty.”

<span id="v.vii-p47"></span>For surely you will not assert, that he
says, ‘And where the Lord of the Lord is.’ “Liberty,” he said, with
reference to the former bondage. Then, that you may not think that he is
speaking of a time to come, he says,

<span id="v.vii-p48"></span>[2 Cor.
3.18](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#018)<span id="v.vii-p48.1"></span>.
“But we all, with unveiled face, reflecting as a mirror the glory of the
Lord.”

<span id="v.vii-p49"></span>Not that which is brought to an end, but
that which remaineth.

<span id="v.vii-p50"></span>“Are transformed into the same image from
glory to glory, even as from the Lord the Spirit.”

<span id="v.vii-p51"></span>Seest thou how again he places the Spirit in
the rank of God, (vide infra) <span id="page_314">p. 314</span> <span
id="v.vii-Page_314"></span>and raises them up to the rank of the
Apostles. For he said before, “Ye are the Epistle of Christ;” and here,
“But we all with open face.” Yet they came, like Moses, bringing a law.
But like as we, he says, needed no veil, so neither ye who received it.
And yet, this glory is far greater, for this is not of our countenance,
but of the Spirit; but nevertheless ye are able as well as we to look
steadfastly upon it. For they indeed could not even by a mediator, but
ye even without a mediator can \[look steadfastly on\] a greater. They
were not able to look upon that of Moses, ye even upon that of the
Spirit. Now had the Spirit been at all inferior, He would not have set
down these things as greater than those. But what is, “we reflecting as
a mirror the glory of the Lord, are transformed into the same image.”
This indeed was shown more clearly when the gifts of miracles were in
operation; howbeit it is not even now difficult to see it, for one who
hath believing eyes. For as soon as we are baptized, the soul beameth
even more than the sun, being cleansed by the Spirit; and not only do we
behold the glory of God, but from it also receive a sort of splendor.
Just as if pure silver be turned towards the sun’s rays, it will itself
also shoot forth rays, not from its own natural property merely but also
from the solar lustre; so also doth the soul being cleansed and made
brighter than silver, receive a ray from the glory of the Spirit, and
send it back. Wherefore also he saith, “Reflecting as a mirror we are
transformed into the same image from glory,” that of the Spirit, “to
glory,” our own, that which is generated in us; and that, of such sort,
as one might expect from the Lord the Spirit. See how here also he
calleth the Spirit, Lord. And in other places too one may see that
lordship of His. For, saith he, “As they ministered and fasted unto the
Lord, the Spirit said, Separate me Paul and Barnabas.” ([Acts xiii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#002)<span id="v.vii-p51.1"></span>.) For
therefore he said, “as they ministered unto the Lord, Separate me,” in
order to show the \[Spirit’s\] equality in honor. And again Christ
saith, “The servant knoweth not what his lord doeth;” but even as a man
knoweth his own things, so doth the Spirit know the things of God; not
by being taught \[them,\] for so the similitude holdeth not good. Also
the working as He willeth showeth His authority and lordship. This
transformeth us. This suffereth not to be conformed to this world; for
such is the creation of which This is the Author. For as he saith,
“Created in Christ Jesus,” ([Ephes. ii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#010)<span id="v.vii-p51.2"></span>.) so
saith he, “Create in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right spirit
in my inward parts.” ([Ps. li. 10](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#010)<span
id="v.vii-p51.3"></span>, LXX.)

<span id="v.vii-p52"></span>\[6.\] Wilt thou that I show thee this also
from the Apostles more obviously to the sense. Consider Paul, whose
garments wrought: Peter, whose very shadows were mighty. ([Acts
19:12](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#012), [Acts
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#015)<span id="v.vii-p52.1"></span>.
XX.) For had they not borne a King’s image and their radiancy been
unapproachable, their garments and shadows had not wrought so mightily.
For the garments of a king are terrible even to robbers. Wouldest thou
see this beaming even through the body? “Looking steadfastly,” said he,
“upon the face of Stephen, they saw it as it had been the face of an
angel.” ([Acts vi. 15](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#015)<span
id="v.vii-p52.2"></span>.) But this was nothing to the glory flashing
within. For what Moses had upon his countenance, that did these carry
about with them on their souls, yea ‘rather’ even far more. For that of
Moses indeed was more obvious to the senses, but this was incorporeal.
And like as fire-bright bodies streaming down from the shining bodies
upon those which lie near them, impart to them also somewhat of their
own splendor, so truly doth it also happen with the faithful. Therefore
surely they with whom it is thus are set free from earth, and have their
dreams of the things in the heavens. Woe is me! for well is it that we
should here even groan bitterly, for that we who enjoy a birth so noble
do not so much as know what is said, because we quickly lose the
reality, and are dazzled about the objects of sense. For this glory, the
unspeakable and awful, remaineth in us for a day or two, and then we
quench it, bringing over it the winter of worldly concerns, and with the
thickness of those clouds repelling its rays. For worldly things are a
winter, and than winter more lowering. For not frost is engendered
thence nor rain, neither doth it produce mire and deep swamps; but,
things than all these more grievous, it formeth hell and the miseries of
hell. And as in severe frost all the limbs are stiffened and are dead,
so truly the soul shuddering in the winter of sins also, performeth none
of its proper functions, stiffened, as it were, by a frost, as to
conscience. For what cold is to the body, that an evil conscience is to
the soul, whence also cometh cowardice. For nothing is more cowardly
than the man that is rivetted to worldly things; for such an one lives
the life of Cain, trembling every day. And why do I mention deaths, and
losses, and offences, and flatteries, and services? for even without
these he is in fear of ten thousand vicissitudes. And his coffers indeed
are full of gold, but his soul is not freed from the fear of poverty.
And very reasonably. For he is moored as it were on rotten and swiftly
shifting things, and even though in his own case he experienced not the
reverse, yet is he undone by seeing it happen in others; and great is
his <span id="page_315">p. 315</span> <span
id="v.vii-Page_315"></span>cowardice, great his unmanliness. For not
only is such an one spiritless as to danger, but also as to all other
things. And if desire of wealth assail him, he doth not like a free man
beat off the assault; but like a bought slave, doth all \[it bids\],
serving the love of money as it were a severe mistress. If again he have
beheld some comely damsel, down he croucheth at once made captive, and
followeth like a raging dog, though it behoveth to do the opposite. For
when thou hast beheld a beautiful woman, consider not how thou mayest
enjoy thy lust, but how be delivered from thy lust. ‘And how is this
possible,’ saith one? ‘for loving is not my own doing.’ Whose then? tell
me. It is from the Devil’s malice. Thou art quite convinced that that
which plotteth against thee is a devil; wrestle then and fight with a
distemper. But I cannot, he saith. Come then, let us first teach thee
this, that what happeneth is from thine own listlessness, and that thou
at the first gavest entrance to the Devil, and now if thou hast a mind,
with much ease mayest drive him off. They that commit adultery, is it
from lust they commit it, or simply from desire of dangers? Plainly from
lust. Do they then therefore obtain forgiveness? Certainly not. Why
not?  Because the sin is their own.  ‘But,’ saith one, ‘why, pray,
string syllogisms? For my conscience bears me witness that I wish to
repel the passion; and cannot, but it keepeth close, presses me sore,
and afflicts me grievously.’ O man, thou dost wish to repel it, but thou
dost not the things repellers should do; but it is with thee just as
with a man in a fever, who drinking of cold streams to the fill, should
say, ‘How many things I devise with the wish to quench this fever, and I
cannot; but they stir up my flame the more.’ Let us see then whether at
all thou too dost the things that inflame, yet thinkest thou art
devising such as quench. ‘I do not,’ he saith. Tell me then, what hast
thou ever essayed to do in order to quench the passion? and what is it,
in fine, that will increase the passion? For even supposing we be not
all of us obnoxious to these particular charges; (for more may be found
who are captivated by the love of money than of beauty;) still the
remedy to be proposed will be common to all, both to these and to those.
For both that is an unreasonable passion, and this, is keener and
fiercer than that. When then we have proved victorious over the greater,
it is very plain that we shall easily subdue the less also. ‘And how is
it,’ saith one, ‘that if this be keener, all persons are not made
captive by the vice, but a greater number are mad after money?’ Because
in the first place this last desire appears to be unattended with
danger: next, although that of beauty be even fiercer, yet it is more
speedily extinguished; for were it to continue like that of money, it
would wholly destroy its captive.

<span id="v.vii-p53"></span>\[7.\] Come then, let us discourse to you on
this, the love of beauty, and let us see whereby the mischief is
increased; for so we shall know whether the fault be ours, or not ours.
And if ours, let us do everything to get the better of it; whereas if
not ours, why do we afflict ourselves for nought? And why do we not
pardon, but find fault, with those who are made captive by it? Whence
then is this love engendered? ‘From comeliness of feature,’ saith one,
‘when she that woundeth one is beautiful and of fair countenance.’ It is
said idly and in vain. For if it were beauty that attracted lovers, then
would the maiden who is such have all men for her lovers; but if she
hath not all, this thing cometh not of nature nor from beauty, but from
unchaste eyes. For it was when by eyeing too curiously <span
id="fr_589"></span>[590](#fn_589) , thou didst admire and become
enamored, that thou receivedst the shaft. ‘And who,’ saith one, ‘when he
sees a beautiful woman, can refrain from commending her he sees? If then
admiring such things cometh not of deliberate choice, it follows that
love depends not on ourselves.’ Stop, O man!  Why dost thou crowd all
things together, running round and round on every side, and not choosing
to see the root of the evil? For I see numbers admiring and commending,
who yet are not enamored. ‘And how is it possible to admire and not be
enamored?’ Clamor not, (for this I am coming to speak of,) but wait, and
thou shalt hear Moses admiring the son of Jacob, and saying, “And Joseph
was a goodly person, and well favored exceedingly.” ([Gen. xxxix.
6](../../../bib/kjv/gen039.htm#006)<span id="v.vii-p54.2"></span>, LXX.)
Was he then enamored who speaketh this? By no means. ‘For,’ saith he,
‘he did not even see him whom he commended.’ We are affected, however,
somewhat similarly towards beauties also which are described to us, not
only which are beheld. But that thou cavil not with us on this
point:—David, was he not comely exceedingly, and ruddy with beauty of
eyes? (So [1 Sam. 16:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#012), [1 Sam.
17:42](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#042)<span id="v.vii-p54.3"></span>.
LXX.) and indeed this beauty of the eyes, is even especially, a
component of beauteousness of more despotic power than any. Was then any
one enamored of him?  By no means. Then to be also enamored cometh not
\[necessarily\] with admiring. For many too have had mothers blooming
exceedingly in beauty of person. What then? Were their children enamored
of them? Away with the thought! but they admire what they see, yet fall
not into a shameful love. ‘No, for again this good provision is <span
id="page_316">p. 316</span> <span id="v.vii-Page_316"></span>Nature’s.’
How Nature’s? Tell me. ‘Because they are mothers,’ he saith. Then
hearest thou not that Persians, and that without any compulsion, have
intercourse with their own mothers, and that not one or two individuals,
but a whole nation? But independent of these, it is hence also evident
that this distemper cometh not from bloom of person nor from beauty
merely, but from a listless and wandering soul. Many at least it is
certain, oftentimes, having passed over thousands of well-favored women,
have given themselves to such as were plainer. Whence it is evident that
love depends not on beauty: for otherwise, surely, those would have
caught such as fell into it, before these. What then is its cause?
‘For,’ saith he, ‘if it be not beauty that causeth love, whence hath it
its beginning and its root? From a wicked Demon?’ It hath it indeed,
thence also, but this is not what we are inquiring about, but whether we
ourselves too be not the cause. For the plot is not theirs only, but
along with them our own too in the first place. For from no other source
is this wicked distemper so engendered as from habit, and flattering
words, and leisure, and idleness, and having nothing to do. For great,
great is the tyranny of habit, even so great as to be moulded into <span
id="fr_590"></span>[591](#fn_590) a necessity of nature. Now if it be
habit’s to gender it, it is very evident that it is also \[habit’s\] to
extinguish it. Certain it is at least that many have in this way ceased
to be enamored, from not seeing those they were enamored of. Now this
for a little while indeed appears to be a bitter thing and exceedingly
unpleasant; but in time it becometh pleasant, and even were they to wish
it, they could not afterwards resume the passion.

<span id="v.vii-p56"></span>\[8.\] How then, when without habit one is
taken captive at first sight? Here also it is indolence of body, or
self-indulgence, and not attending to one’s duties, nor being occupied
in necessary business. For such an one, wandering about like some
vagabond, is transfixed by any wickedness; and like a child let loose,
any one that liketh maketh such a soul his slave. For since it is its
wont to be at work, when thou stoppest its workings in what is good,
seeing it cannot be unemployed, it is compelled to engender what is
otherwise. For just as the earth, when it is not sown nor planted, sends
up simply weeds; so also the soul, when it hath nought of necessary
things to do, being desirous by all means to be doing, giveth herself
unto wicked deeds. And as the eye never ceaseth from seeing, and
therefore will see wicked things, when good things are not set before
it; so also doth the thought, when it secludes itself from necessary
things, busy itself thereafter about such as are unprofitable. For that
even the first assault occupation and thought are able to beat off, is
evident from many things. When then thou hast looked on a beautiful
woman, and wert moved towards her, look no more, and thou art delivered.
‘And how shall I be able to look no more,’ saith he, ‘when drawn by that
desire?’ Give thyself to other things which may distract the soul, to
books, to necessary cares, to protecting others, to assisting the
injured, to prayers, to the wisdom which considers the things to come:
with such things as these bind down thy soul. By these means, not only
shalt thou cure a recent wound, but shalt wear away a confirmed and
inveterate one easily. For if an insult according to the proverb
prevails with the lover to give over his love, how shall not these
spiritual charms <span id="fr_591"></span>[592](#fn_591) much rather be
victorious over the evil, if only we have a mind to stand aloof. But if
we are always conversing and associating with those who shoot such
arrows at us, and talking with them and hearing what they say, we
cherish the distemper. How then dost thou expect the fire to be
quenched, when day by day thou stirrest up the flame?

<span id="v.vii-p58"></span>And let this that we have said about habit
be our speech unto the young; since to those who are men and taught in
heavenly wisdom, stronger than all is the fear of God, the remembrance
of hell, the desire of the kingdom of heaven; for these are able to
quench the fire. And along with these take that thought also, that what
thou seest is nothing else than rheum, and blood, and juices of
decomposed food. ‘Yet a gladsome thing is the bloom of the features,’
saith one. But nothing is more gladsome than the blossoms of the earth,
and these too rot and wither. Do not then in this either give heed to
the bloom, but pass on further inward in thy thought, and stripping off
that beauteous skin in thy thought, scan curiously what lies beneath it.
For even the bodies of the dropsical shine brightly, and the surface
hath nothing offensive; but still, shocked with the thought of the humor
stored within we cannot love such persons. ‘But languishing is the eye
and glancing, and beautifully arched the brow, and dark the lashes, and
soft the eyeball, and serene the look.’ But see how even this itself
again is nothing else than nerves, and veins, and membranes, and
arteries. Think too, I pray, of this beautiful eye, when diseased and
old, wasting with despair, swelling with anger, how hateful to the sight
it is, how quickly it perisheth, how sooner even than pictured ones, it
is effaced. From these things make thy mind pass to the true beauty.
‘But,’ saith he, ‘ I do not see beauty <span id="page_317">p. 317</span>
<span id="v.vii-Page_317"></span>of soul.’ But if thou wilt choose, thou
shalt see it: and as the absent beautiful may be with the mind admired,
though with one’s eyes unseen, so it is possible to see without eyes
beauty of soul. Hast thou not often sketched a beauteous form, and felt
moved unto the drawing? Image also now beauty of soul, and revel in that
loveliness. ‘But,’ saith he, ‘I do not see things incorporeal.’ And yet
we see these, rather than the corporeal, with the mind. Therefore it is,
for instance, that although we see them not, we admire angels also and
archangels, and habits of character, and virtue of soul. And if thou
seest a man considerate and moderate, thou wilt more admire him than
that beautiful countenance. And if thou seest one insulted, yet bearing
it; wronged, yet giving way, admire and love such, even though they be
striken in age. For such a thing is the beauty of the soul; even in old
age it hath many enamored of it, and it never fadeth, but bloometh for
ever. In order then that we also may gain this beauty, let us go in
quest of those that have it, and be enamored of them. For so shall we
too be able, when we have attained this beauty, to obtain the good
things eternal, whereof may all we partake, through the grace and love
towards men of our Lord Jesus Christ, with Whom to the Father, with the
Holy Spirit, be glory and might, for ever and ever.  Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_576"></span>[309:577](1120056.htm#fr_576) <span
id="v.vii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vii-p5.1"></span>μεθοδεύει</span>.

<span id="fn_577"></span>[310:578](1120056.htm#fr_577) <span
id="v.vii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p9"></span> i.e., the Law.

<span id="fn_578"></span>[311:579](1120056.htm#fr_578) <span
id="v.vii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p20"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vii-p20.1"></span>επειδὴ</span>, so also LXX. E.V. “till.”

<span id="fn_579"></span>[311:580](1120056.htm#fr_579) <span
id="v.vii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p25"></span> i.e., Moses.

<span id="fn_580"></span>[311:581](1120056.htm#fr_580) <span
id="v.vii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p28"></span> So he reads the text.

<span id="fn_581"></span>[312:582](1120056.htm#fr_581) <span
id="v.vii-p30.3"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p31"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vii-p31.1"></span>ἁ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vii-p31.2"></span>γιστείαν</span>.

<span id="fn_582"></span>[312:583](1120056.htm#fr_582) <span
id="v.vii-p31.4"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p32"></span> So Chrysostom, though the LXX agrees with
the E.V.

<span id="fn_583"></span>[312:584](1120056.htm#fr_583) <span
id="v.vii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p36"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vii-p36.1"></span>ἱ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vii-p36.2"></span>κανῶς</span>.

<span id="fn_584"></span>[312:585](1120056.htm#fr_584) <span
id="v.vii-p37.2"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p38"></span> \[There are various methods of supplying a
nominative to the verb “turn” in this sentence. Calvin makes Moses the
subject, as representing the law which when it is directed to Christ
causes the veil to be removed. Stanley also makes Moses the subject, but
as representing the people, and renders, “When Moses turns to the Lord,
he strips off the veil.” But Chrysostom gives what is the generally
accepted view, which is that “the heart of Israel is that which turns,”
indicating of course a general conversion (cf. [Rom. xi.
26](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#026)<span id="v.vii-p38.1"></span>) yet
including the case of each individual that turns to Christ. As Beet well
says, “The Apostle cannot leave his people in their darkness without
expressing a hope that they will some day come to the light.” C.\]

<span id="fn_585"></span>[313:586](1120056.htm#fr_585) <span
id="v.vii-p39.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p40"></span> Or, “He.”

<span id="fn_586"></span>[313:587](1120056.htm#fr_586) <span
id="v.vii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p41"></span> St. Paul.

<span id="fn_587"></span>[313:588](1120056.htm#fr_587) <span
id="v.vii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p42"></span> Two <span class="c18"><span
id="v.vii-p42.1"></span>mss</span>. insert here, “the Jews of that day
therefore saw it not, nor do they now;” but Dr. Field rejects the
insertion.

<span id="fn_588"></span>[313:589](1120056.htm#fr_588) <span
id="v.vii-p43.2"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p44"></span> This version of the verb was followed by
Luther, Bengel and others, and is found in the Revised Version. It is
objected to by Meyer, Hodge, Beet *et al*., as being at variance with
the usage of the language since the middle voice of the verb never has
this meaning elsewhere, and at variance with the context which lays the
stress on free and unhindered seeing and not upon reflecting. But it is
urged in reply that Chrysostom may be trusted to know what Greek usage
is, and as to the context the splendor which shone in Moses’s face, that
which suggested this whole train of thought, was a reflection of what he
saw in the Mount. Fortunately whichever way the point is decided, the
blessed result remains for all believers of a growing transformation
into the image of Christ, from glory to glory (like *from strength to
strength* in [Ps. lxxxiv. 7](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#007)<span
id="v.vii-p44.1"></span>), i.e., from one degree of glory to another,—a
process going on without intermission under the influence of the Lord,
the Spirit. C.\]

<span id="fn_589"></span>[315:590](1120056.htm#fr_589) <span
id="v.vii-p53.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p54"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vii-p54.1"></span>περιέργως</span>.

<span id="fn_590"></span>[316:591](1120056.htm#fr_590) <span
id="v.vii-p54.4"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p55"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vii-p55.1"></span>καθίστασθαι</span>. Ben. <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.vii-p55.2"></span>μεθίστασθαι</span>, to pass
into.

<span id="fn_591"></span>[316:592](1120056.htm#fr_591) <span
id="v.vii-p56.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p57"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vii-p57.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vii-p57.2"></span>πῳδαὶ</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily VIII](1120057)
