[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1120014)  [Next](1120016) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.xii"></span>

<span id="iv.xii-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="iv.xii-p1.1"></span>Homily XI.</span>

<span id="iv.xii-p2"></span><span id="iv.xii-p2.1"></span><span
class="c1"><span id="iv.xii-p2.2"></span>[1 Cor.
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#004)<span
id="iv.xii-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.xii-p3"></span>But with me it is a very small thing that I
should be judged of you, or of man’s judgment: yea I judge not mine own
self. For I know nothing against myself, yet am I not hereby justified:
but He that judgeth me is the Lord.

<span id="iv.xii-p4"></span><span class="c18"><span
id="iv.xii-p4.1"></span>Together</span> with all other ills, I know not
how, there hath come upon man’s nature the disease of restless prying
and of unseasonable curiosity, which Christ Himself chastised, saying,
(St. [Matt. vii. 1](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#001)<span
id="iv.xii-p4.2"></span>.) “Judge not, that ye be not judged.” A kind of
thing, which hath no pleasure as all other sins have, but only
punishment and vengeance. For though we are ourselves full of ten
thousand evils, and bearing the “beams” in our own eyes, we become exact
inquisitors of the offences of our neighbor which are not at all bigger
than “motes.” And so this matter at Corinth was falling out. Religious
men and dear to God were ridiculed and cast out for their want of
learning; while others, brimful of evils innumerable, were classed
highly because of their fluent speech. Then like persons sitting in
public to try causes, these were the sort of votes they kept rashly
passing: “such an one is worthy: such an one is better than such
another; this man is inferior to that; that, better than this.” And,
leaving off to mourn for their own bad ways, they were become judges of
others; and in this way again were kindling grievous warfare.

<span id="iv.xii-p5"></span>Mark then, how wisely Paul corrects them,
doing away with this disease. For since he had said, “Moreover, it is
required in stewards that a man be found faithful,” and it seemed as if
he were giving them an opening to judge and pry into each man’s life,
and this was aggravating the party feeling; lest such should be the
effect on them, he draws them away from that kind of petty disputation,
saying, “With me it is a very small thing that I should be judged of
you;” again in his own person carrying on the discourse.

<span id="iv.xii-p6"></span>\[2.\] But what means, “With me it is a very
small thing that I should be judged of you or of man’s day?” (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xii-p6.1"></span>ἡμέρας</span>)  “I judge
myself unworthy,” saith he, “of being judged by you.” And why say I, “by
you?” I will add, “by (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xii-p6.2"></span>καὶ τὸ</span> \[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xii-p6.3"></span>τοῦ</span>\]) any one else.” Howbeit, let no one
condemn Paul of arrogance; though he saith that no man is worthy to pass
sentence con<span id="page_59">p. 59</span> <span
id="iv.xii-Page_59"></span>cerning him. For first, he saith these things
not for his own sake, but wishing to rescue others from the odium which
they had incurred from the Corinthians. And in the next place, he limits
not the matter to the Corinthians merely, but himself also he deposes
from this right of judging; saying, that to decree such things was a
matter beyond his decision. At least he adds, “I judge not mine own
self.”

<span id="iv.xii-p7"></span>But besides what has been said, we must
search out the ground upon which these expressions were uttered. For he
knew well in many cases how to speak with high spirit: and that, not of
pride or arrogance, but of a certain excellent management \[<span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xii-p7.1"></span>οἰκονομίας ἀρίστης</span>\]
seeing that in the present case also he saith this, not as lifting up
himself, but as taking down other men’s sails, and earnestly seeking to
invest the saints with due honor. For in proof that he was one of the
very humble, hear what he saith, bringing forward the testimony of his
enemies on this point; “His bodily presence is weak, and his speech of
no account; ([2 Cor. x. 10](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#010)<span
id="iv.xii-p7.2"></span>.) and again, “Last of all, as to one born out
of due time, He appeared unto me also.” (2 Cor. xv. 8<span
id="iv.xii-p7.3"></span>.) But notwithstanding, see this lowly man, when
the time called on him, to what a pitch he raises the spirit of the
disciples, not teaching pride but instilling a wholesome courage. For
with these same discoursing he saith, “And if the world shall be judged
by you, are ye unworthy to judge the smallest matters? [1 Cor. vi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#002)<span id="iv.xii-p7.4"></span>. For
as the Christian ought to be far removed from arrogance, so also from
flattery and a mean spirit. Thus, if any one says, “I count money as
nothing, but all things here are to me as a shadow, and a dream, and
child’s play;” we are not at all to charge him as arrogant; since in
this way we shall have to accuse Solomon himself of arrogance, for
speaking austerely (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xii-p7.5"></span>φιλοσοφοῦντα</span>) on these things, saying
“Vanity of vanities ([Eccles. i.
2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#002)<span id="iv.xii-p7.6"></span>.) all
is vanity.” But God forbid that we should call the strict rule of life
by the name of arrogance. Wherefore to despise these things is not
haughtiness, but greatness of soul; albeit we see kings, and rulers, and
potentates, making much of them. But many a poor man, leading a strict
life despises them; and we are not therefore to call him arrogant but
highminded: just as, on the other hand, if any be extremely addicted to
them, we do not call him lowly of heart and moderate, but weak, and poor
spirited, and ignoble. For so, should a son despise the pursuits which
become his father and affect slavish ways, we should not commend him as
lowly of heart, but as base and servile we should reproach him. What we
should admire in him would be, his despising those meaner things and
making much account of what came to him from his father. For this is
arrogance, to think one’s self better than one’s fellow-servants: but to
pass the true sentence on things cometh not of boasting, but of
strictness of life.

<span id="iv.xii-p8"></span>On this account Paul also, not to exalt
himself, but to humble others, and to keep down those who were rising up
out of their places, and to persuade them to be modest, said, “With me
it is a very small thing that I should be judged of you or of man’s
day.” Observe how he soothes the other party also. For whosoever is told
that he looks down on all alike, and deigns not to be judged of any one,
will not thenceforth any more feel pain, as though himself were the only
one excluded. For if he had said, “Of you,” only, and so held his peace;
this were enough to gall them as if treated contemptuously. But now, by
introducing, “nor yet of man’s day,” he brought alleviation to the blow;
giving them partners in the contempt. Nay, he even softens this point
again, saying, “not even do I judge myself.” Mark the expression, how
entirely free from arrogance: in that not even he himself, he saith, is
capable of so great exactness.

<span id="iv.xii-p9"></span>\[3.\] Then because this saying also seemed
to be that of one extolling himself greatly, this too he corrects,
saying, “Yet am I not hereby justified.” What then? Ought we not to
judge ourselves and our own misdeeds? Yes surely:  there is great need
to do this when we sin. But Paul said not this, “For I know nothing,”
saith he, “against myself.” What misdeed then was he to judge, when he
“knew nothing against himself?” Yet, saith he, “he was not justified.”
([1 Cor. vi. 3](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#003)<span
id="iv.xii-p9.1"></span>.) We then who have our conscience filled with
ten thousand wounds, and are conscious to ourselves of nothing good, but
quite the contrary; what can we say?

<span id="iv.xii-p10"></span>And how could it be, if he knew nothing
against himself that he was not justified? Because it was possible for
him to have committed certain sins, not however, knowing that they were
sins. From this make thine estimate how great shall be the strictness of
the future judgment. It is not, you see, as considering himself
unblameable that he saith it is so unmeet for him to be judged by them,
but to stop the mouths of those who were doing so unreasonably. At least
in another place, even though men’s sins be notorious, he permits not
judgment unto others, because the occasion required it. “For why dost
thou judge thy brother,” saith he, ([Rom. xiv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#010)<span id="iv.xii-p10.1"></span>.)
or, “thou, why dost thou set at nought thy brother?” For thou wert not
enjoined, O man, to judge others, but to test thine own doings. Why then
dost thou seize upon the office of the Lord? Judgment is His, not thine.

<span id="iv.xii-p11"></span>To which effect, he adds, “Therefore judge
<span id="page_60">p. 60</span> <span id="iv.xii-Page_60"></span>nothing
before the time, until the Lord come; who will both bring to light the
hidden things of darkness, and make manifest the counsels of the hearts,
and then shall each man have his praise from God.” What then? Is it not
right that our teachers should do this? It is right in the case of open
and confessed sins, and that with fitting opportunity, and even then
with pain and inward vexation: not as these were acting at that time, of
vain-glory and arrogance. For neither in this instance is he speaking of
those sins which all own to be such, but about preferring one before
another, and making comparisons of modes of life. For these things He
alone knows how to judge with accuracy, who is to judge our secret
doings, which of these be worthy of greater and which of less punishment
and honor. But we do all this according to what meets our eye. “For if
in mine own errors,” saith he, “I know nothing clearly, how can I be
worthy to pass sentence on other men? And how shall I who know not my
own case with accuracy, be able to judge the state of others?” Now if
Paul felt this, much more we. For (to proceed) he spake these things,
not to exhibit himself as faultless, but to shew that even should there
be among them some such person, free from transgression, not even he
would be worthy to judge the lives of others: and that if he, though
conscious to himself of nothing declare himself guilty, much more they
who have ten thousand sins to be conscious of in themselves.

<span id="iv.xii-p12"></span>\[4.\] Having thus, you see, stopped the
mouths of those who pass such sentences, he travails next with strong
feeling ready to break out and come upon the unclean person. And like as
when a storm is coming on, some clouds fraught with darkness run before
it; afterwards, when the crash of the thunders ariseth and works the
whole heavens into one black cloud, then all at once the rain bursts
down upon the earth: so also did it then happen. For though he might in
deep indignation have dealt with the fornicator, he doth not so; but
with fearful words he first represses the swelling pride of the man,
since in truth, what had occurred was a twofold sin, fornication, and,
that which is worse than fornication, the not grieving over the sin
committed. For not so much does he bewail the sin, as him that committed
it and did not as yet repent. Thus, “I shall bewail many of those,”
saith he, not simply “who have sinned heretofore,” but he adds, “who
have not repented of the uncleanness and impurity which they wrought.”
([2 Cor. xii. 21](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#021)<span
id="iv.xii-p12.1"></span>.) For he who after sinning hath practised
repentance, is a worthy object not of grief but of gratulations, having
passed over into the choir of the righteous. For, ([Is. xliii.
26](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#026)<span id="iv.xii-p12.2"></span>.)
“declare thou thine iniquities first, that thou mayest be justified:”
but if after sinning one is void of shame, he is not so much to be
pitied for falling as for lying where he is fallen.

<span id="iv.xii-p13"></span>Now if it be a grievous fault not to repent
after sins; to be puffed up because of sins, what sort of punishment
doth it deserve? For if he who is elate for his good deeds is unclean,
what pardon shall he meet with who has that feeling with regard to his
sins?

<span id="iv.xii-p14"></span>Since then the fornicator was of this sort,
and had rendered his mind so headstrong and unyielding through his sin,
he of course begins by casting down his pride. And he neither puts the
charge first, for fear of making him hardened, as singled out for
accusation before the rest; nor yet later, lest he should suppose that
what related to him was but incidental. But, having first excited great
alarm in him by his plain speaking towards others, then, and not till
then, he goes on to him, in the course of his rebuke to others giving
the man’s wilfulness a share beforehand.

<span id="iv.xii-p15"></span>For these same words, viz. “I know nothing
against myself, yet am I not hereby justified,” and this, “He that
judgeth me is the Lord, who will both bring to light the hidden things
of darkness, and make manifest the counsels of the hearts,” glance not
lightly both upon that person, and upon such as act in concert with him
and despise the saints. “For what,” saith he, “if any outwardly appear
to be virtuous and admirable persons? He, the Judge, is not a discerner
of externals only, but also brings to light all secrets.”

<span id="iv.xii-p16"></span>\[5.\] On two accounts you see, or rather
on three, correct judgement belongs not to us. One, because, though we
be conscious to ourselves of nothing, still we need one to reprove our
sins with strictness. Another, because the most part of the things which
are done escape us and are concealed. And for a third besides these,
because many things which are done by others seem to us indeed fair, but
they come not of a right mind. Why say ye then, that no sin hath been
committed by this or that person? That such an one is better than such
another? Seeing that this we are not to pronounce, not even concerning
him who knows nothing against himself. For He who discerns secrets, He
it is who with certainty judges.  Behold, for example; I for my part
know nothing against myself: yet neither so am I justified, that is, I
am not quit of accounts to be given, nor of charges to be answered. For
he doth not say this, “I rank not among the righteous;” but “I am not
pure from sin.” For elsewhere he saith also, ([Rom. vi.
7](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#007)<span id="iv.xii-p16.1"></span>,
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.xii-p16.2"></span>δεδικαίωται,
τουτεστιν</span> <span class="Greek"><span id="iv.xii-p16.3"></span>
ἀπήλλακται</span>.) “He that hath died is justified from sin,” that is,
“is liberated.”

<span id="iv.xii-p17"></span>Again, many things we do, good indeed, but
<span id="page_61">p. 61</span> <span id="iv.xii-Page_61"></span>not of
a right mind. For so we commend many, not from a wish to render them
conspicuous, but to wound others by means of them. And the thing done
indeed is right for the well-doer is praised; but the intention is
corrupt: for it is done of a satanical purpose. For this one hath often
done, not rejoicing with his brother, but desiring to wound the other
party.

<span id="iv.xii-p18"></span>Again, a man hath committed a great error;
some other person, wishing to supplant him, says that he hath done
nothing, and comforts him forsooth in his error by recurring to the
common frailty of nature. But oftentimes he doth this from no mind to
sympathize, but to make him more easy in his faults.

<span id="iv.xii-p19"></span>Again, a man rebukes oftentimes not so much
to reprove and admonish, as publicly to (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xii-p19.1"></span>ἐκπομπεῦσαι</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xii-p19.2"></span>καὶ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xii-p19.3"></span>ἐκτραγωδῆσαι</span>) display and exaggerate his
neighbor’s sin. Our counsels however themselves men do not know; but,
([Rom. viii. 27](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#027)<span
id="iv.xii-p19.4"></span>.) “He that searcheth the hearts,” knows them
perfectly; and He will bring all such things into view at that time.
Wherefore he saith, “Who will bring to light the secret things of
darkness and make manifest the counsels of the hearts.”

<span id="iv.xii-p20"></span>\[6.\] Seeing then that not even where we
“know nothing against ourselves,” can we be clean from accusations, and
where we do any thing good, but do it not of a right mind, we are liable
to punishment; consider how vastly men are deceived in their judgments.
For all these matters are not be come at by men, but by the unsleeping
Eye alone: and though we may deceive men, our sophistry will never avail
against Him. Say not then, darkness is around me and walls; who seeth
me? For He who by Himself formed our hearts, Himself knoweth all things.
([Ps. cxxxix. 12](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#012)<span
id="iv.xii-p20.1"></span>.) “For darkness is no darkness with Him.” And
yet he who is committing sin, well saith, “Darkness is around me and
walls;” for were there not a darkness in his mind he would not have cast
out the fear of God and acted as he pleased. For unless the ruling
principle be first darkened, the entrance of sin without fear is a thing
impossible. Say not then, who seeth me? For there is that ([Heb. iv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#012)<span id="iv.xii-p20.2"></span>.)
“pierceth even unto soul and spirit, joints and marrow;” but thou seest
not thyself nor canst thou pierce the cloud; but as if thou hadst a wall
on all sides surrounding thee, thou art without power to look up unto
the heaven.

<span id="iv.xii-p21"></span>For whatsoever sin thou wilt, first let us
examine, and thou shalt see that so it is engendered. For as robbers and
they who dig through walls when they desire to carry off any valuable
thing, put out the candle and then do their work; so also doth men’s
perverse reasoning in the case of those who are committing sin. Since in
us also surely there is a light, the light of reason, ever burning. But
if the spirit of wickedness coming eagerly on with its strong blast
quench that flame, it straightway darkens the soul and prevails against
it, and despoils it straightway of all that is laid up therein. For when
by unclean desire the soul is made captive, even as a cloud and mist the
eyes of the body, so that desire intercepts the foresight of the mind,
and suffers it to see nothing at any distance, either precipice, or
hell, or fear; but thenceforth, having that deceit as a tyrant over him,
he comes to be easily vanquished by sin; and there is raised up before
his eyes as it were a wall without windows, which suffers not the ray of
righteousness to shine in upon the mind, the absurd conceits of lust
enclosing it as with a rampart on all sides. And from that time forward
the unchaste woman is everywhere meeting him: standing present before
his eyes, before his mind, before his thoughts. And as the blind,
although they stand at high noon beneath the very central point of the
heaven, receive not the light, their eyes being fast closed up; just so
these also, though ten thousand doctrines of salvation sound in their
ears from all quarters, having their soul preoccupied with this passion
stop their ears against such discourses. And they know it well who have
made the trial. But God forbid that you should know it from actual
experience.

<span id="iv.xii-p22"></span>\[7.\] And not only this sin hath these
effects, but every misplaced affection as well. For let us transfer, if
you please, the argument from the unchaste woman unto money, and we
shall see here also thick and unbroken darkness. For in the former case,
inasmuch as the beloved object is one and shut up in one place, the
feeling is not so violent; but in the case of money which sheweth itself
every where, in silversmiths’ shops, in taverns, in foundries for gold,
in the houses of the wealthy, the passion blows a vehement gale. For
when servants swaggering in the market place, horses with golden
trappings, men decked with costly garments, are seen with desire by him
who has that distemper, the darkness becomes intense which envelopes
him. And why speak of houses and silversmiths’ shops? for my part I
think that such persons, though it be but in a picture and image that
they see the wealth, are convulsed, and grow wild, and rave. So that
from all quarters the darkness gathers around them. And if they chance
to behold a portraiture of a King, they admire not the beauty of the
precious stones, nor yet the gold, nor the purple robe, but they pine
away. And as the wretched lover before mentioned, though he see but the
image of the woman beloved, cleaveth unto the lifeless thing; so this
man also, beholding a <span id="page_62">p. 62</span> <span
id="iv.xii-Page_62"></span>lifeless image of wealth, is more strongly
affected in the same way, as being holden of a more tyrannical passion.
And he must henceforth either abide at home, or if he venture into the
Forum, return home with innumerable hurts. For many are the objects
which grieve his eyes. And just as the former seeth nothing else save
the woman, even so the latter hastens by poor persons, and all things
else, that he may not obtain so much as a slight alleviation. But upon
the wealthy he steadily fixeth his eyes; by the sight of them
introducing the fire into his own soul mightily and vehemently. For it
is a fire that miserably devours the person that falls into it; and if
no hell were threatened nor yet punishment, this condition were itself
punishment; to be continually tormented and never able to find an end to
the malady.

<span id="iv.xii-p23"></span>\[8.\] Well: these things alone might
suffice to recommend our fleeing from this distemper. But there is no
greater evil than inconsideration which causes men to be rivetted unto
things that bring sorrow of heart and no advantage. Wherefore I exhort
that you cut off the passion at its beginning:  for just as a fever on
its first attack, does not violently burn up the patients with thirst,
but on its increase and the heightening of its fire causes from that
time incurable thirst; and though one should let them fill themselves
full of drink, it puts not out the furnace but makes it burn fiercer: so
also it happens in regard to this passion; unless when it first invadeth
our soul we stop it and shut the doors; having got in, from that time it
makes the disease of those who have admitted it incurable. For so both
good things and bad, the longer they abide in us, the more powerful they
become.

<span id="iv.xii-p24"></span>And in all other things too, any one may
see that this cometh to pass. For so a plant but lately set in the
ground is easily pulled up; but no more so when rooted for a long time;
it then requires great strength in the lever. And a building newly put
together is easily thrown down by those who push against it; but once
well fixed, it gives great trouble to those who attempt to pull it down.
And a wild beast that hath made his accustomed haunt in certain places
for a long time is with difficulty driven away.

<span id="iv.xii-p25"></span>Those therefore who are not yet possessed
by the passion in question, I exhort not to be taken captive. For it is
more easy to guard against falling into it, than having fallen to get
away.

<span id="iv.xii-p26"></span>\[9.\]  But unto those who are seized by it
and broken down, if they will consent to put themselves into the hands
of the <span class="c18"><span id="iv.xii-p26.1"></span>Word</span> of
healing, I promise large hope of salvation, by the Grace of God. For if
they will consider those who have suffered and fallen into that
distemper and have recovered, they will have good hopes respecting the
removal of the disease. Who then ever fell into this disease, and was
easily rid of it? That well-known Zacchæus. For who could be more fond
of money than a publican? But all at once he became a man of strict
life, (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xii-p26.2"></span>Φιλόσοφος</span>) and put out all that blaze.
Matthew in like manner: for he too was a publican, living in continual
rapine. But he likewise all at once stripped himself of the mischief,
and quenched his thirst, and followed after spiritual gain. Considering
therefore these, and the like to them, despair not even thou. For if
thou wilt, quickly thou shalt be able to recover. And if you please,
according to the rule of physicians, we will prescribe accurately what
thou shouldest do.

<span id="iv.xii-p27"></span>It is necessary then, before all other
things, to be right in this, that we never despond, nor despair of our
salvation. Next, we must look not only upon the examples of those who
have done well, but also upon the sufferings of those who have persisted
in sin. For as we have considered Zacchæus, and Matthew, even so ought
we also to take account of Judas, and Gehazi, and Ahar, \[perhaps Achan,
[Josh. vii](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#000)<span
id="iv.xii-p27.1"></span>.\] and Ahab, and Ananias, and Sapphira, in
order that by the one, we may cast out all despair, and by the other cut
off all indolence; and that the soul become not reckless of the remedies
suggested. And let us teach them of themselves to say what the Jews said
on that day, approaching unto Peter, ([Acts
2:37](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#037), [Acts
16:30](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#030)<span id="iv.xii-p27.2"></span>.)
“What must we do to be saved?” And let them hear what they must do.

<span id="iv.xii-p28"></span>\[10.\] What then must we do? We must know
how worthless the things in question are, and that wealth is a run-away
slave, and heartless, and encompasseth its possessors with ills
innumerable. And such words, like charms, let us sound in their ears
continually. And as physicians soothe their patients when they ask for
cold water, by saying that they will give it, making excuses about the
spring, and the vessel, and the fit time, and many more such, (for
should they refuse at once, they make them wild with phrensy,) so let us
also act towards the lovers of money. When they say we desire to be
rich, let us not say immediately that wealth is an evil thing; but let
us assent, and say that we also desire it; but in due time; yea, true
wealth; yea, that which hath undying pleasure: yea, that which is
gathered for thyself, and not for others, and those often our enemies.
And let us produce the lessons of true wisdom, and say, we forbid not
riches, but ill-gotten riches. For it is lawful to be rich, but without
covetousness, without rapine and violence, and an ill report from all
men. With these arguments let us first smooth them down, and not as yet
discourse of hell. For the sick man endures not yet such sayings.
Wherefore <span id="page_63">p. 63</span> <span
id="iv.xii-Page_63"></span>let us go to this world for all our arguments
upon these matters; and say, “Why is it thy choice to be rich through
covetousness? That the gold and the silver may be laid up for others,
but for thee, curses and accusations innumerable?  That he whom you have
defrauded may be stung by want of the very necessaries of life, and
bewail himself, and draw down upon thee the censure of thousands; and
may go at fall of evening about the market place, encountering every one
in the alleys, and in utter perplexity, and not knowing what to trust to
even for that one night? For how is he to sleep after all, with pangs of
the belly, restless famine besetting him, and that often while it is
freezing, and the rain coming down on him? And while thou, having
washed, returnest home from the bath, in a glow with soft raiment, merry
of heart and rejoicing, and hastening unto a banquet prepared and
costly: he, driven every where about the market place by cold and
hunger, takes his round, stooping low and stretching out his hands; nor
hath he even spirit without trembling to make his suit for his necessary
food to one so full fed and so bent on taking his ease; nay, often he
has to retire with insult. When therefore thou hast returned home, when
thou liest down on thy couch, when the lights round thine house shine
bright, when the table is prepared and plentiful, at that time call to
rememberance that poor miserable man wandering about, like the dogs in
the alleys, in darkness and in mire; except indeed when, as is often the
case, he has to depart thence, not unto house, nor wife, nor bed, but
unto a pallet of straw; even as we see the dogs baying all through the
night. And thou, if thou seest but a little drop falling from the roof,
throwest the whole house into confusion, calling thy slaves and
disturbing every thing: while he, laid in rags, and straw, and dirt, has
to bear all the cold.

<span id="iv.xii-p29"></span>What wild beast would not be softened by
these things? Who is there so savage and inhuman that these things
should not make him mild? and yet there are some who are arrived at such
a pitch of cruelty as even to say that they deserve what they suffer.
Yea, when they ought to pity, and weep, and help to alleviate men’s
calamities, they on the contrary visit them with savage and inhuman
censures. Of these I should be glad to ask, Tell me, why do they deserve
what they suffer? Is it because they would be fed and not starve?

<span id="iv.xii-p30"></span>No, you will reply; but because they would
be fed in idleness. And thou, dost not thou wanton in idleness? What say
I? Art thou not oft-times toiling in an occupation more grievous than
any idleness, grasping, and oppressing, and coveting? Better were it if
thou too wert idle after this sort; for it is better to be idle in this
way, than to be covetous. But now thou even tramplest on the calamities
of others, not only idling, not only pursuing an occupation worse than
idleness, but also maligning those who spend their days in misery.

<span id="iv.xii-p31"></span>And let us farther narrate to them the
disasters of others; the untimely bereavements, the dwellers in prison,
those who are torn to pieces before tribunals, those who are trembling
for life; the unlooked for widowhood of women; the sudden reverse of the
rich: and with this let us soften their minds. For by our narrations
concerning others, we shall induce them by all means to fear these evils
in their own case too. For when they hear that the son of such an one
who was a covetous and grasping man, or (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xii-p31.1"></span>ἠ τοῦ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xii-p31.2"></span>δεῖνος</span> instead of <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xii-p31.3"></span>ἦν</span>; <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xii-p31.4"></span>τοῦ δεῖνος</span>) the wife
of such an one who did many tyrannical actions, after the death of her
husband endured afflictions without end; the injured persons setting
upon the wife and the children, and a general war being raised from all
quarters against his house; although a man be the most senseless of
beings, yet expecting himself also to suffer the same, and fearing for
his own lest they undergo the same fate, he will become more moderate.
Now we find life full of many such histories, and we shall not be at a
loss for correctives of this kind.

<span id="iv.xii-p32"></span>But when we speak these things, let us not
speak them as giving advice or counsel, lest our discourse become too
irksome: but as in the order of the narrative and by association with
something else, let us proceed in each case unto that kind of
conversation, and let us be constantly putting them upon stories of the
kind, permitting them to speak of no subject except these which follow:
How such an one’s splendid and famous mansion fell down; How it is so
entirely desolate that all things that were in it have come into the
hands of others; How many trials have taken place daily about this same
property, what a stir; How many of that man’s relations (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xii-p32.1"></span>οἴκεται</span>, probably
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.xii-p32.2"></span>οἰκεῖοι</span>) have
died either beggars, or inhabitants of a prison.

<span id="iv.xii-p33"></span>All these things let us speak as in pity
for the deceased, and as depreciating things present; in order that by
fear and by pity we may soften the cruel mind. And when we see men
shrinking into themselves at these narrations, then and not till then
let us introduce to their notice also the doctrine of hell, not as
terrifying these, but in compassion for others. And let us say, But why
speak of things present? For far, indeed, will our concern be from
ending with these; a yet more grievous punishment will await all such
persons: even a river of fire, and a poisonous worm, and darkness
interminable, and undying tortures. If with such addresses we succeed in
<span id="page_64">p. 64</span> <span
id="iv.xii-Page_64"></span>throwing a spell over them, we shall correct
both ourselves and them, and quickly get the better of our infirmity.

<span id="iv.xii-p34"></span>And on that day we shall have God to praise
us: as also Paul saith, “And then shall each man have praise from God.”
 For that which cometh from men, is both fleeting, and sometimes it
proceeds from no good intentions. But that which cometh from God both
abideth continually, and shines out clearly. For when He who knew all
things before their creation, and who is free from all passion, gives
praise, then also the demonstration of our virtue is even
unquestionable.

<span id="iv.xii-p35"></span>Knowing these things therefore, let us act
so as to be praised of God, and to acquire the greatest blessings; which
God grant us all to obtain, through the grace and loving-kindness of our
Lord Jesus Christ, with Whom to the Father and the Holy Spirit be glory,
power, honor, now and always, and unto all the ages of eternity. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XII](1120016)
