[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1120044)  [Next](1120046) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.xlii"></span>

<span id="iv.xlii-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="iv.xlii-p1.1"></span>Homily XLI.</span>

<span id="iv.xlii-p2"></span><span id="iv.xlii-p2.1"></span><span
class="c1"><span id="iv.xlii-p2.2"></span>[1 Cor.
15:35](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#035),
[36](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#036)<span
id="iv.xlii-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.xlii-p3"></span>But some one will say, How are the dead
raised? and with what manner of body do they come? Thou foolish one,
that which thou thyself sowest is not quickened, except it die.

<span id="iv.xlii-p4"></span><span class="c18"><span
id="iv.xlii-p4.1"></span>Gentle</span> and lowly as the apostle is to a
great degree every where, he here adopts a style rather pungent, because
of the impiety of the gainsayers. He is not however content with this,
but he also employs reasons and examples, subduing thereby even the very
contentious. And above he saith, “Since by man came death, by man came
also the resurrection of the dead;” but here he solves an objection
brought in by the Gentiles. And see how again he abates the vehemence of
his censure; in that he said not, “but perhaps ye will say,” but he set
down the objector indefinitely, in order that, although employing his
impetuous style with all freedom, he might not too severely wound his
hearers. And he states two difficulties, one touching the manner of the
resurrection, the other, the kind of bodies. For of both they on their
part made a question, saying, “How is that which hath been dissolved
raised up?” and, “with what manner of body do they come?” But what
means, “with what manner of body?” It is as if they had said, “with this
which hath been wasted, which hath perished, or with some other?”

<span id="iv.xlii-p5"></span>Then, to point out that the objects of
their enquiry are not questionable but admitted points, he at once meets
them more sharply, saying, “Thou foolish one, that which thou thyself
sowest is not quickened, except it die.” Which we also are wont to do in
the case of those who gainsay things acknowledged.

<span id="iv.xlii-p6"></span>\[2.\] And wherefore did he not at once
appeal to the power of God? Because he is discoursing with unbelievers.
For when his discourse is addressed to believers, he hath not much need
of reasons. Wherefore having said elsewhere, “He shall change the body
of your humiliation, that it may be fashioned like to the body of his
glory,” ([Philip. iii. 2](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#002)<span
id="iv.xlii-p6.1"></span>.) and having indicated somewhat more than the
resurrection, he stated no analogies, but instead of any demonstration,
brought forward the power of God, going on to say, “according to the
working whereby He is able to subject all things to Himself.” But here
he also urges reasons. That is, having established it from the
Scriptures, he adds also in what comes after, these things over and
above, with an eye to them who do not obey the Scriptures; and he saith,
“O foolish one, that which <span class="c18"><span
id="iv.xlii-p6.2"></span>Thou</span> sowest:” i.e., “from thyself thou
hast the proof of these things, by what thou doest every day, and
doubtest thou yet? Therefore do I call thee foolish because of the
things daily done by thine own self thou art ignorant, and being thyself
an artificer of a resurrection, thou doubtest concerning God.” Wherefore
very emphatically he said, “what <span class="c18"><span
id="iv.xlii-p6.3"></span>Thou</span> sowest <span
id="fr_307"></span>[308](#fn_307) ,” thou who art mortal and
perishing. <span id="fr_308"></span>[309](#fn_308)

<span id="iv.xlii-p9"></span><span id="page_250">p. 250</span> <span
id="iv.xlii-Page_250"></span>And see how he uses expressions appropriate
to the purpose he had in view: thus, “it is not quickened,” saith he,
“except it die.” Leaving, you see, the terms appropriate to seed, as
that “it buds,” and “grows,” and “is dissolved,” he adopts those which
correspond to our flesh, viz. “it is quickened,” and, “except it die;”
which do not properly belong to seeds, but to bodies.

<span id="iv.xlii-p10"></span>And he said not, “after it is dead it
lives,” but, which is a greater thing, “therefore it lives, because it
dies.” Seest thou, what I am always observing, that he continually gives
their argument the contrary turn? Thus what they made a sure sign of our
not rising again, the same he makes a demonstration of our rising. For
they said, “the body rises not again, because it is dead.” What then
doth he, retorting their argument, say? “Nay, but unless it died, it
could not rise again: and therefore it rises again, because it died.”
For as Christ more clearly signifies this very thing, in the words,
“Except a grain of wheat fall into the ground and die, it abideth by
itself alone: but if it die, it beareth much fruit:” ([John xii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#024)<span id="iv.xlii-p10.1"></span>.)
thence also Paul, drawing this example, said not, “it doth not live,”
but, “is not quickened;” again assuming the power of God and showing
that not the nature of the ground, but God Himself, brings it all to
pass.

<span id="iv.xlii-p11"></span>And what can be the reason that he did not
bring that forward, which was more akin to the subject: I mean, the seed
of mankind? (For our generation too begins from a sort of decay, even as
that of the corn.) Because it was not of equal force, but the latter was
a more complete instance: for he wants a case of something that perished
entirely, whereas this was but a part; wherefore he rather alleges the
other. Besides, that proceeds from a living body and falls into a living
womb; but here it is no flesh, but the earth into which the seed is
cast, and into the same it is dissolved, like the body which is dead.
Wherefore on this account too the example was more appropriate.

<span id="iv.xlii-p12"></span>\[3.\] [1 Cor.
15.37](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#037)<span id="iv.xlii-p12.1"></span>.
“And he who soweth, soweth not that body that shall be <span
id="fr_309"></span>[310](#fn_309) .”

<span id="iv.xlii-p14"></span>For the things before spoken meet the
question, “how they are raised;” but this, the doubt, “with what manner
of body they come.” But what is, “thou sowest not that body which shall
be?” Not an entire ear of corn, nor new grain. For here his discourse no
longer regards the resurrection, but the manner of the resurrection,
what is the kind of body which shall rise again; as whether it be of the
same kind, or better and more glorious. And he takes both from the same
analogy, intimating that it will be much better.

<span id="iv.xlii-p15"></span>But the heretics, considering none of
these things, dart in upon us and say, “one body falls and another body
rises again. How then is there a resurrection? For the resurrection is
of that which was fallen. But where is that wonderful and surprising
trophy over death, if one body fall and another rise again? For he will
no longer appear to have given back that which he took captive. And how
can the alleged analogy suit the things before mentioned?” Why, it is
not one substance that is sown, and another that is raised, but the same
substance improved. Else neither will Christ have resumed the same body
when He became the first-fruits of them that rise again: but according
to you He threw aside the former body, although it had not sinned, and
took another. Whence then is that other? For this body was from the
Virgin, but that, whence was it? Seest thou to what absurdity the
argument hath come round? For wherefore shows He the very prints of the
nails? Was it not to prove that it is that same body which was
crucified, and the same again that rose from the dead? And what means
also His type of Jonah? For surely it was not one Jonah that was
swallowed up and another that was cast out upon dry land. And why did He
also say, “Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up?”
For that which was destroyed, the same clearly He raised again.
Wherefore also the Evangelist added, that “He spake of the temple of His
body.” ([John 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#019),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#021)<span id="iv.xlii-p15.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.xlii-p16"></span>What is that then which he saith, “Thou
sowest not the body that shall be?” i.e. not the ear of corn: for it is
the same, and not the same; the same, because the substance is the same;
but not the same, because this is more excellent, the substance
remaining the same but its beauty becoming greater, and the same body
rising up new. Since if this were not so, there were no need of a
resurrection, I mean if it were not to rise again improved. For why did
He at all pull down His house, except He were about to build it more
glorious?

<span id="iv.xlii-p17"></span>This now, you see, he said to them who
think that it is utter corruption <span
id="fr_310"></span>[311](#fn_310) . Next, that none again might suspect
from this place that another body is spoken of, he qualifies the dark
saying, and himself interprets what he had spoken, not allowing the
hearer to turn his thoughts from hence in any other direction. What need
is <span id="page_251">p. 251</span> <span
id="iv.xlii-Page_251"></span>there then of our reasonings? Hear himself
speaking, and explaining the phrase, “Thou sowest not the body that
shall be.” For he straightway adds, “but a bare grain, it may chance of
wheat, or of some other kind;” i.e., it is not the body that shall be;
not so clothed, for instance; not having a stalk and beard, but “a bare
grain, it may chance of wheat, or of some other kind.”

<span id="iv.xlii-p19"></span>[1 Cor.
15.38](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#038)<span id="iv.xlii-p19.1"></span>.
“But God giveth it a body even as it pleased Him.”

<span id="iv.xlii-p20"></span>“Yes,” saith one, “but in that case it is
the work of nature.” Of what nature, tell me? For in that case likewise
God surely doeth the whole; not nature, nor the earth, nor the rain.
Wherefore also he making these things manifest, leaves out both earth
and rain, atmosphere, sun, and hands of husbandmen, and subjoins, “God
giveth it a body as it pleased Him.” Do not thou therefore curiously
inquire, nor busy thyself with the how and in what manner, when thou
hearest of the power and will of God.

<span id="iv.xlii-p21"></span>“And to each seed a body of its own.”
Where then is the alien matter which they speak of? For He giveth to
each “his own.” So that when he saith, “Thou sowest not that which shall
be,” he saith not this, that one substance is raised up instead of
another, but that it is improved, that it is more glorious. For “to each
of the seeds,” saith he, “a body of its own.”

<span id="iv.xlii-p22"></span>\[4.\] From hence in what follows, he
introducing also the difference of the resurrection which shall then be.
For do not suppose, because grain is sown and all come up ears of corn,
that therefore there is also in the resurrection an equality of honor.
For in the first place, neither in seeds is there only one rank, but
some are more valuable, and some inferior. Wherefore also he added, “to
each seed a body of its own.”

<span id="iv.xlii-p23"></span>However, he is not content with this, but
seeks another difference greater and more manifest. For that thou mayest
not, when hearing, as I said, that all rise again, suppose that all
enjoy the same reward; he laid before even in the preceding verses the
seeds of this thought, saying, “But each in his own order.” But he
brings it out here also more clearly, saying,

<span id="iv.xlii-p24"></span>[1 Cor.
15.39](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#039)<span id="iv.xlii-p24.1"></span>.
“All flesh is not the same flesh.” For why speak I, saith he, in respect
of seeds?  In respect of bodies let us agitate this point, concerning
which we are discoursing now. Wherefore also he addeth, and saith,

<span id="iv.xlii-p25"></span>“But there is one flesh of men, another
flesh of beasts, another of birds, and another of fishes.”

<span id="iv.xlii-p26"></span>[1 Cor.
15.40](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#040)<span id="iv.xlii-p26.1"></span>.
“There are also celestial bodies, and bodies terrestrial; but the glory
of the celestial is one, and the glory of the terrestrial is another.”

<span id="iv.xlii-p27"></span>[1 Cor.
15.41](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#041)<span id="iv.xlii-p27.1"></span>.
“There is one glory of the sun, and another glory of the moon, and
another glory of the stars: for one star differeth from another star in
glory.”

<span id="iv.xlii-p28"></span>And what means he by these expressions?
Wherefore from the resurrection of the body did he throw himself into
the discourse of the stars and the sun? He did not throw himself out,
neither did he break off from his purpose; far from it: but he still
keeps to it. For whereas he had established the doctrine concerning the
resurrection, he intimates in what follows that great will be then the
difference of glory, though there be but one resurrection. And for the
present he divides the whole into two: into “bodies celestial,” and
“bodies terrestrial.” For that the bodies are raised again, he signified
by the corn:  but that they are not all in the same glory, he signifies
by this. For as the disbelief of the resurrection makes men supine, so
again it makes them indolent to think that all are vouchsafed the same
reward. Wherefore he corrects both. And the one in the preceeding verses
he had completed; but this he begins now. And having made two ranks, of
the righteous and of sinners, these same two he subdivides again into
many parts, signifying that neither righteous nor sinners shall obtain
the same; neither righteous men, all of them, alike with other
righteous, nor sinners with other sinners.

<span id="iv.xlii-p29"></span>Now he makes, you see, first, one
separation between righteous and sinners, where he says, “bodies
celestial, and bodies terrestrial:” by the “terrestrial” intimating the
latter, and by the “celestial,” the former. Then farther he introduces a
difference of sinners from sinners, saying, “All flesh is not the same
flesh, but there is one flesh of fishes, another of birds, and another
of beasts.” And yet all are bodies; but some are in more, and some in
lesser vileness. And that in their manner of living too, and in their
very constitution.

<span id="iv.xlii-p30"></span>And having said this, he ascends again to
the heaven, saying, “There is one glory of the sun, and another glory of
the moon.” For as in the earthly bodies there is a difference, so also
in the heavenly; and that difference no ordinary one, but reaching even
to the uttermost: there being not only a difference between sun and
moon, and stars, but also between stars and stars. For what though they
be all in the heaven? yet some have a larger, others a less share of
glory. What do we learn from hence? That although they be all in God’s
kingdom, all shall not enjoy the same reward; and though all sinners be
in hell, all shall not endure the same punishment. Wherefore he added,

<span id="iv.xlii-p31"></span>[1 Cor.
15.42](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#042)<span id="iv.xlii-p31.1"></span>.
“So also is the resurrection of the dead.”

<span id="iv.xlii-p32"></span>“So,” How? with considerable difference.
<span id="page_252">p. 252</span> <span
id="iv.xlii-Page_252"></span>Then leaving this doctrine as sufficiently
proved, he again comes to the proof itself of the resurrection and the
manner of it, saying,

<span id="iv.xlii-p33"></span>\[5.\] “It is sown in corruption, it is
raised in incorruption.” And observe his consideration. As in the case
of seeds, he used the term proper to bodies, saying, “it is not
quickened, except it die:” so in the case of bodies, the expression
belonging to seeds, saying, “it is sown in corruption, it is raised in
incorruption.” He said not, “is produced <span
id="fr_311"></span>[312](#fn_311) ,” that thou mightest not think it a
work of the earth, but is “raised.” And by sowing here, he means not our
generation in the womb, but the burial in the earth of our dead bodies,
their dissolution, their ashes. Wherefore having said, “it is sown in
corruption, it is raised in incorruption,” he adds,

<span id="iv.xlii-p35"></span>[1 Cor.
15.43](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#043)<span id="iv.xlii-p35.1"></span>.
“It is sown in dishonor.” For what is more unsightly than a corpse in
dissolution? “It is raised in glory.”

<span id="iv.xlii-p36"></span>“It is sown in weakness.” For before
thirty days the whole is gone, and the flesh cannot keep itself together
nor hold out for one day. “It is raised in power.” For there shall
nothing prevail against it for all the future.

<span id="iv.xlii-p37"></span>Here is why he stood in need of those
former analogies, lest many on hearing of these things, that they are
“raised in incorruption and glory and power,” might suppose that there
is no difference among those who rise again. For all indeed rise again,
both in power and in incorruption; and in this glory of their
incorruption yet are not all in the same state of honor and safety.

<span id="iv.xlii-p38"></span>[1 Cor.
15.44](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#044)<span id="iv.xlii-p38.1"></span>.
“It is sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual body. There is a
natural body, and there is a spiritual body.”

<span id="iv.xlii-p39"></span>What sayest thou? Is not “this” body
spiritual? It is indeed spiritual, but that will be much more so. For
now oftentimes both the abundant grace of the Holy Ghost flies away on
men’s committing great sins; and again, the Spirit continuing present,
the life <span id="fr_312"></span>[313](#fn_312) of the flesh depends on
the soul:  and the result in such a case is a void, without the
Spirit <span id="fr_313"></span>[314](#fn_313) . But in that day not so:
rather he abides continually in the flesh of the righteous, and the
victory shall be His, the natural soul also being present <span
id="fr_314"></span>[315](#fn_314) .

<span id="iv.xlii-p43"></span>For either it was some such thing which he
intimated by saying, “a spiritual body,” or that it shall be lighter and
more subtle and such as even to be wafted upon air; or rather he meant
both these. And if thou disbelieve the doctrine, behold the heavenly
bodies which are so glorious and (for this time) so durable, and abide
in undecaying tranquillity; and believe thou from hence, that God can
also make these corruptible bodies incorruptible and much more excellent
than those which are visible.

<span id="iv.xlii-p44"></span>\[6.\] [1 Cor.
15.45](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#045)<span id="iv.xlii-p44.1"></span>.
“So also it is written, ([Gen. ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#007)<span id="iv.xlii-p44.2"></span>.)
the first man Adam became a living soul: the last Adam became a
life-giving Spirit.”

<span id="iv.xlii-p45"></span>And yet the one indeed is written, but the
other not written. How then said he, “it is written?” He modified the
expression according to the issue of events: as he is wont continually
to do: and indeed as it is the way of every prophet. For so Jerusalem,
the prophet said, should be “called a city of righteousness;” ([Is. i.
26](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#026)<span id="iv.xlii-p45.1"></span>.)
yet it was not so called. What then? Did the prophet speak false? By no
means. For he is speaking of the issue of events. And that Christ too
should be called Immanuel; ([Is. vii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#014)<span id="iv.xlii-p45.2"></span>.)
yet was he not so called. But the facts utter this voice; so also here,
“the last Adam became a life-giving Spirit.”

<span id="iv.xlii-p46"></span>And these things he said that thou mayest
learn that the signs and pledges both of the present life and of that
which is to come have already come upon us; to wit, of the present life,
Adam, and of the life to come, Christ. For since he sets down the better
things as matters of hope, he signifies that their beginning hath
already come to pass, and their root and their fountain been brought to
light. But if the root and the fountain be evident to all, there is no
need to doubt of the fruits. Wherefore he saith, “The last Adam became a
life-giving Spirit.” And elsewhere too, He “shall quicken your mortal
bodies through His Spirit that dwelleth in you.” ([Rom. vii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#011)<span id="iv.xlii-p46.1"></span>.)
It is the Spirit’s work then to quicken.

<span id="iv.xlii-p47"></span>Further, lest any should say, “why are the
worse things the elder? and why hath the one sort, to wit, the natural,
come to pass not merely as far as the first-fruits, but altogether; the
other as far as the first-fruits only?”—he signifies that the principles
also of each were so ordered <span id="fr_315"></span>[316](#fn_315) .

<span id="iv.xlii-p49"></span>[1 Cor.
15.46](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#046)<span id="iv.xlii-p49.1"></span>.
“For that is not first,” saith he, “which is spiritual, but that which
is natural, then that which is spiritual.”

<span id="iv.xlii-p50"></span>And he saith not, why, but is content with
<span id="page_253">p. 253</span> <span id="iv.xlii-Page_253"></span>the
ordinance of God, having the evidence from the facts testifying to that
most excellent œconomy of God, and implying that our state is always
going forward to the better; at the same time by this also adding
credibility to his argument. For if the lesser have come to pass, much
more ought we to expect the better.

<span id="iv.xlii-p51"></span>\[7.\] Since then we are to enjoy so great
blessings, let us take our station in this array, and bewail not the
departed, but rather those that have ended their life ill. For so the
husbandman, when he sees the grain dissolving, doth not mourn; rather,
as long as he beholds it continuing solid in the ground he is in fear
and trembling, but when he sees it dissolved rejoices. For the beginning
of the future crop is its dissolving. So let us also then rejoice when
the corruptible house falls, when the man is sown. And marvel not if he
called the burial “a sowing;” for, in truth, this is the better sowing:
inasmuch as that sowing is succeeded by deaths and labors and dangers
and cares; but this, if we lived well, by crowns and rewards; and that,
by corruption and death but this by incorruption and immortality, and
those infinite blessings. To that kind of sowing there went embraces and
pleasures and sleep: but to this, only a voice coming down from heaven,
and all is at once brought to perfection. And he that rises again is no
more led to a life full of toil, but to a place where anguish and sorrow
and sighing are fled away.

<span id="iv.xlii-p52"></span>If thou requirest protection and therefore
mournest thy husband, betake thyself to God, the common Protector and
Saviour and Benefactor of all, to that irresistible alliance, to that
ready aid, to that abiding shelter which is every where present, and is
as a wall unto us on every side.

<span id="iv.xlii-p53"></span>“But your intercourse was a thing
desirable and lovely.” I too know it. But if thou wilt trust sound
reason with this grief, and wilt consider with thyself who hath taken
him away, and that by nobly bearing it thou offerest thy mind as a
sacrifice to our God, even this wave will not be too strong for thee to
stem. And that which time brings to pass, the same do thou by thy
self-command. But if thou shalt yield to weakness, thine emotion will
cease indeed in time, but it will bring thee no reward.

<span id="iv.xlii-p54"></span>And together with these reasons collect
also examples, some in the present life, some in the Holy Scriptures.
Consider that Abraham slew his own son, and neither shed a tear nor
uttered a bitter word. “But he,” you say, “was Abraham.” Nay, thou
surely hast been called to a nobler field of action <span
id="fr_316"></span>[317](#fn_316) . And Job grieved indeed, but so much
as was proper for a father who loved his children and was very
solicitious for the departed; whereas what we now do, is surely the part
of haters and enemies. For if when a man was taken up to court and
crowned, thou wert smiting thyself and lamenting, I should not say that
thou wast a friend of him who was crowned, but a great enemy and
adversary. “Nay,” say you, “not even as it is do I mourn for him, but
for myself.” Well, but this is not the part of an affectionate person,
to wish for thine own sake that he were still in the conflict and
subject to the uncertainty of the future, when he might be crowned and
come to anchor; or that he should be tossed in mid ocean, when he might
have been in port.

<span id="iv.xlii-p56"></span>\[8.\] “But I know not whither he hath
gone,” say you. Wherefore knowest thou not, tell me? For according as he
lived well or otherwise, it is evident whither he will go. “Nay, on this
very account I lament,” say you, “because he departed being a
sinner <span id="fr_317"></span>[318](#fn_317) .” This is a mere pretext
and excuse. For if this were the reason of thy mourning for the
departed, thou oughtest to have formed and corrected him, when he was
alive. The fact is thou dost every where look to what concerns thyself,
not him.

<span id="iv.xlii-p58"></span>But grant that he departed with sin upon
him, even on this account one ought to rejoice, that he was stopped
short in his sins and added not to his iniquity; and help him as far as
possible, not by tears, but by prayers and supplications and alms and
offerings. For not unmeaningly have these things been devised, nor do we
in vain make mention of the departed in the course of the divine
mysteries, and approach God in their behalf, beseeching the Lamb Who is
before us, Who taketh away the sin of the world;—not in vain, but that
some refreshment may thereby ensue to them. Not in vain doth he that
standeth by the altar cry out when the tremendous mysteries are
celebrated, “For all that have fallen asleep in Christ, and for those
who perform commemorations in their behalf <span
id="fr_318"></span>[319](#fn_318) .” For if there were no commemorations
for them, these things would not have been spoken:  since our service is
not a mere stage show, God forbid! yea, it is by <span id="page_254">p.
254</span> <span id="iv.xlii-Page_254"></span>the ordinance of the
Spirit that these things are done.

<span id="iv.xlii-p60"></span>Let us then give them aid and perform
commemoration for them. For if the children of Job were purged by the
sacrifice of their father, why dost thou doubt that when we too offer
for the departed, some consolation arises to them? since God is wont to
grant the petitions of those who ask for others. And this Paul signified
saying, “that in a manifold Person <span
id="fr_319"></span>[320](#fn_319) your gift towards us bestowed by many
may be acknowledged with thanksgiving on your behalf.” ([2 Cor. i.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#011)<span id="iv.xlii-p61.4"></span>.)
Let us not then be weary in giving aid to the departed, both by offering
on their behalf and obtaining prayers for them: for the common Expiation
of the world is even before us. Therefore with boldness do we then
intreat for the whole world, and name their names with those of martyrs,
of confessors, of priests. For in truth one body are we all, though some
members are more glorious than others; and it is possible from every
source to gather pardon <span id="fr_320"></span>[321](#fn_320) for
them, from our prayers, from our gifts in their behalf, from those whose
names are named with theirs. Why therefore dost thou grieve? Why mourn,
when it is in thy power to gather so much pardon for the departed?

<span id="iv.xlii-p63"></span>\[9.\] Is it then that thou art become
desolate and hast lost a protector? Nay, never mention this. For thou
hast not surely lost thy God. And so, as long as thou hast Him, He will
be better to thee than husband and father and child and kinsman: since
even when they were alive, He it was who did all things.

<span id="iv.xlii-p64"></span>These things therefore think upon, and say
with David, “The Lord is my light and my Saviour <span
id="fr_321"></span>[322](#fn_321) , whom shall I fear? ([Ps. xxvii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#001)<span id="iv.xlii-p65.2"></span>.)
Say, Thou art a Father of the fatherless, and a Judge of the widows: 
“([Ps. lxviii. 5](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#005)<span
id="iv.xlii-p65.3"></span>.) and draw down His aid, and thou shalt have
Him to care for thee now more than before, by how much thou art in a
state of greater difficulty.

<span id="iv.xlii-p66"></span>Or hast thou lost a child? Thou hast not
lost it; say not so. This thing is sleep, not death; removal, not
destruction; a journeying from the worse unto the better <span
id="fr_322"></span>[323](#fn_322) . Do not then provoke God to anger;
but propitiate Him. For if thou bearest it nobly, there will thence
accrue some relief both to the departed and to thyself; but if the
contrary, thou dost the more kindle God’s anger. For if when a servant
was chastised by his master, thou didst stand by and complain, thou
wouldest the more exasperate the master against thyself. Do not then so;
but give thanks, that hereby also this cloud of sadness may be scattered
from thee. Say with that blessed one, “the Lord gave, and the Lord hath
taken away.” ([Job i. 21](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#021)<span
id="iv.xlii-p67.1"></span>.) Consider how many more well-pleasing in His
sight have never received children at all, nor been called fathers. “Nor
would I wish to have been so,” say you, “for surely it were better not
to have had experience than after having tasted the pleasure to fall
from it.” Nay, I beseech thee, say not so, provoke not thus also the
Lord to wrath: but for what thou hast received, give Him thanks; and for
what thou hast not to the end, give Him glory. Job said not that which
thou sayest unthankfully, “it were better not to have received,” but
both for the one he gave thanks, saying, “The Lord gave;” and for the
other he blessed God, saying, “The Lord hath taken away, blessed be the
name of the Lord for ever.” And his wife he thus silenced, justifying
himself against her, and uttering those admirable words, “Have we
received good at the hand of the Lord, and shall we not receive evil?”
And yet after this a fiercer temptation befel him: yet was he not even
thus unnerved, but in like manner bore it nobly and glorified God.

<span id="iv.xlii-p68"></span>This also do thou, and consider with
thyself that man hath not taken him, but God who made him, who more than
thyself cares for him and knows what is good for him: who is no enemy
nor lier-in-wait. See how many, living, have made life intolerable to
their parents. “But seest thou not the right-hearted ones?” say you. I
see these too, but even these are not so safe as thy child is. For
though they are now approved, yet it is uncertain what their end will
be; but for him thou hast no longer any fear, nor dost thou tremble lest
anything should happen to him or he experience any change.

<span id="iv.xlii-p69"></span>These things also do thou consider
respecting a good wife and guardian of thine house, and for all things
give thanks unto God. And even if thou shalt lose a wife, give thanks.
Perhaps God’s will is to lead thee to continence, He calls thee to a
nobler field of conflict, He was pleased to set thee free from this
bond. If we thus command ourselves, we shall both gain the joy of this
life and obtain the crowns which are to come, &c. &c.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_307"></span>[249:308](1120045.htm#fr_307) <span
id="iv.xlii-p6.4"></span>

<span id="iv.xlii-p7"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p7.1"></span>σὺ ο σπείρεις</span>.

<span id="fn_308"></span>[249:309](1120045.htm#fr_308) <span
id="iv.xlii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xlii-p8"></span> “Our apostle’s inference is as firm and
strong, as it is emphatical; *Stulte!  Tu quod seminas &c. O fool!  That
which* THOU *sowest &c.*  The force or emphasis may be gathered thus. If
God doth give a body unto that seed which thou sowest for thine own use
and benefit, much more will the same God give a body unto the seed which
He Himself doth sow, seeing the end why He sows it, is not thy temporal
benefit or commodity, but His own immortal glory.” Dr. Jackson’s Works,
vol. iii. 438. See also vol. iii. 433–443.

<span id="fn_309"></span>[250:310](1120045.htm#fr_309) <span
id="iv.xlii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xlii-p13"></span> This seems like a different reading: but
it appears afterwards that S. Chrysostom read the verse as it stands. He
quotes it therefore here in substance, not *verbatim*.

<span id="fn_310"></span>[250:311](1120045.htm#fr_310) <span
id="iv.xlii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xlii-p18"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p18.1"></span>τὴν αὐτὴν φθοράν</span>. The reading is
perhaps corrupt.

<span id="fn_311"></span>[252:312](1120045.htm#fr_311) <span
id="iv.xlii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xlii-p34"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p34.1"></span>φύεται</span>.

<span id="fn_312"></span>[252:313](1120045.htm#fr_312) <span
id="iv.xlii-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xlii-p40"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p40.1"></span>τῆς ψυχῆς ἡ ζωὴ</span>:  “the life of the
animal soul:” alluding to the threefold being of the perfect man, in
spirit, and soul, and body: c.f. [1 Thess. v.
23](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#023)<span id="iv.xlii-p40.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_313"></span>[252:314](1120045.htm#fr_313) <span
id="iv.xlii-p40.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xlii-p41"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p41.1"></span>τούτου χωρίς</span>. i.e., the remains, when
deprived of the natural life, are an empty vessel without the Holy
Ghost, in that Its quickening Power is not put forth in them for the
time.

<span id="fn_314"></span>[252:315](1120045.htm#fr_314) <span
id="iv.xlii-p41.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xlii-p42"></span> i.e. It is true the body may be called
spiritual, because of the Spirit’s indwelling: but it is not wholly and
entirely so. For sometimes the Spirit leaves men when they sin, and even
when the Spirit does not leave them, vitality leaves the body, which
then becomes untenanted; whereas at the resurrection the body being
quickened, the Spirit remains in them for ever. \[This seems to be a
satisfactory explanation of a passage difficult in the original, (*satis
tenebricosa* as Dr. Field says,) and quite uncertain as to the text.
C.\]

<span id="fn_315"></span>[252:316](1120045.htm#fr_315) <span
id="iv.xlii-p47.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xlii-p48"></span> i.e. Why does the worst principle come
first? Why is the natural principle wholly developed not only in Adam,
the first-fruits, but in us and all mankind? And why is the spiritual
principal which is to produce the resurrection, not yet developed in us,
but only in Christ our first-fruits? The answer is, So is the will of
God, by whose ordinance it is that the natural should come first, the
spiritual afterwards.

<span id="fn_316"></span>[253:317](1120045.htm#fr_316) <span
id="iv.xlii-p54.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xlii-p55"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p55.1"></span>μεὶζονα σκάμματα</span>.

<span id="fn_317"></span>[253:318](1120045.htm#fr_317) <span
id="iv.xlii-p56.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xlii-p57"></span> Bingham observes, lib. xv. cap. 3. sect.
16. “Another reason for praying for the dead was, they conceived all men
to die with some remainders of frailty and corruption, and therefore
desired that God would deal with them according to His mercy, and not in
strict justice according to their merits.” “These prayers,” he proceeds
to say, see lib. xxiii. cap. 3. sect. 3. and 13. “are not made upon the
Romish supposition of the soul’s being in purgatory or any place of
torment, but on principles that perfectly overthrow it.” For they call
those for whom they offer, Saints including among them the Blessed
Virgin, the Apostles and Prophets: and they represent them as having
‘pleased God,’ “being at rest,” “sleeping in Christ,” “departed in His
Faith,” and other equivalent expressions. *Vid*. Brett’s *Liturgies*, p.
270–272. Ed. 1838. See also Bp. Bull, vol. ii. 261. Oxford Ed.

<span id="fn_318"></span>[253:319](1120045.htm#fr_318) <span
id="iv.xlii-p58.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xlii-p59"></span> These expressions are not *verbatim*
either in St. Chrysostom’s or in any other of the Liturgies translated
by Brett, but in substance they are in all.

<span id="fn_319"></span>[254:320](1120045.htm#fr_319) <span
id="iv.xlii-p60.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xlii-p61"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p61.1"></span>ἐν πολλῷ προσωπῷ</span>: “in a great Person,”
“the Person of a manifold Being, i.e., of the whole Church.” The common
reading is <span class="Greek"><span id="iv.xlii-p61.2"></span>ἐκ πολλῶν
προσώπων</span>. St. Chrysostom may have thought that the Apostle was
alluding to the Liturgical Service as the voice of the whole mystical
Body of Christ. See his comment on the place in Hom. 2 on 2 Cor. §. 3,
4. Ed. Bened. \[The singular reading of Chrysostom in this place does
not seem to be sustained by any Greek <span class="c18"><span
id="iv.xlii-p61.3"></span>mss</span>., but is represented in several
codices of the old Itala version. On the principle of the *durior
lectio* it might claim attention, but surely on no other ground. C.\]

<span id="fn_320"></span>[254:321](1120045.htm#fr_320) <span
id="iv.xlii-p61.5"></span>

<span id="iv.xlii-p62"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p62.1"></span>συγγνωμήν</span>.

<span id="fn_321"></span>[254:322](1120045.htm#fr_321) <span
id="iv.xlii-p64.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xlii-p65"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlii-p65.1"></span>σωτὴρ</span> LXX.

<span id="fn_322"></span>[254:323](1120045.htm#fr_322) <span
id="iv.xlii-p66.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xlii-p67"></span> The same idea is thus expressed by
Tertullian. “Why mourn, if thy faith be that he hath not perished? Why
bear impatiently *his* being withdrawn for a while, of whom thou
believest that he will return? It is but a journey, which thou
accountest death. It is not meet to mourn for him who is gone before,
but simply to miss him and long for him.” *De Patient*. c. 9.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XLII](1120046)
