[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1120022)  [Next](1120024) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.xx"></span>

<span id="iv.xx-p1"></span> <span id="page_105">p. 105</span> <span
id="iv.xx-Page_105"></span><span class="c16"><span
id="iv.xx-p1.1"></span>Homily XIX.</span>

<span id="iv.xx-p2"></span><span id="iv.xx-p2.1"></span><span
class="c1"><span id="iv.xx-p2.2"></span>[1 Cor.
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#002)<span id="iv.xx-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.xx-p3"></span>Now concerning the things whereof ye wrote to
me:  it is good for a man not to touch a woman. But because of
fornications, let each man have his own wife; and let each woman have
her own husband.

<span id="iv.xx-p4"></span><span class="c18"><span
id="iv.xx-p4.1"></span>Having</span> corrected the three heaviest things
laid to their charge, one, the distraction of the Church, another, about
the fornicator, a third, about the covetous person, he thenceforth uses
a milder sort of speech. And he interposes some exhortation and advice
about marriage and virginity, giving the hearers some respite from more
unpleasant subjects. But in the second Epistle he does the contrary; he
begins from the milder topics, and ends with the more distressing. And
here also, after he has finished his discourse about virginity, he again
launches forth into matter more akin to reproof; not setting all down in
regular order, but varying his discourse in either kind, as the occasion
required and the exigency of the matters in hand.

<span id="iv.xx-p5"></span>Wherefore he says, “Now concerning the things
whereof ye wrote unto me.” For they had written to him, “Whether it was
right to abstain from one’s wife, or not:” and writing back in answer to
this and giving rules about marriage, he introduces also the discourse
concerning virginity: “It is good for a man not to touch a woman.” “For
if,” says he, “thou enquire what is the excellent and greatly superior
course, it is better not to have any connection whatever with a woman: 
but if you ask what is safe and helpful to thine own infirmity, be
connected by marriage.”

<span id="iv.xx-p6"></span>But since it was likely, as also happens now,
that the husband might be willing but the wife not, or perhaps the
reverse, mark how he discusses each case. Some indeed say that this
discourse was addressed by him to priests. But I, judging from what
follows, could not affirm that it was so: since he would not have given
his advice in general terms. For if he were writing these things only
for the priests, he would have said, “It is good for the teacher not to
touch a woman.” But now he has made it of universal application, saying,
“It is good for a man;” not for priest only. And again, “Art thou loosed
from a wife? Seek not a wife.” He said not, “You who are a priest and
teacher,” but indefinitely. And the whole of his speech goes on entirely
in the same tones. And in saying, “Because of fornications, let every
man have his own wife” by the very cause alleged for the concession he
guides men to continence.

<span id="iv.xx-p7"></span>\[2.\] [1 Cor.
7.3](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#003)<span id="iv.xx-p7.1"></span>. “Let
the husband pay the wife the honor <span id="fr_87"></span>[88](#fn_87)
due to her: in like manner the wife the husband.”

<span id="iv.xx-p9"></span>Now what is the meaning of “the due honor?
The wife hath not power over her own body;” but is both the slave and
the mistress of the husband. And if you decline the service which is
due, you have offended God. But if thou wish to withdraw thyself, it
must be with the husband’s permission, though it be but a for short
time. For this is why he calls the matter a debt, to shew that no one is
master of himself but that they are servants to each other.

<span id="iv.xx-p10"></span>When therefore thou seest an harlot tempting
thee, say, “My body is not mine, but my wife’s.” The same also let the
woman say to those who would undermine her chastity, “My body is not
mine, but my husband’s.”

<span id="iv.xx-p11"></span>Now if neither husband nor wife hath power
even over their own body, much less have they over their property. Hear
ye, all that have husbands and all that have wives: that if you must not
count your body your own, much less your money.

<span id="iv.xx-p12"></span>Elsewhere I grant He gives to the husband
abundant precedence, both in the New Testament, and the Old saying,
(<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.xx-p12.1"></span>ἡ ἀποστρόφή</span>
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.xx-p12.2"></span>σου</span>, LXX. [Gen.
iii. 16](../../../bib/sep/gen003.htm#016)<span
id="iv.xx-p12.3"></span>.) “Thy turning shall be towards thy husband,
and he shall rule over thee.” Paul doth so too by making a distinction
thus, and writing, ([Eph. 5:25](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#025),
[33](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#033)<span id="iv.xx-p12.4"></span>.)
“Husbands, love your wives; and let the wife see that she reverence her
husband.” But in this place we hear no more of greater and less, but it
is one and the same right. Now why is this? Because his speech was about
chastity. “In all other things,” says he, “let the husband have the
prerogative; but not so where the question is about chastity.” “The
husband hath no power over his own body, neither the wife.” There is
great equality of honor, and no prerogative.

<span id="iv.xx-p13"></span><span id="page_106">p. 106</span> <span
id="iv.xx-Page_106"></span>\[3.\] [1 Cor.
7.5](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#005)<span id="iv.xx-p13.1"></span>.
“Defraud ye not one the other, except it be by consent.”

<span id="iv.xx-p14"></span>What then can this mean? “Let not the wife,”
says he, “exercise continence, if the husband be unwilling; nor yet the
husband without the wife’s consent.” Why so?  Because great evils spring
from this sort of continence. For adulteries and fornications and the
ruin of families have often arisen from hence. For if when men have
their own wives they commit fornication, much more if you defraud them
of this consolation. And well says he, “Defraud not; fraud” here, and
“debt” above, that he might shew the strictness of the right of dominion
in question. For that one should practice continence against the will of
the other is “defrauding;” but not so, with the other’s consent: any
more than I count myself defrauded, if after persuading me you take away
any thing of mine. Since only he defrauds who takes against another’s
will and by force. A thing which many women do, working sin rather than
righteousness, and thereby becoming accountable for the husband’s
uncleanness, and rending all asunder. Whereas they should value concord
above all things, since this is more important than all beside.

<span id="iv.xx-p15"></span>We will, if you please, consider it with a
view to actual cases. Thus, suppose a wife and husband, and let the wife
be continent, without consent of her husband; well then, if hereupon he
commit fornication, or though abstaining from fornication fret and grow
restless and be heated and quarrel and give all kind of trouble to his
wife; where is all the gain of the fasting and the continence, a breach
being made in love? There is none. For what strange reproaches, how much
trouble, how great a war must of course arise! since when in an house
man and wife are at variance, the house will be no better off than a
ship in a storm when the master is upon ill terms with the man at the
head. Wherefore he saith, “Defraud not one another, unless it be by
consent for a season, that ye may give yourselves unto prayer.” It is
prayer with unusual earnestness which he here means. For if he is
forbidding those who have intercourse with one another to pray, how
could “pray without ceasing” have any place? It is possible then to live
with a wife and yet give heed unto prayer. But by continence prayer is
made more perfect. For he did not say merely, “That ye may pray;” but,
“That ye may give yourselves unto it;” as though what he speaks of might
cause not uncleanness but much occupation.

<span id="iv.xx-p16"></span>“And may be together again, that Satan tempt
you not.” Thus lest it should seem to be a matter of express enactment,
he adds the reason. And what is it? “That Satan tempt you not.” And that
you may understand that it is not the devil only who causeth this crime,
I mean adultery, he adds, “because of your incontinency.”

<span id="iv.xx-p17"></span>“But this I say by way of permission, not of
commandment. For I would that all men were even as I myself; in a state
of continence.” This he doth in many places when he is advising about
difficult matters; he brings forward himself, and says, “Be ye imitators
of me.”

<span id="iv.xx-p18"></span>“Howbeit each man hath his own gift from
God, one after this manner, and another after that.” Thus since he had
heavily charged them saying, “for your incontinence,” he again
comforteth them by the words, “each one hath his own gift of God;” not
declaring that towards that virtue there is no need of zeal on our part,
but, as I was saying before, to comfort them. For if it be a “gift,” and
man contributes nothing thereunto, how sayest thou, “But ([1 Cor.
7.8](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#008)<span id="iv.xx-p18.1"></span>.) I
say to the unmarried and to widows, it is good for them if they abide
even as I: ([1 Cor. 7.9](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#009)<span
id="iv.xx-p18.2"></span>.) but if they have not continency let them
marry?” Do you see the strong sense of Paul how he both signifies that
continence is better, and yet puts no force on the person who cannot
attain to it; fearing lest some offence arise?

<span id="iv.xx-p19"></span>“For it is better to marry than to burn.” He
indicates how great is the tyranny of concupiscence. What he means is
something like this: “If you have to endure much violence and burning
desire, withdraw yourself from your pains and toils, lest haply you be
subverted.”

<span id="iv.xx-p20"></span>\[4.\] [1 Cor.
7.10](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#010)<span id="iv.xx-p20.1"></span>.
“But to the married I give charge, yet not I, but the Lord.”

<span id="iv.xx-p21"></span>Because it is a law expressly appointed by
Christ which he is about to read to them about the “not putting away a
wife without fornication; “(S. [Matt.
5:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#032), [Matt.
19:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#009), [Mark
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#011), [Luke
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#018)<span id="iv.xx-p21.1"></span>.)
therefore he says, “Not I.” True it is what was before spoken though it
were not expressly stated, yet it also is His decree. But this, you see,
He had delivered in express words. So that the words “I and not I” have
this difference of meaning. For that you might not imagine even his own
words to be human, therefore he added, “For I think that I also have the
Spirit of God.”

<span id="iv.xx-p22"></span>Now what is that which “to the married the
Lord commanded? That the wife depart not from her husband: ([1 Cor.
7.11](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#011)<span id="iv.xx-p22.1"></span>.)
but if she depart, let her remain unmarried, or be reconciled unto her
husband.” Here, seeing that both on the score of continence and other
pretexts, and because of infirmities of temper, (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xx-p22.2"></span>μικροψυχίας</span>.) it fell
out that separations took place: it were <span id="page_107">p.
107</span> <span id="iv.xx-Page_107"></span>better, he says, that such
things should not be at all; but however if they take place, let the
wife remain with her husband, if not to cohabit with him, yet so as not
to introduce any other to be her husband.

<span id="iv.xx-p23"></span>[1 Cor.
7.12](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#012)<span id="iv.xx-p23.1"></span>.
“But to the rest speak I, not the Lord. If any brother have a wife that
believeth not, and she is content to dwell with him, let him not leave
her. And if any woman hath an husband that believeth not, and he is
content to dwell with her, let her not leave him.”

<span id="iv.xx-p24"></span>For as when discoursing about separating
from fornicators, he made the matter easy by the correction which he
applied to his words, saying, “Howbeit, not altogether with the
fornicators of this world;” so also in this case he provideth for the
abundant easiness of the duty, saying, “If any wife have a husband, or
husband a wife, that believeth not, let him not leave her.” What sayest
thou? “If he be an unbeliever, let him remain with the wife, but not if
he be a fornicator? And yet fornication is a less sin than unbelief.” I
grant, fornication is a less sin: but God spares thine infirmities
extremely. And this is what He doth about the sacrifice, saying, (S.
[Matt. v. 24](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#024)<span
id="iv.xx-p24.1"></span>.) “Leave the sacrifice, and be reconciled to
thy brother.” This also in the case of the man who owed ten thousand
talents. For him too He did not punish for owing him ten thousand
talents, but for demanding back a hundred pence from his fellow-servant
He took vengeance on him.

<span id="iv.xx-p25"></span>Then lest the woman might fear, as though
she became unclean because of intercourse with her husband, he says,
“For the unbelieving husband is sanctified in the wife, and the
unbelieving wife is sanctified in the husband.” And yet, if “he that is
joined to an harlot is one body,” it is quite clear that the woman also
who is joined to an idolater is one body. Well: it is one body;
nevertheless she becomes not unclean, but the cleanness of the wife
overcomes the uncleanness of the husband; and again, the cleanness of
the believing husband overcomes the uncleanness of the unbelieving wife.

<span id="iv.xx-p26"></span>How then in this case is the uncleanness
overcome, and therefore the intercourse allowed; while in the woman who
prostitutes herself, the husband is not condemned in casting her out?
Because here there is hope that the lost member may be saved through the
marriage; but in the other case the marriage has already been dissolved;
and there again both are corrupted; but here the fault is in one only of
the two. I mean something like this: she that has been guilty of
fornication is utterly abominable: if then “he that is joined to an
harlot is one body,” he also becomes abominable by having connection
with an harlot; wherefore all the purity flits away. But in the case
before us it is not so. But how? The idolater is unclean but the woman
is not unclean. For if indeed she were a partner with him in that
wherein he is unclean, I mean his impiety, she herself would also become
unclean. But now the idolater is unclean in one way, and the wife holds
communion with him in another wherein he is not unclean. For marriage
and mixture of bodies is that wherein the communion consists.

<span id="iv.xx-p27"></span>Again, there is a hope that this man may be
reclaimed by his wife for she is made completely his own: but for the
other it is not very easy. For how will she who dishonored him in former
times and became another’s and destroyed the rights of marriage, have
power to reclaim him whom she had wronged; him, moreover, who still
remains to her as an alien?

<span id="iv.xx-p28"></span>Again in that case, after the fornication
the husband is not a husband: but here, although the wife be an
idolatress, the husband’s rights are not destroyed.

<span id="iv.xx-p29"></span>However, he doth not simply recommend
cohabitation with the unbeliever, but with the qualification that he
wills it. Wherefore he said, “And he himself be content to dwell with
her.” For, tell me, what harm is there when the duties of piety remain
unimpaired and there are good hopes about the unbeliever, that those
already joined should so abide and not bring in occasions of unnecessary
warfare? For the question now is not about those who have never yet come
together, but about those who are already joined. He did not say, If any
one wish to take an unbelieving wife, but, “If any one hath an
unbelieving wife.” Which means, If any after marrying or being married
have received the word of godliness, and then the other party which had
continued in unbelief still yearn for them to dwell together, let not
the marriage be broken off. “For,” saith he, “the unbelieving husband is
sanctified in the wife.” So great is the superabundance of thy purity.

<span id="iv.xx-p30"></span>What then, is the Greek holy? Certainly not:
for he said not, He is holy; but, “He is sanctified in his wife.” And
this he said, not to signify that he is holy, but to deliver the woman
as completely as possible from her fear and lead the man to desire the
truth. For the uncleanness is not in the bodies wherein there is
communion, but in the mind and the thoughts. And here follows the proof;
namely, that if thou continuing unclean have offspring, the child, not
being of thee alone, is of course unclean or half clean. But now it is
not unclean. To which effect he adds, “else were your children unclean;
but now are they holy;” <span id="page_108">p. 108</span> <span
id="iv.xx-Page_108"></span>that is, not unclean. But the Apostle calls
them, “holy,” by the intensity of the expression again casting out the
dread arising from that sort of suspicion.

<span id="iv.xx-p31"></span>[1 Cor.
7.15](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#015)<span id="iv.xx-p31.1"></span>.
“Yet if the unbelieving departeth, let him depart,” for in this case the
matter is no longer fornication. But what is the meaning of, “if the
unbelieving departeth?” For instance, if he bid thee sacrifice and take
part in his ungodliness on account of thy marriage, or else part
company; it were better the marriage were annulled, and no breach made
in godliness. Wherefore he adds, “A brother is not under bondage, nor
yet a sister, in such cases.” If day by day he buffet thee and keep up
combats on this account, it is better to separate. For this is what he
glances at, saying, “But God hath called us in peace.” For it is the
other party who furnished the ground of separation, even as he did who
committed uncleanness.

<span id="iv.xx-p32"></span>[1 Cor.
7.16](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#016)<span id="iv.xx-p32.1"></span>.
“For how knowest thou, O wife, whether thou shalt save thine husband?”
This again refers to that expression, “let her not leave him.” That is,
“if he makes no disturbance, remain,” saith he, “for there is even
profit in this; remain and advise and give counsel and persuade.” For no
teacher will have such power to prevail (Reg. <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xx-p32.2"></span>πεῖσαι</span>. Bened. <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xx-p32.3"></span>ἰσχὺσαι</span>. <span
id="fr_88"></span>[89](#fn_88) ) as a wife. And neither, on one hand,
doth he lay any necessity upon her and absolutely demand the point of
her, that he may not again do what would be too painful; nor, on the
other, doth he tell her to despair: but he leaves the matter in suspense
through the uncertainty of the future, saying, “For how knowest thou, O
wife, whether thou shalt save thy husband? or how knowest thou, O
husband whether thou shalt save thy wife?”

<span id="iv.xx-p34"></span>\[5.\] And again, [1 Cor.
7.17](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#017)<span id="iv.xx-p34.1"></span>.
“Only as God hath distributed to each man, as the Lord hath called each,
so let him walk. Was any one called being circumcised? let him not
become uncircumcised. Was any called in uncircumcision? let him not be
circumcised. Circumcision is nothing, and uncircumcision is nothing; but
the keeping of the commandments of God. Let each man abide in that
calling wherein he was called. Wast thou called, being a slave? Care not
for it.” These things contribute nothing unto faith, saith he. Be not
then contentious neither be troubled; for the faith hath cast out all
these things.

<span id="iv.xx-p35"></span>“Let each man abide in that calling wherein
he was called. Hast thou been called, having an unbelieving wife? 
Continue to have her. Cast not out thy wife for the faith’s sake. Hast
thou been called, being a slave? Care not for it. Continue to be a
slave. Hast thou been called, being in uncircumcision? Remain
uncircumcised. Being circumcised, didst thou become a believer? Continue
circumcised. For this is the meaning of, “As God hath distributed unto
each man.” For these are no hindrances to piety. Thou art called, being
a slave; another, with an unbelieving wife; another, being circumcised.

<span id="iv.xx-p36"></span>Astonishing! where has he put slavery? As
circumcision profits not: and uncircumcision does no harm; so neither
doth slavery, nor yet liberty. And that he might point out this with
surpassing clearness, he says, “But even (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xx-p36.1"></span>Αλλ' εὶ καὶ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xx-p36.2"></span> δυνάσαι</span>) if thou canst become free, use
it rather:” that is, rather continue a slave. Now upon what possible
ground does he tell the person who might be set free to remain a slave? 
He means to point out that slavery is no harm but rather an advantage.

<span id="iv.xx-p37"></span>Now we are not ignorant that some say, the
words, “use it rather,” are spoken with regard to liberty:  interpreting
it, “if thou canst become free, become free.” <span
id="fr_89"></span>[90](#fn_89)   But the expression would be very
contrary to Paul’s manner if he intended this. For he would not, when
consoling the slave and signifying that he was in no respect injured,
have told him to get free. Since perhaps some one might say, “What then,
if I am not able? I am an injured and degraded person.” This then is not
what he says: but as I said, meaning to point out that a man gets
nothing by being made free, he says, “Though thou hast it in thy power
to be made free, remain rather in slavery.”

<span id="iv.xx-p39"></span>Next he adds also the cause; “For he that
was called in the Lord being a bondservant, is the Lord’s free man: 
likewise he that was called, being free, is Christ’s bondservant.”
“For,” saith he, “in the things that relate to Christ, both are equal:
and like as thou art the slave of Christ, so also is thy master. How
then is the slave a free man? Because He has freed thee not only from
sin, but also from outward slavery while continuing a slave. For he
suffers not the slave to be a slave, not even though he be a man abiding
in slavery: and this is the great wonder.

<span id="iv.xx-p40"></span>But how is the slave a free man while
continuing a slave? When he is freed from passions and the diseases of
the mind: when he looks down upon riches and wrath and all other the
like passions.

<span id="iv.xx-p41"></span>[1 Cor.
7.23](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#023)<span id="iv.xx-p41.1"></span>.
“Ye were bought with a price: become not bondservants of men.” This
saying is addressed not to slaves only but also to free men. For it is
possible for one who is a slave not to be a slave; and for one who is a
freeman to be <span id="page_109">p. 109</span> <span
id="iv.xx-Page_109"></span>a slave. “And how can one be a slave and not
a slave?” When he doeth all for God: when he feigns nothing, and doeth
nothing out of eye-service towards men: that is how one that is a slave
to men can be free. Or again, how doth one that is free become a slave?
When he serves men in any evil service, either for gluttony or desire of
wealth or for office’ sake. For such an one, though he be free, is more
of a slave than any man.

<span id="iv.xx-p42"></span>And consider both these points. Joseph was a
slave but not a slave to men: wherefore even in slavery he was freer
than all that are free. For instance, he yielded not to his mistress;
yielded not to the purposes which she who possessed him desired. Again
she was free; yet none ever so like a slave, courting and beseeching her
own servant. But she prevailed not on him, who was free, to do what he
would not. This then was not slavery; but it was liberty of the most
exalted kind. For what impediment to virtue had he from his slavery? Let
men hear, both slaves and free. Which was the slave? He that was
entreated or she that did entreat? She that besought or he that despised
her supplication?

<span id="iv.xx-p43"></span>In fact, there are limits set to slaves by
God Himself; and up to what point one ought to keep them, has also been
determined, and to transgress them is wrong. Namely, when your master
commands nothing which is unpleasing to God, it is right to follow and
to obey; but no farther. For thus the slave becomes free. But if you go
further, even though you are free you are become a slave. At least he
intimates this, saying, “Be not ye the servants of men.”

<span id="iv.xx-p44"></span>But if this be not the meaning, if he bade
them forsake their masters and strive contentiously to become free, in
what sense did he exhort them, saying, “Let each one remain in the
calling in which he is called?” And in another place, ([1 Tim.
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#002)<span id="iv.xx-p44.1"></span>.) “As
many servants as are under the yoke, let them count their own masters
worthy of all honor; and those that have believing masters, let them not
despise them, because they are brethren who partake of the benefit.” And
writing to the Ephesians also and to the Colossians, he ordains and
exacts the same rules. Whence it is plain that it is not this slavery
which he annuls, but that which caused as it is by vice befalls free men
also: and this is the worst kind of slavery, though he be a free man who
is in bondage to it. For what profit had Joseph’s brethren of their
freedom? Were they not more servile than all slaves; both speaking lies
to their father, and to the merchants using false pretences, as well as
to their brother?  But not such was the free man: rather every where and
in all things he was true. And nothing had power to enslave him, neither
chain nor bondage nor the love of his mistress nor his being in a
strange land. But he abode free every where. For this is liberty in the
truest sense when even in bondage it shines through.

<span id="iv.xx-p45"></span>\[6.\] Such a thing is Christianity; in
slavery it bestows freedom. And as that which is by nature an
invulnerable body then shews itself to be invulnerable when having
received a dart it suffers no harm; so also he that is strictly free
then shows himself, when even under masters he is not enslaved. For this
cause his bidding is, “remain a slave.” But if it is impossible for one
who is a slave to be a Christian such as he ought to be, the Greeks will
condemn true religion of great weakness: whereas if they can be taught
that slavery in no way impairs godliness, they will admire our doctrine.
For if death hurt us not, nor scourges, nor chains, much less slavery.
Fire and iron and tyrannies innumerable and diseases and poverty and
wild beasts and countless things more dreadful than these, have not been
able to injure the faithful; nay, they have made them even mightier. And
how shall slavery be able to hurt? It is not slavery itself, beloved,
that hurts; but the real slavery is that of sin. And if thou be not a
slave in this sense, be bold and rejoice. No one shall have power to do
thee any wrong, having the temper which cannot be enslaved. But if thou
be a slave to sin, even though thou be ten thousand times free thou hast
no good of thy freedom.

<span id="iv.xx-p46"></span>For, tell me, what profit is it when, though
not in bondage to a man, thou liest down in subjection to thy passions? 
Since men indeed often know how to spare; but those masters are never
satiated with thy destruction. Art thou in bondage to a man? Why, thy
master also is slave to thee, in arranging about thy food, in taking
care of thy health and in looking after thy shoes and all the other
things. And thou dost not fear so much less thou shouldest offend thy
master, as he fears lest any of those necessaries should fail thee. “But
he sits down, while thou standest.” And what of that? Since this may be
said of thee as well as of him. Often, at least, when thou art lying
down and sleeping sweetly, he is not only standing, but undergoing
endless discomforts in the market-place; and he lies awake more
painfully than thou.

<span id="iv.xx-p47"></span>For instance; what did Joseph suffer from
his mistress to be compared with what she suffered from her evil desire?
For he indeed did not the things which she wished to put upon him; but
she performed every thing which her mistress ordered her, I mean her
spirit of unchastity: which left not off until it had put her to open
shame. What master com<span id="page_110">p. 110</span> <span
id="iv.xx-Page_110"></span>mands such things? what savage tyrant?
“Intreat thy slave,” that is the word: “flatter the person bought with
thy money, supplicate the captive; even if he reject thee with disgust,
again besiege him: even if thou speakest to him oftentimes, and he
consent not, watch for his being alone, and force him, and become an
object of derision.” What can be more dishonorable, what more shameful,
than these words?  “And if even by these means you make no progress,
why, accuse him falsely and deceive your husband.” Mark how mean, how
shameful are the commands, how unmerciful and savage and frantic. What
command does the master ever lay on his slave, such as those which her
wantonness then laid upon that royal woman? And yet she dare not
disobey. But Joseph underwent nothing of this sort, but every thing on
the contrary which brought glory and honor.

<span id="iv.xx-p48"></span>Would you like to see yet another man under
severe orders from a hard mistress, and without spirit to disobey any of
them? Consider Cain, what commands were laid on him by his envy. She
ordered him to slay his brother, to lie unto God, to grieve his father,
to cast off shame; and he did it all, and in nothing refused to obey.
And why marvel that over a single person so great should be the power of
this mistress? She hath often destroyed entire nations. For instance,
the Midianitish women took the Jews, and all but bound them in
captivity; their own beauty kindling desire, was the means of their
vanquishing that whole nation. Paul then to cast out this sort of
slavery, said, “Become not servants of men;” that is, “Obey not men
commanding unreasonable things: nay, obey not yourselves.” Then having
raised up their mind and made it mount on high, he says,

<span id="iv.xx-p49"></span>\[7.\] [1 Cor.
7.25](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#025)<span id="iv.xx-p49.1"></span>.
“Now concerning virgins. I have no commandment of the Lord; but I give
my judgment, as one that hath obtained mercy of the Lord to be
faithful.”

<span id="iv.xx-p50"></span>Advancing on his way in regular order, he
proceeds next to speak concerning virginity. For after that he had
exercised and trained them, in his words concerning continence, he goes
forth towards what is greater, saying, “I have no commandment, but I
esteem it to be good.” For what reason?  For the self-same reason as he
had mentioned respecting continence.

<span id="iv.xx-p51"></span>[1 Cor.
7.27](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#027)<span id="iv.xx-p51.1"></span>.
“Art thou bound unto a wife? Seek not to be loosed. Art thou loosed from
a wife?  Seek not a wife.”

<span id="iv.xx-p52"></span>These words carry no contradiction to what
had been said before but rather the most entire agreement with them. For
he says in that place also, “Except it be by consent:” as here he says,
“Art thou bound unto a wife? Seek not separation.” This is no
contradiction. For its being against consent makes a dissolution: but if
with consent both live continently, it is no dissolution.

<span id="iv.xx-p53"></span>Then, lest this should seem to be laying
down a law, he subjoins, ([1 Cor.
7.28](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#028)<span id="iv.xx-p53.1"></span>.)
“but if thou marry, thou hast not sinned.” He next alleges the existing
state of things, “the present distress, the shortness of the time,” and
“the affliction.” For marriage draws along with it many things, which
indeed he hath glanced at, as well here as also in the discourse about
continence: there, by saying, “the wife hath not power over herself;”
and here, by the expression, “Thou art bound.”

<span id="iv.xx-p54"></span>“But if and thou marry, thou hast not
sinned.” He is not speaking about her who hath made choice of virginity,
for if it comes to that, she hath sinned. Since if the widows <span
id="fr_90"></span>[91](#fn_90) are condemned for having to do with
second marriages after they have once chosen widowhood, much more the
virgins.

<span id="iv.xx-p56"></span> “But such shall have trouble in the flesh.”
“And pleasure too,” you will say: but observe how he curtails this by
the shortness of the time, saying, ([1 Cor.
7.28](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#028)<span id="iv.xx-p56.1"></span>.)
“the time is shortened;” that is, “we are exhorted to depart now and go
forth, but thou art running further in.” And yet even although marriage
had no troubles, even so we ought to press on towards things to come.
But when it hath affliction too, what need to draw on one’s self an
additional burden. What occasion to take up such a load, when even after
taking it you must use it as having it not? For “those even that have
wives must be,” he saith, “as though they had none.”

<span id="iv.xx-p57"></span>Then, having interposed something about the
future, he brings back his speech to the present. For some of his topics
are spiritual; as that, “the one careth about the things which be her
husband’s, the other about those which be God’s.” Others relate to this
present life; as, “I would have you to be free from cares.” But still
with all this he leaves it to their own choice: inasmuch as he who after
proving what is best goes back to compulsion, seems as if he did not
trust his own statements. Wherefore he rather attracts them by
concession, and checks them as follows:

<span id="iv.xx-p58"></span>[1 Cor.
7.35](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#035)<span id="iv.xx-p58.1"></span>.
“And this I say for your own profit, not that I may cast a snare upon
you, but for that which is seemly, and that ye may attend upon the Lord
without distraction. Let the virgins hear that not by that one point is
virginity defined; for she that is careful about the things of the world
cannot be a virgin, nor seemly. Thus, when he said, “There is difference
between a wife and a virgin,” he added this as the difference, and that
wherein they are distinguished from each other. And laying down <span
id="page_111">p. 111</span> <span id="iv.xx-Page_111"></span>the
definition of a virgin and her that is not a virgin, he names, not
marriage nor continence but leisure from engagements and multiplicity of
engagements. For the evil is not in the cohabitation, but in the
impediment to the strictness of life.

<span id="iv.xx-p59"></span>[1 Cor.
7.36](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#036)<span id="iv.xx-p59.1"></span>.
“But if any man think that he behaveth himself unseemly toward his
virgin.”

<span id="iv.xx-p60"></span>Here he seems to be talking about marriage;
but all that he says relates to virginity; for he allows even a second
marriage, saying, “only in the Lord.” Now what means, “in the Lord?”
With chastity, with honor: for this is needed every where, and must be
pursued for else we cannot see God.

<span id="iv.xx-p61"></span>Now if we have passed lightly by what he
says of virginity, let no one accuse us of negligence; for indeed an
entire book hath been composed by us upon this topic and as we have
there with all the accuracy which we could, gone through every branch of
the subject, we considered it a waste of words to introduce it again
here. Wherefore, referring the hearer to that work as concerns these
things, we will say this one thing here: We must follow after
continence. For, saith he, “follow after peace, and the sanctification
without which no one shall see the Lord.” Therefore that we may be
accounted worthy to see Him, whether we be in virginity or in the first
marriage or the second, let us follow after this that we may obtain the
kingdom of heaven, through the grace and loving-kindness of our Lord
Jesus Christ; to Whom with the Father and the Holy Spirit, be glory,
power, honor, now, henceforth, and for everlasting ages. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_87"></span>[105:88](1120023.htm#fr_87) <span
id="iv.xx-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xx-p8"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xx-p8.1"></span>τιμὴν</span>: rec. text. <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xx-p8.2"></span> εὐνοίαν</span>. \[The latest
editors adopt the reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xx-p8.3"></span>̓ὀφειλην</span>. C.\]

<span id="fn_88"></span>[108:89](1120023.htm#fr_88) <span
id="iv.xx-p32.4"></span>

<span id="iv.xx-p33"></span> \[The latter is adopted by Field.\]

<span id="fn_89"></span>[108:90](1120023.htm#fr_89) <span
id="iv.xx-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xx-p38"></span> \[This is the view of Calvin, Neander,
Hoffmann, etc., but Bengel, De Wette, Meyer, Alford, Stanley, Principal
Edwards agree with Chrysostom. The question is a very nice one. C.\]

<span id="fn_90"></span>[110:91](1120023.htm#fr_90) <span
id="iv.xx-p54.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xx-p55"></span> i.e. the widows whom St. Paul mentions, [1
Tim. 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#012)<span id="iv.xx-p55.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XX](1120024)
