[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1120011)  [Next](1120013) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ix"></span>

<span id="iv.ix-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="iv.ix-p1.1"></span>Homily VIII.</span>

<span id="iv.ix-p2"></span><span id="iv.ix-p2.1"></span><span
class="c1"><span id="iv.ix-p2.2"></span>[1 Cor. iii.
1-3](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#001)<span
id="iv.ix-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.ix-p3"></span>And I, brethren, could not speak unto you as
unto spiritual, but as unto Carnal, as unto babes in Christ. I fed you
with milk, and not with meat: for ye were not yet able to bear it; nay,
not even now are ye able. For ye are yet carnal.

<span id="iv.ix-p4"></span><span class="c18"><span
id="iv.ix-p4.1"></span>After</span> having overturned the philosophy
which is from without, and cast down all its arrogance, he comes unto
another argument. For it was likely that they would say, “If we were
putting forth the opinions of Plato, or of Pythagoras, or any other of
the philosophers, reason were thou shouldest draw out such a long
discourse against us. But if we announce the things of the Spirit, for
what reason dost thou turn and toss up and down (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.ix-p4.2"></span>ἄνω καὶ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.ix-p4.3"></span>κάτω στρέφεις</span>) the
wisdom which is from without?”

<span id="iv.ix-p5"></span>Hear then how he makes his stand against
this. “And I, brethren, could not speak unto you as unto spiritual.”
Why, in the first place, says he, though you had been perfect in
spiritual things also, not even so ought you to be elated; for what you
preach is not your own, nor such as yourselves have found from your own
means. But now even these things ye know not as ye ought to know them,
but ye are learners, and the last of all. Whether therefore the Gentile
wisdom be the occasion of your high imaginations; that hath been proved
to be nothing, nay, <span id="page_44">p. 44</span> <span
id="iv.ix-Page_44"></span>in regard to spiritual things to be even
contrary unto us: or if it be on account of things spiritual, in these,
too, ye come short and have your place among the hindmost. Wherefore he
saith, “I could not speak unto you as unto spiritual.” He said not, “I
did not speak,” lest the thing might seem to proceed from his grudging
them somewhat; but in two ways he brings down their high spirit; first,
because they knew not the things that are perfect; next, because their
ignorance was owing to themselves: yea, in a third way besides these, by
pointing out that “not even now are they able \[to bear it\].” For as to
their want of ability at first, that perhaps arose from the nature of
the case. In fact, however, he does not leave them even this excuse. For
not through any inability on their part to receive high doctrines, doth
he say they received them not, but because they were “carnal.” However,
in the beginning this was not so blame-worthy; but that after so long a
time, they had not yet arrived at the more perfect knowledge, this was a
symptom of most utter dulness.

<span id="iv.ix-p6"></span>It may be observed, that he brings the same
charge against the Hebrews, not however, with so much vehemence. For
those, he saith, are such, partly because of tribulation: but these,
because of some appetite for wickedness. Now the two things are not the
same. He implies too, that in the one case he was intending rebuke, in
the other rather stirring them up, when he spake these words of truth.
For to these Corinthians he saith, “Neither yet now are ye able;” but
unto the others ([Heb. vi. 1](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#001)<span
id="iv.ix-p6.1"></span>.) “Wherefore let us cease to speak of the first
principles of Christ, and press on unto perfection:” and again, ([Heb.
5.9](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#009)<span id="iv.ix-p6.2"></span>.) “we
are persuaded better things concerning you, and things which accompany
salvation, though we thus speak.”

<span id="iv.ix-p7"></span>\[2.\] And how calleth he those “carnal,” who
had attained so large a measure of the Spirit; and into whose praises,
at the beginning he had entered so much at large?  Because they also
were carnal, unto whom the Lord saith, (St. [Matt.
7:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#022),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#023)<span id="iv.ix-p7.1"></span>.)
“Depart from Me, ye workers of iniquity, I know you not;” and yet they
both cast out devils, and raised the dead, and uttered prophecies. So
that it is possible even for one who wrought miracles to be carnal. For
so God wrought by Balaam, and unto Pharaoh He revealed things to come,
and unto Nebuchadnezzar; and Caiaphas prophesied, not knowing what he
said; yea, and some others cast out devils in His name, though they were
([Luke ix. 49](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#049)<span
id="iv.ix-p7.2"></span>.) “not with Him;” since not for the doers’ sake
are these things done, but for others’ sake: nor is it seldom, that
those who were positively unworthy have been made instrumental to them.
Now why wonder, if in the case of unworthy men these things are done for
others’ sake, seeing that so it is, even when they are wrought by
saints? For Paul saith, ([1 Cor. iii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#022)<span id="iv.ix-p7.3"></span>.) “All
things are yours; whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or life, or
death:” and again, ([Eph. 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#012)<span id="iv.ix-p7.4"></span>.) “He
gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Pastors and Teachers,
for the perfecting of the saints, unto the work of ministering.” For if
it were not so, there would have been no security against universal
corruption. For it may be that rulers are wicked and polluted, and their
subjects good and virtuous; that laymen may live in piety, and priests
in wickedness; and there could not have been either baptism, or the body
of Christ, or oblation, through such, if in every instance grace
required merit. But as it is, God uses to work even by unworthy persons,
and in no respect is the grace of baptism damaged by the conduct of the
priest: else would the receiver suffer loss. Accordingly, though such
things happen rarely, still, it must be owned, they do happen. Now these
things I say, lest any one of the bystanders busying himself about the
life of the priest, should be offended as concerning the things
solemnized (<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.ix-p7.5"></span>τὰ
τελούμενα</span>). “For man introduceth nothing into the things which
are set before us <span id="fr_48"></span>[49](#fn_48) , but the whole
is a work of the power of God, and He it is who initiates (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.ix-p8.2"></span>ὁ μυσταγωγῶν</span>) you into
the mysteries.”

<span id="iv.ix-p9"></span>\[3.\] “And I, brethren, could not speak unto
you as unto spiritual, but as unto carnal. I fed you with milk, and not
with meat. For ye were not able \[to bear it.\]”

<span id="iv.ix-p10"></span>For lest he should seem to have spoken
ambitiously (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix-p10.1"></span>φιλοτιμίας ἕνεκα</span>, to obtain favor) these
things which he hath just spoken; “the spiritual man judgeth all
things,” and, “he himself is judged of no man,” and, “we have the mind
of Christ;” with a view also to repress their pride: observe what he
saith. “Not on this account,” saith he, “was I silent, because I was not
able to tell you more, but because ‘ye are carnal: neither yet now are
ye able.’”

<span id="iv.ix-p11"></span>Why said he not, “ye are not willing,” but
“ye are not able?” Even because he put the latter for the former. For as
to the want of ability, it arises from the want of will. Which to them
indeed is a matter of accusation, but to their teacher, of excuse. For
if they had been unable by nature, one might perhaps have been forgiven
them; but since it was from choice, they were bereft of all excuse. He
then speaks of the particular point also which makes them carnal. “For
whereas there is among you strife, and jealousy, and division, are ye
not carnal and walk as men?” Although he had fornications also and
uncleannesses of theirs to speak of, he sets down rather that offence
which <span id="page_45">p. 45</span> <span id="iv.ix-Page_45"></span>he
had been a good while endeavoring to correct. Now if “jealousy” makes
men carnal, it is high time for us to bewail bitterly, and to clothe
ourselves with sackcloth and lie in ashes. For who is pure from this
passion? Except indeed I am but conjecturing the case of others from
myself. If “jealousy” maketh men “carnal,” and suffereth them not to be
“spiritual,” although they prophesy and show forth other wonderful
works; now, when not even so much grace is with us, what place shall we
find for our own doings; when not in this matter alone, but also in
others of greater moment, we are convicted.

<span id="iv.ix-p12"></span>\[4.\] From this place we learn that Christ
had good reason for saying, (St. [John iii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#020)<span id="iv.ix-p12.1"></span>.) “He
that doeth evil cometh not to light;” and that unclean life is an
obstacle to high doctrines, not suffering the clear-sightedness of the
understanding to shew itself. As then it is not in any case possible for
a person in error, but living uprightly, to remain in error; so it is
not easy for one brought up in iniquity, speedily to look up to the
height of the doctrines delivered to us, but he must be clean from all
the passions who is to hunt after the truth: for whoso is freed from
these shall be freed also from his error and attain unto the truth. For
do not, I beseech you, think that abstinence merely from covetousness or
fornication may suffice thee for this purpose. Not so. All must concur
in him that seeketh the truth. Wherefore saith Peter, ([Acts
10:34](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#034),
[35](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#035)<span id="iv.ix-p12.2"></span>.)
“Of a truth I perceive that God is no respecter of persons; but in every
nation he that feareth Him, and worketh righteousness, is acceptable to
Him:” that is, He calls and attracts him unto the truth. Seest thou not
Paul, that he was more vehement than any one in warring and persecuting?
yet because he led an irreproachable life, and did these things not
through human passion, he was both received, and reached a mark beyond
all. But if any one should say, “How doth such a one, a Greek, who is
kind, and good, and humane, continue in error?” this would be my answer:
He hath some other passion, vainglory, or indolence of mind, or want of
carefulness about his own salvation, accounting that all things which
concern him are drifted along loosely and at random.  <span
id="fr_49"></span>[50](#fn_49) Peter calls the man irreproachable in all
things one that “worketh righteousness,” \[and Paul says\] “touching the
righteousness which is in the law found blameless.” Again, “I give
thanks to God, whom I serve from my forefathers with a pure conscience,”
([2 Tim. i. 3](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#003)<span
id="iv.ix-p13.1"></span>.) How then, you will say, were unclean persons
considered worthy of the Gospel? Because they wished and longed for it.
Thus the one sort, though in error, are attracted by Him, because they
are clean from passions; the others, of their own accord approaching,
are not thrust back. Many also even from their ancestors have received
the true religion.

<span id="iv.ix-p14"></span>\[5.\] [1 Cor.
3.3](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#003)<span id="iv.ix-p14.1"></span>.
“For whereas there is among you jealousy and strife.”

<span id="iv.ix-p15"></span>At this point he prepares himself to wrestle
with those whose part was obedience: for in what went before he hath
been casting down the rulers of the Church, where he said that wisdom of
speech is nothing worth. But here he strikes at those in subjection, in
the words,

<span id="iv.ix-p16"></span>[1 Cor.
3.4](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#004)<span id="iv.ix-p16.1"></span>.
“For when one saith, I am Paul, and I of Apollos, are ye not carnal?”

<span id="iv.ix-p17"></span>And he points out that this, so far from
helping them at all or causing them to acquire any thing, had even
become an obstacle to their profiting in the greater things. For this it
was which brought forth jealousy, and jealousy had made them “carnal;”
and the having become “carnal” left them not at liberty to hear truths
of the sublimer sort.

<span id="iv.ix-p18"></span>[1 Cor.
3.5](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#005)<span id="iv.ix-p18.1"></span>.
“Who then is Paul, and who is Apollos?”

<span id="iv.ix-p19"></span>In this way, after producing and proving his
facts, he makes his accusation henceforth more openly. Moreover, he
employs his own name, doing away all harshness and not suffering them to
be angry at what it is said. For if Paul is nothing and murmur not, much
less ought they to think themselves ill used. Two ways, you see, he has
of soothing them; first by bringing forward his own person, then by not
robbing them of all as if they contributed nothing. Rather he allows
them some small portion:  small though it be, he does allow it. For
having said, “Who is Paul, and who Apollos,” he adds, “but ministers by
whom ye believed.” Now this in itself is a great thing, and deserving of
great rewards:  although in regard of the archetype and the root of all
good, it is nothing. (For not he that “ministers” to our blessings, but
he that provides and gives them, he is our Benefactor.) And he said not,
“Evangelists,” but “Ministers,” which is more. For they had not merely
preached the Gospel, but had also ministered unto us; the one being a
matter of word only, while the other hath deed also. And so, if even
Christ be a minister only of good things, and not the root Himself and
the fountain, (I mean, of course, in that He is a Son,) observe to what
an issue this matter is brought. (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix-p19.1"></span>ποῦ τὸ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix-p19.2"></span>πρᾶγμα κατάγεται</span>. “how deep and high it
is made to go.”)  How then, you will ask, doth he say that He “was made
a Minister of Circumcision? ([Rom. xv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#008)<span id="iv.ix-p19.3"></span>.) He
is speaking in that place of His secret dispensation in the Flesh, and
not in the same sense which we have now mentioned. For there, by
“Minister,” he means “Fulfiller,” (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix-p19.4"></span>πληρωτὴν</span>, i.e. of types), and not one
that of his own store gives out the blessings.

<span id="iv.ix-p20"></span><span id="page_46">p. 46</span> <span
id="iv.ix-Page_46"></span>Further, he said not, “Those who guide you
into the Faith,” but “those by whom ye believed;” again attributing the
greater share to themselves, and indicating by this also the subordinate
class of ministers (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix-p20.1"></span>τοὺς διακόνους</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix-p20.2"></span>κὰντεῦθεν δηλῶν</span>). Now if they were
ministering to another, how come they to seize the authority for
themselves? But I would have you consider how in no wise he lays the
blame on them as seizing it for themselves, but on those who endow them
with it. For the ground-work of the error lay in the multitude; since,
had the one fallen away, the other would have been broken up. Here are
two points which he has skilfully provided for: in that first he hath
prepared, as by mining (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix-p20.3"></span>ὑπορύξας</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix-p20.4"></span>,</span>) in the quarter where it was necessary
to overthrow the mischief; and next, on their side, in not attracting
ill-will, nor yet making them more contentious.

<span id="iv.ix-p21"></span>[1 Cor.
3.5](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#005)<span id="iv.ix-p21.1"></span>.
“Even as Christ (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix-p21.2"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix-p21.3"></span>Κύριος</span>, rec. text.) gave to every man.”

<span id="iv.ix-p22"></span>For not even this small thing itself was of
themselves, but of God, who put it into their hands. For lest they might
say, What then? are we not to love those that minister unto us? Yea,
saith he; but you should know to what extent. For not even this thing
itself is of them, but of God who gave it.

<span id="iv.ix-p23"></span>[1 Cor.
3.6](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#006)<span id="iv.ix-p23.1"></span>. “I
planted, Apollos watered, but God gave the increase.”

<span id="iv.ix-p24"></span>That is, I first cast the word into the
ground; but, in order that the seeds might not wither away through
temptations, Apollos added his own part. But the whole was of God.

<span id="iv.ix-p25"></span>\[6.\] [1 Cor.
3.7](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#007)<span id="iv.ix-p25.1"></span>. “So
then, neither is he that planteth any thing, neither he that watereth,
but God that giveth the increase.”

<span id="iv.ix-p26"></span>Do you observe the manner in which he
soothes them, so that they should not be too much irritated, on hearing,
“Who is this person,” and “Who is that?” “Nay, both are invidious,
namely, both the saying, ‘Who is this person? Who the other,’” and the
saying, that “neither he that planteth nor he that watereth is any
thing.” How then does he soften these expressions? First, By attaching
the contempt to his own person, “Who is Paul, and who Apollos?” and
next, by referring the whole to God who gave all things. For after he
had said, “Such a person planted,” and added, “He that planteth is
nothing,” he subjoined, “but God that giveth the increase.” Nor does he
stop even here, but applies again another healing clause, in the words.

<span id="iv.ix-p27"></span>[1 Cor.
3.8](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#008)<span id="iv.ix-p27.1"></span>. “He
that planteth and he that watereth, are one.”

<span id="iv.ix-p28"></span>For by means of this he establishes another
point also, viz. that they should not be exalted one against another.
His assertion, that they are one, refers to their inability to do any
thing without “God that giveth the increase.” And thus saying, he
permitted not either those who labored much to lift themselves up
against those who had contributed less; nor these again to envy the
former. In the next place, since this had a tendency to make men more
indolent, I mean, all being esteemed as one, whether they have labored
much or little; observe how he sets this right, saying, “But each shall
receive his own reward according to his own labor.” As if he said, “Fear
not, because I said, Ye are one; for, compared with the work of God,
they are one; howbeit, in regard to labors, they are not so, but “each
shall receive his own reward.”

<span id="iv.ix-p29"></span>Then he smooths it still more, having
succeeded in what he wished; and gratifies them, where it is allowed,
with liberality.

<span id="iv.ix-p30"></span>[1 Cor.
3.9](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#009)<span id="iv.ix-p30.1"></span>. For
we are God’s fellow-workers: “ye are God’s husbandry, God’s building.”

<span id="iv.ix-p31"></span>Seest thou how to them also he hath assigned
no small work, having before laid it down that the whole is of God?  For
since he is always persuading them to obey those that have the rule over
them, on this account he abstains from making very light of their
teachers.

<span id="iv.ix-p32"></span>“Ye are God’s husbandry.”

<span id="iv.ix-p33"></span>For because he had said, “I planted,” he
kept to the metaphor. Now if ye be God’s husbandry, it is right that you
should be called not from those who cultivate you, but from God. For the
field is not called the husbandman’s, but the householder’s.

<span id="iv.ix-p34"></span>“Ye are God’s building.”

<span id="iv.ix-p35"></span>Again, the building is not the workman’s,
but the master’s. Now if ye be a building, ye must not be forced
asunder: since this were no building. If ye be a farm, ye must not be
divided, but be walled in with a single fence, namely, unanimity.

<span id="iv.ix-p36"></span>[1 Cor.
3.10](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#010)<span id="iv.ix-p36.1"></span>.
“According to the Grace of God which was given unto me, as a wise
master-builder I laid a foundation.”

<span id="iv.ix-p37"></span>In this place he calls himself wise, not
exalting himself, but to give them an ensample, and to point out that
this is a wise man’s part, to lay a foundation. You may observe as one
instance of his modest bearing, that in speaking of himself as wise, he
allowed not this to stand as though it were something of his own; but
first attributing himself entirely unto God, then and not till then
calls himself by that name. For, “according to the Grace of God,” saith
he, “which was given unto me.” Thus, at once he signifies both that the
whole is of God; and that this most of all is Grace, viz. the not being
divided, but resting on One Foundation.

<span id="iv.ix-p38"></span>\[7.\] “Another buildeth thereon; but let
each man take heed how he buildeth thereon.”

<span id="iv.ix-p39"></span><span id="page_47">p. 47</span> <span
id="iv.ix-Page_47"></span>Here, I think, and in what follows, he puts
them upon their trial concerning practice, after that he had once for
all knit them together and made them one.

<span id="iv.ix-p40"></span>[1 Cor.
3.11](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#011)<span id="iv.ix-p40.1"></span>.
“For other foundation can no man lay than that is laid, which is Jesus
Christ.”

<span id="iv.ix-p41"></span>I say, no man can lay it so long as he is a
master-builder; but if he lay it, (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix-p41.1"></span>τιθῃ</span> conj. for <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix-p41.2"></span> τεθῃ</span>. *Dounæus ap. Savil. viii. not. p*.
261.) he ceases to be a master-builder.

<span id="iv.ix-p42"></span>See how even from men’s common notions he
proves the whole of his proposition. His meaning is this: “I have
preached Christ, I have delivered unto you the foundation. Take heed how
you build thereon, lest haply it be in vainglory, lest haply so as to
draw away the disciples unto men.” Let us not then give heed unto the
heresies. “For other foundation can no man lay than that which is laid.”
Upon this then let us build, and as a foundation let us cleave to it, as
a branch to a vine; and let there be no interval between us and Christ.
For if there be any interval, immediately we perish. For the branch by
its adherence draws in the fatness, and the building stands because it
is cemented together. Since, if it stand apart it perishes, having
nothing whereon to support itself. Let us not then merely keep hold of
Christ, but let us be cemented to Him, for if we stand apart, we perish.
“For they who withdraw themselves far from Thee, shall perish;” ([Ps.
lxxiii. 27](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#027)<span
id="iv.ix-p42.1"></span>. Sept.) so it is said. Let us cleave then unto
Him, and let us cleave by our works. “For he that keepeth my
commandments, the same abideth in Me” ([John xiv.
21](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#021)<span id="iv.ix-p42.2"></span>. in
substance.) And accordingly, there are many images whereby He brings us
into union. Thus, if you mark it, He is “the Head,” we are “the body:”
can there be any empty interval between the head and body? He is “a
Foundation,” we “a building:” He “a Vine,” we “branches:” He “the
Bridegroom,” we “the bride:” He “the Shepherd,” we “the sheep;” He is
“the Way,” we “they who walk therein.” Again, we are “a temple,” He “the
Indweller:” He “the First-Begotten,” we “the brethren:” He “the Heir,”
we “the heirs together with Him:” He “the Life,” we “the living:” He
“the Resurrection,” we “those who rise again:” He “the Light,” we “the
enlightened.” All these things indicate unity; and they allow no void
interval, not even the smallest. For he that removes but to a little
distance will go on till he has become very far distant. For so the
body, receiving though it be but a small cut by a sword, perishes: and
the building, though there be but a small chink, falls to decay: and the
branch, though it be but a little while cut off from the root, becomes
useless. So that this trifle is no trifle, but is even almost the whole.
Whensoever then we commit some little fault or even negligence, let us
not overlook that little; since this, being disregarded, quickly becomes
great. So also when a garment hath begun to be torn and is neglected, it
is apt to prolong its rent all throughout; and a roof, when a few tiles
have fallen, being disregarded, brings down the whole house.

<span id="iv.ix-p43"></span>\[8.\] These things then let us bear in
mind, and never slight the small things, lest we fall into those which
are great. But if so be that we have slighted them and are come into the
abyss of evils, not even when we are come there let us despond, lest we
fall into recklessness (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix-p43.1"></span>καρηβαρίαν</span>). For to emerge from thence is
hard ever after, for one who is not extremely watchful; not because of
the distance alone, but of the very position, too, wherein we find
ourselves. For sin also is a deep, and is wont to bear down and crush.
And just as those who have fallen into a well cannot with ease get out,
but will want others to draw them up; so also is he that is come into
any depth of sins. To such then we must lower ropes and draw them up.
Nay rather, we need not others only, but ourselves also, that we for our
part may fasten on ourselves and ascend, I say not so much as we have
descended, but much further, if we be willing: for why? God also
helpeth: for He willeth not the death of a sinner so much as his
conversion. Let no one then despair; let no one have the feeling of the
ungodly; for to them properly belongs this kind of sin:  “an ungodly man
having come into any depth of evils, makes light of it <span
id="fr_50"></span>[51](#fn_50) .” So that it is not the multitude of
men’s sins which causes their despair, but their ungodly mind.

<span id="iv.ix-p45"></span>Shouldest thou then have gone all lengths in
wickedness, yet say unto thyself, God is loving unto men and he desires
our salvation: for “though your sins be as scarlet, I will whiten you as
snow,” ([Is. i. 10](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#010)<span
id="iv.ix-p45.1"></span>. Sept.) saith He; and unto the contrary habit I
will change you. Let us not therefore give up in despair; for to fall is
not so grievous, as to lie where we have fallen; nor to be wounded so
dreadful, as after wounds to refuse healing. “For who shall boast that
he has his heart chaste? or who shall say confidently that he is pure
from sin?” ([Prov. xx. 9](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#009)<span
id="iv.ix-p45.2"></span>. Sept.) These things I say not to make you more
negligent, but to prevent your despairing.

<span id="iv.ix-p46"></span>Wouldest thou know how good our Master is?
The Publican went up full of ten thousand wickednesses, and saying only,
“Be merciful unto me,” went down justified. (St. [Luke
18:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#014)<span id="iv.ix-p46.1"></span><span
id="page_48">p. 48</span> <span id="iv.ix-Page_48"></span>.) Yea, God
saith by the prophet, “Because of sin for some little season I grieved
him, ([Isa. 57:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#017),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#018)<span id="iv.ix-p46.2"></span>.
Sept.) and I saw that (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix-p46.3"></span>εἶδον δτι</span> not in Sept.) he was grieved
and went sorrowful, and I healed his ways” (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix-p46.4"></span>ἰασάμην αὐτὸν</span>, Sept.) What is there equal
to this loving-kindness? On condition (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix-p46.5"></span>ἳνα στυγνάση</span>. See St. [John viii.
56](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#056)<span id="iv.ix-p46.6"></span>.
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.ix-p46.7"></span> ἳνα ἴ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.ix-p46.8"></span>δη τὴν</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.ix-p46.9"></span>ἡμέραν</span>) of his “being
but sorrowful,” so he speaks, “I forgave him his sins.” But we do not
even this:  wherefore we especially provoke God to wrath. (For he, who
by little things even is made propitious, when He meets not with so much
as these, is of course indignant and exacts of us the last penalty; for
this comes of exceeding contempt.) Who is there, for instance, that hath
ever become melancholy for his sins? Who hath bemoaned himself? Who hath
beaten his breast? Who hath taken anxious thought? Not one, to my
thinking. But days without number do men weep for dead servants; for the
loss of money:  while as to the soul which we are ruining day by day, we
give it not a thought. How then wilt thou be able to render God
propitious, when thou knowest not even that thou hast sinned?

<span id="iv.ix-p47"></span>“Yea,” saith some one, “I have sinned.”
“Yea,” is thy word to me with the tongue: say it to me with thy mind,
and with the word mourn heavily, that thou mayest have continual
cheerfulness. Since, if we did grieve for our sins, if we mourned
heavily over our offences, nothing else could give us sorrow, this one
pang would expel all kinds of dejection. Here then is another thing also
which we should gain by our thorough confession; namely, the not being
overwhelmed (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix-p47.1"></span>βαπτίζεσθαι</span>) with the pains of the
present life, nor puffed up with its splendors. And in this way, again,
we should more entirely propitiate God; just as by our present conduct
we provoke Him to anger. For tell me, if thou hast a servant, and he,
after suffering much evil at the hands of his fellow-servants, takes no
account of any one of the rest, but is only anxious not to provoke his
master; is he not able by this alone to do away thine anger? But what,
if his offenses against thee are no manner of care to him, while on
those against his fellow-servants he is full of thought; wilt thou not
lay on him the heavier punishment? So also God doeth: when we neglect
His wrath, He brings it upon us more heavily; but when we regard it,
more gently. Yea, rather, He lays it on us no more at all. He wills that
we should exact vengeance of ourselves for our offences, and thenceforth
He doth not exact it Himself. For this is why He at all threatens
punishment; that by fear He may destroy contempt; and when the threat
alone is sufficient to cause fear in us, He doth not suffer us to
undergo the actual trial. See, for instance, what He saith unto
Jeremiah, ([Jer. 7:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#017),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#018)<span id="iv.ix-p47.2"></span>.
Sept. transposing the first and second clauses.) “Seest thou not what
they do? Their fathers light a fire, their children gather sticks
together, their women knead dough.” It is to be feared lest the same
kind of thing be said also concerning us. “Seest thou not what they do?
No one seeketh the things of Christ, but all their own. Their children
run into uncleanness, their fathers into covetousness and rapine, their
wives so far from keeping back their husbands from the pomps and
vanities of life, do rather sharpen their appetites for them.” Just take
your stand in the market place; question the comers and goers, and not
one wilt thou see hastening upon a spiritual errand, but all running
after carnal things. How long ere we awake from our surfeiting? How long
are we to keep sinking down into deep slumber? Have we not had our fill
of evils?

<span id="iv.ix-p48"></span>\[9.\] And yet one might think that even
without words experience itself is sufficient to teach you the
nothingness of things present, and their utter meanness. At all events,
there have been men, who, exercising mere heathen wisdom and knowing
nothing of the future, because they had proved the great worthlessness
of present things, have left them on this account alone. What pardon
then canst thou expect to obtain, grovelling on the ground and not
despising the little things and transient for the sake of the great and
everlasting: who also hearest God Himself declaring and revealing these
things unto thee, and hast such promises from Him? For that things here
have no sufficient power to detain a man, those have shewn who even
without any promise of things greater have kept away from them. For what
wealth did they expect that they came to poverty? There was none. But it
was from their knowing full well that such poverty is better than
wealth. What sort of life did they hope for that they forsook luxury,
and gave themselves up unto severe discipline? Not any. But they had
become aware of the very nature of things; and perceived that this of
the two is more suitable, both for the strict training of the soul, and
for the health of the body.

<span id="iv.ix-p49"></span>These things then duly estimating, and
revolving with ourselves continually the future blessings, let us
withdraw from this present world that we may obtain that other which is
to come; through the favor and loving kindness of our Lord Jesus Christ,
with Whom to the Father and the Holy Ghost &c., &c.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_48"></span>[44:49](1120012.htm#fr_48) <span
id="iv.ix-p7.6"></span>

<span id="iv.ix-p8"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix-p8.1"></span>τὰ προκείμενα</span>, a liturgical word; the
Sacred Elements; vid. St. Basil’s Liturgy, and St. Chrysostom’s.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[45:50](1120012.htm#fr_49) <span
id="iv.ix-p12.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix-p13"></span> \[The version of this sentence follows Dr.
Field’s text. C.\]

<span id="fn_50"></span>[47:51](1120012.htm#fr_50) <span
id="iv.ix-p43.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix-p44"></span> \[This is an exact quotation from the Sept.
version of [Prov. xviii. 3](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#003)<span
id="iv.ix-p44.1"></span>.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily IX](1120013)
