[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1120010)  [Next](1120012) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii"></span>

<span id="iv.viii-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="iv.viii-p1.1"></span>Homily VII.</span>

<span id="iv.viii-p2"></span><span id="iv.viii-p2.1"></span><span
class="c1"><span id="iv.viii-p2.2"></span>[1 Cor.
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#007)<span
id="iv.viii-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.viii-p3"></span>Howbeit we speak wisdom among the perfect,
yet a wisdom not of this world, nor of the rulers of this world, which
are coming to naught; but we speak God’s wisdom in a mystery, even the
wisdom that hath been hidden, which God fore-ordained before the worlds
unto our glory.

<span id="iv.viii-p4"></span><span class="c18"><span
id="iv.viii-p4.1"></span>Darkness</span> seems to be more suitable than
light to those that are diseased in their eyesight: wherefore they
betake themselves by preference to some room that is thoroughly shaded
over. This also is the case with the wisdom which is spiritual. As the
wisdom which is of God seemed to be foolishness unto those without: so
their own wisdom, being foolishness indeed, was accounted by them
wisdom. The result has been just as if a man having skill in navigation
were to promise that without a ship or sails he would pass over a
boundless tract of sea, and then endeavor by reasonings to prove that
the thing is possible; but some other person, ignorant of it all,
committing himself to a ship and a steersman and sailors, were thus to
sail in safety. For the seeming ignorance of this man is wiser than the
wisdom of the other. For excellent is the art of managing a ship; but
when it makes too great professions it is a kind of folly. And so is
every art which is not contented with its own proper limits. Just so the
wisdom which is without \[were wisdom indeed <span
id="fr_37"></span>[38](#fn_37) \] <span id="page_34">p. 34</span> <span
id="iv.viii-Page_34"></span>if it had had the benefit of the spirit. But
since it trusted all to itself and supposed that it wanted none of that
help, it became foolishness, although it seemed to be wisdom. Wherefore
having first exposed it by the facts, then and not till then he calls it
foolishness; and having first called the wisdom of God folly, according
to their reckoning, then and not till then he shews it to be wisdom.
(For after our proofs, not before, we are best able to abash the
gainsayers.)

<span id="iv.viii-p6"></span>His words then are, “Howbeit we speak
wisdom among the perfect:” for when I, accounted foolish and a preacher
of follies, get the better of the wise, I overcome wisdom, not by
foolishness but by a more perfect wisdom; a wisdom, too, so ample and so
much greater, that the other appears foolishness. Wherefore having
before called it by a name such as they named it at that time, and
having both proved his victory from the facts, and shewn the extreme
foolishness of the other side: he thenceforth bestows upon it its right
name, saying, “Howbeit we speak wisdom among the perfect.” “Wisdom” is
the name he gives to the Gospel, to the method of salvation, the being
saved by the Cross. “The perfect,” are those who believe. For indeed
they are “perfect,” who know all human things to be utterly helpless,
and who overlook them from the conviction that by such they are profited
nothing: such were the true believers.

<span id="iv.viii-p7"></span>“But not a wisdom of this world.” For where
is the use of the wisdom which is without, terminating here and
proceeding no further, and not even here able to profit its possessors?

<span id="iv.viii-p8"></span>Now by the “rulers of the world,” here, he
means not certain demons, as some suspect <span
id="fr_38"></span>[39](#fn_38) , but those in authority, those in power,
those who esteem the thing worth contending about, philosophers,
rhetoricians and writers of speeches (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii-p9.2"></span>λογογράφους</span>). For these were the
dominant sort and often became leaders of the people.

<span id="iv.viii-p10"></span>“Rulers of the world” he calls them,
because beyond the present world their dominion extends not. Wherefore,
he adds further, “which are coming to nought;” disparaging it both on
its own account, and from those who wield it. For having shewn that it
is false, that it is foolish, that it can discover nothing, that it is
weak, he shews moreover that it is but of short duration.

<span id="iv.viii-p11"></span>\[2.\] “But we speak God’s wisdom in a
mystery.” What mystery? For surely Christ saith, (St. [Matt. x.
27](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#027)<span id="iv.viii-p11.1"></span>.
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.viii-p11.2"></span>ηκούσατε</span> rec.
text <span class="Greek"><span id="iv.viii-p11.3"></span>
ἀκούετε</span>.) “What ye have heard in the ear, proclaim upon the
housetops.” How then does he call it “a mystery?” Because that neither
angel nor archangel, nor any other created power knew of it before it
actually took place. Wherefore he saith, ([Ephes. iii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#010)<span id="iv.viii-p11.4"></span>)
“That now unto the principalities and powers in heavenly places might be
known by the Church the manifold wisdom of God.” And this hath God done
in honor to us, so that they not without us should hear the mysteries.
For we, too, ourselves, whomsoever we make our friends, use to speak of
this as a sure proof of friendship towards them, that we tell our
secrets to no one in preference to them. Let those hear who expose to
shame <span id="fr_39"></span>[40](#fn_39) the secrets of the Gospel,
and unto all indiscriminately display the “pearls” and the doctrine, and
who cast “the holy things” unto “dogs,” and “swine,” and useless
reasonings. For the Mystery wants no argumentation; but just what it is,
that only is to be declared. Since it will not be a mystery, divine and
whole in all its parts, when thou addest any thing to it of thyself
also.

<span id="iv.viii-p13"></span>And in another sense, too, a mystery is so
called; because we do not behold the things which we see, but some
things we see and others we believe. For such is the nature of our
Mysteries. I, for instance, feel differently upon these subjects from an
unbeliever. I hear, “Christ was crucified;” and forthwith I admire His
loving-kindness unto men: the other hears, and esteems it weakness. I
hear, “He became a servant;” and I wonder at his care for us: the other
hears, and counts it dishonor. I hear, “He died;” and am astonished at
His might, that being in death He was not holden, but even broke the
bands of death: the other hears, and surmises it to be helplessness. He
hearing of the resurrection, saith, the thing is a legend; I, aware of
the facts which demonstrate it, fall down and worship the dispensation
of God. He hearing of a laver, counts it merely as water: but I behold
not simply the thing which is seen, but the purification of the soul
which is by the Spirit. He considers only that my body hath been washed;
but I have believed that the soul also hath become both pure and holy;
and I count it the sepulchre, the resurrection, the sanctification, the
righteousness, the redemption, the adoption, the inheritance, the
kingdom of heaven, the plenary effusion (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii-p13.1"></span>χορηγίαν</span>) of the Spirit. For not by the
sight do I judge of the things that appear, but by the eyes of the mind.
I hear of the “Body of Christ:” in one sense I understand the
expression, in another sense the unbeliever.

<span id="iv.viii-p14"></span>And just as children, looking on their
books, know not the meaning of the letters, neither know what they see;
yea more, if even a grown man be unskilful in letters, the same thing
will befall him; but the skilful will find <span id="page_35">p.
35</span> <span id="iv.viii-Page_35"></span>much meaning stored up in
the letters, even complete lives and histories: and an epistle in the
hands of one that is unskilful will be accounted but paper and ink; but
he that knows how to read will both hear a voice, and hold converse with
the absent, and will reply whatsoever he chooses by means of writing: so
it is also in regard of the Mystery. Unbelievers albeit they hear, seem
not to hear: but the faithful, having the skill which is by the Spirit,
behold the meaning of the things stored therein. For instance, it is
this very thing that Paul signified, when he said that even now the word
preached is hidden: for “unto them that perish,” he saith, “it is
hidden.” ([2 Cor. iv. 3](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#003)<span
id="iv.viii-p14.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.viii-p15"></span>In another point of view, the word
indicates also the Gospel’s being contrary to all expectation. By no
other name is Scripture wont to call what happens beyond all hope and
above all thought of men. Wherefore also in another place, “My mystery
is for Me <span id="fr_40"></span>[41](#fn_40) ,” and for Mine. And Paul
again, (2 Cor. xv. 51<span id="iv.viii-p16.2"></span>.) “Behold, I shew
you a mystery: we shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed.”

<span id="iv.viii-p17"></span>\[3.\] And though it be everywhere
preached, still is it a mystery; for as we have been commanded, “what
things we have heard in the ear, to speak upon the house tops,” so have
we been also charged, “not to give the holy things unto dogs nor yet to
cast our pearls before swine.” (St. [Matt. vii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#009)<span id="iv.viii-p17.1"></span>.)
For some are carnal and do not understand: others have a veil upon their
hearts and do not see: wherefore that is above all things a mystery,
which everywhere is preached, but is not known of those who have not a
right mind; and is revealed not by wisdom but by the Holy Ghost, so far
as is possible for us to receive it. And for this cause a man would not
err, who in this respect also should entitle it a mystery, the utterance
whereof is forbidden. (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii-p17.2"></span>ἀπόῤῥητον</span>)  For not even unto us, the
faithful, hath been committed entire certainty and exactness. Wherefore
Paul also said, ([1 Cor. 13.9](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#009)<span
id="iv.viii-p17.3"></span>.) “We know in part, and we prophesy in part:
for now we see in a mirror darkly; but then face to face.”

<span id="iv.viii-p18"></span>\[4.\] For this cause he saith, “We speak
wisdom in a mystery, the hidden wisdom which God fore-ordained before
the worlds unto our glory. Hidden:” that is, that no one of the powers
above hath learnt it before us; neither do the many know it now.

<span id="iv.viii-p19"></span>“Which he fore-ordained unto our glory”
and yet, elsewhere he saith, “unto his own glory,” for he considereth
our salvation to be His own glory: even as also He calleth it His own
riches, (vid. [Ephes. iii. 8](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#008)<span
id="iv.viii-p19.1"></span>.) though He be Himself rich in good and need
nothing in order that He may be rich.

<span id="iv.viii-p20"></span>“Fore-ordained,” he saith, pointing out
the care had of us. For so those are accounted most both to honor and to
love us, whosoever shall have laid themselves out to do us good from the
very beginning: which indeed is what fathers do in the case of children.
For although they give not their goods until afterwards, yet at first
and from the beginning they had predetermined this. And this is what
Paul is earnest to point out now; that God always loved us even from the
beginning and when as yet we were not. For unless He had loved us, He
would not have fore-ordained our riches. Consider not then the enmity
which hath come between; for more ancient than that was the friendship.

<span id="iv.viii-p21"></span>As to the words, “before the worlds,”
(<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.viii-p21.1"></span>πρὸ τῶν</span>
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.viii-p21.2"></span>αἰώνων</span>) they
mean eternal. For in another place also He saith thus, “Who is before
the worlds.” The Son also, if you mark it, will be found to be eternal
in the same sense. For concerning Him he saith, ([Heb. i.
2](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#002)<span id="iv.viii-p21.3"></span>.)
“By Him He made the worlds;” which is equivalent to subsistence before
the worlds; for it is plain that the maker is before the things which
are made.

<span id="iv.viii-p22"></span>\[5.\] [1 Cor.
2.8](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#008)<span id="iv.viii-p22.1"></span>.
“Which none of the rulers of this world knew; for had they known, they
would not have crucified the Lord of Glory.”

<span id="iv.viii-p23"></span>Now if they knew not, how said He unto
them, (St. [John vii. 28](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#028)<span
id="iv.viii-p23.1"></span>.) “Ye both know Me, and ye know whence I am?”
Indeed, concerning Pilate the Scripture saith, he knew not. (vid. St.
[John xix. 9](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#009)<span
id="iv.viii-p23.2"></span>.) It is likely also that neither did Herod
know. These, one might say, are called rulers of this world: but if a
man were to say that this is spoken concerning the Jews also and the
Priests, he would not err. For to these also He saith, (St. [John viii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#019)<span id="iv.viii-p23.3"></span>.)
“Ye know neither Me nor My Father.” How then saith He a little before,
“Ye both know Me, and ye know whence I am?” However, the manner of this
way of knowledge and of that hath already been declared in the Gospel;
(Hom. 49. on St. John,) and, not to be continually handling the same
topic, thither do we refer our readers.

<span id="iv.viii-p24"></span>What then? was their sin in the matter of
the Cross forgiven them? For He surely did say, “Forgive them.” ([Luke
xxiii. 34](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#034)<span
id="iv.viii-p24.1"></span>.) If they repented, it was forgiven. For even
he who set countless assailants on Stephen and persecuted the Church,
even Paul, became the champion of the Church. Just so then, those others
also who <span id="page_36">p. 36</span> <span
id="iv.viii-Page_36"></span>chose to repent, had forgiveness: and this
indeed Paul himself meant, when he exclaims, ([Rom.
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#011),
[1](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#002)<span id="iv.viii-p24.2"></span>.).
“I say then, have they stumbled that they should fall? God forbid.” “I
say then, hath God cast away His people whom He foreknew? God forbid.”
Then, to shew that their repentance was not precluded, he brought
forward as a decisive proof his own conversion, saying, “For I also am
an Israelite.”

<span id="iv.viii-p25"></span>As to the words, “They knew not;” they
seem to me to be said here not concerning Christ’s Person, but only
concerning the dispensation hidden in that event: (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.viii-p25.1"></span>περὶ αὐτῆς τοῦ</span>
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.viii-p25.2"></span>πράγματος τῆς</span>
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.viii-p25.3"></span>οἰκονομὶας</span>)
as if he had said, what meant “the death,” and the “Cross,” they knew
not. For in that passage also He said not, “They know not Me,” but,
“They know not what they do;” that is, the dispensation which is being
accomplished, and the mystery, they are ignorant of. For they knew not
that the Cross is to shine forth so brightly; that it is made the
salvation of the world, and the reconciliation of God unto men; that
their city should be taken; and that they should suffer the extreme of
wretchedness.

<span id="iv.viii-p26"></span>By the name of “wisdom,” he calls both
Christ, and the Cross and the Gospel. Opportunely also he called Him,
“The Lord of glory.” For seeing that the Cross is counted a matter of
ignominy, he signifies that the Cross was great glory:  but that there
was need of great wisdom in order not only to know God but also to learn
this dispensation of God: and the wisdom which was without turned out an
obstacle, not to the former only, but to the latter also.

<span id="iv.viii-p27"></span>\[6.\] [1 Cor.
2.9](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#009)<span id="iv.viii-p27.1"></span>.
“But as it is written, Things which eye saw not and ear heard not, and
which entered not into the heart of man, whatsoever things God prepared
for them that love Him.”

<span id="iv.viii-p28"></span>Where are these words written? Why, it is
said to have been “written,” then also, when it is set down, not in
words, but in actual events, as in the historical books <span
id="fr_41"></span>[42](#fn_41) ; or when the same meaning is expressed,
but not in the very same words, as in this place: for the words, “They
to whom it was not told about Him shall see, and they who have not heard
shall understand,” ([Isa. 52:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#015), [Rom.
15:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#021), [Isa.
64:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#004)<span id="iv.viii-p29.2"></span>.)
are the same with “the things which eye hath not seen, nor ear heard.”
Either then this is his meaning, or probably it was actually written in
some books, and the copies have perished. For indeed many books were
destroyed, and few were preserved entire even in the first captivity.
And this is plain, in those which remain to us. <span
id="fr_42"></span>[43](#fn_42)   For the Apostle saith ([Acts iii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#024)<span id="iv.viii-p30.2"></span>.)
“From Samuel and the Prophets which follow after they have all spoken
concerning Him:” and these their words are not entirely extant. Paul,
however, as being learned in the law and speaking by the Spirit, would
of course know all with accuracy. And why speak I of the captivity? Even
before the captivity many books had disappeared; the Jews having rushed
headlong to the last degree of impiety:  and this is plain from the end
of the fourth book of Kings, ([2 Kings
22:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#008), [2 Chr.
34:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#014)<span
id="iv.viii-p30.3"></span>.) for the book of Deuteronomy could hardly be
found, having been buried somewhere in a dunghill <span
id="fr_43"></span>[44](#fn_43) .

<span id="iv.viii-p32"></span>And besides, there are in many places
double prophecies, easy to be apprehended by the wiser sort; from which
we may find out many of the things which are obscure.

<span id="iv.viii-p33"></span>\[7.\] What then, hath “eye not seen what
God prepared?” No. For who among men saw the things which were about to
be dispensed? Neither then hath “the ear heard, nor hath it entered into
the heart of man.” How is this? For if the Prophets spoke of it, how
saith he, “Ear hath not heard, neither hath it entered into the heart of
man?” It did not enter; for not of himself alone is he speaking, but of
the whole human race. What then? The Prophets, did not they hear? Yes,
they heard; but the prophetic ear was not the ear “of man:” for not as
men heard they, but as Prophets. Wherefore he said, ([Is. l.
4](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#004)<span id="iv.viii-p33.1"></span>.
Sept.) “He hath added unto me an ear to hear,” meaning by “addition”
that which was from the Spirit. From whence it was plain that before
hearing it had not entered into the heart of man. For after the gift of
the Spirit the heart of the Prophets was not the heart of man, but a
spiritual heart; as also he saith himself, “We have the mind of Christ”
([1 Cor. 2.16](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#016)<span
id="iv.viii-p33.2"></span>.) as if he would say, “Before we had the
blessing of the Spirit and learnt the things which no man can speak, no
one of us nor yet of the Prophets conceived them in his mind. How should
we? since not even angels know them. For what need is there to speak,”
saith he, “concerning ‘the rulers of this world,’ seeing that no man
knew them, nor yet the powers above?”

<span id="iv.viii-p34"></span>What kind of things then are these? That
by what is esteemed to be the foolishness of preaching He shall overcome
the world, and the nations shall be brought in, and there shall be
reconciliation of God with men, and so great blessings shall come upon
us!  How then have we “known? Unto us,” he saith, “God hath revealed
them by His Spirit;” <span id="page_37">p. 37</span> <span
id="iv.viii-Page_37"></span>not by the wisdom which is without; for this
like some dishonored handmaid hath not been permitted to enter in, and
stoop down and look into (see St. [John xx.
5](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#005)<span id="iv.viii-p34.1"></span>.)
the mysteries pertaining to the Lord. Seest thou how great is the
difference between this wisdom and that? The things which angels knew
not, these are what she hath taught us: but she that is without, hath
done the contrary. Not only hath she failed to instruct, but she
hindered and obstructed, and after the event sought to obscure His
doings, making the Cross of none effect. Not then simply by our
receiving the knowledge, does he describe the honor vouchsafed to us,
nor by our receiving it with angels, but, what is more, by His Spirit
conveying it to us.

<span id="iv.viii-p35"></span>\[7.\] Then to show its greatness, he
saith, If the Spirit which knoweth the secret things of God had not
revealed them, we should not have learned them. Such an object of care
was this whole subject to God, as to be among His secrets. Wherefore we
needed also that Teacher who knoweth these things perfectly; for “the
Spirit,” ([1 Cor. 2.10-12](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#010)<span
id="iv.viii-p35.1"></span>.) saith he, “searcheth all things, even the
deep things of God.” For the word “to search” is here indicative not of
ignorance, but of accurate knowledge: it is the very same mode of
speaking which he used even of God, saying, “He that searcheth the
hearts knoweth what is the mind of the Spirit.” ([Rom. viii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#027)<span id="iv.viii-p35.2"></span>.)
Then having spoken with exactness concerning the knowledge of the
Spirit, and having pointed out that it is as fully equal to God’s
knowledge, as the knowledge of a man itself to itself; and also, that we
have learned all things from it and necessarily from it; he added,
“which things also we speak, not in words which man’s wisdom teacheth,
but which the Holy Ghost teacheth; comparing spiritual things with
spiritual.” Seest thou to what point he exalted us because of the
Teacher’s dignity? For so much are we wiser than they as there is
difference between Plato and the Holy Spirit; they having for masters
the heathen rhetoricians but we, the Holy Spirit.

<span id="iv.viii-p36"></span>\[8.\] But what is this, “comparing
spiritual things with spiritual?” When a thing is spiritual and of
dubious meaning, we adduce testimonies from the things which are
spiritual. For instance, I say, Christ rose again—was born of a Virgin;
I adduce testimonies and types and demonstrations; the abode of Jonah in
the whale and his deliverance afterwards; the child-bearing of the
barren, Sarah, Rebecca, and the rest; the springing up of the trees
which took place in paradise ([Gen. ii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#005)<span id="iv.viii-p36.1"></span>.)
when there had been no seeds sown, no rains sent down, no furrow drawn
along. For the things to come were fashioned out and figured forth, as
in shadow, by the former things, that these which are now might be
believed when they came in. And again we shew, how of the earth was man,
and how of man alone the woman; and this without any intercourse
whatever; how the earth itself of nothing, the power of the Great
Artificer being every where sufficient for all things. Thus “with
spiritual things” do I “compare spiritual,” and in no instance have I
need of the Wisdom which is without—neither its reasonings nor its
embellishments. For such persons do but agitate the weak understanding
and confuse it; and are not able to demonstrate clearly any one of the
things which they affirm, but even have the contrary effect. They rather
disturb the mind and fill it with darkness and much perplexity.
Wherefore he saith, “with spiritual things comparing spiritual.” <span
id="fr_44"></span>[45](#fn_44)   Seest thou how superfluous he sheweth
it to be? and not only superfluous, but even hostile and injurious: for
this is meant by the expressions, “lest the Cross of Christ be made of
none effect,” and, “that our (‘your faith,’ rec. text) faith should not
stand in the wisdom of men.” And he points out here, that it is
impossible for those who confidently entrust every thing to it, to learn
any useful thing: for

<span id="iv.viii-p38"></span>\[9.\] [1 Cor.
2.14](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#014)<span id="iv.viii-p38.1"></span>.
“The natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit.”

<span id="iv.viii-p39"></span>It is necessary then to lay it aside
first. “What then,” some man will say; “is the wisdom from without
stigmatized? And yet it is the work of God.” How is this clear? since He
made it not, but it was an invention of thine. For in this place he
calls by the term “wisdom” curious research and superfluous elegance of
words. But should any one say that he means the human understanding;
even in this sense the fault is thine. For thou bringest a bad name upon
it, who makest a bad use of it; who to the injury and thwarting of God
demandest from it things which indeed it never had. Since then thou
boastest therein and fightest with God, He hath exposed its weakness.
For strength of body also is an excellent thing, but when Cain used it
not as he ought, God disabled him and made him tremble ([Gen.
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#012),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#014)<span id="iv.viii-p39.1"></span>.
Sept. “sighing and trembling,” rec. ver. “fugitive and vagabond.”)  Wine
also is a good thing; but because the Jews indulged in it immoderately,
God prohibited the priests entirely from the use of the fruit. <span
id="fr_45"></span>[46](#fn_45)   And since thou also hast abused wisdom
unto the rejecting of God, and hast demanded of it more than it can do
of its own strength; in order to withdraw thee from human hope, he hath
shewed thee its weakness.

<span id="iv.viii-p41"></span><span id="page_38">p. 38</span> <span
id="iv.viii-Page_38"></span>For (to proceed) he is “a natural man,” who
attributes every thing to reasonings of the mind and considers not that
he needs help from above; which is a mark of sheer folly. For God
bestowed it that it might learn and receive help from Him, not that it
should consider itself sufficient unto itself. For eyes are beautiful
and useful, but should they choose to see without light, their beauty
profits them nothing; nor yet their natural force, but even doth harm.
So if you mark it, any soul also, if it choose to see without the
Spirit, becomes even an impediment unto itself.

<span id="iv.viii-p42"></span>“How then, before this,” it will be said,
“did she see all things of herself?” Never at any time did she this of
herself but she had creation for a book set before her in open view. But
when men having left off to walk in the way which God commanded them,
and by the beauty of visible objects to know the Great Artificer, had
entrusted to disputations the leading-staff of knowledge; they became
weak and sank in a sea of ungodliness; for they presently brought in
that which was the abyss of all evil, asserting that nothing was
produced from things which were not, but from uncreated matter; and from
this source they became the parents of ten thousand heresies.

<span id="iv.viii-p43"></span>Moreover, in their extreme absurdities
they agreed; but in those things wherein they seemed to dream out
something wholesome, though it were only as in shadows, they fell out
with one another; that on both sides they might be laughed to scorn. For
that out of things which are not nothing is produced, nearly all with
one accord have asserted and written; and this with great zeal. In these
absurdities then they were urged on by the Devil. But in their
profitable sayings, wherein they seemed, though it were but darkly,
(<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.viii-p43.1"></span>ἐν
αἰνίγματι</span>,) to find some part of what they sought, in these they
waged war with one another: for instance, that the soul is immortal;
that virtue needs nothing external; and that the being good or the
contrary is not of necessity nor of fate.

<span id="iv.viii-p44"></span>Dost thou see the craft of the Devil? If
any where he saw men speaking any thing corrupt, he made all to be of
one mind; but if any where speaking any thing sound, he raised up others
against them; so that the absurdities did not fail, being confirmed by
the general consent, and the profitable parts died away, being variously
understood. Observe how in every respect the soul is unstrung, (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.viii-p44.1"></span>ἄτονος</span>) and is not
sufficient unto herself. And this fell out as one might expect. For if,
being such as she is, she aspire to have need of nothing and withdraw
herself from God; suppose her not fallen into that condition, and into
what extreme madness would she not have insensibly sunk? If, endowed
with a mortal body, she expected greater things from the false promise
of the Devil—(for, “Ye shall be,” said he, “as gods” [Gen. iii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#004)<span id="iv.viii-p44.2"></span>.)—to
what extent would she not have cast herself away, had she received her
body also, from the beginning, immortal. For, even after that, she
asserted herself to be unbegotten and of the essence of God, through the
corrupt mouth of the Manicheans <span id="fr_46"></span>[47](#fn_46) ,
and it was this distemperature which gave occasion to her invention of
the Grecian gods. On this account, as it seems to me, God made virtue
laborious, with a view to bow down the soul and to bring it to
moderation. And that thou mayest convince thyself that this is true, (as
far as from trifles ones may guess at any thing great,) let us learn it
from the Israelites. They, it is well known, when they led not a life of
toil but indulged in relaxation, not being able to bear prosperity, fell
away into ungodliness. What then did God upon this? He laid upon them a
multitude of laws with a view to restrain their licence. And to convince
you that these laws contribute not to any virtue, but were given to them
as a sort of curb, providing them with an occasion of perpetual labor;
hear what saith the prophet concerning them; “I gave them statutes which
were not good.” [Ezek. xx. 25](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#025)<span
id="iv.viii-p45.1"></span>. What means, “not good?” Such as did not much
contribute towards virtue. Wherefore he adds also, “and ordinances
whereby they shall not live.”

<span id="iv.viii-p46"></span>\[10.\] “But the natural man receiveth not
the things of the Spirit.”

<span id="iv.viii-p47"></span>For as with these eyes no man could learn
the things in the heavens; so neither the soul unaided the things of the
Spirit. And why speak I of the things in heaven? It receives not even
those in earth, all of them. For beholding afar off a square tower, we
think it to be round; but such an opinion is mere deception of the eyes:
so also we may be sure, when a man by means of his understanding alone
examines the things which are afar off much ridicule will ensue. For not
only will he not see them such as indeed they are, but will even account
them the contraries of what they are. Wherefore he added, “for they are
foolishness unto him.” But this comes not of the nature of the things,
but of his infirmity, unable as he is to attain to their greatness
through the eyes of his soul.

<span id="iv.viii-p48"></span>\[11.\] Next, pursuing his contrast, he
states the cause of this, saying, “he knoweth not because they are
spiritually discerned:” i.e. the things asserted require faith, and to
apprehend them by reasonings is not possible, for their <span
id="page_39">p. 39</span> <span id="iv.viii-Page_39"></span>magnitude
exceeds by a great deal the meanness of our understanding. Wherefore he
saith, “but he that is spiritual judgeth all things, yet he himself is
judged of no man.” For he that has sight, beholds himself all things
that appertain to the man that has no sight; but no sightless person
discerns what the other is about. So also in the case before us, our own
matters and those of unbelievers, all of them we for our part know; but
ours, they know not henceforth any more. We know what is the nature of
things present, what the dignity of things to come; and what some day
shall become of the world when this state of things shall be no more,
and what sinners shall suffer, and the righteous shall enjoy. And that
things present are nothing worth, we both know, and their meanness we
expose; (for to “discern” is also to expose;) (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii-p48.1"></span>ἀνακρίνειν, ἐλέγχειν</span>) and that the
things to come are immortal and immoveable. All these things are known
to the spiritual man; and what the natural man shall suffer when he is
departed into that world; and what the faithful shall enjoy when he hath
fulfilled his journey from this: none of which are known to the natural
man.

<span id="iv.viii-p49"></span>\[12.\] Wherefore also, subjoining a plain
demonstration of what had been affirmed, he saith, “For who hath known
the mind of the Lord, that he may instruct Him? But we have the mind of
Christ.” That is to say, the things which are in the mind of Christ,
these we know, even the very things which He willeth and hath revealed.
For since he had said, “the Spirit had revealed them;” lest any one
should set aside the Son, he subjoins that Christ also shewed us these
things. Not meaning this, that all the things which He knoweth, we know;
but that all the things which we know are not human so as to be open to
suspicion, but of His mind and spiritual.

<span id="iv.viii-p50"></span>For the mind which we have about these
things we have of Christ; that is, the knowledge which we have
concerning the things of the faith is spiritual; so that with reason we
are “judged of no man.” For it is not possible that a natural man should
know divine things. Wherefore also he said, “For who hath known the mind
of the Lord?” implying that our own mind which we have about these
things, is His mind. And this, “that he may instruct Him,” he hath not
added without reason, but with reference to what he had just now said,
“the spiritual man no one discerneth.” For if no man is able to know the
mind of God, much less can he teach and correct it. For this is the
meaning of, “that he may instruct Him.”

<span id="iv.viii-p51"></span>Seest thou how from every quarter he
repels the wisdom which is without, and shews that the spiritual man
knoweth more things and greater? For seeing that those reasons, “That no
flesh should glory;” and, “For this cause hath He chosen the foolish
things, that He might confound the wise men;” and, “Lest the Cross of
Christ should be made void:” seemed not to the unbelievers greatly
worthy of credit, nor yet attractive, or necessary, or useful, he
finishes by laying down the principal reason; because in this way we
most easily see from Whom we may have the means of learning even high
things, and things secret, and things which are above us. For reason was
absolutely made of none effect by our inability to apprehend through
Gentile wisdom the things above us.

<span id="iv.viii-p52"></span>You may observe, too, that it was more
advantageous to learn in this way from the Spirit. For that is the
easiest and clearest of all teaching.

<span id="iv.viii-p53"></span>“But we have the mind of Christ.” That is,
spiritual, divine, that which hath nothing human. For it is not of
Plato, nor of Pythagoras, but it is Christ Himself, putting His own
things into our mind.

<span id="iv.viii-p54"></span>This then, if naught else, let us revere,
O beloved, and let our life shine forth as most excellent; since He also
Himself maketh this a sure proof of great friendship, viz. the revealing
His secrets unto us: where He saith, (St. [John xv.
15](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#015)<span id="iv.viii-p54.1"></span>.)
“Henceforth I call you not servants, for all ye are My friends; for all
things which I have heard from My Father I have told unto you:” that is,
I have had confidence towards you. Now if this by itself is a proof of
friendship, namely, to have confidence: when it appears that He has not
only confided to us the mysteries conveyed by words, (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.viii-p54.2"></span>τὰ διὰ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.viii-p54.3"></span>ῥημάτων μυστηρία</span>)
but also imparted to us the same conveyed by works, (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.viii-p54.4"></span>διὰ τῶν</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.viii-p54.5"></span>ἔργων</span>, i.e.
sacramental actions) consider how vast the love of which this is the
fruit. This, if nothing else, let us revere; even though we will not
make any such great account of hell, yet let it be more fearful than
hell to be thankless and ungrateful to such a friend and benefactor. And
not as hired servants, but as sons and freemen, let us do all things for
the love of our Father; and let us at last cease from adhering to the
world that we may put the Greeks also to shame. For even now desiring to
put out my strength against them, I shrink from so doing, lest haply,
surpass them as we may by our arguments and the truth of what we teach,
we bring upon ourselves much derision from the comparison of our way of
life; seeing that they indeed, cleaving unto error and having no such
conviction, abide by philosophy, but we do just the contrary. However, I
will say it. For it may be, it may be that in practising how to contend
against them, we shall long as rivals to become better than they in our
mode of life also.

<span id="iv.viii-p55"></span><span id="page_40">p. 40</span> <span
id="iv.viii-Page_40"></span>\[14.\] I was saying not long ago, that it
would not have entered the Apostles’ thoughts to preach what they did
preach, had they not enjoyed Divine Grace; and that so far from
succeeding, they would not even have devised such a thing. Well then,
let us also to-day prosecute the same subject in our discourse; and let
us shew that it was a thing impossible so much as to be chosen or
thought of by them, if they had not had Christ among them: not because
they were arrayed, the weak against the strong, not because few against
many, not because poor against rich, not because unlearned against wise,
but because the strength of their prejudice, too, was great. For ye know
that nothing is so strong with men as the tyranny of ancient custom. So
that although they had not been twelve only, and not so contemptible,
and such as they really were, but another world as large as this, and
with an equivalent number arrayed on their side, or even much greater;
even in this case the result would have been hard to achieve. For the
other party had custom on their side, but to these their novelty was an
obstacle. For nothing so much disturbs the mind, though it be done for
some beneficial purpose, as to innovate and introduce strange things,
and most of all when this is done in matters relating to divine worship
and the glory of God. And how great force there is in this circumstance
I will now make plain; first having made the following statement that
there was added also another difficulty with regard to the Jews. For in
the case of the Greeks, they destroyed both their gods and their
doctrines altogether; but not so did they dispute with the Jews, but
many of their doctrines they abolished, while the God who had enacted
the same they bade them worship. And affirming that men should honor the
legislator, they said, “obey not in all respects the law which is of
Him;” for instance, in the keeping the Sabbath, or observing
circumcision, or offering sacrifices, or doing any other like thing. So
that not only was custom an impediment, but also the fact, that when
they bade men worship God, they bade them break many of His laws.

<span id="iv.viii-p56"></span>\[15.\] But in the case of the Greeks
great was the tyranny of custom. For if it had been a custom of ten
years only, I say not of such a length of time, and if it had
preoccupied but a few men, I say not the whole world, when these persons
made their approaches; even in this case the revolution would have been
hard to effect. But now sophists, and orators, and fathers, and
grandfathers, and many more ancient than all these, had been preoccupied
by the error: the very earth and sea, and mountains and groves, and all
nations of Barbarians, and all tribes of the Greeks, and wise men and
ignorant, rulers and subjects, women and men, young and old, masters and
slaves, artificers and husbandmen, dwellers in cities and in the
country; all of them. And those who were instructed would naturally say,
“What in the world is this? Have all that dwell in the world been
deceived? both sophists and orators, philosophers and historians, the
present generation and they who were before this, Pythagoreans,
Platonists, generals, consuls, kings, they who in all cities from the
beginning were citizens and colonists, both Barbarians and Greeks? And
are the twelve fishermen and tent-makers and publicans wiser than all
these? Why, who could endure such a statement?” However, they spake not
so, nor had it in their mind, but did endure them, and owned that they
were wiser than all. Wherefore they overcame even all. And custom was no
impediment to this, though accounted invincible when she hath acquired
her full swing by course of time.

<span id="iv.viii-p57"></span>And that thou mayest learn how great is
the strength of custom, it hath oftentimes prevailed over the commands
of God. And why do I say, commands? Even over very blessings. For so the
Jews when they had manna, required garlic; enjoying liberty they were
mindful of their slavery; and they were continually longing for Egypt,
because they were accustomed to it. Such a tyrannical thing is custom.

<span id="iv.viii-p58"></span>If thou desire to hear of it from the
heathens also; it is said that Plato, although well aware that all about
the gods was a sort of imposture, condescended to all the feasts and all
the rest of it, as being unable to contend with custom; and as having in
fact learnt this from his master. For he, too, being suspected of some
such innovation, was so far from succeeding in what he desired that he
even lost his life; and this, too, after making his defence. And how
many men do we see now by prejudice held in idolatry, and having nothing
plausible to say, when they are charged with being Greeks, but alleging
the fathers, and grandfathers, and great grandfathers. For no other
reason did some of the heathens call custom, second nature. But when
doctrines are the subject-matter of the custom, it becomes yet more
deeply rooted. For a man would change all things more easily than those
pertaining to religion. The feeling of shame, too, coupled with custom,
was enough to raise an obstacle; and the seeming to learn a new lesson
in extreme old age, and that of those who were not so intelligent. And
why wonder, should this happen in regard of the soul, seeing that even
in the body custom hath great force?

<span id="iv.viii-p59"></span>\[16.\] In the Apostles’ case, however,
there was yet another obstacle, more powerful than these; it was not
merely changing custom so ancient and primitive, but there were perils
also <span id="page_41">p. 41</span> <span
id="iv.viii-Page_41"></span>under which the change was effected. For
they were not simply drawing men from one custom to another, but from a
custom, wherein was no fear to an undertaking which held out threats of
danger. For the believer must immediately incur confiscation,
persecution, exile from his country; must suffer the worst ills, be
hated of all men, be a common enemy both to his own people and to
strangers. So that even if they had invited men to a customary thing out
of novelty, even in this case it would have been a difficult matter. But
when it was from a custom to an innovation, and with all these terrors
to boot, consider how vast was the obstacle!

<span id="iv.viii-p60"></span>And again, another thing, not less than
those mentioned, was added to make the change difficult.  For besides
the custom and the dangers, these precepts were both more burdensome,
and those from which they withdrew men were easy and light. For their
call was from fornication unto chastity; from love of life unto sundry
kinds of death; from drunkenness unto fasting; from laughter unto tears
and compunction; from covetousness unto utter indigence; from safety
unto dangers: and throughout all they required the strictest
circumspection. For, “Filthiness,” ([Ephes. v.
4](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#004)<span id="iv.viii-p60.1"></span>.)
saith he, “and foolish talking, and jesting, let it not proceed out of
your mouth.” And these things they spake unto those who knew nothing
else than how to be drunken and serve their bellies; who celebrated
feasts made up of nothing but of “filthiness” and laughter and all
manner of revellings (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii-p60.2"></span>κωμῳδίας ἁπάσης</span>.) So that not only from
the matter pertaining to severity of life were the doctrines
burthensome, but also from their being spoken unto men who had been
brought up in careless ease, and “filthiness,” and “foolish talking,”
and laughter and revellings. For who among those who had lived in these
things, when he heard, ([Matt. x.
38](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#038)<span id="iv.viii-p60.3"></span>.)
“If a man take not up his cross and follow Me, he is not worthy of Me;”
and, ([Matt. 10.34](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#034)<span
id="iv.viii-p60.4"></span>) “I came not to send peace but a sword, and
to set a man at variance with his father, and the daughter at variance
with her mother,” would not have felt himself chilled all over (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.viii-p60.5"></span>ἐνάρκησε</span>)? And who,
when he heard, “If a man bid not farewell to home and country and
possessions, he is not worthy of Me,” would not have hesitated, would
not have refused? And yet there were men, who not only felt no chill,
neither shrunk away when they heard these things, but ran to meet them
and rushed upon the hardships, and eagerly caught at the precepts
enjoined. Again, to be told, “For every idle word we shall give
account;” ([Matt. xii. 36](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#036)<span
id="iv.viii-p60.6"></span>.) and, “whosoever looketh upon a woman to
lust after her, hath committed adultery with her as soon as seen;”
([Matt. 5:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#028),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#025)<span id="iv.viii-p60.7"></span>.)
and, “whosoever is angry without cause shall fall into hell;”—which of
the men of that day would not these things have frightened off? And yet
all came running in, and many even leaped over the boundaries of the
course. What then was their attraction? Was it not, plainly, the power
of Him who was preached? For suppose that the case were not as it is,
but just contrary <span id="fr_47"></span>[48](#fn_47) , that this side
was the other, and the other this; would it have been easy, let me ask,
to hold fast and to drag on those who resisted? We cannot say so. So
that in every way that power is proved divine which wrought so
excellently. Else how, tell me, did they prevail with the frivolous and
the dissolute, urging them toward the severe and rough course of life?

<span id="iv.viii-p62"></span>\[17.\] Well; such was the nature of the
precepts. But let us see whether the doctrine was attractive. Nay, in
this respect also there was enough to frighten away the unbelievers. For
what said the preachers? That we must worship the crucified, and count
Him as God, who was born of a Jewish woman. Now who would have been
persuaded by these words, unless divine power had led the way? That
indeed He had been crucified and buried, all men knew; but that He had
risen again and ascended, no one save the Apostles had seen.

<span id="iv.viii-p63"></span>But, you will say, they excited them by
promises and deceived them by an empty sound of words. Nay, this very
topic most particularly shews (even apart from all that has been said)
that our doctrines are no deceit. For all its hardships took place here,
but its consolations they were to promise after the resurrection. This
very thing then, for I repeat it, shews that our Gospel is divine. For
why did no one of the believers say, “I close not with this, neither do
I endure it? Thou threatenest me with hardships here, and the good
things thou promisest after the resurrection. Why, how is it plain that
there will be a resurrection? Which of the departed hath returned? 
Which of those at rest hath risen again? Which of these hath said what
shall be after our departure hence?” But none of these things entered
into their minds; rather they gave up their very lives for the
Crucified. So that this bare fact was more than anything a proof of
great power; first, their working conviction at once, touching matters
so important, in persons that had never in their lives before heard of
any such thing; secondly, that they prevailed on them to take the
difficulties upon trial, and to account the blessings as matter of hope.
Now if they had been deceivers they would have done the contrary: their
good things they would have promised as of this world (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.viii-p63.1"></span>ἐντεῦθεν</span>, so St.
[John xviii. 36](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#036)<span
id="iv.viii-p63.2"></span>.); the <span id="page_42">p. 42</span> <span
id="iv.viii-Page_42"></span>fearful things they would not have
mentioned, whether they related to the present life or the future. For
so deceivers and flatterers act. Nothing harsh, nor galling, nor
burdensome, do they hold out, but altogether the contrary. For this is
the nature of deceit.

<span id="iv.viii-p64"></span>\[18.\] But “the folly,” it will be said,
“of the greater part caused them to believe what they were told.” How
sayest thou? When they were under Greeks, they were not foolish; but
when they came over to us, did their folly then begin? And yet they were
not men of another sort nor out of another world, that the Apostles took
and persuaded: they were men too who simply held the opinions of the
Greeks, but ours they received with the accompaniment of dangers. So
that if with better reason they had maintained the former, they would
not have swerved from them, now that they had so long time been educated
therein; and especially as not without danger was it possible to swerve.
But when they came to know from the very nature of the things that all
on that side was mockery and delusion, upon this, even under menaces of
sundry deaths, they sprang off (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii-p64.1"></span>ἀπεπήδησαν</span>) from their customary ways,
and came over voluntarily unto the new; inasmuch as the latter doctrine
was according to nature, but the other contrary to nature.

<span id="iv.viii-p65"></span>But “the persons convinced,” it is said,
“were slaves, and woman, and nurses, and midwives, and eunuchs.” Now in
the first place, not of these alone doth our Church consist; and this is
plain unto all. But be it of these; this is what especially makes the
Gospel worthy of admiration; that such doctrines as Plato and his
followers could not apprehend, the fishermen had power on a sudden to
persuade the most ignorant sort of all to receive. For if they had
persuaded wise men only, the result would not have been so wonderful;
but in advancing slaves, and nurses, and eunuchs unto such great
severity of life as to make them rivals to angels, they offered the
greatest proof of their divine inspiration. Again; had they enjoined I
know not what trifling matters, it were reasonable perhaps to bring
forward the conviction wrought in these persons, to show the trifling
nature of the things which were spoken: but if things great, and high,
and almost transcending human nature, and requiring high thoughts, were
the matter of their lessons of wisdom; the more foolishness thou showest
in those who were convinced, by so much the more dost thou shew clearly
that they who wrought the conviction were wise and filled with divine
grace.

<span id="iv.viii-p66"></span>But, you will say, they prevailed on them
through the excessive greatness of the promises. But tell me, is not
this very thing a wonder to thee, how they persuaded men to expect
prizes and recompenses after death? For this, were there nothing else,
is to me matter of amazement. But this, too, it will be said, came of
folly. Inform me wherein is the folly of these things: that the soul is
immortal; that an impartial tribunal will receive us after the present
life; that we shall render an account of our deeds and words and
thoughts unto God that knoweth all secrets; that we shall see the evil
undergoing punishment, and the good with crowns on their heads. Nay,
these things are not of folly, but the highest instruction of wisdom.
The folly is in the contrary opinions to these.

<span id="iv.viii-p67"></span>\[19.\] Were this then the only thing, the
despising of things present, the setting much by virtue, the not seeking
rewards here, but advancing far beyond in hopes, and the keeping the
soul so intent and faithful as by no present terror to be hindered in
respect of the hope of what shall be; tell me, to what high philosophy
must this belong? But would you also learn the force of the promises and
predictions in themselves, and the truth of those uttered both before
and after this present state of things? Behold, I shew you a golden
chain, woven cunningly from the beginning!  He spake some things to them
about Himself, and about the churches, and about the things to come; and
as He spake, He wrought mighty works. By the fulfilment therefore of
what He said, it is plain that both the wonders wrought were real, and
the future and promised things also.

<span id="iv.viii-p68"></span>But that my meaning may be yet plainer,
let me illustrate it from the actual case. He raised up Lazarus by a
single word merely, and shewed him alive. Again, He said, “The gates of
Hades shall not prevail against the Church (St. [Matt. xvi.
18](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#018)<span id="iv.viii-p68.1"></span>.)
and, “He that forsaketh father or mother, shall receive an hundred-fold
in this life, and shall inherit everlasting life.” ([Matt.
19.29](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#029)<span
id="iv.viii-p68.2"></span>.) The miracle then is one, the raising of
Lazarus; but the predictions are two; made evident, the one here, the
other in the world to come. Consider now, how they are all proved by one
another. For if a man disbelieve the resurrection of Lazarus, from the
prophecy uttered about the Church let him learn to believe the miracle.
For the word spoken so many years before, came to pass then, and
received accomplishment: for “the gates of Hades prevailed not against
the Church.” You see that He who spake truth in the prophecy, it is
clear that he also wrought the miracle: and He who both wrought the
miracle and brings to accomplishment the words which He spake, it is
clear that He speaks the truth also in the predictions of things yet to
come, when He saith, “He who despiseth things present shall receive
<span id="page_43">p. 43</span> <span id="iv.viii-Page_43"></span>an
hundred-fold, and shall inherit everlasting life.” For the things which
have been already done and spoken, He hath given as the surest pledges
of those which shall hereafter come to pass.

<span id="iv.viii-p69"></span>Of all these things then, and the like to
these, collecting them together out of the Gospels, let us tell them,
and so stop their mouths. But if any one say, Why then was not error
completely extinguished? this may be our answer: Ye yourselves are to
blame, who rebel against your own salvation. For God hath so ordered
this matter (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii-p69.1"></span>ᾠκονόμησεν</span>,) that not even a remnant of
the old impiety need be left.

<span id="iv.viii-p70"></span>\[20.\] Now, briefly to recount what has
been said: What is the natural course of things? That the weak should be
overcome by the strong, or the contrary? Those who speak things easy, or
things of the harsher sort? those who attract men with dangers, or with
security? innovators, or those who strengthen custom? those who lead
into a rough, or into a smooth way? those who withdraw men from the
institutions of their fathers, or those who lay down no strange laws?
those who promise all their good things after our departure from this
world, or those who flatter in the present life? the few to overcome the
many, or the many the few?

<span id="iv.viii-p71"></span>But you, too, saith one, gave promises
pertaining to this life. What then have we promised in this life? The
forgiveness of sins and the laver of regeneration. Now in the first
place, baptism itself hath its chief part in things to come; and Paul
exclaims, saying, ([Col. iii. 4](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#004)<span
id="iv.viii-p71.1"></span>.) “For ye died, and your life is hid with
Christ in God: when your life shall be manifested, then shall ye also
with Him be manifested in glory.” But if in this life also it hath
advantages, as indeed it hath, this also is more than all a matter of
great wonder, that they had power to persuade men who had done
innumerable evil deeds, yea such as no one else had done, that they
should wash themselves clean of all, and they should give account of
none of their offences. So that on this very account it were most of all
meet to wonder that they persuaded Barbarians to embrace such a faith as
this, and to have good hopes concerning things to come; and having
thrown off the former burden of their sins, to apply themselves with the
greatest zeal for the time to come to those toils which virtue requires,
and not to gape after any object of sense, but rising to a height above
all bodily things, to receive gifts purely spiritual: yea, that the
Persian, the Sarmatian, the Moor, and the Indian should be acquainted
with the purification of the soul, and the power of God, and His
unspeakable mercy to men, and the severe discipline of faith, and the
visitation of the Holy Spirit, and the resurrection of bodies, and the
doctrines of life eternal. For in all these things, and in whatever is
more than these, the fishermen, initiating by Baptism divers races of
Barbarians, persuaded them (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii-p71.2"></span>φιλοσοφεῖν</span>) to live on high principles.

<span id="iv.viii-p72"></span>Of all these things then, having observed
them accurately, let us speak unto the Gentiles, and again, let us shew
them the evidence of our lives: that by both means we ourselves may be
saved and they drawn over by our means unto the glory of God. For unto
Him be the glory for ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_37"></span>[33:38](1120011.htm#fr_37) <span
id="iv.viii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii-p5"></span> There seems to be a word or two wanting in
the text here, which has been supplied by conjecture in the translation.
\[But they are found in Codex C. Aretinus\].

<span id="fn_38"></span>[34:39](1120011.htm#fr_38) <span
id="iv.viii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii-p9"></span> e.g. Origen, in *Lament*. iv. 11; in Ezek.
*Hom*. xiii. §. 1; *Com. in St. Matt.* §. 125; St. Athanasius on [Ps.
cviii.](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#000)<span id="iv.viii-p9.1"></span>
(cix. Heb.) v. 15. t. i. 1194. Ed. Bened. The author of the Questions
and Answers published with St. Justin Martyr’s works agrees with St.
Chrysostom; see qu. cviii, clxx. Why may not both be right?

<span id="fn_39"></span>[34:40](1120011.htm#fr_39) <span
id="iv.viii-p11.5"></span>

<span id="iv.viii-p12"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.viii-p12.1"></span>ἐκπομπεύοντες</span>. vid. Conc. Ant. A.D.
270. ap. E. H. vii. 30.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[35:41](1120011.htm#fr_40) <span
id="iv.viii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii-p16"></span> This is the rendering, in some old Greek
version, though not in the LXX, of the clause in [Isaiah XXIV.
16](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#016)<span id="iv.viii-p16.1"></span>,
which in our authorized version runs, “My leanness, my leanness; woe
unto me!” “Mystery” stands for the Chaldee “a secret:” which meaning the
Targum of Jonathan gives to the word in this place:  as do the Vulgate,
and the Syriac according to Walton. The received reading of the LXX may
be explained as a paraphrase of this rendering. The words, “and for
mine,” seem added by St. Chrysostom.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[36:42](1120011.htm#fr_41) <span
id="iv.viii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii-p29"></span> Of which, perhaps, *He shall be called a
Nazarene*, St. [Matt. ii. 23](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#023)<span
id="iv.viii-p29.1"></span>. is an instance: although that indeed is not
said to be “written,” but *spoken by the Prophets*.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[36:43](1120011.htm#fr_42) <span
id="iv.viii-p29.3"></span>

<span id="iv.viii-p30"></span> \[Dr. Field prints the original with a
capital letter, making it=Paraleipomena, the LXX. name for the books of
Chronicles, and refers to [2 Chr.
9:29](../../../bib/kjv/ch2009.htm#029), [2 Chr.
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#005), [2 Chr.
13:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#022)<span id="iv.viii-p30.1"></span>.
C.\]

<span id="fn_43"></span>[36:44](1120011.htm#fr_43) <span
id="iv.viii-p30.4"></span>

<span id="iv.viii-p31"></span> Two circumstances in this account appear
to be traditional: that the book found was that of Deuteronomy; and that
the place where it was found was a dunghill.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[37:45](1120011.htm#fr_44) <span
id="iv.viii-p36.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii-p37"></span> \[Principal Edwards explains the phrase
adopting the A.V., as “combining revealed truths so as to form a
consistent and well-proportioned system” Com. *in lo*.\]

<span id="fn_45"></span>[37:46](1120011.htm#fr_45) <span
id="iv.viii-p39.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii-p40"></span> i.e. when they were in course of
attendance on the tabernacle. [Lev.
10:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#009)<span id="iv.viii-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[38:47](1120011.htm#fr_46) <span
id="iv.viii-p44.3"></span>

<span id="iv.viii-p45"></span> ‘Manes opposed to each other two diverse
and adverse principles, alike eternal and coeternal: and fancied two
natures and substances, Good and Bad; in this following elder heretics;”
(some of the Gnostics, see S. Aug. above §6, 14, 16, 21, 22).…“Hence
they are compelled to affirm that good souls are of the same nature with
God.” S. Aug. *de Hæresibus*, §. 46.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[41:48](1120011.htm#fr_47) <span
id="iv.viii-p60.8"></span>

<span id="iv.viii-p61"></span> i.e. suppose miracles and the attempt to
convert had been the other way, from strictness to ease and pleasure.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily VIII](1120012)
