[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1120024)  [Next](1120026) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.xxii"></span>

<span id="iv.xxii-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="iv.xxii-p1.1"></span>Homily XXI.</span>

<span id="iv.xxii-p2"></span><span id="iv.xxii-p2.1"></span><span
class="c1"><span id="iv.xxii-p2.2"></span>[1 Cor. ix.
1](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#001)<span
id="iv.xxii-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.xxii-p3"></span>Am I not an Apostle? am I not free? have I
not seen Jesus Christ our Lord? are not ye my work in the Lord?

<span id="iv.xxii-p4"></span><span class="c18"><span
id="iv.xxii-p4.1"></span>Inasmuch</span> as he had said, “If meat make
my brother to stumble I will eat no flesh forever;” a thing which he had
not yet done, but professed he would do if need require: lest any man
should say, “Thou vauntest thyself at random, and art severe in
discourse, and utterest words of promise, a thing easy to me or to any
body; but if these sayings come from thy heart, shew by deeds something
which thou hast slighted in order to avoid making thy brother stumble:”
for this cause, I say, in what follows he is compelled to enter on the
proof of this also, and to point out how he was used to forego even
things permitted that he might not give offence, although without any
law to enforce his doing so.

<span id="iv.xxii-p5"></span>And we are not yet come to the admirable
part of the matter: though it be admirable that he abstain even from
things lawful to avoid offence: but it is his habit of doing so at the
cost of so much trouble and danger <span id="fr_99"></span>[100](#fn_99)
. “For why,” saith he, “speak of the idol sacrifices? Since although
Christ had enjoined that those who preach the Gospel should live at the
charge of their disciples, I did not so, but chose, if need were, to end
my life with famine and die the most grievous of deaths, so I might
avoid receiving of those whom I instruct.”

<span id="iv.xxii-p7"></span>Not because they would otherwise be made to
stumble, but because his not receiving would edify them <span
id="fr_100"></span>[101](#fn_100) : a much greater thing for him to do.
And to witness this he summons themselves, among whom he was used to
live in toil and in hunger, nourished by others, and put to straits, in
order not to offend them. And yet there was no ground for their taking
offence, for it would but have been a law which he was fulfilling. But
for all this, by a sort of supererogation <span
id="fr_101"></span>[102](#fn_101) he used to spare them.

<span id="iv.xxii-p10"></span>Now if he did more than was enacted lest
they should take offence, and abstained from permitted things to edify
others; what must they deserve who abstain not from idol sacrifices? and
that, when many perish thereby? a thing which even apart from all
scandal one ought to shrink from, as being “the table of demons.”

<span id="iv.xxii-p11"></span>The sum therefore of this whole topic is
this which he works out in many verses. But we must resume it and make a
fresh entrance on what he hath alleged. For neither hath he set it down
thus expressly as I have worded it; nor doth he leap at once upon it;
but begins from another topic, thus speaking;

<span id="iv.xxii-p12"></span>\[2.\] “Am I not an Apostle?” For besides
all that hath been said, this also makes no small difference that Paul
himself is the person thus conducting himself. As thus: To prevent their
alleging, “You may taste of the sacrifices, sealing <span
id="fr_102"></span>[103](#fn_102) at the same time:” for a while he
withstands not that statement, but argues, “Though it were lawful, your
brethren’s harm should keep you from doing so;” and afterwards he proves
that it is not even lawful. In this particular place, however, he
establishes the former point from circumstances relating to himself. And
intending presently to say that he had received nothing from them, he
sets it not down at once, but his own dignity is what he first affirms:
“Am I not an Apostle? am I not free?”

<span id="iv.xxii-p14"></span>Thus, to hinder their saying, “True; thou
didst not receive, but the reason thou didst not was its not being
lawful;” he sets down therefore first the causes why he might reasonably
have received, had he been willing to do so.

<span id="iv.xxii-p15"></span>Further: that there might not seem to be
any thing invidious in regard of Peter and such as Peter, in his saying
these things, (for they did not use to decline receiving;) he first
shows that they had authority to receive, and then that no one might
say, “Peter had authority to receive but thou hadst not,” he possesses
the hearer beforehand with these encomiums of himself. And perceiving
that he must praise <span id="page_119">p. 119</span> <span
id="iv.xxii-Page_119"></span>himself, (for that was the way to correct
the Corinthians,) yet disliking to say any great thing of himself, see
how he hath tempered both feelings as the occasion required:  limiting
his own panegyric, not by what he knew of himself, but by what the
subject of necessity required. For he might have said, “I most of all
had a right to receive, even more than they, because ‘I labored more
abundantly than they.’”  But this he omits, being a point wherein he
surpassed them; and those points wherein they were great and which were
just grounds for their receiving, those only he sets down: as follows:

<span id="iv.xxii-p16"></span>“Am I not an Apostle? am I not free?” i.e.
“have I not authority over myself? am I under any, to overrule me and
forbid my receiving?”

<span id="iv.xxii-p17"></span>“But they have an advantage over you, in
having been with Christ.”

<span id="iv.xxii-p18"></span>“Nay, neither is this denied me.” With a
view to which he saith,

<span id="iv.xxii-p19"></span>“Have I not seen Jesus Christ our Lord?”
For “last of all,” (c. [1 Cor.
15.8](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#008)<span id="iv.xxii-p19.1"></span>.)
saith he, “as unto one born out of due time, He appeared unto me also.”
Now this likewise was no small dignity: since “many Prophets,” (S.
[Matt. xiii. 17](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#017)<span
id="iv.xxii-p19.2"></span>.) saith He, “and righteous men have desired
to see the things which ye see, and have not seen them:” and, “Days will
come when ye shall desire to see one of these days.” (S. [Luke xvii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#022)<span id="iv.xxii-p19.3"></span>.)

<span id="iv.xxii-p20"></span>“What then, though thou be ‘an Apostle,’
and ‘free,’ and hast ‘seen Christ,’ if thou hast not exhibited any work
of an Apostle; how then can it be right for thee to receive?” Wherefore
after this he adds,

<span id="iv.xxii-p21"></span>“Are not ye my work in the Lord?” For this
is the great thing; and those others avail nothing, apart from this.
Even Judas himself was “an Apostle,” and “free,” and “saw Christ;” but
because he had not “the work of an Apostle,” all those things profited
him not. You see then why he adds this also, and calls themselves to be
witnesses of it.

<span id="iv.xxii-p22"></span>Moreover, because it was a great thing
which he had uttered, see how he chastens it, adding, “In the Lord:”
i.e., “the work is God’s, not mine.”

<span id="iv.xxii-p23"></span>[1 Cor.
9.2](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#002)<span id="iv.xxii-p23.1"></span>.
“If to others I am not an Apostle, yet at least I am to you.”

<span id="iv.xxii-p24"></span>Do you see how far he is from enlarging
here without necessity? And yet he had the whole world to speak of, and
barbarous nations, and sea and land. However, he mentions none of these
things, but carries his point by concession, and even granting more than
he need. As if he had said, “Why need I dwell on things over and above,
since these even alone are enough for my present purpose? I speak not,
you will observe, of my achievements in other quarters, but of those
which have you for witnesses. Upon which it follows that if from no
other quarter, yet from you I have a right to receive. Nevertheless,
from whom I had most right to receive, even you whose teacher I was,
from those I received not.”

<span id="iv.xxii-p25"></span>“If to others I am not an Apostle, yet at
least I am to you.” Again, he states his point by concession. For the
whole world had him for its Apostle. “However,” saith he, “I say not
that, I am not contending nor disputing, but what concerns you I lay
down. ‘For the seal of mine Apostleship are ye:’” i.e., its proof.
“Should any one, moreover, desire to learn whence I am an Apostle, you
are the persons whom I bring forward: for all the signs of an Apostle
have I exhibited among you, and not one have I failed in.” As also he
speaks in the Second Epistle, saying, ([2 Cor. xii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#012)<span id="iv.xxii-p25.1"></span>.)
“Though I am nothing, truly the signs of an Apostle were wrought among
you in all patience, by signs and wonders and mighty works. For what is
there wherein ye were made inferior to the rest of the Churches?”
Wherefore he saith, “The seal of mine Apostleship are ye.” “For I both
exhibited miracles, and taught by word, and underwent dangers, and
shewed forth a blameless life.” And these topics you may see fully set
forth by these two Epistles, how he lays before them the demonstration
of each with all exactness.

<span id="iv.xxii-p26"></span>\[3.\] [1 Cor.
9.3](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#003)<span id="iv.xxii-p26.1"></span>.
“My defence to them that examine me is this.” What is, “My defence to
them that examine me is this?” “To those who seek to know whereby I am
proved to be an Apostle, or who accuse me as receiving money, or inquire
the cause of my not receiving, or would fain shew that I am not an
Apostle: to all such, my instruction given to you and these things which
I am about to say, may stand for a full explanation and defence.” What
then are these?

<span id="iv.xxii-p27"></span>[1 Cor.
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#005)<span id="iv.xxii-p27.1"></span>.
“Have we no right to eat and to drink? Have we no right to lead about a
wife that is a believer?” Why, how are these sayings a defence?
“Because, when it appears that I abstain even from things which are
allowed, it cannot be just to look suspiciously on me as a deceiver or
one acting for gain.”

<span id="iv.xxii-p28"></span>Wherefore, from what was before alleged
and from my having instructed you and from this which I have now said, I
have matter sufficient to make my defence to you: and all who examine me
I meet upon this ground, alleging both what has gone before and this
which follows: “Have we no right to eat and to drink? have we no right
to lead about a wife that is a believer? “Yet for all this, having it I
abstain?”

<span id="iv.xxii-p29"></span>What then? did he not use to eat or to
drink?  <span id="page_120">p. 120</span> <span
id="iv.xxii-Page_120"></span>It were most true to say that in many
places he really did not eat nor drink: for (c. [1 Cor.
5.11](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#011)<span id="iv.xxii-p29.1"></span>.)
“in hunger,” saith he, “and in thirst, and in nakedness” we were
abiding.” Here, however, this is not his meaning; but what?  “We eat not
nor drink, receiving of those whom we instruct, though we have a right
so to receive.”

<span id="iv.xxii-p30"></span>“Have we no right to lead about a wife
that is a believer, even as the rest of the Apostles, and the brethren
of the Lord, and Cephas?” Observe his skilfulness. The leader of the
choir stands last in his arrangement: since that is the time for laying
down the strongest of all one’s topics. Nor was it so wonderful for one
to be able to point out examples of this conduct in the rest, as in the
foremost champion and in him who was entrusted with the keys of heaven.
But neither does he mention Peter alone, but all of them: as if he had
said, Whether you seek the inferior sort or the more eminent, in all you
find patterns of this sort.

<span id="iv.xxii-p31"></span>For the brethren too of the Lord, being
freed from their first unbelief (vid. S. [John vii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#005)<span id="iv.xxii-p31.1"></span>.),
had come to be among those who were approved, although they attained not
to the Apostles. And accordingly the middle place is that which he hath
assigned to them, setting down those who were in the extremes before and
after.

<span id="iv.xxii-p32"></span>[1 Cor.
9.6](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#006)<span id="iv.xxii-p32.1"></span>.
“Or I only and Barnabas, have we not a right to forbear working?”

<span id="iv.xxii-p33"></span>(See his humility of mind and his soul
pure from envy, how he takes care not to conceal him whom he knew to be
a partaker with himself in this perfection.) For if the other things be
common, how is not this common? Both they and we are apostles and are
free, and have seen Christ, and have exhibited the works of Apostles.
Therefore we likewise have a right both to live without working and to
be supported by our disciples.

<span id="iv.xxii-p34"></span>\[4.\] [1 Cor.
9.7](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#007)<span id="iv.xxii-p34.1"></span>.
“What soldier ever serveth at his own charges?” For since, which was the
strongest point, he had proved from the Apostles that it is lawful to do
so, he next comes to examples and to the common practice; as he uses to
do: “What soldier serveth at his own charges?” saith he. But do thou
consider, I pray, how very suitable are the examples to his proposed
subject, and how he mentions first that which is accompanied with
danger; viz. soldiership and arms and wars. For such a kind of thing was
the Apostolate, nay rather much more hazardous than these. For not with
men alone was their warfare, but with demons also, and against the
prince of those beings was their battle array. What he saith therefore
is this: “Not even do heathen governors, cruel and unjust as they are,
require their soldiers to endure service and peril and live on their own
means. How then could Christ ever have required this?”

<span id="iv.xxii-p35"></span>Nor is he satisfied with one example. For
to him who is rather simple and dull, this also is wont to come as a
great refreshment, viz. their seeing the common custom also going along
with the laws of God. Wherefore he proceeds to another topic also and
says, “Who planteth a vineyard, and eateth not of the fruit thereof?”
For as by the former he indicated his dangers, so by this his labor and
abundant travail and care.

<span id="iv.xxii-p36"></span>He adds likewise a third example, saying,
“Who feedeth a flock, and eateth not of the milk thereof?” He is
exhibiting the great concern which it becomes a teacher to show for
those who are under his rule. For, in fact, the Apostles were both
soldiers and husbandmen and shepherds, not of the earth nor of
irrational animals, nor in such wars as are perceptible by sense; but of
reasonable souls and in battle array with the demons.

<span id="iv.xxii-p37"></span>It also must be remarked how every where
he preserves moderation, seeking the useful only, not the extraordinary.
For he said not, “What soldier serveth and is not enriched?” but, “What
soldier ever serveth at his own charges?” Neither did he say, “Who
planteth a vineyard, and gathereth not gold, or spareth to collect the
whole fruit?” but, “Who eateth not of the fruit thereof?” Neither did he
say, “Who feedeth a flock, and maketh not merchandize of the lambs?” But
what? “And eateth not of the milk thereof?” Not of the lambs, but of the
milk; signifying, that a little relief should be enough for the teacher,
even his necessary food alone. (This refers to those who would devour
all and gather the whole of the fruit.) “So likewise the Lord ordained,”
saying, “The laborer is worthy of his food.” (St. [Matt. x.
10](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#010)<span id="iv.xxii-p37.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.xxii-p38"></span>And not this only doth he establish by his
illustrations, but he shows also what kind of man a priest ought to be.
For he ought to possess both the courage of a soldier and the diligence
of a husbandman and the carefulness of a shepherd, and after all these,
to seek nothing more than necessaries.

<span id="iv.xxii-p39"></span>\[5.\] Having shewn, as you see, both from
the Apostles, that it is not forbidden the teacher to receive, and from
illustrations found in common life, he proceeds also to a third head,
thus saying,

<span id="iv.xxii-p40"></span>[1 Cor.
9.8](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#008)<span id="iv.xxii-p40.1"></span>.
“Do I speak these things after the manner of men? or saith not the law
also the same?”

<span id="iv.xxii-p41"></span>For since he had hitherto alleged nothing
out of the Scriptures, but put forward the common custom; “think not,”
saith he, “that I am confident in these alone, nor that I go to the
opinions of men for the ground of these enactments. For I can shew that
these things are <span id="page_121">p. 121</span> <span
id="iv.xxii-Page_121"></span>also well-pleasing to God, and I read an
ancient law enjoining them.” Wherefore also he carries on his discourse
in the form of a question, which is apt to be done in things fully
acknowledged; thus saying, “Say I these things after the manner of men?”
i.e. “do I strengthen myself only by human examples?” “or saith not the
law also the same?”

<span id="iv.xxii-p42"></span>[1 Cor.
9.9](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#009)<span id="iv.xxii-p42.1"></span>.
“For it is written in the law of Moses, Thou shalt not muzzle the ox
when he treadeth out the corn.”

<span id="iv.xxii-p43"></span>And on what account hath he mentioned
this, having the example of the priests? Wishing to establish it far
beyond what the case required. Further, lest any should say, “And what
have we to do with the saying about the oxen?” he works it out more
exactly, saying, “Is it for the oxen that God careth;” Doth God then,
tell me, take no care for oxen? Well, He doth take care of them, but not
so as to make a law concerning such a thing as this. So that had he not
been hinting at something important, training the Jews to mercy in the
case of the brutes, and through these, discoursing with them of the
teachers also; he would not have taken so much interest as even to make
a law to forbid the muzzling of oxen.

<span id="iv.xxii-p44"></span>Wherein he points out another thing
likewise, that the labor of teachers both is and ought to be great.

<span id="iv.xxii-p45"></span>And again another thing. What then is
this? That whatever is said by the Old Testament respecting care for
brutes, in its principal meaning bears on the instruction of human
beings: as in fact do all the rest: the precepts, for example,
concerning various garments; and those concerning vineyards and seeds
and not making the ground bear divers crops, <span
id="fr_103"></span>[104](#fn_103) and those concerning leprosy; and, in
a word, all the rest: for they being of a duller sort He was discoursing
with them from these topics, advancing them by little and little.

<span id="iv.xxii-p47"></span>And see how in what follows he doth not
even confirm it, as being clear and self-evident. For having said, “Is
it for the oxen that God careth?” he added, “or saith he it altogether
for our sake?” Not adding even the “altogether” at random, but that he
might not leave the hearer any thing whatever to reply.

<span id="iv.xxii-p48"></span>And he dwells upon the metaphor, saying
and declaring, “Yea for our sakes it was written, because he who ploweth
ought to plow in hope;” i.e., the teacher ought to enjoy the returns of
his labors; “and he that thresheth ought to thresh in hope of
partaking.” And observe his wisdom in that from the seed he transferred
the matter to the threshing floor; herein also again manifesting the
many toils of the teachers, that they in their own persons both plough
and tread the floor. And of the ploughing, because there was nothing to
reap, but labor only, he used the word, “hope;” but of treading the
floor he presently allows the fruit, saying, “He that thresheth is a
partaker of his hope.”

<span id="iv.xxii-p49"></span>Further, lest any should say, “Is this
then the return for so many toils,” he adds, “in hope,” i.e., “which is
to come.” No other thing therefore doth the mouth of this animal being
unmuzzled declare than this; that the teachers who labor ought also to
enjoy some return.

<span id="iv.xxii-p50"></span>\[6.\] [1 Cor.
9.11](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#011)<span id="iv.xxii-p50.1"></span>.
“If we sowed unto you spiritual things, is it a great matter if we shall
reap your carnal things?”

<span id="iv.xxii-p51"></span>Lo, he adds also a fourth argument for the
duty of yielding support. For since he had said, “What soldier ever
serveth at his own charges?” and, “who planteth a vineyard?” and, “who
feedeth a flock?” and introduced the ox that treadeth the corn; he
points out likewise another most reasonable cause on account of which
they might justly receive; viz. having bestowed much greater gifts, no
more as having labored only. What is it then? “if we sowed unto you
spiritual things, is it a great matter if we shall reap your carnal
things?” Seest thou a most just allegation and fuller of reason than all
the former? for “in those instances,” says he, “carnal is the seed,
carnal also is the fruit; but here not so, but the seed is spiritual,
the return carnal.” Thus, to prevent high thoughts in those who
contribute to their teachers, he signified that they receive more than
they give. As if he had said, “Husbandmen, whatsoever they sow, this
also do they receive; but we, sowing in your souls spiritual things, do
reap carnal.” For such is the kind of support given by them. Further,
and still more to put them to the blush.

<span id="iv.xxii-p52"></span>[1 Cor.
9.12](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#012)<span id="iv.xxii-p52.1"></span>.
“If others partake of this right over you, do not we yet more?”

<span id="iv.xxii-p53"></span>See also again another argument, and this
too from examples though not of the same kind. For it is not Peter whom
he mentions here nor the Apostles, but certain other spurious ones, with
whom he afterwards enters into combat, and concerning whom he says, ([2
Cor. xi. 20](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#020)<span
id="iv.xxii-p53.1"></span>.) “If a man devour you, if he take you
captive, if he exalt himself, if he smite you on the face,” and already
he is sounding the prelude <span id="fr_104"></span>[105](#fn_104) to
the fight with them. Wherefore neither did he say, “If others take of
you,” but pointing out their insolence and tyranny and trafficking, he
says, “if others partake of this right over you,” i.e., “rule you,
exercise authority, use you as servants, not taking you captive only,
but with much authority.” Wherefore he added “do not we yet more?” which
he would not have said if <span id="page_122">p. 122</span> <span
id="iv.xxii-Page_122"></span>the discourse were concerning the Apostles.
But it is evident that he hints at certain pestilent men, and deceivers
of them. “So that besides the law of Moses even ye yourselves have made
a law in behalf of the duty of contribution.”

<span id="iv.xxii-p55"></span>And having said, “do not we yet more?” he
does not prove why yet more, but leaves it to their consciences to
convince them of that, wishing at the same time both to alarm and to
abash them more thoroughly.

<span id="iv.xxii-p56"></span>\[7.\] Nevertheless, we did not use this
right;” i.e., “did not receive.” Do you see, when he had by so many
reasons before proved that receiving is not unlawful, how he next says,
“we receive not,” that he might not seem to abstain as from a thing
forbidden? “For not because it is unlawful,” saith he, “do I not
receive; for it is lawful and this we have many ways shown: from the
Apostles; from the affairs of life, the soldier, the husbandman, and the
shepherd; from the law of Moses; from the very nature of the case, in
that we have sown unto you spiritual things; from what yourselves have
done to others.” But as he had laid down these things, lest he should
seem to put to shame the Apostles who were in the habit of receiving;
abashing them and signifying that not as from a forbidden thing doth he
abstain from it: so again, lest by his large store of proof and the
examples and reasonings by which he had pointed out the propriety of
receiving, he should seem to be anxious to receive himself and therefore
to say these things; he now corrects it. And afterwards he laid it down
more clearly where he says, “And I wrote not these things, that it may
be so done in my case;” but here his words are, “we did not use this
right.”

<span id="iv.xxii-p57"></span>And what is a still greater thing, neither
could any have this to say, that being in abundance we declined using
it; rather, when necessity pressed upon us we would not yield to the
necessity. Which also in the second Epistle he says; “I robbed other
Churches, taking wages of them that I might minister unto you; and when
I was present with you, and was in want, I was not a burden on any man.”
([2 Cor. 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#009)<span id="iv.xxii-p57.1"></span>.)
And in this Epistle again, “We both hunger, and thirst, and are naked,
and are buffeted.” ([1 Cor. iv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#011)<span id="iv.xxii-p57.2"></span>.)
And here again he hints the same thing, saying, “But we bear all
things.” For by saying, “we bear all things,” he intimates both hunger
and great straits and all the other things. “But not even thus have we
been compelled,” saith he, “to break the law which we laid down for
ourselves. Wherefore? “that we may cause no hinderance to the Gospel of
Christ.” For since the Corinthians were rather weak-minded, “lest we
should wound you,” saith he “by receiving, we chose to do even more than
was commanded rather than hinder the Gospel,” i.e., your instruction.
Now if we in a matter left free to us, and when we were both enduring
much hardship and having Apostles for our pattern, used abstinence lest
we should give hindrance, (and he did not say, “subversion,” but
“hindrance;” nor simply “hindrance,” but “any” hindrance,) that we might
not, so to speak, cause so much as the slightest suspense and delay to
the course of the Word: “If now,” saith he, “we used so great care, how
much more ought you to abstain, who both come far short of the Apostles
and have no law to mention, giving you permission: but contrariwise are
both putting your hand to things forbidden and things which tend to the
great injury of the Gospel, not to its hindrance only <span
id="fr_105"></span>[106](#fn_105) ; and not even having any pressing
necessity in view.” For all this discussion he had moved on account of
these Corinthians, who were making their weaker brethren to stumble by
eating of things sacrificed to idols.

<span id="iv.xxii-p59"></span>\[8.\] These things also let us listen to,
beloved; that we may not despise those who are offended, nor, “cause any
hindrance to the Gospel of Christ;” that we may not betray our own
salvation. And say not thou to me when thy brother is offended, “this or
that, whereby he is offended, hath not been forbidden; it is permitted.”
For I have something greater to say to thee: “although Christ Himself
have permitted it, yet if thou seest any injured, stop and do not use
the permission.” For this also did Paul; when he might have received,
Christ having granted permission, he received not. Thus hath our Lord in
His mercy mingled much gentleness with His precepts that it might not be
all merely of commandment, but that we might do much also of our own
mind. Since it was in His power, had He not been so minded, to extend
the commandments further and to say, “he who fasts not continually, let
him be chastised; he who keeps not his virginity, let him be punished;
he that doth not strip himself of all that he hath, let him suffer the
severest penalty.” But he did not so, giving thee occasion, if thou
wilt, to be forward in doing more. Wherefore both when He was
discoursing about virginity, He said, “He that is able to receive, let
him receive it:” and in the case of the rich man, some things He
commanded, but some He left to the determination of his mind. For He
said not, “Sell what thou hast,” but, “If thou wilt be perfect, sell.”

<span id="iv.xxii-p60"></span>But we are not only not forward to do
more, and to go beyond the precepts, but we fall very short even of the
measure of things commanded. <span id="page_123">p. 123</span> <span
id="iv.xxii-Page_123"></span>And whereas Paul suffered hunger that he
might not hinder the Gospel; we have not the heart even to touch what is
in our own stores, though we see innumerable souls overthrown. “Yea”
saith one, “let the moth eat, and let not the poor eat; let the worm
devour, and let not the naked be clothed; let all be wasted away with
time, and let not Christ be fed; and this when He hungereth.” “Why, who
said this?” it will be asked. Nay, this is the very grievance, that not
in words but in deeds these things are said:  for it were less grievous
uttered in words than done in deeds. For is not this the cry, day by
day, of the inhuman and cruel tyrant, Covetousness, to those who are led
captive by her? “Let your goods be set before informers and robbers and
traitors for luxury, and not before the hungry and needy for their
sustenance.” Is it not ye then who make robbers? Is it not ye who
minister fuel to the fire of the envious? Is it not ye who make
vagabonds and traitors, putting your wealth before them for a bait? What
madness is this? (for a madness it is, and plain distraction,) to fill
your chests with apparel, and overlook him that is made after God’s
image and similitude, naked and trembling with cold, and with difficulty
keeping himself upright.

<span id="iv.xxii-p61"></span>“But he pretends,” saith one, “this tremor
and weakness.” And dost thou not fear lest a thunderbolt from heaven,
kindled by this word, should fall upon thee? (For I am bursting with
wrath: bear with me.) Thou, I say, pampering and fattening thyself and
extending thy potations to the dead of night and comforting thyself in
soft coverlets, dost not deem thyself liable to judgment, so lawlessly
using the gifts of God: (for wine was not made that we should be
drunken; nor food, that we should pamper our appetites; nor meats, that
we should distend the belly.) But from the poor, the wretched, from him
that is as good as dead, from him demandest thou strict accounts, and
dost thou not fear Christ’s tribunal, so full of all awfulness and
terror?  Why, if he do play the hypocrite, he doth it of necessity and
want, because of thy cruelty and inhumanity, requiring the use of such
masks and refusing all inclination to mercy. For who is so wretched and
miserable as without urgent necessity, for one loaf of bread, to submit
to such disgrace, and to bewail himself and endure so severe a
punishment? So that this hypocrisy of his goeth about, the herald of
thine inhumanity. For since by supplicating and beseeching and uttering
piteous expressions and lamenting and weeping and going about all day,
he doth not obtain even necessary food, he devised perhaps even this
contrivance also, the disgrace and blame whereof falls not so much on
himself as on thee: for he indeed is meet to be pitied because he hath
fallen into so great necessity; but we are worthy of innumerable
punishments because we compel the poor to suffer such things. For if we
would easily give way, never would he have chosen to endure such things.

<span id="iv.xxii-p62"></span>And why speak I of nakedness and
trembling? For I will tell a thing yet more to be shuddered at, that
some have been compelled even to deprive their children of sight at an
early age in order that they might touch our insensibility. For since
when they could see and went about naked, neither by their age nor by
their misfortunes could they win favor of the unpitying, they added to
so great evils another yet sterner tragedy, that they might remove their
hunger; thinking it to be a lighter thing to be deprived of this common
light and that sunshine which is given to all, than to struggle with
continual famine and endure the most miserable of deaths. Thus, since
you have not learned to pity poverty, but delight yourselves in
misfortunes, they satisfy your insatiable desire, and both for
themselves and for us kindle a fiercer flame in hell.

<span id="iv.xxii-p63"></span>\[9.\] And to convince you that this is
the reason why these and such like things are done, I will tell you of
an acknowledged proof which no man can gainsay. There are other poor
men, of light and unsteady minds and not knowing how to bear hunger, but
rather enduring every thing than it. These having often tried to deal
with us by piteous gestures and words and finding that they availed
nothing, have left off those supplications and henceforward our very
wonder-workers are surpassed by them, some chewing the skins of worn-out
shoes, and some fixing sharp nails into their heads, others lying about
in frozen pools with naked stomachs, and others enduring different
things yet more horrid than these, that they may draw around them the
ungodly spectators. And thou, while these things are going on, standest
laughing and wondering the while and making a fine show of other men’s
miseries, our common nature disgracing itself. And what could a fierce
demon do more? Next, you give him money in abundance that he may do
these things more promptly. And to him that prays and calls on God and
approaches with modesty, you vouchsafe neither an answer nor a look:
rather you utter to him, continually teazing you, those disgusting
expressions, “Ought this fellow to live? or at all to breathe and see
this sun?” whereas to the other sort you are both cheerful and liberal,
as though you were appointed to dispense the prize of that ridiculous
and Satanic unseemliness. Wherefore with more propriety to those who
appoint these sports and bestow nothing till they see others punishing
themselves, might these words be addressed, “Ought <span
id="page_124">p. 124</span> <span id="iv.xxii-Page_124"></span>these men
to live, to breathe at all, or see the sun, who transgress against our
common nature, who insult God?” For whereas God saith, “Give alms, and I
give thee the kingdom of heaven,” thou hearest not: but when the Devil
shews thee a head pierced with nails, on a sudden thou hast become
liberal. And the contrivance of the evil spirit pregnant with so much
mischief, hath wrought upon thee more than the promise of God bringing
innumerable blessings. If gold were to be laid down to prevent the doing
of these things or the looking upon them when done, there is nothing
which thou oughtest not to practise and endure, to get rid of so
excessive madness; but ye contrive every thing to have them done, and
look on the doing of them. Still askest thou then, tell me, to what end
is hell-fire? Nay, ask not that any more, but how is there one hell
only? For of how many punishments are not they worthy, who get up this
cruel and merciless spectacle and laugh at what both they and yourselves
ought to weep over; yea, rather of the two, ye who compel them to such
unseemly doings.

<span id="iv.xxii-p64"></span>“But I do not compel them,” say you. What
else but compelling is it, I should like to know? Those who are more
modest and shed tears and invoke God, thou art impatient even of
listening to; but for these thou both findest silver in abundance and
bringest around thee many to admire them.

<span id="iv.xxii-p65"></span>“Well, let us leave off,” say you,
“pitying them. And dost thou too enjoin this?” Nay, it is not pity, O
man, to demand so severe a punishment for a few pence, to order men to
maim themselves for necessary food and cut into many pieces the skin of
their head so mercilessly and pitifully. “Gently,” say you, “for it is
not we who pierce those heads.” Would it were thou, and the horror would
not be so horrible. For he that slays a man does a much more
grievous <span id="fr_106"></span>[107](#fn_106) thing than he who bids
him slay himself, which indeed happens in the case of these persons. For
they endure more bitter pains when they are bidden to be themselves the
executors of these wicked commands.

<span id="iv.xxii-p67"></span>And all this in Antioch, where men were
first called Christians, wherein are bred the most civilized of mankind,
where in old time the fruit of charity flourished so abundantly. For not
only to those at hand but also to those very far off, they used to send,
and this when famine was expected.

<span id="iv.xxii-p68"></span>\[10.\] What then ought we to do? say you.
To cease from this savage practice: and to convince all that are in need
that by doing these things they will gain nothing, but if they modestly
approach they shall find your liberality great. Let them be once aware
of this, even though they be of all men most miserable, they will never
choose to punish themselves so severely, I pledge myself; nay, they will
even give you thanks for delivering them both from the mockery and the
pain of that way of life. But as it is, for charioteers you would let
out even your own children, and for dancers you would throw away your
very souls, while for Christ an hungered you spare not the smallest
portion of your substance. But if you give a little silver, you think as
much of it as if you had laid out all you have, not knowing that not the
giving but the giving liberally, this is true almsgiving. Wherefore also
it is not those simply who give whom the prophet proclaims and calls
happy, but those who bestow liberally. For he doth not say simply, He
hath given, but what? ([Ps. cxii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#008)<span id="iv.xxii-p68.1"></span>.)
“he hath dispersed abroad, he hath given to the poor.” For what profit
is it, when out of it thou givest as it were a glass of water out of the
sea, and even a widow’s magnanimity is beyond thy emulation? And how
wilt thou say, “Pity me, O Lord, according to thy great pity, and
according to the multitude of thy mercies blot out my transgression,”
thyself not pitying according to any great pity, nay, haply not
according to any little. For I am greatly ashamed, I own, when I see
many of the rich riding upon their golden-bitted chargers with a train
of domestics clad in gold, and having couches of silver and other and
more pomp, and yet when there is need to give to a poor man, becoming
more beggarly than the very poorest.

<span id="iv.xxii-p69"></span>\[11.\] But what is their constant talk?
“He hath,” they say, “the common church-allowance.” And what is that to
thee? For thou wilt not be saved because I give; nor if the Church
bestow hast thou blotted out thine own sins. For this cause givest thou
not, because the Church ought to give to the needy? Because the priests
pray, wilt thou never pray thyself?  And because others fast, wilt thou
be continually drunken?  Knowest thou not that God enacted not
almsgiving so much for the sake of the poor as for the sake of the
persons themselves who bestow?

<span id="iv.xxii-p70"></span>But dost thou suspect the priest? Why this
thing itself, to begin with, is a grievous sin. However, I will not
examine the matter too nicely. Do thou it all in thine own person, and
so shalt thou reap a double reward. Since in fact, what we say in behalf
of almsgiving, we say not, that thou shouldest offer to us, but that
thou shouldest thyself minister by thine own hands. For if thou bringest
thine alms to me, perhaps thou mayest even be led captive by vain-glory,
and oftentimes likewise thou shalt go away offended through suspicion of
something <span id="page_125">p. 125</span> <span
id="iv.xxii-Page_125"></span>evil: but if ye do all things by
yourselves, ye shall both be rid of offences and of unreasonable
suspicion, and greater is your reward. Not therefore to compel you to
bring your money hither, do I say these things; nor from indignation on
account of the priests being ill-reported of. For if one must be
indignant and grieve, for you should be our grief, who say this ill.
Since to them who are spoken ill of falsely and vainly the reward is
greater, but to the speakers the condemnation and punishment is heavier.
I say not these things therefore in their behalf, but in solicitude and
care for you. For what marvel is it if some in our generation are
suspected, when in the case of those holy men who imitated the angels,
who possessed nothing of their own, I mean the Apostles, there was a
murmuring in the ministration to the widows ([Acts vi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#001)<span id="iv.xxii-p70.1"></span>.)
that the poor were overlooked? when “not one said that aught of the
things he possessed was his own, but they had all things common?” ([Acts
iv. 32](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#032)<span
id="iv.xxii-p70.2"></span>.)

<span id="iv.xxii-p71"></span>Let us not then put forward these
pretexts, nor account it an excuse that the Church is wealthy. But when
you see the greatness of her substance, bear in mind also the crowds of
poor who are on her list, the multitudes of her sick, her occasions of
endless expenses. Investigate, scrutinize, there is none to forbid, nay,
they are even ready to give you an account. But I wish to go much
farther. Namely, when we have given in our accounts and proved that our
expenditure is no less than our income, nay, sometimes more, I would
gladly ask you this further question: When we depart hence and shall
hear Christ saying, “Ye saw me hungry, and gave me no meat; naked, and
ye clothed me not;” what shall we say? what apology shall we make? Shall
we bring forward such and such a person who disobeyed these commands? or
some of the priests who were suspected? “Nay, what is this to thee? for
I accuse thee,” saith He, “of those things wherein thou hast thyself
sinned. And the apology for these would be, to have washed away thine
own offences, not to point to others whose errors have been the same as
thine.”

<span id="iv.xxii-p72"></span>In fact, the Church through your meanness
is compelled to have such property as it has now. Since, if men did all
things according to the apostolical laws, its revenue should have been
your good will, which were both a secure chest and an inexhaustible
treasury. But now when ye lay up for yourselves treasures upon the earth
and shut up all things in your own stores, while the Church is compelled
to be at charges with bands of widows, choirs of virgins, sojournings of
strangers, distresses of foreigners, the misfortunes of prisoners, the
necessities of the sick and maimed, and other such like causes, what
must be done?  Turn away from all these, and block up so many ports? Who
then could endure the shipwrecks that would ensue; the weepings, the
lamentations, the wailings which would reach us from every quarter?

<span id="iv.xxii-p73"></span>Let us not then speak at random what comes
into our mind. For now, as I have just said, we are really prepared to
render up our accounts to you. But even if it were the reverse, and ye
had corrupt teachers plundering and grasping at every thing, not even so
were their wickedness an apology for you. For the Lover of mankind and
All-wise, the Only-Begotten Son of God, seeing all things, and knowing
the chance that in so great length of time and in so vast a world there
would be many corrupt priests; lest the carelessness of those under
their rule should increase through their neglect, removing every excuse
for indifference; “In Moses’ seat,” saith He, “sit the Scribes and the
Pharisees; all things, therefore, whatsoever they bid you, these do ye,
but do not ye after their works:” implying, that even if thou hast a bad
teacher, this will not avail thee, shouldest thou not attend to the
things which are spoken. For not from what thy teacher hath done but
from what thou hast heard and disobeyed, from that, I say, doth God pass
his sentence upon thee. So that if thou doest the things commanded, thou
shalt then stand with much boldness: but if thou disobey the things
spoken, even though thou shouldest show ten thousand corrupt priests,
this will not plead for thee at all. Since Judas also was an apostle,
but nevertheless this shall never be any apology for the sacrilegious
and covetous. Nor will any be able when accused to say, “Why the Apostle
was a thief and sacrilegious, and a traitor;” yea, this very thing shall
most of all be our punishment and condemnation that not even by the
evils of others were we corrected. For this cause also these things were
written that we might shun all emulation of such things.

<span id="iv.xxii-p74"></span>Wherefore, leaving this person and that,
let us take heed to ourselves. For “each of us shall give account of
himself to God.” In order therefore that we may render up this account
with a good defence, let us well order our own lives and stretch out a
liberal hand to the needy, knowing that this only is our defence, the
showing ourselves to have rightly done the things commanded; there is no
other whatever. And if we be able to produce this, we shall escape those
intolerable pains of hell, and obtain the good things to come; unto
which may we all attain, by the grace and mercy of our Lord Jesus
Christ, with Whom, to the Father and the Holy Ghost, be glory, power,
and honor, now and ever, and world without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_99"></span>[118:100](1120025.htm#fr_99) <span
id="iv.xxii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxii-p6"></span> The reading here adopted is Savile’s.

<span id="fn_100"></span>[118:101](1120025.htm#fr_100) <span
id="iv.xxii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxii-p8"></span> A slight transposition has been made here:
the sense seeming to require it.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[118:102](1120025.htm#fr_101) <span
id="iv.xxii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxii-p9"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxii-p9.1"></span>ἐκ περιουσίας</span>.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[118:103](1120025.htm#fr_102) <span
id="iv.xxii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxii-p13"></span> i.e. making the sign of the Cross: <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxii-p13.1"></span>σφραγίζοντι</span>.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[121:104](1120025.htm#fr_103) <span
id="iv.xxii-p45.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxii-p46"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxii-p46.1"></span>διάφορον ποιεῖν τὴν γῆν</span>. See [Deut.
xxii. 9](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#009)<span
id="iv.xxii-p46.2"></span>. LXX.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[121:105](1120025.htm#fr_104) <span
id="iv.xxii-p53.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xxii-p54"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxii-p54.1"></span>προανακρούεται</span>.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[122:106](1120025.htm#fr_105) <span
id="iv.xxii-p57.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xxii-p58"></span> The reading seems imperfect, and
unintelligible:  it is rendered as if it were, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxii-p58.1"></span>οὐκ ἐπὶ τῷ ἐγκοπὴν μόνον δοῦναι</span>.

<span id="fn_106"></span>[124:107](1120025.htm#fr_106) <span
id="iv.xxii-p65.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxii-p66"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxii-p66.1"></span>χαλεπώτερον</span>; the sense seems to require
“*less* grievous:” perhaps the negative has slipped out of the text.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XXII](1120026)
