[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1120016)  [Next](1120018) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.xiv"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="iv.xiv-p1.1"></span>Homily XIII.</span>

<span id="iv.xiv-p2"></span><span id="iv.xiv-p2.1"></span><span
class="c1"><span id="iv.xiv-p2.2"></span>[1 Cor. iv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#010)<span
id="iv.xiv-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.xiv-p3"></span>“We are fools for Christ’s sake:” (For it is
necessary from this point to resume our discourse:)  “but ye are wise in
Christ: we are weak, but ye are strong: ye have glory, but we have
dishonor.”

<span id="iv.xiv-p4"></span><span class="c18"><span
id="iv.xiv-p4.1"></span>Having</span> filled his speech with much
severity which conveys a sharper blow than any direct charge and having
said, “Ye have reigned without us;” and “God hath set forth us last, as
men doomed to death” he shows by what comes next how they are “doomed to
death;” saying, We are fools, and weak, and despised, and hunger, and
thirst, and are naked, and are buffeted, and have no certain dwelling
place, and toil, working with our own hands:” which were very signs of
genuine teachers and apostles. Whereas the others prided themselves on
the things which are contrary to these, on wisdom, glory, wealth,
consideration.

<span id="iv.xiv-p5"></span>Desiring therefore to take down their
self-conceit and to point out that in respect of these things, so far
from taking credit to themselves, they ought rather to be ashamed; he
first of all mocks them, saying, “Ye have reigned without us.” As if he
had said, “My sentence is that the present is not a time of honor nor of
glory, which kind of things you enjoy, but of persecution and insult,
such as we are suffering. If however it be not so; if this rather be the
time of remuneration:  then as far as I see,” (but this he saith in
irony,) “ye, the disciples, for your part have become no less than
kings: but we the teachers and apostles, and before all entitled to
receive the reward, not only have fallen very far behind you, but even,
as persons doomed to death, that is, condemned convicts, spend our lives
entirely in dishonors, and dangers, and hunger: yea insulted as fools,
and driven about, and enduring all intolerable things.”

<span id="iv.xiv-p6"></span>Now these things he said that he might
hereby cause them also to consider, that they should zealously seek the
condition of the Apostles; their dangers and their indignities, not
their honors and glories. For these, not the other, are what the Gospel
requires. But to this effect he speaks not directly, not to shew himself
disagreeable to them: rather in a way characteristic of himself he takes
in hand this rebuke. For if he had introduced his address in a direct
manner, he would have spoken thus; “Ye err, and are beguiled, and have
swerved far from the apostolical mode of instruction. For every apostle
and minister of Christ ought to be esteemed a fool, ought to live in
affliction and <span id="page_73">p. 73</span> <span
id="iv.xiv-Page_73"></span>dishonor; which indeed is our state: whereas
you are in the contrary case.”

<span id="iv.xiv-p7"></span>But thus might his expressions have offended
them yet more, as containing but praises of the Apostles; and might have
made them fiercer, censured as they were for indolence and vainglory and
luxuriousness. Wherefore he conducts not his statement in this way, but
in another, more striking but less offensive; and this is why he
proceeds with his address as follows, saying ironically, “But ye are
strong and honorable;” since, if he had not used irony, he would have
spoken to this effect; “It is not possible that one man should be
esteemed foolish, and another wise; one strong, and another weak; the
Gospel requiring both the one and the other. For if it were in the
nature of things that one should be this, and another that, perchance
there might be some reason in what you say. But now it is not permitted,
either to be counted wise, or honorable, or to be free from dangers. If
otherwise, it follows of necessity that you are preferred before us in
the sight of God; you the disciples before us the teachers, and that
after our endless hardships.” If this be too bad for anyone to say, it
remains for you to make our condition your object.

<span id="iv.xiv-p8"></span>\[2.\] And “let no one,” saith he, “think
that I speak only of the past:”

<span id="iv.xiv-p9"></span>[1 Cor.
4.11](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#011)<span id="iv.xiv-p9.1"></span>.
“Even unto this present hour we both hunger and thirst and are naked.”
Seest thou that all the life of Christians must be such as this; and not
merely a day or two? For though the wrestler who is victorious in a
single contest only, be crowned, he is not crowned again if he suffer a
fall.

<span id="iv.xiv-p10"></span>“And hunger;” against the luxurious. “And
are buffeted;” against those who are puffed up. “And have no certain
dwelling-place;” for we are driven about. “And are naked;” against the
rich.

<span id="iv.xiv-p11"></span>[1 Cor.
4.12](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#012)<span id="iv.xiv-p11.1"></span>.
“And labor;” now against the false apostles who endure neither toil nor
peril, while they themselves receive the fruits. “But not so are we,”
saith he: “but together with our perils from without, we also strain
ourselves to the utmost with perpetual labor. And what is still more, no
one can say that we fret at these things, for the contrary is our
requital to them that so deal with us: this, I say, is the main point,
not our suffering evil, for that is common to all, but our suffering
without despondency or vexation. But we so far from desponding are full
of exultation. And a sure proof of this is our requiting with the
contrary those who do us wrong.”

<span id="iv.xiv-p12"></span>Now as to the fact that so they did, hear
what follows.

<span id="iv.xiv-p13"></span>\[[1 Cor.
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#013)<span id="iv.xiv-p13.1"></span>.\]
“Being reviled, we bless; being persecuted, we endure; being defamed, we
entreat; we are made as the filth of the world.” This is the meaning of
“fools for Christ’s sake.” For whoso suffers wrong and avenges not
himself nor is vexed, is reckoned a fool by the heathen; and dishonored
and weak. And in order that he might not render his speech too
unpalatable by referring the sufferings he was speaking of to their
city, what saith he? “We are made the filth,” not, “of your city,” but,
“of the world.” And again, “the off-scouring of all men;” not of you
alone, but of all. As then when he is discoursing of the providential
care of Christ, letting pass the earth, the heaven, the whole creation,
the Cross is what he brings forward; so also when he desires to attract
them to himself hurrying by all his miracles, he speaks of his
sufferings on their account. So also it is our method when we be injured
by any and despised, whatsoever we have endured for them, to bring the
same forward.

<span id="iv.xiv-p14"></span>“The offscouring of all men, even until
now.” This is a vigorous blow which he gave at the end, “of all men;”
“not of the persecutors only,” saith he, “but of those also for whom we
suffer these things: Oh greatly am I obliged to them.” It is the
expression of one seriously concerned; not in pain himself, but desiring
to make them feel, (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xiv-p14.1"></span>πλῆξαι</span>) that he who hath innumerable
complaints to make should even salute them. And therefore did Christ
command us to bear insults meekly that we might both exercise ourselves
in a high strain of virtue, and put the other party to the more shame.
For that effect one produces not so well by reproach as by silence.

<span id="iv.xiv-p15"></span>[1 Cor.
4.14](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#014)<span id="iv.xiv-p15.1"></span>.
\[3.\] Then since he saw that the blow could not well be borne, he
speedily heals it; saying, “I write not these things to shame you, but
to admonish you as my beloved children.” “For not as abashing you,”
saith he, “do I speak these things.” The very thing which by his words
he had done, this he says he had not done: rather he allows that he had
done it, not however with an evil and spiteful mind. Why, this mode of
soothing is the very best, if we should say what we have to say and add
the apology from our motive. For not to speak was impossible, since they
would have remained uncorrected: on the other hand, after he had spoken,
to leave the wound untended, were hard. Wherefore along with his
severity he apologizes: for this so far from destroying the effect of
the knife, rather makes it sink deeper in, while it moderates the full
pain of the wound. Since when a man is told that not in reproach but in
love are these things said, he the more readily receives correction.

<span id="iv.xiv-p16"></span>However, even here also is great severity,
and a strong appeal to their sense of shame, (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xiv-p16.1"></span>ἐντροπή</span>) <span id="page_74">p. 74</span>
<span id="iv.xiv-Page_74"></span>in that he said not, “As a master” nor
yet “as an apostle,” nor yet “as having you for my disciples;” (which
had well suited his claims on them;) but, “as my beloved children I
admonish you.” And not simply, children; but, “longed after.” “Forgive
me,” saith he. “If anything disagreeable has been said, it all proceeds
of love.” And he said not, “I rebuke,” but “I admonish.” Now, who would
not bear with a father in grief, and in the act of giving good advice?
Wherefore he did not say this before, but after he had given the blow.

<span id="iv.xiv-p17"></span>“What then?” some might say; “Do not other
teachers spare us?” “I say not so, but, they carry not their forbearance
so far.” This however he spake not out at once, but by their professions
and titles gave indication of it; “Tutor” and “Father” being the terms
which he employs.

<span id="iv.xiv-p18"></span>[1 Cor.
4.15](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#015)<span id="iv.xiv-p18.1"></span>.
\[4.\] “For though,” saith he, “ye have ten thousand tutors in Christ,
yet have ye not many fathers.” He is not here setting forth his dignity,
but the exceeding greatness of his love. Thus neither did he wound the
other teachers: since he adds the clause, “in Christ:” but rather
soothed them, designating not as parasites but as tutors those among
them who were zealous and patient of labor: and also manifested his own
anxious care of them. On this account he said not, “Yet not many
masters,” but, “not many fathers.” So little was it his object to set
down any name of dignity, or to argue that of him they had received the
greater benefit: but granting to the others the great pains they had
taken for the Corinthians, (for that is the force of the word Tutor,)
the superiority in love he reserves for his own portion: for that again
is the force of the word Father.

<span id="iv.xiv-p19"></span>And he saith not merely, No one loves you
so much; a statement which admitted not of being called in question; but
he also brings forward a real fact. What then is this? “For in Christ
Jesus I begat you through the Gospel. In Christ Jesus.” Not unto myself
do I impute this. Again, he strikes at those who gave their own names to
their teaching. For “ye,” saith he, “are the seal of mine Apostleship.”
And again, “I planted:” and in this place, “I begat.” He said not, “I
preached the word,” but, “I begat;” using the words of natural
relationship. (<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.xiv-p19.1"></span>τοῖς
τῆς</span> <span class="Greek"><span id="iv.xiv-p19.2"></span>φύσεως
ὀνόμασι</span>)  For his one care at the moment was, to shew forth the
love which he had for them. “For they indeed received you from me, and
led you on; but that you are believers at all came to pass through me.”
Thus, because he had said, “as children;” lest you should suppose that
the expression was flattery he produces also the matter of fact.

<span id="iv.xiv-p20"></span>[1 Cor.
4.16](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#016)<span id="iv.xiv-p20.1"></span>.
\[5.\] “I beseech you, be ye imitators of me, as I also am of Christ.”
(<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.xiv-p20.2"></span>κάθως κὰγὼ
Χριστοῦ</span>, omitted in our version: the Vulgate has it, see c. [1
Cor. 11.1](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#001)<span
id="iv.xiv-p20.3"></span>.) Astonishing!  How great is our teacher’s
boldness of speech!  How highly finished the image, when he can even
exhort others hereunto!  Not that in self-exaltation he doth so, but
implying that virtue is an easy thing. As if he had said, “Tell me not,
‘I am not able to imitate thee. Thou art a Teacher, and a great one.’
For the difference between me and you is not so great as between Christ
and me: and yet I have imitated Him.”

<span id="iv.xiv-p21"></span>On the other hand, writing to the
Ephesians, he interposes no mention of himself, but leads them all
straight to the one point, “Be ye imitators of God,” is his word.
([Ephes. v. 1](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#001)<span
id="iv.xiv-p21.1"></span>.) But in this place, since his discourse was
addressed to weak persons, he puts himself in by the way.

<span id="iv.xiv-p22"></span>And besides, too, he signifies that it is
possible even thus to imitate Christ. For he who copies the perfect
impression of the seal, copies the original model.

<span id="iv.xiv-p23"></span>Let us see then in what way he followed
Christ:  for this imitation needs not time and art, but a steady purpose
alone. Thus if we go into the study of a painter, we shall not be able
to copy the portrait, though we see it ten thousand times. But to copy
him we are enabled by hearing alone. Will ye then that we bring the
tablet before you and sketch out for you Paul’s manner of life? Well,
let it be produced, that picture far brighter than all the images of
Emperors: for its material is not boards glued together, nor canvass
stretched out; but the material is the work of God: being as it is a
soul and a body: a soul, the work of God, not of men; and a body again
in like wise.

<span id="iv.xiv-p24"></span>Did you utter applause here? Nay, not here
is the time for plaudits; but in what follows: for applauding, I say,
and for imitating too: for so far we have but the material which is
common to all without exception: inasmuch as soul differs not from soul
in regard of its being a soul: but the purpose of heart shews the
difference. For as one body differs not from another in so far as it is
a body, but Paul’s body is like every one’s else, only dangers make one
body more brilliant than another:  just so is it in the case of the soul
also.

<span id="iv.xiv-p25"></span>\[6.\] Suppose then our tablet to be the
soul of Paul: this tablet was lately lying covered with soot, full of
spider’s webs; (for nothing can be worse than blasphemy;) but when He
came who transformeth all things, and saw that not through indolence or
sluggishness were his lines so drawn but through inexperience and his
not having the tints (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xiv-p25.1"></span>τὰ ἄνθη</span>) of true piety: <span
id="page_75">p. 75</span> <span id="iv.xiv-Page_75"></span>(for zeal
indeed he had, but the colors were not there; for he had not “the zeal
according to knowledge:”)  He gives him the tint of the truth, that is,
grace: and in a moment he exhibited the imperial image. For having got
the colors and learnt what he was ignorant of, he waited no time, but
forthwith appeared a most excellent artist. And first he shews the head
of the king, preaching Christ; then also the remainder of the body; the
body of a perfect Christian life. Now painters we know shut themselves
up and execute all their works with great nicety and in quiet; not
opening the doors to any one: but this man, setting forth his tablet in
the view of the world, in the midst of universal opposition, clamor,
disturbance, did under such circumstances work out this Royal Image, and
was not hindered. And therefore he said, “We are made a spectacle unto
the world;” in the midst of earth, and sea, and the heaven, and the
whole habitable globe, and the world both material and intellectual, he
was drawing that portrait of his.

<span id="iv.xiv-p26"></span>Would you like to see the other parts also
thereof from the head downwards? Or will ye that from below we carry our
description upwards? Contemplate then a statue of gold or rather of
something more costly than gold, and such as might stand in heaven; not
fixed with lead nor placed in one spot, but hurrying from Jerusalem even
unto Illyricum, ([Rom. xv. 19](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#019)<span
id="iv.xiv-p26.1"></span>.) and setting forth into Spain, and borne as
it were on wings over every part of the world. For what could be more
“beautiful” than these “feet” which visited the whole earth under the
sun? This same “beauty” the prophet also from of old proclaimeth,
saying, ([Is. lii. 7](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#007)<span
id="iv.xiv-p26.2"></span>.) “How beautiful are the feet of them that
preach the Gospel of peace!” Hast thou seen how fair are the feet? Wilt
thou see the bosom too? Come, let me shew thee this also, and thou shalt
behold it far more splendid than these beautiful, yea even than the
bosom itself of the ancient lawgiver. For Moses indeed carried tablets
of stone: but this man within him had Christ Himself: it was the very
image of the King which he bore.

<span id="iv.xiv-p27"></span>For this cause he was more awful than the
Mercy Seat <span id="fr_70"></span>[71](#fn_70) and the Cherubim. For no
such voice went out from them as from hence; but from them it talked
with men chiefly about things of sense, from the tongue of Paul on the
other hand about the things above the heavens. Again, from the Mercy
Seat it spake oracles to the Jews alone; but from hence to the whole
world: and there it was by things without life; but here by a soul
instinct with virtue.

<span id="iv.xiv-p29"></span>This Mercy Seat was brighter even than
heaven, not shining forth with variety of stars nor with rays from the
sun, but the very Sun of righteousness was there, and from hence He sent
forth His rays. Again, from time to time in this our heaven, any cloud
coursing over at times makes it gloomy; but that bosom never had any
such storm sweeping across it. Or rather there did sweep over it many
storms and oft: but the light they darkened not; rather in the midst of
the temptation and dangers the light shone out. Wherefore also he
himself when bound with his chain kept exclaiming, ([2 Tim. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#009)<span id="iv.xiv-p29.1"></span>.)
“The word of God is not bound.” Thus continually by means of that tongue
was It sending forth its rays. And no fear, no danger made that bosom
gloomy. Perhaps the bosom seems to outdo the feet; however, both they as
feet are beautiful, and this as a bosom.

<span id="iv.xiv-p30"></span>Wilt thou see also the belly with its
proper beauty? Hear what he saith about it, ([1 Cor.
8.13](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#013)<span id="iv.xiv-p30.1"></span>.)
“If meat make my brother to stumble, I will eat no flesh while the world
standeth:  ([Rom. xiv. 21](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#021)<span
id="iv.xiv-p30.2"></span>.) It is good neither to eat flesh nor to drink
wine, nor anything whereby thy brother stumbleth, or is offended, or is
made weak: ([1 Cor. 6.13](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#013)<span
id="iv.xiv-p30.3"></span>.) Meats for the belly and the belly for
meats.” What can be more beautiful in its kind than this belly thus
instructed to be quiet, and taught all temperance, and knowing how both
to hunger and be famished, and also to suffer thirst? For as a
well-trained horse with a golden bridle, so also did this walk with
measured paces, having vanquished the necessity of nature. For it was
Christ walking in it. Now this being so temperate, it is quite plain
that the whole body of vice besides was done away.

<span id="iv.xiv-p31"></span>Wouldst thou see the hands too? those which
he now hath? Or wouldest thou rather behold first their former
wickedness? ([Acts viii. 3](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#003)<span
id="iv.xiv-p31.1"></span>.) “Entering (this very man) into the houses,
he haled,” of late, “men and women,” with the hands not of man, but of
some fierce wild beast. But as soon as he had received the colors of the
Truth and the spiritual experience, no longer were these the hands of a
man, but spiritual; day by day being bound with chains. And they never
struck any one, but they were stricken times without number. Once even a
viper ([Acts 28:3](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#003),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#005)<span id="iv.xiv-p31.2"></span>.)
reverenced those hands: for they were the hands of a human being no
longer; and therefore it did not even fasten on them.

<span id="iv.xiv-p32"></span>And wilt thou see also the back, resembling
as it does the other members? Hear what he saith about this also. ([2
Cor. 11:24](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#024),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#025)<span id="iv.xiv-p32.1"></span>.)
“Five times I received of the Jews forty stripes <span id="page_76">p.
76</span> <span id="iv.xiv-Page_76"></span>save one; thrice was I beaten
with rods, once was I stoned, thrice I suffered shipwreck, a night and a
day I have been in the deep.”

<span id="iv.xiv-p33"></span>\[7.\] But lest we too should fall into an
interminable deep, and be carried away far and wide, going over each of
his members severally; come let us quit the body and look at another
sort of beauty, that, namely, which proceeds from his garments; to which
even devils shewed reverence; and therefore both they made off, and
diseases took flight. And wheresoever Paul happened to shew himself,
they all retired and got out of the way, as if the champion of the whole
world had appeared. And as they who have been often wounded in war,
should they see but some part of the armor of him that wounded them feel
a shuddering; much in the same way the devils also, at sight of
“handkerchiefs” only were astonied. Where be now the rich, and they that
have high thoughts about wealth? Where they who count over their own
titles and their costly robes? With these things if they compare
themselves, it will be clay in their sight and dirt, all they have of
their own. And why speak I of garments and golden ornaments?  Why, if
one would grant me the whole world in possession, the mere nail of Paul
I should esteem more powerful than all that dominion: his poverty than
all luxury: his dishonor, than all glory: his nakedness than all riches:
no security would I compare with the buffeting of that sacred head: no
diadem, with the stones to which he was a mark. This crown let us long
for, beloved: and if persecution be not now, let us mean while prepare
ourselves. For neither was he of whom we speak glorious by persecutions
alone: for he said also, ([1 Cor. ix.
27](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#027)<span id="iv.xiv-p33.1"></span>.
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.xiv-p33.2"></span>ὑποπιέζω</span> rec.
text, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xiv-p33.3"></span>ὑπωπίαζω</span>) “I keep under my body;” now in
this one may attain excellence without persecutions. And he exhorted not
to ([Rom. iii. 14](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#014)<span
id="iv.xiv-p33.4"></span>.) “make provision for the flesh to fulfill the
lusts thereof.” And again, ([1 Tim. vi.
8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#008)<span id="iv.xiv-p33.5"></span>.)
“Having food and covering, let us be therewith content.” For to these
purposes we have no need of persecutions. And the wealthy too he sought
to moderate, saying, ([1 Tim. 6.9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#009)<span
id="iv.xiv-p33.6"></span>.) “They that desire to be rich fall into
temptation.”

<span id="iv.xiv-p34"></span>If therefore we also thus exercise
ourselves, when we enter into the contest we shall be crowned: and
though there be no persecution before us, we shall receive for these
things many rewards. But if we pamper the body and live the life of a
swine, even in peace we shall often sin and bear shame.

<span id="iv.xiv-p35"></span>Seest thou not with whom we wrestle? With
the incorporeal powers. How then, being ourselves flesh, are we to get
the better of these? For if wrestling with men one have need to be
temperate in diet, much more with evil spirits. But when together with
fulness of flesh we are also bound down to wealth, whence are we to
overcome our antagonists? For wealth is a chain, a grievous chain, to
those who know not how to use it; a tyrant savage and inhuman, imposing
all his commands by way of outrage on those who serve him. Howbeit, if
we will, this bitter tyranny we shall depose from its throne, and make
it yield to us, instead of commanding. How then shall this be? By
distributing our wealth unto all. For so long as it stands against us,
each single handed, like any robber in a wilderness it works all its bad
ends: but when we bring it forth among others, it will master us no
more, holden as it will be in chains, on all sides, by all men.

<span id="iv.xiv-p36"></span>\[8.\] And these things I say, not because
riches are a sin: the sin is in not distributing them to the poor, and
in the wrong use of them. For God made nothing evil but all things very
good; so that riches too are good; i.e. if they do not master their
owners; if the wants of our neighbors be done away by them. For neither
is that light good which instead of dissipating darkness rather makes it
intense: nor should I call that wealth, which instead of doing away
poverty rather increases it. For the rich man seeks not to take from
others but to help others: but he that seeks to receive from others is
no longer rich, but is emphatically poor. So that it is not riches that
are an evil, but the needy mind which turns wealth into poverty. These
are more wretched than those who ask alms in the narrow streets,
carrying a wallet and mutilated in body. I say, clothed in rags as they
are, not so miserable as those in silks and shining garments. Those who
strut in the market-place are more to be pitied than those who haunt the
crossings of the streets, and enter into the courts, and cry from their
cellars, and ask charity. For these for their part do utter praises to
God, and speak words of mercy and a strict morality. And therefore we
pity them, and stretch out the hand, and never find fault with them. But
those who are rich to bad purpose; cruelty and inhumanity, ravening and
satanical lust, are in the words they belch out. And therefore by all
are they detested and laughed to scorn. Do but consider; which of the
two among all men is reckoned disgraceful, to beg of the rich or the
poor. Every one, I suppose, sees it at once:—of the poor. Now this, if
you mark it, is what the rich do; for they durst not apply to those who
are richer than themselves: whereas those who beg do so of the wealthy:
for one beggar asks not alms of another, but of a rich man; but the rich
man tears the poor in pieces.

<span id="iv.xiv-p37"></span>Again tell me, which is the more dignified,
to receive from those who are willing and are obliged to you, or when
men are unwilling, to <span id="page_77">p. 77</span> <span
id="iv.xiv-Page_77"></span>compel and tease them? Clearly not to trouble
those who are unwilling. But this also the rich do: for the poor receive
from willing hands, and such as are obliged to them; but the rich from
persons unwilling and repugnant, which is an indication of greater
poverty. For if no one would like so much as to go to a meal, unless the
inviter were to feel obliged to the guest, how can it be honorable to
take one’s share of any property by compulsion? Do we not on this
account get out of the way of dogs and fly from their baying, because by
their much besetting they fairly force us off? This also our rich men
do.

<span id="iv.xiv-p38"></span>“But, that fear should accompany the gift,
is more dignified.” Nay, this is of all most disgraceful. For he who
moves heaven and earth about his gains, who can be so laughed to scorn
as he? For even unto dogs, not seldom, through fear, we throw whatever
we had hold of. Which I ask again, is more disgraceful? that one clothed
with rags should beg, or one who wears silk? Thus when a rich man pays
court to old and poor persons, so as to get possession of their
property, and this when there are children, what pardon can he deserve?

<span id="iv.xiv-p39"></span>Further: If you will, let us examine the
very words; what the rich beggars say, and what the poor. What then
saith the poor man? “That he who giveth alms will never have to give by
measure (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xiv-p39.1"></span>μετριάσει</span> perhaps corrupt:  conj. <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xiv-p39.2"></span> πεινάσει</span>, “will
never hunger); that he is giving of what is God’s: that God is loving
unto men, and recompenses more abundantly; all which are words of high
morality, and exhortation, and counsel. For he recommends thee to look
unto the Lord, and he takes away thy fear of the poverty to come. And
one may perceive much instruction in the words of those who ask alms:
but of what kind are those of the rich? Why, of swine, and dogs, and
wolves, and all other wild beasts. For some of them discourse
perpetually on banquets, and dishes, and delicacies, and wine of all
sorts, and ointments, and vestures, and all the rest of that
extravagance. And others about the interest of money and loans. And
making out accounts and increasing the mass of debts to an intolerable
amount, as if it had begun in the time of men’s fathers or grandfathers,
one they rob of his house, another of his field, and another of his
slave, and of all that he has. Why should one speak of their wills,
which are written in blood instead of ink? For either by surrounding
them with some intolerable danger, or else bewitching them with some
paltry promises, whomsoever they may see in possession of some small
property, those they persuade to pass by all their relations, and that
oftentimes when perishing through poverty, and instead of them to enter
their own names. Is there any madness and ferocity of wild beasts of any
sort which these things do not throw into the shade?

<span id="iv.xiv-p40"></span>\[8.\] Wherefore I beseech you, all such
wealth as this let us flee, disgraceful as it is and in deaths abundant;
and let us obtain that which is spiritual, and let us seek after the
treasures in the heavens. For whoso possess these, they are the rich,
they are the wealthy, both here and there enjoying things; even all
things. Since whoso will be poor, according to the word of God, has all
men’s houses opened to him. For unto him that for God’s sake has ceased
to possess any thing, every one will contribute of his own. But whoso
will hold a little with injustice, shutteth the doors of all against
him. To the end, then, that we may attain both to the good things here
and to those which are there, let us choose the wealth which cannot be
removed, that immortal abundance: which may God grant us all to obtain,
through the grace and loving-kindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, &c.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_70"></span>[75:71](1120017.htm#fr_70) <span
id="iv.xiv-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv-p28"></span> That is, probably, “of our Lord’s Human
Nature:” according to Theodoret on [Rom. iii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#025)<span id="iv.xiv-p28.1"></span>.
“The true Mercy Seat is the Lord Christ. The name suits Him as man, not
as God: for as God, He Himself gives oracles from the Mercy Seat.” And
Theophylact on the same place: “It meant certainly the Human Nature,
which was the Sheath of the Deity, covering It over.” See Suicer on the
word <span class="Greek"><span id="iv.xiv-p28.2"></span>ἱ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xiv-p28.3"></span>λαστήριον</span>. \[This
note is based upon a false reading, which has been corrected according
to Field. C.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XIV](1120018)
