[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1120042)  [Next](1120044) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.xl"></span>

<span id="iv.xl-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="iv.xl-p1.1"></span>Homily XXXIX.</span>

<span id="iv.xl-p2"></span><span id="iv.xl-p2.1"></span><span
class="c1"><span id="iv.xl-p2.2"></span>[1 Cor. xv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#011)<span id="iv.xl-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.xl-p3"></span>Whether then it be I or they, so we preach,
and so ye believed.

<span id="iv.xl-p4"></span><span class="c18"><span
id="iv.xl-p4.1"></span>Having</span> exalted the Apostles and abased
himself, then again having exalted himself above them that he might make
out an equality: (for he did effect an equality, when he showed that he
had advantages over them as well as they over him,) and having thereby
proved himself worthy of credit; neither so doth he dismiss them, but
again ranks himself with them, pointing out their concord in Christ.
Nevertheless he doth it not so as that he should seem to have been
tacked on to them, <span id="fr_269"></span>[270](#fn_269) but as
himself also to appear in the same rank. For so it was profitable for
the Gospel. Wherefore also he was equally earnest, on the one hand, that
he might not seem to overlook them; on the other, that he might not be
on account of the honor paid to them held cheap by those that were under
his authority. Therefore he also now makes himself equal again, saying,

<span id="iv.xl-p6"></span>“Whether then it be I or they, so we preach.”
“From whomsoever,” saith he, “ye choose to learn, learn; there is no
difference between us.” And he said not, “if ye will not believe me,
believe them;” but while he makes himself worthy of credit and saith
that he is of himself sufficient, he affirms the same also of them by
themselves. For the difference of persons took no effect, their
authority being equal. And in the Epistle to the Galatians <span
id="page_234">p. 234</span> <span id="iv.xl-Page_234"></span>he doth
this, taking them with him, not as also standing in need of them, but
saying indeed that even himself was sufficient: “For they who were of
repute imparted nothing to me:” ([Gal. ii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#006)<span id="iv.xl-p6.1"></span>.)
nevertheless, even so I follow after agreement with them. “For they gave
unto me,” saith he, “their right hands.” ([Gal. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#009)<span id="iv.xl-p6.2"></span>.) For
if the credit of Paul were always to depend on others and to be
confirmed by testimony from others, the disciples would hence have
received infinite injury. It is not therefore to exalt himself that he
doeth this, but fearing for the Gospel. Wherefore also he here saith,
making himself equal, “Whether it be I or they, so we preach.”

<span id="iv.xl-p7"></span>Well did he say, “we preach,” indicating his
great boldness of speech. For we speak not secretly, nor <span
id="fr_270"></span>[271](#fn_270) in a corner, but we utter a voice
clearer than a trumpet. And he said not, “we preached,” but, “even now
‘so we preach.’” “And so ye believed.” Here he said not, “ye believe,”
but, “ye believed.” Because they were shaken in mind, therefore he ran
back to the former times, and proceeds to add the witness from
themselves.

<span id="iv.xl-p9"></span>\[2.\] [1 Cor.
15.12](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#012)<span id="iv.xl-p9.1"></span>.
“Now if Christ is preached that He hath been raised from the dead, how
say some among you that there is no resurrection of the dead?”

<span id="iv.xl-p10"></span>Seest thou how excellently he reasons, and
proves the resurrection from the fact of Christ’s being raised, having
first established the former in many ways? “For both the prophets spake
of it,” saith he, “and the Lord Himself showed it by His appearing, and
we preach, and ye believed;” weaving thus his fourfold testimony; the
witness of the prophets, the witness of the issue of events, the witness
of the apostles, the witness of the disciples; or rather a fivefold. For
this very cause too itself implies the resurrection; viz. his dying for
others’ sins. If therefore this hath been proved, it is evident that the
other also follows, viz. that the other dead likewise are raised. And
this is why, as concerning an admitted fact, he challenges and questions
them, saying, “Now if Christ hath been raised, how say some among you
that there is no resurrection of the dead?”

<span id="iv.xl-p11"></span>Hereby also again abating the boldness of
the gainsayers: in that he said not, “how say, ye,” but, “how say some
among you.” And neither doth he bring a charge against all nor declare
openly the very persons whom he accuses, in order not to make them more
reckless: neither on the other hand doth he conceal it wholly, that he
may correct them. For this purpose accordingly, separating them from the
multitude, he strips himself for the contest with them, by this both
weakening and confounding them, and holding the rest in their conflicts
with these firmer to the truth, nor suffering them to desert to those
that were busy to destroy them: he being in fact prepared to adopt a
vehement mode of speech.

<span id="iv.xl-p12"></span>Further, lest they should say, “this indeed
is clear and evident unto all that Christ is raised, and none doubts it;
this doth not however necessarily imply the other also, to wit, the
resurrection of mankind:”—for the one was both before proclaimed and
came to pass, and was testified of by his appearing; the fact, namely,
of Christ’s resurrection: but the other is yet in hope, i.e., our own
part:—see what he doeth; from the other side again he makes it out:
which is a proof of great power. Thus, “why do some say,” saith he,
“that there is no resurrection of the dead?” Of course then the former
also in its turn is subverted by this, the fact, namely, that Christ is
raised. Wherefore also he adds, saying,

<span id="iv.xl-p13"></span>[1 Cor.
15.13](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#013)<span id="iv.xl-p13.1"></span>.
“But if there is no resurrection of the dead, neither hath Christ been
raised.”

<span id="iv.xl-p14"></span>Seest thou Paul’s energy, and his spirit for
the combat, so invincible? how not only from what is evident he
demonstrates what is doubted, but also from what is doubted, endeavors
to demonstrate to gainsayers the former evident proposition? Not because
what had already taken place required demonstration, but that he might
signify this to be equally worthy of belief with that.

<span id="iv.xl-p15"></span>\[3.\] “And what kind of consequence is
this?” saith one. “For if Christ be not raised, that then neither should
others be raised, doth follow: but that if others be not raised, neither
should Christ be raised, what reason can there be in this?” Since then
this doth not appear to be very reasonable, see how he works it out
wisely, scattering his seeds beforehand from the beginning, even from
the very groundwork of the Gospel: as, that “having died for our sins,”
He was raised; and that He is “the first-fruits of them that slept.” For
the first-fruits—of what can He be the first-fruits, except of them that
are raised? And how can He be first-fruits, if they rise not of whom He
is first-fruits? How then are they not raised?

<span id="iv.xl-p16"></span>Again, if they be not raised, wherefore was
Christ raised? Wherefore came He? Wherefore did He take upon Him flesh,
if he were not about to raise flesh again? For He stood not in need of
it Himself but for our sakes. But these things he afterwards set down as
he goes on; for the present he saith, “If the dead be not raised,
neither hath Christ been raised,” as <span id="page_235">p. 235</span>
<span id="iv.xl-Page_235"></span>though that were connected with this.
For had He not intended to raise Himself, He would not have wrought that
other work. Seest thou by degrees the whole economy overthrown by those
words of theirs and by their unbelief in the resurrection? But as yet he
saith nothing of the incarnation, but of the resurrection. For not His
having become incarnate, but His having died, took away death; since
while He had flesh, the tyranny of death still had dominion.

<span id="iv.xl-p17"></span>[1 Cor.
15.14](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#014)<span id="iv.xl-p17.1"></span>.
“And if Christ hath not been raised, then is our preaching vain, your
faith also is vain.”

<span id="iv.xl-p18"></span>Although what followed in due course would
have been, “but if Christ be not risen, ye fight against things evident,
and against so many prophets, and the truth of facts;” nevertheless he
states what is much more fearful to them: “then is our preaching vain,
your faith also is vain.” For he wishes to shake thoroughly their mind:
“we have lost all,” saith he, “all is over, if He be not risen.” Seest
thou how great is the mystery of the œconomy? As thus: if after death He
could not rise again, neither is sin loosed nor death taken away nor the
curse removed. Yea, and not only have we preached in vain, but ye also
have believed in vain.

<span id="iv.xl-p19"></span>\[4.\] And not hereby alone doth he show the
impiety of these evil doctrines, but he further contends earnestly
against them, saying,

<span id="iv.xl-p20"></span>[1 Cor.
15.15](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#015)<span id="iv.xl-p20.1"></span>.
“Yea, and we are found false witnesses of God: because we witnessed of
Him that He raised up Christ; whom He raised not up, if so be that the
dead are not raised.”

<span id="iv.xl-p21"></span>But if this be absurd, (for it is a charge
against God and a calumny,) and He raised Him not, as ye say, not only
this, but other absurdities too will follow.

<span id="iv.xl-p22"></span>And again he establishes it all, and takes
it up again, saying,

<span id="iv.xl-p23"></span>[1 Cor.
15.16](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#016)<span id="iv.xl-p23.1"></span>.
“For if the dead are not raised, neither hath Christ been raised.”

<span id="iv.xl-p24"></span>For had He not intended to do this, He would
not have come into the world. And he names not this, but the end, to
wit, His resurrection; through it drawing all things.

<span id="iv.xl-p25"></span>[1 Cor.
15.17](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#017)<span id="iv.xl-p25.1"></span>.
“And if Christ hath not been raised, your faith is vain.”

<span id="iv.xl-p26"></span>With whatever is clear and confessed, he
keeps on surrounding the resurrection of Christ, by means of the
stronger point making even that which seems to be weak and doubtful,
strong and clear.

<span id="iv.xl-p27"></span>“Ye are yet in your sins.” For if He was not
raised, neither did He die; and if He died not, neither did He take away
sin: His death being the taking away of sin. “For behold,” saith one,
“the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the world.” ([John i.
29](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#029)<span id="iv.xl-p27.1"></span>.) But
how “taketh away?” By His death. Wherefore also he called him a Lamb, as
one slain. But if He rose not again, neither was He slain: and if He was
not slain, neither was sin taken away: and if it was not taken away, ye
are in it: and if ye are in it, we have preached in vain: and if we have
preached in vain, ye have believed in vain that ye were reconciled. And
besides, death remains immortal, if He did not arise. For if He too was
holden of death and loosed not its pains, how released He all others,
being as yet Himself holden of it? Wherefore also he adds,

<span id="iv.xl-p28"></span>[1 Cor.
15.18](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#018)<span id="iv.xl-p28.1"></span>.
“Then they also which are fallen asleep in Christ have perished.”

<span id="iv.xl-p29"></span>“And why speak I of you,” saith he, “when
all those also are perished, who have done all and are no longer subject
to the uncertainty of the future?” But by the expression, “in Christ,”
he means either “in the faith,” or “they who died for His sake, who
endured many perils, many miseries, who walked in the narrow way. <span
id="fr_271"></span>[272](#fn_271) ”

<span id="iv.xl-p31"></span>Where are those foul-mouthed Manichees who
say that by the resurrection here means the liberation from sin <span
id="fr_272"></span>[273](#fn_272) ? For these compact and continuous
syllogisms, holding as they do also conversely, indicate nothing of what
they say, but what we affirm. It is true, “rising again” is spoken of
one who has fallen: and this is why he keeps on explaining, and saith
not only that He was raised, but adds this also, “from the dead.” And
the Corinthians too doubted not of the forgiveness of sins, but of the
resurrection of bodies.

<span id="iv.xl-p33"></span>But what necessity is there at all, that
except mankind be not without sin, neither should Christ Himself be so?
Whereas, if He were not to raise men up, it were natural to say,
“wherefore came He and took our flesh and rose again?” But on our
supposition not so. Yea, and whether men sin or do not sin, there is
ever with God an impossibility of sinning, and what happens to us
reaches not to Him, nor doth one case answer to the other by way of
conversion, as in the matter of the resurrection of the body <span
id="fr_273"></span>[274](#fn_273) .

<span id="iv.xl-p35"></span>\[4.\] [1 Cor.
15.19](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#019)<span id="iv.xl-p35.1"></span>.
“If in this life only we have hoped in Christ, we are of all men most
pitiable.

<span id="iv.xl-p36"></span>What sayest thou, O Paul? How “in this <span
id="page_236">p. 236</span> <span id="iv.xl-Page_236"></span>life only
have we hope,” if our bodies be not raised, the soul abiding and being
immortal?  Because even if the soul abide, even if it be infinitely
immortal, as indeed it is, without the flesh it shall not receive those
hidden good things, as neither truly shall it be punished. For all
things shall be made manifest before the judgment-seat of Christ, “that
every one may receive the things done in the body, according to that he
hath done, whether it be good or bad.” ([2 Cor. v.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#010)<span id="iv.xl-p36.1"></span>.)
Therefore he saith, “if in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are
of all men most pitiable.” For if the body rise not again, the soul
abides uncrowned without that blessedness which is in heaven. And if
this be so, we shall enjoy nothing then at all: and if nothing then, in
the present life is our recompense. “What then in this respect can be
more wretched than we?” saith he.

<span id="iv.xl-p37"></span>But these things he said, as well to confirm
them in the doctrine of the resurrection of the body, as to persuade
them concerning that immortal life, in order that they might not suppose
that all our concerns end with the present world. For having
sufficiently established what he purposed by the former arguments, and
having said, “if the dead are not raised, neither hath Christ been
raised; but if Christ were not raised, we have perished, and we are yet
in our sins;” again he also subjoins this, thoroughly demolishing their
arrogance. For so when he intends to introduce any of the necessary
doctrines, he first shakes thoroughly their hardness of heart by fear:
which accordingly he did here, having both above scattered those seeds,
and made them anxious, as those who had fallen from all: and now again
after another manner, and so as they should most severely feel it, doing
this same thing and saying, “‘we are of all men most pitiable,’ if after
so great conflicts and deaths and those innumerable evils, we are to
fall from so great blessings, and our happiness is limited by the
present life.” For in fact all depends on the resurrection. So that even
hence it is evident that his discourse was not of a resurrection from
sins, but of bodies, and of the life present and to come.

<span id="iv.xl-p38"></span>\[5.\] [1 Cor.
15.20](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#020)<span id="iv.xl-p38.1"></span>.
“But now hath Christ been raised from the dead, the first-fruits of them
that are asleep.”

<span id="iv.xl-p39"></span>Having signified how great mischiefs are
bred from not believing the resurrection, he takes up the discourse
again, and says, “But now hath Christ been raised from the dead;”
continually adding, “from the dead,” so as to stop <span
id="fr_274"></span>[275](#fn_274) the mouths of the heretics. “The
first-fruits of them that slept.” But if their first-fruits, then
themselves also, must needs rise again. Whereas if he were speaking of
the resurrection from sins, and none is without sin;—for even Paul
saith, “I know nothing against myself, yet am I not hereby
justified <span id="fr_275"></span>[276](#fn_275) ;”—how shall there be
any who rise again, according to you? Seest thou that his discourse was
of bodies? And that he might make it worthy of credit, he continually
brings forward Christ who rose again in the flesh.

<span id="iv.xl-p42"></span>Next he also assigns a reason. For, as I
said, when one asserts but does not state the reason, his discourse is
not easily received by the multitude. What then is the reason?

<span id="iv.xl-p43"></span>[1 Cor.
15.21](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#021)<span id="iv.xl-p43.1"></span>.
“For since by man came death, by man came also the resurrection of the
dead.”

<span id="iv.xl-p44"></span>But if by a man, doubtless by one having a
body. And observe his thoughtfulness, how on another ground also he
makes his argument inevitable. As thus: “he that is defeated,” saith he,
“must in his own person also renew the conflict, the nature which was
cast down must itself also gain the victory. For so the reproach was
wiped away.”

<span id="iv.xl-p45"></span>But let us see what kind of death he is
speaking of.

<span id="iv.xl-p46"></span>[1 Cor.
15.22](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#022)<span id="iv.xl-p46.1"></span>.
“For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive.”

<span id="iv.xl-p47"></span>What then? tell me; did all die in Adam the
death of sin <span id="fr_276"></span>[277](#fn_276) ? How then was Noah
righteous in his generation? and how Abraham? and how Job? and how all
the rest? And what, I pray? shall all be made alive in Christ? Where
then are those who are led away into hell fire? Thus, if this be said of
the body, the doctrine stands:  but if of righteousness and sin, it doth
so no longer.

<span id="iv.xl-p50"></span>Further, lest, on hearing that the making
alive is common to all, thou shouldest also suppose that sinners are
saved, he adds,

<span id="iv.xl-p51"></span>[1 Cor.
15.23](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#023)<span id="iv.xl-p51.1"></span>.
“But every man in his own order.”

<span id="iv.xl-p52"></span>For do not, because thou hearest of a
resurrection, imagine that all enjoy the same benefits. Since if in the
punishment all will not suffer alike but the difference is great; much
more where there are sinners and righteous men shall the separation be
yet wider.

<span id="iv.xl-p53"></span><span id="page_237">p. 237</span> <span
id="iv.xl-Page_237"></span>“Christ the first-fruits, then they that are
Christ’s;” i.e., the faithful and the approved.

<span id="iv.xl-p54"></span>[1 Cor.
15.24](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#024)<span id="iv.xl-p54.1"></span>.
“Then cometh the end.”

<span id="iv.xl-p55"></span>For when these shall have risen again, all
things shall have an end, not as now when after Christ’s resurrection
things abide yet in suspense. Wherefore he added, “at His coming,” that
thou mayest learn that he is speaking of that time, “when He shall have
delivered up the kingdom to God even the Father; when He shall have
abolished all rule and all authority and power.”

<span id="iv.xl-p56"></span>\[6.\] Here, give heed to me carefully, and
see that no part escape you of what I say. For our contest is with
enemies <span id="fr_277"></span>[278](#fn_277) : wherefore we first
must practice the *reductio ad absurdum* which also Paul often doeth.
Since in this way shall we find what they say most easy of detection.
Let us ask them then first, what is the meaning of the saying, “When he
shall have delivered up the kingdom to God, even the Father?” For if we
take this just as it stands and not in a sense becoming Deity, He will
not after this retain it. For he that hath delivered up to another,
ceases any longer to retain a thing himself. And not only will there be
this absurdity, but that also the other person who receives it will be
found not to be possessor of it before he hath so received it. Therefore
according to them, neither was the Father a King before, governing our
affairs: nor will it seem that the Son after these things will be a
King. How then, first of all, concerning the Father doth the Son Himself
say, “My Father worketh hitherto, and I work:” ([John v.
17](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#017)<span id="iv.xl-p57.1"></span>.) and
of Him Daniel, “That His kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, which shall
not pass away?” ([Dan. vii. 14](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#014)<span
id="iv.xl-p57.2"></span>.) Seest thou how many absurdities are produced,
and repugnant to the Scriptures, when one takes the thing spoken after
the manner of men?

<span id="iv.xl-p58"></span>But what “rule,” then doth he here say, that
Christ “putteth down?” That of the angels? Far from it. That of the
faithful? Neither is it this. What rule then?  That of the devils,
concerning which he saith, “Our wrestling is not against flesh and
blood, but against the principalities, against the powers, against the
world-rulers of this darkness:” ([Eph. vi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#012)<span id="iv.xl-p58.1"></span>.) For
now it is not as yet “put down” perfectly, they working in many places,
but then shall they cease.

<span id="iv.xl-p59"></span>[1 Cor.
15.25](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#025)<span id="iv.xl-p59.1"></span>.
“For He must reign, till He hath put all enemies under His feet.”

<span id="iv.xl-p60"></span>Again from hence also another absurdity is
produced, unless we take this also in a way becoming Deity. For the
expression “until,” is one of end and limitation: but in reference to
God, this does not exist.

<span id="iv.xl-p61"></span>[1 Cor.
15.26](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#026)<span id="iv.xl-p61.1"></span>.
“The last enemy that shall be abolished is death.”

<span id="iv.xl-p62"></span>How the last? After all, after the devil,
after all the other things. For so in the beginning also death came in
last; the counsel of the devil having come first, and our disobedience,
and then death. Virtually then indeed it is even now abolished: but
actually, at that time.

<span id="iv.xl-p63"></span>\[7.\] [1 Cor.
15.27](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#027)<span id="iv.xl-p63.1"></span>.
“For He hath put all things in subjection under His feet. But when He
saith, All things are put in subjection, it is manifest that He is
excepted who did subject all things unto Him.”

<span id="iv.xl-p64"></span>[1 Cor.
15.28](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#028)<span id="iv.xl-p64.1"></span>.
“And when all things have been subjected unto Him, then shall the Son
also Himself be subjected unto Him that did subject all things unto
Him.”

<span id="iv.xl-p65"></span>And yet before he said not that it was the
Father who “put things under Him,” but He Himself who “abolishes.” For
“when He shall have abolished,” saith he, “all rule and authority:” and
again, “for He must reign until He hath put all His enemies under His
feet.” How then doth he here say, “the Father?”

<span id="iv.xl-p66"></span>And not only is there this apparent
perplexity, but also that he is afraid with a very unaccountable fear,
and uses a correction, saying, “He is excepted, who did subject all
things unto Him,” as though some would suspect, whether the Father might
Himself not be subject unto the Son; than which what can be more
irrational? nevertheless, he fears this.

<span id="iv.xl-p67"></span>How then is it? for in truth there are many
questions following one upon another. Well, give me then your earnest
attention; since in fact it is necessary for us first to speak of the
scope of Paul and his mind, which one may find everywhere shining forth,
and then to subjoin our solution: this being itself an ingredient in our
solution.

<span id="iv.xl-p68"></span>What then is Paul’s mind, and what is his
custom? He speaks in one way when he discourses of the Godhead alone,
and in another when he falls into the argument of the economy. Thus
having once taken hold of our Lord’s Flesh, he freely thereafter uses
all the sayings that humiliate Him; without fear as though that were
able to bear all such expressions. Let us see therefore here also,
whether his discourse is of the simple Godhead, or whether in view of
the incarnation he asserts of Him those things which he saith: or rather
let us first point out where he did this of which I have spoken. Where
then did he this? Writ<span id="page_238">p. 238</span> <span
id="iv.xl-Page_238"></span>ing to the Philippians he saith, “Who, being
in the form of God, counted it not a prize to be on an equality with
God, but emptied Himself of no reputation, taking the form of a servant,
being made in the likeness of men: and being found in fashion as a man,
He humbled Himself, becoming obedient even unto death, yea, the death of
the cross. Wherefore hath God highly exalted Him.” ([Philip. ii.
6-9](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#006)<span id="iv.xl-p68.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.xl-p69"></span>Seest thou how when he was discoursing of
the Godhead alone, he uttered those great things, that He “was in the
form of God” and that He “was equal with” Him that begat Him, and to Him
refers the whole? But when He showed Him to thee made flesh, he lowered
again the discourse. For except thou distinguish these things, there is
great variance between the things spoken. Since, if He were “equal with
God,” how did He highly exalt one equal with Himself? If He were “in the
form of God,” how “gave” He Him “a name?” for he that giveth, giveth to
one that hath not, and he that exalteth, exalteth one that is before
abased. He will be found then to be imperfect and in need, before He
hath received the “exaltation” and “the Name;” and many other absurd
corollaries will hence follow. But if thou shouldest add the
incarnation, thou wilt not err in saying these things. These things then
here also consider, and with this mind receive thou the expressions.

<span id="iv.xl-p70"></span>\[8.\] Now together with these we will state
also other reasons why this pericope of Scripture was thus composed. But
at present it is necessary to mention this:  first, that Paul’s
discourse was of the resurrection, a thing counted to be impossible and
greatly disbelieved: next, he was writing to Corinthians among whom
there were many philosophers who mocked at such things always. For
although in other things wrangling one with another, in this they all,
as with one mouth, conspired, dogmatically declaring that there is no
resurrection. Contending therefore for such a subject so disbelieved and
ridiculed, both on account of the prejudice which had been formed, and
on account of the difficulty of the thing; and wishing to demonstrate
its possibility, he first effects this from the resurrection of Christ.
And having proved it both from the prophets, and from those who had
seen, and from those who believed: when he had obtained an admitted
*reductio ad absurdum*, he proves in what follows the resurrection of
mankind also. “For if the dead rise not,” saith he, “neither has Christ
been raised.”

<span id="iv.xl-p71"></span>Further; having closely urged these converse
arguments in the former verses, he tries it again in another way,
calling Him the “first-fruits,” and pointing to His “abolishing all rule
and authority and power, and death last.” “How then should death be put
down,” saith he, “unless he first loose the bodies which he held?” Since
then he had spoken great things of the Only-Begotten, that He “gives up
the kingdom,” i.e., that He Himself brings these things to pass, and
Himself is victor in the war, and “putteth all things under His feet,”
he adds, to correct the unbelief of the multitude, “for He must reign
till He hath put all His enemies under His feet.” Not as putting an end
to the kingdom, did he use the expression “until,” but to render what
was said worthy of credit, and induce them to be confident. For “do
not,” saith he, “because thou hast heard that He will abolish all rule,
and authority and power,” to wit, the devil, and the bands of demons,
(many as there are,) and the multitudes of unbelievers, and the tyranny
of death, and all evils: do not thou fear as though His strength was
exhausted. For until He shall have done all these things, “He must
reign;” not saying this, that after He hath brought it to pass He doth
not reign; but establishing this other, that even if it be not now,
undoubtedly it will be. For His kingdom is not cut off: yea, He rules
and prevails and abides until He shall have set to right all things.

<span id="iv.xl-p72"></span>And this manner of speech one might find
also in the Old Testament; as when it is said, “But the word of the Lord
abideth for ever;” ([Ps. cxix. 89](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#089)<span
id="iv.xl-p72.1"></span>.) and, “Thou art the same, and Thy years shall
not fail.” ([Ps. cii. 27](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#027)<span
id="iv.xl-p72.2"></span>.) Now these and such-like things the Prophet
saith, when he is telling of things which a long space of time must
achieve and which must by all means come to pass; casting out the
fearfulness of the duller sort of hearers.

<span id="iv.xl-p73"></span>But that the expression, “until,” spoken of
God, and “unto,” do not signify an end, hear what one saith:  “From
everlasting unto everlasting Thou art God:” ([Ps. xc.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#002)<span id="iv.xl-p73.1"></span>.) and
again, “I am, I am,” and “Even to your old age I am He.” ([Is. xlvi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#004)<span id="iv.xl-p73.2"></span>.)

<span id="iv.xl-p74"></span>For this cause indeed doth he set death
last, that from the victory over the rest this also might be easily
admitted by the unbeliever. For when He destroys the devil who brought
in death, much more will He put an end to His work.

<span id="iv.xl-p75"></span>\[9.\] Since then he referred all to Him,
the “abolishing rule and authority,” the perfecting of His kingdom, (I
mean the salvation of the faithful, the peace of the world, the taking
away of evils, for this is to perfect His kingdom,) the putting an end
to death; and he said not, “the Father by Him,” but, “Himself shall put
down, and Himself shall put under His feet,” and he no where mentioned
Him that begat Him; he was afraid afterward, lest on this account among
<span id="page_239">p. 239</span> <span id="iv.xl-Page_239"></span>some
of the more irrational persons, either the Son might seem to be greater
than the Father, or to be a certain distinct principle,
unbegotten. <span id="fr_278"></span>[279](#fn_278)   And therefore,
gently guarding himself, he qualifies the magnitude of his expressions,
saying, “for He put all things in subjection under His feet,” again
referring to the Father these high achievements; not as though the Son
were without power. For how could He be, of whom he testified so great
things before, and referred to Him all that was said?  But it was for
the reason which I mentioned, and that he might show all things to be
common to Father and Son which were done in our behalf. For that Himself
alone was sufficient to “put all things in subjection under Him,” hear
again Paul saying, ([Philip. iii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#021)<span id="iv.xl-p76.2"></span>.)
“Who shall fashion anew the body of our humiliation that it may be
conformed to the body of His glory, according to the working whereby He
is able even to subject all things unto Himself.”

<span id="iv.xl-p77"></span>Then also he uses a correction, saying, “But
when He saith, all things are put in subjection, it is evident that He
is excepted who did subject all things unto Him,” testifying even thence
no small glory to the Only-Begotten. For if He were less and much
inferior, this fear would never have been entertained by him. Neither is
he content with this, but also adds another thing, as follows. I say,
lest any should doubtingly ask, “And what if the Father hath not been
‘put under Him?’ this doth not at all hinder the Son from being the more
mighty;” fearing this impious supposition, because that expression was
not sufficient to point out this also, he added, going very much beyond
it, “But when all things have been subjected unto Him, then shall the
Son also Himself be subjected;” showing His great concord with the
Father, and that He is the principle of all other good things and the
first Cause, who hath begotten One so great in power and in
achievements.

<span id="iv.xl-p78"></span>\[10.\] But if he said more than the
subject-matter demanded, marvel not. For in imitation of his Master he
doeth this: since He too purposing to show His concord with Him that
begat Him, and that He hath not come without His mind, descends so far,
I say not, as the proof of concord demanded, but as the weakness of the
persons present required. For He prays to His Father for no other cause
but this; and stating the reason He saith, “that they may believe that
Thou hast sent Me.” ([John xi. 42](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#042)<span
id="iv.xl-p78.1"></span>.) In imitation therefore of Him, Paul here in
his manner of speech goes beyond what was required; not that thou
mightest have any suspicion of a forced servitude, far from it; but that
he might the more entirely cast out those impious doctrines. For so when
he is minded to pull up any thing by the roots, he is wont to do it, and
abundantly more with it <span id="fr_279"></span>[280](#fn_279) . Thus
too, for example, when he spake of a believing wife and an unbelieving
husband, companying with one another by the law of marriage, that the
wife might not consider herself defiled by that intercourse and the
embraces of the unbeliever, he said not, “the wife is not unclean,” nor,
“she is no wise harmed by the unbeliever,” but, which was much more,
“the unbeliever is even ‘sanctified’ by her,” not meaning to signify
that the heathen was made holy through her, but by the very great
strength of the expression anxious to remove her fear.  So also here,
his zeal to take away that impious doctrine by a very strong utterance
was the cause of his expressing himself as he did. For as to suspect the
Son of weakness is extreme impiety: (wherefore he corrects it, saying,
“He shall put all enemies under His feet:”)  so on the other hand is it
more impious to consider the Father inferior to Him. Wherefore he takes
it also away with exceeding force. And observe how he puts it. For he
said not simply, “He is excepted which put all things under Him,” but,
“it is manifest,” “for even if it be admitted,” saith he, “nevertheless
I make it sure <span id="fr_280"></span>[281](#fn_280) .”

<span id="iv.xl-p81"></span>And that thou mayest learn that this is the
reason of the things spoken, I would ask thee this question: Doth an
additional “subjection” at that time befal the Son? And how can this be
other than impious and unworthy of God? For the greatest subjection and
obedience is this, that He who is God took the form of a servant. How
then will He be “subjected?” Seest thou, that to take away the impious
notion, he used this expression? and this too in a suitable though
reserved sense? For he becomes a Son and a divine Person, so He obeys;
not humanly, but as one acting freely and having all authority.
Otherwise how is he co-enthroned? How, “as the Father raiseth up, even
so He, whom He will?” ([John v.
21](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#021)<span id="iv.xl-p81.1"></span>.) How
are “all things that the Father hath His,” and all that He hath, the
Father’s? ([John xvi. 15](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#015)<span
id="iv.xl-p81.2"></span>.) For these phrases indicate to us an authority
exactly measured by <span id="fr_281"></span>[282](#fn_281) that of Him
that begat Him.

<span id="iv.xl-p83"></span>\[11.\] But what is this, “When He shall
deliver up the kingdom?” The Scripture acknowledges two kingdoms of God,
the one by appropriation <span id="fr_282"></span>[283](#fn_282) , the
other by creation <span id="fr_283"></span>[284](#fn_283) . Thus, He is
King over all, both Greeks and Jews and devils and His adversaries, in
respect of His <span id="page_240">p. 240</span> <span
id="iv.xl-Page_240"></span>creation: but He is King of the faithful and
willing and subject, in respect of His making them His own. This is the
kingdom which is said also to have a beginning. For concerning this He
saith also in the second Psalm, “Ask of Me, and I shall give Thee the
heathen for Thine inheritance.” ([Ps. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#008)<span id="iv.xl-p85.3"></span>.)
Touching this also, He Himself said to His disciples, “All authority
hath been given unto Me by My father,” ([Matt. xxviii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#018)<span id="iv.xl-p85.4"></span>.)
referring all to Him that begat Him, not as though of Himself He were
not sufficient, but to signify that He is a Son, and not unbegotten.
This kingdom then He doth “deliver up,” i.e., “bring to a right end.”

<span id="iv.xl-p86"></span>“What then,” saith one, “can be the reason
why He spake nothing of the Spirit?” Because of Him he was not
discoursing now, nor doth he confound all things together. Since also
where he saith, “There is one God the Father, and one Lord Jesus,”
undoubtedly not as allowing the Spirit to be inferior, is he therefore
silent, but because for the time it was not urgent, he so expressed
himself. For he is wont also to make mention of the Father only, yet we
must not therefore cast out the Son: he is wont to speak also of the Son
and of the Spirit only, yet not for this are we to deny <span
id="fr_284"></span>[285](#fn_284) the Father.

<span id="iv.xl-p88"></span>But what is, “that God may be all in all?”
That all things may be dependent upon Him, that none may suppose two
authorities without a beginning, nor another kingdom separated off; that
nothing may exist independent of him. For when the enemies shall be
lying under the feet of the Son, and He having them cast under His feet
be at no variance with His Father, but at concord with Him in entire
perfection, then He shall Himself “be all in all.”

<span id="iv.xl-p89"></span>But some say that he spake this to declare
the removal of wickedness, as though all would yield thenceforth and
none would resist nor do iniquity. For when there is no sin, it is
evident that “God shall be all in all.”

<span id="iv.xl-p90"></span>\[12.\] But if bodies do not rise again, how
are these things true? For the worst enemy of all, death, remains,
having wrought whatever he listed. “Nay,” saith one, “for they shall sin
no more.” And what of that? For he is not discoursing here of the death
of the soul, but of that of the body? How then is he “put down?” For
victory is this, the winning of those things which have been carried off
and detained. But if men’s bodies are to be detained in the earth, it
follows that the tyranny of death remains, these bodies for their part
being holden, and there being no other body for him to be vanquished in.
But if this which Paul spake of, ensue, as undoubtedly it will ensue,
God’s victory will appear, and that a glorious one, in His being able to
raise again the bodies which were holden thereby. Since an enemy too is
then vanquished, when a man takes the spoils, not when he suffers them
to remain in the other’s possession: but unless one venture to take what
is his, how can we say that he is vanquished? After this manner of
victory doth Christ Himself say in the Gospels that He hath been
victorious, thus speaking, “When he shall bind the strong man, then
shall he also spoil his goods.” ([Matt. xii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#029)<span id="iv.xl-p90.1"></span>.)
Since if this were not so, it would not be at all a manifest victory.
For as in the death of the soul, “he that hath died is justified from
sin;” ([Rom. vi. 7](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#007)<span
id="iv.xl-p90.2"></span>.) (and yet we cannot say that this is a
victory, for he is not the victor who adds no more to his wickedness,
but he who hath done away the former captivity of his passions;) just so
in this instance also, I should not call death’s being stayed from
feeding on the bodies of men a splendid victory, but rather that the
bodies heretofore holden by him should be snatched away from him.

<span id="iv.xl-p91"></span>But if they should still be contentious and
should say that these things were spoken of the soul’s death, how is
this “destroyed last?” since in the case of each one at his Baptism it
hath been destroyed perfectly. If however thou speakest of the body, the
expression is admissible; I mean, such a saying as that it will be “last
destroyed.”

<span id="iv.xl-p92"></span>But if any should doubt why discoursing of
the resurrection, he did not bring forward the bodies which rose again
in the time of our Lord, our answer might be the following: that this
could not be alleged in behalf of the resurrection. For to point out
those who after rising died again, suited not one employed in proving
that death is entirely destroyed. Yea, this is the very reason why he
said that he is “destroyed last,” that thou mightest never more suspect
his rising again. For when sin is taken away, much more shall death
cease: it being out of all reason when the fountain is dried up, that
the stream flowing from it should still subsist; and when the root is
annihilated, that the fruit should remain.

<span id="iv.xl-p93"></span>\[13.\] Since then in the last day the
enemies of God shall be destroyed, together with death and the devil and
the evil spirits, let us not be dejected at the prosperity of the
enemies of God. For the enemies of the Lord in the moment of their glory
and exaltation fail; “yea, like smoke have they failed away.” ([Ps.
xxxvii. 20](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#020)<span
id="iv.xl-p93.1"></span>.) When thou seest any enemy of God wealthy,
with armed attendants and many flatterers, be not cast down, but lament,
weep, call upon God, that He may enrol him amongst His friends: and the
more he prospers being God’s enemy, <span id="page_241">p. 241</span>
<span id="iv.xl-Page_241"></span>so much the more do thou mourn for him.
For sinners we ought always to bewail, but especially when they enjoy
wealth and abundance of good days; even as one should the sick, when
they eat and drink to excess.

<span id="iv.xl-p94"></span>But there are some, who when they hear these
words are of so unhappy a disposition, as to sigh bitterly thereupon,
and say, “Tears are due to me who have nothing.” Thou hast well said,
“who have nothing,” not because thou hast not what another hath, but
because thou accountest the thing such as to be called happy; yea, for
this cause art thou worthy of infinite lamentations: even as, if a
person living in health should count happy him that is sick and lying on
a soft couch, this latter is not near so wretched and miserable as he,
because he hath no sense of his own advantages. Just such a result one
may observe in these men’s case also: nay, and hereby our whole life is
confounded and disordered. For these sayings have undone many, and
betrayed them to the devil, and made them more pitiable than such as are
wasted with famine. Yea, that those who long after more, are more
wretched than mendicants, as being possessed with a greater and bitterer
sorrow than they, is evident from what follows.

<span id="iv.xl-p95"></span>A drought once overtook our city, and all
were trembling for the last of evils, and were beseeching God to rid
them of this fear. And one might see then that which was spoken of by
Moses; ([Deut. xxviii. 23](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#023)<span
id="iv.xl-p95.1"></span>.) “the heavens become brass,” and a death, of
all deaths the most horrible, waited for every day. But afterwards, when
it seemed good to the merciful God, beyond all expectation there was
wafted down from heaven a great and plentiful rain, and thenceforth all
were in holiday and feasting, as having come up from the very gates of
death. But in the midst of so great blessings and the common gladness of
all, one of those exceedingly wealthy people went about with a gloomy
and downcast countenance, quite dead with sorrow; and when many enquired
the reason, wherefore in the common joy of all men he alone is
sorrowful, he could not even keep within him his savage passion, but
goaded by the tyranny of the disease, declared before them all the
reason. “Why,” saith he, “having in my possession ten thousand measures
of wheat, I have no means of disposing of them left.” Shall we then
count him happy, tell me, for these words, for which he deserved to be
stoned? Him that was more cruel than any wild beast, the common enemy?
What sayest thou, man? Art thou sad because all did not perish, that
thou mightest gather gold? Hast thou not heard what Solomon saith,
([Prov. xi. 26](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#026)<span
id="iv.xl-p95.2"></span>.) “He that withholdeth <span
id="fr_285"></span>[286](#fn_285) corn, the people shall curse him?” but
goest about a common enemy of the blessings of the world, and a foe to
the liberality of the Lord of the world, and a friend of Mammon, or
rather his slave? Nay, doth not that tongue deserve to be cut out, and
the heart to be quenched, that brought forth these words?

<span id="iv.xl-p97"></span>\[14.\] Seest thou how gold doth not suffer
men to be men, but wild beasts and fiends? For what can be more pitiful
than this rich man, whose daily prayer is that there may be famine, in
order that he may have a little gold? Yea, and his passion by this time
is come round to the contrary of itself: he not even rejoicing in his
abundant store of the fruits of the earth, but on this very account
grieving the rather, (to such a pass is he come,) that his possessions
are infinite. Although one who hath much ought to be joyful: but this
man on that very account is dejected. Seest thou that, as I said, the
rich do not reap as much pleasure from what is present, as they endure
sorrow for what hath not yet been added? For he that had innumerable
quantities of wheat did more grieve and lament than he who suffered
hunger. And while the one, on merely having his necessary food, was
crowning himself and leaping for joy and giving thanks to God; the
other, who had so much, was fretting and thought he was undone. It is
not then the superfluity which causes our pleasure, but a
self-controlling mind: since without this, though one obtain and have
all, he will feel as one deprived of all and will mourn accordingly:
 inasmuch as this man too of whom we are now speaking, even if he had
sold all he had for as large a sum as he wished, would again have
grieved that it was not for more; and if he could have had more, he
would again have sought another advance; and if he had disposed of the
bushel for one pound, he would even then have been distracted for
sorrow, that the half bushel could not be sold for as much. And if the
price were not set so high at first, marvel not. Since drunkards also
are not at first inflamed, but when they have loaded themselves with
much wine, then they kindle the flame into greater fierceness: so these
men, by how much more they have grasped, in so much the greater poverty
do they find themselves, and they who gain more than others, are the
very persons to be the most in want.

<span id="iv.xl-p98"></span>\[15.\] But I say these things not only to
this man, but also to each one of those who are so diseased: those, I
say, who raise the price of their wares and make a traffic of the
poverty of their neighbors. For of humanity none any where makes
account: but every where the covetous desire brings out many at the time
of sale. And oil and wine is sold by one quicker, by another more
slowly, but neither out of regard <span id="page_242">p. 242</span>
<span id="iv.xl-Page_242"></span>to others; rather the one seeks gain,
the other to avoid loss by the spoiling of his produce. Thus, because
most men not making much account of the laws of God, shut up and keep
all in doors, God by other means leading them to humanity,—that were it
but of necessity they may do something kind,—hath infused into them the
fear of greater loss, not allowing the fruits of the earth to keep any
long time, in order that out of mere dread of the damage from their
spoiling, they may expose for sale to the needy, even against their
will, such things as they wickedly bury at home and keep. However, after
all this, some are so insatiable as not even thereby to be corrected.
Many, for example, have gone so far as to empty whole casks, not giving
even a cup-full to the poor man, nor a piece of money to the needy, but
after it hath become vinegar, they dash it all upon the ground, and
destroy their casks together with the fruit. Others again who would not
give a part of a single cake to the hungry, have thrown whole granaries
into some river: and because they listened not to God who bade them give
to the needy, at the bidding of the moth, even unwillingly, they emptied
out all they had in their houses, in utter destruction and waste;
drawing down upon their own heads together with this loss much scorn and
many a curse.

<span id="iv.xl-p99"></span>And such is the course of their affairs
here; but the hereafter, what words shall set before us? For as these
men in this world cast their moth-eaten grain, become useless, into
rivers; even so the doers of such things, on this very account become
useless, God casts into the river of fire. Because as the grain by the
moth and worm, so are their souls devoured by cruelty and inhumanity.
And the reason of these things is their being nailed to things present,
and gaping after this life only. Whence also such men are full of
infinite sadness; for name whatever pleasure thou wilt, the fear of
their end is enough to annihilate all, and such an one “is dead, while
he is yet alive.” ([1 Tim. v. 6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#006)<span
id="iv.xl-p99.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.xl-p100"></span>Now then that unbelievers should have these
feelings, is no marvel; but when they who have partaken of so great
mysteries and learned such high rules of self-denial concerning things
to come, delight to dwell in things present, what indulgence do they
deserve?

<span id="iv.xl-p101"></span>\[16.\] Whence then arises their loving to
dwell in present things? From giving their mind to luxury, and fattening
their flesh, and making their soul delicate, and rendering their burden
heavy, and their darkness great, and their veil thick. For in luxury the
better part is enslaved, but the worse prevails; and the former is
blinded on every side and dragged on in its maimed condition; while the
other draws and leads men about every where, though it ought to be in
the rank of things that are led.

<span id="iv.xl-p102"></span>Since great indeed is the bond between the
soul and the body; the Maker having contrived this, lest any should
induce us to abhor it as alien. For God indeed bade us love our enemies;
but the devil hath so far prevailed as to induce some <span
id="fr_286"></span>[287](#fn_286) even to hate their own body. Since
when a man saith that it is of the devil, he proves nothing else than
this; which is the extreme of dotage. For if it be of the devil, what is
this so perfect harmony, such as to render it meet in every way for the
energies of the self-controlling soul? “Nay,” saith one, “if it be meet,
how doth the body blind it?” It is not the body which blinds the soul;
far from it, O man; but the luxury. But whence do we desire the luxury?
Not from our having a body, by no means; but from an evil choice. For
the body requires feeding, not high feeding <span
id="fr_287"></span>[288](#fn_287) , the body needs nourishing, not
breaking up and falling apart. You see that not to the soul only, but to
the very body also which receives the nourishment, the luxury is
hostile. For it becomes weaker instead of strong, and softer instead of
firm, and sickly instead of healthful, and heavier instead of light, and
slighter instead of compact, and ill-favored instead of handsome, and
unsavory instead of fragrant, and impure instead of clean, and full of
pain instead of being at ease, and useless instead of useful, and old
instead of young, and decaying instead of strong, and slow and dull
instead of quick, and maimed instead of whole. Whereas if it were of the
devil, it ought not to receive injury from the things of the devil, I
mean, from sin.

<span id="iv.xl-p105"></span>\[17.\] But neither is the body, nor food,
of the devil, but luxury alone. For by means of it that malignant fiend
brings to pass his innumerable evils. Thus did he make victims of <span
id="fr_288"></span>[289](#fn_288) a whole people. “For the beloved waxed
fat,” saith one, “and grew thick, and was enlarged, and kicked.” ([Deut.
xxxii. 15](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#015)<span
id="iv.xl-p106.3"></span>.) And thence also was the beginning of those
thunderbolts on Sodom. And to declare this, Ezekiel said, “But this was
the iniquity of Sodom, in pride and fulness of bread and
refinements <span id="fr_289"></span>[290](#fn_289) they waxed wanton.”
([Ezek. xvi. 4](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#004)<span
id="iv.xl-p107.2"></span>.) Therefore also Paul said, ([1 Tim. v.
6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#006)<span id="iv.xl-p107.3"></span>.)
“She that giveth herself to pleasure <span
id="fr_290"></span>[291](#fn_290) , is dead while she liveth.” How
should this be? Because as a sepulchre she bears about her body, bound
close to innumerable evils <span id="fr_291"></span>[292](#fn_291) . And
if the body so perish, how will the soul be affected; what disorder,
what <span id="page_243">p. 243</span> <span
id="iv.xl-Page_243"></span>waves, what a tempest will she be filled
with? Hereby, you see, she becomes unfitted for every duty, and will
have no power easily to speak, or hear, or take counsel, or do anything
that is needful. But as a pilot when the storm hath got the better of
his skill, is plunged into the deep, vessels and sailors and all: so
also the soul together with the body is drowned in the grievous abyss of
insensibility.

<span id="iv.xl-p110"></span>For, in fact, God hath set the stomach in
our bodies as a kind of mill, giving it a proportionate power, and
appointing a set measure which it ought to grind every day. If therefore
one cast in more, remaining undigested it doth injury to the whole body.
Hence diseases and weaknesses and deformities: since in truth luxury
makes the beautiful woman not only sickly, but also foul to look upon.
For when she is continually sending forth unpleasant exhalations, and
breathes fumes of stale wine, and is more florid than she ought to be,
and spoils the symmetry that beseems a woman, and loses all her
seemliness, and her body becomes flabby, her eyelids bloodshot and
distended, and her bulk unduly great, and her flesh an useless load;
consider what a disgust it all produces.

<span id="iv.xl-p111"></span>Moreover, I have heard a physician say that
many have been hindered from reaching their proper height by nothing so
much as luxurious living. For the breath being obstructed by the
multitude of things which are cast in and being occupied in the
digestion of such things, that which ought to serve for growth is spent
on this digestion of superfluities. Why need one speak of gout, rheum
dispersed every where, the other diseases hence arising, the whole
abomination? For nothing is so disgusting as a woman pampering herself
with much food. Therefore among the poorer women one may see more of
beauty: the superfluities being consumed and not cleaving to them, like
some superfluous clay, of no use and benefit. For their daily exercise,
and labors, and hardships, and their frugal table, and spare diet,
minister unto them much soundness of body, and thence also much bloom.

<span id="iv.xl-p112"></span>\[18.\] But if thou talkest of the pleasure
of luxury, thou wilt find it to go no farther than the throat: since as
soon as it hath passed the tongue, it is flown away, leaving behind in
the body much that is disgusting. For do not I pray look on the
voluptuaries at table only, but when you see them rise up, then follow
them, and you will see bodies rather of wild beasts and irrational
creatures than of human beings. You will see them with headache,
distended, bound up, needing a bed and a couch and plenty of rest, and
like men who are tossed in a great tempest and require others to save
them, and long for that condition in which they were before they were
swelled even to bursting <span id="fr_292"></span>[293](#fn_292) : they
carrying their bellies about with a burden like that of women with
child, and can scarce step forward, and scarce see, and scarce speak,
and scarce do any thing. But if it should chance that they sleep a
little, they see again strange dreams and full of all manner of fancies.

<span id="iv.xl-p114"></span>What should one say of that other madness
of theirs? the madness of lust, I mean, for this also hath its fountains
from hence. Yea, as horses wild after the female, so they, goaded on by
the sting of their drunkenness, leap upon all, more irrational than
they, and more frantic in their boundings; and committing many more
unseemlinesses which but to name is unlawful. For they know not in fact
any longer what they suffer, nor what they do.

<span id="iv.xl-p115"></span>But not so he that keeps from luxury:
rather he sits in harbor, beholding other men’s shipwrecks, and enjoys a
pleasure pure and lasting, following after that life which becomes him
that is free. Knowing therefore these things, let us flee from the evil
banquets of luxury and cleave to a spare table; that being of a good
habit both of soul and body, we may both practice all virtue, and attain
the good things to come, through the grace and mercy of our Lord Jesus
Christ, with Whom to the Father, with the Holy Ghost, be glory, power,
and honor, now and ever, and world without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_269"></span>[233:270](1120043.htm#fr_269) <span
id="iv.xl-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xl-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xl-p5.1"></span>προσεῤῥίφθαι</span>.

<span id="fn_270"></span>[234:271](1120043.htm#fr_270) <span
id="iv.xl-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xl-p8"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xl-p8.1"></span>ἐν παραβύστῳ</span>. The <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xl-p8.2"></span>παραβύστον</span> was one of
the inferior courts at Athens, so called because it had cognizance only
of trivial and obscure matters, and because it was situate <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xl-p8.3"></span>ἐν ἀφανεῖ τόπῳ τῆς
πόλεως</span>, in an obscure part of the city. Hence the phrase. Pausan.
*Attic*. c. 28; Demosth. *contr. Timocr*. p. 715 Ed. Reiske.

<span id="fn_271"></span>[235:272](1120043.htm#fr_271) <span
id="iv.xl-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xl-p30"></span> \[The author fails to give the full force
of this striking phrase. It means “Those whose sleep is a sleep in
Christ.” C.\]

<span id="fn_272"></span>[235:273](1120043.htm#fr_272) <span
id="iv.xl-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xl-p32"></span> The Manichæans say, “that Christ came in
the last times, to deliver not bodies but souls.” St. Aug. *de Hæres*.
§. 46. They argued against the resurrection of the body from such texts
as [1 Cor. 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#005), [1 Cor.
15:50](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#050)<span id="iv.xl-p32.1"></span>;
see Epiph. *Hæres*. 66. §. 86, 87. They as well as the old Gnostics, of
course, took this line, holding as they did the inherent corruption of
matter.

<span id="fn_273"></span>[235:274](1120043.htm#fr_273) <span
id="iv.xl-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xl-p34"></span> His argument may be thus briefly stated.
The Apostle had in the former verses made use of the resurrection of
Christ and our resurrection as terms implying one another. If (according
to the Manichees) the word resurrection means only liberation from sin,
the terms no longer imply one another. For Christ by His divine nature
cannot sin. It doth not therefore follow that, if we be not raised,
Christ is not risen.

<span id="fn_274"></span>[236:275](1120043.htm#fr_274) <span
id="iv.xl-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xl-p40"></span> lit. sew up, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xl-p40.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xl-p40.2"></span>πόῤῥαψαι</span>.

<span id="fn_275"></span>[236:276](1120043.htm#fr_275) <span
id="iv.xl-p40.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xl-p41"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xl-p41.1"></span>οὐδεν ἐμαυτῷ σύνοιδα</span>. [1 Cor. iv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#004)<span id="iv.xl-p41.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_276"></span>[236:277](1120043.htm#fr_276) <span
id="iv.xl-p47.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xl-p48"></span> This may seem at first sight, especially to
the English reader, inconsistent with such texts as [Eph.
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#001), [Col.
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#012)<span id="iv.xl-p48.1"></span>,
&c. But it will be found that the term <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xl-p48.2"></span>νεκροὶ</span> used in those texts, is applied
rather to each person’s actual sin and its effects, than to the general
result of Adam’s transgression; and that <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xl-p48.3"></span>ἀποθανὼν</span>, when applied to the latter,
relates to the death of the body: as in [Rom. v.
15](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#015)<span id="iv.xl-p48.4"></span>.
which is so expounded by St. Aug. *de Nupt*. ii. 46.

<span id="iv.xl-p49"></span>\[Whatever may be thought of the speaker’s
view of the former part of this verse, it is clear that he does not make
the “all” of the second clause coextensive with the “all” of the first.
He expressly excludes sinners. And he is right. Men are connected with
Adam by nature, but with Christ by faith and this is the work of grace.
Adam and Christ are the two heads of humanity but in a different way.
The limitation of the second “all” is further confirmed by the fact that
the whole discussion here is about believers. The Apostle says nothing
in this chapter about the resurrection of unbelievers. C.\]

<span id="fn_277"></span>[237:278](1120043.htm#fr_277) <span
id="iv.xl-p56.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xl-p57"></span> The partisans of Marcellus of Ancyra, who
about the middle of the fourth century taught that the Personal Kingdom
of the Son, and indeed His Personality, will cease at the last day, He
being such an emanation from the Father as shall be again absorbed into
the Father. See S. Cyril, *Catech*. xv. 27. and others quoted by Bp.
Pearson on the Creed, Art. vi. part 2. This error is supposed to have
occasioned the insertion at Constantinople of the words, “Of whose
kingdom there shall be no end,” in the Nicene Creed. It appears that
Marcellus alleged this text.

<span id="fn_278"></span>[239:279](1120043.htm#fr_278) <span
id="iv.xl-p75.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xl-p76"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xl-p76.1"></span>ἀρχἠ ἀγέννητος</span>.

<span id="fn_279"></span>[239:280](1120043.htm#fr_279) <span
id="iv.xl-p78.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xl-p79"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xl-p79.1"></span>πολλῃ κέχρηται τῃ περιουσίᾳ</span>.

<span id="fn_280"></span>[239:281](1120043.htm#fr_280) <span
id="iv.xl-p79.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xl-p80"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xl-p80.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xl-p80.2"></span>σφαλίζομαι</span>.

<span id="fn_281"></span>[239:282](1120043.htm#fr_281) <span
id="iv.xl-p81.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xl-p82"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xl-p82.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xl-p82.2"></span>πηκριβωμένην πρός</span>.

<span id="fn_282"></span>[239:283](1120043.htm#fr_282) <span
id="iv.xl-p83.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xl-p84"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xl-p84.1"></span>οἰκείωσιν</span>.

<span id="fn_283"></span>[239:284](1120043.htm#fr_283) <span
id="iv.xl-p84.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xl-p85"></span> This distinction, in these terms, is found
elsewhere in St. Chrysostom; as on 47 (48) Psalm, v. 1; on [1 Tim. vi.
11](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#011)<span id="iv.xl-p85.1"></span>; as
quoted by Suicer v. <span class="Greek"><span id="iv.xl-p85.2"></span>
βασιλεία</span>.

<span id="fn_284"></span>[240:285](1120043.htm#fr_284) <span
id="iv.xl-p86.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xl-p87"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xl-p87.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xl-p87.2"></span>θετήσομεν</span>.

<span id="fn_285"></span>[241:286](1120043.htm#fr_285) <span
id="iv.xl-p95.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xl-p96"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xl-p96.1"></span>τιμιουλκῶν</span>, Theodotion. <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xl-p96.2"></span>συνέχων</span> LXX.

<span id="fn_286"></span>[242:287](1120043.htm#fr_286) <span
id="iv.xl-p102.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xl-p103"></span> The Manichæans, and Gnostic sects.

<span id="fn_287"></span>[242:288](1120043.htm#fr_287) <span
id="iv.xl-p103.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xl-p104"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xl-p104.1"></span>τροφῆς οὐ τρυφῆς</span>.

<span id="fn_288"></span>[242:289](1120043.htm#fr_288) <span
id="iv.xl-p105.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xl-p106"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xl-p106.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xl-p106.2"></span>ξετραχήλισε</span>.

<span id="fn_289"></span>[242:290](1120043.htm#fr_289) <span
id="iv.xl-p106.4"></span>

<span id="iv.xl-p107"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xl-p107.1"></span>εὐθηνίαις</span> LXX.

<span id="fn_290"></span>[242:291](1120043.htm#fr_290) <span
id="iv.xl-p107.4"></span>

<span id="iv.xl-p108"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xl-p108.1"></span>σπαταλῶσα</span>.

<span id="fn_291"></span>[242:292](1120043.htm#fr_291) <span
id="iv.xl-p108.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xl-p109"></span> “It is thy own soul, wretched woman, that
thou hast lost: the spiritual life gone, thou for a while leadst on a
life of thine own, and movest about, wearing thy death upon thee.” S.
Cypr. *of the Lapsed*. C. 30.

<span id="fn_292"></span>[243:293](1120043.htm#fr_292) <span
id="iv.xl-p112.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xl-p113"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xl-p113.1"></span>πρὶν ἢ διαῤῥαγῆναι</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XL](1120044)
