[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1120067)  [Next](1120069) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.xix"></span>

<span id="v.xix-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="v.xix-p1.1"></span>Homily XIX.</span>

<span id="v.xix-p2"></span><span id="v.xix-p2.1"></span><span
class="c1"><span id="v.xix-p2.2"></span>[2 Cor. ix.
1](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#001)<span id="v.xix-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="v.xix-p3"></span>For as touching the ministering to the
saints, it is superfluous for me to write to you.

<span id="v.xix-p4"></span><span class="c18"><span
id="v.xix-p4.1"></span>Though</span> he had said so much about it, he
says here, “It is superfluous for me to write to you.” And his wisdom is
shown not only in this, that though he had said so much about it, he
saith, “it is superfluous for me to write to you,” but in that he yet
again speaketh of it. For what he said indeed a little above, he said
concerning those who received the money, to ensure them the enjoyment of
great honor:  but what he said before that, (his account of the
Macedonians, that “their deep poverty abounded unto the riches of their
liberality,” and all the rest,) was concerning loving-kindness and
almsgiving. But nevertheless even though he had said so much before and
was going to speak again, he says, “it is superfluous for me to write to
you.” And this he does the rather to win them to himself. For a man who
has so high a reputation as not to stand in need even of advice, is
ashamed to appear inferior to, and come short of, that opinion of him.
And he does this often in accusation also, using the rhetorical figure,
omission, for this is very effective. For the judge seeing the
magnanimity of the accuser entertains no suspicions even. For he argues,
‘he who when he might say much, yet saith it not, how should he invent
what is not true?’ And he gives occasion to suspect even more than he
says, and invests himself with the presumption of a good disposition.
This also in his advice and in his praises he does. For having said, “It
is superfluous for me to write to you,” observe how he advises them.

<span id="v.xix-p5"></span>“For I know your readiness of which I glory
on your behalf to them of Macedonia.” Now it was a great thing that he
even knew it himself, but much greater, that he also published it to
others: for the force it has is greater: for they would not like to be
so widely disgraced. Seest thou his wisdom of purpose? He exhorted them
by others’ example, the Macedonians, for, he says, “I make known to you
the grace of God which hath been given in the Churches of Macedonia.” He
exhorted them by their own, for he saith, “who were the first to make a
beginning a year ago not only to do, but also to will.” He exhorted them
by the Lord’s, for “ye know” he saith, “the grace of our Lord, that
though He was rich, yet for our sakes He became poor.” ([2 Cor.
8.9](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#009)<span id="v.xix-p5.1"></span>.)
Again he retreats upon that strong main point, the conduct of others.
 For mankind is emulous. And truly the example of the Lord ought to have
had most power to draw them over: and next to it, the \[consideration\]
of the recompense: but because they were somewhat weak, this draws them
most. For nothing does so much as emulation. But observe how he
introduces it in a somewhat novel way. For He did not say, ‘Imitate
them;’ but what?

<span id="v.xix-p6"></span>“And your zeal has stirred up very many.”
What sayest thou? A little before thou saidst, \[they did it\] “of their
own accord, beseeching us with much entreaty,” how then now, “your
zeal?” ‘Yes,’ he saith, ‘we did not advise, we did not exhort, but we
only praised you, we only boasted of you, and this was enough to incite
them.” Seest thou how he rouses them each by the other, these by those,
and those by these, and, along with the emulation, has intermingled also
a very high encomium. Then, that he may not elate them, he follows it up
in a tempered tone, saying, “Your zeal hath stirred up very many.” Now
consider what a thing it is that those who have been the occasion to
others of this munificence, should be themselves behind hand in this
contribution. Therefore he did not say, ‘Imitate them,’ for it would not
have kindled so great an emulation, but how? ‘They <span
id="page_368">p. 368</span> <span id="v.xix-Page_368"></span>have
imitated you; see then that ye the teachers appear not inferior to your
disciples.’

<span id="v.xix-p7"></span>And see how, whilst stirring up and inflaming
them still more, he feigns to be standing by them, as if espousing their
party in some rivalry and contention. For, as he said above, “Of their
own accord, with much entreaty they came to us, insomuch that we
exhorted Titus, that as he had made a beginning before, so he would
complete this grace;” so also he says here,

<span id="v.xix-p8"></span>[2 Cor.
9.3](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#003)<span id="v.xix-p8.1"></span>. “For
this cause have I sent the brethren that our glorying on your behalf may
not be made void.”

<span id="v.xix-p9"></span>Seest thou that he is in anxiety and terror,
lest he should seem to have said what he said only for exhortation’s
sake? ‘But because so it is,’ saith he, “I have sent the brethren;” ‘so
earnest am I on your behalf,’ “that our glorying may not be made void.”
And he appears to make himself of the Corinthians’ party throughout,
although caring for all alike. What he says is this; ‘I am very proud of
you, I glory before all, I boasted even unto them <span
id="fr_849"></span>[850](#fn_849) , so that if ye be found wanting, I am
partner in the shame.’ And this indeed he says under limitation, for he
added,

<span id="v.xix-p11"></span>“In this respect,” not, in all points;

<span id="v.xix-p12"></span>“That even as I said, ye may be prepared.”
‘For I did not say, ‘they are purposing,’ but ‘all is ready; and nothing
is now wanting on their part. This then,’ he says, ‘I wish to be shown
by your deeds.’ Then he even heightens the anxiety, saying,

<span id="v.xix-p13"></span>[2 Cor.
9.4](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#004)<span id="v.xix-p13.1"></span>.
“Lest by any means if there come with me any from Macedonia, we, (that
we say not ye,) should be put to shame in this confidence.” The shame is
greater when the spectators he has arrayed against them are many, even
those same persons who had heard \[his boasting.\] And he did not say,
‘for I am bringing with me Macedonians;’ ‘for there are Macedonians
coming with me;’ lest he should seem to do it on purpose; but how \[said
he?\] “Lest by any means, if there come with me any from Macedonia?”
‘For this may happen,’ he says, ‘it is matter of possibility.’ For thus
he also made what he said unsuspected, but had he expressed himself in
that other way, he would have even made them the more contentious. See
how he leads them on, not from spiritual motives only, but from human
ones as well. ‘For,’ says he, ‘though you make no great account of me,
and reckon confidently on my excusing you, yet think of them of
Macedonia,’ “lest by any means, if they come and find you;” and he did
not say ‘unwillingly,’ but “unprepared,” not having got all completed.
But if this be a disgrace, not to contribute quickly; consider how great
it were to contribute either not at all, or less than behoved. Then he
lays down what would thereupon follow, in terms at once gentle and
pungent, thus saying, “We, (that we say not ye,) should be put to
shame.” And he tempers it again, saying, “in this confidence” not as
making them more listless, but as showing that they who were approved in
all other respects, ought in this one also to have great fearlessness.

<span id="v.xix-p14"></span>\[2.\] [2 Cor.
9.5](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#005)<span id="v.xix-p14.1"></span>. “I
thought it necessary therefore to entreat the brethren, that they would
make up beforehand this your bounty, that the same might be ready, as a
matter of bounty and not of extortion. <span
id="fr_850"></span>[851](#fn_850) ”

<span id="v.xix-p16"></span>Again, he resumed the subject in a different
manner: and that he may not seem to be saying these things without
object, he asserts that the sole reason for this journey was, that they
might not be put to shame. Seest thou how his words, “It is superfluous
for me to write,” were the beginning of advising? You see, at least, how
many things he discourses concerning this ministering. And along with
this, one may further remark that, (lest he should seem to contradict
himself as having said, “It is superfluous,” yet discoursing at length
about it,) he passed on unto discourse of quickness and largeness and
forwardness \[in contributing,\] by this means securing that point also.
For these three things he requires. And indeed he moved these three main
points even at the first, for when he says, “In much proof of affliction
the abundance of their joy, and their deep poverty, abounded unto the
riches of their liberality,” he says nothing else than that they
contributed both much and gladly and quickly; and that not only did not
giving much pain them, but not even being in trials, which is more
grievous than giving. And the words, “they gave themselves to us;” these
also show both their forwardness and the greatness of their faith. And
here too again he treats of those heads. For since these are opposed to
\[each other,\] munificence and forwardness, and one that has given much
is often sorrowful, whilst another, that he may not be sorry, gives
less; observe how he takes care for each, and with the wisdom which
belongs to him. For he did not say, ‘it is better to give a little and
of free choice, than much of necessity;’ because he wished them to
contribute both much and of free choice; but how saith he? “that they
might make up beforehand this your bounty, that the same might be ready
as a matter of bounty <span id="fr_851"></span>[852](#fn_851) , and not
extortion. He <span id="page_369">p. 369</span> <span
id="v.xix-Page_369"></span>begins first with that which is pleasantest
and lighter; namely, the ‘not of necessity,’ for, it is “bounty” he
says. Observe how in the form of his exhortation he represents at once
the fruit as springing up, and the givers as filled with blessing. And
by the term employed he won them over, for no one gives a blessing with
pain. Yet neither was he content with this; but added, “not as of
extortion.” ‘Think not,’ he says, ‘that we take it as extortioners, but
that we may be the cause of a blessing unto you.’ For extortion belongs
to the unwilling, so that whoso giveth alms unwillingly giveth of
extortion. <span id="fr_852"></span>[853](#fn_852)   Then from this he
passed on again unto that, the giving munificently.

<span id="v.xix-p19"></span>[2 Cor.
9.6](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#006)<span id="v.xix-p19.1"></span>.
“But this I say:”  that is, along with this I say also that. What?

<span id="v.xix-p20"></span>“He that soweth sparingly, shall reap also
sparingly; and he that soweth bountifully shall reap also bountifully.”
And he did not say niggardly, but a milder expression, employing the
name of the sparing.  And he called the thing sowing; that thou mightest
at once look unto the recompense, and having in mind the harvest,
mightest feel that thou receivest more than thou givest. Wherefore he
did not say, ‘He that giveth,’ but “He that soweth:” and he said not
‘ye, if ye sow,’ but made what he said general. Neither did he say,
‘largely,’ but “bountifully,” which is far greater than this. And again,
he betakes himself to that former point of gladness; saying,

<span id="v.xix-p21"></span>[2 Cor.
9.7](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#007)<span id="v.xix-p21.1"></span>.
“Let each man do according as he hath purposed in his heart.” For a man
when left to himself, does a thing more readily than when compelled.
Wherefore also he dwells upon this: for having said, “according as he is
disposed,” he added,

<span id="v.xix-p22"></span>“Not grudgingly, nor of necessity.” And
neither was he content with this, but he adds a testimony from Scripture
also, saying,

<span id="v.xix-p23"></span>“For God loveth a cheerful giver.” Seest
thou how frequently he lays this down? “I speak not by commandment:”
and, “Herein I give my advice:” and, “as a matter of bounty, and not as
of extortion,” and again, “not grudgingly, nor of necessity; for God
loveth a cheerful giver.” In this passage I am of opinion that a large
\[giver\] is intended; the Apostle however has taken it as giving with
readiness. For because the example of the Macedonians and all those
other things were enough to produce sumptuousness, he does not say many
things on that head, but upon giving without reluctance. For if it is a
work of virtue, and yet all that is done of necessity is shorn of its
reward <span id="fr_853"></span>[854](#fn_853) , with reason also he
labors at this point. And he does not advise merely, but also adds a
prayer, as his wont is to do, saying,

<span id="v.xix-p25"></span>[2 Cor.
9.8](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#008)<span id="v.xix-p25.1"></span>.
“And may God <span id="fr_854"></span>[855](#fn_854) , that is able,
fulfill all grace towards you.”

<span id="v.xix-p27"></span>By this prayer he takes out the way a
thought which lay in wait against <span
id="fr_855"></span>[856](#fn_855) this liberality and which is now also
an hinderance to many. For many persons are afraid to give alms, saying,
‘Lest perchance I become poor,’ ‘lest perchance I need aid from others.’
To do away with this fear then, he adds this prayer, saying, May “He
make all grace abound towards you.” Not merely fulfil, but “make it
abound.” And what is “make grace abound?” ‘Fill you,’ he means, ‘with so
great things, that ye may be able to abound in this liberality.’

<span id="v.xix-p29"></span>“That ye, having always all sufficiency in
every thing, may abound to every good work.”

<span id="v.xix-p30"></span>Observe, even in this his prayer, his great
philosophy. He prays not for riches nor for abundance, but for all
sufficiency. Nor is this all that is admirable in him; but that as he
prayed not for superfluity, so he doth not press sore on them nor compel
them to give of their want, condescending to their weakness; but asks
for a “sufficiency,” and shows at the same time that they ought not to
abuse the gifts received from God. “That ye may abound,” he saith, “to
every good work.” ‘It is therefore,’ saith he, ‘I ask for this, that ye
may bestow on others also.’ Yet he did not say, ‘bestow,’ but ‘abound.’
For in carnal things he asks for a sufficiency for them, but in
spiritual things for abundance even; not in almsgiving only, but in all
other things also, “unto every good work.” Then he brings forward unto
them the prophet for a counsellor, having sought out a testimony
inviting them to bountifulness, and says,

<span id="v.xix-p31"></span>[2 Cor.
9.9](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#009)<span id="v.xix-p31.1"></span>. “As
it is written,

<span id="v.xix-p32"></span>He hath scattered abroad, he hath given to
the poor;

<span id="v.xix-p33"></span>His righteousness abideth for ever.”

<span id="v.xix-p34"></span>This is the import of “abound;” for the
words, “he hath dispersed abroad,” signify nothing else but the giving
plentifully. For if the things themselves abide not, yet their results
abide. For this is the thing to be admired, that when they are kept they
are lost; but when dispersed abroad they abide, yea, abide for ever. Now
by “righteousness,” here, he means love towards men. For this maketh
righteous, consuming sins like a fire when it is plentifully poured out.

<span id="v.xix-p35"></span>\[3.\] Let us not therefore nicely
calculate, but sow with a profuse hand. Seest thou not how much others
give to players and harlots? Give at any rate the half to Christ, of
what they give to dancers. As much as they give of ostenta<span
id="page_370">p. 370</span> <span id="v.xix-Page_370"></span>tion to
those upon the stage, so much at any rate give thou unto the hungry. For
they indeed even clothe the persons of wantons <span
id="fr_856"></span>[857](#fn_856) with untold gold; but thou not even
with a threadbare garment the flesh of Christ, and that though beholding
it naked. What forgiveness doth this deserve, yea, how great a
punishment doth it not deserve, when he indeed bestoweth so much upon
her that ruineth and shameth him, but thou not the least thing on Him
that saveth thee and maketh thee brighter? But as long as thou spendest
it upon thy belly and on drunkenness and dissipation <span
id="fr_857"></span>[858](#fn_857) , thou never thinkest of poverty: but
when need is to relieve poverty, thou art become poorer than any body.
And when feeding parasites and flatterers, thou art as joyous as though
thou hadst fountains to spend from <span
id="fr_858"></span>[859](#fn_858) ; but if thou chance to see a poor
man, then the fear of poverty besets thee. Therefore surely we shall in
that day be condemned, both by ourselves and by others, both by those
that have done well and those that have done amiss. For He will say to
thee, ‘Wherefore wast thou not thus magnanimous in things where it
became thee?  But here is a man who, when giving to an harlot, thought
not of any of these things; whilst thou, bestowing upon thy Master Who
hath bid thee “not be anxious” ([Matt. vi.
25](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#025)<span id="v.xix-p38.2"></span>.),
art full of fear and trembling.’ And what forgiveness then shalt thou
deserve? For if a man who hath received will not overlook, but will
requite the favor, much more will Christ. For He that giveth even
without receiving, how will He not give after receiving? ‘What then,’
saith one, ‘when some who have spent much come to need other men’s
help?’ Thou speakest of those that have spent their all; when thou
thyself bestowest not a farthing. Promise to strip thyself of every
thing and then ask questions about such men; but as long as thou art a
niggard and bestowest little of thy substance, why throw me out excuses
and pretenses? For neither am I leading thee to the lofty peak of entire
poverty <span id="fr_859"></span>[860](#fn_859) but for the present I
require thee to cut off superfluities and to desire a sufficiency alone.
Now the boundary of sufficiency is the using those things which it is
impossible to live without. No one debars thee from these; nor forbids
thee thy daily food. I say food, not feasting; raiment, not
ornament <span id="fr_860"></span>[861](#fn_860) . Yea rather, if one
should enquire accurately, this is in the best sense feasting. For,
consider. Which should we say more truly feasted, he whose diet was
herbs, and who was in sound health and suffered no uneasiness: or he who
had the table of a Sybarite, and was full of ten thousand disorders?
Very plainly the former. Therefore let us seek nothing more than this,
if we would at once live luxuriously and healthfully: and let us set
these boundaries to sufficiency. And let him that can be satisfied with
pulse and can keep in good health, seek for nothing more; but let him
who is weaker and requires to be dieted with garden herbs, not be
hindered of this. But if any be even weaker than this and require the
support of flesh in moderation, we will not debar him from this either.
For we do not advise these things, to kill and injure men but to cut off
what is superfluous; and that is superfluous which is more than we need.
For when we are able even without a thing to live healthfully and
respectably, certainly the addition of that thing is a superfluity.

<span id="v.xix-p41"></span>\[4.\] Thus let us think also in regard of
clothing and of the table and of a dwelling house and of all our other
wants; and in every thing inquire what is necessary. For what is
superfluous is also useless. When thou shalt have practised living on
what is sufficient; then if thou hast a mind to emulate that widow, we
will lead thee on to greater things than these. For thou hast not yet
attained to the philosophy of that woman, whilst thou art anxious about
what is sufficient. For she soared higher even than this; for what was
to have been her support; that she cast in, all of it. Wilt thou then
still distress thyself about such things as be necessary; and dost thou
not blush to be vanquished by a woman; and not only not to emulate her,
but to be left even of her far behind? For she did not say the things we
say, ‘But what, if when I have spent all I be compelled to beg of
another?’ but in her munificence stripped herself of all she had. What
shall we say of the widow in the Old Testament in the time of the
prophet Elias? For the risk she ran was not of poverty, but even of
death and extinction, and not her own only, but her children’s too. For
neither had she any expectation of receiving from others, but of
presently dying. ‘But,’ saith one, ‘she saw the prophet, and that made
her munificent.’ But do not ye see saints without number? And why do I
speak of saints? Ye see the Lord of the prophets asking an alms, and yet
not even so do ye become humane; but though ye have coffers
spewing <span id="fr_861"></span>[862](#fn_861) one into another, do not
even impart of your superfluity. What sayest thou? Was he a prophet that
came to her, and did this persuade her to so great a magnanimity? This
of itself deserves much admiration, that she was persuaded of his being
a great and wonderful person. For how was it she did not say, as it
would have been <span id="page_371">p. 371</span> <span
id="v.xix-Page_371"></span>likely that a barbarian woman and a foreigner
would have reasoned, ‘If he were a prophet, he would not have begged of
me. If he were a friend of God, He would not have neglected him. Be it
that because of sins the Jews suffer this punishment: but whence, and
wherefore, doth this man suffer?’ But she entertained none of these
thoughts; but opened to him her house, and before her house, her heart;
and set before him all she had; and putting nature on one side and
disregarding her children, preferred the stranger unto all. Consider
then how great punishment will be laid up for us, if we shall come
behind <span id="fr_862"></span>[863](#fn_862) and be weaker than a
woman, a widow, poor, a foreigner, a barbarian, a mother of children,
knowing nothing of these things which we know!  For because we have
strength of body, we are not therefore manly persons. For he alone hath
this virtue, yea though he be laid upon his bed, whose strength is from
within; since without this, though a man should tear up a mountain by
his strength of body, I would call him nothing stronger than a girl or
wretched crone. For the one struggles with incorporeal ills, but the
other dares not even look them in the face. And that thou mayest learn
that this is the measure of manliness, collect it from this very
example. For what could be more manly than that woman who both against
the tyranny of nature, and against the force of hunger, and against the
threat of death, stood nobly fast, and proved stronger than all? Hear at
least how Christ proclaimeth her. For, saith He, “there were many widows
in the days of Elias, and to none of them was the prophet sent but to
her.” ([Luke 4:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#025),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#026)<span id="v.xix-p43.2"></span>.)
Shall I say something great and startling? This woman gave more to
hospitality, than our father Abraham. For she “ran” not “unto the herd,”
as he, ([Gen. xviii. 7](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#007)<span
id="v.xix-p43.3"></span>.) but by that “handful” ([1 Kings xvii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#012)<span id="v.xix-p43.4"></span>.)
outstripped all that have been renowned for hospitality. For in this was
his excellence that he set himself to do that office; but hers, in that
for the sake of the stranger she spared not her children even, and that
too, though she looked not for the things to come. But we, though a
heaven exists, though a hell is threatened, though (which is greater
than all) God hath wrought such great things for us and is made glad and
rejoiceth over such things, sink back supinely. <span
id="fr_863"></span>[864](#fn_863)   Not so, I beseech you: but let us
“scatter abroad,” let us “give to the poor” as we ought to give. For
what is much and what little, God defines, not by the measure of what is
given, but by the extent of the substance of him that gives. Often
surely hast thou who didst cast in an hundred staters of gold offered
less than he that offered but one obol, for thou didst cast in of thy
superfluity. Howbeit do if but this, and thou wilt come quickly even to
greater munificence. Scatter wealth that thou mayest gather
righteousness. For along with wealth this refuseth to come to us; yet
through it, though not with it, it is made present to us. For it is not
possible that lust of wealth and righteousness should dwell together;
they have their tents apart. Do not then obstinately strive to bring
things together which are incompatible, but banish the usurper
covetousness, if thou wouldest obtain the kingdom. For this <span
id="fr_864"></span>[865](#fn_864) is the \[rightful\] queen, and of
slaves makes freemen, the contrary of which the other doth. Wherefore
with all earnestness let us shun the one and welcome the other, that we
may both gain freedom in this life and obtain the kingdom of heaven,
through the grace and love towards men of our Lord Jesus Christ, with
Whom, to the Father together with the Holy Spirit, be glory, might,
honor, now and for ever, and world without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_849"></span>[368:850](1120068.htm#fr_849) <span
id="v.xix-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.xix-p10"></span> i.e. them of Macedonia.

<span id="fn_850"></span>[368:851](1120068.htm#fr_850) <span
id="v.xix-p14.2"></span>

<span id="v.xix-p15"></span> This verse, as given by Chrysostom, varies
somewhat from the Received Text.

<span id="fn_851"></span>[368:852](1120068.htm#fr_851) <span
id="v.xix-p16.1"></span>

<span id="v.xix-p17"></span> A *blessing*, <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xix-p17.1"></span> εὐλογὶαν</span>.

<span id="fn_852"></span>[369:853](1120068.htm#fr_852) <span
id="v.xix-p17.2"></span>

<span id="v.xix-p18"></span> Literally, *giveth extortion*.

<span id="fn_853"></span>[369:854](1120068.htm#fr_853) <span
id="v.xix-p23.1"></span>

<span id="v.xix-p24"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xix-p24.1"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xix-p24.2"></span>ποτέμνεται</span>.

<span id="fn_854"></span>[369:855](1120068.htm#fr_854) <span
id="v.xix-p25.2"></span>

<span id="v.xix-p26"></span> A.V. “God is able to, &c.” \[which gives
the true text. C.\]

<span id="fn_855"></span>[369:856](1120068.htm#fr_855) <span
id="v.xix-p27.1"></span>

<span id="v.xix-p28"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xix-p28.1"></span>ὐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xix-p28.2"></span>φορμοῦντα</span>.

<span id="fn_856"></span>[370:857](1120068.htm#fr_856) <span
id="v.xix-p35.1"></span>

<span id="v.xix-p36"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xix-p36.1"></span>ἕ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xix-p36.2"></span>ταιριζομένων</span>.

<span id="fn_857"></span>[370:858](1120068.htm#fr_857) <span
id="v.xix-p36.3"></span>

<span id="v.xix-p37"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xix-p37.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xix-p37.2"></span>σωτίαν</span>.

<span id="fn_858"></span>[370:859](1120068.htm#fr_858) <span
id="v.xix-p37.3"></span>

<span id="v.xix-p38"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xix-p38.1"></span>ἀπὸ πηγῶν δαπανῶν</span>.

<span id="fn_859"></span>[370:860](1120068.htm#fr_859) <span
id="v.xix-p38.3"></span>

<span id="v.xix-p39"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xix-p39.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xix-p39.2"></span>κτημοσύνης</span>.

<span id="fn_860"></span>[370:861](1120068.htm#fr_860) <span
id="v.xix-p39.3"></span>

<span id="v.xix-p40"></span> Chrys. <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xix-p40.1"></span>τροφὴν, οὐ τρυφὴν λέγω.  σκεπάσματα, οὐ
καλλωπισματα</span>, with a manifest play on the words.

<span id="fn_861"></span>[370:862](1120068.htm#fr_861) <span
id="v.xix-p41.1"></span>

<span id="v.xix-p42"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xix-p42.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xix-p42.2"></span>ρευγόμενα</span>.

<span id="fn_862"></span>[371:863](1120068.htm#fr_862) <span
id="v.xix-p42.3"></span>

<span id="v.xix-p43"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xix-p43.1"></span>ἔλαττον φέρωμεν</span>.

<span id="fn_863"></span>[371:864](1120068.htm#fr_863) <span
id="v.xix-p43.5"></span>

<span id="v.xix-p44"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xix-p44.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xix-p44.2"></span>ναπεπτώκαμεν</span>.

<span id="fn_864"></span>[371:865](1120068.htm#fr_864) <span
id="v.xix-p44.3"></span>

<span id="v.xix-p45"></span> i.e., righteousness. \[According to the
text which the Apostle quotes from [Psalm
cxii.](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#000)<span id="v.xix-p45.1"></span>,
the abiding of righteousness forever is God’s reward for scattering.
Righteousness here appears to mean general excellence or virtue as
manifested in beneficence. A parallel use of the term is found in the
Sermon on the Mount where ([Matth. vi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#001)<span id="v.xix-p45.2"></span>.)
according to the true text, our Lord in giving general directions about
almsgiving, etc., begins with the injunction, “Take heed that ye do not
your *righteousness* before men, to be seen of them.” When therefore it
is said in the Psalm that the liberal man’s righteousness or beneficence
shall continue forever, the implication is that he shall always have the
means to continue his liberality. This is sustained by the tendency of
things and by the general course of Divine Providence. But Chrysostom,
while enforcing the inculcation of beneficence, carries out the spirit
of the Apostle’s utterances, and calls attention not only to the
frequency and amount of one’s gifts but also to the spirit which prompts
them. The mere mechanical view which makes a merit of voluntary poverty
and praises a gift to others without respect to the motive that prompted
it, finds no sanction in the Apostle’s words or in those of his
expounder. C.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XX](1120069)
