[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1120019)  [Next](1120021) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.xvii"></span>

<span id="iv.xvii-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="iv.xvii-p1.1"></span>Homily XVI.</span>

<span id="iv.xvii-p2"></span><span id="iv.xvii-p2.1"></span><span
class="c1"><span id="iv.xvii-p2.2"></span>[1 Cor. v.
9-11](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#009)<span
id="iv.xvii-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.xvii-p3"></span>I wrote unto you in my epistle to have no
company with fornicators: yet not altogether with the fornicators of
this world, or with the covetous and extortioners, or with idolaters,
for then must ye needs go out of the world: but now I write unto you not
to keep company, if any man that is named a brother be a fornicator, or
covetous, or an idolater, or a drunkard, or a reviler, or an
extortioner; with such an one no not to eat.

<span id="iv.xvii-p4"></span><span class="c18"><span
id="iv.xvii-p4.1"></span>For</span> since he had said, “Ye have not
rather mourned, that such an one should be taken away;” and, “Purge out
the old leaven;” and it was likely that they would surmise it to be
their duty to avoid all fornicators: for if he that has sinned imparts
some of his own mischief to those who have not sinned, much more is it
meet to keep one’s self away from those without: (for if one ought not
to spare a friend on account of such mischief arising from him, much
less any others;) and under this impression, it was probable that they
would separate themselves from the fornicators among the Greeks also,
and the matter thus turning out impossible, they would have taken it
more to heart: he used this mode of correction, saying, “I wrote unto
you to have no company with fornicators, yet not altogether with the
fornicators of this world:” using the word “altogether,” as if it were
an acknowledged thing. For that they might not think that he charged not
this upon them as being rather imperfect, and should attempt to do it
under the erroneous impression that they were perfect, he shews that
this were even impossible to be done, though they wished it ever so
much. For it would be necessary to seek another world. Wherefore he
added, “For ye must needs then go out of the world.” Seest thou that he
is no hard master, and that in his legislation he constantly regards not
only what may be done, but also what may be easily done. For how is it
possible, says he, for a man having care of a house and children, and
engaged in the affairs of the city, or who is an artisan or a soldier,
(the greater part of mankind being Greeks,) to avoid the unclean who are
to be found every where? For by “the fornicators of the world,” he means
those who are among the Greeks. “But now I write unto you, If any
brother” be of this kind, “with such an one no not to eat.” Here also he
glances at others who were living in wickedness.

<span id="iv.xvii-p5"></span><span id="page_90">p. 90</span> <span
id="iv.xvii-Page_90"></span>But how can one “that is a brother” be an
idolater? As was the case once in regard to the Samaritans who chose
piety but by halves. And besides he is laying down his ground beforehand
for the discourse concerning things offered in sacrifice to idols, which
after this he intends to handle.

<span id="iv.xvii-p6"></span>“Or covetous.” For with these also he
enters into conflict. Wherefore he said also, “Why not rather take
wrong? Why not rather be defrauded? Nay, ye yourselves do wrong and
defraud.”

<span id="iv.xvii-p7"></span>“Or a drunkard.” For this also he lays to
their charge further on; as when he says, “One is hungry and another is
drunken:” and, “meats for the belly and the belly for meats.”

<span id="iv.xvii-p8"></span>“Or a reviler, or an extortioner:” for
these too he had rebuked before.

<span id="iv.xvii-p9"></span>\[2.\] Next he adds also the reason why he
forbids them not to mix with heathens of that character, implying that
it is not only impossible, but also superfluous.

<span id="iv.xvii-p10"></span>[1 Cor.
5.12](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#012)<span id="iv.xvii-p10.1"></span>,
“For what have I to do with judging them that are without?” Calling the
Christians and the Greeks, “those within” and “those without,” as also
he says elsewhere, ([1 Tim. iii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#007)<span id="iv.xvii-p10.2"></span>.)
“He must also have a good report of them that are without.” And in the
Epistle to the Thessalonians he speaks the same language, saying, ([2
Thess. iii. 14](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#014)<span
id="iv.xvii-p10.3"></span>.) “Have no intercourse with him to the end
that he may be put to shame.” And, “Count him not as an enemy, but
admonish him as a brother.” Here, however, he does not add the reason.
Why? Because in the other case he wished to soothe them, but in this,
not so. For the fault in this case and in that was not the same, but in
the Thessalonians it was less. For there he is reproving indolence; but
here fornication and other most grievous sins. And if any one wished to
go over to the Greeks, he hinders not him from eating with such persons;
this too for the same reason. So also do we act; for our children and
our brethren we leave nothing undone, but of strangers we do not make
much account. How then? Did not Paul care for them that were without as
well? Yes, he cared for them; but it was not till after they received
the Gospel and he had made them subject to the doctrine of Christ, that
he laid down laws for them. But so long as they despised, it was
superfluous to speak the precepts of Christ to those who knew not Christ
Himself.

<span id="iv.xvii-p11"></span>“Do not ye judge them that are within,
whereas them that are without, God judgeth?” For since he had said,
“What have I to do with judging those without;” lest any one should
think that these were left unpunished, there is another tribunal which
he sets over them, and that a fearful one. And this he said, both to
terrify those, and to console these; intimating also that this
punishment which is for a season snatches them away from that which is
undying and perpetual: which also he has plainly declared elsewhere,
saying, ([1 Cor. xi. 32](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#032)<span
id="iv.xvii-p11.1"></span>.) “But now being judged, we are chastened,
that we should not be condemned with the world.”

<span id="iv.xvii-p12"></span>\[3.\] “Put away from among yourselves the
wicked person.” He used an expression found in the Old Testament,
([Deut. xvii. 7](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#007)<span
id="iv.xvii-p12.1"></span>.) partly hinting that they too will be very
great gainers, in being freed as it were from some grievous plague; and
partly to shew that this kind of thing is no innovation, but even from
the beginning it seemed good to the legislator that such as these should
be cut off. But in that instance it was done with more severity, in this
with more gentleness. On which account one might reasonably question,
why in that case he conceded that the sinner should be severely punished
and stoned, but in the present instance not so; rather he leads him to
repentance. Why then were the lines drawn in the former instance one way
and in the latter another? For these two causes: one, because these were
led into a greater trial and needed greater long-suffering; the other
and truer one, because these by their impunity were more easily to be
corrected, coming as they might to repentance; but the others were
likely to go on to greater wickedness. For if when they saw the first
undergoing punishment they persisted in the same things, had none at all
been punished, much more would this have been their feeling. For which
reason in that dispensation death is immediately inflicted upon the
adulterer and the manslayer; but in this, if through repentance they are
absolved, they have escaped the punishment. However, both here one may
see some instances of heavier punishment, and in the Old Testament some
less severe, in order that it may be signified in every way that the
covenants are akin to each other, and of one and the same lawgiver: and
you may see the punishment following immediately both in that covenant
and in this, and in both often after a long interval. Nay, and
oftentimes not even after a long interval, repentance alone being taken
as satisfaction by the Almighty. Thus in the Old Testament, David, who
had committed adultery and murder, was saved by means of repentance; and
in the New, Ananias, who withdrew but a small portion of the price of
the land, perished together with his wife. Now if these instances are
more frequent in the Old Testament, and those of the contrary kind in
the New, the difference of the persons produces the difference in the
treatment adopted in such matters.

<span id="iv.xvii-p13"></span>\[4.\] C. [1 Cor.
6.1](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#001)<span id="iv.xvii-p13.1"></span>.
“Dare any one of you, having a matter against his brother, (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xvii-p13.2"></span>τὸν ἀδελφὸν</span>, rec.
text <span class="Greek"><span id="iv.xvii-p13.3"></span> τὁν
ἓτερον</span>.) go to law before the unrighteous, and not before the
saints?”

<span id="iv.xvii-p14"></span><span id="page_91">p. 91</span> <span
id="iv.xvii-Page_91"></span>Here also he again makes his complaint upon
acknowledged grounds; for in that other place he says, “It is actually
reported that there is fornication among you.” And in this place, “Dare
any one of you?” From the very first outset giving signs of his anger,
and implying that the thing spoken of comes of a daring and lawless
spirit.

<span id="iv.xvii-p15"></span>Now wherefore did he bring in by the way
that discourse about covetousness and about the duty of not going to law
without the Church? In fulfilment of his own rule. For it is a custom
with him to set to right things as they fall in his way; just as when
speaking about the tables which they used in common, he launched out
into the discourse about the mysteries. So here, you see, since he had
made mention of covetous brethren, burning with anxiety to correct those
in sin, he brooks not exactly to observe order; but he again corrects
the sin which had been introduced out of the regular course, and so
returns to the former subject.

<span id="iv.xvii-p16"></span>Let us hear then what he also says about
this. “Dare any of you, having a matter, go to law before the
unrighteous, and not before the saints?” For a while, he employs those
personal terms to expose, discredit, and blame their proceedings: nor
does he quite from the beginning subvert the custom of seeking judgment
before the believers: but when he had stricken them down by many words,
then he even takes away entirely all going to law. “For in the first
place,” says he, “if one must go to law it were wrong to do so before
the unrighteous. But you ought not to go to law at all.” This however he
adds afterwards. For the present he thoroughly sifts the former subject,
namely, that they should not submit matters to external arbitration.
“For,” says he, “how can it be otherwise than absurd that one who is at
variance (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xvii-p16.1"></span>μικροψυχοῦτα</span>) with his friend should
take his enemy to be a reconciler between them? And how can you avoid
feeling shame and blushing when a Greek sits to judge a Christian? And
if about private matters it is not right to go to law before Greeks, how
shall we submit to their decisions about other things of greater
importance?”

<span id="iv.xvii-p17"></span>Observe, moreover, how he speaks. He says
not, “Before the unbelievers,” but, “Before the unrighteous;” using the
expression of which he had most particular need for the matter before
him, in order to deter and keep them away. For see that his discourse
was about going to law, and those who are engaged in suits seek for
nothing so much as that the judges should feel great interest about what
is just; he takes this as a ground of dissuasion, all but saying, “Where
are you going? What are you doing, O man, bringing on yourself the
contrary to what you wish, and in order to obtain justice committing
yourself to unjust men?” And because it would have been intolerable to
be told at once not to go to law, he did not immediately add this, but
only changed the judges, bringing the party engaged in the trial from
without into the Church.

<span id="iv.xvii-p18"></span>\[5.\] Then, since it seemed easily open
to contempt, I mean our being judged by those who were within, and
especially at that time, (for they were not perhaps competent to
comprehend a point, nor were they such as the heathen judges, well
skilled in laws and rhetoric, inasmuch as the greater part of them were
uneducated men,) mark how he makes them worthy of credit, first calling
them “Saints.”

<span id="iv.xvii-p19"></span>But seeing that this bore witness to
purity of life, and not to accuracy in hearing a case, observe how he
orderly handles this part also, saying thus, “Do ye not know that the
saints shall judge the world?” How then canst thou who art in thy day to
judge them, endure to be judged by them now? They will not indeed judge,
taking their seat in person and demanding account, yet they shall
condemn. This at least he plainly said; “And if the world is judged in
you, are ye unworthy to judge the smallest matters?” He says not “by
you,” but “in you:” just as when He said, (St. [Matt. xii.
42](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#042)<span id="iv.xvii-p19.1"></span>.)
“The queen of the south shall rise up and condemn this generation:” and,
“The men of Nineveh shall arise and condemn this generation.” For when
beholding the same sun and sharing all the same things, we shall be
found believers but they unbelievers, they will not be able to take
refuge in ignorance. For we shall accuse them, simply by the things
which we have done. And many such ways of judgment one will find there.

<span id="iv.xvii-p20"></span>Then, that no one should think he speaks
about other persons, mark how he generalizes his speech. “And if the
world is judged in you, are ye unworthy to judge the smallest matters?”

<span id="iv.xvii-p21"></span>The thing is a disgrace to you, he says,
and an unspeakable reproach. For since it was likely that they would be
out of countenance at being judged by those that were within; “nay,”
saith he, “on the contrary, the disgrace is when you are judged by those
without: for those are the very small controversies, not these.”

<span id="iv.xvii-p22"></span>[1 Cor.
6.3](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#003)<span id="iv.xvii-p22.1"></span>.
“Know ye not that we shall judge angels? how much more, things which
pertain to this life?”

<span id="iv.xvii-p23"></span>Some say that here the priests are hinted
at, but away with this. His speech is about demons. For had he been
speaking about corrupt priests, he would have meant them above when he
said, “the world is judged in you:” (for the Scripture is wont to call
evil men also “The world:”)  and he would not have said the same <span
id="page_92">p. 92</span> <span id="iv.xvii-Page_92"></span>thing twice,
nor would he, as if he was saying something of greater consequence, have
put it down afterwards. But he speaks concerning those angels about whom
Christ saith, “Depart ye into the fire which is prepared for the devil
and his angels.” (St. [Matt. xxv.
41](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#041)<span id="iv.xvii-p23.1"></span>.)
And Paul, “his angels fashion themselves as ministers of righteousness.”
([2 Cor. xi. 15](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#015)<span
id="iv.xvii-p23.2"></span>.) For when the very incorporeal powers shall
be found inferior to us who are clothed with flesh, they shall suffer
heavier punishment.

<span id="iv.xvii-p24"></span>But if some should still contend that he
speaks of priests, “What sort of priests?” let us ask. Those whose walk
in life has been worldly, of course. In what sense then does he say, “We
shall judge angels, much more things that relate to this life?” He
mentions the angels, in contradistinction to “things relating to this
life”: likely enough; for they are removed from the need of these
things, because of the superior excellence of their nature.

<span id="iv.xvii-p25"></span>\[6.\] [1 Cor.
6.4](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#004)<span id="iv.xvii-p25.1"></span>.
“If then ye have to judge things pertaining to this life, set them to
judge who are of no account in the Church.” <span
id="fr_78"></span>[79](#fn_78)

<span id="iv.xvii-p27"></span>Wishing to instruct us as forcibly as
possible that they ought not to commit themselves to those without,
whatsoever the matter may be; having raised what seemed to be an
objection, he answers it in the first instance. For what he says is
something like this: Perhaps some one will say, “No one among you is
wise, nor competent to pass sentence; all are contemptible.” Now what
follows? “Even though none be wise,” says he, “I bid you entrust things
to those who are of least weight.”

<span id="iv.xvii-p28"></span>[1 Cor.
6.5](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#005)<span id="iv.xvii-p28.1"></span>.
“But this I say to move you to shame.” These are the words of one
exposing their objection as being an idle pretext: and therefore he
adds, “Is it so that there is not a wise man among you, no not even
one?” Is the scarcity, says he, so great? so great the want of sensible
persons among you? And what he subjoins strikes even still harder. For
having said, “Is it so, that there is not a wise man among you, not even
one?” he adds, “who shall be able to judge in the case of his brother.”
For when brother goes to law with brother, there is never any need of
understanding and talent in the person who is mediating in the cause,
the feeling and relationship contributing greatly to the settlement of
such a quarrel.

<span id="iv.xvii-p29"></span>“But brother goeth to law with brother,
and that before unbelievers.” Do you observe with what effect he
disparaged the judges at first by calling them unrighteous; whereas
here, to move shame, he calls them Unbelievers? For surely it is
extremely disgraceful if the priest could not be the author of
reconciliation even among brethren, but recourse must be had to those
without. So that when he said, “those who are of no account,” his chief
meaning was not (<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.xvii-p29.1"></span>οὐ
τοῦτο</span> <span class="Greek"><span id="iv.xvii-p29.2"></span>εἰπε
προηγουμένως</span> ) that the Church’s outcasts should be appointed as
judges, but to find fault with them. For that it was proper to make
reference to those who were able to decide, he has shewn by saying, “Is
it so, that there is not a wise man among you, not even one?” And with
great impressiveness he stops their mouths, and says, “Even though there
were not a single wise man, the hearing ought to have been left to you
who are unwise rather than that those without should judge.” For what
else can it be than absurd, that whereas on a quarrel arising in a house
we call in no one from without and feel ashamed if news get abroad among
strangers of what is going on within doors; where the Church is, the
treasure of the unutterable Mysteries, there all things should be
published without?

<span id="iv.xvii-p30"></span>[1 Cor.
6.6](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#006)<span id="iv.xvii-p30.1"></span>.
“But brother goeth to law with brother, and that before unbelievers.”

<span id="iv.xvii-p31"></span>The charge is twofold; both that he “goeth
to law,” and “before the unbelievers.” For if even the thing by itself,
To go to law with a brother, be a fault, to do it also before aliens,
what pardon does it admit of?

<span id="iv.xvii-p32"></span>\[7.\] [1 Cor.
6.7](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#007)<span id="iv.xvii-p32.1"></span>.
“Nay, already it is altogether a defect in you, that ye have lawsuits
one with another.”

<span id="iv.xvii-p33"></span>Do you see for what place he reserved this
point?  And how he has cleared the discussion of it in good time? For “I
talk not yet,” saith he, “which injures, or which is injured.” Thus far,
the act itself of going to law brings each party under his censure, and
in that respect one is not at all better than another. But whether one
go to law justly or unjustly, that is quite another subject. Say not
then, “which did the wrong?” For on this ground I at once condemn thee,
even for the act of going to law.

<span id="iv.xvii-p34"></span>Now if being unable to bear a wrong-doer
be a fault, what accusation can come up to the actual wrong? “Why not
rather take wrong? Why not rather be defrauded?”

<span id="iv.xvii-p35"></span>[1 Cor.
6.8](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#008)<span id="iv.xvii-p35.1"></span>.
“Nay, ye yourselves do wrong, and defraud, and that your brethren.”

<span id="iv.xvii-p36"></span>Again, it is a twofold crime, perhaps even
threefold or fourfold. One, not to know how to bear being wronged.
Another, actually to do wrong. A third, to commit the settlement of
these matters even unto the unjust. And yet a fourth, that it should be
so done to a brother. For men’s offences are not judged by the same
rule, when they are committed against any chance person, and towards
one’s own member. For it must be a greater degree of recklessness to
venture upon that. In the other <span id="page_93">p. 93</span> <span
id="iv.xvii-Page_93"></span>case, the nature of the thing is alone
trampled on; but in this, the quality of the person also.

<span id="iv.xvii-p37"></span>\[8.\] Having thus, you see, abashed them
from arguments on general principles, and before that, from the rewards
proposed <span id="fr_79"></span>[80](#fn_79) ; he shuts up the
exhortation with a threat, making his speech more peremptory, and saying
thus, ([1 Cor. 6.9](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#009)<span
id="iv.xvii-p38.2"></span>.) “Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not
inherit the kingdom of God? Be not deceived: neither fornicators, nor
idolaters, nor adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers of themselves
with men, ([1 Cor. 6.10](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#010)<span
id="iv.xvii-p38.3"></span>.) nor covetous, nor thieves, nor drunkards,
nor revilers, nor extortioners, shall inherit the kingdom of God.” What
sayest thou? When discoursing about covetous persons, have you brought
in upon us so vast a crowd of lawless men? “Yes,” says he, “but in doing
this, I am not confusing my discourse, but going on in regular order.”
For as when discoursing about the unclean he made mention of all
together; so again, on mentioning the covetous he brings forward all,
thus making his rebukes familiar to those who have such things on their
conscience. For the continual mention of the punishment laid up for
others makes the reproof easy to be received, when it comes into
conflict with our own sins. And so in the present instance he utters his
threat, not at all as being conscious of their doing such things, nor as
calling them to account, a thing which has special force to hold the
hearer and keep him from starting off; namely, the discourse having no
respect unto him, but being spoken indefinitely and so wounding his
conscience secretly.

<span id="iv.xvii-p39"></span>“Be not deceived.” Here he glances at
certain who maintain (what indeed most men assert now) that God being
good and kind to man, takes not vengeance upon our misdeeds: “Let us not
then be afraid.” For never will he exact justice of any one for any
thing. And it is on account of these that he says, “Be not deceived.”
For it belongs to the extreme of error and delusion, after depending on
good to meet with the contrary; and to surmise such things about God as
even in man no one would think of. Wherefore saith the Prophet in His
person, ([Psa. 50.21](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#021)<span
id="iv.xvii-p39.1"></span>.) <span id="fr_80"></span>[81](#fn_80) “Thou
hast conceived iniquity, that I shall be like unto thee: I will reprove
thee and set before thy face thine iniquities.” And Paul here, “Be not
deceived; neither fornicators,” (he puts first the one that was already
condemned,) “nor adulterers, nor effeminate, nor drunkards, nor
revilers, shall inherit the kingdom of God.”

<span id="iv.xvii-p41"></span>Many have attacked this place as extremely
severe, since he places the drunkard and the reviler with the adulterer
and the abominable and the abuser of himself with mankind. And yet the
offenses are not equal: how then is the award of punishment the same?
What shall we say then? First, that drunkenness is no small thing nor
reviling, seeing that Christ Himself delivered over to hell him that
called his brother Fool. And often that sin has brought forth death.
Again, the Jewish people too committed the greatest of their sins
through drunkenness. In the next place, it is not of punishment that he
is so far discoursing, but of exclusion from the kingdom. Now from the
kingdom both one and the other are equally thrust out; but whether in
hell they will find any difference, it belongs not to this present
occasion to enquire. For that subject is not before us just now.

<span id="iv.xvii-p42"></span>\[9.\] [1 Cor.
6.11](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#011)<span id="iv.xvii-p42.1"></span>.
“And such were some of you: but ye were washed, but ye were sanctified.”

<span id="iv.xvii-p43"></span>In a way to abash them exceedingly, he
adds this:  as if he said, “Consider from what evils God delivered us;
how great an experiment and demonstration of loving-kindness He afforded
us!  He did not limit His redemption to mere deliverance, but greatly
extended the benefit: for He also made thee clean. Was this then all?
Nay: but He also “sanctified.” Nor even is this all: He also
“justified.” Yet even bare deliverance from our sins were a great gift:
but now He also filled thee with countless blessing. And this He hath
done, “In the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ;” not in this name or in
that: yea also, “In the Spirit of our God.”

<span id="iv.xvii-p44"></span>Knowing therefore these things, beloved,
and bearing in mind the greatness of the blessing which hath been
wrought, let us both continue to live soberly, being pure from all
things that have been enumerated; and let us avoid the tribunals which
are in the forums of the Gentiles; and the noble birth which God hath
freely given us, the same let us preserve to the end. For think how full
of shame it is that a Greek should take his seat and deal out justice to
thee.

<span id="iv.xvii-p45"></span>But you will say, what if he that is
within judge contrary to the law? Why should he? tell me. For I would
know by what kind of laws the Greek administers justice, and by what the
Christian? Is it not quite plain that the laws of men are the rule of
the Greek, but those of God, of the Christian? Surely then with the
latter there is greater chance of justice, seeing that these laws are
even sent from heaven. For in regard to those without, besides what has
been said, there are many other things also to suspect; talent in
speakers and corruption in magistrates and many other things which are
the ruin of justice. But with us, nothing of this sort.

<span id="iv.xvii-p46"></span><span id="page_94">p. 94</span> <span
id="iv.xvii-Page_94"></span>“What then,” you will say, “if the adversary
be one in high place? Well, for this reason more than all one ought to
go to law in Christian courts: for in the courts without he will get the
better of you at all events. “But what if he acquiesce not, but both
despise those within and forcibly drag the course without?” Better were
it to submit willingly to what you are likely to endure by compulsion,
and not go to law, that thou mayest have also a reward. For, (St. [Matt.
v. 40](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#040)<span
id="iv.xvii-p46.1"></span>.) “If any one will go to law with thee, and
take away thy coat, thou shalt let him have thy cloak also:” and,
([Matt. 5.25](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#025)<span
id="iv.xvii-p46.2"></span>.) “Agree with thine adversary quickly, whilst
thou art with him in the way.” And why need I speak of our rules? For
even the pleaders in the heathen courts very often tell us this, saying,
“it were better to make up matters out of court.” But, O wealth, or
rather, O the absurd love of wealth!  It subverts all things and casts
them down; and all things are to the many an idle tale and fables
because of money!  Now that those who give trouble to courts of laws
should be worldly men is no marvel: but that many of those who have bid
farewell to the world should do the very same, this is a thing from
which all pardon is cut off. For if you choose to see how far you should
keep from this sort of need, I mean that of the tribunals, by rule of
the Scripture, and to learn for whom the laws are appointed, hear what
Paul saith; ([1 Tim. i. 9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#009)<span
id="iv.xvii-p46.3"></span>.) “For a righteous man law is not made, but
for the lawless, and unruly.” And if he saith these things about the
Mosaic Law, much more about the laws of the heathen.

<span id="iv.xvii-p47"></span>\[10.\] Now then, if you commit injustice,
it is plain that you cannot be righteous: but if you are injured and
bear it, (for this is a special mark of a righteous man,) you have no
need of the laws which are without. “How then,” say you, “shall I be
able to bear it when injured?” And yet Christ hath commanded something
even more than this. For not only hath he commanded you when injured to
bear it, but even to give abundantly more to the wrong-doer; and in your
zeal for suffering ill to surpass his eagerness for doing it. For he
said not, “to him that will sue thee at law, and take away thy coat,
give thy coat,” but, “together with that give also thy cloak.” But I bid
you overcome him, saith He, by suffering, not by doing, evil:  for this
is the certain and splendid victory. Wherefore also Paul goes on to say,
“Now then it is altogether a defect in (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xvii-p47.1"></span>ἥττημα</span> rec. vers. “a fault.”) you that
ye have lawsuits one with another.” And, “Wherefore do ye not rather
take wrong?” For that the injured person overcomes, rather than he who
cannot endure being injured, this I will make evident to you. He that
cannot endure injury, though he force the other into court and gain the
verdict, yet is he then most of all defeated. For that which he would
not, he hath suffered; in that the adversary hath compelled him both to
feel pain and to go to law. For what is it to the point that you have
prevailed? and what, that you have recovered all the money? You have in
the meanwhile borne what you did not desire, having been compelled to
decide the matter by law. But if you endure the injustice, you overcome;
deprived indeed of the money, but not at all of the victory which is
annexed to such self-command. For the other had no power to oblige you
to do what you did not like.

<span id="iv.xvii-p48"></span>And to shew that this is true; tell me,
which conquered at the dunghill? Which was defeated? Job who was
stripped of all, or the devil who stripped him of all? Evidently the
devil who stripped him of all. Whom do we admire for the victory, the
devil that smote, or Job that was smitten? Clearly, Job. And yet he
could not retain his perishing wealth nor save his children. Why speak I
of riches and children? He could not insure to himself bodily health.
Yet nevertheless this is the conqueror, he that lost all that he had.
His riches indeed he could not keep; but his piety he kept with all
strictness. “But his children when perishing he could not help.” And
what then? Since what happened both made them more glorious, and besides
in this way he protected himself against the despiteful usage. Now had
he not have suffered ill and been wronged of the devil, he would not
have gained that signal victory. Had it been an evil thing to suffer
wrong, God would not have enjoined it upon us: for God enjoineth not
evil things. What, know ye not that He is the God of Glory? that it
could not be His will to encompass us with shame and ridicule and loss,
but to introduce (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xvii-p48.1"></span>προξενῆσαι</span>) us to the contrary of
these? Therefore He commands us to suffer wrong, and doth all to
withdraw us from worldly things, and to convince us what is glory, and
what shame; what loss, and what gain.

<span id="iv.xvii-p49"></span>“But it is hard to suffer wrong and be
spitefully entreated.” Nay, O man, it is not, it is not hard. How long
will thy heart be fluttering about things present? For God, you may be
sure, would not have commanded this, had it been hard. Just consider.
The wrong-doer goes his way with the money, but with an evil conscience
besides: the receiver of the wrong, defrauded indeed of some money, but
enriched with confidence towards God; an acquisition more valuable than
countless treasures.

<span id="iv.xvii-p50"></span>\[11.\] Knowing these things, therefore,
let us of our free choice go on strict principles, and not be like the
unwise, who think that they are then <span id="page_95">p. 95</span>
<span id="iv.xvii-Page_95"></span>not wronged, when their suffering
wrong is the result of a trial. But, quite on the contrary, that is the
greatest harm; and so in every case when we exercise self-restraint in
these matters, not willingly, but after being worsted in that other
quarter. For it is no advantage that a man defeated in a trial endures
it; for it becomes thenceforth a matter of necessity. What then is the
splendid victory? When thou lookest down on it: when thou refusest to go
to law.

<span id="iv.xvii-p51"></span>“How say you? have I been stripped of
every thing,” saith one, “and do you bid me keep silent? Have I been
shamefully used, and do you exhort me to bear it meekly? And how shall I
be able?” Nay, but it is most easy if thou wilt look up unto heaven; if
thou wilt behold the beauty that is in sight; and whither God hath
promised to receive thee, if thou bear wrong nobly. Do this then; and
looking up unto the heaven, think that thou art made like unto Him that
sitteth there upon the Cherubim. For He also was injured and He bore it;
He was reproached and avenged not Himself; and was beaten, yet He
asserted not His cause. Nay, He made return, in the contrary kind, to
those who did such things, even in benefits without number; and He
commanded us to be imitators of Him. Consider that thou camest naked out
of thy mother’s womb, and that naked both thou and he that hath done
thee wrong shall depart; rather, he for his part, with innumerable
wounds, breeding worms. Consider that things present are but for a
season; count over the tombs of thine ancestors; acquaint thyself
accurately with past events; and thou shalt see that the wrong-doer hath
made thee stronger. For his own passion he hath aggravated, his
covetousness I mean; but yours, he hath alleviated, taking away the food
of the wild beast. And besides all this, he hath set you free from
cares, agony, envy, informers, trouble, worry, perpetual fear; and the
foul mass of evils he hath heaped upon his own head.

<span id="iv.xvii-p52"></span>“What then,” saith one, “if I have to
struggle with hunger?” Thou endurest this with Paul, who saith, ([1 Cor.
iv. 10](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#010)<span
id="iv.xvii-p52.1"></span>.) “Even unto this present hour we both
hunger, and thirst, and are naked.” But he did it, you will say, “for
God’s sake:” do thou it also for God’s sake. For when thou abstainest
from avenging, thou dost so for God’s sake.

<span id="iv.xvii-p53"></span>“But he that wronged me, takes his
pleasure with the wealthy.” Nay, rather with the devil. But be you
crowned with Paul.

<span id="iv.xvii-p54"></span>Therefore fear not hunger, for ([Prov. x.
3](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#003)<span id="iv.xvii-p54.1"></span>.)
“the Lord will not kill with hunger the souls of the righteous.” And
again, another saith, ([Ps. lv.
23](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#023)<span id="iv.xvii-p54.2"></span>.)
“Cast upon the Lord thy care, and He will nourish thee.” For if the
sparrows of the field are nourished by Him, how shall He not nourish
thee? Now let us not be of little faith nor of little soul, O my
beloved!  For He who hath promised the kingdom of heaven and such great
blessings, how shall He not give things present? Let us not covet
superfluous things, but let us keep to a sufficiency, and we shall
always be rich. Let shelter be what we seek and food, and we shall
obtain all things; both these, and such as are far greater.

<span id="iv.xvii-p55"></span>But if you are still grieving and bowing
down, I should like to shew you the soul of the wrongdoer after his
victory, how it is become ashes. For truly sin is that kind of thing:
while one commits it, it affords a certain pleasure; but when it is
finished, then the trifling pleasure is gone, one knows not how, and in
its place comes dejection. And this is our feeling when we do hurt to
any: afterwards, at any rate, we condemn ourselves.  So also when we
over-reach we have pleasure; but afterwards we are stung by conscience.
Seest thou in any one’s possession some poor man’s home? Weep not for
him that is spoiled, but for the spoiler: for he has not inflicted, but
sustained an evil. For he robbed the other of things present; but
himself he cast out of the blessings which cannot be uttered. For if he
who giveth not to the poor shall go away into hell; what shall he suffer
who takes the goods of the poor?

<span id="iv.xvii-p56"></span>“Yet,” saith one, “where is the gain, if I
suffer ill?” Indeed, the gain is great. For not of the punishment of him
that hath done thee harm doth God frame a compensation for thee: since
that would be no great thing. For what great good is it, if I suffer ill
and he suffer ill? And yet I know of many, who consider this the
greatest comfort, and who think they have got all back again, when they
see those who had insulted them undergoing punishment. But God doth not
limit His recompense to this.

<span id="iv.xvii-p57"></span>Wouldest thou then desire to know in
earnest how great are the blessings which await thee? He openeth for
thee the whole heaven; He maketh thee a fellow-citizen with the Saints;
He fits thee to bear a part in their choir: from sins He absolveth; with
righteousness He crowneth. For if such as forgive offenders shall obtain
forgiveness, those who not only forgive but who also give largely to
boot, what blessing shall they not inherit?

<span id="iv.xvii-p58"></span>Therefore, bear it not with a poor spirit,
but even pray for him that injured thee. It is for thyself that thou
dost this. Hath he taken thy money? Well: he took thy sins too:  which
was the case with Naaman and Gehazi. How much wealth wouldest thou not
give to have thine iniquities forgiven thee?  This, believe me, is the
case now. For if thou endure nobly and <span id="page_96">p. 96</span>
<span id="iv.xvii-Page_96"></span>curse not, thou hast bound on thee a
glorious crown. It is not my word, but thou hast heard Christ speaking,
“Pray for those that despitefully use you.” And consider the reward how
great!  “That ye may be like your Father which is in the heavens.” So
then you have been deprived of nothing, yea, you have been a gainer: you
have received no wrongs, rather you have been crowned; in that you are
become better disciplined in soul; are made like to God; are set free
from the care of money; are made possessor of the kingdom of heaven.

<span id="iv.xvii-p59"></span>All these things therefore taking into
account, let us restrain ourselves in injuries, beloved, in order that
we may both be freed from the tumult of this present life, and cast out
all unprofitable sadness of spirit, and may obtain the joy to come;
through the grace and loving-kindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, with
Whom to the Father and the Holy Spirit be glory, power, honor, now,
henceforth, and for ever and ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_78"></span>[92:79](1120020.htm#fr_78) <span
id="iv.xvii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xvii-p26"></span> \[Most of the modern critics and the Rev.
Version make this a question, but Principal Edwards agrees with
Chrysostom in considering it a precept. C.\]

<span id="fn_79"></span>[93:80](1120020.htm#fr_79) <span
id="iv.xvii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvii-p38"></span> i.e. in the clause, *Do ye not know that
the Saints shall judge the world*? [1 Cor.
6.2](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#002)<span id="iv.xvii-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[93:81](1120020.htm#fr_80) <span
id="iv.xvii-p39.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xvii-p40"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xvii-p40.1"></span>τὰς ἀνομίας σου</span> not in rec. text.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XVII](1120021)
