[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1120046)  [Next](1120048) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.xliv"></span>

<span id="iv.xliv-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="iv.xliv-p1.1"></span>Homily XLIII.</span>

<span id="iv.xliv-p2"></span><span id="iv.xliv-p2.1"></span><span
class="c1"><span id="iv.xliv-p2.2"></span>[1 Cor. xvi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#001)<span
id="iv.xliv-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.xliv-p3"></span>Now concerning the collection for the
saints, as I gave order to the Churches of Galatia, so also do ye.

<span id="iv.xliv-p4"></span><span class="c18"><span
id="iv.xliv-p4.1"></span>Having</span> completed his discourse
concerning doctrines, and being about to enter upon that which belongs
rather to morals, he dismisses every thing else and proceeds to the
chief of good things, discoursing about alms. Nor does he discuss morals
in general, but when he hath treated of this matter alone, he leaves
off. A thing however obviously unlike what he did every where else; for
of alms and of temperance and of meekness and of long-suffering and of
all the rest, he treats in the other Epistles in the conclusion. For
what reason then doth he handle here this part only of practical
morality? Because the greater part also of what had been spoken before
was of an ethical nature: I mean, where he chastised the fornicator;
where he was correcting those who go to law among Gentiles; where he
terrified the drunkards and the gluttons; where he condemned the
seditious, the contentious, and those who loved to have the preeminence;
where those who unworthily approach the Mysteries were delivered over by
him unto that intolerable sentence; where he discoursed concerning love.
For this cause, I say, the subject which most pressed on him, viz. the
aid required for the saints, this alone he mentions.

<span id="iv.xliv-p5"></span>And observe his consideration. When he had
persuaded them concerning the resurrection, and made them more earnest,
then and not till then he discusses this point also.

<span id="iv.xliv-p6"></span>It is true indeed that on these matters he
had spoken to them before, when he said, “If we sowed unto you spiritual
things, is it a great matter if we shall reap your carnal things?” <span
id="page_259">p. 259</span> <span id="iv.xliv-Page_259"></span>And, “Who
planteth a vineyard, and eateth not of the fruit thereof?” But because
he knew the greatness of this moral achievement, he refuses not to add a
fresh mention at the end of his letter.

<span id="iv.xliv-p7"></span>And he calls the collection <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xliv-p7.1"></span>λογίαν</span> (a
“contribution,”) immediately from the very first making out the things
to be easy. For when contribution is made by all together, that becomes
light which is charged upon each.

<span id="iv.xliv-p8"></span>But having spoken about the collection, he
did not say immediately, “Let every one of you lay up in store with
himself;” although this of course was the natural consequence; but
having first said, “As I gave order to the Churches of Galatia,” he
added this, kindling their emulation by the account of the well-doings
of others, and putting it in the form of a narration. And this also he
did when writing to the Romans; for to them also while appearing to
narrate the reason why he was going away to Jerusalem, he introduces
thereupon his discourse about alms; “But now I go unto Jerusalem,
ministering unto the saints: for it hath been the good pleasure of
Macedonia and Achaia to make a certain contribution for the poor among
the saints.” ([Rom. xv. 25](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#025)<span
id="iv.xliv-p8.1"></span>.) Only those he stimulates by mention of
Macedonians and Corinthians; these of Galatians. For he saith, “As I
gave order to the Churches of Galatia, so also do ye:” for they would
surely feel ashamed ever afterwards to be found inferior to Galatians.
And he saith not, “I advised,” and, “I counselled;” but, “I gave order,”
which is more authoritative. And he doth not bring forward a single
city, or two, or three, but an entire nation:  which also he doth in his
doctrinal instructions, saying, “Even as also in all the Churches of the
saints.” For if this be potent for conviction of doctrines, much more
for imitation of actions.

<span id="iv.xliv-p9"></span>\[2.\] “What then, I ask, didst thou give
order about?”

<span id="iv.xliv-p10"></span>[1 Cor.
16.2](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#002)<span id="iv.xliv-p10.1"></span>.
“On the first day of the week,” that is, the Lord’s day, “let each one
of you lay by him in store, as he may prosper.” Mark how he exhorts them
even from the time: for indeed the day was enough to lead them to
almsgiving. Wherefore “call to mind,” saith he, “what ye attained to on
this day: how all the unutterable blessings, and that which is the root
and the beginning of our life took place on this day. But not in this
regard only is the season convenient for a zealous benevolence, but also
because it hath rest and immunity from toils: the souls when released
from labors becoming readier and apter to show pity. Moreover, the
communicating also on that day in Mysteries so tremendous and immortal
instils great zealousness. On it, accordingly, “let each one of you,”
not merely this or that individual, but “each one of you,” whether poor
or rich, woman or man, slave or free, “lay by him store.” He said not,
“Let him bring it the church,” lest they might feel ashamed because of
the smallness of the sum; but “having by gradual additions swelled his
contribution, let him then produce it, when I am come but for the
present lay it up,” saith he, “at home, and make thine house a church;
thy little box a treasury. Become a guardian sacred wealth, a
self-ordained steward of the poor. Thy benevolent mind assigns to thee
this priesthood.”

<span id="iv.xliv-p11"></span>Of this our treasury <span
id="fr_333"></span>[334](#fn_333) even now is a sign: but the sign
remains, the thing itself no where.

<span id="iv.xliv-p13"></span>\[3.\] Now I am aware that many of this
congregation will again find fault with me when I treat of these
subjects, and say, “Be not, I beseech you, be not harsh and disagreeable
to your audience. Make allowances for their disposition; give way to the
mind of the hearers. For in this case you really do put us to shame; you
make us blush.” But I may not endure such words:  since neither was Paul
ashamed to be continually troublesome upon such points as these and to
speak words such as mendicants use. I grant indeed that if I said, “give
it me,” and “lay it up in my house,” there might perchance be something
to be ashamed of in what I said: hardly however even in that case; for
“they who wait upon the altar,” we read, “have their portion with the
altar.” (c. [1 Cor. 9.13](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#013)<span
id="iv.xliv-p13.1"></span>.) However, some one perhaps might find fault
as if he were framing an argument for his own interest. But now it is
for the poor that I make my supplication; nay, not so much for the poor,
as for your sake who bestow the gift. Wherefore also I am bold to speak
out. For what shame is it to say, Give unto thy Lord in His hunger: Put
raiment on Him going about naked; Receive Him being a stranger? Thy Lord
is not ashamed before the whole world to speak thus: “I was an hungred,
and ye gave Me not to eat,” He who is void of all want and requires
nothing. And am I to be ashamed and hesitate? Away with this. This shame
is of the snare of the devil. I will not then be ashamed, but will say,
and that boldly, “Give <span id="page_260">p. 260</span> <span
id="iv.xliv-Page_260"></span>to the needy;” I will say it with a louder
voice than the needy themselves. True it is, if any one can show and
prove that in saying these things we are drawing you over unto
ourselves, and under the pretence of the poor are ourselves making gain,
such a course would be worthy, I say not of shame, but even of ten
thousand thunderbolts; and life itself would be more than persons so
behaving would deserve. If, on the contrary, by the grace of God, we are
in nothing troublesome about ourselves, but “have made the Gospel
without charge” to you; laboring indeed in no wise like Paul, but being
contented with our own;—with all boldness of speech I will say, “Give
unto the needy:” yea, and I will not leave off saying it, and of those
who give not I will be a severe accuser. For so, if I were a general and
had soldiers, I should not feel ashamed at demanding food for my men:
for I vehemently set my heart upon your salvation.

<span id="iv.xliv-p14"></span>\[4.\] But that my argument may both be
more forcible and more effective, I will take Paul for my comrade, and
like him will discourse and say, “Let each one of you lay by him in
store, as he may prosper.” Now observe also how he avoids being
burdensome. He said not, “so much,” or “so much,” but “as he may
prosper,” whether much or little. Neither said he, “what any one may
have gained,” but, “as he may prosper:” signifying that the supply is of
God. And not only so, but also by his not enjoining them to deposit all
at once, he makes his counsel easy: since the gathering little by little
hinders all perception of the burden <span
id="fr_334"></span>[335](#fn_334) and the cost. Here you see the reason
too for his not enjoining them to produce it immediately, but giving
them a long day <span id="fr_335"></span>[336](#fn_335) ; whereof adding
the cause, he saith, “That there be no gatherings when I come:” which
means, that ye may not when the season is come for paying in
contributions just then be compelled to collect them. And this too in no
ordinary degree encouraged them again: the expectation of Paul being
sure to make them more earnest.

<span id="iv.xliv-p17"></span>[1 Cor.
16.3](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#003)<span id="iv.xliv-p17.1"></span>.
“And when I arrive, whomsoever ye shall approve, them will I send with
letters to carry your bounty <span id="fr_336"></span>[337](#fn_336) to
Jerusalem.”

<span id="iv.xliv-p19"></span>He said not, “this person,” and “that,”
but, “whomsoever ye shall approve,” whomsoever you shall choose, thus
freeing his ministration from suspicion. Wherefore to them he leaves the
right of voting in the choice of those who are to convey it. He is far
enough from saying, “The payment is yours, but the privilege of
selecting those who are to carry it is not yours.” Next, that they might
not think him quite absent, he adds his letters, saying, “Whomsoever you
approve, I will send with letters.” <span
id="fr_337"></span>[338](#fn_337)   As if he had said, I also will be
with them and share in the ministration, by my letters. And he said not,
“These will I send to bear your alms,” but, “your bounty;” to signify
that they were doing great deeds; to mark that they were gainers
themselves. And elsewhere he calls it both “a blessing” and “a
distribution.” ([2 Cor. 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#005),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#013)<span id="iv.xliv-p20.1"></span>.)
The one that he might not make them less active, the other that he might
not elate them. But in no case whatever hath he called it “alms.”

<span id="iv.xliv-p21"></span>[1 Cor.
16.4](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#004)<span id="iv.xliv-p21.1"></span>.
“And if it be meet for me to go also, they shall go with me.”

<span id="iv.xliv-p22"></span>Here again he exhorts them to liberality.
As thus: “if it be so much,” saith he, “as to require my presence also,
neither will I decline this.” But he did not in the first instance
promise this, nor say, “When I am come I will carry it.” For he would
not have made so much of it, if he had so set it down from the first.
Afterwards however he adds it well and seasonably. Here then you have
the reason why he did not immediately promise, nor yet altogether hold
his peace concerning it: but having said, “I will send,” then at length
he adds himself also. And here too again he leaves it to their own
decision; in saying, “If it be meet for me to go also:” whereas this
rested with them, namely, to make their collection large; so large even,
as to affect his plans and cause him in person to make the journey.

<span id="iv.xliv-p23"></span>\[5.\] [1 Cor.
16.5](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#005)<span id="iv.xliv-p23.1"></span>.
“But I will come to you,” saith he, “when I shall have passed through
Macedonia.” This he had said also above; then however with anger: at
least he added, (c. [1 Cor. 4.19](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#019)<span
id="iv.xliv-p23.2"></span>.) “And I will know not the speech of them
that are puffed up, but the power:” but here, more mildly; that they
might even long for his coming. Then, that they might not say, “Why is
it that you honor the Macedonians above us?” he said not, “When I
depart,” but, “When I shall have passed through Macedonia; for I do pass
through Macedonia.”

<span id="iv.xliv-p24"></span>[1 Cor.
16.6](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#006)<span id="iv.xliv-p24.1"></span>.
“But with you it may be that I shall abide, or even winter.” For I do
not at all wish to take you merely in my way, but to continue among you
and spend some time. For when he wrote this letter, he was in Ephesus,
and it was winter; as you may know by his saying, “Until Pentecost I
will tarry at Ephesus; but after this I shall go away to Macedonia, and
after having gone through it, I will be with you in the summer; and
perhaps I shall even spend the winter with you.” And why did he say,
“perhaps;” and did <span id="page_261">p. 261</span> <span
id="iv.xliv-Page_261"></span>not positively affirm it? Because Paul did
not foreknow all things; for good purposes. Wherefore neither doth he
absolutely affirm, in order that if it came not to pass, he might have
something to resort to; first, his previous mention of it having been
indefinite; and next, the power of the Spirit leading him wheresoever It
willed, not where he himself desired. And this also he expresses in the
second Epistle, when excusing himself on account of his delay, and
saying, “Or the things which I purpose, do I purpose according to the
flesh, that with me there should be the yea yea and the nay nay?” ([2
Cor. i. 17](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#017)<span
id="iv.xliv-p24.2"></span>.)

<span id="iv.xliv-p25"></span>“That ye may set me forward on my journey
wheresoever I go.” This also is a mark of love, and great strength of
affection.

<span id="iv.xliv-p26"></span>[1 Cor.
16.7](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#007)<span id="iv.xliv-p26.1"></span>.
“For I do not wish to see you now by the way; for I hope to tarry awhile
with you, if the Lord permit.”

<span id="iv.xliv-p27"></span>Now these things he said, both to signify
his love and also to terrify the sinners, not however openly, but with
outward demonstration of friendship.

<span id="iv.xliv-p28"></span>[1 Cor.
16.8](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#008)<span id="iv.xliv-p28.1"></span>.
“But I will tarry at Ephesus until Pentecost.”

<span id="iv.xliv-p29"></span>As we should expect, he tells them all
exactly, informing them as friends. For this too is a mark of friendship
to say the reason why he was not with them, why he delayed, and where he
was staying.

<span id="iv.xliv-p30"></span>[1 Cor.
16.9](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#009)<span id="iv.xliv-p30.1"></span>.
“For a great door and effectual is opened unto me, and there are many
adversaries.”

<span id="iv.xliv-p31"></span>Now if it was “great,” how could there be
“adversaries?” Why on this very account the adversaries were many,
because men’s faith was great; because the entrance was great and wide.
But what means, “A great door?” There are many prepared to receive the
faith, many ready to approach and be converted. There is a spacious
entrance for me, things being now come to that point that the mind of
those approaching is at its prime for the obedience of the faith. On
this account, vehement was the blast of the breath of the devil, because
he saw many turning away from him.

<span id="iv.xliv-p32"></span>You see then on both accounts it was
needful for him to stay; both because the gain was abundant, and because
the struggle was great.

<span id="iv.xliv-p33"></span>And herewith also he cheered them up,
namely, by saying, that henceforth the word works every where and
springs up readily. And if there be many who plot against it, this also
is a sign of the advance of the Gospel. For at no time doth that evil
demon wax fierce, except on seeing his goods made spoil of abundantly.
([Matt. xii](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#000)<span
id="iv.xliv-p33.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.xliv-p34"></span>\[6.\] Let us then, when we desire to
effect any thing great and noble, not regard this, the greatness of the
labor which it brings, but let us rather look to the gain. Mark, for
instance, Paul, not therefore lingering, not therefore shrinking back,
because “there were many adversaries;” but because “there was a great
door,” pressing on and persevering. Yea, and as I was saying, this was a
sign that the devil was being stripped, for it is not, depend on it, by
little and mean achievements that men provoke that evil monster to
wrath. And so when thou seest a righteous man performing great and
excellent deeds, yet suffering innumerable ills, marvel not; on the
contrary, one might well marvel, if the devil receiving so many blows
were to keep quiet and bear the wounds meekly. Even as you ought not to
be surprised were a serpent, continually goaded, to grow fierce and
spring on the person that goaded it. Now no serpent steals on you so
fierce as the devil, leaping up against all; and, like a scorpion with
its sting raised, he raises himself upright. Let not this then disturb
you: since of course he that returns from war and victory and slaughter
must needs be bloody, and oftentimes also have received wounds. Do thou,
then, for thy part, when thou seest any one doing alms and performing
numberless other good works and so curtailing the power of the devil,
and then falling into temptations and perils; be not troubled thereupon.
This is the very reason why he fell into temptations, because he
mightily smote the devil.

<span id="iv.xliv-p35"></span>“And how did God permit it?” you will say.
That he might be crowned more signally: that the other might receive a
severer wound. For when after benefits conferred a man suffers, and that
grievously, and yet continually gives thanks, it is a blow to the devil.
For it is a great thing, even when our affairs are flowing on
prosperously, to show mercy and to adhere to virtue: but it is far
greater in grievous calamity not to desist from this noble occupation;
this is he who may be most truly said to do so for God’s sake. So then,
though we be in peril, beloved, though we suffer ever so greatly, let us
with the greater zeal apply ourselves to our labors for virtue’s sake.
For this is not at all the season for retribution.

<span id="iv.xliv-p36"></span>Here then let us not ask for our crowns,
lest when the crowns come in their season, we diminish our recompense.
For as in the case of artificers, they who support themselves and work
receive higher pay; while those who have their maintenance with their
employers, are curtailed in no small part of the wages; so also in
regard to the saints: he that doth immense good and suffers extreme evil
hath his reward unimpaired and a far more abundant recompense, not only
for the good things which he hath done, but also for the evil which he
hath suffered. But he that enjoys rest and luxury here, hath not <span
id="page_262">p. 262</span> <span id="iv.xliv-Page_262"></span>such
bright crowns there. Let us not then seek for our recompense here. But
“then” of all times let us rejoice, when doing well we suffer ill. For
God hath in store for us in that world not only the reward of our good
deeds, but that of our temptations also.

<span id="iv.xliv-p37"></span>But to explain myself more clearly:
suppose two rich merciful men, and let them give to the poor: then let
one continue in his riches and enjoy all prosperity: the other fall into
poverty and diseases and calamities, and give God thanks. Now when these
are gone away into the other world, which will receive the greater
reward? Is it not quite plain that it will be he who is sick and in
adversity, seeing that though he did well and suffered ill, he felt not
according to human infirmity? I suppose this is plain to every one. And,
in truth, this is the adamantine statue, this is the considerate
servant. (See S. [Matt. xxv. 21](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#021)<span
id="iv.xliv-p37.1"></span>.) But if we ought not to do any thing good
for the hope of the kingdom, but because it so pleaseth God, which is
more than any kingdom; what doth he deserve, who because he doth not
receive his recompense here, is become more remiss concerning virtue?

<span id="iv.xliv-p38"></span>Let us then not be troubled when we see
that such an one who invited widows and made continual feasts lost his
house by fire, or sustained some other such like disaster. Yea, for this
very thing he shall receive his reward. For even Job was not so much
admired for his alms-deeds as he was for his sufferings afterwards. For
this reason his friends also are little esteemed and deemed of no
account; because they sought for the recompenses of the present world,
and with a view to this gave sentence against the just man. Let us then
not seek for our return here; let us not become poor and needy; since
surely it is of extreme meanness, when heaven is proposed, and things
which are above the heaven, to be looking round on the things which are
here. Let us not by any means do so; but whichsoever of unexpected
things come upon us, hold we fast the commands of God continually, and
obey the blessed Paul.

<span id="iv.xliv-p39"></span>\[7.\] And let us make a little chest for
the poor at home; and near the place at which you stand praying, there
let it be put: and as often as you enter in to pray, first deposit your
alms, and then send up your prayer; and as you would not wish to pray
with unwashen hands <span id="fr_338"></span>[339](#fn_338) , so neither
do so without alms:  since not even the Gospel hanging by our bed <span
id="fr_339"></span>[340](#fn_339) is more important than that alms
should be laid up for you; for if you hang up the Gospel and do nothing,
it will do you no such great good. But if you have this little coffer,
you have a defence against the devil, you give wings to your prayer, you
make your house holy, having meat for the King  (S. [Matt. xxv.
34](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#034)<span id="iv.xliv-p43.1"></span>.)
there laid up in store. And for this reason let the little coffer be
placed also near the bed <span id="fr_340"></span>[341](#fn_340) , and
the night will not be troubled with fantasies. Only let nothing be cast
into it, which is the fruit of injustice. For this thing is charity; and
it cannot be that charity should ever spring out of hardheartedness.

<span id="iv.xliv-p45"></span>Will you have mention also of the
resources out of which you should make your deposits, so as in this
respect also to make this kind of contribution easy? The handicraft man,
for instance, the sandal-maker, or the leather-cutter, or the
brass-founder, or any other artificer,—when he sells any article of his
trade, let him give the first-fruits of its price unto God: let him cast
in a small portion here, and assign something to God out of his portion,
though it be rather scanty <span id="fr_341"></span>[342](#fn_341) . For
neither do I ask any great thing; but so much as the childish ones among
the Jews <span id="fr_342"></span>[343](#fn_342) , full as they are of
innumerable evils, just so much let us cast in, we who look forward to
heaven. And this I say not as laying down a law, neither as forbidding
more, but as recommending a deposit of not less than a tenth part. And
this also do thou practise not in selling only, but also in buying and
receiving a recompense. Let those also who possess land observe this law
in regard to their rents: yea, let it be a law for all who gather their
incomes in an honest way. For with those who demand usury I have no
concern, neither with soldiers who do violence to others and turn to
their own advantage their neighbors’ calamities. Since from that quarter
God will accept nothing. But these things I say to those who gather
their substance by righteous labor.

<span id="iv.xliv-p48"></span>Yea, and if we establish ourselves in this
kind of habit, we are ever after stung by our conscience if ever we omit
this rule; and after a while we shall not even think it a hard thing;
and by degrees we shall arrive at the greater things, and by practising
how to despise wealth, and by pulling up the root of evils, we shall
both pass the present life in peace, and obtain the life to come; which
may it be the portion of us all to attain unto, &c. &c.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_333"></span>[259:334](1120047.htm#fr_333) <span
id="iv.xliv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xliv-p12"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xliv-p12.1"></span>το γαζοφυλακίον</span>, Bingham, viii. 7. 11.
says, “The Church had her *gazophylacia*, or Treasuries, as well as the
Temple; which appears from a Canon of the Fourth Council of Carthage,”
(93. *ap. Harduin*. i. 984.) “which forbids the offerings of persons at
variance with one another to be received *either in the Treasury or the
Sanctuary*. So that the Treasury was a distinct place from the Corban in
the Sanctuary.…Here all such offerings of the people were laid up as
were not thought proper to be brought to the Altar.” He further refers
to the *Apostolical Canons*, 4 and 5, “That beside Bread and Wine,
nothing should be brought to the Altar, save only new ears of corn and
grapes, and oil for the lamps, and incense for the time of the oblation.
But all other fruits should be sent <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xliv-p12.2"></span>εἰς οἷκον</span>, to the Repository, or
Treasury it may be, as first-fruits for the Bishop and Presbyters, and
not be brought to the Altar, but be by them divided among the Bishops
and Clergy.” See Harduin, i. 10.

<span id="fn_334"></span>[260:335](1120047.htm#fr_334) <span
id="iv.xliv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xliv-p15"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xliv-p15.1"></span>λειτουργία</span>.

<span id="fn_335"></span>[260:336](1120047.htm#fr_335) <span
id="iv.xliv-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xliv-p16"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xliv-p16.1"></span>πολλὴν τὴν προθεσμίαν</span>.

<span id="fn_336"></span>[260:337](1120047.htm#fr_336) <span
id="iv.xliv-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xliv-p18"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xliv-p18.1"></span>χάριν</span>.

<span id="fn_337"></span>[260:338](1120047.htm#fr_337) <span
id="iv.xliv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xliv-p20"></span> \[Chrysostom evidently understood the
verse in the sense found in the margin of the Revised Version. C.\]

<span id="fn_338"></span>[262:339](1120047.htm#fr_338) <span
id="iv.xliv-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xliv-p40"></span> S. Chrys. on St. [Matt.
xv.](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#000)<span id="iv.xliv-p40.1"></span>
Hom. 51. “We see this kind of custom prevailing in the Church with most
people; they are anxious to come in with clean garments and to wash
their hands, but make no account of presenting their soul clean unto
God.” Ed. Sav. t. ii. 328; cf. Hom. 73. p. 861; *in Eph*. 3. p. 778.
“Tell me, wouldest thou choose with unwashen hands to approach the
Sacrifice? Far from it, to my thinking. Thou wouldest rather not come at
all, than with defiled hands. Shall the next thing be, that while thou
art so scrupulous in that which is but a trifle, thou approachest with a
soul defiled, and darest to touch It?”

<span id="fn_339"></span>[262:340](1120047.htm#fr_339) <span
id="iv.xliv-p40.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xliv-p41"></span> The custom here alluded to may perhaps
explain the traditional wish or invocation.

<span id="iv.xliv-p42"></span>“Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John,

<span id="iv.xliv-p43"></span>“Bless the bed that I lie on.”

<span id="fn_340"></span>[262:341](1120047.htm#fr_340) <span
id="iv.xliv-p43.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xliv-p44"></span> The reading seems corrupt. It is rendered
as if it were <span class="Greek"><span id="iv.xliv-p44.1"></span>διὰ
τοῦτο καὶ παρὰ τῇ κλίνῇ κείσθω τὸ κιβώτιον</span>.

<span id="fn_341"></span>[262:342](1120047.htm#fr_341) <span
id="iv.xliv-p45.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xliv-p46"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xliv-p46.1"></span>μεριζέσθω πρὸς τον Θεὸν ἐξ ἐλάττονος
μοίρας</span>.

<span id="fn_342"></span>[262:343](1120047.htm#fr_342) <span
id="iv.xliv-p46.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xliv-p47"></span> Among whom it was a common saying,
“Tithes are the Hedge of the Law.” Hooker, *E. P.* v. 79. 8. See S.
[Luke xviii. 12](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#012)<span
id="iv.xliv-p47.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XLIV](1120048)
