[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1120035)  [Next](1120037) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.xxxiii"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxiii-p1"></span> <span id="page_186">p. 186</span> <span
id="iv.xxxiii-Page_186"></span><span class="c16"><span
id="iv.xxxiii-p1.1"></span>Homily XXXII.</span>

<span id="iv.xxxiii-p2"></span><span id="iv.xxxiii-p2.1"></span><span
class="c1"><span id="iv.xxxiii-p2.2"></span>[1 Cor. xii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#027)<span
id="iv.xxxiii-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.xxxiii-p3"></span>Now ye are the body of Christ and
severally members thereof.

<span id="iv.xxxiii-p4"></span><span class="c18"><span
id="iv.xxxiii-p4.1"></span>For</span> lest any should say, “What is the
example of the body to us? since the body is a slave to nature but our
good deeds are of choice;” he applies it to our own concerns; and to
signify that we ought to have the same concord of design as they have
from nature, he saith, “Now ye are the body of Christ.” But if our body
ought not to be divided, much less the body of Christ, and so much less
as grace is more powerful than nature.

<span id="iv.xxxiii-p5"></span> But what is the expression, “severally?”
“So far at least as appertaineth to you; and so far as naturally a part
should be built up from you.” For because he had said, “the body,”
whereas the whole body was not the Corinthian Church, but the Church in
every part of the world, therefore he said, “severally:” i.e., the
Church amongst you is a part of the Church existing every where and of
the body which is made up of all the Churches: so that not only with
yourselves alone, but also with the whole Church throughout the world,
ye ought to be at peace, if at least ye be members of the whole body.

<span id="iv.xxxiii-p6"></span>\[2.\] [1 Cor.
12.28](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#028)<span
id="iv.xxxiii-p6.1"></span>. “And God hath set some in the Church: first
apostles, secondly prophets, thirdly teachers, then miracles, then gifts
of healings, helps, governments, divers kinds of tongues.”

<span id="iv.xxxiii-p7"></span>Thus what I spake of before, this also he
now doth. Because they thought highly of themselves in respect of the
tongues he sets it last every where. For the terms, “first” and
“secondly,” are not used by him here at random, but in order by
enumeration to point out the more honorable and the inferior. Wherefore
also he set the apostles first who had all the gifts in themselves. And
he said not, “God hath set certain in the Church, apostles” simply, “or
prophets,” but he employs “first, second,” and “third,” signifying that
same thing which I told you of.

<span id="iv.xxxiii-p8"></span>“Secondly, prophets.” For they used to
prophesy, as the daughters of Philip, as Agabus, as these very persons
among the Corinthians, of whom he saith, “Let the prophets speak, two or
three.” (c. [1 Cor. 14.29](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#029)<span
id="iv.xxxiii-p8.1"></span>.) And writing also to Timothy, he said,
“Neglect not the gift that is in thee, which was given thee by
prophecy.” ([1 Tim. iv. 14](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#014)<span
id="iv.xxxiii-p8.2"></span>.) And they were much more many that
prophesied. And if Christ saith, “The Law and the Prophets prophesied
until John,” (S. [Matt. xi. 13](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#013)<span
id="iv.xxxiii-p8.3"></span>.) He saith it of those prophets who before
proclaimed His coming.

<span id="iv.xxxiii-p9"></span>“Thirdly, teachers.” For he that
prophesieth speaks all things from the Spirit; but he that teacheth
sometimes discourses also out of his own mind. Wherefore also he said,
“Let the elders that rule well be counted worthy of double honor,
especially they who labor in the word and in teaching:” ([1 Tim. v.
17](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#017)<span id="iv.xxxiii-p9.1"></span>.)
whereas he that speaks all things by the Spirit doth not labor. This
accordingly is the reason why he set him after the prophet, because the
one is wholly a gift but the other is also man’s labor. For he speaks
many things of his own mind, agreeing however with the sacred
Scriptures.

<span id="iv.xxxiii-p10"></span>\[3.\] “Then miracles, then gifts of
healings.”  Seest thou how he again divides the healings from the power,
which also he did before. For the power is more than the healing: since
he that hath power both punishes and heals, but he that hath the gift of
healings doeth cures only. And observe how excellent the order he made
use of, when he set the prophecy before the miracles and the healings.
For above when he said, “To one is given by the Spirit the word of
wisdom, and to another the word of knowledge,” he spake, not setting
them in order, but indifferently. Here, on the other hand, he sets a
first and a second rank. Wherefore then doth he set <span
id="page_187">p. 187</span> <span
id="iv.xxxiii-Page_187"></span>prophecy first? Because even in the old
covenant the matter has this order. For example, when Isaiah was
discoursing with the Jews, and exhibiting a demonstration of the power
of God, and bringing forward the evidence of the worthlessness of the
demons, he stated this also as the greater evidence of his divinity, his
foretelling things to come. ([Isa.
41:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#022),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#023)<span
id="iv.xxxiii-p10.1"></span>.) And Christ Himself after working so many
signs saith that this was no small sign of His divinity: and continually
adds, “But these things have I told you, that when it is come to pass,
ye may believe that I am He.” (S. [John
13:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#019), [John
14:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#029), [John
16:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#004)<span
id="iv.xxxiii-p10.2"></span>.)

<span id="iv.xxxiii-p11"></span>“Well then; the gifts of healing are
justly inferior to prophecy. But why likewise to teaching?” Because it
is not the same thing to declare the word of preaching and sow piety in
the hearts of the hearers, as it is to work miracles:  since these are
done merely for the sake of that. When therefore any one teaches both by
word and life, he is greater than all. For those he calls emphatically
teachers, who both teach by deeds and instruct in word. For instance:
this made the Apostles themselves to become Apostles. And those gifts
certain others also, of no great worth, received in the beginning, as
they who said, “Lord, did we not prophesy by Thy Name, and do mighty
works?” and after this were told, “I never knew you; depart from Me, ye
that work iniquity.” (S. [Matt. vii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#022)<span id="iv.xxxiii-p11.1"></span>.)
But this twofold mode of teaching, I mean that by deeds and by words, no
bad man would ever undertake. As to his setting the prophets first
marvel not at it. For he is not speaking of prophets simply, but of
those who by prophecy do also teach and say every thing to the common
benefit: which in proceeding he makes more clear to us.

<span id="iv.xxxiii-p12"></span>“Helps, governments.” What is, “helps?”
To support the weak. Is this then a gift, tell me? In the first place,
this too is of the Gift of God, aptness for a patron’s office <span
id="fr_193"></span>[194](#fn_193) ; the dispensing spiritual things;
besides which he calls many even of our own good deeds, “gifts;” not
meaning us to lose heart, but showing that in every case we need God’s
help, and preparing them to be thankful, and thereby making them more
forward and stirring up their minds.

<span id="iv.xxxiii-p14"></span>“Divers kind of tongues.” Seest thou
where he hath set this gift, and how he every where assigns it the last
rank?

<span id="iv.xxxiii-p15"></span>\[4.\] Further, since again by this
catalogue he had pointed out a great difference, and stirred up the
afore-mentioned distemper of those that had lesser gifts, he darts upon
them in what follows with great vehemence, because he had already given
them those many proofs of their not being left much inferior. What I
mean is; because it was likely that on hearing these things they would
say, “And why were we not all made Apostles?”—whereas above he had made
use of a more soothing tone of discourse, proving at length the
necessity of this result, even from the image of the body; for “the
body,” saith he, “is not one member;” and again, “but if all were one
member, where were the body?” and from the fact that they were given for
use; for to each one is given “the manifestation of the Spirit,” saith
he, “to profit withal:” and from all being watered from the same Spirit:
and from what is bestowed being a free gift and not a debt; “for there
are,” saith he, “diversities of gifts, but the same Spirit:” and from
the manifestation of the Spirit being made alike through all; for “to
each one,” saith he, “is given the manifestation through the Spirit:”
and from the fact that these things were shaped according to the
pleasure of the Spirit and of God; “for all these,” saith he, “worketh
the one and the same Spirit, dividing to each one severally even as he
will:” and, “God hath set the members each one of them in the body, even
as it pleased Him:” and from the inferior members also being necessary;
“for those which seem,” saith he, “to be more feeble are necessary:”
from their being alike necessary, in that they “from the greater too
needing the less: “for the head,” saith he, “cannot say to the feet, I
have no need of you:” from these latter enjoying even more honor; for
“to that which lacketh,” saith he, “He hath given more abundant honor:”
from the care of them being common and equal; for “for all the members
have the same care one for another:” and from there being one honor and
one grief of them all; for “whether,” saith he, “one member suffereth,
all the members suffer with it; or one member is honored, all the
members rejoice with it:”—whereas, I say, he had above exhorted them by
these topics, here and henceforth he uses language so as to bear them
down and rebuke them. For, as I said, it behoves us neither always to
exhort people nor always to silence them. Therefore also Paul himself,
because he at length exhorted them, doth henceforth vehemently attack
them, saying,

<span id="iv.xxxiii-p16"></span>[1 Cor.
12.29](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#029)<span
id="iv.xxxiii-p16.1"></span>. “Are all apostles? are all prophets? have
all gifts of healing?”

<span id="iv.xxxiii-p17"></span>And he doth not stop at the first and
the second gift, but proceeds to the last, either meaning this that all
cannot be all things, (even as he there saith, “if all were one member,
where were the body?”) or establishing some other point also along with
these, which may tell in the way of consolation again. What then is
this? His signifying that even the lesser gifts <span id="page_188">p.
188</span> <span id="iv.xxxiii-Page_188"></span>are contended for
equally with the greater, from the circumstance that not even these were
given absolutely to all? For “why,” saith he, “dost thou grieve that
thou hast not gifts of healing? consider that what thou hast, even
though it be less, is oftentimes not possessed by him that hath the
greater.” Wherefore he saith,

<span id="iv.xxxiii-p18"></span>[1 Cor.
12.30](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#030)<span
id="iv.xxxiii-p18.1"></span>. “Do all speak with tongues? do all
interpret?”

<span id="iv.xxxiii-p19"></span>For even as the great gifts God hath not
vouchsafed all to all men, but to some this, and to others that, so also
did He in respect of the less, not proposing these either to all. And
this He did, procuring thereby abundant harmony and love, that each one
standing in need of the other might be brought close to his brother.
This economy He established also in the arts, this also in the elements,
this also in the plants, and in our members, and absolutely in all
things.

<span id="iv.xxxiii-p20"></span>\[5.\] Then he subjoins further the most
powerful consolation, and sufficient to recover them and quiet their
vexed souls. And what is this?

<span id="iv.xxxiii-p21"></span>[1 Cor.
12.31](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#031)<span
id="iv.xxxiii-p21.1"></span>. “Desire earnestly,” saith he, “the better
gifts. And a still more excellent way show I unto you.”

<span id="iv.xxxiii-p22"></span>Now by saying this, he gently hinted
that they were the cause of their own receiving the lesser gifts, and
had it in their power, if they would, to receive the greater. For when
he saith, “desire earnestly,” he demands from them all diligence and
desire for spiritual things. And he said not, the greater gifts, but
“the better,” i.e., the more useful, those which would profit. And what
he means is this: “continue to desire gifts; and I point out to you a
fountain of gifts.” For neither did he say, “a gift,” but “a way,” that
he might the more extol that which he intends to mention. As if he said,
It is not one, or two, or three gifts that I point out to you, but one
way which leadeth to all these <span id="fr_194"></span>[195](#fn_194) :
and not merely a way, but both “a more excellent way” and one that is
open in common to all. For not as the gifts are vouchsafed, to some
these, to others those, but not all to all; so also in this case: but it
is an universal gift. Wherefore also he invites all to it. “Desire
earnestly,” saith he, “the better gifts and yet show I unto you a more
excellent way;” meaning love towards our neighbor.

<span id="iv.xxxiii-p25"></span>Then intending to proceed to the
discourse concerning it and the encomium of this virtue, he first
lowereth these by comparison with it, intimating that they are nothing
without it; very considerately.  For if he had at once discoursed of
love, and having said, “I show unto you a way,” had added, “but this is
love,” and had not conducted his discourse by way of comparison; some
might possibly have scoffed at what was said, not understanding clearly
the force of the thing spoken of but still gaping after these. Wherefore
he doth not at once unfold it, but first excites the hearer by the
promise, and saith, “I show unto you a more excellent way,” and so
having led him to desire it, he doth not even thus straightway proceed
to it, but augmenting still further and extending their desire, he
discourses first of these very things, and shows that without it they
are nothing; reducing them to the greatest necessity of loving one
another; seeing also that from neglect of it sprang that which caused
all their evils. So that in this respect also it might justly appear
great, if the gifts not only brought them not together, but divided them
even when united: but this, when many were so divided, would reunite
them by virtue of its own and make them one body. This however he doth
not say at once, but what they chiefly longed for, that he sets down; as
that the thing was a gift and a most excellent way to all the gifts. So
that, even if thou wilt not love thy brother on the score of friendship,
yet for the sake of obtaining a better sign and an abundant gift,
cherish love.

<span id="iv.xxxiii-p26"></span>\[6.\] And see whence he first begins;
from that which was marvellous in their eyes and great, the gift of
tongues. And in bringing forward that gift, he mentions it not just in
the degree they had it in, but far more. For he did not say, “if I speak
with tongues,” but,

<span id="iv.xxxiii-p27"></span>[1 Cor.
13.1](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#001)<span
id="iv.xxxiii-p27.1"></span>. “If I speak with the tongues of men,—”

<span id="iv.xxxiii-p28"></span>What is, “of men?” Of all nations in
every part of the world. And neither was he content with this
amplification, but he likewise uses another much greater, adding the
words, <span id="page_189">p. 189</span> <span
id="iv.xxxiii-Page_189"></span>“and of angels,—and have not love, I am
become sounding brass, or a clanging cymbal.”

<span id="iv.xxxiii-p29"></span>Dost thou see to what point he first
exalted the gift, and to what afterwards he lowered and cast it down?
For neither did he simply say, “I am nothing,” but, “I am become
sounding brass,” a thing senseless and inanimate. But how “sounding
brass?” Emitting a sound indeed, but at random and in vain, and for no
good end. Since besides my profiting nothing, I am counted by most men
as one giving impertinent trouble, an annoying and wearisome kind of
person. Seest thou how one void of love is like to things inanimate and
senseless?

<span id="iv.xxxiii-p30"></span>Now he here speaks of the “tongues of
angels,” not investing angels with a body, but what he means is this: 
“should I even so speak as angels are wont to discourse unto each other,
without this I am nothing, nay rather a burden and an annoyance.” Thus
(to mention one other example) where he saith, “To Him every knee shall
bow, of things in heaven and things on earth, and things under the
earth,” ([Philip. ii. 10](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#010)<span
id="iv.xxxiii-p30.1"></span>.) he doth not say these things as if he
attributed to angels knees and bones, far from it, but it is their
intense adoration which he intends to shadow out by the fashion amongst
us: so also here he calls it “a tongue” not meaning an instrument of
flesh, but intending to indicate their converse with each other by the
manner which is known amongst us.

<span id="iv.xxxiii-p31"></span>\[7.\] Then, in order that his discourse
may be acceptable, he stops not at the gift of tongues, but proceeds
also to the remaining gifts; and having depreciated all in the absence
of love, he then depicts her image. And because he preferred to conduct
his argument by amplification, he begins from the less and ascends to
the greater. For whereas, when he indicated their order, he placed the
gift of tongues last, this he now numbers first; by degrees, as I said,
ascending to the greater gifts. Thus having spoken of tongues, he
proceeds immediately to prophecy; and saith;

<span id="iv.xxxiii-p32"></span>[1 Cor.
13.2](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#002)<span
id="iv.xxxiii-p32.1"></span>. “And if I have the gift of prophecy.”

<span id="iv.xxxiii-p33"></span>And this gift again with an excellency.
For as in that case he mentioned not tongues, but the tongues of all
mankind, and as he proceeded, those of angels, and then signified that
the gift was nothing without love: so also here he mentions not prophecy
alone but the very highest prophecy: in having said, “If I have
prophecy,” he added, “and know all mysteries and all knowledge;”
expressing this gift also with intensity.

<span id="iv.xxxiii-p34"></span>Then after this also he proceeds to the
other gifts. And again, that he might not seem to weary them, naming
each one of the gifts, he sets down the mother and fountain of all, and
this again with an excellency, thus saying, “And if I have all faith.”
Neither was he content with this, but even that which Christ spake of as
greatest, this also he added, saying, “so as to remove mountains and
have not love, I am nothing.” And consider how again here also he lowers
the dignity of the tongues. For whereas in regard of prophecy he
signifies the great advantage arising from it, “the understanding
mysteries, and having all knowledge;” and in regard of faith, no
trifling work, even “the removing mountains;” in respect of tongues, on
the other hand, having named the gift itself only, he quits it.

<span id="iv.xxxiii-p35"></span>But do thou, I pray, consider this also,
how in brief he comprehended all gifts when he named prophecy and
faith:  for miracles are either in words or deeds. And how doth Christ
say, that the least degree of faith is the being able to remove a
mountain? For as though he were speaking something very small, did He
express Himself when He said, “If ye have faith as a grain of
mustard-seed, ye shall say to this mountain, Remove, and it shall
remove;” (S. [Matt. xvii. 20](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#020)<span
id="iv.xxxiii-p35.1"></span>.) whereas Paul saith that this is “all
faith.” What then must one say?  Since this was a great thing, the
removing a mountain, therefore also he mentioned it, not as though “all
faith” were only able to do this, but since this seemed to be great to
the grosser sort because of the bulk of the outward mass, from this also
he extols his subject. And what he saith is this:

<span id="iv.xxxiii-p36"></span>“If I have all faith, and can remove
mountains, but have not love, I am nothing.”

<span id="iv.xxxiii-p37"></span>\[8.\] [1 Cor.
13.3](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#003)<span
id="iv.xxxiii-p37.1"></span>. “And if I bestow all my goods to feed the
poor, and if I give my body to be burned, but have not love, it
profiteth me nothing.”

<span id="iv.xxxiii-p38"></span>Wonderful amplification!  For even these
things too he states with another addition: in that he said not, “if I
give to the poor the half of my goods,” or “two or three parts,” but,
“though I give all my goods.” And he said not, “give,” but, “distribute
in morsels <span id="fr_195"></span>[196](#fn_195) ,” so that to the
expense may be added the administering also with all care.

<span id="iv.xxxiii-p40"></span>But not even yet have I pointed out the
whole of the excellency, until I bring forward the testimonies of Christ
which were spoken concerning almsgiving and death. What then are His
testimonies? To the rich man He saith, “If thou wouldest be perfect,
sell what thou hast and give to the poor, and come, follow me.” (S.
[Matt. xix. 21](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#021)<span
id="iv.xxxiii-p40.1"></span>.) And discoursing likewise of love to <span
id="page_190">p. 190</span> <span id="iv.xxxiii-Page_190"></span>one’s
neighbor, He saith, “Greater love hath no man than this, that a man may
lay down his life for his friends.” (S. [John xiv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#013)<span id="iv.xxxiii-p40.2"></span>.)
Whence it is evident, that even before God this is greatest of all. But,
“I declare,” said Paul, “that even if we should lay down life for God’s
sake, and not merely lay it down, but so as even to be burned, (for this
is the meaning of, “if I give my body to be burned,”) we shall have no
great advantage if we love not our neighbor.” Well then, the saying that
the gifts are of no great profit without charity is no marvel: since our
gifts are a secondary consideration to our way of life. At any rate,
many have displayed gifts, and yet on becoming vicious have been
punished:  as those who “prophesied in His name, and cast out many
demons, and wrought many mighty works;” as Judas the traitor: while
others, exhibiting as believers a pure life, have needed nothing else in
order to their salvation. Wherefore, that the gifts should, as I said,
require this, is no marvel: but that an exact life even should avail
nothing without it, this is what brings the intensity of expression
strongly out and causes great perplexity:  especially too when Christ
appears to adjudge His great rewards to both these, I mean to the giving
up our possessions, and to the perils of martyrdom. For both to the rich
man He saith, as I before observed, “If thou wilt be perfect, sell thy
goods, and give to the poor, and come, follow me:” and discoursing with
the disciples, of martyrdom He saith, “Whosoever shall lose his life for
My sake, shall find it;” and, “Whosoever shall confess Me before men,
him will I also confess before My Father which is in heaven.” For great
indeed is the labor of this achievement, and well nigh surpassing nature
itself, and this is well known to such as have had these crowns
vouchsafed to them. For no language can set it before us: so noble a
soul doth the deed belong to and so exceedingly wonderful is it.

<span id="iv.xxxiii-p41"></span>\[9.\] But nevertheless, this so
wonderful thing Paul said was of no great profit without love, even
though it have the giving up of one’s goods joined with it. Wherefore
then hath he thus spoken? This will I now endeavor to explain, first
having enquired of this, How is it possible that one who gives all his
goods to feed the poor can be wanting in love? I grant, indeed, he that
is ready to be burned and hath the gifts, may perhaps possibly not have
love: but he who not only gives his goods, but even distributes them in
morsels; how hath not he love? <span id="fr_196"></span>[197](#fn_196)  
What then are we to say? Either that he supposed an unreal case as real;
which kind of thing he is ever wont to do, when he intends to set before
us something in excess; as when writing to the Galatians he saith, “If
we or an angel from heaven preach any other gospel unto you than that ye
receive let him be accursed.” ([Gal. i.
8](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#008)<span id="iv.xxxiii-p42.1"></span>.)
And yet neither was himself nor an angel about to do so; but to signify
that he meant to carry the matter as far as possible, he set down even
that which could never by any means happen. And again, when he writes to
the Romans, and saith, “Neither angels, nor principalities, nor powers,
shall be able to separate us from the love of God;” for neither was this
about to be done by any angels: but here too he supposes a thing which
was not; as indeed also in what comes next, saying, “nor any other
creature,” whereas there is no other creature, for he had comprehended
the whole creation, having spoken of all things both above and below.
Nevertheless here also he mentions that which was not, by way of
hypothesis, so as to show his exceeding desire. Now the same thing he
doth here also, saying, “If a man give all, and have not love, it
profits him nothing.”

<span id="iv.xxxiii-p43"></span>Either then we may say this, or that his
meaning is for those who give to be also joined closely to those who
retire, and not merely to give without sympathy, but in pity and
condescension, bowing down and grieving with the needy. For therefore
also hath almsgiving been enacted by God: since God might have nourished
the poor as well without this, but that he might bind us together unto
charity and that we might be thoroughly fervent toward each other, he
commanded them to be nourished by us. Therefore one saith in another
place also; “a good word is better than a gift;” ([Sir.
18:16](../../../bib/apo/sir018.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/apo/sir018.htm#017)<span
id="iv.xxxiii-p43.1"></span>.) and, “behold, a word is beyond a good
gift.” ([Sir. 18:16](../../../bib/apo/sir018.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/apo/sir018.htm#017)<span
id="iv.xxxiii-p43.2"></span>.) And He Himself saith, “I will have mercy,
and not sacrifice.” (S. [Matt. 9:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#030),
[Hos. 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#006)<span
id="iv.xxxiii-p43.3"></span>.) For since it is usual, both for men to
love those who are benefited by them, and for those who receive benefits
to be more kindly affected towards their benefactors; he made this law,
constituting it a bond of friendship.

<span id="iv.xxxiii-p44"></span>\[10.\] But the point proposed for
enquiry above is, How, after Christ had said that both these belong to
perfection, Paul affirms, that <span id="page_191">p. 191</span> <span
id="iv.xxxiii-Page_191"></span>these without charity are imperfect? Not
contradicting Him, God forbid:  but harmonizing with Him, and that
exactly. For so in the case of the rich man, He said, not merely, “sell
thy goods, and give to the poor,” but He added, “and come, follow Me.”
Now not even the following Him proves any man a disciple of Christ so
completely as the loving one another. For, “by this shall all men know,”
saith He, “that ye are My disciples, if ye have love one to another.”
(S. [John xiii. 35](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#035)<span
id="iv.xxxiii-p44.1"></span>.) And also when He saith, “Whosoever loseth
his life for My sake, shall find it;” (S. [Matt.
10:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#039),
[35](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#035)<span
id="iv.xxxiii-p44.2"></span>.) and, “whosoever shall confess Me before
men, him will I also confess before My Father which is in heaven;” He
means not this, that it is not necessary to have love, but He declares
the reward which is laid up for these labors. Since that along with
martyrdom He requires also this, is what He elsewhere strongly
intimates, thus saying, “Ye shall indeed drink of My cup, and be
baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with;” (S. [Matt. xx.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#023)<span id="iv.xxxiii-p44.3"></span>.)
i.e., ye shall be martyrs, ye shall be slain for My sake; “but to sit on
My right hand, and on My left, (not as though any sit on the right hand
and the left, but meaning the highest precedency and honor) “is not Mine
to give,” saith He, “but to those for whom it is prepared.” Then
signifying for whom it is prepared, He calls them and saith, “whosoever
among you will be chief, let him be servant to you all;” (S. [Matt. xx.
26](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#026)<span id="iv.xxxiii-p44.4"></span>.)
setting forth humility and love. And the love which He requires is
intense; wherefore He stopped not even at this, but added, “even as the
Son of Man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give
His life a ransom for many;” pointing out that we ought so to love as
even to be slain for our beloved. For this above all is to love Him.
Wherefore also He saith to Peter, “If thou lovest Me, feed My sheep.”
(S. [John xxi. 16](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#016)<span
id="iv.xxxiii-p44.5"></span>.)

<span id="iv.xxxiii-p45"></span>\[11.\] And that ye may learn how great
a work of virtue it is, let us sketch it out in word, since in deeds we
see it no where appearing; and let us consider, if it were every where
in abundance, how great benefits would ensue: how there were no need
then of laws, or tribunals or punishments, or avenging, or any other
such things since if all loved and were beloved, no man would injure
another. Yea, murders, and strifes, and wars, and divisions, and
rapines, and frauds, and all evils would be removed, and vice be unknown
even in name. Miracles, however, would not have effected this; they
rather puff up such as are not on their guard, unto vain-glory and
folly.

<span id="iv.xxxiii-p46"></span>Again: what is indeed the marvellous
part of love; all the other good things have their evils yoked with
them: as he that gives up his possessions is oftentimes puffed up on
this account: the eloquent is affected with a wild passion for glory;
the humble-minded, on this very ground, not seldom thinks highly of
himself in his conscience. But love is free from every such mischief.
For none could ever be lifted up against the person whom he loves. And
do not, I pray, suppose one person only loving but all alike; and then
wilt thou see its virtue. Or rather, if thou wilt, first suppose one
single person beloved, and one loving; loving, however, as it is meet to
love. Why, he will so live on earth as if it were heaven, every where
enjoying a calm and weaving for himself innumerable crowns. For both
from envy, and wrath, and jealousy, and pride, and vain-glory, and evil
concupiscence, and every profane love, and every distemper, such a man
will keep his own soul pure. Yea, even as no one would do himself an
injury so neither would this man his neighbors. And being such, he shall
stand with Gabriel himself, even while he walks on earth.

<span id="iv.xxxiii-p47"></span>Such then is he that hath love. But he
that works miracles and hath perfect knowledge, without this, though he
raises ten thousand from the dead, will not be much profited, broken off
as he is from all and not enduring to mix himself up with any of his
fellow-servants. For no other cause than this did Christ say that the
sign of perfect love towards Him is the loving one’s neighbors. For, “if
thou lovest Me,” saith He, “O Peter, more than these, feed My sheep.”
(S. [John xxi. 15](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#015)<span
id="iv.xxxiii-p47.1"></span>.) Dost thou see how hence also He again
covertly intimates, in what case this is greater than martyrdom? For if
any one had a beloved child in whose behalf he would even give up his
life, and some one were to love the father, but pay no regard whatever
to the son, he would greatly incense the father; nor would he feel the
love for himself, because of the overlooking his son. Now if this ensue
in the case of father and son, much more in the case of God and men:
since surely God is more loving than any parents.

<span id="iv.xxxiii-p48"></span>Wherefore, having said, “The first and
great commandment is, Thou shalt love the Lord thy God,” he added, “and
the second—(He leaves it not in silence, but sets it down also)—is like
unto it, Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself.” And see how with
nearly the same excellency He demands also this. For as concerning God,
He saith, “with all thy heart:” so concerning thy neighbor, “as
thyself,” which is tantamount to, “with all thy heart.”

<span id="iv.xxxiii-p49"></span>Yea, and if this were duly observed,
there would be neither slave nor free, neither ruler nor ruled, neither
rich nor poor, neither small nor great; nor would any devil then ever
have been known: I say not, Satan only, but whatever other such spirit
there be, nay, rather <span id="page_192">p. 192</span> <span
id="iv.xxxiii-Page_192"></span>were there a hundred or ten thousand
such, they would have no power, while love existed. For sooner would
grass endure the application of fire than the devil the flame of love.
She is stronger than any wall, she is firmer than any adamant; or if
thou canst name any material stronger than this the firmness of love
transcends them all. Her, neither wealth nor poverty overcometh: nay,
rather there would be no poverty, no unbounded wealth, if there were
love, but the good parts only from each estate. For from the one we
should reap its abundance, and from the other its freedom from care: and
should neither have to undergo the anxieties of riches, nor the dread of
poverty.

<span id="iv.xxxiii-p50"></span>\[12.\] And why do I mention the
advantages arising from it? Yea, rather consider how great a blessing it
is of itself to exercise love; what cheerfulness it produces, in how
great grace it establishes the soul; a thing which above all is a choice
quality of it. For the other parts of virtue have each their troubles
yoked with them; as fasting, temperance, watching, have envy,
concupiscence, and contempt. But love along with the gain hath great
pleasure, too, and no trouble, and like an industrious bee, gathering
the sweets from every flower, deposits them in the soul of him who
loveth. Though any one be a slave, it renders slavery sweeter that
liberty. For he who loveth rejoices not so much in commanding, as in
being commanded, although to command is sweet: but love changes the
nature of things and presents herself with all blessings in her hands,
gentler than any mother, wealthier than any queen, and makes
difficulties light and easy, causing our virtues to be facile, but vice
very bitter to us. As thus: to expend seems grievous, yet love makes it
pleasant: to receive other men’s goods, pleasant, but love suffers it
not to appear pleasant, but frames our minds to avoid it as an evil.
Again, to speak evil seems to be pleasant to all; but love, while she
makes this out to be bitter, causeth speaking well to be pleasant; for
nothing is so sweet to us as to be praising one whom we love. Again,
anger hath a kind of pleasure; but in this case no longer, rather all
its sinews are taken away. Though he that is beloved should grieve him
who loves him, anger no where shows itself; but tears and exhortations,
and supplications; so far is love from being exasperated: and should she
behold one in error, she mourns and is in pain; yet even this pain
itself brings pleasure. For the very tears and the grief of love, are
sweeter than any mirth and joy. For instance: they that laugh are not so
refreshed as they that weep for their friends. And if thou doubt it,
stop their tears; and they repine at it not otherwise than as persons
intolerably ill-used. “But there is,” said one, “an unbecoming pleasure
in love. <span id="fr_197"></span>[198](#fn_197) ” Avaunt, and hold thy
peace, whoever thou art. For nothing is so pure from such pleasure as
genuine love.

<span id="iv.xxxiii-p52"></span>For tell me not of this ordinary sort,
the vulgar and low-minded, and a disease rather than love, but of this
which Paul seeks after, which considers the profit of them that are
loved; and thou shalt see that no fathers are so affectionate as persons
of this stamp. And even as they who love money cannot endure to spend
money, but would with more pleasure be in straits than see their wealth
diminishing: so too, he that is kindly affected towards any one, would
choose to suffer ten thousand evils than see his beloved one injured.

<span id="iv.xxxiii-p53"></span>\[13.\] “How then,” saith one, “did the
Egyptian woman who loved Joseph wish to injure him?” Because she loved
with this diabolical love. Joseph however not with this, but with that
which Paul requires. Consider then how great a love his words were
tokens of, and the action which she was speaking of. “Insult me and make
me an adulteress, and wrong my husband, and overthrow all my house, and
cast thyself out from thy confidence towards God:” which were
expressions of one who so far from loving him did not even love herself.
But because he truly loved, he sought to avert her from all these. And
to convince you that it was in anxiety for her, learn the nature of it
from his advice. For he not only thrust her away, but also introduced an
exhortation capable of quenching every flame:  namely “if on my account,
my master,” saith he, “knoweth not any thing which is in his house.” He
at once reminds her of her husband that he might put her to shame. And
he said not, “thy husband,” but “my master,” which was more apt to
restrain her and induce her to consider who she was, and of whom she was
enamored,—a mistress, of a slave. “For if he be lord, then art thou
mistress. Be ashamed then of familiarity with a servant, and consider
whose wife thou art, and with whom thou wouldst be connected, and
towards whom thou art becoming thankless and inconsiderate, and that I
repay him greater good-will.” And see how he extols his benefits. For
since that barbarous and abandoned woman could entertain no lofty
sentiment, he shames her from human considerations, saying, “He knoweth
nothing through me,” i.e., “he is a great benefactor to me, and I cannot
strike my patron in a vital part. He hath made me a second lord of his
house, and no one <span id="fr_198"></span>[199](#fn_198) hath been kept
back from me, but thee.” Here he endeavors to raise her mind, that so at
any rate he might persuade her to be <span id="page_193">p. 193</span>
<span id="iv.xxxiii-Page_193"></span>ashamed, and might signify the
greatness of her honor. Nor did he stop even here, but likewise added a
name sufficient to restrain her, saying, “Because thou art his wife; and
how shall I do this wickedness? But what sayest thou? That thy husband
is not present, nor knoweth that he is wronged? But God will behold it.”
She however profited nothing by his advice, but still sought to attract
him. For desiring to satiate her own frenzy, not through love of Joseph,
she did these things; and this is evident from what she did afterwards.
As that she institutes a trial, and brings in accusation, and bears
false witness, and exposes to a wild beast him that had done no wrong,
and casts him into a prison; or rather for her part, she even slew him,
in such a manner did she arm the judge against him. What then? Was then
Joseph too such as she was? Nay, altogether the contrary, for he neither
contradicted nor accused the woman. “Yes,” it may be said: “for he would
have been disbelieved.” And yet he was greatly beloved; and this is
evident not only from the beginning but also from the end. For had not
his barbarian master loved him greatly, he would even have slain him in
his silence, making no defence: being as he was an Egyptian and a ruler,
and wronged in his marriage-bed as he supposed, and by a servant, and a
servant to whom he had been so great a benefactor. But all these things
gave way to his regard for him, and the grace which God poured down upon
him. And together with this grace and love, he had also other no small
proofs, had he been minded to justify himself; the garments themselves.
For if it were she to whom violence was done, her own vest should have
been torn, her face lacerated, instead of her retaining his garments.
But “he heard,” saith she, “that I lifted up my voice, and left his
garments, and went out.” And wherefore then didst thou take them from
him? since unto one suffering violence, the one thing desirable is to be
rid of the intruder.

<span id="iv.xxxiii-p55"></span>But not from hence alone, but also from
the subsequent events, shall I be able to point out his good-will and
his love. Yea even when he fell into a necessity of mentioning the cause
of his imprisonment, and his remaining there, he did not even then
declare the whole course of the story. But what saith he? “I too have
done nothing: but indeed I was stolen out of the land of the Hebrews;”
and he no where mentioned the adulteress nor doth he plume himself on
the matter, which would have been any one’s feeling, if not for
vain-glory, yet so as not to appear to have been cast into that cell for
an evil cause. For if men in the act of doing wrong by no means abstain
even so from blaming the same things, although to do so brings reproach;
of what admiration is not he worthy, because, pure as he was he did not
mention the woman’s passion nor make a show of her sin; nor when he
ascended the throne and became ruler of all Egypt, remember the wrong
done by the woman nor exact any punishment?

<span id="iv.xxxiii-p56"></span>Seest thou how he cared for her? but
her’s was not love, but madness. For it was not Joseph that she loved,
but she sought to fulfil her own lust. And the very words too, if one
would examine them accurately, were accompanied with wrath and great
blood-thirstiness. For what saith she? “Thou hast brought in a Hebrew
servant to mock us:” upbraiding her husband for the kindness; and she
exhibited the garments, having become herself more savage than any wild
beast: but not so he. And why speak I of his good-will to her, when he
was such, we know, towards his brethren who would slay him; and never
said one harsh thing of them, either within doors or without?

<span id="iv.xxxiii-p57"></span>\[14.\] Therefore Paul saith, that the
love which we are speaking of is the mother of all good things, and
prefers it to miracles and all other gifts. For as where there are vests
and sandals of gold, we require also some other garments whereby to
distinguish the king: but if we see the purple and the diadem, we
require not to see any other sign of his royalty: just so here likewise,
when the diadem of love is upon our head, it is enough to point out the
genuine disciple of Christ, not to ourselves only, but also to the
unbelievers. For, “by this,” saith He, “shall all men know that ye are
My disciples, if ye have love one to another.” (S. [John xiii.
35](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#035)<span id="iv.xxxiii-p57.1"></span>.)
So that this sign is greater surely than all signs, in that the disciple
is recognised by it. For though any should work ten thousand signs, but
be at strife one with another, they will be a scorn to the unbelievers.
Just as if they do no sign, but love one another exactly, they will
continue both reverenced and inviolable by all men. Since Paul himself
we admire on this account, not for the dead whom he raised, nor for the
lepers whom he cleansed, but because he said, “who is weak, and I am not
weak? who is made to stumble, and I burn not?” ([2 Cor. xi.
29](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#029)<span id="iv.xxxiii-p57.2"></span>.)
For shouldest thou have ten thousand miracles to compare with this, thou
wilt have nothing equal to it to say. Since Paul also himself said, that
a great reward was laid up for him, not because he wrought miracles, but
because “to the weak he became as weak. For what is my reward?” saith
he. “That, when I preach the Gospel, I may make the Gospel without
charge.” ([1 Cor. ix. 18](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#018)<span
id="iv.xxxiii-p57.3"></span>.) And when he puts himself before the
Apostles, he saith not, “I have wrought miracles more abundant than
they,” but, “I have <span id="page_194">p. 194</span> <span
id="iv.xxxiii-Page_194"></span>labored more abundantly than they.” ([1
Cor. xv. 10](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#010)<span
id="iv.xxxiii-p57.4"></span>.) And even by famine was he willing to
perish for the salvation of the disciples. “For it were better for me to
die,” saith he, “than that any man should make my glorying void:” ([1
Cor. ix. 15](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#015)<span
id="iv.xxxiii-p57.5"></span>.) not because he was glorying, but that he
might not seem to reproach them. For he no where is wont to glory in his
own achievements, when the season doth not call to it; but even if he be
compelled so to do he calleth himself “a fool.” But if he ever glory it
is “in infirmities,” in wrongs, in greatly sympathizing with those who
are injured: even as here also he saith, “who is weak, and I am not
weak?” These words are greater even than perils. Wherefore also he sets
them last, amplifying his discourse.

<span id="iv.xxxiii-p58"></span>Of what then must we be worthy compared
with him, who neither contemn wealth for our own sake, nor give up the
superfluities of our goods? But not so Paul; rather both soul and body
did he use to give up, that they who stoned and beat him with rods,
might obtain the kingdom. “For thus,” saith he, “hath Christ taught me
to love;” who left behind Him the new commandment concerning love, which
also Himself fulfilled in deed. For being Lord of all, and of that
Blessed Nature; from men, whom He created out of nothing and on whom He
had bestowed innumerable benefits, from these, insulting and spitting on
Him, He turned not away, but even became man for their sakes, and
conversed with harlots and publicans, and healed the demoniacs, and
promised heaven. And after all these things they apprehended and beat
him with rods, bound, scourged, mocked, and at last crucified Him. And
not even so did He turn away, but even when He was on high upon the
cross, He saith, “Father, forgive them their sin.” But the thief who
before this reviled Him, He translated into very paradise; and made the
persecutor Paul, an Apostle; and gave up His own disciples, who were His
intimates and wholly devoted to Him, unto death for the Jews’ sake who
crucified Him.

<span id="iv.xxxiii-p59"></span>Recollecting therefore in our minds all
these things, both those of God and of men, let us emulate these high
deeds, and possess ourselves of the love which is above all gifts, that
we may obtain both the present and the future blessings: the which may
we all obtain, through the grace and mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ,
with Whom to the Father, with the Holy Ghost, be glory, power, honor,
now and ever, and world without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_193"></span>[187:194](1120036.htm#fr_193) <span
id="iv.xxxiii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxiii-p13"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxiii-p13.1"></span>προστατικόν εἶναι</span>.

<span id="fn_194"></span>[188:195](1120036.htm#fr_194) <span
id="iv.xxxiii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxiii-p23"></span> \[Chrysostom’s view of the text is made
more plain by a rendering somewhat different from that of the English
translator and of both the Authorized Version and the Revised. “Desire
earnestly the better gifts. And furthermore I show you a very excellent
way to do it.” The contrast is not between the “gifts” on one hand and
love on the other, but between eagerness of emulation and the pursuit of
love as a means of attaining the gifts. In this the Greek expositor
anticipates the conclusions of the best modern critics, such as DeWette,
Meyer, Alford, Hodge, Heinrici, etc. The view is sustained by the
natural force of the words used and by the connection. It is true that
the superiority of love as a means is lost sight of in the beautiful
panegyric of love that follows, but that seems due to the ardor of the
writer’s mind and the attractiveness of the theme. It is not through the
pursuit and exercise of gifts that we attain to love; but it is love
that develops the gifts within us, and love is greater than gifts. The
reason why the Apostle indulges here in the digression which occupies
the thirteenth chapter is thus given by Principal Edwards (*in loco*).
“Partly to rebuke indirectly the dissension of the Corinthian Church,
partly a statement of the peculiarly Christian means to secure
possession of the *Charismata* for the edification of the Church and
render them innocuous to their possessor, partly also a glimpse of a
moral development different in kind from gifts and greater in moral
worth than all other moral virtues, partly a reiteration in a new form
of the idea that the Church is an organic body.”

<span id="iv.xxxiii-p24"></span>In the whole passage the English
translator adhered to the rendering of the Authorized Version,
“charity,” which Wyclif used for the *charitas* of the Vulgate. I have
changed this to “love” which, besides its unambiguousness and its more
exact conformity to the original, admits of the deeper meaning and wider
application which makes God as well as our brethren the object of the
affection. C.\]

<span id="fn_195"></span>[189:196](1120036.htm#fr_195) <span
id="iv.xxxiii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxiii-p39"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxiii-p39.1"></span>ψωμίσω</span>.

<span id="fn_196"></span>[190:197](1120036.htm#fr_196) <span
id="iv.xxxiii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxiii-p42"></span> \[The point which Chrysostom so
anxiously discusses is much more readily settled by modern interpreters.
Thus one of them says, “All outward acts of beneficence are of no avail
without love. A man may give away his whole estate, or sacrifice
himself, and be in no sense the gainer. He may do all this from vanity,
or from the fear of perdition, or to purchase heaven, and only increase
his condemnation. Religion is no such easy thing. Men would gladly
compound by external acts of beneficence or by penances for a change of
heart; but the thing is impossible. Thousands indeed are deluded on this
point, and think that they can substitute what is outward for what is
inward, but God requires the heart, and without holiness the most
liberal giver or the most suffering ascetic can never see God.” (Hodge) 
The address of our Saviour to the rich young ruler was not intended to
furnish a general rule of action or even to specify a particular kind of
perfection. When he told the earnest enquirer to sell all that he had
the object was to disclose to him his inordinate love of this world’s
goods and so lead him to see how far he was from the perfection which he
had claimed. Chrysostom’s use of this passage is precisely that which
was made by Anthony, the first of the Fathers of the Desert, and by St.
Francis of Assisi, and which lies at the basis of the whole monastic
system. C.\]

<span id="fn_197"></span>[192:198](1120036.htm#fr_197) <span
id="iv.xxxiii-p50.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxiii-p51"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxiii-p51.1"></span>τό φιλεῖν</span>.

<span id="fn_198"></span>[192:199](1120036.htm#fr_198) <span
id="iv.xxxiii-p53.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxiii-p54"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxiii-p54.1"></span>οὐδεὶς</span>, LXX <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxiii-p54.2"></span>οὐδέν</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XXXIII](1120037)
