[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1120039)  [Next](1120041) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.xxxvii"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p1.1"></span>Homily XXXVI.</span>

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p2"></span><span id="iv.xxxvii-p2.1"></span><span
class="c1"><span id="iv.xxxvii-p2.2"></span>[1 Cor. xiv.
20](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#020)<span
id="iv.xxxvii-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p3"></span>Brethren, be not children in mind;
howbeit in malice be ye babes, but in mind be men.

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p4"></span><span class="c18"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p4.1"></span>As</span> might be expected, after his long
argument and demonstration he adopts a more vehement style and abundance
of rebuke; and mentions an example suited to the subject. For children
too are wont to gape after trifles and to be fluttered, but of things
very great they have not so much admiration. Since then these also
having the gift of tongues, which was the lowest of all, thought they
had the whole; therefore he saith, “Be not children,” i.e., be not
without understanding where ye ought to be considerate, but there be ye
childlike and simple, where unrighteousness is, where vain-glory, where
pride. For he that is a babe in wickedness ought also to be wise. Since
as wisdom with wickedness would not be wisdom, so also simplicity with
folly would not be simplicity, it being requisite both in simplicity to
avoid folly, and in wisdom wickedness. For as neither bitter nor sweet
medicines in excess do good, so neither doth simplicity by itself, nor
wisdom: and this is why Christ enjoining us to mix both said, “Be ye
wise as serpents, and harmless as doves.” ([Matt. x.
16](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#016)<span id="iv.xxxvii-p4.2"></span>.)

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p5"></span>But what is it to be a babe in
wickedness? Not even to know what wickedness is: yea, such he willed
them to be. Wherefore also he said, “It is actually reported that there
is fornication among you.” ([1 Cor. v.
1](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#001)<span id="iv.xxxvii-p5.1"></span>.)
He said not, “is done,” but is “reported:” as if he said, “ye are not
without knowledge of the thing; ye have heard of it some time.” I say,
he would have them both to be men and children; the one however in
wickedness, but the other in wisdom. For so even the man may become a
man, if he be also a child: but as long as he <span id="page_216">p.
216</span> <span id="iv.xxxvii-Page_216"></span>is not a child in
wickedness, neither will he be a man. For the wicked, instead of being
mature, will be but a fool.

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p6"></span>[1 Cor.
14.21](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#021)<span
id="iv.xxxvii-p6.1"></span>. “In the law it is written, By men of
strange tongues and by the lips of strangers will I speak unto this
people; and not even thus will they hear me, saith the Lord.”

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p7"></span>Yet surely it is no where written in the
Law, but as I said before, he calls always the whole of the Old
Testament, the Law: both the prophets and the historical books. And he
brings forward his testimony from Esaias the prophet, again covertly
detracting from the glory of the gift, for their profit; nevertheless,
even thus he states it with praise. For the expression, “not even thus,”
hath force to point out that the miracle was enough to astonish them;
and if they did not believe, the fault was theirs. And wherefore did God
work it, if they were not to believe? That He might in every case appear
to do His part.

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p8"></span>\[2.\]  Having shown then even from the
prophecy, that the sign in question is not of great use, he adds,

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p9"></span>[1 Cor.
14.22](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#022)<span
id="iv.xxxvii-p9.1"></span>. “Wherefore tongues are for a sign, not to
them that believe, but to the unbelieving: but prophesying is for a sign
not to the unbelieving, but to them that believe.”

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p10"></span>[1 Cor.
14.23](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#023)<span
id="iv.xxxvii-p10.1"></span>. “If therefore the whole Church be
assembled together, and all speak with tongues, and there come in men
unlearned or unbelieving, will they not say that ye are mad?”

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p11"></span>[1 Cor.
14.24](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#024)<span
id="iv.xxxvii-p11.1"></span>. “But if all prophesy, and there come in
one unbelieving or unlearned, he is reproved by all, he is judged by
all:”

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p12"></span>[1 Cor.
14.25](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#025)<span
id="iv.xxxvii-p12.1"></span>. “And thus the secrets of his heart are
made manifest; and so he will fall down on his face and worship God,
declaring that God is among you indeed.”

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p13"></span>Great in this place is the difficulty
which one seems to find arising from what is said. For if tongues are
for a sign to them that believe not, how saith he, if they that believe
not should see you speaking with tongues, they will say that “ye are
mad?” And if prophecy be “not for the unbelieving, but for them that
believe,” how shall also the unbelievers gain thereby?

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p14"></span>“For if there come in,” saith he, “when
ye are prophesying, one that believeth not, he is reproved by all, and
judged.”

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p15"></span>And not only this, but also after this
another question hence springs up: since the tongue will appear on the
contrary greater than the prophecy. For if the tongues are for a sign to
the unbelieving, but prophecy to them that believe, that which draws in
aliens and makes of the household, is greater than that which regulates
those of the household. What then is the meaning of that expression?
Nothing difficult nor obscure, nor contrary to what went before, but
rather very agreeable to it, if we give heed: viz., that prophecy is
suitable to both, but then tongue not so. Wherefore having said of the
tongue, “it is for a sign,” he adds, “not to them that believe, but to
the unbelievers,” and to them “for a sign,” i.e., for astonishment, not
so much for instruction.

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p16"></span>“But in the case of prophecy too,” saith
some one, “he did the very same thing, saying, ‘but prophesying serveth
not for the unbelieving, but for them which believe.’ For the believer
hath no need to see a sign, but requires only teaching and catechizing.
How then sayest thou,” saith he, “that prophecy is of use to both, when
Paul saith ‘not to the unbelieving, but to them which believe?’” If thou
wilt accurately examine, thou wilt understand what is said. For he said
not, “prophecy is not useful to them unbelieving,” but, “is not for a
sign,” as the tongue,” i.e., a mere sign without profit: nor is the
tongue any way useful to believers; for its only work is to astonish and
to confound; the word “sign” being one of those which may be taken two
ways: as when he saith, “show me a sign,” ([Ps. lxxxvi.
17](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#017)<span id="iv.xxxvii-p16.1"></span>.)
and adds, “for good:” and again, “I am become as a wonder unto many,”
([Ps. lxxi. 7](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#007)<span
id="iv.xxxvii-p16.2"></span>.) i.e., a sign.

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p17"></span>And to show thee that he introduced the
term “sign” here, not as a thing which of course did some good, he added
that which resulted from it. And what was this? “They will say,” saith
he, “that ye are mad.” This however not from the nature of the sign, but
from their folly. But when thou hearest of unbelievers, do not suppose
that the same persons are in every case intended, but at one time they
which are incurably diseased and abide uncorrected, and at another they
which may be changed; such as were they who in the times of the Apostles
admire the mighty things of God which they hear of; such as in the case
of Cornelius. His meaning accordingly is this; that prophecy avails both
among the unbelieving and among them that believe: as to the tongue,
when heard by the unbelieving and inconsiderate, instead of profiting by
it, they rather deride the utterers as madmen. For, in fact, it is to
them but for a sign, i.e., in order to astonish them merely; whereas
they who had understanding used also to profit by it: with a view to
which the sign was given. Even as then there were not only certain who
accused them of drunkenness, but many also admired them as relating the
wonderful works of God. It appears then that the mockers were those
without understanding. Wherefore also Paul did not simply say, “they
will say that ye are mad,” but added, “unlearned and unbelievers.”

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p18"></span><span id="page_217">p. 217</span> <span
id="iv.xxxvii-Page_217"></span>But prophecy is not for a sign merely,
but is also suitable and useful for faith and for profit unto both
classes. And this, if not directly, yet in the sequel he more clearly
explained, saying, “he is reproved by all. For, if all prophesy,” saith
he, “and there come in one unbelieving or unlearned, he is reproved by
all; he is judged by all; and thus are the secrets of his heart made
manifest; and so he will fall down on his face and worship God,
declaring that God is among you indeed.”

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p19"></span>So that not in this only is prophecy
greater, in its availing with each class <span
id="fr_238"></span>[239](#fn_238) , but also in its attracting the more
shameless of the unbelievers. For it was not the same wonder, when Peter
convicted <span id="fr_239"></span>[240](#fn_239) Sapphira, which was a
work of prophecy, and when he spake with tongues: but in the former case
all shrank into themselves; whereas, when he spake with tongues, he got
the credit of being even beside himself.

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p22"></span>\[3.\] Having said then, that a tongue
profited not, and having again qualified <span
id="fr_240"></span>[241](#fn_240) this statement by turning the charge
upon the Jews, he proceeds to signify that it even doth injury. “And
wherefore was it given?” That it might go forth with interpretation:
since without this, it hath even the contrary effect among them that are
without understanding. “For if,” saith he, “all speak with tongues, and
there come in unbelievers or unlearned, they will say that ye are mad;”
as indeed even the Apostles incurred the suspicion of being drunken: 
for “these men,” it saith, “are filled with new wine:  ([Acts ii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#013)<span id="iv.xxxvii-p23.3"></span>.)
but it is not the fault of the sign, but of their unskilfulness;
therefore he added, “unlearned and unbelievers,” to show that the notion
belongs to their ignorance and want of faith; for, as I before said, his
object is to rank that gift not among things that are disparaged, but
among those which do not greatly profit, and this, in order to repress
them, and bring them to a necessity of seeking for an interpreter. For
since the greater part looked not to this, but made use of it for
display and rivalry, this is what he especially withdraws them from,
intimating that their credit is injured, they bringing on themselves a
suspicion of madness. And this especially is what Paul continually
attempts to establish, when he wants to lead men away from any thing: he
shows that the person suffers loss in respect of those very things which
he desires.

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p24"></span>And do thou accordingly likewise: if
thou wouldest lead men away from pleasure, show that the thing is
bitter: if thou wouldest withdraw them from vain-glory, show that the
thing is full of dishonor: thus also was Paul used to do. When he would
tear away the rich from their love of money, he said not merely that
wealth is a hurtful thing, but also that it casts into temptations. “For
they that desire to be rich,” saith he,” fall into a temptation.” ([1
Tim. vi. 9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#009)<span
id="iv.xxxvii-p24.1"></span>.) Thus, since it seems to deliver from
temptations, he attributes to it the contrary of that which the rich
supposed. Others again held fast by the wisdom that is without, as
though by it establishing Christ’s doctrine; he signifies that not only
it gives no aid to the cross, but even makes it void. They held to going
to law before strangers, thinking it unmeet to be judged by their own,
as if those without were wiser: he points out that going to law before
them that are without is shameful. They clave to things offered in
sacrifice to idols, as displaying perfect knowledge: he intimates that
this is a mark of imperfect knowledge, not to know how to manage in the
things which concern our neighbors. So also here, because they were
wild <span id="fr_241"></span>[242](#fn_241) about this gift of tongues,
through their love of glory, he signifies that this on the other hand
more than any thing brings shame upon them, not only depriving them of
glory, but also involving them in a suspicion of madness. But he did not
at once say this, but having spoken very many things before, when he had
made his discourse acceptable, then he brings in that topic so very
contrary to their opinion. And this in fact is no more than the common
rule; that he who intends thoroughly to shake a deep-rooted opinion and
to turn men round to its contrary, must not at once state the opposites:
otherwise he will be ridiculous in the eyes of them that are preoccupied
by the contrary conviction. Since that which is very much beside
expectation cannot be from the beginning easily received, but you must
first well undermine by other arguments, and then give it the contrary
turn.

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p26"></span>Thus for example he did when discoursing
of marriage: I mean, since many regarded it as a thing which brings
ease, and he wished to intimate that the abstaining from marriage was
ease; if he had said this at once he would not so easily have made it
acceptable: whereas now, having stated it after much other matter and
timing its introduction exactly, he strongly touched the hearers. This
also he did in respect of virginity. For before this having said much,
and after this again, at last he saith, “I spare you,” and, “I would
have you to be free from cares.” ([1 Cor.
7:28](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#028),
[32](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#032)<span
id="iv.xxxvii-p26.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p27"></span>This then he doth in respect of the
tongues, showing that they not only deprive of glory, but also bring
shame upon those who have them in the eyes of the unbelievers. But
prophecy, on the contrary, is both free from reproach among the
unbelievers, and hath very great <span id="page_218">p. 218</span> <span
id="iv.xxxvii-Page_218"></span>credit and usefulness. For none will say
in regard to prophesying, “they are mad;” nor will any one deride them
that prophesy; but, on the contrary, will be astonished at and admire
them. For “he is reproved by all,” i.e., the things which he hath in his
heart, are brought forward and shown unto all:  now it is not the same
thing for any one to come in and see one speaking in Persian and another
in Syriac, and to come in and hear the secrets of his own mind; as
whether he cometh in as a tempter and with evil mind, or sincerely; or
that such and such a thing hath been done by him, and such another
designed. For this is much more awful and more profitable than the
other. For this cause therefore, whereas of the tongues he saith, “ye
are mad;” not however affirming this of himself, but of their judgment: 
i.e., “they will say,” saith he, “that ye are mad;” here, on the
contrary, he makes use both of the verdict of the facts <span
id="fr_242"></span>[243](#fn_242) , and that of those who are the
objects of the benefit. “For he is reproved by all,” saith he, “he is
judged by all; and thus are the secrets of his heart made manifest; and
so he will fall down on his face and worship God, declaring that God is
around you indeed. Seest thou that this is not capable of two
interpretations: how in the former case what is done may be doubted of,
and here and there an unbeliever might ascribe it to madness? whereas
here there will be no such thing, but he will both wonder and worship,
first making a confession by his deeds, and then by his words also. Thus
also Nebuchadnezzar worshipped God, saying, “Of a truth, your God, He is
the God that revealeth secrets, seeing thou couldest reveal this
secret.” ([Dan. ii. 47](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#047)<span
id="iv.xxxvii-p28.1"></span>.) Seest thou the might of prophecy, how it
changed that savage one and brought him under instruction and introduced
him to faith?

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p29"></span>\[4.\] [1 Cor.
14.26](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#026)<span
id="iv.xxxvii-p29.1"></span>. “What is it then, brethren? When ye come
together, each one hath a psalm, hath a teaching, hath a tongue, hath a
revelation, hath an interpretation. Let all things be done unto
edifying.”

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p30"></span>Seest thou the foundation and the rule
of Christianity? how, as it is the artificer’s work to build, so it is
the Christian’s to profit his neighbors in all things.

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p31"></span>But since he had vehemently run down the
gift; lest it might seem to be superfluous, for with a view to pull down
their pride and no more, he did this:—again he reckons it with the other
gifts, saying, “hath a psalm, hath a teaching, hath a tongue.” For of
old they used also to make psalms by a gift and to teach by a gift.
Nevertheless, “let all these look to one thing,” saith he, “the
correction of their neighbor: let nothing be done at random. For if thou
comest not to edify thy brother, why dost thou come here at all? In
fact, I do not make much account of the difference of the gifts. One
thing concerns me, one thing is my desire, to do all things “unto
edifying.” Thus also he that hath the lesser gift will outrun him that
hath the greater, if this be not wanting. Yea, therefore are the gifts
bestowed, that each might be edified; since unless this take place, the
gift will rather turn to the condemnation of the receiver. For what,
tell me, is the use of prophesying? What is the use of raising the dead,
when there is none who profits by it? But if this be the end of the
gifts, and if it be possible to effect it in another way without gifts,
boast not thyself on the score of the signs, nor do thou bewail thyself
to whom the gifts are denied.

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p32"></span>\[5.\] [1 Cor.
14.27](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#027)<span
id="iv.xxxvii-p32.1"></span>. “And if any man speaketh in a tongue, let
it be by two, or at the most by three, and that in turn; and let one
interpret.”

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p33"></span>[1 Cor.
14.28](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#028)<span
id="iv.xxxvii-p33.1"></span>. “But if there be no interpreter, let him
keep silence in the Church; and let him speak to himself, and to God.”

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p34"></span>What sayest thou, tell me? Having spoken
so much of tongues, that the gift is a thing unprofitable, a thing
superfluous, if it have no interpreter, dost thou command again to speak
with tongues? I do not command, saith he, neither do I forbid; as when
he saith, “if any of them that believe not bid you to a feast and ye be
disposed to go,” he saith it not laying down a law for them to go, but
not hindering them: so likewise here. “And let him speak to himself and
to God.” If he endure not to be silent, saith he, but is so ambitious
and vain-glorious, “let him speak by himself. <span
id="fr_243"></span>[244](#fn_243) ” And thus, by the very fact of so
permitting, he greatly checked and put them to shame. Which he doth also
elsewhere, discoursing of converse with a wife and saying, “But this I
say because of your incontinency.” But not so did he speak, when he was
discoursing of prophecy. How then? In a tone of command and legislation:
“Let the prophets speak, two or three.” And he no where here seeks the
interpreter, nor doth he stop the mouth of him that prophesies as under
the former head, saying, “If there be no interpreter, let him keep
silence;” because in fact he who speaks in a tongue is not sufficient of
himself. Wherefore if any hath both gifts, let him speak. But if he hath
not, yet wish to speak, let him do so with the interpreter’s aid. For
the prophet is an interpreter, but of God; whereas thou art of man. “But
if there be no interpreter, let him keep silence:” for nothing ought to
be done superfluously, nothing for ambition. Only “let him speak to
<span id="page_219">p. 219</span> <span
id="iv.xxxvii-Page_219"></span>himself and to God;” i.e., mentally, or
quietly and without noise: at least, if he will speak. For this is
surely not the tone of one making a law, but it may be of one who shames
them more even by his permission; as when he saith, “but if any hunger,
let him eat at home:” and seeming to give permission, he touches them
hereby the more sharply. “For ye come not together for this purpose,”
saith he, “that ye may show that ye have a gift, but that ye may edify
the hearers;” which also he before said, “Let all things be done unto
edifying.”

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p36"></span>\[6.\] [1 Cor.
14.29](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#029)<span
id="iv.xxxvii-p36.1"></span>. “Let the prophets speak by two or three,
and let the others discern.”

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p37"></span>No where hath he added, “at the most,”
as in the case of the tongues. And how is this, one saith? For he makes
out that neither is prophesy sufficient in itself, if at least he
permitteth the judgment to others. Nay, surely it is quite sufficient;
and this is why he did not stop the mouth of the prophet, as of the
other, when there is no interpreter; nor, as in his case he said, “if
there be no interpreter let him keep silence,” so also in the case of
the prophet, “if there be none to discern, let him not prophesy;” but he
only secured the hearer; since for the satisfaction of the hearers he
said this, that no diviner might throw himself in among them. For of
this also at the beginning he bade them beware, when he introduced a
distinction between divination and prophecy, and now he bids them
discriminate and spy out the matter, so that no Satanic teacher might
privily enter.

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p38"></span>[1 Cor.
14.30](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#030)<span
id="iv.xxxvii-p38.1"></span>. “But if a revelation be made to another
sitting by, let the first keep silence.”

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p39"></span>[1 Cor.
14.31](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#031)<span
id="iv.xxxvii-p39.1"></span>. “For ye all can prophesy one by one, that
all may learn, and all may be comforted.”

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p40"></span>What may this be which is spoken? “If
when thou prophesiest,” saith he, “and art speaking, the spirit of
another stir him up, be silent thenceforth.” For that which he said in
the case of the tongues, this also here he requires, that it should be
done “in turn,” only in a diviner way here. For he made not use of the
very expression, “in turn <span id="fr_244"></span>[245](#fn_244) ?” but
“if a revelation be made to another.” Since what need was there further,
that when the second was moved to prophesy the first should speak? Ought
they then both? Nay, this were profane and would produce confusion.
Ought the first? This too were out of place. For to this end when the
one was speaking, the Spirit moved the other, in order that he too might
say somewhat.

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p42"></span>So then, comforting him that had been
silenced, he saith, “For ye all can prophesy one by one, that all may
learn, and all may be comforted.” Seest thou how again he states the
reason wherefore he doeth all things? For if him that speaks with
tongues he altogether forbid to speak, when he hath not an interpreter,
because of the unprofitableness; reasonably also he bids restrain
prophecy, if it have not this quality, but createth confusion and
disturbance and unseasonable tumult.

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p43"></span>[1 Cor.
14.32](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#032)<span
id="iv.xxxvii-p43.1"></span>. “And the spirits of the prophets are
subject to the prophets.”

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p44"></span>Seest thou how he put him to shame
earnestly and fearfully? For that the man might not strive nor be
factious, he signifies that the gift itself was under subjection. For by
“spirit” here, he means its actual working. But if the spirit be
subject, much more thou its possessor canst not justly be contentious.

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p45"></span>\[7.\] Then he signifies that this is
pleasing also to God, subjoining and saying,

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p46"></span>[1 Cor.
14.33](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#033)<span
id="iv.xxxvii-p46.1"></span>. “For God is not a God of confusion, but of
peace, as \[I teach\] in all the Churches of the saints.” <span
id="fr_245"></span>[246](#fn_245)

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p48"></span>Seest thou by how many reasons he leads
him to silence and soothes him, in the act of giving way to the other? 
By one thing and that the chief, that he was not shut up by such a
proceeding; “for ye all can prophesy,” saith he, “one by one.” By a
second, that this seems good to the Spirit Himself; “for the spirits of
the prophets are subject to the prophets.” Besides these, that this is
according to the mind of God; “for God,” saith he, “is not a God of
confusion, but of peace:” and by a fourth, that in every part of the
world this custom prevails, and no strange thing is enjoined upon them.
For thus, saith he, “I teach in all the Churches of the saints.”

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p49"></span>What now can be more awful than these
things? For in truth the Church was a heaven then, the Spirit governing
all things, and moving each one of the rulers and making him inspired.
But now we retain only the symbols of those gifts. For now also we speak
two or three, and in turn, and when one is silent, another begins. But
these are only signs and memorials of those things. Wherefore when we
begin to speak, the people respond, “with thy Spirit <span
id="fr_246"></span>[247](#fn_246) ,” indicating that of old they thus
used to speak, not of their own wisdom, but moved by the Spirit. But not
so now: (I speak of mine own case so far.)  But the present Church is
like a woman who hath fallen from her former prosperous days, and in
many respects retains the symbols only of that ancient prosperity;
displaying indeed the repositories and caskets of <span id="page_220">p.
220</span> <span id="iv.xxxvii-Page_220"></span>her golden ornaments,
but bereft of her wealth: such an one doth the present Church resemble.
And I say not this in respect of gifts: for it were nothing marvelous if
it were this only: but in respect also of life and virtue. Thus the list
of her widows, and the choir of her virgins, then gave great ornament to
the churches: but now she is made desolate and void, and the tokens only
remain. There are indeed widows now, there are also virgins; but they
retain not that adornment which women should have who prepare themselves
for such wrestlings. For the special distinction of the virgin is the
caring for the things of God alone, and the waiting on Him without
distraction: and the widow’s mark too should be not so much the not
engaging in a second marriage, as the other things, charity to the poor,
hospitality, continuing instant in prayers, all those other things,
which Paul writing to Timothy requires with great exactness. One may see
also the married women exhibiting among us great seemliness. But this is
not the only thing required, but rather that sedulous attention to the
needy, through which those women of old shone out most brightly. Not as
the generality now-a-days. For then instead of gold they were clothed
with the fair array of almsgiving: but now, having left off this, they
are decked out on every side with cords of gold woven of the chain of
their sins.

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p51"></span>Shall I speak of another repository too
emptied of its hereditary splendor? They all met together in old time
and sang psalms in common. This we do also now: but then among all was
there one soul and one heart: but now not in one single soul can one see
that unanimity, rather great is the warfare every where.

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p52"></span>“Peace,” even now, “to all,” <span
id="fr_247"></span>[248](#fn_247) he that presides in the Church prays
for, entering as it were into his Father’s house: but of this peace the
name is frequent, but the reality no where.

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p54"></span>\[8.\] Then the very houses were
churches: but now the church itself is a house, or rather worse than any
house. For in a house one may see much good order: since both the
mistress of the house is seated on her chair with all seemliness, and
the maidens weave in silence, and each of the domestics hath his
appointed task in hand. But here great is the tumult, great the
confusion, and our assemblies differ in nothing from a vintner’s shop,
so loud is the laughter, so great the disturbance; as in baths, as in
markets, the cry and tumult is universal. And these things are here
only: since elsewhere it is not permitted even to address one’s neighbor
in the church, not even if one have received back a long absent friend,
but these things are done without, and very properly. For the church is
no barber’s or perfumer’s shop, nor any other merchant’s warehouse in
the market-place, but a place of angels, a place of archangels, a palace
of God, heaven itself. As therefore if one had parted the heaven and had
brought thee in thither, though thou shouldest see thy father or thy
brother, thou wouldest not venture to speak; so neither here ought one
to utter any other sound but these which are spiritual. For, in truth,
the things in this place are also a heaven.

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p55"></span>And if thou believest not, look to this
table, call to mind for Whose sake it is set, and why: consider Who it
is that is coming forth here; tremble with awe even before the time. For
so, when one sees the throne only of a king, in heart he rises up,
expecting the king’s coming forth. And do thou accordingly thrill with
awe even before that thrilling moment: raise up thyself, and before thou
seest the veils drawn aside and the choir of angels marching forth,
ascend thou to the very heaven.

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p56"></span>But the uninitiated knows not these
things. Well then, it is necessary with a view to him also to introduce
other topics. For neither towards him shall we want reasons able to stir
him up thoroughly and cause him to soar.

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p57"></span>Thou then who knowest not these things,
when thou shalt hear the prophet <span id="fr_248"></span>[249](#fn_248)
saying, “Thus saith the Lord,” quit the earth, ascend thou also unto
heaven, consider who it is that by him discourses with thee.

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p59"></span>But as things are, for a buffoon who is
moving laughter or for a whorish and abandoned woman, so vast an
assemblage of spectators is set, listening in entire quietness to what
is spoken, and this when none commands silence <span
id="fr_249"></span>[250](#fn_249) ; and there is neither tumult, nor
cry, nor any the least noise: but when God is speaking from heaven on
subjects so awful, we behave ourselves more impudently than dogs, and
even to the harlot women we pay greater respect than to God.

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p61"></span>Doth it make your flesh creep to be told
of these things? Nay then, much rather let it creep when ye do them.

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p62"></span>\[9.\] That which Paul said of them that
despised the poor and feasted alone, “What, have ye not houses to eat
and to drink in? or despise ye the Church of God, and shame them that
<span id="page_221">p. 221</span> <span
id="iv.xxxvii-Page_221"></span>have not?” ([1 Cor. xi.
22](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#022)<span
id="iv.xxxvii-p62.1"></span>.)—the same allow me also to say of those
who make a disturbance and hold conversations in this place. “What? have
ye not houses to trifle in? or despise ye the Church of God, and corrupt
those even who would be modest and quiet?” “But it is sweet and pleasant
for you to converse with your friends.” I do not forbid this, but let it
be done in the house, in the market, in the baths. For the church is not
a place of conversation, but of teaching. But now it differs not from
the market; nay, if it be not too bold a word, haply, not even from the
stage; in such sort do the women who assemble here adorn themselves more
wantonly than the unchaste who are to be found there. Accordingly we see
that even hither many profligates are enticed by them; and if any one is
trying or intending to corrupt a woman, there is no place, I suppose,
that seems to him more suitable than the church. And if anything be to
be sold or bought, the church appears more convenient than the market.
For on such subjects also there is more talk here than in the shops
themselves. Or if any wish to say or to hear any scandal, you will find
that this too is to be had here more than in the forum without. And if
you wish to hear any thing of political matters, or the affairs of
private families, or the camp, go not to the judgment-hall, nor sit in
the apothecary’s shop; for here, here I say are those who report all
these things more accurately; and our assemblies are any thing rather
than a church.

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p63"></span>Can it be that I have touched you to the
quick? I for my part think not. For while ye continue in the same
practices, how am I to know that you are touched by what hath been said?
Therefore I must needs handle the same topics again.

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p64"></span>Are these things then to be endured? Are
these things to be borne? We weary and distract ourselves every day that
ye may not depart without having learned something useful:  and none of
you go away at all the better, but rather injured the more. Yea, and “ye
come together unto judgment,” having no longer any cloak for your sin,
and ye thrust out the more modest, disturbing them with your fooleries
on every side.

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p65"></span>But what do the multitude say? “I do not
hear what is read,” saith one, “nor do I know what the words are which
are spoken.” Because thou makest a tumult and confusion, because thou
comest not with a reverent soul. What sayest thou?  “I know not what
things are said.” Well then, for this very reason oughtest thou to give
heed. But if not even the obscurity stir up thy soul, much more if
things were clear wouldest thou hurry them by. Yea, this is the reason
why neither all things are clear, lest thou shouldest indulge indolence;
nor obscure, lest thou shouldest be in despair.

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p66"></span>And whereas that eunuch and barbarian
([Acts viii. 20](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#020)<span
id="iv.xxxvii-p66.1"></span>.) said none of these things, but surrounded
as he was with a crowd of so important affairs and on his journey, had a
book in his hands and was reading: dost thou, both abounding in
teachers, and having others to read to thee privately <span
id="fr_250"></span>[251](#fn_250) , allege to me thine excuses and
pretexts? Knowest thou not what is said? Why then pray that thou mayest
learn: but sure it is impossible to be ignorant of all things. For many
things are of themselves evident and clear. And further, even if thou be
ignorant of all, even so oughtest thou to be quiet, not to put out them
that are attentive; that God, accepting thy quietness and thy reverence,
may make the obscure things also plain. But canst thou not be silent?
 Well then, go out, not to become a mischief to others also.

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p68"></span>For in truth there ought to be but one
voice in the church always, even as there is but one body. Therefore
both he that reads utters his voice alone, and the Bishop himself is
content to sit in silence; and he who chants chants alone; and though
all utter the response, the voice is wafted as from one mouth. And he
that pronounces a homily pronounces it alone. But when there are many
conversing on many and diverse subjects, why do we disturb you for no
good? since surely unless ye thought that we are but disturbing you for
no good, ye would not in the midst of our speech on such high matters,
discourse on things of no consequence.

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p69"></span>\[10.\] Therefore not in your conduct
only, but in your very estimation of things, there is great perversion.
And ye gape after superfluities, and leaving the truth pursue all sorts
of shadows and dreams. Are not all present things a shadow and dreams,
and worse than a shadow? For both before they appear, they fly away; and
before they are flown, the trouble they give is much, and more than the
pleasure. Let one acquire in this world and bury in the earth ever such
abundance of wealth, yet when the night is past, naked he shall depart
hence, and no wonder. Since they too who are rich but in a dream, on
rising from their couch have nothing of what they seemed to have while
sleeping. So also are the greedy of gain: or rather not so, but in a
much worse condition. For he that dreams of being rich, neither hath the
money which he fancied he had, nor is any other mischief found to have
accrued to him from this phantasy when he arises, but this man is both
deprived of his riches, and hath also to depart, filled with the sins
which arise out of them; and in his wealth having but enjoyed a
phantasy, <span id="page_222">p. 222</span> <span
id="iv.xxxvii-Page_222"></span>the evils resulting from his wealth he
sees not in fancy any more, but in the very truth of things; and his
pleasure was in dreams, but the punishment ensuing on his pleasure turns
out no more a dream, but is matter of actual experience. Yea rather,
even before that punishment, even here he pays the heaviest penalty, in
the very collecting of his wealth wearing into himself innumerable
sadnesses, anxieties, accusations, calumnies, tumults, perturbations.

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p70"></span>In order therefore that we may be
delivered both from the dreams and from the evils that are not in
dreams, instead of covetousness let us choose almsgiving, instead of
rapine, mercy to mankind. For thus we shall obtain the good things both
present and to come, through the grace and mercy of our Lord Jesus
Christ, with Whom, to the Father, with the Holy Ghost, be glory, power,
honor, now and ever, and world without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_238"></span>[217:239](1120040.htm#fr_238) <span
id="iv.xxxvii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p20"></span> i.e. <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p20.1"></span>ἐν ἀπίστοις καὶ πίστοις</span>.

<span id="fn_239"></span>[217:240](1120040.htm#fr_239) <span
id="iv.xxxvii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p21"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p21.1"></span>ἤ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p21.2"></span>λεγξεν</span>.

<span id="fn_240"></span>[217:241](1120040.htm#fr_240) <span
id="iv.xxxvii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p23"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p23.1"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p23.2"></span>ποτεμόμενος αὐτὸ τοῦτο</span>.

<span id="fn_241"></span>[217:242](1120040.htm#fr_241) <span
id="iv.xxxvii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p25"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p25.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p25.2"></span>πτόηντο</span>.

<span id="fn_242"></span>[218:243](1120040.htm#fr_242) <span
id="iv.xxxvii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p28"></span> i.e., the actions of the man’s life,
and his conscience, which answers to the prophecy.

<span id="fn_243"></span>[218:244](1120040.htm#fr_243) <span
id="iv.xxxvii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p35"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p35.1"></span>καθ̓ ἑαυτόν</span>.

<span id="fn_244"></span>[219:245](1120040.htm#fr_244) <span
id="iv.xxxvii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p41"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p41.1"></span>ἀνὰ μέρος</span>. [1 Cor.
14.7](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#007)<span
id="iv.xxxvii-p41.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_245"></span>[219:246](1120040.htm#fr_245) <span
id="iv.xxxvii-p46.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p47"></span> \[Chrysostom connects this clause with
what precedes as do Alford, Tregelles, Edwards and the Rev. Ver. He is
doubtless right here, but not in his addition of <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxxvii-p47.1"></span> διδάσκω</span>, for
which there is no adequate support. C.\]

<span id="fn_246"></span>[219:247](1120040.htm#fr_246) <span
id="iv.xxxvii-p49.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p50"></span> The “Anaphora,” or more solemn part of
the Liturgy begins with the Versicle and Response here alluded to, in
the Clementine Liturgy, and in those of St. Mark, St. Chrysostom, St.
Basil, and the Roman Missal.

<span id="fn_247"></span>[220:248](1120040.htm#fr_247) <span
id="iv.xxxvii-p52.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p53"></span> See Bingham, xiii. 8. 13.; S. Chrys. 3
Hom. in Coloss. t. iv. 106. Ed. Savile.

<span id="fn_248"></span>[220:249](1120040.htm#fr_248) <span
id="iv.xxxvii-p57.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p58"></span> Because the Catechumens and others, as
it seems, were allowed to hear the Lessons read, though not to be
present at what was strictly called the Communion Service. See Bingham,
xiv. iii. 1.

<span id="fn_249"></span>[220:250](1120040.htm#fr_249) <span
id="iv.xxxvii-p59.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p60"></span> An allusion to the injunctions for
silence used by the Deacon occasionally in the Church: see Bingham, ii.
20. 14:  and the Apost. Constit. ii. 57. as quoted by him; “Let the
Deacon oversee the people, that none whisper, or doze, or laugh, or
nod;” and afterwards in the time of the offering, “Let some of the
Deacons observe the people, and make silence among them.” Chrys. Hom.
24. on Acts, says, “Prayer is going on, and here are young persons
talking and jesting with one another even while on their knees. Do thou
who standest by, young or old, rebuke them, if thou seest it; reprimand
them more sharply; if he take it not well, call the Deacon.”

<span id="fn_250"></span>[221:251](1120040.htm#fr_250) <span
id="iv.xxxvii-p66.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p67"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p67.1"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxvii-p67.2"></span>παναγινώσκοντας</span>, perhaps, ‘repeating
what is read in a lower tone.’

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XXXVII](1120041)
