[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](life004)  [Next](life006) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*On the Christian Life*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry Beveridge \[1845\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi"></span>

# <span id="vi-p0.1"></span>CHAPTER IV.

#### <span id="vi-p0.2"></span>OF MEDITATING ON THE FUTURE LIFE.

<span id="vi-p1"></span>The three divisions of this chapter,—I. The
principal use of the cross is, that it in various ways accustoms us to
despise the present, and excites us to aspire to the future life, sec.
1, 2. II. In withdrawing from the present life we must neither shun it
nor feel hatred for it; but desiring the future life, gladly quit the
present at the command of our sovereign Master, see. 3, 4. III. Our
infirmity in dreading death described. The correction and safe remedy,
sec. 6.

<span id="vi-p2"></span>1. WHATEVER be the kind of tribulation with
which we are afflicted, we should always consider the end of it to be,
that we may be trained to despise the present, and thereby stimulated to
aspire to the future life. For since God well knows how strongly we are
inclined by nature to a slavish love of this world, in order to prevent
us from clinging too strongly to it, he employs the fittest reason for
calling us back, and shaking off our lethargy. Every one of us, indeed,
would be thought to aspire and aim at heavenly immortality during the
whole course of his life. For we would be ashamed in no respect to excel
the lower animals; whose condition would not be at all inferior to ours,
had we not a hope of immortality beyond the grave. But when you attend
to the plans, wishes, and actions of each, you see nothing in them but
the earth. Hence our stupidity; our minds being dazzled with the glare
of wealth, power, and honours, that they can see no farther. The heart
also, engrossed with avarice, ambition, and lust, is weighed down and
cannot rise above them. In short, the whole soul, ensnared by the
allurements of the flesh, seeks its happiness on the earth. To meet this
disease, the Lord makes his people sensible of the vanity of the present
life, by a constant proof of its miseries. Thus, that they may not
promise themselves deep and lasting peace in it, he often allows them to
be assailed by war, tumult, or rapine, or to be disturbed by other
injuries. That they may not long with too much eagerness after fleeting
and fading riches, or rest in those which they already possess, he
reduces them to want, or, at least, restricts them to a moderate
allowance, at one time by exile, at another by sterility, at another by
fire, or by other means. That they may not indulge too complacently in
the advantages of married life, he either vexes them by the misconduct
of their partners, or humbles them by the wickedness of their children,
or afflicts them by bereavement. But if in all these he is indulgent to
them, lest they should either swell with vain-glory, or be elated with
confidence, by diseases and dangers he sets palpably before them how
unstable and evanescent are all the advantages competent to mortals. We
duly profit by the discipline of the cross, when we learn that this
life, estimated in itself, is restless, troubled, in numberless ways
wretched, and plainly in no respect happy; that what are estimated its
blessings are uncertain, fleeting, vain, and vitiated by a great
admixture of evil. From this we conclude, that all we have to seek or
hope for here is contest; that when we think of the crown we must raise
our eyes to heaven. For we must hold, that our mind never rises
seriously to desire and aspire after the future, until it has learned to
despise the present life.

<span id="vi-p3"></span>2. For there is no medium between the two
things: the earth must either be worthless in our estimation, or keep us
enslaved by an intemperate love of it. Therefore, if we have any regard
to eternity, we must carefully strive to disencumber ourselves of these
fetters. Moreover, since the present life has many enticements to allure
us, and great semblance of delight, grace, and sweetness to soothe us,
it is of great consequence to us to be now and then called off from its
fascinations. <span id="fr_11"></span>[12](#fn_11) For what, pray, would
happen, if we here enjoyed an uninterrupted course of honour and
felicity, when even the constant stimulus of affliction cannot arouse us
to a due sense of our misery? That human life is like smoke or a shadow,
is not only known to the learned; there is not a more trite proverb
among the vulgar. Considering it a fact most useful to be known, they
have recommended it in many well-known expressions. Still there is no
fact which we ponder less carefully, or less frequently remember. For we
form all our plans just as if we had fixed our immortality on the earth.
If we see a funeral, or walk among graves, as the image of death is then
present to the eye, I admit we philosophise admirably on the vanity of
life. We do not indeed always do so, for those things often have no
effect upon us at all. But, at the best, our philosophy is momentary. It
vanishes as soon as we turn our back, and leaves not the vestige of
remembrance behind; in short, it passes away, just like the applause of
a theatre at some pleasant spectacle. Forgetful not only of death, but
also of mortality itself, as if no rumour of it had ever reached us, we
indulge in supine security as expecting a terrestrial immortality.
Meanwhile, if any one breaks in with the proverb, that man is the
creature of a day, <span id="fr_12"></span>[13](#fn_12) we indeed
acknowledge its truth, but, so far from giving heed to it, the thought
of perpetuity still keeps hold of our minds. Who then can deny that it
is of the highest importance to us all, I say not, to be admonished by
words, but convinced by all possible experience of the miserable
condition of our earthly life; since even when convinced we scarcely
cease to gaze upon it with vicious, stupid admiration, as if it
contained within itself the sum of all that is good? But if God finds it
necessary so to train us, it must be our duty to listen to him when he
calls, and shakes us from our torpor, that we may hasten to despise the
world, and aspire with our whole heart to the future life.

<span id="vi-p4"></span>3. Still the contempt which believers should
train themselves to feel for the present life, must not be of a kind to
beget hatred of it or ingratitude to God. This life, though abounding in
all kinds of wretchedness, is justly classed among divine blessings
which are not to be despised. Wherefore, if we do not recognize the
kindness of God in it, we are chargeable with no little ingratitude
towards him. To believers, especially, it ought to be a proof of divine
benevolence, since it is wholly destined to promote their salvation.
Before openly exhibiting the inheritance of eternal glory, God is
pleased to manifest himself to us as a Father by minor proofs, viz., the
blessings which he daily bestows upon us. Therefore, while this life
serves to acquaint us with the goodness of God, shall we disdain it as
if it did not contain one particle of good? We ought, therefore, to feel
and be affected towards it in such a manner as to place it among those
gifts of the divine benignity which are by no means to be despised. Were
there no proofs in Scripture, (they are most numerous and clear,) yet
nature herself exhorts us to return thanks to God for having brought us
forth into light, granted us the use of it, and bestowed upon us all the
means necessary for its preservation. And there is a much higher reason
when we reflect that here we are in a manner prepared for the glory of
the heavenly kingdom. For the Lord hath ordained, that those who are
ultimately to be crowned in heaven must maintain a previous warfare on
the earth, that they may not triumph before they have overcome the
difficulties of war, and obtained the victory. Another reason is, that
we here begin to experience in various ways a foretaste of the divine
benignity, in order that our hope and desire may be whetted for its full
manifestation. When once we have concluded that our earthly life is a
gift of the divine mercy, of which, agreeably to our obligation, it
behoves us to have a grateful remembrance, we shall then properly
descend to consider its most wretched condition, and thus escape from
that excessive fondness for it, to which, as I have said, we are
naturally prone.

<span id="vi-p5"></span>4. In proportion as this improper love
diminishes, our desire of a better life should increase. I confess,
indeed, that a most accurate opinion was formed by those who thought,
that the best thing was not to be born, the next best to die early. For,
being destitute of the light of God and of true religion, what could
they see in it that was not of dire and evil omen? Nor was it
unreasonable for those <span id="fr_13"></span>[14](#fn_13) who felt
sorrow and shed tears at the birth of their kindred, to keep holiday at
their deaths. But this they did without profit; because, devoid of the
true doctrine of faith, they saw not how that which in itself is neither
happy nor desirable turns to the advantage of the righteous: and hence
their opinion issued in despair. Let believers, then, in forming an
estimate of this mortal life, and perceiving that in itself it is
nothing but misery, make it their aim to exert themselves with greater
alacrity, and less hinderance, in aspiring to the future and eternal
life. When we contrast the two, the former may not only be securely
neglected, but, in comparison of the latter, be disdained and contemned.
If heaven is our country, what can the earth be but a place of exile? If
departure from the world is entrance into life, what is the world but a
sepulchre, and what is residence in it but immersion in death? If to be
freed from the body is to gain full possession of freedom, what is the
body but a prison? If it is the very summit of happiness to enjoy the
presence of God, is it not miserable to want it? But “whilst we are at
home in the body, we are absent from the Lord,” (<span
id="vi-p5.3"></span>[2 Cor. v. 6](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#006)<span
id="vi-p5.3"></span>.) Thus when the earthly is compared with the
heavenly life, it may undoubtedly be despised and trampled under foot.
We ought never, indeed, to regard it with hatred, except in so far as it
keeps us subject to sin; and even this hatred ought not to be directed
against life itself. At all events, we must stand so affected towards it
in regard to weariness or hatred as, while longing for its termination,
to be ready at the Lord’s will to continue in it, keeping far from
everything like murmuring and impatience. For it is as if the Lord had
assigned us a post, which we must maintain till he recalls us. Paul,
indeed, laments his condition, in being still bound with the fetters of
the body, and sighs earnestly for redemption, (<span
id="vi-p5.4"></span>[Rom. vii. 24](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#024)<span
id="vi-p5.4"></span>;) nevertheless, he declared that, in obedience to
the command of Gods he was prepared for both courses, because he
acknowledges it as his duty to God to glorify his name whether by life
or by death, while it belongs to God to determine what is most conducive
to His glory, (<span id="vi-p5.5"></span>[Philippians
1:20-24](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#020)<span id="vi-p5.5"></span>.)
Wherefore, if it becomes us to live and die to the Lord, let us leave
the period of our life and death at his disposal. Still let us ardently
long for death, and constantly meditate upon it, and in comparison with
future immortality, let us despise life, and, on account of the bondage
of sin, long to renounce it whenever it shall so please the Lord.

<span id="vi-p6"></span>5. But, most strange to say, many who boast of
being Christians, instead of thus longing for death, are so afraid of it
that they tremble at the very mention of it as a thing ominous and
dreadful. We cannot wonder, indeed, that our natural feelings should be
somewhat shocked at the mention of our dissolution. But it is altogether
intolerable that the light of piety should not be so powerful in a
Christian breast as with greater consolation to overcome and suppress
that fear. For if we reflect that this our tabernacle, unstable,
defective, corruptible, fading, pining, and putrid, is dissolved, in
order that it may forthwith be renewed in sure, perfect, incorruptible,
in fine, in heavenly glory, will not faith compel us eagerly to desire
what nature dreads? If we reflect that by death we are recalled from
exile to inhabit our native country, a heavenly country, shall this give
us no comfort? But everything longs for permanent existence. I admit
this, and therefore contend that we ought to look to future immortality,
where we may obtain that fixed condition which nowhere appears on the
earth. For Paul admirably enjoins believers to hasten cheerfully to
death, not because they a would be unclothed, but clothed upon,” (<span
id="vi-p6.1"></span>[2 Cor. v. 2](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#002)<span
id="vi-p6.1"></span>.) Shall the lower animals, and inanimate creatures
themselves even wood and stone, as conscious of their present vanity,
long for the final resurrection, that they may with the sons of God be
delivered from vanity, (<span id="vi-p6.2"></span>[Rom. viii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#019)<span id="vi-p6.2"></span>;) and
shall we, endued with the light of intellect, and more than intellect,
enlightened by the Spirit of God, when our essence is in question, rise
no higher than the corruption of this earth? But it is not my purpose,
nor is this the place, to plead against this great perverseness. At the
outset, I declared that I had no wish to engage in a diffuse discussion
of common-places. My advice to those whose minds are thus timid is to
read the short treatise of Cyprian De Mortalitate, unless it be more
accordant with their deserts to send them to the philosophers, that by
inspecting what they say on the contempt of death, they may begin to
blush. This, however let us hold as fixed, that no man has made much
progress in the school of Christ who does not look forward with joy to
the day of death and final resurrection, (<span id="vi-p6.3"></span>[2
Tim. iv. 18](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#018)<span id="vi-p6.3"></span>;
<span id="vi-p6.4"></span>[Tit. ii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#013)<span id="vi-p6.4"></span>:) for
Paul distinguishes all believers by this mark; and the usual course of
Scripture is to direct us thither whenever it would furnish us with an
argument for substantial joy. “Look up,” says our Lord, “and lift up
your heads: for your redemption draweth nigh,” (<span
id="vi-p6.5"></span>[Luke xxi. 28](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#028)<span
id="vi-p6.5"></span>.) Is it reasonable, I ask, that what he intended to
have a powerful effect in stirring us up to alacrity and exultation
should produce nothing but sadness and consternation? If it is so, why
do we still glory in him as our Master? Therefore, let us come to a
sounder mind, and how repugnant so ever the blind and stupid longing of
the flesh may be, let us doubt not to desire the advent of the Lord not
in wish only, but with earnest sighs, as the most propitious of all
events. He will come as a Redeemer to deliver us from an immense abyss
of evil and misery, and lead us to the blessed inheritance of his life
and glory.

<span id="vi-p7"></span>6. Thus, indeed, it is; the whole body of the
faithful, so long as they live on the earth, must be like sheep for the
slaughter, in order that they may be conformed to Christ their head,
(<span id="vi-p7.1"></span>[Rom. viii.
36](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#036)<span id="vi-p7.1"></span>.) Most
deplorable, therefore, would their situation be did they not, by raising
their mind to heaven, become superior to all that is in the world, and
rise above the present aspect of affairs, (<span id="vi-p7.2"></span>1
Cor. xv. l9.) On the other hand, when once they have raised their head
above all earthly objects, though they see the wicked flourishing in
wealth and honour, and enjoying profound peace, indulging in luxury and
splendour, and revelling in all kinds of delights, though they should
moreover be wickedly assailed by them, suffer insult from their pride,
be robbed by their avarice, or assailed by any other passion, they will
have no difficulty in bearing up under these evils. They will turn their
eye to that day, (<span id="vi-p7.3"></span>[Isaiah xxv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#008)<span id="vi-p7.3"></span>; <span
id="vi-p7.4"></span>[Rev. vii. 17](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#017)<span
id="vi-p7.4"></span>,) on which the Lord will receive his faithful
servants, wipe away all tears from their eyes, clothe them in a robe of
glory and joy, feed them with the ineffable sweetness of his pleasures,
exalt them to share with him in his greatness; in fine, admit them to a
participation in his happiness. But the wicked who may have flourished
on the earth, he will cast forth in extreme ignominy, will change their
delights into torments, their laughter and joy into wailing and gnashing
of teeth, their peace into the gnawing of conscience, and punish their
luxury with unquenchable fire. He will also place their necks under the
feet of the godly, whose patience they abused. For, as Paul declares,
“it is a righteous thing with God to recompense tribulation to them that
trouble you; and to you who are troubled rest with us, when the Lord
Jesus shall be revealed from heaven,” (<span id="vi-p7.5"></span>[2
Thess. 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#007)<span id="vi-p7.5"></span>.) This,
indeed, is our only consolation; deprived of it, we must either give way
to despondency, or resort to our destruction to the vain solace of the
world. The Psalmist confesses, “My feet were almost gone: my steps had
well nigh slipt: for I was envious at the foolish when I saw the
prosperity of the wicked,” (<span id="vi-p7.6"></span>[Ps.
73:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#004)<span id="vi-p7.6"></span>;) and he
found no resting-place until he entered the sanctuary, and considered
the latter end of the righteous and the wicked. To conclude in one word,
the cross of Christ then only triumphs in the breasts of believers over
the devil and the flesh, sin and sinners, when their eyes are directed
to the power of his resurrection.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_11"></span>[12](life005.htm#fr_11) <span
id="vi-p3.1"></span>French, “<span id="vi-p3.2"></span>Or pource que la
vie presente a tousiours force de delices pour nous attraire, et a
grande apparence d’amenité, de grace et de douceur pour nous amieller,
il nous est bien mestier d’estre retiré d’heure en d’heure, à ce que
nous ne soyons point abusez, et comme ensorcelez de telles
flatteries;”—Now because the present life has always a host of delights
to attract us, and has great appearance of amenity, grace, and sweetness
to entice us, it is of great importance to us to be hourly withdrawn, in
order that we may not be deceived, and, as it were, bewitched with such
flattery.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[13](life005.htm#fr_12) <span
id="vi-p3.3"></span>Latin, “Animal esse;”—is an ephemereal animal.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[14](life005.htm#fr_13) <span
id="vi-p5.1"></span>French, “<span id="vi-p5.2"></span>Le peuple des
Scythes;”—the Scythians.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. How to Use the Present Life, and the Comforts of
It.](life006)
