[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140177)  [Next](2140179) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xii"></span>

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xii-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="viii.vii.iii.xii-p1.1"></span>Canon XI.</span>

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.vii.iii.xii-p2.1"></span>Presbytides</span>, as they are
called, or female presidents, are not to be appointed in the Church.

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xii-p3"></span><span id="page_130">p. 130</span>
<span id="viii.vii.iii.xii-Page_130"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="viii.vii.iii.xii-p3.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xii-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.vii.iii.xii-p4.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon XI.</span>

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xii-p5"></span>Widows called presidents shall not
be appointed in churches.

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xii-p6"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.vii.iii.xii-p6.1"></span>Balsamon.</span>

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xii-p7"></span>In old days certain venerable
women (<span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.vii.iii.xii-p7.1"></span>πρεσβύτιδες</span>) sat in Catholic
churches, and took care that the other women kept good and modest
order.  But from their habit of using improperly that which was proper,
either through their arrogancy or through their base self-seeking,
scandal arose.  Therefore the Fathers prohibited the existence in the
Church thereafter of any more such women as are called presbytides or
presidents.  And that no one may object that in the monasteries of women
one woman must preside over the rest, it should be remembered that the
renunciation which they make of themselves to God and the tonsure brings
it to pass that they are thought of as one body though many; and all
things which are theirs, relate only to the salvation of the soul.  But
for woman to teach in a Catholic Church, where a multitude of men is
gathered together, and women of different opinions, is, in the highest
degree, indecorous and pernicious.

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xii-p8"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.vii.iii.xii-p8.1"></span>Hefele.</span>

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xii-p9"></span>It is doubtful what was here
intended, and this canon has received very different interpretations. 
In the first place, what is the meaning of the words <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.vii.iii.xii-p9.1"></span>πρεσβύτιδες</span>
and <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.vii.iii.xii-p9.2"></span>προκαθήμεναι</span> (“presbytides” and
female presidents)?  I think the first light is thrown on the subject by
Epiphanius, who in his treatise against the Collyridians (*Hær*., lxxix.
4) says that “women had never been allowed to offer sacrifice, as the
Collyridians presumed to do, but were only allowed to minister. 
Therefore there were only deaconesses in the Church, and even if the
oldest among them were called ‘presbytides,’ this term must be clearly
distinguished from presbyteresses.  The latter would mean priestesses
(<span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.vii.iii.xii-p9.3"></span>ἱερίσσας</span>), but ‘presbytides’
only designated their age, as seniors.”  According to this, the canon
appears to treat of the superior deaconesses who were the overseers
(<span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.vii.iii.xii-p9.4"></span>προκαθήμεναι</span>) of the other
deaconesses; and the further words of the text may then probably mean
that in future no more such superior deaconesses or eldresses were to be
appointed, probably because they had often outstepped their authority.

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xii-p10"></span>Neander, Fuchs, and others,
however, think it more probable that the terms in question are in this
canon to be taken as simply meaning deaconesses, for even in the church
they had been wont to preside over the female portion of the
congregation (whence their name of “presidents”); and, according to St.
Paul’s rule, only widows over sixty years of age were to be chosen for
this office (hence called “presbytides”).  We may add, that this
direction of the apostle was not very strictly adhered to subsequently,
but still it was repeatedly enjoined that only elder persons should be
chosen as deaconesses.  Thus, for instance, the Council of Chalcedon, in
its fifteenth canon, required that deaconesses should be at least forty
years of age, while the Emperor Theodosius even prescribed the age of
sixty.

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xii-p11"></span>Supposing now that this canon
simply treats of deaconesses, a fresh doubt arises as to how the last
words—“they are not to be appointed in the Church” are to be
understood.  For it may mean that “from henceforth no more deaconesses
shall be appointed;” or, that “in future they shall no more be solemnly
ordained in the church.”  The first interpretation would, however,
contradict the fact that the Greek Church had deaconesses long after the
Synod of Laodicea.  For instance, in 692 the Synod *in Trullo* (Can.
xiv.) ordered that “no one under forty years of age should be ordained
deaconess.”  Consequently the second interpretation, “they shall not be
solemnly ordained in the church,” seems a better one, and Neander
decidedly prefers it.  It is certainly true that several later synods
distinctly forbade the old practice of conferring a sort of ordination
upon deaconesses, as, for instance, the first Synod of Orange
(*Arausicanum I.* of 441, Can. xxvj.) in the words—*diaconæ omnimodis
non ordinandæ*; also the Synod at Epaon in 517 (Can. xxj.), and the
second Synod at Orleans in 533 (Can. xviij.); but in the Greek Church at
least, an ordination, a <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.vii.iii.xii-p11.1"></span>χειροτονεῖσθαι</span> , took place as
late as the Council *in Trullo* (Can. xiv.).  But this Canon of Laodicea
does not speak of solemn dedication, and certainly not of ordination,
but only of <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.vii.iii.xii-p11.2"></span>καθίστασθαι</span>.  These reasons
induce us to return to the first interpretation of this canon, and to
understand it as forbidding from that time forward the appointment of
any more chief deaconesses or “presbytides.”

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xii-p12"></span>Zonaras and Balsamon give yet
another explanation.  In their opinion, these “presbytides” were not
chief deaconesses, but aged women in general (*ex populo*), to whom was
<span id="page_131">p. 131</span> <span
id="viii.vii.iii.xii-Page_131"></span>given the supervision of the
females, in church.  The Synod of Laodicea, however, did away with this
arrangement, probably because they had misused their office for purposes
of pride, or money-making, bribery, etc.

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xii-p13"></span>Compare with the foregoing the
Excursus on Deaconesses, appended to Canon XIX. of Nice.

<span id="viii.vii.iii.xii-p14"></span>This canon is found in the
*Corpus Juris Canonici*, Gratian’s *Decretum*, Pars I., Dist. XXXII., c.
xix., in Isidore’s version; but Van Espen remarks that the Roman
Correctors have pointed out that it departs widely from the Greek
original.  The Roman Correctors further say “The note of Balsamon on
this point should be seen;” and with this interpretation Morinus also
agrees in his work on Holy Orders (*De Ordinationibus*, Pars III.,
Exercit. x., cap. iij., n. 3).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon XII](2140179)
