[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140608)  [Next](2140610) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lxxxvi"></span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lxxxvi-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.lxxxvi-p1.1"></span>Canon LXXXV.  (Greek lxxxviii.)</span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lxxxvi-p2"></span>That by the bishop of Carthage,
when there shall be need, letters shall be written and subscribed in the
name of all the bishops.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lxxxvi-p3"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.lxxxvi-p3.1"></span>It</span> was said by all the bishops: 
If any letters are to be composed in the name of the council it seemed
good that the venerable bishop who presides over this See should
vouchsafe to dictate and sign them in the name of all, among which also
are those to the episcopal legates, who are to be sent throughout the
African provinces, in the matter of the Donatists; and it seemed good
that the letters given them should contain the tenor of the mandate
which they are not to go beyond.  And they subscribed:  I, Aurelius,
bishop of the church of Carthage have consented to this decree and
having read it have signed it.  Likewise all the rest of the bishops
subscribed.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lxxxvi-p4"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.lxxxvi-p4.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lxxxvi-p5"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.lxxxvi-p5.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon LXXXV.</span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lxxxvi-p6"></span>It seemed good that whatever
letters were to be sent from the Synod should be written and subscribed
by the bishop of Carthage in the name of all.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lxxxvi-p7"></span>This is Canon xix. of Carthage,
September, <span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.lxxxvi-p7.1"></span>a.d.</span> 401.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lxxxvi-p8"></span>In this Council previous decrees
are confirmed.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lxxxvi-p9"></span>In the fifth consulate of the most
glorious Emperors Arcadius and Honorius, Augusti, the VI Calends of
September, in the City of Milevis, in the secretarium of the basilica,
when Aurelius the bishop of Carthage had taken his seat in plenary
council, the deacons standing by, Aurelius, the bishop, said:  Since the
body of the holy Church is one, and there is one head of all the
members, it has come to pass by the divine permission and assistance
given to our weakness, that we, invited out of brotherly love, have come
to this church.  Wherefore I beg your charity to believe that our coming
to you is neither superfluous, nor unacceptable to all; and that the
consent of all of us may make it manifest that we agree with the decrees
already confirmed by the Council at Hippo or which were defined
afterwards by a larger synod at Carthage, these shall now be read to us
in order.  Then at last the agreement of your holiness will appear
clearer than light, if they know that the things lawfully defined by us
in former councils, ye have set forth, not only by your consent to these
acts, but also by your subscriptions.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lxxxvi-p10"></span>Xantippus, bishop of the first see
of Numidia said:  I believe what pleased all the brethren and the
statutes they confirmed with their hands; we by our subscribing our
names shew that it pleases us also, and have confirmed them with our
superscription.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.lxxxvi-p11"></span>Nicetius, the bishop of the first
see of Mauritania Sitifensis said:  The decrees which have been read,
since they do not lack reason, and have been approved by all, these also
are pleasing to my littleness, and I will confirm them with my
subscription.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon LXXXVI](2140610)
