[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140028)  [Next](2140030) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.vi.xi"></span>

<span id="vii.vi.xi-p1"></span> <span id="page_18">p. 18</span> <span
id="vii.vi.xi-Page_18"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="vii.vi.xi-p1.1"></span>Excursus on the Rise of the Patriarchate of
Jerusalem.</span>

<span id="vii.vi.xi-p2"></span>The narrative of the successive steps by
which the See of Jerusalem rose from being nothing but Ælia, a Gentile
city, into one of the five patriarchal sees is sad reading for a
Christian.  It is but the record of ambition and, worse still, of
knavery.  No Christian can for a moment grudge to the Holy City of the
old dispensation the honour shewn it by the Church, but he may well wish
that the honour had been otherwise obtained.  A careful study of such
records as we possess shews that until the fifth century the
Metropolitan of Cæsarea as often took precedence of the Bishop of
Jerusalem as vice versa, and Beveridge has taken great pains to shew
that the learned De Marca is in error in supposing that the Council of
Nice assigned to Jerusalem a dignity superior to Cæsarea, and only
inferior to Rome, Alexandria, and Antioch.  It is true that in the
signatures the Bishop of Jerusalem does sign before his metropolitan,
but to this Beveridge justly replies that the same is the case with the
occupants of two other of his suffragan sees.  Bishop Beveridge’s
opinion is that the Council assigned Jerusalem the second place in the
province, such as London enjoys in the Province of Canterbury.  This,
however, would seem to be as much too little as De Marca’s contention
grants too much.  It is certain that almost immediately after the
Council had adjourned, the Bishop of Jerusalem, Maximus, convoked a
synod of Palestine, without any reference to Cæsarea, which consecrated
bishops and acquitted St. Athanasius.  It is true that he was
reprimanded for doing so, <span id="fr_66"></span>[67](#fn_66) but yet
it clearly shews how he intended to understand the action of Nice.  The
matter was not decided for a century more, and then through the
chicanery of Juvenal the bishop of Jerusalem.

<span id="vii.vi.xi-p4"></span>(Canon Venables, *Dict. Christ.
Biography*.)

<span id="vii.vi.xi-p5"></span>Juvenalis succeeded Praylius as bishop of
Jerusalem somewhere about 420 <span class="sc"><span
id="vii.vi.xi-p5.1"></span>a.d.</span>  The exact year cannot be
determined.  The episcopate of Praylius, which commenced in 417 <span
class="sc"><span id="vii.vi.xi-p5.2"></span>a.d.</span>, was but short,
and we can hardly give it at most more than three years.  The statement
of Cyril of Scythopolis, in his Life of St. Euthymius (c. 96), that
Juvenal died “in the forty-fourth year of his episcopate,” 458 <span
class="sc"><span id="vii.vi.xi-p5.3"></span>a.d.</span>, is certainly
incorrect, as it would make his episcopate begin in 414 <span
class="sc"><span id="vii.vi.xi-p5.4"></span>a.d.</span>, three years
before that of his predecessor.  Juvenal occupies a prominent position
during the Nestorian and Eutychian troubles towards the middle of the
fifth century.  But the part played by him at the councils of Ephesus
and Chalcedon, as well as at the disgraceful <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.vi.xi-p5.5"></span>λῃστρικὴ σύνοδος</span> of 449, was more
conspicuous than creditable, and there are few of the actors in these
turbulent and saddening scenes who leave a more unpleasing impression. 
The ruling object of Juvenal’s episcopate, to which everything else was
secondary, and which guided all his conduct, was the elevation of the
see of Jerusalem from the subordinate position it held in accordance
with the seventh of the canons of the council of Nicæa, as suffragan to
the metropolitan see of Cæsarea, to a primary place in the episcopate. 
Not content with aspiring to metropolitan rank, Juvenal coveted
patriarchal dignity, and, in defiance of all canonical authority, he
claimed jurisdiction over the great see of Antioch, from which he sought
to remove Arabia and the two Phœnicias to his own province.  At the
council of Ephesus, in 431, he asserted for “the apostolic see of
Jerusalem the same rank and authority with the apostolic see of Rome”
(Labbe, *Concil*. iii. 642).  These falsehoods he did not scruple to
support with forged documents (“insolenter ausus per commentitia scripta
firmare,” Leo. Mag. *Ep.* 119 \[92\]), and other disgraceful artifices. 
Scarcely had Juvenal been consecrated bishop of Jerusalem when he
proceeded to assert his claims to the metropolitan rank by his acts.  In
the letter of remonstrance against the proceedings of the council of
<span id="page_19">p. 19</span> <span
id="vii.vi.xi-Page_19"></span>Ephesus, sent to Theodosius by the
Oriental party, they complain that Juvenal, whose “ambitious designs and
juggling tricks” they are only too well acquainted with, had ordained in
provinces over which he had no jurisdiction (Labbe, *Concil*. iii.
728).  This audacious attempt to set at nought the Nicene decrees, and
to falsify both history and tradition was regarded with the utmost
indignation by the leaders of the Christian church.  Cyril of Alexandria
shuddered at the impious design (“merito perhorrescens,” Leo. *u. s.*),
and wrote to Leo, then archdeacon of Rome, informing him of what Juvenal
was undertaking, and begging that his unlawful attempts might have no
sanction from the apostolic See (“ut nulla illicitis conatibus
præberetur assensio,” *u. s.*).  Juvenal, however, was far too useful an
ally in his campaign against Nestorius for Cyril lightly to discard. 
When the council met at Ephesus Juvenal was allowed, without the
slightest remonstrance, to take precedence of his metropolitan of
Cæsarea, and to occupy the position of vice-president of the council,
coming next after Cyril himself (Labbe, *Concil.* iii. 445), and was
regarded in all respects as the second prelate in the assembly.  The
arrogant assertion of his supremacy over the bishop of Antioch, and his
claim to take rank next after Rome as an apostolical see, provoked no
open remonstrance, and his pretensions were at least tacitly allowed. 
At the next council, the disgraceful *Latrocinium*, Juvenal occupied the
third place, after Dioscorus and the papal legate, having been specially
named by Theodosius, together with Thalassius of Cæsarea (who appears to
have taken no umbrage at his suffragan being preferred before him), as
next in authority to Dioscorus (Labbe, *Concil.* iv. 109), and he took a
leading part in the violent proceedings of that assembly.  When the
council of Chalcedon met, one of the matters which came before it for
settlement was the dispute as to priority between Juvenal and Maximus
Bishop of Antioch.  The contention was long and severe.  It ended in a
compromise agreed on in the Seventh Action, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.vi.xi-p5.6"></span>μετὰ πολλὴν φιλονεικίαν</span> .  Juvenal
surrendered his claim to the two Phœnicias and to Arabia, on condition
of his being allowed metropolitical jurisdiction over the three
Palestines (Labbe, *Concil.* iv. 613).  The claim to patriarchal
authority over the Bishop of Antioch put forward at Ephesus was
discreetly dropped.  The difficulty presented by the Nicene canon does
not appear to have presented itself to the council, nor was any one
found to urge the undoubted claims of the see of Cæsarea.  The terms
arranged between Maximus and Juvenal were regarded as satisfactory, and
received the consent of the assembled bishops (ibid. 618).  Maximus,
however, was not long in repenting of his too ready acquiescence in
Juvenal’s demands, and wrote a letter of complaint to pope Leo, who
replied by the letter which has been already quoted, dated June 11, 453
<span class="sc"><span id="vii.vi.xi-p5.7"></span>a.d.</span>, in which
he upheld the binding authority of the Nicene canons, and commenting in
the strongest terms on the greediness and ambition of Juvenal, who
allowed no opportunity of forwarding his ends to be lost, declared that
as far as he was concerned he would do all he could to maintain the
ancient dignity of the see of Antioch (Leo Magn. *Ep. ad Maximum*, 119
\[92\]).  No further action, however, seems to have been taken either by
Leo or by Maximus.  Juvenal was left master of the situation, and the
church of Jerusalem has from that epoch peaceably enjoyed the
patriarchal dignity obtained for it by such base means.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_66"></span>[18:67](2140029.htm#fr_66) <span
id="vii.vi.xi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vi.xi-p3"></span> Socrates:  *Hist. Eccl*., ii. 24.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon VIII](2140030)
