[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140293)  [Next](2140295) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="x.xvi.xii"></span>

<span id="x.xvi.xii-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="x.xvi.xii-p1.1"></span>Canon VIII.</span>

<span id="x.xvi.xii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="x.xvi.xii-p2.1"></span>Our</span> brother bishop Rheginus, the
beloved of God, and his fellow beloved of God bishops, Zeno and
Evagrius, of the Province of Cyprus, have reported to us an innovation
which has been introduced contrary to the ecclesiastical constitutions
and the Canons of the Holy Apostles, and which touches the liberties of
all.  Wherefore, since injuries affecting all require the more
attention, as they cause the greater damage, and particularly when they
are transgressions of an ancient custom; and since those excellent men,
who have petitioned the Synod, have told us in writing and by word of
mouth <span id="page_235">p. 235</span> <span
id="x.xvi.xii-Page_235"></span>that the Bishop of Antioch has in this
way held ordinations in Cyprus; therefore the Rulers of the holy
churches in Cyprus shall enjoy, without dispute or injury, according to
the Canons of the blessed Fathers and ancient custom, the right of
performing for themselves the ordination of their excellent Bishops. 
The same rule shall be observed in the other dioceses and provinces
everywhere, so that none of the God beloved Bishops shall assume control
of any province which has not heretofore, from the very beginning, been
under his own hand or that of his predecessors.  But if any one has
violently taken and subjected \[a Province\], he shall give it up; lest
the Canons of the Fathers be transgressed; or the vanities of worldly
honour be brought in under pretext of sacred office; or we lose, without
knowing it, little by little, the liberty which Our Lord Jesus Christ,
the Deliverer of all men, hath given us by his own Blood.

<span id="x.xvi.xii-p3"></span>Wherefore, this holy and ecumenical Synod
has decreed that in every province the rights which heretofore, from the
beginning, have belonged to it, shall be preserved to it, according to
the old prevailing custom, unchanged and uninjured:  every Metropolitan
having permission to take, for his own security, a copy of these acts. 
And if any one shall bring forward a rule contrary to what is here
determined, this holy and ecumenical Synod unanimously decrees that it
shall be of no effect.

<span id="x.xvi.xii-p4"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="x.xvi.xii-p4.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="x.xvi.xii-p5"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="x.xvi.xii-p5.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon VIII.</span>

<span id="x.xvi.xii-p6"></span>Let the rights of each province be
preserved pure and inviolate.  No attempt to introduce any form contrary
to these shall be of any avail.

<span id="x.xvi.xii-p7"></span>The caption is the one given in the
ordinary Greek texts.  The canon is found word for word in the VII
Session of the Council, with the heading, “A decree of the same holy
Synod.”  (Labbe and Cossart, *Concilia*, Tom. III., col. 802.)

<span id="x.xvi.xii-p8"></span>I have followed in reading “the Canons of
the Holy Apostles” the reading in Balsamon and Zonaras, and that of
Elias Ehingerus Augustanus (so says Beveridge) in his edition of the
Greek canons, <span class="sc"><span
id="x.xvi.xii-p8.1"></span>a.d.</span> 1614.  But the Bodleian <span
class="sc"><span id="x.xvi.xii-p8.2"></span>ms.</span>, and John of
Antioch in his collection of the Canons, and the Codex edited by
Christopher Justellus read “of the Holy Fathers” instead of “of the Holy
Apostles.”  Beveridge is of opinion that this is the truer reading, for
while no doubt the Ephesine Fathers had in mind the Apostolic Canons,
yet they seem to have more particularly referred in this place to the
canons of Nice.  And this seems to be intimated in the libellum of the
Bishops of Cyprus, who gave rise to this very decree, in which the
condemned practice is said to be “contrary to the Apostolic Canons and
to the definitions of the most holy Council of Nice.”

<span id="x.xvi.xii-p9"></span>This canon Photius does not recognize,
for in the Preface to his Nomocanon he distinctly writes that there were
but seven canons adopted by the Ephesine Synod, and in the first chapter
of the first title he cites the preceding canon as the seventh, that is
the last.  John of Antioch likewise says that there are but seven canons
of Ephesus, but reckons this present canon as the seventh, from which
Beveridge concludes that he rejects the Canon concerning Charisius
(vii).

<span id="x.xvi.xii-p10"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="x.xvi.xii-p10.1"></span>Beveridge.</span>

<span id="x.xvi.xii-p11"></span>Concerning the present canon, of rather
decree, the Bishop of Antioch, who had given occasion to the six former
canons, gave also occasion for the enacting of this, by arrogating to
himself the right of ordaining in the Island of Cyprus, in violation of
former usage.  After the bishops of that island, who are mentioned in
the canon, had presented their statements (*libellum*) to the Synod, the
present decree was set forth, in which warning was given that no
innovation should be tolerated in Ecclesiastical administration, whether
in Cyprus or elsewhere; but that in all Dioceses and Provinces their
ancient rights and privileges should be preserved.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Letter of the Same Holy Synod of Ephesus, to the Sacred Synod
in Pamphylia Concerning Eustathius Who Had Been Their
Metropolitan.](2140295)
