[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140061)  [Next](2140063) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.iii.iii.i"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.iii.i-p1"></span> <span id="page_63">p. 63</span>
<span id="viii.iii.iii.i-Page_63"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="viii.iii.iii.i-p1.1"></span>The Canons of the Council of
Ancyra.</span>

<span id="viii.iii.iii.i-p2"></span>(*Found in Labbe and Cossart’s*
Concilia*, and all Collections, in the Greek text together with several
Latin versions of different dates.  Also in Justellus and Beveridge. 
There will also be found annotations by Routh, and a reprint of the
notes of Christopher Justellus and of Bp. Beveridge in Vol. IV. of the*
Reliquiæ Sacræ, ed. altera, 1846.)

<span id="viii.iii.iii.i-p3"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="viii.iii.iii.i-p3.1"></span>Canon I.</span>

<span id="viii.iii.iii.i-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.iii.iii.i-p4.1"></span>With</span> regard to those presbyters
who have offered sacrifices and afterwards returned to the conflict, not
with hypocrisy, but in sincerity, it has seemed good that they may
retain the honour of their chair; provided they had not used management,
arrangement, or persuasion, so as to appear to be subjected to the
torture, when it was applied only in seeming and pretence.  Nevertheless
it is not lawful for them to make the oblation, nor to preach, nor in
short to perform any act of sacerdotal function.

<span id="viii.iii.iii.i-p5"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="viii.iii.iii.i-p5.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="viii.iii.iii.i-p6"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.iii.iii.i-p6.1"></span>Ancient Epitome to Canons I. and
II.</span>

<span id="viii.iii.iii.i-p7"></span>Presbyters and deacons who offered
sacrifice and afterwards renewed the contest for the truth shall have
only their seat and honour, but shall not perform any of the holy
functions.

<span id="viii.iii.iii.i-p8"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.iii.iii.i-p8.1"></span>Zonaras.</span>

<span id="viii.iii.iii.i-p9"></span>Of those that yielded to the tyrants
in the persecution, and offered sacrifice, some, after having been
subjected to torture, being unable to withstand to the end its force and
intensity, were conquered, and denied the faith; some, through
effeminacy, before they experienced any suffering, gave way, and lest
they should seem to sacrifice voluntarily they persuaded the
executioners, either by bribes or entreaties, to manifest perhaps a
greater degree of severity against them, and seemingly to apply the
torture to them, in order that sacrificing under these circumstances
they might seem to have denied Christ, conquered by force, and not
through effeminacy.

<span id="viii.iii.iii.i-p10"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.iii.iii.i-p10.1"></span>Hefele.</span>

<span id="viii.iii.iii.i-p11"></span>It was quite justifiable, and in
accordance with the ancient and severe discipline of the Church, when
this Synod no longer allowed priests, even when sincerely penitent, to
discharge priestly functions.  It was for this same reason that the two
Spanish bishops, Martial and Basilides, were deposed, and that the
judgment given against them was confirmed in 254 by an African synod
held under St. Cyprian.

<span id="viii.iii.iii.i-p12"></span>The reader will notice how clearly
the functions of a presbyter are set forth in this canon as they were
understood at that time, they were “to offer” (<span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii.iii.i-p12.1"></span>προσφέρειν</span>), “to preach” (<span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii.iii.i-p12.2"></span>ὁμιλεῖν</span>),
and “to perform any act of sacerdotal function” (<span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii.iii.i-p12.3"></span>λειτουργεῖν τι τῶν
ἱερατικῶν λειτουργιῶν</span>).

<span id="viii.iii.iii.i-p13"></span>This canon is in the *Corpus Juris
Canonici* *Decretum*.  Pars I., Dist. l., c. xxxii.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon II](2140063)
