[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140290)  [Next](2140292) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="x.xvi.ix"></span>

<span id="x.xvi.ix-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="x.xvi.ix-p1.1"></span>Canon VI.</span>

<span id="x.xvi.ix-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="x.xvi.ix-p2.1"></span>Likewise</span>, if any should in any way
attempt to set aside the orders in each case made by the holy Synod at
Ephesus, the holy Synod decrees that, if they be bishops or clergymen,
they shall absolutely forfeit their office; and, if laymen, that they
shall be excommunicated.

<span id="x.xvi.ix-p3"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="x.xvi.ix-p3.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="x.xvi.ix-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="x.xvi.ix-p4.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon VI.</span>

<span id="x.xvi.ix-p5"></span>If any layman shall resist the Synod, let
him be excommunicated.  But if it be a cleric let him be discharged.

<span id="x.xvi.ix-p6"></span>How courageous the passing of this canon
was can only be justly appreciated by those who are familiar with the
weight of the imperial authority at that day in ecclesiastical matters
and who will remember that at the very time this canon was passed it was
extremely difficult to say whether the Emperor would support Cyril’s or
John’s synod.

<span id="x.xvi.ix-p7"></span><span id="page_231">p. 231</span> <span
id="x.xvi.ix-Page_231"></span>Observation of the Roman Editors (Ed:
1608).

<span id="x.xvi.ix-p8"></span>In the Vatican books and in some others
only these six canons are found; but in certain texts there is added,
under the name of Canon VII., the definition of the same holy Synod put
forth after the Presbyter Charisius had stated his case, and for Canon
VIII. another decree of the synod concerning the bishops of Cyprus.

<span id="x.xvi.ix-p9"></span>Observation of Philip Labbe, S.J.P.

<span id="x.xvi.ix-p10"></span>In the Collections of John Zonaras and of
Theodore Balsamon, also in the “Code of the Universal Church” which has
John Tilius, Bishop of St. Brieuc and Christopher Justellus for its
editors, are found eight canons of the Ephesine council, to wit the six
which are appended to the foregoing epistle and two others:  but it is
altogether a subject of wonder that in the Codex of Canons, made for the
Roman Church by Dionysius Exiguus, none of these canons are found at
all.  I suppose that the reason of this is that the Latins saw that they
were not decrees affecting the Universal Church, but that the Canons set
forth by the Ephesine fathers dealt merely with the peculiar and private
matters of Nestorius and of his followers.

<span id="x.xvi.ix-p11"></span>The Decree of the same holy Synod,
pronounced after hearing the Exposition \[of the Faith\] by the Three
hundred and eighteen holy and blessed Fathers in the city of Nice, and
the impious formula composed by Theodore of Mopsuestia, and given to the
same holy Synod at Ephesus by the Presbyter Charisius, of Philadelphia:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon VII](2140292)
