[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140235)  [Next](2140237) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.iv"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="ix.iv-p1.1"></span>Historical Excursus on the Introduction into the
Creed of the Words “and the Son.”</span>

<span id="ix.iv-p2"></span>The introduction into the Nicene Creed of the
words “and the Son” (*Filioque*) has given rise to, or has been the
pretext for, such bitter reviling between East and West (during which
many statements unsupported by fact have become more or less commonly
believed) that I think it well in this place to set forth as
dispassionately as possible the real facts of the case.  I shall briefly
then give the proof of the following propositions:

<span id="ix.iv-p3"></span>1.  That no pretence is made by the West that
the words in dispute formed part of the original creed as adopted at
Constantinople, or that they now form part of that Creed.

<span id="ix.iv-p4"></span>2.  That so far from the insertion being made
by the Pope, it was made in direct opposition to his wishes and command.

<span id="ix.iv-p5"></span>3.  That it never was intended by the words
to assert that there were two <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iv-p5.1"></span>’Αρχαὶ</span> in the Trinity, nor in any respect
on this point to differ from the teaching of the East.

<span id="ix.iv-p6"></span>4.  That it is quite possible that the words
were not an intentional insertion at all.

<span id="ix.iv-p7"></span>5.  And finally that the doctrine of the East
as set forth by St. John Damascene is now and always has been the
doctrine of the West on the procession of the Holy Spirit, however much
through ecclesiastico-political contingencies this fact may have become
obscured.

<span id="ix.iv-p8"></span>With the truth or falsity of the doctrine set
forth by the Western addition to the creed this work has no concern, nor
even am I called upon to treat the historical question as to when and
where the expression “and the Son” was first used.  For a temperate and
eminently scholarly treatment of this point from a Western point of
view, I would refer the reader to Professor Swete’s *On the History of
the Doctrine of the Procession of the Holy Spirit*.  In J. M. Neale’s
*History of the Holy Eastern Church* will be found a statement from the
opposite point of view.  The great treatises of past years I need not
mention here, but may be allowed to enter a warning to the reader, that
they were often written in the period of hot controversy, and make more
for strife than for peace, magnifying rather than lessening differences
both of thought and expression.

<span id="ix.iv-p9"></span>Perhaps, too, I may be allowed here to remind
the readers that it has been said that while “ex Patre Filioque
procedens” in Latin does not necessitate a double source of the Holy
Spirit, the expression <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iv-p9.1"></span>ἐκπορευόμενον ἐκ τοῦ πατρὸς καὶ ἐκ τοῦ
Υἱοῦ</span> does.  On such a point I am not fit to give an opinion, but
St. John Damascene does not use this expression.

<span id="ix.iv-p10"></span>1.  That no pretence is made by the West
that the words in dispute ever formed part of <span id="page_166">p.
166</span> <span id="ix.iv-Page_166"></span>the creed as adopted at
Constantinople is evidently proved by the patent fact that it is printed
without those words in all our *Concilias* and in all our histories.  It
is true that at the Council of Florence it was asserted that the words
were found in a copy of the Acts of the Seventh Ecumenical which they
had, but no stress was even at that eminently Western council laid upon
the point, which even if it had been the case would have shewn nothing
with regard to the true reading of the Creed as adopted by the Second
Synod. <span id="fr_209"></span>[210](#fn_209)   On this point there
never was nor can be any doubt.

<span id="ix.iv-p12"></span>2.  The addition was not made at the will
and at the bidding of the Pope.  It has frequently been said that it was
a proof of the insufferable arrogancy of the See of Rome that it dared
to tamper with the creed set forth by the authority of an Ecumenical
Synod and which had been received by the world.  Now so far from the
history of this addition to the creed being a ground of pride and
complacency to the advocates of the Papal claims, it is a most marked
instance of the weakness of the papal power even in the West.

<span id="ix.iv-p13"></span>“Baronius,” says Dr. Pusey, “endeavours in
vain to find any Pope, to whom the ‘formal addition’ may be ascribed,
and rests at last on a statement of a writer towards the end of the 12th
century, writing against the Greeks.  ‘If the Council of Constantinople
added to the Nicene Creed, ‘in the Holy Ghost, the Lord, and Giver of
life,’ and the Council of Chalcedon to that of Constantinople, ‘perfect
in Divinity and perfect in Humanity, consubstantial with the Father as
touching his Godhead, consubstantial with us as touching his manhood,’
and some other things as aforesaid, the Bishop of the elder Rome ought
not to be calumniated, because for explanation, he added one word \[that
the Holy Spirit proceeds from the Son\] having the consent of very many
bishops and most learned Cardinals.’  ‘For the truth of which,’ says Le
Quien, ‘be the author responsible!’  It seems to me inconceivable, that
all account of any such proceeding, if it ever took place, should have
been lost.” <span id="fr_210"></span>[211](#fn_210)

<span id="ix.iv-p15"></span>We may then dismiss this point and briefly
review the history of the matter.

<span id="ix.iv-p16"></span>There seems little doubt that the words were
first inserted in Spain.  As early as the year 400 it had been found
necessary at a Council of Toledo to affirm the double procession against
the Priscillianists, <span id="fr_211"></span>[212](#fn_211) and in 589
by the authority of the Third Council of Toledo the newly converted
Goths were required to sign the creed with the addition. <span
id="fr_212"></span>[213](#fn_212)   From this time it became for Spain
the accepted form, and was so recited at the Eighth Council of Toledo in
653, and again in 681 at the Twelfth Council of Toledo. <span
id="fr_213"></span>[214](#fn_213)

<span id="ix.iv-p20"></span>But this was at first only true of Spain,
and at Rome nothing of the kind was known.  In the Gelasian Sacramentary
the Creed is found in its original form. <span
id="fr_214"></span>[215](#fn_214)   The same is the case with the old
Gallican Sacramentary of the viith or viiith century. <span
id="fr_215"></span>[216](#fn_215)

<span id="ix.iv-p23"></span>However, there can be no doubt that its
introduction spread very rapidly through the West and that before long
it was received practically everywhere except at Rome.

<span id="ix.iv-p24"></span>In 809 a council was held at Aix-la-Chapelle
by Charlemagne, and from it three divines were sent to confer with the
Pope, Leo III, upon the subject.  The Pope opposed the insertion of the
Filioque on the express ground that the General Councils had forbidden
any addition to be made to their formulary. <span
id="fr_216"></span>[217](#fn_216)   Later on, the Frankish Emperor asked
his bishops what was “the meaning of the Creed according to the
Latins,” <span id="fr_217"></span>[218](#fn_217) and Fleury gives the
result of the investigations to have been, “In France they continued to
chant the creed with the word Filioque, and at Rome they continued not
to chant it.” <span id="fr_218"></span>[219](#fn_218)

<span id="ix.iv-p28"></span><span id="page_167">p. 167</span> <span
id="ix.iv-Page_167"></span>So firmly resolved was the Pope that the
clause should not be introduced into the creed that he presented two
silver shields to the *Confessio* in St. Peter’s at Rome, on one of
which was engraved the creed in Latin and on the other in Greek, without
the addition.  This act the Greeks never forgot during the controversy. 
Photius refers to it in writing to the Patriarch of Acquileia.  About
two centuries later St. Peter Damian <span
id="fr_219"></span>[220](#fn_219) mentions them as still in place; and
about two centuries later on, Veccur, Patriarch of Constantinople,
declares they hung there still. <span id="fr_220"></span>[221](#fn_220)

<span id="ix.iv-p31"></span>It was not till 1014 that for the first time
the interpolated creed was used at mass with the sanction of the Pope. 
In that year Benedict VIII. acceded to the urgent request of Henry II.
of Germany and so the papal authority was forced to yield, and the
silver shields have disappeared from St. Peter’s.

<span id="ix.iv-p32"></span>3.  Nothing could be clearer than that the
theologians of the West never had any idea of teaching a double source
of the Godhead.  The doctrine of the Divine Monarchy was always intended
to be preserved, and while in the heat of the controversy sometimes
expressions highly dangerous, or at least clearly inaccurate, may have
been used, yet the intention must be judged from the prevailing teaching
of the approved theologians.  And what this was is evident from the
definition of the Council of Florence, which, while indeed it was not
received by the Eastern Church, and therefore cannot be accepted as an
authoritative exposition of its views, yet certainly must be regarded as
a true and full expression of the teaching of the West.  “The Greeks
asserted that when they say the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father,
they do not use it because they wish to exclude the Son; but because it
seemed to them, as they say, that the Latins assert the Holy Spirit to
proceed from the Father and the Son, as from two principles and by two
spirations, and therefore they abstain from saying that the Holy Spirit
proceeds from the Father and the Son.  But the Latins affirm that they
have no intention when they say the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father
and the Son to deprive the Father of his prerogative of being the
fountain and principle of the entire Godhead, viz. of the Son and of the
Holy Ghost; nor do they deny that the very procession of the Holy Ghost
from the Son, the Son derives from the Father; nor do they teach two
principles or two spirations; but they assert that there is one only
principle, one only spiration, as they have always asserted up to this
time.”

<span id="ix.iv-p33"></span>4.  It is quite possible that when these
words were first used there was no knowledge on the part of those using
them that there had been made any addition to the Creed.  As I have
already pointed out, the year 589 is the earliest date at which we find
the words actually introduced into the Creed.  Now there can be no doubt
whatever that the Council of Toledo of that year had no suspicion that
the creed as they had it was not the creed exactly as adopted at
Constantinople.  This is capable of the most ample proof.

<span id="ix.iv-p34"></span>In the first place they declared, “Whosoever
believes that there is any other Catholic faith and communion, besides
that of the Universal Church, that Church which holds and honours the
decrees of the Councils of Nice, Constantinople, I. Ephesus, and
Chalcedon, let him be anathema.”  After some further anathemas in the
same sense they repeat “the creed published at the council of Nice,” and
next, “The holy faith which the 150 fathers of the Council of
Constantinople explained, consonant with the great Council of Nice.” 
And then lastly, “The holy faith which the translators of the council of
Chalcedon explained.”  The creed of Constantinople as recited contained
the words “and from the Son.”  Now the fathers at Toledo were not
ignorant of the decree of Ephesus forbidding the making of “another
faith” (<span class="Greek"><span id="ix.iv-p34.1"></span>ἑτέραν
πίστιν</span>) for they themselves cite it, as follows from the acts of
Chalcedon; “The holy and universal Synod forbids to bring forward any
other faith; or to write or <span id="page_168">p. 168</span> <span
id="ix.iv-Page_168"></span>believe or to teach other, or be otherwise
minded.  But whoso shall dare either to expound or produce or deliver
any other faith to those who wish to be converted etc.”  Upon this Dr.
Pusey well remarks, <span id="fr_221"></span>[222](#fn_221) “It is, of
course, impossible to suppose that they can have believed any addition
to the creed to have been forbidden by the clause, and, accepting it
with its anathema, themselves to have added to the creed of
Constantinople.”

<span id="ix.iv-p36"></span>But while this is the case it might be that
they understood <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iv-p36.1"></span>ἑτέραν</span> of the Ephesine decree to forbid
the making of contradictory and new creeds and not explanatory additions
to the existing one.  Of this interpretation of the decree, which would
seem without any doubt to be the only tenable one, I shall treat in its
proper place.

<span id="ix.iv-p37"></span>We have however further proof that the
Council of Toledo thought they were using the unaltered creed of
Constantinople.  In these acts we find they adopted the following; “for
reverence of the most holy faith and for the strengthening of the weak
minds of men, the holy Synod enacts, with the advice of our most pious
and most glorious Lord, King Recarede, that through all the churches of
Spain and Gallæcia, the symbol of faith of the council of
Constantinople, i.e. of the 150 bishops, should be recited according to
the form of the Eastern Church, etc.”

<span id="ix.iv-p38"></span>This seems to make the matter clear and the
next question which arises is, How the words could have got into the
Spanish creed?  I venture to suggest a possible explanation.  Epiphanius
tells us that in the year 374 “all the orthodox bishops of the whole
Catholic Church together make this address to those who come to baptism,
in order that they may proclaim and say as follows.” <span
id="fr_222"></span>[223](#fn_222)   If this is to be understood
literally of course Spain was included.  Now the creed thus taught the
catechumens reads as follows at the point about which our interest
centres:

<span id="ix.iv-p40"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iv-p40.1"></span>Καὶ εἰς τὸ ἅγιον πνεῦμα πιστεύομεν,</span>…<span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.iv-p40.2"></span>ἐκ τοῦ πατρὸς ἐκπορευόμενον
καὶ ἐκ τοῦ Υἱοῦ λαμβανόμενον καὶ πιστευόμενον, εἰς μίαν καθολικὴν
κ.τ.λ</span>.  Now it looks to me as if the text had got corrupted and
that there should be a full stop after <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iv-p40.3"></span>λαμβανόμενον</span>, and that <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.iv-p40.4"></span>πιστευόμενον</span> should
be <span class="Greek"><span id="ix.iv-p40.5"></span>πιστεύομεν</span>. 
These emendations are not necessary however for my suggestion although
they would make it more perfect, for in that case by the single omission
of the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iv-p40.6"></span>λαμβανόμενον</span> the Western form is
obtained.  It will be noticed that this was some years before the
Constantinopolitan Council and therefore nothing would be more natural
than that a scribe accustomed to writing the old baptismal creed and now
given the Constantinopolitan creed, so similar to it, to copy, should
have gone on and added the <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iv-p40.7"></span>καὶ ἐκ τοῦ Υἱοῦ</span>, according to habit.

<span id="ix.iv-p41"></span>However this is a mere suggestion, I think I
have shewn that there is strong reason to believe that whatever the
explanation may be, the Spanish Church was unaware that it had added to
or changed the Constantinopolitan creed.

<span id="ix.iv-p42"></span>5.  There remains now only the last point,
which is the most important of all, but which does not belong to the
subject matter of this volume and which therefore I shall treat with the
greatest brevity.  The writings of St. John Damascene are certainly
deemed entirely orthodox by the Easterns and always have been.  On the
other hand their entire orthodoxy has never been disputed in the West,
but a citation from Damascene is considered by St. Thomas as
conclusive.  Under these circumstances it seems hard to resist the
conclusion that the faith of the East and the West, so far as its
official setting forth is concerned, is the same and always has been. 
And perhaps no better proof of the Western acceptance of the Eastern
doctrine concerning the eternal procession of the Holy Spirit can be
found than the fact that St. John Damascene has been in recent years
raised by the pope for his followers to the rank of a Doctor of the
Catholic Church.

<span id="ix.iv-p43"></span><span id="page_169">p. 169</span> <span
id="ix.iv-Page_169"></span>Perhaps I may be allowed to close with two
moderate statements of the Western position, the one by the learned and
pious Dr. Pusey and the other by the none less famous Bishop Pearson.

<span id="ix.iv-p44"></span>Dr. Pusey says:

<span id="ix.iv-p45"></span>“Since, however, the clause, which found its
way into the Creed, was, in the first instance, admitted, as being
supposed to be part of the Constantinopolitan Creed, and, since after it
had been rooted for 200 years, it was not uprooted, for fear of
uprooting also or perplexing the faith of the people, there was no fault
either in its first reception or in its subsequent retention.”

<span id="ix.iv-p46"></span>“The Greeks would condemn forefathers of
their own, if they were to pronounce the clause to be heretical.  For it
would be against the principles of the Church to be in communion with an
heretical body.  But from the deposition of Photius, <span
class="sc"><span id="ix.iv-p46.1"></span>a.d.</span> 886 to at least
<span class="sc"><span id="ix.iv-p46.2"></span>a.d.</span> 1009, East
and West retained their own expression of faith without schism. <span
id="fr_223"></span>[224](#fn_223) ”

<span id="ix.iv-p48"></span>“<span class="sc"><span
id="ix.iv-p48.1"></span>a.d.</span> 1077, Theophylact did not object to
the West, retaining for itself the confession of faith contained in the
words, but only excepted against the insertion of the words in the
Creed. <span id="fr_224"></span>[225](#fn_224) ”

<span id="ix.iv-p50"></span>And Bp. Pearson, explaining Article VIII. of
the Creed says:  “Now although the addition of words to the formal Creed
without the consent, and against the protestations of the Oriental
Church be not justifiable; yet that which was added is nevertheless a
certain truth, and may be so used in that Creed by them who believe the
same to be a truth; so long as they pretend it not to be a definition of
that Council, but an addition or explication inserted, and condemn not
those who, out of a greater respect to such synodical determinations,
will admit of no such insertions, nor speak any other language than the
Scriptures and their Fathers spoke.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_209"></span>[166:210](2140236.htm#fr_209) <span
id="ix.iv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p11"></span> In fact the contention of the Latins was
that the words were inserted by II. Nice!  To this the Easterns answered
most pertinently “Why did you not tell us this long ago?”  They were not
so fortunate when they insisted that St. Thomas would have quoted it,
for some scholars have thought St. Thomas but ill acquainted with the
proceedings at the Seventh Synod.  Vide Hefele, *Concil*. XLVIII., §
810.

<span id="fn_210"></span>[166:211](2140236.htm#fr_210) <span
id="ix.iv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p14"></span> E. B. Pusey.  *On the clause* “and The
Son,” p. 68.

<span id="fn_211"></span>[166:212](2140236.htm#fr_211) <span
id="ix.iv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p17"></span> Hefele.  *Hist. of the Councils*, Vol.
III., p. 175.

<span id="fn_212"></span>[166:213](2140236.htm#fr_212) <span
id="ix.iv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p18"></span> Hefele.  *Hist. Counc*., Vol. IV., p. 416.

<span id="fn_213"></span>[166:214](2140236.htm#fr_213) <span
id="ix.iv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p19"></span> Hefele.  *Hist. Counc*., Vol. IV., p. 470;
Vol. V., p. 208.

<span id="fn_214"></span>[166:215](2140236.htm#fr_214) <span
id="ix.iv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p21"></span> Muratorius.  *Ord. Rom*., Tom. I., col.
541.

<span id="fn_215"></span>[166:216](2140236.htm#fr_215) <span
id="ix.iv-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p22"></span> Mabillon.*  Mus. Ital*., Tom. I., p. 313
and p. 376.

<span id="fn_216"></span>[166:217](2140236.htm#fr_216) <span
id="ix.iv-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p25"></span> Labbe and Cossart.  *Concilia*, Tom. vij.,
col. 1194.

<span id="fn_217"></span>[166:218](2140236.htm#fr_217) <span
id="ix.iv-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p26"></span> Capit. Reg. Franc., Tom. I., p. 483.

<span id="fn_218"></span>[166:219](2140236.htm#fr_218) <span
id="ix.iv-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p27"></span> Fleury.  *Hist. Eccl*., Liv. xlv., chap.
48.

<span id="fn_219"></span>[167:220](2140236.htm#fr_219) <span
id="ix.iv-p28.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p29"></span> Pet. Damian.  *Opusc*., xxxviij.

<span id="fn_220"></span>[167:221](2140236.htm#fr_220) <span
id="ix.iv-p29.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p30"></span> Leo Allat.  *Græc. Orthod*., Tom. I., p.
173.

<span id="fn_221"></span>[168:222](2140236.htm#fr_221) <span
id="ix.iv-p34.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p35"></span> E. B. Pusey.  *On the clause*, “and the
Son,” p. 48.

<span id="fn_222"></span>[168:223](2140236.htm#fr_222) <span
id="ix.iv-p38.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p39"></span> Epiphanius, *Ancoratus*, cxx.

<span id="fn_223"></span>[169:224](2140236.htm#fr_223) <span
id="ix.iv-p46.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p47"></span> Peter of Antioch about <span
class="sc"><span id="ix.iv-p47.1"></span>a.d.</span> 1054, says that he
had heard the name of the Roman Pontiff recited from the Diptychs at the
mass at Constantinople forty-five years before.  Le Quien, p. xii.

<span id="fn_224"></span>[169:225](2140236.htm#fr_224) <span
id="ix.iv-p48.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p49"></span> E. B. Pusey.  *On the clause* “and the
Son,” p. 72.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Historical Note on the Lost “Tome” of the Second
Council.](2140237)
