[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140504)  [Next](2140506) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iii.iv.xi"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.iv.xi-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="xv.iii.iv.xi-p1.1"></span>Canon XI.</span>

<span id="xv.iii.iv.xi-p2"></span>(*Greek*.)

<span id="xv.iii.iv.xi-p3"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iii.iv.xi-p3.1"></span>Bishop</span> <span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iii.iv.xi-p3.2"></span>Hosius</span> said:  This also we ought to
decree, that <span id="fr_393"></span>[394](#fn_393) when a bishop comes
from one city to another city, or from one province to another province,
to indulge boastfulness, ministering to his own praises rather than
serving religious devotion, and wishes to prolong his stay \[in a
city\], and the bishop of that city is not skilled in teaching, let him
\[the visiting bishop\] not do despite to the bishop of the place and
attempt by frequent discourses to disparage him and lessen his repute
(for this device is wont to cause tumults), and strive by such arts to
solicit and wrest to himself another’s throne, <span id="page_426">p.
426</span> <span id="xv.iii.iv.xi-Page_426"></span>not scrupling to
abandon the church committed to him and to procure translation to
another.  A definite limit of time should therefore be set in such a
case, especially since not to receive a bishop is accounted the part of
rude and discourteous persons.  Ye remember that in former times our
fathers decreed that if a layman were staying in a city and should not
come to divine worship for three \[successive\] Sundays \[that is\], for
three \[full\] weeks, he should be repelled from communion.  If then
this has been decreed in the case of laymen, it is neither needful, nor
fitting, nor yet even expedient that a bishop, unless he has some grave
necessity or difficult business, should be very long absent from his own
church and distress the people committed to him.

<span id="xv.iii.iv.xi-p5"></span>All the bishops said:  We decide that
this decree also is most proper.

<span id="xv.iii.iv.xi-p6"></span>(*Latin*.)

<span id="xv.iii.iv.xi-p7"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iii.iv.xi-p7.1"></span>Bishop</span> <span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iii.iv.xi-p7.2"></span>Hosius</span> said:  This also ye ought to
determine.  If a bishop comes from one city to another city, or from his
own province to another province, and serving ambition rather than
devotion, wishes to remain resident for a long time in a strange city,
and then (as it perchance happens that the bishop of the place is not so
practised or so learned as himself) he, the stranger, should begin to do
him despite and deliver frequent discourses to disparage him and lessen
his repute, not hesitating by this device to leave the church assigned
him and remove to that which is another’s—do ye then \[in such a case\]
set a limit of time \[for his stay in the city\], because on the one
hand to refuse to receive a bishop is discourteous, and on the other his
too long stay is mischievous.  Provision must be made against this.  I
remember that in a former council our brethren decreed that if any
layman did not attend divine service in a city in which he was staying
three Sundays, that is, for three weeks, he should be deprived of
communion.  If then this has been decreed in the case of laymen, it is
far less lawful and fitting that a bishop, if there be no grave
necessity detaining him, should be absent from his church longer than
the time above written.

<span id="xv.iii.iv.xi-p8"></span>All said that such was their pleasure.

<span id="xv.iii.iv.xi-p9"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xv.iii.iv.xi-p9.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="xv.iii.iv.xi-p10"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iii.iv.xi-p10.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon XI.</span>

<span id="xv.iii.iv.xi-p11"></span>A bishop when called in by another
bishop, if he that called him is unskilled, must not be too assiduous in
preaching, for this would be indecorous to the unlearned bishop, and an
attack upon his bishopric.  And both improper.  Without grave necessity
it is undesirable for a bishop to be absent from his church.

<span id="xv.iii.iv.xi-p12"></span>This is Canon XIV. of the Latin.

<span id="xv.iii.iv.xi-p13"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iii.iv.xi-p13.1"></span>Van Espen.</span>

<span id="xv.iii.iv.xi-p14"></span>To understand this canon it must be
again remembered that in the first ages of the Church bishops were wont
to be appointed at the demand of the people; wherefore whoever were
going around after the episcopate, were accustomed to solicit the hearts
of the people, and to make it their study to win their affections.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_393"></span>[425:394](2140505.htm#fr_393) <span
id="xv.iii.iv.xi-p3.3"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.iv.xi-p4"></span> Here begins the Greek text, according
to Bev.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon XII](2140506)
