[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140297)  [Next](2140299) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="x.xvi.xvi"></span>

<span id="x.xvi.xvi-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="x.xvi.xvi-p1.1"></span>Note on the Messalians or Massalians.</span>

<span id="x.xvi.xvi-p2"></span>(Tillemont, *Mémoires*, Tom. VIII.,
Seconde Partie.  Condensed.)

<span id="x.xvi.xvi-p3"></span>St. Epiphanius distinguishes two sorts of
persons who were called by the name of Messalians, the one and the more
ancient were heathen, the other were Christian in name.

<span id="x.xvi.xvi-p4"></span>The Messalians who bore the Christian
name had no beginning, nor end, nor chief, nor fixed faith.  Their first
writers were Dadoes, Sabas, Adelphus, Hermes, Simeon and some <span
id="page_241">p. 241</span> <span
id="x.xvi.xvi-Page_241"></span>others.  Adelphus was neither monk nor
clerk, but a layman.  Sabas had taken the habit of an anchorite and was
surnamed “the Eunuch,” because he had mutilated himself.  Adelphus was
of Mesopotamia and was considered their leader, so that they are
sometimes called “Adelphians.”  They are also called “Eustathians.” 
“Euchites” is the Greek equivalent of “Messalians” in Hebrew.  They were
also called “Enthusiasts” or “Corentes” because of the agitation the
devils caused them, which they attributed to the Holy Spirit.

<span id="x.xvi.xvi-p5"></span>St. Epiphanius thought that these
heretics sprang up in the time of Constance, although Theodoret does not
put them down until the days of Valentinian.  They came from
Mesopotamia, but spread as far as Antioch by the year 376.

<span id="x.xvi.xvi-p6"></span>They pretended to renounce the world, and
to give up their possessions, and under the habit of monks they taught
Manichæan impieties, and others still more detestable.

<span id="x.xvi.xvi-p7"></span>Their principal tenet was that everyone
inherited from his ancestors a demon, who had possession of his soul
from the moment of his birth, and always led it to evil.  That baptism
cut away the outside branches of sin, but could not free the soul of
this demon, and that therefore its reception was useless.  That only
constant prayer could drive out this demon.  That when it was expelled,
the Holy Spirit descended and gave visible and sensible marks of his
presence, and delivered the body from all the uprisings of passion, and
the soul from the inclination to evil, so that afterwards there was no
need of fasting, nor of controlling lust by the precepts of the Gospel.

<span id="x.xvi.xvi-p8"></span>Besides this chief dogma, gross errors,
contrary to the first principles of religion, were attributed to them. 
That the divinity changed itself in different manners to unite itself to
their souls.  They held that the body of Christ was infinite like his
divine nature; they did not hesitate to say that his body was at first
full of devils which were driven out when the Word took it upon
him. <span id="fr_275"></span>[276](#fn_275)   They claimed that they
possessed clear knowledge of the state of souls after death, read the
hearts and desires of man, the secrets of the future and saw the Holy
Trinity with their bodily eyes.  They affirmed that man could not only
attain perfection but equal the deity in virtue and knowledge.

<span id="x.xvi.xvi-p10"></span>They never fasted, slept men and women
together, in warm weather in the open streets.  But certain say that
before attaining to this liberty of license three years of mortification
were required.

<span id="x.xvi.xvi-p11"></span>The most well-known point of their
discipline is that they forbade all manual labour as evil, and unworthy
of the spiritual.

<span id="x.xvi.xvi-p12"></span>Harmenopulus in his Basilicæ (Tom. I.
Lib. ix.) says that they held the Cross in horror, that they refused to
honour the Holy Virgin, or St. John the Baptist, or any of the Saints
unless they were Martyrs; that they mutilated themselves at will, that
they dissolved marriages, that they foreswore and perjured themselves
without scruple, that women were appointed as mistresses of the sect to
instruct and govern men, even priests.

<span id="x.xvi.xvi-p13"></span>Although so opposed to the faith of the
Church, yet for all this the Messalians did not separate themselves from
her communion.  They did not believe in the Communion as a mystery which
sanctifies us, which must be approached with fear and faith, but only
came to the holy Table to hide themselves and to pass for Catholics, for
this was one of their artifices.  When asked, they had no hesitation in
denying all that they believed, and were willing to anathematize those
who thought with them.  And all this they did without fear, because they
were taught they had attained perfection, that is impassibility.

<span id="x.xvi.xvi-p14"></span>*Vide* Theodoret, *H. E.*, Lib. iv.,
cap. xi.

<span id="x.xvi.xvi-p15"></span>Photius tells us that John of Antioch
wrote against these heretics.

<span id="x.xvi.xvi-p16"></span>St. Maximus the Abbot speaks of this
heresy as still existing in the <span class="sc"><span
id="x.xvi.xvi-p16.1"></span>VII</span>th Century, and as practising the
most abominable infamies.  Photius bears witness of its resuscitation
<span id="page_242">p. 242</span> <span
id="x.xvi.xvi-Page_242"></span>in his days in Cappadocia with its wonted
corruptions.  Harmenopulus remarks that a certain Eleutherius of
Paphlagonia had added to it new crimes, and that in part it became the
source of the sect of the Bogomiles, so well known in the decadence of
the Greek empire.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_275"></span>[241:276](2140298.htm#fr_275) <span
id="x.xvi.xvi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="x.xvi.xvi-p9"></span> They were therefore Nestorians.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Decree of the Synod in the Matter of Euprepius and
Cyril.](2140299)
