[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140710)  [Next](2140712) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi.xvii"></span>

<span id="xvi.xvii-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="xvi.xvii-p1.1"></span>Excursus on the Reception of the Seventh
Council.</span>

<span id="xvi.xvii-p2"></span>The reception of the Seventh Council in
the East was practically universal.  No historian pretends that the
iconoclastic opinions had any hold over the masses of the people.  It
was strictly speaking a court movement, backed by the army, and whenever
the images were laid low and their veneration condemned it was by the
power of the State, enforcing its will upon a yielding and (as we would
call them to-day) Erastian clergy.  (Cf. Harnack, *History of Dogma*,
Eng. tr. Vol. iv., p. 326.)

<span id="xvi.xvii-p3"></span>The struggle indeed was not quite put an
end to by the conciliar decree.  After the death of the Empress in <span
class="sc"><span id="xvi.xvii-p3.1"></span>a.d.</span> 803, several
iconoclastic rulers sat on the throne of the East, <span
id="page_576">p. 576</span> <span id="xvi.xvii-Page_576"></span>among
them Michael the Stammerer, who (as Michaud wittily says) “fought the
images and married the nuns.” <span id="fr_545"></span>[546](#fn_545)  
He sent a letter, which is still extant, to Louis le Débonnaire of
France, setting forth the superstitions of the orthodox, which is most
curious and interesting reading.  (*Vide* Mansi.)

<span id="xvi.xvii-p6"></span>His successor was Theophilus, who reigned
from 829 until 842, and was a fanatical iconoclast.  The Patriarchs of
Antioch, Alexandria, and Jerusalem wrote to him officially, several
years after his accession, begging him not to imitate the bad example of
the iconoclasts.  At that time the only Patriarch who sided with the
heretics was John the Grammarian, the Patriarch of Constantinople, the
very same who in 814 had repudiated the iconoclast doctrine!  With the
death of this Emperor, the power of the Iconoclasts likewise died; and
at the accession of Michael III with his mother Theodora and his sister
Thecla came the final triumph of the images.  I shall quote here the
words of Harnack:  “Then came an Empress, Theodora, who finally restored
the worship.  This took place at the Synod held at Constantinople <span
class="sc"><span id="xvi.xvii-p6.1"></span>a.d.</span> 842.  This Synod
decreed that a Feast of Orthodoxy (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xvi.xvii-p6.2"></span>ἡ κυριακὴ τῆς ὀρθοδοξίας</span> ) should be
celebrated annually, at which the victory over the iconoclasts should be
regularly remembered.  Thus the whole of orthodoxy was united in
image-worship.  In this way the Eastern Church reached the position
which suited its nature.  We have here the conclusion of a development,
consistent in the main points.  The divine and sacred, as that had
descended into the sensuous world by the incarnation, had created for
itself in the Church a system of material, supernatural things, which
offered themselves for man’s use.”  (*Hist. Dogma*.  Vol. iv., p. 328.)

<span id="xvi.xvii-p7"></span>Much has been written, and truly written,
of the superiority of the iconoclastic rulers; but when all has been
said that can be, the fact still remains, that they were most of them
but sorry Christians, and the justice of the Protestant Archbishop of
Dublin’s summing up of the matter will not be disputed by any impartial
student.  He says, “No one will deny that with rarest exceptions, all
the religious earnestness, all which constituted the quickening power of
a church, was ranged upon the other \[i.e. the orthodox\] side.  Had the
Iconoclasts triumphed, when their work showed itself at last in its true
colours, it would have proved to be the triumph, not of faith in an
invisible God, but of frivolous unbelief in an incarnate Saviour.” 
(Trench.  *Mediæval History*, Chap. vii.)

<span id="xvi.xvii-p8"></span>We come now to consider what reception the
Seventh of the General Councils met with in the West.  And first we find
that it was accepted, so far at least as its dogmatic decrees went, by
the Pope, the whole Roman Church and, so far as we know, by all the West
except the realm of Charlemagne and, as would naturally be expected, the
English Church.

<span id="xvi.xvii-p9"></span>It is true that this was a large and very
important exception; so large and so important that it becomes necessary
to examine in detail the causes which led to this rejection.

<span id="xvi.xvii-p10"></span>Some persons have supposed that the
English council held at Calcuth in 787 rejected the ecumenical character
of II. Nice, because in two of its canons (the 1st and the 4th) it only
speaks of “the faith of the Six General Councils.”  But it is evident
that the reason for this was that it had not yet heard of the Nicene
synod; moreover such action would have been clearly impossible, since
the council was presided over by the Bishop of Ostia, the legate of Pope
Hadrian.

<span id="xvi.xvii-p11"></span>The first opposition to the council in
the West was made apparently by Charlemagne himself.  Pope Hadrian sent
him a translation of the acts into Latin and signified his accept<span
id="page_577">p. 577</span> <span id="xvi.xvii-Page_577"></span>ance of
the council.  But this translation was so badly done that not only was a
large part of the acts utterly unintelligible, but also, in at least one
place, a bishop of the council was made to say that the sacred images
were to be adored with the same supreme worship as is paid to the Holy
Trinity.

<span id="xvi.xvii-p12"></span>It may not be wholly charitable to
suggest the possibility of such a thing having any influence in the
matter.  On the other hand it would be unfair to the reader not to state
that Charlemagne had, or thought that he had, serious grievances against
the Empress Irene, and that he might not have been sorry to have
discovered some reason for which to reject her council.  It should,
moreover, be remembered how much the Pope in his struggle for
independence of the Eastern Empire trusted to Charlemagne, and therefore
how reluctant he might readily have been to break with so important an
ally; and so might be induced to tolerate the rejection by the Frankish
Emperor of what had been received by him, the Vicar of Christ and the
successor of Peter, as the Seventh Ecumenical Synod of the Catholic
Church.

<span id="xvi.xvii-p13"></span>As a result of this feeling of
Charlemagne’s, there were written what we call the “Caroline Books,” and
these exercised so mighty an influence on this whole question, and so
completely misled even the learned, that I shall give a careful
examination of their authorship, authority, and contents; for there can
be no doubt that it was the influence of these books (which appeared in
790) that induced the unfortunate action of the Council of Frankfort
four years later (in 794); and that of the Convention of Paris in 825.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_545"></span>[576:546](2140711.htm#fr_545) <span
id="xvi.xvii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.xvii-p4"></span> It was during this period that St.
Theodore, writing in 826 to Arsenius, observes:

<span id="xvi.xvii-p5"></span>“Rome has not received it as an Ecumenical
Council, but only as a provincial Synod, assembled to remedy a
particular evil; Legates of the other Patriarchs were not there; those
of Rome had come on different business:  Legates, indeed, there were
from the East, but they were brought by our deputies, not sent by their
Patriarchs, who knew nothing of the matter till afterwards.  Our
countrymen acted thus for the purpose of more easily bringing back the
heretics by persuading them that it was an Œcumenical Council.” 
“Theodore, however, it is fair to add, afterwards changed his opinion.” 
Such is Dr. Neale’s candid admission.  *Hist. of the East. Ch*., Vol.
II., p. 135.  How often, alas! has this passage been quoted by
controversialists, and the word of warning to the reader been wholly
omitted.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Examination of the Caroline Books.](2140712)
