[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140013)  [Next](2140015) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.ii"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p1"></span> <span id="page_2">p. 2</span> <span
id="vii.ii-Page_2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="vii.ii-p1.1"></span>Historical Introduction.</span>

<span id="vii.ii-p2"></span>The history of the Council of Nice has been
so often written by so many brilliant historians, from the time of its
sitting down to to-day, that any historical notice of the causes leading
to its assembling, or account of its proceedings, seems quite
unnecessary.  The editor, however, ventures to call the attention of the
reader to the fact that in this, as in every other of the Seven
Ecumenical Councils, the question the Fathers considered was not what
they supposed Holy Scripture might mean, nor what they, from *à priori*
arguments, thought would be consistent with the mind of God, but
something entirely different, to wit, what they had received.  They
understood their position to be that of witnesses, not that of
exegetes.  They recognized but one duty resting upon them in this
respect—to hand down to other faithful men that good thing the Church
had received according to the command of God.  The first requirement was
not learning, but honesty.  The question they were called upon to answer
was not, What do I think probable, or even certain, from Holy Scripture?
but, What have I been taught, what has been intrusted to me to hand down
to others?  When the time came, in the Fourth Council, to examine the
Tome of Pope St. Leo, the question was not whether it could be proved to
the satisfaction of the assembled fathers from Holy Scripture, but
whether it was the traditional faith of the Church.  It was not the
doctrine of Leo in the fifth century, but the doctrine of Peter in the
first, and of the Church since then, that they desired to believe and to
teach, and so, when they had studied the Tome, they cried out: <span
id="fr_46"></span>[47](#fn_46)

<span id="vii.ii-p4"></span>“This is the faith of the Fathers!  This is
the faith of the Apostles!…Peter hath thus spoken by Leo!  The Apostles
thus taught!  Cyril thus taught!” etc.

<span id="vii.ii-p5"></span>No Acts of either of the first two
Ecumenical Councils have been handed down. <span
id="fr_47"></span>[48](#fn_47)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_46"></span>[2:47](2140014.htm#fr_46) <span
id="vii.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p3"></span> This is clearly set forth by Pope Vigilius
as follows:  “No one can doubt that our fathers believed that they
should receive with veneration the letter of blessed Leo if they
declared it to agree with the doctrines of the Nicene and
Constantinopolitan Councils, as also with those of blessed Cyril, set
forth in the first of Ephesus.  And if that letter of so great a
Pontiff, shining with so bright a light of the orthodox Faith, needed to
be approved by these comparisons, how can that letter to Maris the
Persian, which specially rejects the First Council of Ephesus and
declares to be heretics the expressed doctrines of the blessed Cyril, be
believed to have been called orthodox by these same Fathers, condemning
as it does those writings, by comparison with which, as we have said,
the doctrine of so great a Pontiff deserved to be commended?”—Vigil.,
*Constitutum pro dammatione Trium Capitulorum*.  Migne, *Pat. Lat*.,
tom. lxix., col. 162.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[2:48](2140014.htm#fr_47) <span
id="vii.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p6"></span> About twenty-five years ago Mr. Eugène
Révillout discovered, in the Museum of Turin, two fragments in Coptic
which he supposed to be portions of the Acts of this Council (of which
the rest are still missing) incorporated into the Acts of a Council held
at Alexandria in 362.  But there is too little known about these
fragments to attribute to them any fixed value.  I therefore only refer
the reader to the literature on the subject—*Journal Asiatique*,
Fevrier–Mars, 1873; *Annales de Philosophie Chrétienne*, Juin, 1873;
*Revue de Questions Historiques*, Avril, 1874; M. W. Guettée, *Histoire
de l’Église*, t. III., p. 21; Eugène Révillout, *Le Concile de Nicée et
le Concile d’Alexandrie…d’après les textes Coptes*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Nicene Creed.](2140015)
