[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140320)  [Next](2140322) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xi.xviii.iii"></span>

<span id="xi.xviii.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="xi.xviii.iii-p1.1"></span>Canon III.</span>

<span id="xi.xviii.iii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xi.xviii.iii-p2.1"></span>It</span> has come to \[the knowledge of\]
the holy Synod that certain of those who are enrolled among the clergy
have, through lust of gain, become hirers of other men’s possessions,
and make contracts pertaining to secular affairs, lightly esteeming the
service of God, and slip into the houses of secular persons, whose
property they undertake through covetousness to manage.  Wherefore the
great and holy Synod decrees that henceforth no bishop, clergyman, nor
monk shall hire possessions, or engage in business, or occupy himself in
worldly engagements, unless he shall be called by the law to the
guardianship of minors, from which there is no escape; or unless the
bishop of the city shall commit to him the care of ecclesiastical
business, or of unprovided orphans or widows and of persons who stand
especially in need of the Church’s help, through the fear of God.  And
if any one shall hereafter transgress these decrees, he shall be
subjected to ecclesiastical penalties.

<span id="xi.xviii.iii-p3"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xi.xviii.iii-p3.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="xi.xviii.iii-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xi.xviii.iii-p4.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon III.</span>

<span id="xi.xviii.iii-p5"></span>Those who assume the care of secular
houses should be corrected, unless perchance the law called them to the
administration of those not yet come of age, from which there is no
exemption.  Unless further their Bishop permits them to take care of
orphans and widows.

<span id="xi.xviii.iii-p6"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xi.xviii.iii-p6.1"></span>Bright.</span>

<span id="xi.xviii.iii-p7"></span>These two cases excepted, the
undertaking of secular business was made ecclesiastically penal.  Yet
this is not to be construed as forbidding clerics to work at trades
either (1) when the church-funds were insufficient to maintain them, or
(2) in order to have more <span id="page_270">p. 270</span> <span
id="xi.xviii.iii-Page_270"></span>to bestow in alms, or (3) as an
example of industry or humility.  Thus, most of the clergy of Cæsarea in
Cappadocia practised sedentary trades for a livelihood (Basil, *Epist*.,
cxcviii., 1); and some African canons allow, or even direct, a cleric to
live by a trade, provided that his clerical duties are not neglected
(Mansi, iii., 955).  At an earlier time Spyridion, the famous Cypriot
bishop, still one of the most popular saints in the Levant (Stanley’s
*East. Church*, p. 126), retained, out of humility (<span
class="Greek"><span id="xi.xviii.iii-p7.1"></span>ἀτυφιαν πολλήν</span>,
Soc. i. 12), his occupation as a shepherd; and in the latter part of the
fourth century Zeno, bishop of Maiuma, wove linen, partly to supply his
own wants, and partly to obtain means of helping the poor (Soz., vii.
28).  Sidonius mentions a “reader” who maintained himself by commercial
transactions (*Epist*., vi. 8), and in the Anglo-Saxon Church, although
presbyters were forbidden to become “negotiorum sæcularium dispositores”
(Cl. of Clovesho in 747, c. 8), or to be “*mongers* and covetous
merchants” (Elfric’s canons, xxx.), yet the canons of King Edgar’s reign
ordered every priest “diligently to learn a handicraft” (No. 11;
Wilkins, i. 225).  In short, it was not the mere fact of secular
employment, but secularity of motive and of tone that was condemned.

<span id="xi.xviii.iii-p8"></span>This canon was the second of these
proposed by the Emperor, and is found in the *Corpus Juris Canonici*,
Gratian’s *Decretum*, Pars I. Dist. lxxxvi., C. xxvj.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon IV](2140322)
