[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140155)  [Next](2140157) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xix"></span>

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xix-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="viii.vi.iv.xix-p1.1"></span>Canon XIX.</span>

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xix-p2"></span>A <span class="sc"><span
id="viii.vi.iv.xix-p2.1"></span>bishop</span> shall not be ordained
without a synod and the presence of the metropolitan of the province. 
And when he is present, it is by all means better that all his brethren
in the ministry of the Province should assemble together with him; and
these the metropolitan ought to invite by letter.  And it were better
that all should meet; but if this be difficult, it is indispensable that
a majority should either be present or take part by letter in the
election, and that thus the appointment should be made in the presence,
or with the consent, of the majority; but if it should be done contrary
to these decrees, the ordination shall be of no force.  And if the
appointment shall be made according to the prescribed canon, and any
should object through natural love of contradiction, the decision of the
majority shall prevail.

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xix-p3"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="viii.vi.iv.xix-p3.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xix-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.vi.iv.xix-p4.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon XIX.</span>

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xix-p5"></span>If there be no synod and
metropolitan, let there be no bishop.  If on account of some difficulty
all do not meet together, at least let the greater number, or let them
give their assent by letter.  But if after the affair is all settled a
few are contentious, let the vote of the majority stand firm.

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xix-p6"></span><span id="page_118">p. 118</span>
<span id="viii.vi.iv.xix-Page_118"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.vi.iv.xix-p6.1"></span>Zonaras.</span>

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xix-p7"></span>In the first place it must be noted
that by “ordination” in this place is meant election, and the laying on
of the bishop’s hand.

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xix-p8"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.vi.iv.xix-p8.1"></span>Balsamon.</span>

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xix-p9"></span>The method of choosing a bishop is
laid down in the canons of Nice, number iv., but the present canon adds
the provision that an election which takes place in violation of the
provisions of this decree is null and invalid:  and that when those who
are electing are divided in opinion as to whom to choose, the votes of
the majority shall prevail.  But when you hear this canon saying that
there should be no election without the presence of the Metropolitan,
you must not say that he ought to be present at an election (for this
was prohibited, as is found written in other canons) but rather say that
his presence here is a permission or persuasion, without which no
election could take place.

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xix-p10"></span>Compare Apostolic Canon number j.

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xix-p11"></span>This canon is found in the *Corpus
Juris Canonici*, Gratian’s *Decretum*, Pars I., Dist. LXV., can. iij. 
Gratian has chosen Isidore’s version, and the Roman Correctors point out
that Dionysius’ is preferable.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon XX](2140157)
