[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140038)  [Next](2140040) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.vi.xxi"></span>

<span id="vii.vi.xxi-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="vii.vi.xxi-p1.1"></span>Canon XIV.</span>

<span id="vii.vi.xxi-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="vii.vi.xxi-p2.1"></span>Concerning</span> catechumens who have
lapsed, the holy and great Synod has decreed that, after they have
passed three years only as hearers, they shall pray with the
catechumens.

<span id="vii.vi.xxi-p3"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="vii.vi.xxi-p3.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="vii.vi.xxi-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="vii.vi.xxi-p4.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon XIV.</span>

<span id="vii.vi.xxi-p5"></span>If any of the catechumens shall have
fallen for three years he shall be a hearer only, and then let him pray
with the catechumens.

<span id="vii.vi.xxi-p6"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="vii.vi.xxi-p6.1"></span>Justellus.</span>

<span id="vii.vi.xxi-p7"></span>The people formerly were divided into
three classes in the church, for there were catechumens, faithful, and
penitents; but it is clear from the present canon there were two kinds
of catechumens:  one consisting of those who heard the Word of God, and
wished to become Christians, but had not yet desired baptism; these were
called “hearers.”  Others who were of long standing, and were properly
trained in the faith, and desired baptism—these were called
“competentes.”

<span id="vii.vi.xxi-p8"></span><span id="page_32">p. 32</span> <span
id="vii.vi.xxi-Page_32"></span>There is difference of opinion among the
learned as to whether there was not a third or even a fourth class of
catechumens.  Bingham and Card. Bona, while not agreeing in particular
points, agree in affirming that there were more than two classes. 
Bingham’s first class are those not allowed to enter the church, the
<span class="Greek"><span id="vii.vi.xxi-p8.1"></span>ἐξωθούμενοι</span>
, but the affirmation of the existence of such a class rests only on a
very forced explanation of canon five of Neocæsarea.  The second class,
the hearers, audientes, rests on better evidence.  These were not
allowed to stay while the Holy Mysteries were celebrated, and their
expulsion gave rise to the distinction between the “Mass of the
Catechumens” (*Missa Catechumenorum*) and the “Mass of the Faithful”
(*Missa Fidelium*).  Nor were they suffered to hear the Creed or the Our
Father.  Writers who multiply the classes insert here some who knelt and
prayed, called *Prostrati* or *Genuflectentes* (the same name as was
given to one of the grades of penitence).

<span id="vii.vi.xxi-p9"></span>(Edw. H. Plumptre in *Dict. Christ.
Antiq. s.v.* Catechumens.)

<span id="vii.vi.xxi-p10"></span>After these stages had been traversed
each with its appropriate instruction, the catechumens gave in their
names as applicants for baptism, and were known accordingly as
*Competentes* (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.vi.xxi-p10.1"></span>συναιτοῦντες</span> ).  This was done
commonly at the beginning of the Quadragesimal fast, and the
instruction, carried on through the whole of that period, was fuller and
more public in its nature (Cyril Hieros. *Catech.* i. 5; Hieron. *Ep.*
61, *ad Pammach*. c. 4).  To catechumens in this stage the great
articles of the Creed, the nature of the Sacraments, the penitential
discipline of the Church, were explained, as in the Catechetical
Lectures of Cyril of Jerusalem, with dogmatic precision.  Special
examinations and inquiries into character were made at intervals during
the forty days.  It was a time for fasting and watching and prayer
(*Const. Apost.* viii. 5; 4 C. *Carth.* c. 85; Tertull. *De Bapt.* c.
20; Cyril. l. c.) and, in the case of those who were married, of the
strictest continence (August. *De fide et oper.* v. 8).  Those who
passed through the ordeal were known as the *perfectiores* (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.vi.xxi-p10.2"></span>τελειώτεροι</span> ),
the *electi*, or in the nomenclature of the Eastern Church as <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.vi.xxi-p10.3"></span>βαπτιζόμενοι</span> or
<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.vi.xxi-p10.4"></span>φωτιζόμενοι</span> , the present participle
being used of course with a future or gerundial sense.  Their names were
inscribed as such in the *album* or register of the church.  They were
taught, but not till a few days before their baptism, the Creed and the
Lord’s Prayer which they were to use after it.  The periods for this
registration varied, naturally enough, in different churches.  At
Jerusalem it was done on the second (Cyril. *Catech.* iii.), in Africa
on the fourth Sunday in Lent (August. *Serm.* 213), and this was the
time at which the candidate, if so disposed, might lay aside his old
heathen or Jewish name and take one more specifically Christian (Socrat.
*H. E.* vii. 21).…It is only necessary to notice here that the
*Sacramentum Catechumenorum* of which Augustine speaks (*De Peccat.
Merit.* ii. 26) as given apparently at or about the time of their first
admission by imposition of hands, was probably the <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.vi.xxi-p10.5"></span>εὐλογίαι</span> or
*panis benedictus*, and not, as Bingham and Augusti maintain, the *salt*
which was given with milk and honey after baptism.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon XV](2140040)
