[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140690)  [Next](2140692) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi.xiv.v"></span>

<span id="xvi.xiv.v-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="xvi.xiv.v-p1.1"></span>Canon V.</span>

<span id="xvi.xiv.v-p2"></span>That they who cast contumely upon clerics
because they have been ordained in the church without bringing a gift
with them, are to be published with a fine.

<span id="xvi.xiv.v-p3"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xvi.xiv.v-p3.1"></span>It</span> is a sin unto death when men
incorrigibly continue in their sin, but they sin more deeply, who
proudly lifting themselves up oppose piety and sincerity, accounting
mammon of more worth than obedience to God, and caring nothing for his
canonical precepts.  <span id="page_559">p. 559</span> <span
id="xvi.xiv.v-Page_559"></span>The Lord God is not found among such,
unless, perchance, having been humbled by their own fall, they return to
a sober mind.  It behoves them the rather to turn to God with a contrite
heart and to pray for forgiveness and pardon of so grave a sin, and no
longer to boast in an unholy gift.  For the Lord is nigh unto them that
are of a contrite heart.  With regard, therefore, to those who pride
themselves that because of their benefactions of gold they were ordained
in the Church, and resting confidently in this evil custom (so alien
from God and inconsistent with the whole priesthood), with a proud look
and open mouth vilify with abusive words those who on account of the
strictness of their life were chosen by the Holy Ghost and have been
ordained without any gift of money, we decree in the first place that
they take the lowest place in their order; but if they do not amend let
them be subjected to a fine.  But if it appear that any one has done
this \[i.e., given money\], at any time as a price for ordination, let
him be dealt with according to the Apostolic Canon which says:  “If a
bishop has obtained possession of his dignity by means of money (the
same rule applies also to a presbyter or deacon) let him be deposed and
also the one who ordained him, and let him also be altogether cut off
from communion, even as Simon Magus was by me Peter.”  To the same
effect is the second canon of our holy fathers of Chalcedon, which
says:  If any bishop gives ordination in return for money, and puts up
for sale that which cannot be sold, and ordains for money a bishop or
chorepiscopus, or presbyter, or deacon, or any other of those who are
reckoned among the clergy; or who for money shall appoint anyone to the
office of œconomus, advocate, or paramonarius; or, in a word, who hath
done anything else contrary to the canon, for the sake of filthy
lucre—he who hath undertaken to do anything of this sort, having been
convicted, shall be in danger of losing his degree.  And he who has been
ordained shall derive no advantage from the ordination or promotion thus
negotiated; but let him remain a stranger to the dignity and
responsibility which he attained by means of money.  And if any one
shall appear to have acted as a go-between in so shameful and godless a
traffic, he also, if he be a cleric, shall be removed from his degree;
if he be a layman or a monk, let him be excommunicated.

<span id="xvi.xiv.v-p4"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xvi.xiv.v-p4.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="xvi.xiv.v-p5"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xvi.xiv.v-p5.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon V.</span>

<span id="xvi.xiv.v-p6"></span>It seems that such as glory in the fact
that they owe their position to their liberality in gold to the Church,
and who contemn those who were chosen because of their virtue and were
appointed without any largess, should receive the lowest place in their
order.  And should they continue in their ways, let them be punished. 
But those who made such gifts so as to get ordinations, let such be cast
forth from communion, as Simon Magus was by Peter.

<span id="xvi.xiv.v-p7"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xvi.xiv.v-p7.1"></span>Hefele.</span>

<span id="xvi.xiv.v-p8"></span>Zonaras and Balsamon in earlier times,
and later Christian Lupus and Van Espen, remarked that the second part
of this canon treats of simony, but not the first.  This has in view
rather those who, on account of their large expenditure on churches and
the poor, have been raised, without simony, to the clerical estate as a
reward and recognition of their beneficence; and being proud of this,
now depreciate other clergymen who were unable or unwilling to make such
foundations and the like.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon VI](2140692)
