[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140368)  [Next](2140370) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiii.iv"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p1"></span> <span id="page_328">p. 328</span> <span
id="xiii.iv-Page_328"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xiii.iv-p1.1"></span>The Letter of Agatho, Pope of Old Rome, to the
Emperor, and the Letter of Agatho and of 125 Bishops of the Roman Synod,
Addressed to the Sixth Council.</span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p2"></span>(*Read at the Fourth Session, November 15,
at the request of George, Patriarch of Constantinople and his
Suffragans*.)

<span id="xiii.iv-p3"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xiii.iv-p3.1"></span>Introductory Note.</span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p4"></span>(Bossuet, *Defensio Cler. Gal*. Lib. VII.,
cap. xxiv.)

<span id="xiii.iv-p5"></span>All the fathers spoke one by one, and only
after examination were the letters of St. Agatho and the whole Western
Council approved.  Agatho, indeed, and the Western Bishops put forth
their decrees thus \[‘We have directed persons from our humility to your
valour protected of God, which shall offer to you the report of us all,
that is, of all the Bishops in the Northern or Western Regions, in which
too we have summed up the confession of our Apostolic Faith, yet <span
id="fr_325"></span>[326](#fn_325) \] not as those who wished to contend
about these things as being uncertain, but, being certain and
unchangeable to see them forth in a brief definition, \[suppliantly
beseeching you that, by the favour of your sacred majesty, you would
command these same things to be preached to all, and to have force with
all.’\]  Undoubtedly, therefore, so far as in them lay, they defined the
matter.  The question was, whether the other Churches throughout the
world would agree, and a matter so great was only made clear after
Episcopal examination.  But the high, magnificent, yet true expressions,
which St. Agatho had used of his See, namely, that resting on the
promise of the Lord it had never turned aside from the path of truth,
and that its Pontiffs, the predecessors of Agatho, who were charged in
the person of Peter to strengthen their brethren, had ever discharged
that office, this the Fathers of the Council hear and receive.  But not
the less they examine the matter, they inquire into the decrees of Roman
Pontiffs, and, after inquiry held, approve Agatho’s decrees, condemn
those of Honorius:  a certain proof that they did not understand
Agatho’s expressions as if it were necessary to receive without
discussion every decree of Roman Pontiffs even *de fide*, inasmuch as
they are subjected to the supreme and final examination of a General
Council:  but as if these expressions taken as a whole, in their total,
hold good in the full and complete succession of Peter, as we have often
said, and in its proper place shall say at greater length.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_325"></span>[328:326](2140369.htm#fr_325) <span
id="xiii.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p6"></span> The words in brackets are not quoted by
Bossuet.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Letter of Pope Agatho.](2140370)
