[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140116)  [Next](2140118) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.v.iv.vi"></span>

<span id="viii.v.iv.vi-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="viii.v.iv.vi-p1.1"></span>Canon VI.</span>

<span id="viii.v.iv.vi-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.v.iv.vi-p2.1"></span>If</span> any one shall hold private
assemblies outside of the Church, and, despising the canons, shall
presume to perform ecclesiastical acts, the presbyter with the consent
of the bishop refusing his permission, let him be anathema.

<span id="viii.v.iv.vi-p3"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="viii.v.iv.vi-p3.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="viii.v.iv.vi-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.v.iv.vi-p4.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon VI.</span>

<span id="viii.v.iv.vi-p5"></span>Whoso privately gathers a religious
meeting let him be anathema.

<span id="viii.v.iv.vi-p6"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.v.iv.vi-p6.1"></span>Hefele.</span>

<span id="viii.v.iv.vi-p7"></span>Both these canons, \[V. and VI.\]
forbid the existence of conventicles, and conventicle services.  It
already appears from the second article of the Synodal Letter of Gangra,
that the Eustathians, through spiritual pride, separated themselves from
the rest of the congregation, as being the pure and holy, avoided the
public worship, and held private services of their own.  The ninth,
tenth, and eleventh articles of the Synodal Letter give us to understand
that the Eustathians especially avoided the public services, when
married clergy officiated.  We might possibly conclude, from the words
of the sixth canon:  <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.v.iv.vi-p7.1"></span>μὴ συνόντος τοῦ πρεσβυτέρου κατὰ γνώμην
τοῦ ἐπισκόπου</span>, that no priest performed any part in their private
services; but it is more probable that the Eustathians, who did not
reject the priesthood as such, but only abhorred the married clergy, had
their own unmarried clergy, and that these officiated at their separate
services.  And the above-mentioned words of the canon do not the least
contradict this supposition, for the very addition of the words <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.v.iv.vi-p7.2"></span>κατὰ γνώμην τοῦ
ἐπισκόπου</span> indicate that the sectarian priests who performed the
services of the Eustathians had received no permission to do so from the
bishop of the place.  Thus did the Greek commentators, Balsamon, etc.,
and likewise Van Espen, interpret this canon.

<span id="viii.v.iv.vi-p8"></span>The meaning of this canon is very
obscure.  The Latin reads *non conveniente presbytero, de episcopi
sententia*; and Lambert translates “without the presence of a priest,
with consent of the bishop.”  Hammond differs from this and renders
thus, “without the concurrence of the presbyter and the consent of the
bishop.”  I have translated literally and left the obscurity of the
original.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon VII](2140118)
