[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140048)  [Next](2140050) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.vi.xxxi"></span>

<span id="vii.vi.xxxi-p1"></span> <span id="page_43">p. 43</span> <span
id="vii.vi.xxxi-Page_43"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="vii.vi.xxxi-p1.1"></span>Excursus on the Number of the Nicene
Canons.</span>

<span id="vii.vi.xxxi-p2"></span>There has come down to us a Latin
letter purporting to have been written by St. Athanasius to Pope
Marcus.  This letter is found in the Benedictine edition of St.
Athanasius’s works (ed. Patav. ii. 599) but rejected as spurious by
Montfaucon the learned editor.  In this letter is contained the
marvellous assertion that the Council of Nice at first adopted forty
canons, which were in Greek, that it subsequently added twenty Latin
canons, and that afterwards the council reassembled and set forth
seventy altogether.  A tradition that something of the kind had taken
place was prevalent in parts of the East, and some collections did
contain seventy canons.

<span id="vii.vi.xxxi-p3"></span>In the Vatican Library is a <span
class="sc"><span id="vii.vi.xxxi-p3.1"></span>ms.</span> which was
bought for it by the famous Asseman, from the Coptic Patriarch, John,
and which contains not only seventy, but eighty canons attributed to the
council of Nice.  The <span class="sc"><span
id="vii.vi.xxxi-p3.2"></span>ms.</span> is in Arabic, and was discovered
by J. B. Romanus, S. J., who first made its contents known, and
translated into Latin a copy he had made of it.  Another Jesuit,
Pisanus, was writing a history of the Nicene Council at the time and he
received the eighty newly found canons into his book; but, out of
respect to the pseudo-Athanasian letter, he at first cut down the number
to seventy; but in later editions he followed the <span class="sc"><span
id="vii.vi.xxxi-p3.3"></span>ms.</span>  All this was in the latter half
of the sixteenth century; and in 1578 Turrianus, who had had Father
Romanus’s translation revised before it was first published, now issued
an entirely new translation with a *Proëmium <span
id="fr_103"></span>[104](#fn_103)* containing a vast amount of
information upon the whole subject, and setting up an attempted proof
that the number of the Nicene Canons exceeded twenty.  His argument for
the time being carried the day.

<span id="vii.vi.xxxi-p5"></span>Hefele says, “it is certain that the
Orientals <span id="fr_104"></span>[105](#fn_104) believed the Council
of Nice to have promulgated more than twenty canons:  the learned
Anglican, Beveridge, <span id="fr_105"></span>[106](#fn_105) has proved
this, reproducing an ancient Arabic paraphrase of the canons of the
first four Ecumenical Councils.  According to this Arabic paraphrase,
found in a <span class="sc"><span
id="vii.vi.xxxi-p7.1"></span>ms.</span> in the Bodleian Library, the
Council of Nice must have put forth three books of canons.…The Arabic
paraphrase of which we are speaking gives a paraphrase of all these
canons, but Beveridge took only the part referring to the second
book—that is to say, the paraphrase of the twenty genuine canons; for,
according to his view, which was perfectly correct, it was only these
twenty canons which were really the work of the Council of Nice, and all
the others were falsely attributed to it.” <span
id="fr_106"></span>[107](#fn_106)

<span id="vii.vi.xxxi-p9"></span>Hefele goes on to prove that the canons
he rejects must be of much later origin, some being laws of the times of
Theodosius and Justinian according to the opinion of Renaudot. <span
id="fr_107"></span>[108](#fn_107)

<span id="vii.vi.xxxi-p11"></span>Before leaving this point I should
notice the profound research on these Arabic canons of the Maronite,
Abraham Echellensis.  He gives eighty-four canons in his Latin
translation of 1645, and was of opinion that they had been collected
from different Oriental sources, and sects; but that originally they had
all been translated from the Greek, and were collected by James, the
celebrated bishop of Nisibis, who was present at Nice.  But this last
supposition is utterly untenable.

<span id="vii.vi.xxxi-p12"></span>Among the learned there have not been
wanting some who have held that the Council of Nice passed more canons
than the twenty we possess, and have arrived at the conclusion
independently of the Arabic discovery, such are Baronius and Card.
d’Aguirre, but their arguments have been sufficiently answered, and they
cannot present anything able to weaken the conclusion that flows from
the consideration of the following facts.

<span id="vii.vi.xxxi-p13"></span><span id="page_44">p. 44</span> <span
id="vii.vi.xxxi-Page_44"></span>(Hefele:  *History of the Councils*,
Vol. I. pp. 355 *et seqq*. \[2d ed.\])

<span id="vii.vi.xxxi-p14"></span>Let us see first what is the testimony
of those Greek and Latin authors who lived about the time of the
Council, concerning the number.

<span id="vii.vi.xxxi-p15"></span>a.  The first to be consulted among
the Greek authors is the learned Theodoret, who lived about a century
after the Council of Nicæa.  He says, in his History of the Church: 
“After the condemnation of the Arians, the bishops assembled once more,
and decreed twenty canons on ecclesiastical discipline.”

<span id="vii.vi.xxxi-p16"></span>b.  Twenty years later, Gelasius,
Bishop of Cyzicus, after much research into the most ancient documents,
wrote a history of the Nicene Council.  Gelasius also says expressly
that the Council decreed twenty canons; and, what is more important, he
gives the original text of these canons exactly in the same order, and
according to the tenor which we find elsewhere.

<span id="vii.vi.xxxi-p17"></span>c.  Rufinus is more ancient than these
two historians.  He was born near the period when the Council of Nicæa
was held, and about half a century after he wrote his celebrated history
of the Church, in which he inserted a Latin translation of the Nicene
canons.  Rufinus also knew only of these twenty canons; but as he has
divided the sixth and the eighth into two parts, he has given twenty-two
canons, which are exactly the same as the twenty furnished by the other
historians.

<span id="vii.vi.xxxi-p18"></span>d.  The famous discussion between the
African bishops and the Bishop of Rome, on the subject of appeals to
Rome, gives us a very important testimony on the true number of the
Nicene canons.  The presbyter Apiarius of Sicca in Africa, having been
deposed for many crimes, appealed to Rome.  Pope Zosimus (417–418) took
the appeal into consideration, sent legates to Africa; and to prove that
he had the right to act thus, he quoted a canon of the Council of Nicæa,
containing these words:  “When a bishop thinks he has been unjustly
deposed by his colleagues he may appeal to Rome, and the Roman bishop
shall have the business decided by *judices in partibus*.”  The canon
quoted by the Pope does not belong to the Council of Nicæa, as he
affirmed; it was the fifth canon of the Council of Sardica (the seventh
in the Latin version).  What explains the error of Zosimus is that in
the ancient copies the canons of Nicæa and Sardica are written
consecutively, with the same figures, and under the common title of
canons of the Council of Nicæa; and Zosimus might *optima fide* fall
into an error—which he shared with Greek authors, his contemporaries,
who also mixed the canons of Nicæa with those of Sardica.  The African
bishops, not finding the canon quoted by the Pope either in their Greek
or in their Latin copies, in vain consulted also the copy which Bishop
Cecilian, who had himself been present at the Council of Nicæa, had
brought to Carthage.  The legates of the Pope then declared that they
did not rely upon these copies, and they agreed to send to Alexandria
and to Constantinople to ask the patriarchs of these two cities for
authentic copies of the canons of the Council of Nicæa.  The African
bishops desired in their turn that Pope Boniface should take the same
step (Pope Zosimus had died meanwhile in 418)—that he should ask for
copies from the Archbishops of Constantinople, Alexandria, and Antioch. 
Cyril of Alexandria and Atticus of Constantinople, indeed, sent exact
and faithful copies of the Creed and canons of Nicæa; and two learned
men of Constantinople, Theilo and Thearistus, even translated these
canons into Latin.  Their translation has been preserved to us in the
acts of the sixth Council of Carthage, and it contains only the twenty
ordinary canons.  It might be thought at first sight that it contained
twenty-one canons; but on closer consideration we see, as Hardouin has
proved, that this twenty-first article is nothing but an historical
notice appended to the Nicene canons by the Fathers of Carthage.  It is
conceived in these terms:  “After the bishops had decreed these rules at
Nicæa, and after the holy Council had decided what was the ancient rule
for the celebration of Easter, peace and unity of faith were
re-established between the East and the West.  This is what we (the
African bishops) have thought it right to add according to the history
of the Church.”

<span id="vii.vi.xxxi-p19"></span><span id="page_45">p. 45</span> <span
id="vii.vi.xxxi-Page_45"></span>The bishops of Africa despatched to Pope
Boniface the copies which had been sent to them from Alexandria and
Constantinople, in the month of November 419; and subsequently in their
letters to Celestine I. (423–432), successor to Boniface, they appealed
to the text of these documents.

<span id="vii.vi.xxxi-p20"></span>e.  All the ancient collections of
canons, either in Latin or Greek, composed in the fourth, or quite
certainly at least in the fifth century, agree in giving only these
twenty canons to Nicæa.  The most ancient of these collections were made
in the Greek Church, and in the course of time a very great number of
copies of them were written.  Many of these copies have descended to us;
many libraries possess copies; thus Montfaucon enumerates several in his
*Bibliotheca Coisliniana*.  Fabricius makes a similar catalogue of the
copies in his *Bibliotheca Græca* to those found in the libraries of
Turin, Florence, Venice, Oxford, Moscow, etc.; and he adds that these
copies also contain the so-called apostolic canons, and those of the
most ancient councils.  The French bishop John Tilius presented to
Paris, in 1540, a <span class="sc"><span
id="vii.vi.xxxi-p20.1"></span>ms.</span> of one of these Greek
collections as it existed in the ninth century.  It contains exactly our
twenty canons of Nicæa, besides the so-called apostolic canons, those of
Ancyra, etc.  Elias Ehmger published a new edition at Wittemberg in
1614, using a second <span class="sc"><span
id="vii.vi.xxxi-p20.2"></span>ms.</span> which was found at Augsburg;
but the Roman collection of the Councils had before given in 1608, the
Greek text of the twenty canons of Nicæa.  This text of the Roman
editors, with the exception of some insignificant variations, was
exactly the same as that of the edition of Tilius.  Neither the learned
Jesuit Sirmond nor his coadjutors have mentioned what manuscripts were
consulted in preparing this edition; probably they were manuscripts
drawn from several libraries, and particularly from that of the
Vatican.  The text of this Roman edition passed into all the following
collections, even into those of Hardouin and Mansi; while Justell in his
*Bibliotheca juris Canonici* and Beveridge in his *Synodicon* (both of
the eighteenth century), give a somewhat different text, also collated
from <span class="sc"><span id="vii.vi.xxxi-p20.3"></span>mss.</span>,
and very similar to the text given by Tilius.  Bruns, in his recent
*Bibliotheca Ecclesiastica*, compares the two texts.  Now all these
Greek <span class="sc"><span id="vii.vi.xxxi-p20.4"></span>mss.</span>,
consulted at such different times, and by all these editors, acknowledge
only twenty canons of Nicæa, and always the same twenty which we
possess.

<span id="vii.vi.xxxi-p21"></span>The Latin collections of the canons of
the Councils also give the same result—for example, the most ancient and
the most remarkable of all, the *Prisca*, and that of Dionysius the
Less, which was collected about the year 500.  The testimony of this
latter collection is the more important for the number twenty, as
Dionysius refers to the *Græca auctoritas*.

<span id="vii.vi.xxxi-p22"></span>f.  Among the later Eastern witnesses
we may further mention Photius, Zonaras and Balsamon.  Photius, in his
*Collection of the Canons*, and in his *Nomocanon*, as well as the two
other writers in their commentaries upon the canons of the ancient
Councils, quote only and know only twenty canons of Nicæa, and always
those which we possess.

<span id="vii.vi.xxxi-p23"></span>g.  The Latin canonists of the Middle
Ages also acknowledge only these twenty canons of Nicæa.  We have proof
of this in the celebrated Spanish collection, which is generally but
erroneously attributed to St. Isidore (it was composed at the
commencement of the seventh century), and in that of Adrian (so called
because it was offered to Charles the Great by Pope Adrian I).  The
celebrated Hincmar, Archbishop of Rheims, the first canonist of the
ninth century, in his turn attributes only twenty canons to the Council
of Nicæa, and even the pseudo-Isidore assigns it no more.

<span id="vii.vi.xxxi-p24"></span>I add for the convenience of the
reader the captions of the Eighty Canons as given by Turrianus,
translating them from the reprint in Labbe and Cossart, *Concilia*, Tom.
II. col. 291.  The Eighty-four Canons as given by Echellensis together
with numerous Constitutions and Decrees attributed to the Nicene Council
are likewise to be found in Labbe (*ut supra*, col. 318).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_103"></span>[43:104](2140049.htm#fr_103) <span
id="vii.vi.xxxi-p3.4"></span>

<span id="vii.vi.xxxi-p4"></span> *Vide* Labbe, *Conc*. ii. 287.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[43:105](2140049.htm#fr_104) <span
id="vii.vi.xxxi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vi.xxxi-p6"></span> Who exactly these *Orientals* were
Hefele does not specify, but Ffoulkes well points out (*Dict. Christ.
Antiq. sub voce* Councils of Nicæa) that it is an entire mistake to
suppose that the Greek Church “ever quoted other canons \[than the xx\]
as Nicene ‘by mistake,’ which were not Nicene, as popes Zosimus,
Innocent and Leo did.”

<span id="fn_105"></span>[43:106](2140049.htm#fr_105) <span
id="vii.vi.xxxi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vi.xxxi-p7"></span> Beveridge, *Synod. sive Pand*. i. 686.

<span id="fn_106"></span>[43:107](2140049.htm#fr_106) <span
id="vii.vi.xxxi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="vii.vi.xxxi-p8"></span> Hefele:  *Hist. Councils*, I. 362.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[43:108](2140049.htm#fr_107) <span
id="vii.vi.xxxi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vi.xxxi-p10"></span> Renaudot:  *Hist.* *Patriarcharum
Alexandrianorum Jacobitarum*.  Paris, 1713, p. 75.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Captions of the Arabic Canons Attributed to the Council of
Nice.](2140050)
