[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140020)  [Next](2140022) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.vi.iii"></span>

<span id="vii.vi.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="vii.vi.iii-p1.1"></span>Canon II.</span>

<span id="vii.vi.iii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="vii.vi.iii-p2.1"></span>Forasmuch</span> as, either from necessity,
or through the urgency of individuals, many things have been done
contrary to the Ecclesiastical canon, so that men just converted from
heathenism to the faith, and who have been instructed but a little
while, are straightway brought to the spiritual laver, and as soon as
they have been baptized, are advanced to the episcopate or the
presbyterate, it has seemed right to us that for the time to come no
such thing shall be done.  For to the catechumen himself there is need
of time and of a longer trial after baptism.  For the apostolical saying
is clear, “Not a novice; lest, being lifted up with pride, he fall into
condemnation and the snare of the devil.”  But if, as time goes on, any
sensual sin should be found out about the person, and he should be
convicted by two or three witnesses, let him cease from the clerical
office.  And whoso shall transgress these \[enactments\] will imperil
his own clerical position, as a person who presumes to disobey the great
Synod.

<span id="vii.vi.iii-p3"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="vii.vi.iii-p3.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="vii.vi.iii-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="vii.vi.iii-p4.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon II.</span>

<span id="vii.vi.iii-p5"></span>*Those who have come from the heathen
shall not be immediately advanced to the presbyterate.  For without a
probation of some time a neophyte is of no advantage (*<span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.vi.iii-p5.1"></span>κακός</span>*).  But if
after ordination it be found out that he had sinned previously, let him
then be expelled from the clergy.*

<span id="vii.vi.iii-p6"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="vii.vi.iii-p6.1"></span>Hefele.</span>

<span id="vii.vi.iii-p7"></span>It may be seen by the very text of this
canon, that it was already forbidden to baptize, and to raise to the
episcopate or to the priesthood anyone who had only been a catechumen
for a short time:  this injunction is in fact contained in the eightieth
(seventy-ninth) apostolical canon; and according to that, it would be
older than the Council of Nicæa.  There have been, nevertheless, certain
cases in which, for urgent reasons, an exception has been made to the
rule of the Council of Nicæa—for instance, that of S. Ambrose.  The
canon of Nicæa does not seem to allow such an exception, but it might be
justified by the apostolical canon, which says, at the close:  “It is
not right that any one who has not yet been proved should be a teacher
of others, unless by a peculiar divine grace.”  The expression of the
canon of Nicæa, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.vi.iii-p7.1"></span>ψυχικὸν τι ἁμάρτημα</span>, is not easy to
explain:  some render it by the Latin words *animale peccatam*,
believing that the Council has here especially in view sins of the
flesh; but as Zonaras has said, all sins are <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.vi.iii-p7.2"></span>ψυχικὰ ἁμαρτήματα</span>.  We must then
understand the passage in question to refer to a capital and very
serious offence, as the penalty of deposition annexed to it points out.

<span id="vii.vi.iii-p8"></span>These words have also given offence,
<span class="Greek"><span id="vii.vi.iii-p8.1"></span>εἰ δὲ προϊόντος
τοῦ χρόνον</span>; that is to say, “It is necessary henceforward,” etc.,
understanding that it is only those who have been too quickly ordained
who are threatened with deposition in case they are guilty of crime; but
the canon is framed, and ought to be understood, in a general manner: 
it applies to all other clergymen, but it appears also to point out that
greater severity should be shown toward those who have been too quickly
ordained.

<span id="vii.vi.iii-p9"></span>Others have explained the passage in
this manner:  “If it shall become known that any one who has been too
quickly ordained was guilty before his baptism of any serious offence,
he ought to be deposed.”  This is the interpretation given by Gratian,
but it must <span id="page_11">p. 11</span> <span
id="vii.vi.iii-Page_11"></span>be confessed that such a translation does
violence to the text.  This is, I believe, the general sense of the
canon, and of this passage in particular:  “Henceforward no one shall be
baptized or ordained quickly.  As to those already in orders (without
any distinction between those who have been ordained in due course and
those who have been ordained too quickly), the rule is that they shall
be deposed if they commit a serious offence.  Those who are guilty of
disobedience to this great Synod, either by allowing themselves to be
ordained or even by ordaining others prematurely, are threatened with
deposition *ipso facto*, and for this fault alone.”  We consider, in
short, that the last words of the canon may be understood as well of the
ordained as of the ordainer.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon III](2140022)
