[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140500)  [Next](2140502) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iii.iv.vii"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.iv.vii-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="xv.iii.iv.vii-p1.1"></span>Canon VII.</span>

<span id="xv.iii.iv.vii-p2"></span>(*Greek*.)

<span id="xv.iii.iv.vii-p3"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iii.iv.vii-p3.1"></span>Bishop</span> <span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iii.iv.vii-p3.2"></span>Hosius</span> said:  Our importunity and
great pertinacity and unjust petitions have brought it about that we do
not have as much favour and confidence as we ought to enjoy.  For many
of the bishops do not intermit resorting to the imperial Court,
especially the Africans, who, as we have learned from our beloved
brother and fellow-bishop, Gratus, do not accept salutary counsels, but
so despise them that one man carries to the Court petitions many and
diverse and of no possible benefit to the Church, and does not (as ought
to be done and as is fitting) assist and help the poor and the laity or
the widows, but is intriguing to obtain worldly dignities and offices
for certain persons.  This evil then causes enfeeblement \[*better*,
murmuring (read <span class="Greek"><span
id="xv.iii.iv.vii-p3.3"></span>τονθρυσμόν</span> or <span
class="Greek"><span
id="xv.iii.iv.vii-p3.4"></span>τονθορυσμόν</span>)\], not without some
scandal and blame to us.  But I account it quite <span id="page_422">p.
422</span> <span id="xv.iii.iv.vii-Page_422"></span>proper for a bishop
to give assistance to one oppressed by some one, or to a widow suffering
injustice, or, again, an orphan robbed of his estate, always provided
that these persons have a just cause of petition.

<span id="xv.iii.iv.vii-p4"></span>If, then, beloved brethren, this
seems good to all, do ye decree that no bishop shall go to the imperial
Court except those whom our most pious emperor may summon by his own
letters.  Yet since it often happens that persons condemned for their
offences to deportation or banishment to an island, or who have received
some sentence or other, beg for mercy and seek refuge with the Church
\[i.e., take sanctuary\], such persons are not to be refused assistance,
but pardon should be asked for them without delay and without
hesitation.  If this, then, is also your pleasure, do ye all vote
assent.

<span id="xv.iii.iv.vii-p5"></span>All gave answer:  Be this also
decreed.

<span id="xv.iii.iv.vii-p6"></span>(*Latin*.)

<span id="xv.iii.iv.vii-p7"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iii.iv.vii-p7.1"></span>Bishop</span> <span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iii.iv.vii-p7.2"></span>Hosius</span> said:  Importunities and
excessive pertinacity and unjust petitions have caused us to have too
little favour or confidence, while certain bishops cease not to go to
the Court, especially the Africans, who (as we have learned) spurn and
contemn the salutary counsels of our most holy brother and
fellow-bishop, Gratus, so that they not only bring to the Court many and
diverse petitions (not for the good of the Church nor, as is usual and
right, to succour the poor or widows or orphans), but even seek to
obtain worldly dignities and offices for certain persons.  This evil
therefore stirs up at times not only murmurings, but even scandals.  But
it is proper that bishops should intercede for persons suffering from
violence and oppression, afflicted widows and defrauded orphans,
provided, nevertheless, that these persons have a just cause or
petition.

<span id="xv.iii.iv.vii-p8"></span>If, then, brethren dearly beloved,
such be your pleasure, do we decree that no bishops go to the Court
except those who may have been invited or summoned by letters of the
God-fearing emperor.  But since it often happens that those who are
suffering from injustice or who are condemned for their offences to
deportation or banishment to an island, or, in short, have received some
sentence or other, seek refuge with the mercy of the Church, such
persons should be succoured and pardon be begged for them without
hesitation.  Decree this, therefore, if it be your pleasure.

<span id="xv.iii.iv.vii-p9"></span>All said:  It is our pleasure and be
it decreed.

<span id="xv.iii.iv.vii-p10"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xv.iii.iv.vii-p10.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="xv.iii.iv.vii-p11"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iii.iv.vii-p11.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon VII.</span>

<span id="xv.iii.iv.vii-p12"></span>When an orphan, widow, and other
desolate persons are oppressed by force let the bishop give them succour
and approach the Emperor; but through a pretext of this kind let him not
be a hanger on of the camp, but rather let him send a deacon.

<span id="xv.iii.iv.vii-p13"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iii.iv.vii-p13.1"></span>Van Espen.</span>

<span id="xv.iii.iv.vii-p14"></span>The “salutary counsels” (*salutaria
consilia*) here seem to be synodical admonitions, as Zonaras notes; and
these might well be ascribed to Gratus, the bishop of Carthage, because
many of the African synods were held under his presidency and direction.

<span id="xv.iii.iv.vii-p15"></span> •          •          •         
•          •          •          •          •          •          •

<span id="xv.iii.iv.vii-p16"></span>Nothing is more noteworthy than how
from the first princes summoned bishops in counsel with regard to
affairs touching either the estate of the Church or of the Realm; and
called them to their presence in urgent and momentous cases, and kept
them with them.

<span id="xv.iii.iv.vii-p17"></span>Justinian, the emperor, in his
*Novels* (Chapter II.) defines that no one of the God-beloved bishops
shall dare to be absent any more from his diocese for a whole year, and
adds this exception, “unless he does so on account of an imperial
jussio; in this case alone he shall be held to be without blame.”

<span id="xv.iii.iv.vii-p18"></span>On this whole matter of bishops
interceding for culprits, and especially for those condemned to death,
see St. Augustine (*Epist*. 153 ad Macedonium).

<span id="xv.iii.iv.vii-p19"></span>With this canon may be compared
Canon VII. of the Council of Rheims in <span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iii.iv.vii-p19.1"></span>a.d.</span> 630.

<span id="xv.iii.iv.vii-p20"></span>This canon is found in part in the
*Corpus Juris Canonici*, Gratian’s *Decretum*, P. II., Causa xxiij.,
Quæst. viij., c. xxviij.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon VIII](2140502)
