[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140016)  [Next](2140018) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.v"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p1"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="vii.v-p1.1"></span> Excursus on the Words</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.v-p1.2"></span>γεννηθέντα οὐ
ποιηθέντα</span><span class="c4"><span id="vii.v-p1.3"></span> .</span>

<span id="vii.v-p2"></span>(J. B. Lightfoot.  *The Apostolic
Fathers*—Part II. Vol. ii. Sec. I. pp. 90, *et seqq.*)

<span id="vii.v-p3"></span>The Son is here \[Ignat. *Ad. Eph.* vii.\]
declared to be <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.v-p3.1"></span>γεννητὸς</span> as man and <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.v-p3.2"></span>ἀγέννητος</span> as God, for
this is clearly shown to be the meaning from the parallel clauses.  Such
language is not in accordance with later theological definitions, which
carefully distinguished between <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.v-p3.3"></span>γενητός</span> and <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.v-p3.4"></span>γεννητός</span> between <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.v-p3.5"></span>ἀγένητος</span> and <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.v-p3.6"></span>ἀγέννητος</span>; so that <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.v-p3.7"></span>γενητός, ἀγένητος</span>
respectively denied and affirmed the eternal existence, being equivalent
to <span class="Greek"><span id="vii.v-p3.8"></span>κτιστός</span>,
<span class="Greek"><span id="vii.v-p3.9"></span>ἄκτιστος</span>, while
<span class="Greek"><span id="vii.v-p3.10"></span>γεννητός</span>, <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.v-p3.11"></span>ἀγέννητος</span> described
certain ontological relations, whether in time or in eternity.  In the
later theological language, therefore, the Son was <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.v-p3.12"></span>γεννητός</span> even in his
Godhead.  See esp. Joann. Damasc. *de Fid. Orth.* i. 8 \[where he draws
the conclusion that only the Father is <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.v-p3.13"></span>ἀγέννητος</span>, and only the Son <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.v-p3.14"></span>γεννητός</span>\].

<span id="vii.v-p4"></span>There can be little doubt however, that
Ignatius wrote <span class="Greek"><span id="vii.v-p4.1"></span>γεννητός
καὶ ἀγέννητος</span>, though his editors frequently alter it into <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.v-p4.2"></span>γενητὸς καὶ ἀγένητος</span>. 
For (1) the Greek <span class="sc"><span
id="vii.v-p4.3"></span>ms.</span> still retains the double \[Greek nun\]
<span class="Greek"><span id="vii.v-p4.4"></span>ν</span>, though the
claims of orthodoxy would be a temptation to scribes to <span
id="page_5">p. 5</span> <span id="vii.v-Page_5"></span>substitute the
single <span class="Greek"><span id="vii.v-p4.5"></span>ν</span>.  And
to this reading also the Latin *genitus et ingenitus* points.  On the
other hand it cannot be concluded that translators who give *factus et
non factus* had the words with one <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.v-p4.6"></span>ν</span>, for this was after all what Ignatius
meant by the double <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.v-p4.7"></span>ν</span>, and they would naturally render his
words so as to make his orthodoxy apparent.  (2) When Theodoret writes
<span class="Greek"><span id="vii.v-p4.8"></span>γεννητὸς ἐξ
ἀγεννήτου</span>, it is clear that he, or the person before him who
first substituted this reading, must have read <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.v-p4.9"></span>γεννητὸς καὶ ἀγέννητος</span>, for there would be
no temptation to alter the perfectly orthodox <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.v-p4.10"></span>γενητὸς καὶ ἀγένητος</span>, nor (if altered)
would it have taken this form.  (3) When the interpolator substitutes
<span class="Greek"><span id="vii.v-p4.11"></span>ὁ μόνος ἄληθινὸς Θεὸς
ὁ ἀγέννητος</span>…<span class="Greek"><span id="vii.v-p4.12"></span>τοῦ
δὲ μονογονοῦς πατῂρ καὶ γεννήτωρ</span>, the natural inference is that
he too, had the forms in double <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.v-p4.13"></span>ν</span>, which he retained, at the same time
altering the whole run of the sentence so as not to do violence to his
own doctrinal views; see Bull *Def. Fid. Nic.* ii. 2 § 6.  (4) The
quotation in Athanasius is more difficult.  The <span class="sc"><span
id="vii.v-p4.14"></span>mss.</span> vary, and his editors write <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.v-p4.15"></span>γενητὸς καὶ
ἀγένητος</span>.  Zahn too, who has paid more attention to this point
than any previous editor of Ignatius, in his former work (*Ign. v. Ant.*
p. 564), supposed Athanasius to have read and written the words with a
single <span class="Greek"><span id="vii.v-p4.16"></span>ν</span>,
though in his subsequent edition of Ignatius (p. 338) he declares
himself unable to determine between the single and double <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.v-p4.17"></span>ν</span>.  I believe,
however, that the argument of Athanasius decides in favour of the <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.v-p4.18"></span>νν</span>.  Elsewhere he
insists repeatedly on the distinction between <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.v-p4.19"></span>κτίζειν</span> and <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.v-p4.20"></span>γεννᾶν</span>, justifying the use of the latter
term as applied to the divinity of the Son, and defending the statement
in the Nicene Creed <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.v-p4.21"></span>γεννητὸν ἐκ τῆς οὐσίας τοῦ πατρὸς τὸν υἱὸν
ὁμοούσιον</span> (*De Synod.* 54, 1, p. 612).  Although he is not
responsible for the language of the Macrostich (*De Synod.* 3, 1, p.
590), and would have regarded it as inadequate without the <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.v-p4.22"></span>ὁμοούσιον,</span> yet this
use of terms entirely harmonizes with his own.  In the passage before
us, *ib.* §§ 46, 47 (p. 607), he is defending the use of *homousios* at
Nicæa, notwithstanding that it had been previously rejected by the
council which condemned Paul of Samosata, and he contends that both
councils were orthodox, since they used *homousios* in a different
sense.  As a parallel instance he takes the word <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.v-p4.23"></span>ἀγέννητος</span> which like
*homousios* is not a scriptural word, and like it also is used in two
ways, signifying either (1) <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.v-p4.24"></span>Τὸ ὂν μεν, μήτε δὲ γεννηθὲν μήτε ὅλως ἔχον τὸν
αἴτιον,</span> or (2) <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.v-p4.25"></span>Τὸ ἄκτιστον</span>.  In the former sense the Son
cannot be called <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.v-p4.26"></span>ἀγέννητος</span>, in the latter he may be so
called.  Both uses, he says, are found in the fathers.  Of the latter he
quotes the passage in Ignatius as an example; of the former he says,
that some writers subsequent to Ignatius declare <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.v-p4.27"></span>ἕν τὸ ἀγέννητον ὁ πατὴρ, καὶ
εἶς ὁ ἐξ αὐτου υἱὸς γνήσιος, γέννημα αληθίνον κ.τ.λ</span>.  \[He may
have been thinking of Clem. Alex. *Strom.* vi. 7, which I shall quote
below.\]  He maintains that both are orthodox, as having in view two
different senses of the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.v-p4.28"></span>ἀγέννητον</span> , and the same, he argues, is
the case with the councils which seem to take opposite sides with regard
to *homousios*.  It is clear from this passage, as Zahn truly says, that
Athanasius is dealing with one and the same word throughout; and, if so,
it follows that this word must be <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.v-p4.29"></span>ἀγέννητον</span>, since <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.v-p4.30"></span>ἀγένητον</span> would be
intolerable in some places.  I may add by way of caution that in two
other passages, *de Decret. Syn. Nic.* 28 (1, p. 184), *Orat. c. Arian.*
i. 30 (1, p. 343), St. Athanasius gives the various senses of <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.v-p4.31"></span>ἀγένητον</span> (for this is
plain from the context), and that these passages ought not to be treated
as parallels to the present passage which is concerned with the senses
of <span class="Greek"><span id="vii.v-p4.32"></span>ἀγέννητον</span> . 
Much confusion is thus created, *e.g.* in Newman’s notes on the several
passages in the Oxford translation of Athanasius (pp. 51 sq., 224 sq.),
where the three passages are treated as parallel, and no attempt is made
to discriminate the readings in the several places, but “ingenerate” is
given as the rendering of both alike.  If then Athanasius who read <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.v-p4.33"></span>γεννητὸς καὶ
ἀγέννητος</span> in Ignatius, there is absolutely no authority for the
spelling with one <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.v-p4.34"></span>ν</span>.  The earlier editors (Voss, Ussher,
Cotelier, etc.), printed it as they found it in the <span
class="sc"><span id="vii.v-p4.35"></span>ms.</span>; but Smith
substituted the forms with the single <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.v-p4.36"></span>ν</span>, and he has been followed more recently
by Hefele, Dressel, and some other.  In the Casanatensian copy of the
<span class="sc"><span id="vii.v-p4.37"></span>ms.</span>, a marginal
note is added, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.v-p4.38"></span>ἀναγνωστέον</span> <span id="page_6">p. 6</span>
<span id="vii.v-Page_6"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.v-p4.39"></span>ἀγένητος τοῦτ᾽ ἔστι μὴ ποιηθείς</span>. 
Waterland (*Works,* III., p. 240 sq., Oxf. 1823) tries ineffectually to
show that the form with the double <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.v-p4.40"></span>ν</span> was invented by the fathers at a later
date to express their theological conception.  He even “doubts whether
there was any such word as <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.v-p4.41"></span>ἀγέννητος</span> so early as the time of
Ignatius.”  In this he is certainly wrong.

<span id="vii.v-p5"></span>The <span class="sc"><span
id="vii.v-p5.1"></span>mss.</span> of early Christian writers exhibit
much confusion between these words spelled with the double and the
single <span class="Greek"><span id="vii.v-p5.2"></span>ν</span>.  See
*e.g.* Justin *Dial.* 2, with Otto’s note; Athenag. *Suppl*. 4 with
Otto’s note; Theophil, *ad Autol.* ii. 3, 4; Iren. iv. 38, 1, 3; Orig.
*c. Cels.* vi. 66; Method. *de Lib. Arbitr.*, p. 57; Jahn (see Jahn’s
note 11, p. 122); Maximus in Euseb. *Præp. Ev.* vii. 22; Hippol. *Hær.*
v. 16 (from Sibylline Oracles); Clem. Alex. *Strom*. v. 14; and very
frequently in later writers.  Yet notwithstanding the confusion into
which later transcribers have thus thrown the subject, it is still
possible to ascertain the main facts respecting the usage of the two
forms.  The distinction between the two terms, as indicated by their
origin, is that <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.v-p5.3"></span>ἀγένητος</span> denies *the creation*, and <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.v-p5.4"></span>ἀγέννητος</span> *the
generation or parentage*.  Both are used at a very early date; *e.g.*
<span class="Greek"><span id="vii.v-p5.5"></span>ἀγένητος</span> by
Parmenides in Clem. Alex. *Strom.* v. 14, and by Agothon in Arist. *Eth.
Nic.* vii. 2 (comp. also *Orac. Sibyll.* prooem. 7, 17); and <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.v-p5.6"></span>ἀγέννητος</span> in Soph.
*Trach.* 61 (where it is equivalent to <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.v-p5.7"></span>δυσγενῶν</span>.  Here the distinction of meaning
is strictly preserved, and so probably it always is in Classical
writers; for in Soph. *Trach.* 743 we should after Porson and Hermann
read <span class="Greek"><span id="vii.v-p5.8"></span>ἀγένητον</span>
with Suidas.  In Christian writers also there is no reason to suppose
that the distinction was ever lost, though in certain connexions the
words might be used convertibly.  Whenever, as here in Ignatius, we have
the double <span class="Greek"><span id="vii.v-p5.9"></span>ν</span>
where we should expect the single, we must ascribe the fact to the
indistinctness or incorrectness of the writer’s theological conceptions,
not to any obliteration of the meaning of the terms themselves.  To this
early father for instance the eternal <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.v-p5.10"></span>γέννησις</span> of the Son was not a distinct
theological idea, though substantially he held the same views as the
Nicene fathers respecting the Person of Christ.  The following passages
from early Christian writers will serve at once to show how far the
distinction was appreciated, and to what extent the Nicene conception
prevailed in ante-Nicene Christianity; Justin *Apol*. ii. 6, comp. *ib.*
§ 13; Athenag. *Suppl*. 10 (comp. *ib.* 4); Theoph. *ad. Aut.* ii. 3;
Tatian *Orat.* 5; Rhodon in Euseb. *H. E.* v. 13; Clem. Alex. *Strom.*
vi. 7; Orig. *c. Cels.* vi. 17, *ib.* vi. 52; Concil. Antioch (<span
class="sc"><span id="vii.v-p5.11"></span>a.d.</span> 269) in Routh *Rel.
Sacr.* III., p. 290; Method. *de Creat.* 5.  In no early Christian
writing, however, is the distinction more obvious than in the
*Clementine Homilies*, x. 10 (where the distinction is employed to
support the writer’s heretical theology):  see also viii. 16, and comp.
xix. 3, 4, 9, 12.  The following are instructive passages as regards the
use of these words where the opinions of other heretical writers are
given; Saturninus, Iren. i. 24, 1; Hippol. *Hær.* vii. 28; Simon Magus,
Hippol. *Hær.* vi. 17, 18; the Valentinians, Hippol. *Hær.* vi. 29, 30;
the Ptolemæus in particular, Ptol. *Ep. ad. Flor.* 4 (in Stieren’s
Irenæus, p. 935); Basilides, Hippol. *Hær.* vii. 22; Carpocrates,
Hippol. *Hær.* vii. 32.

<span id="vii.v-p6"></span>From the above passages it will appear that
Ante-Nicene writers were not indifferent to the distinction of meaning
between the two words; and when once the orthodox Christology was
formulated in the Nicene Creed in the words <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.v-p6.1"></span>γεννηθέντα οὐ ποιηθέντα</span>, it became
henceforth impossible to overlook the difference.  The Son was thus
declared to be <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.v-p6.2"></span>γεννητός</span> but not <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.v-p6.3"></span>γενητός</span>.  I am therefore unable to agree
with Zahn (*Marcellus*, pp. 40, 104, 223, *Ign. von Ant.* p. 565), that
at the time of the Arian controversy the disputants were not alive to
the difference of meaning.  See for example Epiphanius, *Hær.* lxiv. 8. 
But it had no especial interest for them.  While the orthodox party
clung to the *homousios* as enshrining the doctrine for which they
fought, they had no liking for the terms <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.v-p6.4"></span>ἀγέννητος</span> and <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.v-p6.5"></span>γεννητός</span> as applied to the Father and the
Son respectively, though unable to deny their propriety, because they
were affected by the Arians and applied in their own way.  To the
orthodox mind the Arian formula <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.v-p6.6"></span>οὐκ ἦν πρὶν γεννηθήναι</span> or some Semiarian
formula hardly less dangerous, seemed <span id="page_7">p. 7</span>
<span id="vii.v-Page_7"></span>always to be lurking under the expression
<span class="Greek"><span id="vii.v-p6.7"></span>Θεὸς γεννητός</span> as
applied to the Son.  Hence the language of Epiphanius *Hær.* lxxiii.
19:  “As you refuse to accept our *homousios* because though used by the
fathers, it does not occur in the Scriptures, so will we decline on the
same grounds to accept your <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.v-p6.8"></span>ἀγέννητος</span> .”  Similarly Basil *c. Eunom.*
i., iv., and especially *ib.* further on, in which last passage he
argues at great length against the position of the heretics, <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.v-p6.9"></span>εἰ ἀγέννητος, φασὶν, ὁ πατήρ,
γεννητὸς δὲ ὁ υἱός, οὐ τῆς αὐτῆς οὐσίας</span>.  See also the arguments
against the Anomœans in \[Athan.\] *Dial. de Trin*. ii. passim.  This
fully explains the reluctance of the orthodox party to handle terms
which their adversaries used to endanger the *homousios*.  But, when the
stress of the Arian controversy was removed, it became convenient to
express the Catholic doctrine by saying that the Son in his divine
nature was <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.v-p6.10"></span>γέννητος</span> but not <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.v-p6.11"></span>γένητος</span>.  And this
distinction is staunchly maintained in later orthodox writers, *e.g.*
John of Damascus, already quoted in the beginning of this Excursus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Canons of the 318 Holy Fathers Assembled in the City of Nice,
in Bithynia.](2140018)
