[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140520)  [Next](2140522) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iv.ii"></span>

<span id="xv.iv.ii-p1"></span> <span id="page_438">p. 438</span> <span
id="xv.iv.ii-Page_438"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xv.iv.ii-p1.1"></span>Introductory Note.</span>

<span id="xv.iv.ii-p2"></span>An attempt to write a commentary upon all
the canons of the African Code, would have meant nothing less than the
preparation of one volume or more on the canon law of the West.  This is
impossible and therefore, interesting as the field would be, I have been
compelled to restrain my pen, and rather than give a scant and
insufficient annotation, I have contented myself with providing the
reader with as good a translation as I have been able to make of the
very corrupt Latin (correcting it at times by the Greek), and have added
the Ancient Epitome and the quaint notes in full of John Johnson from
the Second Edition, of 1714, of his “Clergyman’s Vade-mecum,” Pt. II.,
which occupy little space, but may not be easily reached by the ordinary
reader.  The student will find full scholia on these Canons in Van Espen
in the Latin, and in Zonaras and Balsamon in the Greek.  These latter
are in Beveridge’s *Synodicon*.

<span id="xv.iv.ii-p3"></span>Johnson writes an excellent Introduction
to his Epitome of these Canons, as follows:

<span id="xv.iv.ii-p4"></span>“Councils were nowhere more frequently
called in the Primitive Times than in Africa.  In the year 418–19, all
canons formerly made in sixteen councils held at Carthage, one at
Milevis, one at Hippo, that were approved of, were read, and received a
new sanction from a great number of bishops, then met in synod at
Carthage.  This Collection is the Code of the African Church, which was
always in greatest repute in all Churches next after the Code of the
Universal Church.  This code was of very great authority in the old
English Churches, for many of the Excerptions of Egbert were transcribed
from it.  And though the Code of the Universal Church ends with the
canons of Chalcedon, <span id="fr_416"></span>[417](#fn_416) yet these
African Canons are inserted into the Ancient Code both of the Eastern
and Western Churches.  These canons though ratified and approved by a
synod, yet seem to have been divided or numbered by some private and
unlearned hand, and have probably met with very unskilful transcribers,
by which means some of them are much confounded and obscured, as to
their sense and coherence.  They are by Dionysius Exiguus and others
entituled *The Canons of the Synod of Africa*.  And though all were not
originally made at one time, yet they were all confirmed by one synod of
African bishops, who, after they had recited the Creed and the twenty
canons of the Council of Nice, proceeded to make new canons, and
re-enforce old ones.”

<span id="xv.iv.ii-p6"></span>In his “Library of Canon Law”
(*Bibliotheca Juris Canonici*) Justellus gives these canons, and, in my
opinion, gives them rightly, the title “The Code of Canons of the
African Church” (*Codex Canonum Ecclesiæ Africanæ*), although
Hefele <span id="fr_417"></span>[418](#fn_417) describes them as “the
collection of those African Canons put together in 419 by Dionysius
Exiguus.”  Hefele says that the title Dionysius gave them in his
collection was “The Statutes of an African Council” (*Statuta Concilii
Africani*) which would certainly be wholly inadequate and misleading;
but in the edition of Dionysius in Migne’s *Patrologia Latina* (Tom.
LXVII., col. 181) in the *Codex Canonum Ecclesiasticorum* no such title
occurs, but the perfectly accurate one, “A Synod at Carthage in Africa,
which adopted one hundred and thirty-eight canons.”  This is an exact
description of what took place and of the origin of these most important
dogmatic and disciplinary enactments.  Hefele must have been thinking of
Dionysius’s *Preface* where the expression does occur but not as a
title.

<span id="xv.iv.ii-p8"></span>(Beveridge.  *Synodicon*, Tom. II., p.
202.)

<span id="xv.iv.ii-p9"></span>Carthage was formerly the head of the
whole of Africa, as St. Augustine tells us in his Epistle CLXII.  From
this cause it happened that a great number of councils were held <span
id="page_439">p. 439</span> <span id="xv.iv.ii-Page_439"></span>there,
gathered from all the provinces of Africa.  Especially while Aurelius as
Archbishop was occupying the throne were these meetings of bishops
frequently holden; and by these, for the establishing of ecclesiastical
discipline in Africa, many canons were enacted.  At last, after the
consulate of Honorius (XII.) and Theodosius (VIII.), Augustuses, on the
eighth day before the Calends of June, that is to say, on May 25, in the
year of our Lord 419, another Council was held in the same city at which
all the canons previously adopted were considered, and the greater part
of them were again confirmed by the authority of the synod.  These
canons, thus confirmed by this council, merited to be called from that
day to this “The Code of Canons of the African Church.”  These canons
were not at first adopted in Greek but in Latin, and they were confirmed
in the same language.  This Dionysius Exiguus distinctly testifies to in
his preface to the “Code of Ecclesiastical Canons,” in which they are
included.  It is uncertain when the canons of this Carthaginian synod
were done into Greek.  This only is certain, that they had been
translated into Greek before the Council in Trullo by which, in its
Second Canon, they were received into the Greek Nomocanon, and were
confirmed by the authority of this synod; so that from that time these
canons stand in the Eastern Church on an equality with all the rest.

<span id="xv.iv.ii-p10"></span>An extremely interesting point arises as
to what was the authority of the collection as a collection, and how
this collection was made?  There seems no doubt that the collection
substantially as we know it was the code accepted by the Council of
Trullo, the canons of which received a quasi-ecumenical authority from
the subsequent general imprimatur given them by the Seventh Ecumenical
Council, the Second of Nice.  Van Espen has considered this point at
great length in Dissertation VIII. of the First Part of his
*Commentaries*, and to his pages I must refer the reader for anything
like an adequate presentation of the matter.  He concludes (§ I.) that
the “Code owes its origin to this synod,” and argues against De Marca in
proof of the proposition that the collection was not the private work of
Dionysius, but the official work of the council by one of its officials,
concluding with the remark (§ II.) that “this was the persuasion both of
Greeks and Latins,…and these canons are set forth by Balsamon with the
title, ‘The Canons of the CCXVII. Blessed Fathers who met together at
Carthage.’”

<span id="xv.iv.ii-p11"></span>In the notes on each canon I shall give
the source, following Hefele in all respects (*Hist. of the Councils*,
vol. ii., pp. 468 *et seqq*.), and content myself here with setting down
a list of the various councils which made the enactments, with their
dates.

<span id="xv.iv.ii-p12"></span>Carthage (under Gratus)—345–348 <span
class="sc"><span id="xv.iv.ii-p12.1"></span>a.d.</span>

<span id="xv.iv.ii-p13"></span>      “       (under Genethlius)—387 or
390

<span id="xv.iv.ii-p14"></span>Hippo—393

<span id="xv.iv.ii-p15"></span>I.  Carthage—394

<span id="xv.iv.ii-p16"></span>II.   “   (June 26)—397

<span id="xv.iv.ii-p17"></span>III.   “   (August 28)—397

<span id="xv.iv.ii-p18"></span>IV.   “   (April 27)—399

<span id="xv.iv.ii-p19"></span>V.   “   (June 15)—401

<span id="xv.iv.ii-p20"></span>VI.   “   (September 13)—401

<span id="xv.iv.ii-p21"></span>VII.  Milevis (August 27)—402

<span id="xv.iv.ii-p22"></span>VIII.  Carthage (August 25)—403

<span id="xv.iv.ii-p23"></span>IX.   “   (June)—404

<span id="xv.iv.ii-p24"></span>X.   “   (August 25)—405

<span id="xv.iv.ii-p25"></span>XI.   “   (June 13)—407

<span id="xv.iv.ii-p26"></span>XII. and XIII.  Carthage (June 16 and
October 13)—408

<span id="xv.iv.ii-p27"></span><span id="page_440">p. 440</span> <span
id="xv.iv.ii-Page_440"></span>XIV.  Carthage (June 15)—409

<span id="xv.iv.ii-p28"></span>XV.   “   (June 14)—410

<span id="xv.iv.ii-p29"></span>XVI.   “   (May 1)—418

<span id="xv.iv.ii-p30"></span>XVII.   “   (May 25) which adopted the
African Code—419

<span id="xv.iv.ii-p31"></span>The numbering of the African councils
differs very widely between the different writers, and Cave reckons nine
between 401 and 608, and thirty-five Carthaginian between 215 and
533. <span id="fr_418"></span>[419](#fn_418)   Very useful tables,
shewing the conclusions of Fuchs, are found at the end of Bruns,
*Canones Apostolorum et Conciliorum Veterum Selecti*.

<span id="xv.iv.ii-p33"></span>I need only add that I have frequently
used Dr. Bruns’s text, but have not confined myself to it exclusively. 
Evidently in the Latin, as we now have it, there are many corrupt
passages.  In strange contradistinction to this, the Greek is apparently
pure and is clear throughout.  Possibly the Greek translation was made
from a purer Latin text than we now possess.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_416"></span>[438:417](2140521.htm#fr_416) <span
id="xv.iv.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv.ii-p5"></span> I do not understand what Johnson means by
this statement.  Vide Can. j. of Chalcedon.

<span id="fn_417"></span>[438:418](2140521.htm#fr_417) <span
id="xv.iv.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv.ii-p7"></span> Hefele.  *Hist. of the Councils*, vol.
ii., p. 468, Note 1.

<span id="fn_418"></span>[440:419](2140521.htm#fr_418) <span
id="xv.iv.ii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv.ii-p32"></span> For this statement I am indebted to Mr.
Ffoulkes in art. “African Councils.”  Smith and Cheetham, *Dict. Christ.
Antiq.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: An Ancient Introduction.](2140522)
