[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140377)  [Next](2140379) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiii.xiii"></span>

<span id="xiii.xiii-p1"></span> <span id="page_351">p. 351</span> <span
id="xiii.xiii-Page_351"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xiii.xiii-p1.1"></span>Excursus on the Condemnation of Pope
Honorius.</span>

<span id="xiii.xiii-p2"></span>To this decree attaches not only the
necessary importance and interest which belongs to any ecumenical
decision upon a disputed doctrinal question with regard to the
incarnation of the Son of God, but an altogether accidental interest,
arising from the fact that by this decree a Pope of Rome is stricken
with anathema in the person of Honorius.  I need hardly remind the
reader how many interesting and difficult questions in theology such an
action on the part of an Ecumenical Council raises, and how all
important, not to say vital, to such as accept the ruling of the recent
Vatican Council, it is that some explanation of this fact should be
arrived at which will be satisfactory.  It would be highly improper for
me in these pages to discuss the matter theologically.  Volumes on each
side have been written on this subject, and to these I must refer the
reader, but in doing so I hope I may be pardoned if I add a word of
counsel—to read both sides.  If one’s knowledge is derived only from
modern Eastern, Anglican or Protestant writers, such as “Janus and the
Council,” the Père Gratry’s “Letters,” or Littledale’s controversial
books against Rome, one is apt to be as much one-sided as if he took his
information from Cardinal Baronius, Cardinal Bellarmine, Rohrbacher’s
*History*, or from the recent work on the subject by Pennacchi. <span
id="fr_334"></span>[335](#fn_334)   Perhaps the average reader will
hardly find a more satisfactory treatment than that by Bossuet in the
*Defensio*.  (*Liber* VII., cap. xxi., etc.)

<span id="xiii.xiii-p4"></span>It will be sufficient for the purposes of
this volume to state that Roman Catholic Curialist writers are not at
one as to how the matter is to be treated.  Pennacchi, in his work
referred to above, is of opinion that Honorius’s letters were strictly
speaking Papal decrees, set forth *auctoritate apostolica*, and
therefore irreformable, but he declares, contrary to the opinion of
almost all theologians and to the decree of this Council, that they are
orthodox, and that the Council erred in condemning them; as he expresses
it, the decree rests upon an *error in facto dogmatico*.  To save an
Ecumenical Synod from error, he thinks the synod ceased to be ecumenical
before it took this action, and was at that time only a synod of a
number of Orientals!  Cardinal Baronius has another way out of the
difficulty.  He says that the name of Honorius was forged and put in the
decree by an erasure in the place of the name of Theodore, the quondam
Patriarch, who soon after the Council got himself restored to the
Patriarchal position.  Baronius moreover holds that Honorius’s letters
have been corrupted, that the Acts of the Council have been corrupted,
and, in short, that everything which declares or proves that Honorius
was a heretic or was condemned by an Ecumenical Council as such, is
untrustworthy and false.  The groundlessness, not to say absurdity, of
Baronius’s view has been often exposed by those of his own communion, a
brief but sufficient summary of the refutation will be found in Hefele,
who while taking a very halting and unsatisfactory position himself, yet
is perfectly clear that Baronius’s contention is utterly
indefensible. <span id="fr_335"></span>[336](#fn_335)

<span id="xiii.xiii-p6"></span>Most Roman controversialists of recent
years have admitted both the fact of Pope Honorius’s condemnation (which
Baronius denies), and the monothelite (and therefore heretical)
character of his epistles, but they are of opinion that these letters
were not his *ex cathedrâ* utterances as Doctor Universalis, but mere
expressions of the private opinion of the Pontiff as a theologian.  With
this matter we have no concern in this connexion.

<span id="xiii.xiii-p7"></span>I shall therefore say nothing further on
this point but shall simply supply the leading proofs that Honorius was
as a matter of fact condemned by the Sixth Ecumenical Council.

<span id="xiii.xiii-p8"></span>1.  His condemnation is found in the Acts
in the xiiith Session, near the beginning.

<span id="xiii.xiii-p9"></span>2.  His two letters were ordered to be
burned at the same session.

<span id="xiii.xiii-p10"></span><span id="page_352">p. 352</span> <span
id="xiii.xiii-Page_352"></span>3.  In the xvith Session the bishops
exclaimed “Anathema to the heretic Sergius, to the heretic Cyrus, to the
heretic Honorius, etc.”

<span id="xiii.xiii-p11"></span>4.  In the decree of faith published at
the xviijth Session it is stated that “the originator of all evil…found
a fit tool for his will in…Honorius, Pope of Old Rome, etc.”

<span id="xiii.xiii-p12"></span>5.  The report of the Council to the
Emperor says that “Honorius, formerly bishop of Rome” they had “punished
with exclusion and anathema” because he followed the monothelites.

<span id="xiii.xiii-p13"></span>6.  In its letter to Pope Agatho the
Council says it “has slain with anathema Honorius.”

<span id="xiii.xiii-p14"></span>7.  The imperial decree speaks of the
“unholy priests who infected the Church and falsely governed” and
mentions among them “Honorius, the Pope of Old Rome, the confirmer of
heresy who contradicted himself.”  The Emperor goes on to anathematize
“Honorius who was Pope of Old Rome, who in everything agreed with them,
went with them, and strengthened the heresy.”

<span id="xiii.xiii-p15"></span>8.  Pope Leo II. confirmed the decrees
of the Council and expressly says that he too anathematized
Honorius. <span id="fr_336"></span>[337](#fn_336)

<span id="xiii.xiii-p17"></span>9.  That Honorius was anathematized by
the Sixth Council is mentioned in the Trullan Canons (No. j.).

<span id="xiii.xiii-p18"></span>10.  So too the Seventh Council declares
its adhesion to the anathema in its decree of faith, and in several
places in the acts the same is said.

<span id="xiii.xiii-p19"></span>11.  Honorius’s name was found in the
Roman copy of the Acts.  This is evident from Anastasius’s life of Leo
II.  (*Vita Leonis II*.)

<span id="xiii.xiii-p20"></span>12.  The Papal Oath as found in the
*Liber Diurnus* <span id="fr_337"></span>[338](#fn_337) taken by each
new Pope from the fifth to the eleventh century, in the form probably
prescribed by Gregory II., “smites with eternal anathema the originators
of the new heresy, Sergius, etc., together with Honorius, because he
assisted the base assertion of the heretics.”

<span id="xiii.xiii-p22"></span>13.  In the lesson for the feast of St.
Leo II. in the Roman Breviary the name of Pope Honorius occurs among
those excommunicated by the Sixth Synod.  Upon this we may well hear
Bossuet:  “They suppress as far as they can, the Liber Diurnus:  they
have erased this from the Roman Breviary.  Have they therefore hidden
it?  Truth breaks out from all sides, and these things become so much
the more evident, as they are the more studiously put out of
sight.” <span id="fr_338"></span>[339](#fn_338)

<span id="xiii.xiii-p24"></span>With such an array of proof no
conservative historian, it would seem, can question the fact that
Honorius, the Pope of Rome, was condemned and anathematized as a heretic
by the Sixth Ecumenical Council.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_334"></span>[351:335](2140378.htm#fr_334) <span
id="xiii.xiii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xiii-p3"></span> Pennacchi.  *De Honorii I., Romani
Pontificis, causa in Concilio VI*.

<span id="fn_335"></span>[351:336](2140378.htm#fr_335) <span
id="xiii.xiii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xiii-p5"></span> Hefele.  *History of the Councils*. 
Vol. V., p. 190 *et seqq*.

<span id="fn_336"></span>[352:337](2140378.htm#fr_336) <span
id="xiii.xiii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xiii-p16"></span> “Also Honorius, qui hanc apostolicam
sedem non apostolicæ traditionis doctrina lustravit, sed profana
proditione immaculatam fidem subvertere conatus est, et omnes, qui in
suo errore defuncti sunt.”

<span id="fn_337"></span>[352:338](2140378.htm#fr_337) <span
id="xiii.xiii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xiii-p21"></span> Ed. Eugène de Rozière.  Paris, 1869,
No. 84.

<span id="fn_338"></span>[352:339](2140378.htm#fr_338) <span
id="xiii.xiii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xiii-p23"></span> Bossuet.  *Def. Cleri Gal*., Lib. vij.,
cap. xxvj.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Imperial Edict Posted in the Third Atrium of the Great Church
Near What is Called Dicymbala.](2140379)
