[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140673)  [Next](2140675) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi.ii"></span> <span id="page_523">p. 523</span> <span
id="xvi.ii-Page_523"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p1"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xvi.ii-p1.1"></span>Introduction.</span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p2"></span>Gibbon thus describes the Seventh Ecumenical
Council of the Christian Church:  “The decrees were framed by the
president <span id="fr_506"></span>[507](#fn_506) Tarasius, and ratified
by the acclamations and subscriptions of three hundred and fifty
bishops.  They unanimously pronounced that the worship of images is
agreeable to Scripture and reason, to the Fathers and councils of the
Church; but they hesitated whether that worship be relative or direct;
whether the godhead and the figure of Christ be entitled to the same
mode of adoration. <span id="fr_507"></span>[508](#fn_507)   Of this
second Nicene Council the acts are still extant; a curious monument of
superstition and ignorance, of falsehood and folly.”  (*Decline and
Fall*, chapter xlix.)

<span id="xvi.ii-p5"></span>And this has been read as history, and has
passed as such in the estimation of the overwhelming majority of
educated English-speaking people for several generations, and yet it is
a statement as full of absolute and inexcusable errors as the passage in
another part of the same work which the late Bishop Lightfoot so
unmercifully exposed, and which the most recent editor, Bury, has taken
pains to correct.

<span id="xvi.ii-p6"></span>I do not know whether it is worth while to
do so, but perhaps it may be as well to state, that whatever may be his
opinion of the truths of the conclusions arrived at by the council, no
impartial reader can fail to recognize the profound learning <span
id="fr_508"></span>[509](#fn_508) of the assembly, the singular acumen
displayed in the arguments employed, and the remarkable freedom from
what Gibbon and many others would consider “superstition.”  So radical
is this that Gibbon would have noticed it had he read the acts of the
synod he is criticising (which we have good reason for believing that he
never did).  There he would have found the Patriarch declaring that at
that time the venerable images worked no miracles, a statement that
would be made by no prelate of the Latin or Greek Church to-day, even in
the light of the nineteenth century.

<span id="xvi.ii-p8"></span>As I have noted in the previous pages my
task is not that of a controversialist.  To me at present it is a matter
of no concern whether the decision of the council is true or false.  I
shall therefore strictly confine myself to two points:  1. That the
Council was Ecumenical.  2. What its decision was; explaining the
technical meaning of the Greek words employed during this controversy
and finally incorporated in the decree.

<span id="xvi.ii-p9"></span>1.  *This Council was certainly Ecumenical*.

<span id="xvi.ii-p10"></span>It seems strange that any person familiar
with the facts of the case could for a moment entertain a doubt as to
the ecumenical character of the council which met at Nice in 787.

<span id="xvi.ii-p11"></span>(*a*)  It was called by the Roman Emperors
to be an Ecumenical Council.  *Vide* letter of Tarasius.

<span id="xvi.ii-p12"></span>(*b*)  It was called with the approval of
the Pope (not like I. Constantinople, without his knowledge; or like
Chalcedon, contrary to his expressed wish), and two papal legates were
present at its deliberations and signed its decrees.

<span id="xvi.ii-p13"></span>(*c*)  The Patriarch of Constantinople was
present in person.

<span id="xvi.ii-p14"></span>(*d*)  The other Patriarchates were
represented, although on account of the Moslem tyranny the Patriarchs
could not attend in person, nor could they even send proctors.

<span id="xvi.ii-p15"></span>(*e*)  The decrees were adopted by an
unanimous vote of the three hundred and fifty bishops.

<span id="xvi.ii-p16"></span><span id="page_524">p. 524</span> <span
id="xvi.ii-Page_524"></span>(*f*)  They were immediately received in all
the four Eastern Patriarchates. <span id="fr_509"></span>[510](#fn_509)

<span id="xvi.ii-p18"></span>(*g*)  They were immediately accepted by
the Pope.

<span id="xvi.ii-p19"></span>(*h*)  For a full thousand years they have
been received by the Latin and Greek Churches with but a few exceptions
altogether insignificant, save the Frankish kingdom.

<span id="xvi.ii-p20"></span>In the face of such undisputed facts, it
would be strange were anyone to doubt the historical fact that the
Second Council of Nice is one of the Ecumenical Councils of the Catholic
Church, and indeed so far as I am aware none have done so except such as
have been forced into this position for doctrinal consistency.

<span id="xvi.ii-p21"></span>Nor have all Protestants allowed their
judgment to be warped in this matter.  As a sample I may quote from that
stanch Protestant whom Queen Elizabeth appointed a chaplain in ordinary
in 1598, and who in 1610 was made Dean of Gloucester, the profoundly
learned Richard Field.  In his famous “Book of the Church” (Book V.
chap. lj.), he says:  “These” \[six, which he had just described\] “were
all the lawful General Councils (lawful, I say, both in their beginning
and proceeding and continuance) that ever were holden in the Christian
Church, touching matters of faith.  For the Seventh, which is the Second
of Nice, was not called about any question of faith but of manners.  So
that there are but Seven General Councils that the whole Church
acknowledgeth, called to determine matters of faith and manners.  For
the rest that were holden afterwards, which our adversaries \[the Roman
Catholics\] would have to be acknowledged general, they are not only
rejected by us but by the Grecians also, as not general, but patriarchal
only, etc.”

<span id="xvi.ii-p22"></span>Of course there are a number of writers
(principally of the Anglican Communion), who have argued thus:  “The
doctrine taught by the Second Council of Nice we reject, ergo it cannot
have been an Ecumenical Council of the Catholic Church.”  And they have
then gone on to prove their conclusion.  With such writers I have no
concern.  My simple contention is that the Council is admitted by all to
have been representative of East and West, and to have been accepted for
a thousand years as such, and to be to-day accepted as Ecumenical by the
Latin and Greek Churches.  If its doctrines are false, then one of the
Ecumenical Synods set forth false doctrine, a statement which should
give no trouble, so far as I can understand, to anyone who does not hold
the necessary infallibility of Ecumenical Synods. <span
id="fr_510"></span>[511](#fn_510)

<span id="xvi.ii-p24"></span>Among those who have argued against the
ecumenical character of the Seventh Council there are, however, two
whose eminent learning and high standing demand a consideration of
anything they may advance on any subject they treat of, these are the
Rev. John Mason Neale and the Rev. Sir William Palmer.

<span id="xvi.ii-p25"></span>Dr. Neale considers the matter at some
length in a foot-note to his *History of the Eastern Church* (Vol. II.,
pp. 132–135), but I think it not improper to remark that the author
ingenuously confesses in this very note that if he came to the
conclusion that the council was ecumenical, “it would be difficult to
clear our own Church from the charge of heresy.”  Entertaining such an
opinion at the start, his conclusion could hardly be unbiassed.

<span id="xvi.ii-p26"></span>The only argument which is advanced in this
note which is different from those of other opponents of the Council, is
that it had not the authentication of a subsequent Ecumenical Synod. 
The argument seems to me so extraordinary that I think Dr. Neale’s exact
words should be cited:  “In the first place, we may remark that the
Second Council of Nicæa wants one mark of authority, shared according to
the more general belief by the six—according to the opinions which an
English Churchman must necessarily embrace by the first five Coun<span
id="page_525">p. 525</span> <span id="xvi.ii-Page_525"></span>cils—its
recognition as Ecumenical by a later Council undoubtedly so.”  But
surely this involves an absurdity, for if it is not known whether the
last one is ecumenical or no, how will its approval of the next to the
last give that council any certainty?  If III. Constantinople is
doubtful being the sixth, because there is no seventh to have confirmed
it; then II. Constantinople, the fifth, is doubtful because it has only
been confirmed by a synod itself doubtful and so on, which is absurd. 
The test of the ecumenicity of a council is not its acceptance by a
subsequent synod, but its acceptance by the whole Church, and this Dr.
Neale frankly confesses is the case with regard to II. Nice:  “It cannot
be denied,” he admits, “that at the present day both the Eastern and the
Latin Churches receive it as Ecumenical” (p. 132).  He might have added,
“and have done so without any controversy on the subject for nearly a
thousand years.”

<span id="xvi.ii-p27"></span>I do not think there is any need of my
delaying longer over Dr. Neale’s note, which I have noticed at all only
because of his profound scholarship, and not because on this particular
point I thought he had thrown any new light upon the matter, nor urged
any argument really calling for an answer.

<span id="xvi.ii-p28"></span>Sir William Palmer’s argument (*A Treatise
on the Church of Christ*, Pt. IV., Chapter X., Sect. IV.) is one of much
greater force, and needs an answer.  He points out how, long after the
Council of Nice, the number of the General Councils was still spoken of
as being Six, and that in some instances this council is referred to as
the “pseudo” General Council of Nice.  Now at first sight this argument
seems to be of great force.  But upon further consideration it will be
seen to be after all of no great weight.  We may not be able to explain,
nor are we called upon to do so, why in certain cases writers chose
still to speak of Six instead of Seven General Councils, but we would
point out that the same continuance of the old expression can be found
with regard to others of the General Councils.  For example, St. Gregory
the Great says that he “revered the four Ecumenical Councils as he did
the four Gospels,” but the fifth Ecumenical Synod had been held a number
of years before.  Will anyone pretend from this to draw the conclusion
that at that time the Ecumenical character of the Fifth Synod (II.
Constantinople) was not recognized at Rome?  Moreover, among the
instances cited (and there are but a very few all told) one of them is
fatal to the argument.  For if Pope Hadrian in 871 still speaks of only
six Ecumenical Synods, he omits two (according to Roman count), for this
date is after the synod which deposed Photius—a synod rejected indeed
afterwards by the Greeks, but always accepted by the Latins as the
Eighth of the Ecumenical Councils.  Would Sir William pretend for an
instant that Hadrian and the Church of Rome did not recognize that
Council as Ecumenical and as the Eighth Synod?  He could not, for on
page 208 he ingenuously confesses that that Council “had been approved
and confirmed by that Pope.”

<span id="xvi.ii-p29"></span>But after all, the contention fails in its
very beginning, for Sir William frankly recognizes that the Popes from
the first espoused the cause of the council and were ready to defend
it.  Now this involved the acknowledgment of its ecumenical character,
for it was called as an Ecumenical Synod, this we expressly learn from
the letter of Tarasius to the other Eastern Patriarchs (Labbe, *Conc*.,
Tom. VII., col. 165), from the letter of the Emperor and Empress to the
bishops throughout the empire (L. and C., *Conc*., Tom. VII., col. 53),
and (above all) from the witness of the Council itself, assuming the
style of the “Holy Ecumenical Synod.”  In the face of such evidence any
further proof is surely uncalled for.

<span id="xvi.ii-p30"></span>We come now to the only other argument
brought against the ecumenical character of this council—to wit, that
many writers, even until after the beginning of the <span
class="sc"><span id="xvi.ii-p30.1"></span>XVI</span>th century, call the
Seventh a “pseudo-Council.”  But surely this proves too much, for it
would seem to imply that even down to that time the cultus of images was
not established in the West, a proposition too ridiculous to be defended
by anyone.  It is indeed worthy of notice that <span id="page_526">p.
526</span> <span id="xvi.ii-Page_526"></span>all the authors cited are
Frankish, (1) the *Annales Francorum* (<span class="sc"><span
id="xvi.ii-p30.2"></span>a.d.</span> 808) in the continuation of the
same (<span class="sc"><span id="xvi.ii-p30.3"></span>a.d.</span> 814),
in an anonymous life of Charlemagne, and the *Annales* written after
819; (2) Eginhard in his *Annales Francorum* (<span class="sc"><span
id="xvi.ii-p30.4"></span>a.d.</span> 829); (3) the Gallican bishops at
Paris, 824; <span id="fr_511"></span>[512](#fn_511) (4) Hincmar of
Rheims; (5) Ado, bishop of Vienne (died 875); (6) Anastasius
acknowledges that the French had not accepted the veneration of the
sacred images; (7) The *Chronicle of St. Bertinus* (after 884); (8) The
*Annales Francorum* after the council still speak of it as pseudo; (9)
Regino, Abbot of Prum (circa 910); (10) the *Chronicle of St. Bertinus*,
of the Xth Century.  (11) Hermanus Contractus:  (12) the author who
continued the Gestes Francorum to <span class="sc"><span
id="xvi.ii-p31.1"></span>a.d.</span> 1165; (13) Roger Hoverden (<span
class="sc"><span id="xvi.ii-p31.2"></span>a.d.</span> 1204); (14)
Conrade à Lichtenau, Abbot of Urspurg (circa 1230); (15) Matthew of
Westminster.

<span id="xvi.ii-p32"></span>No doubt to these, given in Palmer, who has
made much use of Lannoy, others could be added; but they are enough to
shew that the council was very little known, and that none of these
writers had ever seen its acts.

<span id="xvi.ii-p33"></span>Sir William is of opinion that by what
precedes in his book he has “proved that for at least five centuries and
a half the Council of Nice remained rejected in the Western Church.”  I
venture to think that the most he has proved is that during that period
of time he has been able to find fifteen individuals who for one reason
or another wrote rejecting that council, that is to say three in a
century, a number which does not seem quite sufficient to make the
foundation of so considerable a generalization as “the Western Church.” 
The further conclusion of Sir William, I think, every scholar will
reject as simply preposterous, viz.:  “In fact the doctrine of the
adoration of images \[by which he means the doctrine taught by the II.
Council of Nice\] was never received in the West, except where the
influence of the Roman See was predominant” (p. 211).

<span id="xvi.ii-p34"></span>Sir William is always, however, honest, and
the following quotation which he himself makes from Cardinal Bellarmine
may well go far toward explaining the erroneous or imperfect statements
he has so learnedly and laboriously gathered together.  “Bellarmine
says:  ‘It is very credible that St. Thomas, Alexander of Hales, and
other scholastic doctors had not seen the second synod of Nice, nor the
eighth general synod;’ he adds that they ‘were long in obscurity, and
were first published in our own age, as may be known from their not
being extant in the older volumes of the councils; and St. Thomas and
the other ancient schoolmen never make any mention of this Nicene
Synod.’  (Bell. *De Imag. Sanct*. Lib. II. cap. xxij.)”

<span id="xvi.ii-p35"></span>2.  *What the Council decreed*.

<span id="xvi.ii-p36"></span>The council decreed that similar veneration
and honour should be paid to the representations of the Lord and of the
Saints as was accustomed to be paid to the “laurata” and tablets
representing the Christian emperors, to wit, that they should be bowed
to, and saluted with kisses, and attended with lights and the offering
of incense. <span id="fr_512"></span>[513](#fn_512)   But the Council
was most explicit in declaring that this was merely a veneration of
honour and affection, such as can be given to the creature, and that
under no circumstances could the adoration of divine worship be given to
them but to God alone.

<span id="xvi.ii-p38"></span>The Greek language has in this respect a
great advantage over the Hebrew, the Latin and the English; it has a
word which is a general word and is properly used of the affectionate
regard and veneration shown to any person or thing, whether to the
divine Creator or to any of his creatures, this word is <span
class="Greek"><span id="xvi.ii-p38.1"></span>προσκύνησις</span>; it has
also another word which can properly be used to denote only the worship
due to the most high, God, this word is <span class="Greek"><span
id="xvi.ii-p38.2"></span>λατρεία</span>.  When then the Council defined
that the worship of “latria “was never to be given to any but God alone,
<span id="page_527">p. 527</span> <span id="xvi.ii-Page_527"></span>it
cut off all possibility for ido*latry*, mario*latry*, icono*latry*, or
any other “latry” except “theo-latry.”  If therefore any of these other
“latries” exist or ever have existed, they exist or have existed not in
accordance with, but in defiance of, the decree of the Second Council of
Nice.

<span id="xvi.ii-p39"></span>But unfortunately, as I have said, we have
neither in Hebrew, Latin, nor English any word with this restricted
meaning, and therefore when it became necessary to translate the Greek
acts and the decree, great difficulty was experienced, and by the use of
“adoro” as the equivalent of <span class="Greek"><span
id="xvi.ii-p39.1"></span>προσκυνέω</span> many were scandalized,
thinking that it was divine adoration which they were to give to the
sacred images, which they knew would be idolatry.  The same trouble is
found in rendering into English the acts and decrees; for while indeed
properly speaking “worship” no more means necessarily divine worship in
English than “adoratio” does in Latin (*e.g.* [1 Chron.
29.20](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#020)<span id="xvi.ii-p39.2"></span>,
“All the congregation bowed down their heads and worshipped the Lord and
the King” \[i.e. Solomon\]; [Luke xiv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#010)<span id="xvi.ii-p39.3"></span>,
“Then shalt thou have worship in the presence of them that sit at meat
with thee”), yet to the popular mind “the worship of images” is the
equivalent of idolatry.  In the following translations I have uniformly
translated as follows and the reader from the English will know what the
word is in the original.

<span id="xvi.ii-p40"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xvi.ii-p40.1"></span>Προσκυνέω</span>, to venerate; <span
class="Greek"><span id="xvi.ii-p40.2"></span>τιμάω</span>, to honour;
<span class="Greek"><span id="xvi.ii-p40.3"></span>λατρεύω</span>, to
adore; <span class="Greek"><span
id="xvi.ii-p40.4"></span>ἀσπάζομαι,</span> to salute; <span
class="Greek"><span id="xvi.ii-p40.5"></span>δουλεύω</span>, to serve;
<span class="Greek"><span id="xvi.ii-p40.6"></span>εἰκών</span>, an
image.

<span id="xvi.ii-p41"></span>The relative force of <span
class="Greek"><span id="xvi.ii-p41.1"></span>προσκύνησις</span> and
<span class="Greek"><span id="xvi.ii-p41.2"></span>λατρεία</span> cannot
better be set forth than by Archbishop Trench’s illustration of two
circles having the same centre, the larger including the less (*New
Testament Synonyms*, *sub voce* <span class="Greek"><span
id="xvi.ii-p41.3"></span>Λατρεύω</span>).

<span id="xvi.ii-p42"></span>To make this matter still clearer I must
ask the reader’s attention to the use of the words *abadh* and *shachah*
in the Hebrew; the one *abadh*, which finds, when used with reference to
God or to false gods its equivalent in <span class="Greek"><span
id="xvi.ii-p42.1"></span>λατρεύω</span>; the other *shachah*, which is
represented by <span class="Greek"><span
id="xvi.ii-p42.2"></span>προσκυνέω</span> .  Now in the Old Testament no
distinction in the Hebrew is drawn between these words when applied to
creator or creature.  The one denotes service primarily for hire; the
other bowing down and kissing the hand to any in salutation.  Both words
are constantly used and sometimes refer to the Creator and sometimes to
the creature—*e.g.*, we read that Jacob served (*abadh*) Laban ([Gen.
xxix. 20](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#020)<span
id="xvi.ii-p42.3"></span>); and that Joshua commanded the people not to
serve the gods of their fathers but to serve (*abadh*) the Lord ([Josh.
xxiv. 14](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#014)<span
id="xvi.ii-p42.4"></span>).  And for the use of *shachah* the following
may suffice:  “And all the congregation blessed the Lord God of their
fathers and bowed down their heads and worshipped (Hebrew, *shachah*;
Greek, <span class="Greek"><span
id="xvi.ii-p42.5"></span>προσκυνέω</span> ; Latin, *adoro*) the Lord and
the King” ([1 Chron. 29.20](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#020)<span
id="xvi.ii-p42.6"></span>).  But while it is true of the Hebrew of the
Old Testament that there is no word which refers alone to Divine Worship
this is not true of the Septuagint Greek nor of the Greek of the New
Testament, for in both <span class="Greek"><span
id="xvi.ii-p42.7"></span>προσκυνέω</span> has always its general
meaning, sometimes applying to the creature and sometimes to the
Creator; but <span class="Greek"><span
id="xvi.ii-p42.8"></span>λατρεύω</span> is used to denote divine worship
alone, as St. Augustine pointed out long ago.

<span id="xvi.ii-p43"></span>This distinction comes out very clearly in
the inspired translation of the Hebrew found in [Matthew iv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#010)<span id="xvi.ii-p43.1"></span>,
“Thou shalt worship (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xvi.ii-p43.2"></span>προσκυνήσεις</span>) the Lord thy God, and him
only shalt thou serve (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xvi.ii-p43.3"></span>λατρεύσεις</span> ).”  “Worship” was due indeed
to God above all but not exclusively to him, but latria is to be given
to “him only.” <span id="fr_513"></span>[514](#fn_513)

<span id="xvi.ii-p45"></span>I think I have now said enough to let the
reader understand the doctrine taught by the council and to prove that
in its decree it simply adopted the technical use of words found in the
Greek of the Septuagint and of the New Testament.  I may then close this
introduction with a few remarks upon outward acts of veneration in
general.

<span id="xvi.ii-p46"></span><span id="page_528">p. 528</span> <span
id="xvi.ii-Page_528"></span>Of course, the outward manifestation in
bodily acts of reverence will vary with times and with the habits of
peoples.  To those accustomed to kiss the earth on which the Emperor had
trodden, it would be natural to kiss the feet of the image of the King
of Kings.  The same is manifestly true of any outward acts whatever,
such as bowing, kneeling, burning of lights, and offering of incense. 
All these when offered before an image are, according to the mind of the
Council, but outward signs of the reverence due to that which the image
represents and pass backward to the prototype, and thus it defined,
citing the example of the serpent in the wilderness, of which we read,
“For he that turned himself toward it was not saved by the thing that he
saw, but by thee, that art the Saviour of all” ([Wisdom xvi.
17](../../../bib/apo/wis016.htm#017)<span id="xvi.ii-p46.1"></span>). 
If anyone feels disposed to attribute to outward acts any necessary
religious value he is falling back into Judaism, and it were well for
him to remember that the nod which the Quakers adopted out of protest to
the bow of Christians was once the expression of divine worship to the
most sacred idols; that in the Eastern Church the priest only bows
before the Lord believed to be present in the Holy Sacrament while he
prostrates himself before the infidel Sultan; and that throughout the
Latin communion the acolytes genuflect before the Bishop, as they pass
him, with the same genuflection that they give to the Holy Sacrament
upon the Altar.  In this connexion I quote in closing the fine satire in
the letter of this very council to the Emperor and Empress.  St. Paul
“says of Jacob ([Heb. xi. 21](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#021)<span
id="xvi.ii-p46.2"></span>), ‘He worshipped the top of his staff,’ and
like to this is that said by Gregory, surnamed the theologian, ‘Revere
Bethlehem and worship the manger.’  But who of those truly understanding
the Divine Scriptures would suppose that here was intended the Divine
worship of latria?  Such an opinion could only be entertained by an
idiot or one ignorant of Scriptural and Patristic knowledge.  Would
Jacob give divine worship to his staff?  Or would Gregory, the
theologian, give command to worship as God a manger!” <span
id="fr_514"></span>[515](#fn_514)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_506"></span>[523:507](2140674.htm#fr_506) <span
id="xvi.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p3"></span> Who was possibly at least not the
president, vide Michaud, *Sept. Conc. Œuméniques*, p. 330.

<span id="fn_507"></span>[523:508](2140674.htm#fr_507) <span
id="xvi.ii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p4"></span> Worship is “relative” or “absolute,” what
Gibbon means by “direct” would be hard to say.  How entirely false the
whole statement is, Gibbon himself would have recognized had he read the
acts.

<span id="fn_508"></span>[523:509](2140674.htm#fr_508) <span
id="xvi.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p7"></span> Dr. Neale complains that the acts display a
painful lack of critical knowledge and that several spurious passages
are attributed to the Fathers.  But I confess this does not seem to me
either surprising or disgraceful.  The attributing of books, even in our
critical days, to persons who were not their authors is not so uncommon
as to make us wonder such a thing might have occurred in such stormy
times, when learning of this sort must have suffered by the adversities
of the Church and State, the Iconoclastic persecutions and the Moslem
incursions.

<span id="fn_509"></span>[524:510](2140674.htm#fr_509) <span
id="xvi.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p17"></span> “It is certain,” confesses Dr. Neale
(*History of the Holy Eastern Church*, Vol. II., p. 113; in his attempt
to overthrow the authority of this council) “that Politian approved (S.
Theod. Stud. Ep. xviij.) although he was not present at the council of
Nicæa; and the controversy, which had never much disturbed Africa, may
henceforth be considered as terminated in the Diocese of Alexandria.”

<span id="fn_510"></span>[524:511](2140674.htm#fr_510) <span
id="xvi.ii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p23"></span> As a sample of all that bigotry and
dishonesty can do when writing on such a subject, the reader is referred
to a little book by the Rev. F. Meyrick (a canon of the Church of
England) published in Paris for the Anglo-Continental Society, 1877,
entitled, *Du Schisme d’Orient et de l’authorité du prétendu septième
concile.*

<span id="fn_511"></span>[526:512](2140674.htm#fr_511) <span
id="xvi.ii-p30.5"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p31"></span> The true date is 825.

<span id="fn_512"></span>[526:513](2140674.htm#fr_512) <span
id="xvi.ii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p37"></span> Vide Labbe and Cossart, *Concilia*, tom.
vii., col. 59.

<span id="fn_513"></span>[527:514](2140674.htm#fr_513) <span
id="xvi.ii-p43.4"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p44"></span> Vide the Synod’s Letter to the Emperor and
Empress.

<span id="fn_514"></span>[528:515](2140674.htm#fr_514) <span
id="xvi.ii-p46.3"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p47"></span> The treatise of St. John Damascene on *The
Holy Images* has very recently been published in an English translation
by M. H. Allies.  (London.  Thos. Baker, 1898.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Divine Sacra Sent by the Emperors Constantine and Irene to
the Most Holy and Most Blessed Hadrian, Pope of Old Rome.](2140675)
