[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140233)  [Next](2140235) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.ii"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p1"></span> <span id="page_162">p. 162</span> <span
id="ix.ii-Page_162"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="ix.ii-p1.1"></span>Historical Introduction.</span>

<span id="ix.ii-p2"></span>In the whole history of the Church there is
no council which bristles with such astonishing facts as the First
Council of Constantinople.  It is one of the “undisputed General
Councils,” one of the four which St. Gregory said he revered as he did
the four holy Gospels, and he would be rash indeed who denied its right
to the position it has so long occupied; and yet

<span id="ix.ii-p3"></span>1.  It was not intended to be an Ecumenical
Synod at all.

<span id="ix.ii-p4"></span>2.  It was a local gathering of only one
hundred and fifty bishops.

<span id="ix.ii-p5"></span>3.  It was not summoned by the Pope, nor was
he invited to it.

<span id="ix.ii-p6"></span>4.  No diocese of the West was present either
by representation or in the person of its bishop; neither the see of
Rome, nor any other see.

<span id="ix.ii-p7"></span>5.  It was a council of Saints, Cardinal
Orsi, the Roman Historian, says:  “Besides St. Gregory of Nyssa, and St.
Peter of Sebaste, there were also at Constantinople on account of the
Synod many other Bishops, remarkable either for the holiness of their
life, or for their zeal for the faith, or for their learning, or for the
eminence of their Sees, as St. Amphilochius of Iconium, Helladius of
Cesarea in Cappadocia, Optimus of Antioch in Pisidia, Diodorus of
Tarsus, St. Pelagius of Laodicea, St. Eulogius of Edessa, Acacius of
Berea, Isidorus of Cyrus, St. Cyril of Jerusalem, Gelasius of Cesarea in
Palestine, Vitus of Carres, Dionysius of Diospolis, Abram of Batnes, and
Antiochus of Samosata, all three Confessors, Bosphorus of Colonia, and
Otreius of Melitina, and various others whose names appear with honour
in history.  So that perhaps there has not been a council, in which has
been found a greater number of Confessors and of Saints.” <span
id="fr_202"></span>[203](#fn_202)

<span id="ix.ii-p9"></span>6.  It was presided over at first by St.
Meletius, the bishop of Antioch who was bishop not in communion with
Rome, <span id="fr_203"></span>[204](#fn_203) who died during its
session and was styled a Saint in the panegyric delivered over him and
who has since been canonized as a Saint of the Roman Church by the Pope.

<span id="ix.ii-p12"></span>7.  Its second president was St. Gregory
Nazianzen, who was at that time liable to censure for a breach of the
canons which forbade his translation to Constantinople.

<span id="ix.ii-p13"></span>8.  Its action in continuing the Meletian
Schism was condemned at Rome, and its Canons rejected for a thousand
years.

<span id="ix.ii-p14"></span>9.  Its canons were not placed in their
natural position after those of Nice in the codex which was used at the
Council of Chalcedon, although this was an Eastern codex.

<span id="ix.ii-p15"></span>10.  Its Creed was not read nor mentioned,
so far as the acts record, at the Council of Ephesus, fifty years
afterwards.

<span id="ix.ii-p16"></span>11.  Its title to being (as it undoubtedly
is) the Second of the Ecumenical Synods rests upon its Creed having
found a reception in the whole world.  And now—*mirabile dictu*—an
English scholar comes forward, ready to defend the proposition that the
First Council of Constantinople never set forth any creed at all! <span
id="fr_204"></span>[205](#fn_204)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_202"></span>[162:203](2140234.htm#fr_202) <span
id="ix.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p8"></span> Orsi, *Ist. Eccl.*, xviii., 63.

<span id="fn_203"></span>[162:204](2140234.htm#fr_203) <span
id="ix.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p10"></span> E. B. Pusey.  *The Councils of the Church*,
<span class="sc"><span id="ix.ii-p10.1"></span>a.d.</span> 51–381, p.
306.  Tillemont, *Mémoires*, xvj., 662, who says, “If none of those who
die out of communion with Rome can merit the title of Saints and
Confessors, Baronius should have the names of St. Meletius, St. Elias of
Jerusalem and St. Daniel the Stylite stricken from the Martyrology.” 
*Cf*. F. W. Puller, *The Primitive Saints and See of Rome*, pp. 174 and
238.

<span id="ix.ii-p11"></span>Many attempts have been made to explain this
fact away, but without success.  Not only was the president of the
Council a *persona non grata* to the Pope, but the members of the
Council were well aware of the fact, and much pleased that such was the
case, and Hefele acknowledges that the reason the council determined to
continue the Meletian Schism was because allowing Paulinus to succeed to
Meletius would be “too great a concession to the Latins” (vol. III., p.
346).

<span id="fn_204"></span>[162:205](2140234.htm#fr_204) <span
id="ix.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p17"></span> F. J. A. Hort, *Two Dissertations*.  I. On
<span class="Greek"><span id="ix.ii-p17.1"></span>μονογένης Θέος</span>
in *Scripture and tradition, II. On the Constantinopolitan Creed and
other Eastern Creeds of the 4th Century*.  It should be added that Dr.
Hort acknowledges that, “we may well believe that they \[i.e. the 150
fathers of Constantinople\] had expressed approval” of the creed
ordinarily attributed to them (p. 115).  The whole dissertation is a
fine example of what Dr. Salmon so well called Dr. Hort’s “*perfervidum
ingenium* as an advocate,” and of his “exaggeration of judgment.” 
(Salmon.  *Criticism of the Text of the New Testament*, p. 12, also see
p. 34.)  Swainson, in his *The Nicene and Apostles’ Creeds*, has all the
material points found in Hort’s *Dissertation*.  Harnack goes much
further.  He is of opinion that the Creed of Constantinople (as we call
it), the Creed which has been the symbol of orthodoxy for fifteen
hundred years, is really a Semi-Arian, anti-Nicene, and *quasi*
Macedonian confession!  The first contention he supports, not without a
show of plausibility, by the fact that it omits the words (which were
really most crucial) “that is to say of the substance of the Father.” 
In support of the second opinion he writes as follows:  “The words
\[with regard to the Holy Ghost\] are in entire harmony with the form
which the doctrine of the Holy Spirit had in the sixties.  A
Pneumatochian could have subscribed this formula at a pinch; and just
because of this it is certain that the Council of 381 did not accept
this creed.”  Some scholars arrive at “certainty” more easily than
others, even Harnack himself only attains this “certainty” in the
foot-note!  The reader will remark that what Harnack is “certain ”of in
the foot-note is that the Council “did not accept” this creed, not that
it “did not frame” it, which is entirely a different question.  (Adolf
Harnack, *History of Dogma*, \[Eng. Trans.\], Vol. iv., p. 99.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Holy Creed Which the 150 Holy Fathers Set Forth, Which is
Consonant with the Holy and Great Synod of Nice.](2140235)
