[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140347)  [Next](2140349) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xi.xviii.xxx"></span>

<span id="xi.xviii.xxx-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="xi.xviii.xxx-p1.1"></span>Canon XXIX.</span>

<span id="xi.xviii.xxx-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xi.xviii.xxx-p2.1"></span>It</span> is sacrilege to degrade a bishop
to the rank of a presbyter; but, if they are for just cause removed from
episcopal functions, neither ought they to have the position of a
Presbyter; and if they have been displaced without any charge, they
shall be restored to their episcopal dignity.

<span id="xi.xviii.xxx-p3"></span>And Anatolius, the most reverend
Archbishop of Constantinople, said:  If those who are alleged to have
been removed from the episcopal dignity to the order of presbyter, have
indeed been condemned for any sufficient causes, clearly they are not
worthy of the honour of a presbyter.  But if they have been forced down
into the lower rank without just cause, they are worthy, if they appear
guiltless, to receive again both the dignity and priesthood of the
Episcopate.

<span id="xi.xviii.xxx-p4"></span>And all the most reverend Bishops
cried out:

<span id="xi.xviii.xxx-p5"></span>The judgment of the Fathers is right. 
We all say the same.  The Fathers have righteously decided.  Let the
sentence of the Archbishops prevail.

<span id="xi.xviii.xxx-p6"></span>And the most magnificent and glorious
judges said:

<span id="xi.xviii.xxx-p7"></span>Let the pleasure of the Holy Synod be
established for all time.

<span id="xi.xviii.xxx-p8"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xi.xviii.xxx-p8.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="xi.xviii.xxx-p9"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xi.xviii.xxx-p9.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon XXIX.</span>

<span id="xi.xviii.xxx-p10"></span>He is sacrilegious who degrades a
bishop to the rank of a presbyter.  For he that is guilty of crime is
unworthy of the priesthood.  But he that was deposed without cause, let
him be \[still\] bishop.

<span id="xi.xviii.xxx-p11"></span>What precedes and follows the
so-called canon is abbreviated from the <span class="sc"><span
id="xi.xviii.xxx-p11.1"></span>IV</span>th Session of the Council (L.
and C., *Conc*., Tom. IV., col. 550).  I have followed a usual Greek
method of printing it.

<span id="xi.xviii.xxx-p12"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xi.xviii.xxx-p12.1"></span>Hefele.</span>

<span id="xi.xviii.xxx-p13"></span>This so-called canon is nothing but a
verbal copy of a passage from the minutes of the <span id="page_291">p.
291</span> <span id="xi.xviii.xxx-Page_291"></span>fourth session in the
matter of Photius of Tyre and Eustathius of Berytus.  Moreover, it does
not possess the peculiar form which we find in all the genuine canons of
Chalcedon, and in almost all ecclesiastical canons in general; on the
contrary, there adheres to it a portion of the debate, of which it is a
fragment, in which Anatolius is introduced as speaking.  Besides it is
wanting in all the old Greek, as well as in the Latin collections of
canons, and in those of John of Antioch and of Photius, and has only
been appended to the twenty-eight genuine canons of Chalcedon from the
fact that a later transcriber thought fit to add to the genuine canons
the general and important principle contained in the place in question
of the fourth session.  Accordingly, this so-called canon is certainly
an ecclesiastical rule declared at Chalcedon, and in so far a <span
class="Greek"><span id="xi.xviii.xxx-p13.1"></span>κανών</span>, but it
was not added as a canon proper to the other twenty-eight by the Synod.

<span id="xi.xviii.xxx-p14"></span>From the Fourth Session of the same
Holy Synod, having reference to the matter of the Egyptian Bishops.

<span id="xi.xviii.xxx-p15"></span>The most magnificent and glorious
judges, and the whole Senate, said:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon XXXI](2140349)
