[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140422)  [Next](2140424) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiv.iii.xl"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii.xl-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="xiv.iii.xl-p1.1"></span>Canon XXXIX.</span>

<span id="xiv.iii.xl-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xiv.iii.xl-p2.1"></span>Since</span> our brother and fellow-worker,
John, bishop of the island of Cyprus, together with his people in the
province of the Hellespont, both on account of barbarian incursions, and
that they may be freed from servitude of the heathen, and may be subject
alone to the sceptres of most Christian rule, have emigrated from the
said island, by the providence of the philanthropic God, and the labour
of our Christ-loving and pious Empress; we determine that the privileges
which were conceded by the divine fathers who first at Ephesus
assembled, are to be preserved without any innovations, viz.:  that new
Justinianopolis shall have the rights of Constantinople and whoever is
constituted the pious and most religious bishop thereof shall take
precedence of all the bishops of the province of the Hellespont, and be
elected \[?\] by his own bishops according to ancient custom.  For the
customs which obtain in each church our divine Fathers also took pains
should be maintained, the existing bishop of the city of Cyzicus being
subject to the metropolitan of the aforesaid Justinianopolis, for the
imitation of all the rest of the bishops who are under the aforesaid
beloved of God metropolitan John, by whom, as custom demands, even the
bishop of the very city of Cyzicus shall be ordained.

<span id="xiv.iii.xl-p3"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xiv.iii.xl-p3.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="xiv.iii.xl-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xiv.iii.xl-p4.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon XXXIX.</span>

<span id="xiv.iii.xl-p5"></span>The new Justinianopolis shall have the
rights of Constantinople, and its prelate shall rule over all the
bishops of the Hellespont to whom he has gone, and he shall be ordained
by his own bishop:  as the fathers of Ephesus decreed.

<span id="xiv.iii.xl-p6"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xiv.iii.xl-p6.1"></span>Hefele.</span>

<span id="xiv.iii.xl-p7"></span>Hitherto the bishop of Cyzicus was
metropolitan of the province of the Hellespont.  Now he too is to be
subject to the bishop of New-Justinianopolis.  What, however, is meant
by “the right of Constantinople”?  It was <span id="page_384">p.
384</span> <span id="xiv.iii.xl-Page_384"></span>impossible that the
Synod should place the bishop of Justinianopolis in equal dignity with
the patriarch of Constantinople.  But they probably meant to say:  “The
rights which the bishop of Constantinople has hitherto exercised over
the province of the Hellespont, as chief metropolitan, fall now to the
bishop of New-Justinianopolis.”  Or perhaps we should read, instead of
Constantinople <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.iii.xl-p7.1"></span>Κ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.iii.xl-p7.2"></span>ωνσταντινέων πόλεως</span>, as the
Amerbachian <span class="sc"><span
id="xiv.iii.xl-p7.3"></span>ms.</span> has it, and translate:  “The same
rights which Constantia (the metropolis of Cyprus) possessed, New
Justinianopolis shall henceforth have.”  The latter is the more
probable.

<span id="xiv.iii.xl-p8"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xiv.iii.xl-p8.1"></span>Van Espen.</span>

<span id="xiv.iii.xl-p9"></span>To understand this canon it must be
remembered that the Metropolis of Cyprus, which was formerly called
Constantia, when restored by the Emperor Justinian was called by his
name, New Justinianopolis.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon XL](2140424)
