[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140677)  [Next](2140679) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi.vi"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi-p1"></span> <span id="page_536">p. 536</span> <span
id="xvi.vi-Page_536"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xvi.vi-p1.1"></span>Extracts from the Acts.</span>

<span id="xvi.vi-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xvi.vi-p2.1"></span>Session II.</span>

<span id="xvi.vi-p3"></span>\[*The Papal Letters were presented by the
Legates.  First was read that to Constantine and Irene, but not in its
entirety, if we may trust Anastasius the Librarian, who gives what he
says is the original Latin text.  Here follows a translation of this and
of the Greek, also a translation of the Latin passage altogether
omitted, (as we are told) with the consent of the Roman Legates*.\]

<span id="xvi.vi-p4"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xvi.vi-p4.1"></span>Part of Pope Hadrian’s Letter.</span>

<span id="xvi.vi-p5"></span>\[*As written by the Pope*.\]

<span id="xvi.vi-p6"></span>(Migne, *Pat. Lat*., Tom. XCVI., col. 1217.)

<span id="xvi.vi-p7"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xvi.vi-p7.1"></span>If</span> you persevere in that orthodox Faith
in which you have begun, and the sacred and venerable images be by your
means erected again in those parts, as by the lord, the Emperor
Constantine of pious memory, and the blessed Helen, who promulgated the
orthodox Faith, and exalted the holy Catholic and Apostolic Roman Church
your spiritual mother, and with the other orthodox Emperors venerated it
as the head of all Churches, so will your Clemency, that is protected of
God, receive the name of another Constantine, and another Helen, through
whom at the beginning the holy Catholic and Apostolic Church derived
strength, and like whom your own imperial fame is spread abroad by
triumphs, so as to be brilliant and deeply fixed in the whole world. 
But the more, if following the traditions of the orthodox Faith, you
embrace the judgment of the Church of blessed Peter, chief of the
Apostles, and, as of old your predecessors the holy Emperors acted, so
you, too, venerating it with honour, love with all your heart his Vicar,
and if your sacred majesty follow by preference their orthodox Faith,
according to our holy Roman Church.  May the chief of the Apostles
himself, to whom the power was given by our Lord God to bind and remit
sins in heaven and earth, be often your protector, and trample all
barbarous nations under your feet, and everywhere make you conquerors. 
For let sacred authority lay open the marks of his dignity, and how
great veneration ought to be shewn to his, the highest See, by all the
faithful in the world.  For the Lord set him who bears the keys <span
id="page_537">p. 537</span> <span id="xvi.vi-Page_537"></span>of the
kingdom of heaven as chief over all, and by Him is he honoured with this
privilege, by which the keys of the kingdom of heaven are entrusted to
him.  He, therefore, that was preferred with so exalted an honour was
thought worthy to confess that Faith on which the Church of Christ is
founded.  A blessed reward followed that blessed confession, by the
preaching of which the holy universal Church was illumined, and from it
the other Churches of God have derived the proofs of Faith.  For the
blessed Peter himself, the chief of the Apostles, who first sat in the
Apostolic See, left the chiefship of his Apostolate, and pastoral care,
to his successors, who are to sit in his most holy seat for ever.  And
that power of authority, which he received from the Lord God our
Saviour, he too bestowed and delivered by divine command to the
Pontiffs, his successors, etc.

<span id="xvi.vi-p8"></span>\[*As read in Greek to the Council*.\]

<span id="xvi.vi-p9"></span>(Migne, *Pat. Lat*., Tom. XCVI., col. 1218.)

<span id="xvi.vi-p10"></span>If the ancient orthodoxy be perfected and
restored by your means in those regions, and the venerable icons be
placed in their original state, you will be partakers with the Lord
Constantine, Emperor of old, now in the Divine keeping, and the Empress
Helena, who made conspicuous and confirmed the orthodox Faith, and
exalted still more your holy mother, the Catholic and Roman and
spiritual Church, and with the orthodox Emperors who ruled after them,
and so your most pious and heaven-protected name likewise will be set
forth as that of another Constantine and another Helena, being renowned
and praised through the whole world, by whom the holy Catholic and
Apostolic Church is restored.  And especially if you follow the
tradition of the orthodox Faith of the Church of the holy Peter and
Paul, the chief Apostles, and embrace their Vicar, as the Emperors who
reigned before you of old both honoured their Vicar, and loved him with
all their heart:  and if your sacred majesty honour the most holy Roman
Church of the chief Apostles, to whom was given power by God the Word
himself to loose and to bind sins in heaven and earth.  For they will
extend their shield over your power, and all barbarous nations shall be
put under your feet:  and wherever you go they will make you
conquerors.  For the holy and chief Apostles themselves, who set up the
Catholic and orthodox Faith, have laid it down as a written law that all
who after them are to be successors of their seats, should hold their
Faith and remain in it to the end.

<span id="xvi.vi-p11"></span>\[*The part which was never read to the
Council at all*.\]

<span id="xvi.vi-p12"></span>(Found in L. and C., *Concilia*, Tom. VII.,
col. 117.)

<span id="xvi.vi-p13"></span>We greatly wondered that in your imperial
commands, directed for the Patriarch of the royal city, Tarasius, we
find him there called Universal:  but we know not whether this was
written through ignorance or schism, or the heresy of the wicked.  But
henceforth we advise your most merciful and imperial majesty, that he be
by no means called Universal in your writings, because it appears to be
contrary to the institutions of the holy Canons and the decrees of the
traditions of the holy Fathers.  For he never could have ranked second,
save for the authority of our holy Catholic and Apostolic Church, as is
plain to all. <span id="fr_520"></span>[521](#fn_520)   Because if he be
named Universal, above the holy Roman Church which has a prior rank,
which is the head of all the Churches of God, it is certain that he
shews himself as a rebel against the holy Councils, and a heretic.  For,
if he is Universal, he is recognized to have the Primacy even over the
Church of our See, which appears ridiculous to all faithful Christians: 
because in the whole world the chief rank and power was given to the
blessed Apostle Peter by the Redeemer of the world himself; and through
the same Apostle, whose place we unworthily hold, the holy Catholic and
Apostolic Roman Church holds the first rank, and the authority of power,
now and for ever, so that if any one, which we believe not, has called
him, or assents to his being called Universal, let him know that he is
estranged from the orthodox Faith, and a rebel against our holy Catholic
and Apostolic Church.

<span id="xvi.vi-p15"></span>\[*After the reading was ended* (col.
120)\]

<span id="xvi.vi-p16"></span>Tarasius the most holy patriarch said:  Did
you yourselves receive these letters from the most holy Pope, and did
you carry them to our pious Emperor?

<span id="xvi.vi-p17"></span>Peter and Peter the most beloved-of-God
presbyters who held the place of Hadrian, the most holy pope of Rome,
said:  We ourselves received such letters from our apostolic father and
delivered them to the pious lords.

<span id="xvi.vi-p18"></span>John, the most magnificent Logothete,
said:  That this is the case is also known to the Sicilians, the beloved
of God Theodore, the bishop of Catanea, and the most revered deacon
Epiphanius who is with him, <span id="page_538">p. 538</span> <span
id="xvi.vi-Page_538"></span>who holds the place of the archbishop of
Sardinia.  For both of these at the bidding of our pious Emperors, went
to Rome with the most reverend apocrisarius of our most holy patriarch.

<span id="xvi.vi-p19"></span>Theodore the God-beloved bishop of Catanea,
standing in the midst, said:  The pious emperor, by his honourable
jussio, bid send Leo, the most god-beloved presbyter (who together with
myself is a slave of your holiness), with the precious letter of his
most sacred majesty; and he who reveres our \[*sic* in Greek, “your,” in
Latin\] holiness, being the governor (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xvi.vi-p19.1"></span>στρατηγὸς</span> ) of my province of Sicily,
sent me to Rome with the pious jussio of our orthodox Emperors. <span
id="fr_521"></span>[522](#fn_521)

<span id="xvi.vi-p21"></span>And when we were gone, we announced the
orthodox faith of the pious emperors.

<span id="xvi.vi-p22"></span>And when the most blessed Pope heard it, he
said:  Since this has come to pass in the days of their reign, God has
magnified their pious rule above all former reigns.  And this suggestion
(<span class="Greek"><span id="xvi.vi-p22.1"></span>ἀναφορὰν</span>)
which has been read he sent to our most pious kings together with a
letter to your holiness and with his vicars who are here present and
presiding.

<span id="xvi.vi-p23"></span>Cosmas, the deacon, notary, and chamberlain
(*Cubuclesius*) said:  And another letter was sent by the most holy Pope
of Old Rome to Tarasius, our most holy and œcumenical Patriarch.  Let it
be disposed of as your holy assembly shall direct.

<span id="xvi.vi-p24"></span>The Holy Synod said, Let it be read.

<span id="xvi.vi-p25"></span>\[*Then was read Hadrian’s letter to
Tarasius of Constantinople, which ends by saying that,* “our
dearly-loved proto-presbyter of the Holy Church of Rome, and Peter, a
monk, a presbyter, and an abbot, who have been sent by us to the most
tranquil and pious emperors, we beg you will deem them worthy of all
kindness and humane amenity for the sake of St. Peter, coropheus of the
Apostles, and for our sakes, so that for this we may be able to offer
you our sincere thanks.” <span id="fr_522"></span>[523](#fn_522) *The
letter being ended* (col. 128),\]

<span id="xvi.vi-p27"></span>Peter and Peter, the most reverend
presbyters and representatives of the most holy Pope of Old Rome said: 
Let the most holy Tarasius, Patriarch of the royal city, say whether he
agrees (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xvi.vi-p27.1"></span>στοιχεῖ</span>) with the letters of the most
holy Pope of Old Rome or not.

<span id="xvi.vi-p28"></span>Tarasius the most holy patriarch said:  The
divine Apostle Paul, who was filled with the light of Christ, and who
hath begotten us through the gospel, in writing to the Romans,
commending their zeal for the true faith which they had in Christ our
true God, thus said:  “Your faith is gone forth into all the world.”  It
is necessary to follow out this witness, and he that would contradict it
is without good sense.  Wherefore Hadrian, the ruler of Old Rome, since
he was a sharer of these things, thus borne witness to, wrote expressly
and truly to our religious Emperors, and to our humility, confirming
admirably and beautifully the ancient tradition of the Catholic Church. 
And we also ourselves, having examined both in writing, <span
id="fr_523"></span>[524](#fn_523) and by inquisition, and
syllogistically and by demonstration, and having been taught by the
teachings of the Fathers, so have confessed, so do confess, and so will
confess; and shall be fast, and shall remain, and shall stand firm in
the sense of the letters which have just been read, receiving the imaged
representations according to the ancient tradition of our holy fathers;
and these we venerate with firmly-attached <span
id="fr_524"></span>[525](#fn_524) affection, as made in the name of
Christ our God, and of our Spotless Lady the Holy Mother of God, and of
the Holy Angels, and of all the Saints, most clearly giving our
adoration and faith to the one only true God.

<span id="xvi.vi-p31"></span>And the holy Synod said:  The whole holy
Synod thus teaches.

<span id="xvi.vi-p32"></span><span id="page_539">p. 539</span> <span
id="xvi.vi-Page_539"></span>Peter and Peter, the God-loved presbyters
and legates of the Apostolic See, said:  Let the holy Synod say whether
it receives the letters of the most holy Pope of Old Rome.

<span id="xvi.vi-p33"></span>The holy Synod said:  We follow, we
receive, we admit them.

<span id="xvi.vi-p34"></span>\[*The bishops then give one by one their
votes all in the same sense*.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_520"></span>[537:521](2140678.htm#fr_520) <span
id="xvi.vi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi-p14"></span> This statement seems somewhat open to
criticism in view of the position taken by St. Leo, and of the assertion
of Pope Gelasius that Constantinople was a suffragan see to Heraclea.

<span id="fn_521"></span>[538:522](2140678.htm#fr_521) <span
id="xvi.vi-p19.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi-p20"></span> The meaning of the passage is obscure, but
Mendham’s translation seems clearly wrong.

<span id="fn_522"></span>[538:523](2140678.htm#fr_522) <span
id="xvi.vi-p25.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi-p26"></span> Compare with this the statement of the
famous historian, Gibbon (Chapter XLIX., N. 79), “The pope’s legates
were casual messengers, two priests without any special commission, and
who were disavowed on their return.  Some vagabond monks were persuaded
by the Catholics to represent the Oriental patriarchs.  This curious
anecdote is revealed by Theodore Studites, one of the warmest
Iconoclasts of the age.”  And yet to this tissue of false statements
Bury, in his just-published edition of Gibbon (1898), has no note of
correction to make!  And this has passed, and will pass, for history
among the overwhelming majority of English readers!  Nor does there seem
to be any possible excuse for Gibbon in either particular, the first
statement is proved to be false by the letters of Hadrian, the second
statement is equally disproved by the letters of the “high priests of
the East,” in which it is quite clear that no claim was set up that they
represented the Patriarchs, but the Patriarchates, which they did, as
they proved, in a very real sense.  This letter Gibbon must have seen,
if indeed he ever took the trouble to read the Acts, for it is spread
out in full in Actio Secunda and was read at length to the Council.

<span id="fn_523"></span>[538:524](2140678.htm#fr_523) <span
id="xvi.vi-p28.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi-p29"></span> Mendham here has translated “The
Scriptures,” following the Latin, the Greek is <span class="Greek"><span
id="xvi.vi-p29.1"></span>γραφικῶς</span>.

<span id="fn_524"></span>[538:525](2140678.htm#fr_524) <span
id="xvi.vi-p29.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi-p30"></span> Mendham translates <span
class="Greek"><span id="xvi.vi-p30.1"></span>σχετικῷ</span> “relative,”
which is a quite possible rendering.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Extracts from the Acts.  Session III.](2140679)
