[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140389)  [Next](2140391) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiv.iii.vii"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii.vii-p1"></span> <span id="page_365">p. 365</span>
<span id="xiv.iii.vii-Page_365"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xiv.iii.vii-p1.1"></span>Excursus on the Marriage of the
Clergy.</span>

<span id="xiv.iii.vii-p2"></span>On this subject there is a popular
misconception which must first be removed.  In the popular mind to-day
there is no distinction between “a married clergy” being allowed, and
“the marriage of the clergy” being allowed; even theological writers who
have attained some repute have confused these two things in the most
unfortunate and perplexing fashion.  It will suffice to mention as an
instance of this Bp. Harold Browne in his book on the XXXIX. Articles,
in which not only is the confusion above spoken of made, but the very
blunder is used for controversial purposes, to back up and support by
the authority of the ancient Church in the East (which allowed a married
clergy) the practice of the Nestorians and of the modern Church of
England, both of which tolerate the marriage of the clergy, a thing
which the ancient Church abhorred and punished with deposition.

<span id="xiv.iii.vii-p3"></span>I cannot better express the doctrine
and practice of the ancient Church in the East than by quoting the words
of the Rev. John Fulton in the Introduction to the Third Edition of his
*Index Canonum*. <span id="fr_344"></span>[345](#fn_344)   He says: 
“Marriage was no impediment to ordination even as a Bishop; and Bishops,
Priests, and Deacons, equally with other men, were forbidden to put away
their wives under pretext of religion.  The case was different when a
man was unmarried at the time of his ordination.  Then he was held to
have given himself wholly to God in the office of the Holy Ministry, and
he was forbidden to take back from his offering that measure of his
cares and his affections which must necessarily be given to the
maintenance and nurture of his family.  In short, the married man might
be ordained, but with a few exceptions no man was allowed to marry after
ordination.”  In his “Digest” *sub voce* “Celibacy” he gives the
earliest canon law on the subject as follows:  “None of the clergy,
except readers and singers may marry after ordination (Ap. Can. xxvi.);
but deacons may marry, if at their ordination they have declared an
intention to do so (Ancyra x.).  A priest who marries is to be deposed
(Neocæsarea i.).  A deaconess who marries is to be anathematized (Chal.
xv.); a monk or dedicated virgin who marries, is to be excommunicated
(Chal. xvi.).  Those who break their vows of celibacy are to fulfil the
penance of digamists (Ancyra xix.).” <span
id="fr_345"></span>[346](#fn_345)

<span id="xiv.iii.vii-p6"></span>We may then take it for a general
principle that in no part of the ancient Church was a priest allowed to
contract holy matrimony; and in no place was he allowed to exercise his
priesthood afterwards, if he should dare to enter into such a relation
with a woman.  As I have so often remarked it is not my place to approve
or disapprove this law of the Church, my duty is the much simpler one of
tracing historically what the law was and what it is in the East and
West to-day.  The Reformers considered that in this, as in most other
matters, these venerable churches had made a mistake, but neither the
maintenance nor the disproof of this opinion in any way concerns me, so
far as this volume is concerned.  All that is necessary for me to do is
to affirm that if a priest were at any time to attempt to marry, he
would be attempting to do that which from the earliest times of which we
have any record, no priest has ever been allowed to do, but which always
has been punished as a gross sin of immorality.

<span id="xiv.iii.vii-p7"></span>In tracing the history of this subject,
the only time during which any real difficulty presents itself is the
first three centuries, after that all is much clearer, and my duty is
simply to lay the undisputed facts of the case before the reader.

<span id="xiv.iii.vii-p8"></span>We begin then with the debatable
ground.  And first with regard to the Lord, “the great High Priest of
our profession,” of course there can be no doubt that he set the
example, or—if any think that he was not a pattern for the priests of
his Church to follow—at least lived the life, of celibacy.  When we come
to the question of what was the practice of his first followers in this
matter, there would likewise seem to be but little if any reasonable
<span id="page_366">p. 366</span> <span
id="xiv.iii.vii-Page_366"></span>doubt.  For while of the Apostles we
have it recorded only of Peter that he was a married man, we have it
also expressly recorded that in his case, as in that of all the rest who
had “forsaken all” to follow him, the Lord himself said, “Every one that
hath forsaken houses, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or
wife, or children, or lands, for my name’s sake shall receive an hundred
fold and shall inherit eternal life.” <span
id="fr_346"></span>[347](#fn_346)

<span id="xiv.iii.vii-p10"></span>There can be no doubt that St. Paul in
his epistles allows and even contemplates the probability that those
admitted to the ranks of the clergy will have been already married, but
distinctly says that they must have been the “husband of one
wife,” <span id="fr_347"></span>[348](#fn_347) by which all antiquity
and every commentator of gravity recognizes that digamists are cut off
from the possibility of ordination, but there is nothing to imply that
the marital connexion was to be continued after ordination.  For a
thorough treatment of this whole subject from the ancient and Patristic
point of view, the reader is referred to St. Jerome. <span
id="fr_348"></span>[349](#fn_348)

<span id="xiv.iii.vii-p13"></span>The next stage in our progress is
marked by the so-called Apostolical Canons.  Now for those who hold that
these canons had directly or indirectly the Apostles for their author,
or that as we have them now they are all of even sub-Apostolic date, the
matter becomes more simple, for while indeed these canons do not
expressly set forth the law subsequently formulated for the East, they
certainly seem to be not inconsistent therewith, but rather to look that
way, especially Canons V. and LI.  But few will be found willing to
support so extreme an hypothesis, and while indeed many scholars are of
opinion that most of the canons of the collection we style
“Apostolical,” are ante-Nicene, yet they will not be recognized as of
more value than as so many mirrors, displaying what was at their date
considered pure discipline.  It is abundantly clear that the fathers in
council in Trullo thought the discipline they were setting forth to be
the original discipline of the Church in the matter, and the discipline
of the West an innovation, but that such was really the case seems far
from certain.  Thomassinus treats this point with much learning, and I
shall cite some of the authorities he brings forward.  Of these the most
important is Epiphanius, who as a Greek would be certain to give the
tradition of the East, had there been any such tradition known in his
time.  I give the three great passages.

<span id="xiv.iii.vii-p14"></span>“It is evident that those from the
priesthood are chiefly taken from the order of virgins, or if not from
virgins, at least from monks; or if not from the order of monks, then
they are wont to be made priests who keep themselves from their wives,
or who are widows after a single marriage.  But he that has been
entangled by a second marriage is not admitted to priesthood in the
Church, even if he be continent from his wife, or be a widower.  Anyone
of this sort is rejected from the grade of bishop, presbyter, deacon, or
subdeacon.  The order of reader, however, can be chosen from all the
orders these grades can be chosen from, that is to say from virgins,
monks, the continent, widowers, and they who are bound by honest
marriage.  Moreover, if necessity so compel, even digamists may be
lectors, for such is not a priest, etc., etc.” <span
id="fr_349"></span>[350](#fn_349)

<span id="xiv.iii.vii-p16"></span>“Christ taught us by an example that
the priestly work and ornaments should be communicated to those who
shall have preserved their continency after a single marriage, or shall
have persevered in virginity.  And this the Apostles thereafter honestly
and piously decreed, through the ecclesiastical canon of the
priesthood.” <span id="fr_350"></span>[351](#fn_350)

<span id="xiv.iii.vii-p18"></span>“Nay, moreover, he that still uses
marriage, and begets children, even though the husband of but one wife,
is by no means admitted by the Church to the order of deacon, presbyter,
bishop, or subdeacon.  But for all this, he who shall have kept himself
from the commerce of his one wife, or has been deprived of her, may be
ordained, and this is <span id="page_367">p. 367</span> <span
id="xiv.iii.vii-Page_367"></span>most usually the case in those places
where the ecclesiastical canons are most accurately observed.” <span
id="fr_351"></span>[352](#fn_351)

<span id="xiv.iii.vii-p20"></span>Nor is the weight of this evidence
lessened, but much increased, by the acknowledgment of the same father
that in some places in his days the celibate life was not observed by
such priests as had wives, for he explains that such a state of things
had come about “not from following the authority of the canons, but
through the neglect of men, which is wont at certain periods to be the
case.” <span id="fr_352"></span>[353](#fn_352)

<span id="xiv.iii.vii-p22"></span>The witness of the Western Fathers
although so absolutely and indisputably clear is not so conclusive as to
the East, and yet one passage from St. Jerome should be quoted.  “The
Virgin Christ and the Virgin Mary dedicated the virginity of both
sexes.  The Apostles were chosen when either virgins or continent after
marriage, and bishops, presbyters, and deacons are chosen either when
virgins, or widowers, or at least continent forever after the
priesthood.” <span id="fr_353"></span>[354](#fn_353)

<span id="xiv.iii.vii-p24"></span>It would be out of place to enter into
any detailed argument upon the force of these passages, but I shall lay
before the reader the summing up of the whole matter by a weighty recent
writer of the Ultramontane Roman School.

<span id="xiv.iii.vii-p25"></span>“Is the celibate an Apostolic
ordinance?  Bickel affirmed that it is, and Funk denied it in 1878. 
To-day \[1896\] canonists commonly admit that one cannot prove the
existence of any formal precept, either divine or apostolic, which
imposes the celibate upon the clergy, and that all the texts, whether
taken out of Holy Scripture or from the Fathers, on this subject contain
merely a counsel, and not a command.”  “In the Fourth Century a great
number of councils forbade bishops, priests, and deacons to live in the
use of marriage with their lawful wives.…But there does not appear to
have been any disposition to declare by law as invalid the marriages of
clerics in Holy Orders.  In the Fifth and Sixth Centuries the law of the
celibate was observed by all the Churches of the West, thanks to the
Councils and to the Popes.”  “In the Seventh and down to the end of the
Tenth Century, <span id="fr_354"></span>[355](#fn_354) as a matter of
fact the law of celibacy was little observed in a great part of the
Western Church, but as a matter of law the Roman Pontiffs and the
Councils were constant in their proclamation of its obligation.”  By the
canonical practice of the unreformed West, the reception of Holy Orders
is an *impedimentum dirimens matrimonii*, which renders any marriage
subsequently contracted not only illicit but absolutely null.  On this
diriment impediment the same Roman Catholic writer says:  “The diriment
impediment of Holy Orders is of ecclesiastical obligation and not of
divine, and consequently the Church can dispense it.  This is the
present teaching which is in opposition to that of the old schools.”

<span id="xiv.iii.vii-p27"></span>“There is no question of the nullity
of the marriages contracted by clerics before 1139.  At the Council of
the Lateran of that year, Innocent II. declared that these marriages
contracted in contempt of the ecclesiastical law are not true marriages
in his eyes.  His successors do not seem to have insisted much upon this
new diriment impediment, although it was attacked most vigorously by the
offending clergymen; but the School of Bologna, the authority of which
was then undisputed, openly declared for the nullity of the marriages
contracted by clerics in Holy Orders.  Thus it is that this point of law
has been settled rather by teaching, than by any precise text, or by any
law of a known date.” <span id="fr_355"></span>[356](#fn_355)

<span id="xiv.iii.vii-p29"></span>It should not, however, be forgotten
that although this is true with regard to Pope Innocent II. in 1139, it
is also true that in 530 the Emperor Justinian declared null and void
all marriages contracted by clerics in Holy Orders, and the children of
such marriages to be spurious (*spurii*).

<span id="xiv.iii.vii-p30"></span>The reader will be interested in
reading the answer on this point made by King Henry <span
id="page_368">p. 368</span> <span id="xiv.iii.vii-Page_368"></span>VIII.
to the letter sent him by the German ambassadors. <span
id="fr_356"></span>[357](#fn_356)   I can here give but a part
translated into English.  “Although the Church from the beginning
admitted married men, as priests and bishops, who were without crime,
the husband of one wife, (out of the necessity of the times, as
sufficient other suitable men could not be found as would suffice for
the teaching of the world) yet Paul himself chose the celibate Timothy;
but if anyone came unmarried to the priesthood and afterwards took a
wife, he was always deposed from the priesthood, according to the canon
of the Council of Neocæsarea which was before that of Nice.  So, too, in
the Council of Chalcedon, in the first canon of which all former canons
are confirmed, it is established that a deaconess, if she give herself
over to marriage, shall remain under anathema, and a virgin who had
dedicated herself to God and a monk who join themselves in marriage,
shall remain excommunicated.…No Apostolic canon nor the Council of Nice
contain anything similar to what you assert, viz.:  that priests once
ordained can marry afterwards.  And with this statement agrees the Sixth
Synod, in which it was decreed that if any of the clergy should wish to
lead a wife, he should do so before receiving the Subdiaconate, since
afterwards it was by no means lawful; nor was there given in the Sixth
Synod any liberty to priests of leading wives after their priesting, as
you assert.  Therefore from the beginning of the newborn Church it is
clearly seen that at no time it was permitted to a priest to lead a wife
after his priesting, and nowhere, where this was attempted, was it done
with impunity, but the culprit was deposed from his priesthood.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_344"></span>[365:345](2140390.htm#fr_344) <span
id="xiv.iii.vii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii.vii-p4"></span> John Fulton, *Index Canonum*, p. 29
(N.Y., 1892.)

<span id="fn_345"></span>[365:346](2140390.htm#fr_345) <span
id="xiv.iii.vii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii.vii-p5"></span> Ibid., p. 294.

<span id="fn_346"></span>[366:347](2140390.htm#fr_346) <span
id="xiv.iii.vii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii.vii-p9"></span> [Matt.
19:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#029), [Luke
18:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#029), [Mark
10:29](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#029)<span
id="xiv.iii.vii-p9.1"></span> is found the same incident recorded, but
while “wife” is mentioned among the things “left,” no “wife” is found
among the things gained.

<span id="fn_347"></span>[366:348](2140390.htm#fr_347) <span
id="xiv.iii.vii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii.vii-p11"></span> [1 Tim.
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#002),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#012), [Titus
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#006)<span
id="xiv.iii.vii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_348"></span>[366:349](2140390.htm#fr_348) <span
id="xiv.iii.vii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii.vii-p12"></span> Hieron, *Adv. Jovin*. Lib. I. 
*Confer* also the *In Apolog. pro libris Adv. Jovin.*

<span id="fn_349"></span>[366:350](2140390.htm#fr_349) <span
id="xiv.iii.vii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii.vii-p15"></span> Epiph. *Exposit*. *Fid. Cath.*, c.
xxi.

<span id="fn_350"></span>[366:351](2140390.htm#fr_350) <span
id="xiv.iii.vii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii.vii-p17"></span> Ibid. *Hæresi*. 48, n. 7.

<span id="fn_351"></span>[367:352](2140390.htm#fr_351) <span
id="xiv.iii.vii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii.vii-p19"></span> Epiph. *Hæresi*, 59, n. 4.

<span id="fn_352"></span>[367:353](2140390.htm#fr_352) <span
id="xiv.iii.vii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii.vii-p21"></span> Ibid. ut supra.

<span id="fn_353"></span>[367:354](2140390.htm#fr_353) <span
id="xiv.iii.vii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii.vii-p23"></span> Hieron. *Apolog. pro. lib. adv.
Jovin*.

<span id="fn_354"></span>[367:355](2140390.htm#fr_354) <span
id="xiv.iii.vii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii.vii-p26"></span> It is curious that this is just four
centuries, the same length of time as from the Reformation.

<span id="fn_355"></span>[367:356](2140390.htm#fr_355) <span
id="xiv.iii.vii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii.vii-p28"></span> *L’Ami du Clergé,* 6 Août, 1896, pp.
677 and 678.

<span id="fn_356"></span>[368:357](2140390.htm#fr_356) <span
id="xiv.iii.vii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii.vii-p31"></span> This letter is found in full in the
Addenda to the Appendix at the end of the seventh volume of Burnet’s
*History of the Reformation* (London.  Orr & Co., 1850, p. cxlviij.).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon VII](2140391)
