[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140279)  [Next](2140281) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="x.xiv"></span>

<span id="x.xiv-p1"></span> <span id="page_222">p. 222</span> <span
id="x.xiv-Page_222"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="x.xiv-p1.1"></span>Extracts from the Acts.</span>

<span id="x.xiv-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="x.xiv-p2.1"></span>Session II.  (Continued.)</span>

<span id="x.xiv-p3"></span>(Labbe and Cossart, *Concilia*, Tom. III.,
col. 617.)

<span id="x.xiv-p4"></span>And all the most reverend bishops at the same
time cried out.  This is a just judgment.  To Cœlestine, a new Paul!  To
Cyril a new Paul!  To Cœlestine the guardian of the faith!  To Cœlestine
of one mind with the synod!  To Cœlestine the whole Synod offers its
thanks!  One Cœlestine!  One Cyril!  One faith of the Synod!  One faith
of the world!

<span id="x.xiv-p5"></span>Projectus, the most reverend bishop and
legate, said:  Let your holiness consider the form (<span
class="Greek"><span id="x.xiv-p5.1"></span>τύπον</span>) of the writings
of the holy and venerable pope Cœlestine, the bishop, who has exhorted
your holiness (not as if teaching the ignorant, but as reminding them
that know) that those things which he had long ago defined, and now
thought it right to remind you of, ye might give command to be carried
out to the uttermost, according to the canon of the common faith, and
according to the use of the Catholic Church.

<span id="x.xiv-p6"></span>Firmus, the bishop of Cæsarea in Cappadocia
said:  The Apostolic and holy see of the most holy bishop Cœlestine,
hath previously given a decision and type (<span class="Greek"><span
id="x.xiv-p6.1"></span>τύπον</span>) in this matter, through the
writings which were sent to the most God beloved bishops, to wit to
Cyril of Alexandria, and to Juvenal of Jerusalem, and to Rufus of
Thessalonica, and to the holy churches, both of Constantinople and of
Antioch.  This we have also followed and (since the limit set for
Nestorius’s emendation was long gone by, and much time has passed since
our arrival at the city of Ephesus in accordance with the decree of the
most pious emperor, and thereupon having delayed no little time so that
the day fixed by the emperor was past; and since Nestorius although
cited had not appeared) we carried into effect the type (<span
class="Greek"><span id="x.xiv-p6.2"></span>τύπον</span>) having
pronounced against him a canonical and apostolical judgment.

<span id="x.xiv-p7"></span>Arcadius the most reverend bishop and legate,
said:  Although our sailing was slow, and contrary winds hindered us
especially, so that we did not know whether we should arrive at the
destined place, as we had hoped, nevertheless by God’s good
providence…Wherefore we desire to ask your blessedness, that you command
that we be taught what has been already decreed by your holiness.

<span id="x.xiv-p8"></span>Philip, presbyter and legate of the Apostolic
See said:  We offer our thanks to the holy and venerable Synod, that
when the writings of our holy and blessed pope had been read to you, the
holy members by our \[*or* your\] holy voices, <span
id="fr_260"></span>[261](#fn_260) ye joined yourselves to the holy head
also by your holy acclamations.  For your blessedness is not ignorant
that the head of the whole faith, the head of the Apostles, is blessed
Peter the Apostle.  And since now our mediocrity, after having been
tempest-tossed and much vexed, has arrived, we ask that ye give order
that there be laid before us what things were done in this holy Synod
before our arrival; in order that according to the opinion of our
blessed pope and of this present holy assembly, we likewise may ratify
their determination.

<span id="x.xiv-p10"></span>Theodotus, the bishop of Ancyra said:  The
God of the whole world has made manifest the justice of the judgment
pronounced by the holy Synod by the writings of the most religious
bishop Cœlestine, and by the coming of your holiness.  For ye have made
manifest the zeal of the most holy and reverend bishop Cœlestine, and
his care for the pious faith.  And since very reasonably your reverence
is desirous of learning what has been done from the minutes of the acts
concerning the deposition of Nestorius your reverence will be fully
convinced of the justice of the sentence, and of the zeal of the holy
Synod, and the symphony of the faith which the most pious and holy
bishop Cœlestine has <span id="page_223">p. 223</span> <span
id="x.xiv-Page_223"></span>proclaimed with a great voice, of course
after your full conviction, the rest shall be added to the present
action.

<span id="x.xiv-p11"></span>\[*In the Acts follow two short letters from
Cœlestine, one to the Emperor and the other to Cyril, but nothing is
said about them, or how they got there, and thus abruptly ends the
account of this session*.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_260"></span>[222:261](2140280.htm#fr_260) <span
id="x.xiv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="x.xiv-p9"></span> This seems to be certainly corrupt.  I have
literally followed the Greek.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Extracts from the Acts.  Session III.](2140281)
