[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140396)  [Next](2140398) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiv.iii.xiv"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii.xiv-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="xiv.iii.xiv-p1.1"></span>Canon XIII.</span>

<span id="xiv.iii.xiv-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xiv.iii.xiv-p2.1"></span>Since</span> we know it to be handed down
as a rule of the Roman Church that those who are deemed worthy to be
advanced to the diaconate or presbyterate should promise no longer to
cohabit with their wives, we, preserving the ancient rule and apostolic
perfection and order, will that the lawful marriages of men who are in
holy orders be from this time forward firm, by no means dissolving their
union with their wives nor depriving them of their mutual intercourse at
a convenient time.  Wherefore, if anyone shall have been found worthy to
be ordained subdeacon, or deacon, or presbyter, he is by no means to be
prohibited from admittance to such a rank, even if he shall live with a
lawful wife.  Nor shall it be demanded of him at the time of his
ordination that he promise to abstain from lawful intercourse with his
wife:  lest we should affect injuriously marriage constituted by God and
blessed by his presence, as the Gospel saith:  “What God hath joined
together let no man put asunder;” and the Apostle saith, “Marriage is
honourable and the bed undefiled;” and again, “Art thou bound to a wife?
seek not to be loosed.”  But we know, as they who assembled at Carthage
(with a care for the honest life of the clergy) said, that subdeacons,
who handle the Holy Mysteries, and deacons, and presbyters should
abstain from their consorts according to their own course \[of
ministration\].  So that what has been handed down through the Apostles
and preserved by ancient custom, we too likewise maintain, knowing that
there is a time for all things and especially for fasting and prayer. 
For it is meet that they who assist at the divine altar should be
absolutely continent when they are handling holy things, in order that
they may be able to obtain from God what they ask in sincerity.

<span id="xiv.iii.xiv-p3"></span>If therefore anyone shall have dared,
contrary to the Apostolic Canons, to deprive any of those who are in
holy orders, presbyter, or deacon, or subdeacon of cohabitation and
intercourse with his lawful wife, let him be deposed.  In like manner
also if any presbyter or deacon on pretence of piety has dismissed his
wife, let him be excluded from communion; and if he persevere in this
let him be deposed.

<span id="xiv.iii.xiv-p4"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xiv.iii.xiv-p4.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="xiv.iii.xiv-p5"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xiv.iii.xiv-p5.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon XIII.</span>

<span id="xiv.iii.xiv-p6"></span>Although the Romans wish that everyone
ordained deacon or presbyter should put away his wife, we wish the
marriages of deacons and presbyters to continue valid and firm.

<span id="xiv.iii.xiv-p7"></span><span id="page_372">p. 372</span> <span
id="xiv.iii.xiv-Page_372"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xiv.iii.xiv-p7.1"></span>Fleury.</span>

<span id="xiv.iii.xiv-p8"></span>(*H. E*., Livre XL., chap. 1.)

<span id="xiv.iii.xiv-p9"></span>What is said in this canon, that the
council of Carthage orders priests to abstain from their wives at
prescribed periods, is a misunderstanding of the decree, caused either
by malice or by ignorance.  This canon is one of those adopted by the
Fifth Council of Carthage held in the year 400, and it is decreed that
subdeacons, deacons; priests, and bishops shall abstain from their
wives, following the ancient statutes, and shall be as though they had
them not.  The Greek version of this canon has rendered the Latin words
*priora statuta* by these, *idious horous*, which may mean “fixed
times”:  for the translator read, following another codex, *propria* for
*priora*.  Be this as it may, the Fathers of the Trullan council
supposed that this obliged the clergy only to continence at certain
fixed times, and were not willing to see that it included bishops as
well.

<span id="xiv.iii.xiv-p10"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xiv.iii.xiv-p10.1"></span>Van Espen.</span>

<span id="xiv.iii.xiv-p11"></span>Although the Latin Church does not
disapprove, <span id="fr_359"></span>[360](#fn_359) as contrary to the
law of the Gospel the discipline of the Greeks which allows the use of
marriage to presbyters and deacons, provided it was contracted before
ordination; yet never has it approved this canon which with too great
zeal condemns the opposite custom, and rashly assigns great errors to
the Roman Church.

<span id="xiv.iii.xiv-p13"></span>This canon is found in the *Corpus
Juris Canonici*, Gratian’s *Decretum*, Pars I., Dist. XXXI., c. xiij.

<span id="xiv.iii.xiv-p14"></span>Antonius Augustinus in his proposed
emendations of Gratian says (*Lib*. I. *dial. de emend. Grat*. c. 8.): 
“This canon can in no way be received; for it is written in opposition
to the celibacy of the Latin priests, and openly is against the Roman
Church.”  But to me the note which Gratian appends seems much more
learned and true:  “This however must be understood as of local
application; for the Eastern Church, to which the VI. Synod prescribed
this rule, did not receive a vow of chastity from the ministers of the
altar.”  It may be well to note here that by the opinion of most Latin
casuists the obligation to chastity among the Roman clergy rests upon
the vow and not upon any law of the Church binding thereto.  This
evidently was the opinion of Gratian.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_359"></span>[372:360](2140397.htm#fr_359) <span
id="xiv.iii.xiv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii.xiv-p12"></span> Clement VIII. made a decree in
conformity with this canon that a Greek presbyter who was married shall
abstain from his wife for a week or three days before he offered the
sacrifice of the mass.  *Const.* 33, *in Bull. Rom* (*cit*. Van Espen
*l. c*.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon XIV](2140398)
