[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140381)  [Next](2140383) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiv.ii"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p1"></span> <span id="page_356">p. 356</span> <span
id="xiv.ii-Page_356"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xiv.ii-p1.1"></span>Introductory Note.</span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p2"></span>From the fact that the canons of the Council
in Trullo are included in this volume of the Decrees and Canons of the
Seven Ecumenical Councils it must not for an instant be supposed that it
is intended thereby to affirm that these canons have any ecumenical
authority, or that the council by which they were adopted can lay any
claim to being ecumenical either in view of its constitution or of the
subsequent treatment by the Church of its enactments.

<span id="xiv.ii-p3"></span>It is true that it claimed at the time an
ecumenical character, and styled itself such in several of its canons,
it is true that in the mind of the Emperor Justinian II., who summoned
it, it was intended to have been ecumenical.  It is true that the Greeks
at first declared it to be a continuation of the Sixth Synod and that by
this name they frequently denominate and quote its canons.  But it is
also true that the West was not really represented at it at all (as we
shall see presently); that when the Emperor afterwards sent the canons
to the Pope to receive his signature, he absolutely refused to have
anything to do with them; and it is further true that they were never
practically observed by the West at all, and that even in the East their
authority was rather theoretical than real.

<span id="xiv.ii-p4"></span>(Fleury.  *Histoire Ecclesiastique*, Livre
XL., Chap. xlix.)

<span id="xiv.ii-p5"></span>As the two last General Councils (in 553 and
in 681) had not made any Canons, the Orientals judged it suitable to
supply them eleven years after the Sixth Council, that is to say, the
year 692, fifth indiction.  For that purpose the Emperor Justinian
convoked a Council, at which 211 Bishops attended, of whom the principal
were the four Patriarchs, Paul of Constantinople, Peter of Alexandria,
Anastasius of Jerusalem, George of Antioch.  Next in the subscriptions
are named John of Justinianopolis, Cyriacus of Cesarea in Cappadocia,
Basil of Gortyna in Crete, who says that he represents the whole Council
of the Roman Church, as he had said in subscribing the Sixth Council. 
But it is certain otherwise that in this latter council there were
present Legates of the Holy See.  This council, like the Sixth, <span
id="fr_339"></span>[340](#fn_339) assembled in the dome of the palace
called in Latin *Trullus*, which name it has kept.  It is also named in
Latin Quinisextum, in Greek Penthecton, as one might say, the
fifth-sixth, to mark that it is only the supplement of the two preceding
Councils, though properly it is a distinct one.

<span id="xiv.ii-p7"></span>The intention was to make a body of
discipline to serve thenceforth for the whole Church, and it was
distributed into 102 Canons.

<span id="xiv.ii-p8"></span>To this statement by Fleury some additions
must be made.  First, with regard to the date of the synod.  This is not
so certain as would appear at first sight.  At the Seventh Ecumenical
Council, the patriarch Tarasius of Constantinople asserted that, “four
or five years after the sixth Ecumenical Council the same bishops, in a
new assembly under Justinian II. had published the \[Trullan\] Canons
mentioned,” and this assertion the Seventh Council appears to have
accepted as true, if we understand the sixth session aright.  Now were
this statement true, the date would be probably 686, but this is
impossible by the words of the council itself, where we find mention
made of the fifteenth of January of the past 4th indiction, or the year
of the world, 6109.  To make this agree at all, scholars tell us that
for iv. must be read xiv.  But the rest of the statement is equally
erroneous, the bishops were not the same, as can readily be seen by
comparing the subscriptions to the Acts.

<span id="xiv.ii-p9"></span>The year of the world 6109 is certainly
wrong, and so other scholars would read 6199, <span id="page_357">p.
357</span> <span id="xiv.ii-Page_357"></span>but here a division takes
place, for some reckon by the Constantinopolitan era, and so fix the
date at 691, and others following the Alexandrian era fix it at 706. 
But this last is certainly wrong, for the canons were sent for signature
to Pope Sergius, who died as early as 701.  Hefele’s conclusion is as
follows:

<span id="xiv.ii-p10"></span>(Hefele.  *Hist. of the Councils*, Vol. V.,
p. 222.)

<span id="xiv.ii-p11"></span>The year 6199 of the Constantinopolitan era
coincides with the year 691 after Christ and the <span class="sc"><span
id="xiv.ii-p11.1"></span>IV</span>th Indiction ran from September 1,
690, to August 31, 691.  If then, our Synod, in canon iij., speaks of
the 15th of January in the *past* Indiction IV., it means January 691;
but it belongs itself, to the Vth Indiction, i.e., it was opened after
September 1, 691, and before September 1, 692.

<span id="xiv.ii-p12"></span>As this is not a history of the Councils
but a collection of their decrees and canons with illustrative notes,
the only other point to be considered is the reception these canons met
with.

<span id="xiv.ii-p13"></span>The decrees were signed first by the
Emperor, the next place was left vacant for the Pope, then followed the
subscriptions of the Patriarchs of Constantinople, Alexandria,
Jerusalem, and Antioch, the whole number being 211, bishops or
representatives of bishops.  It is not quite certain whether any of the
Patriarchs were present except Paul of Constantinople; but taking it all
in all the probability is in favour of their presence. <span
id="fr_340"></span>[341](#fn_340)   Blank places were left for the
bishops of Thessalonica, Sardinia, Ravenna and Corinth.  The Archbishop
of Gortyna in Crete added to his signature the phrase “Holding the place
of the holy Church of Rome in every synod.”  He had in the same way
signed the decrees of III. Constantinople, Crete belonging to the Roman
Patriarchate; as to whether his delegation on the part of the Roman
Synod continued or was merely made to continue by his own volition we
have no information.  The ridiculous blunder of Balsamon must be noted
here, who asserts that the bishops whose names are missing and for which
blank places were left, had actually signed.

<span id="xiv.ii-p15"></span>Pope Sergius refused to sign the decrees
when they were sent to him, rejected them as “lacking authority”
(*invalidi*) and described them as containing “novel errors.”  With the
efforts to extort his signature we have no concern further than to state
that they signally failed.  Later on, in the time of Pope Constantine, a
middle course seems to have been adopted, a course subsequently in the
ninth century thus expressed by Pope John VIII., “he accepted all those
canons which did not contradict the true faith, good morals, and the
decrees of Rome,” a truly notable statement!  Nearly a century later
Pope Hadrian I. distinctly recognizes all the Trullan decrees in his
letter to Tenasius of Constantinople and attributes them to the Sixth
Synod.  “All the holy six synods I receive with all their canons, which
rightly and divinely were promulgated by them, among which is contained
that in which reference is made to a Lamb being pointed to by the
Precursor as being found in certain of the venerable images.”  Here the
reference is unmistakably to the Trullan Canon LXXXII.

<span id="xiv.ii-p16"></span>Hefele’s summing up of the whole matter is
as follows:

<span id="xiv.ii-p17"></span>(Hefele, *Hist. of the Councils*, Vol. V.,
p. 242.)

<span id="xiv.ii-p18"></span>That the Seventh Ecumenical Council at Nice
ascribed the Trullan canons to the Sixth Ecumenical Council, and spoke
of them entirely in the Greek spirit, cannot astonish us, as it was
attended almost solely by Greeks.  They specially pronounced the
recognition of the canons in question in their own first canon; but
their own canons have never received the ratification of the Holy See.

<span id="xiv.ii-p19"></span><span id="page_358">p. 358</span> <span
id="xiv.ii-Page_358"></span>Thus far Hefele, but it seems that Gratian’s
statement on the subject in the *Decretum* should not be omitted here. 
(Pars I. Dist. XVI., c. v.)

<span id="xiv.ii-p20"></span>“Canon V.  *The Sixth Synod is confirmed by
the authority of Hadrian*.

<span id="xiv.ii-p21"></span>“I receive the Sixth Synod with all its
canons.

<span id="xiv.ii-p22"></span>“Gratian.  *There is a doubt whether it set
forth canons but this is easily removed by examining the fourth session
of the <span class="sc"><span id="xiv.ii-p22.1"></span>VII</span>th*
\[<span class="sc"><span id="xiv.ii-p22.2"></span>VI</span>th by
mistake, *vide* Roman Correctors’ note\] *Synod*.

<span id="xiv.ii-p23"></span>“*For Peter the Bp. of Nicomedia says*:

<span id="xiv.ii-p24"></span>“C. VI. *The Sixth Synod wrote canons*.

<span id="xiv.ii-p25"></span>“I have a book containing the canons of the
holy Sixth Synod.  The Patriarch said:  § 1. Some are scandalized
through their ignorance of these canons, saying:  Did the Sixth Synod
make any canons?  Let them know then that the Sixth Holy Synod was
gathered together under Constantine against those who said there is one
operation and one will in Christ, in which the holy Fathers
anathematized these as heretics and explained the orthodox faith.

<span id="xiv.ii-p26"></span>“II. Pars § 2. And the synod was dissolved
in the <span class="sc"><span id="xiv.ii-p26.1"></span>XIV</span>th year
of Constantine.  After four or five years the same holy Fathers met
together under Justinian, the son of Constantine, and promulgated the
aforementioned canons, of which let no one have any doubt.  For they who
under Constantine were in synod, these same bishops under Justinian
subscribed to all these canons.  For it was fitting that a Universal
Synod should promulgate ecclesiastical canons.  *Item*:  § 3. The Holy
Sixth Synod after it promulgated its definition against the
Monothelites, the emperor Constantine who had summoned it, dying soon
after, and Justinian his son reigning in his stead, the same holy synod
divinely inspired again met at Constantinople four or five years
afterwards, and promulgated one hundred and two canons for the
correction of the Church.

<span id="xiv.ii-p27"></span>“Gratian.  *From this therefore it may be
gathered that the Sixth Synod was twice assembled:  the first time under
Constantine and then passed no canons; the second time under Justinian
his son, and promulgated the aforesaid canons.”*

<span id="xiv.ii-p28"></span>Upon this passage of Gratian’s the Roman
Correctors have a long and interesting note, with quotations from
Anastasius, which should be read with care by the student but is too
long to cite here.

<span id="xiv.ii-p29"></span>I close with some eminently wise remarks by
Prof. Michaud.

<span id="xiv.ii-p30"></span>(E. Michaud, *Discussion sur les Sept
Conciles Œcuméniques*, p. 272.)

<span id="xiv.ii-p31"></span>Upon the canons of this council we must
remark:

<span id="xiv.ii-p32"></span>1.  That save its acceptance of the
dogmatic decisions of the six Ecumenical Councils, which is contained in
the first canon, this council had an exclusively disciplinary character;
and consequently if it should be admitted by the particular churches,
these would always remain, on account of their autonomy, judges of the
fitness or non-suitability of the practical application of these
decisions.

<span id="xiv.ii-p33"></span>2.  That the Easterns have never pretended
to impose this code upon the practice of the Western Churches,
especially as they themselves do not practise everywhere the hundred and
two canons mentioned.  All they wished to do was to maintain the ancient
discipline against the abuses and evil innovations of the Roman Church,
and to make her pause upon the dangerous course in which she was already
beginning to enter.

<span id="xiv.ii-p34"></span>3.  That if among these canons, some do not
apply to the actual present state of society, *e.g.*, the 8th, 10th,
11th, etc.; if others, framed in a spirit of transition between the then
Eastern customs and those of Rome, do not appear as logical nor as wise
as one might desire, *e.g.*, the 6th, 12th, 48th, etc., nevertheless on
the other hand, many of them are marked with the most profound sagacity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_339"></span>[356:340](2140382.htm#fr_339) <span
id="xiv.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p6"></span> This statement of Fleury’s is contested by
those who agree with Asseman in thinking that the Sixth Synod was held
in Santa Sophia, *vide Biblioth. Jur., Orient*. Tom. v., p. 85.

<span id="fn_340"></span>[357:341](2140382.htm#fr_340) <span
id="xiv.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p14"></span> *Cf*. Hefele, l.c., Vol. V., 237.  On the
other hand *vide* Asseman (l.c. Tom. V., pp. 30, 69), who thinks
Alexandria and Jerusalem were vacant at the time!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Canons of the Council in Trullo.](2140383)
