[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140695)  [Next](2140697) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi.xiv.x"></span>

<span id="xvi.xiv.x-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="xvi.xiv.x-p1.1"></span>Canon X.</span>

<span id="xvi.xiv.x-p2"></span>That no cleric ought to leave his diocese
and go into another without the knowledge of the Bishop.

<span id="xvi.xiv.x-p3"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xvi.xiv.x-p3.1"></span>Since</span> certain of the clergy,
misinterpreting the canonical constitutions, leave their own diocese and
run into other dioceses, especially into this God-protected royal city,
and take up their abode with princes, celebrating liturgies in their
oratories, it is not permitted to receive such persons into any house or
church without the license of their own Bishop and also that of the
Bishop of Constantinople.  And if any clerk shall do this without such
license, and shall so continue, let him be deposed.  With regard to
those who have done this with the knowledge of the aforesaid Bishops, it
is not lawful for them to undertake mundane and secular
responsibilities, since this is forbidden by the sacred canons.  And if
anyone is discovered holding the office of those who are called
Meizoteroi; let him either lay it down, or be deposed from the
priesthood.  Let him rather be the instructor of the children and others
of the household, reading to them the Divine Scriptures, for to this end
he received the priesthood.

<span id="xvi.xiv.x-p4"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xvi.xiv.x-p4.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="xvi.xiv.x-p5"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xvi.xiv.x-p5.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon X.</span>

<span id="xvi.xiv.x-p6"></span>A clergyman who after leaving his own
parish has settled in another far off from his own bishop and from the
bishop of Constantinople, shall be received neither into house nor
church.  And if he shall persevere in his course, he shall be deposed. 
But if they shall do this with a knowledge of what we have said, they
shall not receive a secular position; or should they have received them,
they shall cease from them.  And if they refuse they shall be deposed.

<span id="xvi.xiv.x-p7"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xvi.xiv.x-p7.1"></span>Hefele.</span>

<span id="xvi.xiv.x-p8"></span>On the office of the <span
class="Greek"><span id="xvi.xiv.x-p8.1"></span>μειζότεροι</span> , the
Greek commentators Zonaras and Balsamon give us more exact information. 
We give the substance of it, viz.:  they were *majores domus* stewards
of the estates of high personages.

<span id="xvi.xiv.x-p9"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xvi.xiv.x-p9.1"></span>Balsamon</span>.

<span id="xvi.xiv.x-p10"></span>On account of this canon it seems to me
that the most holy Patriarch at the time and his Chartophylax allow
alien clergymen to celebrate the liturgy in this royal city, even
without letters dimissory of the local bishop of each one.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon XI](2140697)
