[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140707)  [Next](2140709) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi.xiv.xxii"></span>

<span id="xvi.xiv.xxii-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="xvi.xiv.xxii-p1.1"></span>Canon XXII.</span>

<span id="xvi.xiv.xxii-p2"></span>That when it happens that monks have
to eat with women they ought to observe giving of thanks, and
abstemiousness, and discretion.

<span id="xvi.xiv.xxii-p3"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xvi.xiv.xxii-p3.1"></span>To</span> surrender all things to God, and
not to serve our own wills, is great gain.  For says the divine Apostle,
“whether ye eat or drink, do all to the glory of God.”  And Christ our
God has bidden us in his Gospels, to cut off the beginning of sins; for
not only is adultery rebuked by him, but even the movement of the mind
towards the act of adultery when he says, “Whosoever looketh on a woman
to lust after her, hath committed adultery with her already in his
heart.”  We who have been thus taught ought therefore to purify our
minds.  Now although all things are lawful, all things are not
expedient, as we have been taught by the mouth of the Apostle.  It is
needful that all men should eat in order that they may live.  And for
those to whom life consists of marrying, and bringing forth children,
and of the condition of the lay state, there is nothing unbecoming in
men and women eating together, only let them give thanks to the giver of
the food; but if there be the entertainments of the theatre, that is,
Satanic songs accompanied with the meretricious inflections of harps,
there come upon them, through these things, the curse of the prophet,
who thus speaks:  “Woe to them who drink wine with harp and psaltery,
but they regard not the works of the Lord, and consider not the works of
his hands.”  Whenever persons of this sort are found among <span
id="page_570">p. 570</span> <span
id="xvi.xiv.xxii-Page_570"></span>Christians, let them amend their ways;
but if they will not do so, let there overtake them the penalties which
have been enacted in the canons by our predecessors.  With regard to
those whose life is free from care and apart from men, that is, those
who have resolved before the Lord God to carry the solitary yoke, they
should sit down alone and in silence.  Moreover it is also altogether
unlawful for those who have chosen the priestly life to eat in private
with women, unless it be with God-fearing and discreet men and women, so
that even their feast may be turned to spiritual edification.  The same
rule is to be observed with relatives.  Again, if it happen that a monk
or priest while on a journey does not have with him what is absolutely
necessary for him, and, because of his pressing needs, thinks well to
turn aside into an inn or into someone’s house, this he is permitted to
do, seeing that need compels.

<span id="xvi.xiv.xxii-p4"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xvi.xiv.xxii-p4.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="xvi.xiv.xxii-p5"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xvi.xiv.xxii-p5.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon XXII.</span>

<span id="xvi.xiv.xxii-p6"></span>There is no objection to laywomen
eating with men:  it is not right however for men who have chosen the
lonely life, to eat privately with women; unless perchance together with
them that fear God and with religious men and women.  But when
travelling, a monk or anyone in sacred orders, not carrying necessary
provisions with him, may enter a public house.

<span id="xvi.xiv.xxii-p7"></span>Balsamon refers in connexion with this
canon to Apostolic Canons xlij. and xliij.; lx. of the Synod of
Carthage, and lxij. of the Synod in Trullo.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Letter of the Synod to the Emperor and Empress.](2140709)
