[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140146)  [Next](2140148) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.vi.iv.x"></span>

<span id="viii.vi.iv.x-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="viii.vi.iv.x-p1.1"></span>Canon X.</span>

<span id="viii.vi.iv.x-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.vi.iv.x-p2.1"></span>The</span> Holy Synod decrees that persons
in villages and districts, or those who are called chorepiscopi, even
though they may have received ordination to the Episcopate, shall regard
their own limits and manage the churches subject to them, and be content
with the care and administration of these; but they may ordain readers,
sub-deacons and exorcists, and shall be content with promoting these,
but shall not presume to ordain either a presbyter or a deacon, without
the consent of bishop of the city to which he and his district are
subject.  And if he shall dare to transgress \[these\] decrees, he shall
be deposed from the rank which he enjoys.  And a chorepiscopus is to be
appointed by the bishop of the city to which he is subject.

<span id="viii.vi.iv.x-p3"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="viii.vi.iv.x-p3.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="viii.vi.iv.x-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.vi.iv.x-p4.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon X.</span>

<span id="viii.vi.iv.x-p5"></span>A chorepiscopus makes Exorcists,
Lectors, Subdeacons and Singers, but not a presbyter or a deacon without
the bishop of the city.  Who dares to transgress this law let him be
deposed.  The bishop of the city makes the chorepiscopus.

<span id="viii.vi.iv.x-p6"></span>For the Minor Orders in the Early
Church see the Excursus on the subject appended to Canon XXIV. of
Laodicea.

<span id="viii.vi.iv.x-p7"></span>“Ordination to the episcopate.”  In
translating thus I have followed both Dionysius and Isidore, the former
of whom translates “although they had received the imposition of the
hand of the bishop and had been consecrated bishops;” and the latter
“although they had received from bishops the imposition of the hand, and
had been consecrated bishops.”

<span id="viii.vi.iv.x-p8"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.vi.iv.x-p8.1"></span>Van Espen.</span>

<span id="viii.vi.iv.x-p9"></span>There can be no doubt that the
Chorepiscopi, the authority of whom is limited by this canon, are
supposed to be endowed with the episcopal character.  Among the learned
there is a controversy as to whether Chorepiscopi were true bishops by
virtue of the ordination to that office, and endowed with the episcopal
character or were only bishops when accidentally so.  But whatever may
be the merits of this controversy, there can be no doubt from the
context of this canon that the Fathers of Antioch took it for granted
that the chorepiscopi were true bishops by virtue of their ordination,
but it is also evident that they were subject to the bishop of the
greater city.  It must also be noted that these chorepiscopi were not
instituted by the canons of the Councils of Ancyra, Neocæsarea, or even
of Nice, for these speak of them and make <span id="page_114">p.
114</span> <span id="viii.vi.iv.x-Page_114"></span>their decrees as
concerning something already existing.

<span id="viii.vi.iv.x-p10"></span>And from the very limitations of this
canon it is by no means obscure that the fathers of Antioch supposed
these chorepiscopi to be real bishops, for otherwise even with the
license of the bishop of the city they could not ordain presbyters or
deacons.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon XI](2140148)
