[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140378)  [Next](2140380) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiii.xiv"></span>

<span id="xiii.xiv-p1"></span> <span id="page_353">p. 353</span> <span
id="xiii.xiv-Page_353"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xiii.xiv-p1.1"></span>The Imperial Edict Posted in the Third Atrium
of the Great Church Near What is Called Dicymbala.</span>

<span id="xiii.xiv-p2"></span>In the name of our Lord and Master Jesus
Christ, our God and Saviour, the most pious Emperor, the peaceful and
Christ-loving Constantine, an Emperor faithful to God in Jesus Christ,
to all our Christ-loving people living in this God-preserved and royal
city.

<span id="xiii.xiv-p3"></span>\[*The document is very long, Hefele gives
the following epitome, which is all sufficient for the ordinary reader,
who will remember that it is an Edict of the Emperor and not anything
proceeding from the council*.\]

<span id="xiii.xiv-p4"></span>*Hefele’s Epitome* (*Hist. of the
Councils*, Vol. v., p. 178).

<span id="xiii.xiv-p5"></span>“The heresy of Apollinaris, etc., has been
renewed by Theodore of Pharan and confirmed by Honorius, sometime Pope
of Old Rome, who also contradicted himself.  Also Cyrus, Pyrrhus, Paul,
Peter; more recently.  Macarius, Stephen, and Polychronius had diffused
Monothelitism.  He, the Emperor, had therefore convoked this holy and
Ecumenical Synod, and published the present edict with the confession of
faith, in order to confirm and establish its decrees.  (There follows
here an extended confession of faith, with proofs for the doctrine of
two wills and operations.)  As he recognized the five earlier Ecumenical
Synods, so he anathematized all heretics from Simon Magus, but
especially the originator and patrons of the new heresy, Theodore and
Sergius; also Pope Honorius, who was their adherent and patron in
everything, and confirmed the heresy (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xiii.xiv-p5.1"></span>τὸν κατὰ πάντα τούτοις συναιρέτην καὶ
σύνδρομον καὶ βεβαιωτὴν τῆς αἱρέσεως</span>, further, Cyrus, etc., and
ordained that no one henceforth should hold a different faith, or
venture to teach one will and one energy.  In no other than the orthodox
faith could men be saved.  Whoever did not obey the imperial edict
should, if he were a bishop or cleric be deposed; if an official,
punished with confiscation of property and loss of the girdle (<span
class="Greek"><span id="xiii.xiv-p5.2"></span>ζώνη</span>); if a private
person, banished from the residence and all other cities.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Canons of the Council in Trullo; Often Called The Quinisext
Council.](2140380)
