[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140682)  [Next](2140684) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi.xi"></span>

<span id="xvi.xi-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="xvi.xi-p1.1"></span>Excursus on the Conciliabulum Styling Itself the
Seventh Ecumenical Council, But Commonly Called the Mock Synod of
Constantinople.</span>

<span id="xvi.xi-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xvi.xi-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 754.

<span id="xvi.xi-p3"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xvi.xi-p3.1"></span>The</span> reader will find all the information
he desires with regard to the great iconoclastic controversy in the
ordinary church-histories, and the theological side of the matter in the
writings of St. John Damascene.  It seems, however, that in order to
render the meaning of the action of the last of the Ecumenical Councils
clear it is necessary to provide an account of the synod which was held
to condemn what it so shortly afterward expressly approved.  I quote
from Hefele *in loco*, and would only further draw the reader’s
attention to the fact that the main thing objected to was not (as is
commonly supposed) the outward veneration of the sacred icons, but the
making and setting up of them, as architectural ornaments; and that it
was not only representations of the persons of the Most Holy Trinity,
and of the Divine Son in his incarnate form that were denounced, but
even pictures of the Blessed Virgin and of the other saints; all this is
evident to anyone reading the foregoing abstract of the decree.

<span id="xvi.xi-p4"></span><span id="page_547">p. 547</span> <span
id="xvi.xi-Page_547"></span>(Hefele, *History of the Councils*, Vol. V.,
p. 308 *et seqq*.)

<span id="xvi.xi-p5"></span>The Emperor, after the death of the
Patriarch Anastasius (<span class="sc"><span
id="xvi.xi-p5.1"></span>a.d.</span> 753), summoned the bishops of his
Empire to a great synod in the palace Hieria, which lay opposite to
Constantinople on the Asiatic side of the Bosphorus, between Chrysopolis
and Chalcedon, a little to the north of the latter.  The vacancy of the
patriarchate, facilitated his plans, since the hope of succeeding to
this see kept down, in the most ambitious and aspiring of the bishops,
any possible thought of opposition.  The number of those present
amounted to 338 bishops, and the place of president was occupied by
Archbishop Theodosius of Ephesus, already known to us as son of a former
Emperor—Apsimar, from the beginning an assistant in the iconoclastic
movement.  Nicephorus names him alone as president of the synod;
Theophanes, on the contrary, mentions Bishop Pastillas of Perga as
second president, and adds, “The Patriarchates of Rome, Alexandria,
Antioch, and Jerusalem were not represented \[the last three were then
in the hands of the Saracens\], the transactions began on February 10th,
and lasted until August 8th (in Hieria); on the latter date, however,
the synod assembled in St. Mary’s Church in Blachernæ, the northern
suburb of Constantinople, and the Emperor now solemnly nominated Bishop
Constantine of Sylæum, a monk, as patriarch of Constantinople.  On
August 27th, the heretical decree \[of the Synod\] was published.”

<span id="xvi.xi-p6"></span>We see from this that the last sessions of
this Conciliabulum were held no longer in Hieria, but in the Blachernæ
of Constantinople.  We have no complete Acts of this assembly, but its
very verbose <span class="Greek"><span
id="xvi.xi-p6.1"></span>ὅ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xvi.xi-p6.2"></span>ρος</span> (decree), together with a short
introduction, is preserved among the acts of the Seventh Ecumenical
Council.

<span id="xvi.xi-p7"></span>This decree was by no means suffered to
remain inoperative.

<span id="xvi.xi-p8"></span>(W. M. Sinclair.  Smith and Wace,
*Dictionary of Chr.* *Biog., sub voce* Constantinus VI.)

<span id="xvi.xi-p9"></span>The Emperor singled out the more noted
monks, and required them to comply with the decrees of the synod.  In
<span class="sc"><span id="xvi.xi-p9.1"></span>a.d.</span> 766 he
exacted an oath against images from all the inhabitants of the empire. 
The monks refused with violent obstinacy, and Copronymus appears to have
amused himself by treating them with ruthless harshness.  The Emperor,
indeed, seems to have contemplated the extirpation of monachism.  John
the Damascene he persuaded his bishops to excommunicate.  Monks were
forced to appear in the hippodrome at Constantinople hand in hand with
harlots, while the populace spat at them.  The new patriarch
Constantinus, presented by the emperor to the council the last day of
its session, was forced to foreswear images, to attend banquets, to eat
and drink freely against his monastic vows, to wear garlands, to witness
the coarse spectacles and hear the coarse language which entertained the
Emperor.  Monasteries were destroyed, made into barracks, or
secularized.  Lachanodraco, governor of the Thracian Theme, seems to
have exceeded Copronymus in his ribaldry and injustice.  He collected a
number of monks into a plain, clothed them with white, presented them
with wives, and forced them to choose between marriage and loss of
eyesight.  He sold the property of the monasteries, and sent the price
to the Emperor.  Copronymus publicly thanked him, and commended his
example to other governors.

<span id="xvi.xi-p10"></span>(Harnack.  *History of Dogma*, Vol. V., p.
325 \[Eng. Tr.\].)

<span id="xvi.xi-p11"></span>The clergy obeyed when the decrees were
published; but resistance was offered in the ranks of the monks.  Many
took to flight, some became martyrs.  The imperial police stormed the
churches, and destroyed those images and pictures that had not been
secured.  The iconoclastic zeal by no means sprang from enthusiasm for
divine service in spirit and in truth.  The Emperor now also directly
attacked the monks; he meant to extirpate the hated order, and to
overthrow the throne of Peter.  We see how the idea of an absolute
military state rose powerfully in Constantinople; how it strove to
establish itself by brute force.  The Emperor, according to trustworthy
evidence, made the inhabitants of the city swear <span id="page_548">p.
548</span> <span id="xvi.xi-Page_548"></span>that they would henceforth
worship no image, and give up all intercourse with monks.  Cloisters
were turned into arsenals and barracks, relics were hurled into the sea,
and the monks, as far as possible, secularized.  And the politically
far-seeing Emperor, at the same time entered into correspondence with
France (Synod of Gentilly, <span class="sc"><span
id="xvi.xi-p11.1"></span>a.d.</span> 767), and sought to win Pepin. 
History seemed to have suffered a violent rupture, a new era was dawning
which should supersede the history of the Church.

<span id="xvi.xi-p12"></span>But the Church was too powerful, and the
Emperor was not even master of Oriental Christendom, but only of part of
it.  The orthodox Patriarchs of the East (under the rule of Islam)
declared against the iconoclastic movement, and a Church without monks
or pictures, in schism with the other orthodox Churches, was a
nonentity.  A spiritual reformer was wanting.  Thus the great reaction
set in after the death of the Emperor (<span class="sc"><span
id="xvi.xi-p12.1"></span>a.d.</span> 775), the ablest ruler
Constantinople had seen for a long time.  This is not the place to
describe how it was inaugurated and cautiously carried out by the
skilful policy of the Empress Irene; cautiously, for a generation had
already grown up that was accustomed to the cultus without images.  An
important part was played by the miracles performed by the re-emerging
relics and pictures.  But the lower classes had always been really
favourable to them; only the army and the not inconsiderable number of
bishops who were of the school of Constantine had to be carefully
handled.  Tarasius, the new Patriarch of Constantinople and a supporter
of images, succeeded, after overcoming much difficulty, and especially
distrust in Rome and the East, after also removing the excited army, in
bringing together a General Council of about 350 bishops at Nicæa, <span
class="sc"><span id="xvi.xi-p12.2"></span>a.d.</span> 787, which
reversed the decrees of <span class="sc"><span
id="xvi.xi-p12.3"></span>a.d.</span> 754.  The proceedings of the seven
sittings are of great value, because very important patristic passages
have been preserved in them which otherwise would have perished; for at
this synod also the discussions turned chiefly on the Fathers.  The
decision (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xvi.xi-p12.4"></span>ὅ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xvi.xi-p12.5"></span>ρος</span>) restored orthodoxy and finally
settled it.

<span id="xvi.xi-p13"></span>I cannot do better than to cite in
conclusion the words of the profoundly learned Archbishop of Dublin,
himself a quasi-Iconoclast.

<span id="xvi.xi-p14"></span>(Trench.  *Lect. Medieval Ch. Hist*., p.
93.)

<span id="xvi.xi-p15"></span>It is only fair to state that the most
zealous favourers and promoters of this ill-directed homage always
disclaimed with indignation the charge of offering to the images any
reverence which did not differ in kind, and not merely in degree, from
the worship which they offered to Almighty God, designating it as they
did by altogether a different name.  We shall very probably feel that in
these distinctions which they drew between the one and the other,
between the “honour” which they gave to these icons and the “worship”
which they withheld from these and gave only to God, there lay no
slightest justification of that in which they allowed themselves; but
these distinctions acquit them of idolatry, and it is the merest justice
to remember this.

<span id="xvi.xi-p16"></span>(Trench.  *Ut supra*, p. 99.)

<span id="xvi.xi-p17"></span>I can close this Lecture with no better or
wiser words than those with which Dean Milman reads to us the lesson of
this mournful story:  “There was this irremediable weakness in the cause
of iconoclasm; it was a mere negative doctrine, a proscription of those
sentiments which had full possession of the popular mind, without any
strong countervailing excitement.  The senses were robbed of their
habitual and cherished objects of devotion, but there was no awakening
of an inner life of intense and passionate piety.  The cold, naked walls
from whence the Scriptural histories had been effaced, the despoiled
shrines, the mutilated images, could not compel the mind to a more pure
and immaterial conception of God and the Saviour.  Hatred of images, in
the process of the strife, might become, as it did, a fanaticism, it
could never become a religion.  Iconoclasm might proscribe idolatry; but
it had no power of kindling a purer faith.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Decree of the Holy, Great, Ecumenical Synod, the Second of
Nice.](2140684)
