[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140158)  [Next](2140160) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xxii"></span>

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xxii-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="viii.vi.iv.xxii-p1.1"></span>Canon XXII.</span>

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xxii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.vi.iv.xxii-p2.1"></span>Let</span> not a bishop go to a strange
city, which is not subject to himself, nor into a district which does
not belong to him, either to ordain any one, or to appoint presbyters or
deacons to places within the jurisdiction of another bishop, unless with
the consent of the proper bishop of the place.  And if any one shall
presume to do any such thing, the ordination shall be void, and he
himself shall be punished by the synod.

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xxii-p3"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="viii.vi.iv.xxii-p3.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xxii-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.vi.iv.xxii-p4.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon XXII.</span>

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xxii-p5"></span>A bishop shall not go from city to
city ordaining people, except by the will of the bishop of the city: 
otherwise the ordination shall be without force, and he himself exposed
to censure.

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xxii-p6"></span>If we do not draw a rash
conclusion, we should say that the interference of bishops in dioceses
not their own, must have been very frequent in early days.  This one
synod enacted two canons (number XIII. and this present canon) on the
subject.  The same prohibition is found in canons XIV. and XXXV. of the
Apostolic canons, in canon XV. of Nice, canon ij. of I. Constantinople
and in many others.  On account of the similarity of this canon to canon
xiii. some have supposed it to be spurious, the enactment of some other
synod, and this was the opinion of Godefrides Hermantius (*Vita S.
Athanasii*, Lib. IV., cap. xij.) as well as of Alexander Natalis (*Hist.
Sœc*., IV., Dissert. xxv.).  Van Espen, however, is of opinion that the
two canons do not cover exactly the same ground, for he says Canon XIII.
requires letters both from the Metropolitan and from the other bishops
of the province, while this canon XXII. requires only the consent of the
diocesan.  He concludes that Canon XIII. refers to a diocese *sede
vacante*, when the Metropolitan with the other bishops took care of the
widowed church, but that Canon XXII. refers to a diocese with its own
bishop, whose will is all that is needed for the performance of
episcopal acts by another bishop.  And this distinction Schelestratius
makes still more evident by his discussion of the matter in his scholion
on Canon XIII.

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xxii-p7"></span>Compare with this canon of the
Apostolic Canons number XXXV. also number XIV.

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xxii-p8"></span>This canon is found in the *Corpus
Juris Canonici*, Gratian’s *Decretum*, Pars II., Causa IX., Quæst. II.,
can. vij., but in a form differing far from the Greek original, as the
Roman Correctors point out; and even Gratian’s present text is not as he
wrote it, but amended.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon XXIII](2140160)
