[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140674)  [Next](2140676) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi.iii"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p1"></span> <span id="page_529">p. 529</span> <span
id="xvi.iii-Page_529"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xvi.iii-p1.1"></span>The Divine <span
id="fr_515"></span>[516](#fn_515) Sacra <span
id="fr_516"></span>[517](#fn_516) Sent by the Emperors Constantine and
Irene to the Most Holy and Most Blessed Hadrian, Pope of Old
Rome.</span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p4"></span>(*Found in Labbe and Cossart*, Concilia,
*Tom. VII., col. 32*.)

<span id="xvi.iii-p5"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xvi.iii-p5.1"></span>They</span> who receive the dignity of the
empire, or the honour of the principal priesthood from our Lord Jesus
Christ, ought to provide and to care for those things which please him,
and rule and govern the people committed to their care according to his
will and good pleasure.

<span id="xvi.iii-p6"></span>Therefore, O most holy Head (Caput), it is
incumbent upon us and you, that irreprehensibly we know the things which
be his, and that in these we exercise ourselves, since from him we have
received the imperatorial dignity, and you the dignity of the chief
priesthood.

<span id="xvi.iii-p7"></span>But now to speak more to the point.  Your
paternal blessedness knows what hath been done in times past in this our
royal city against the venerable images, how those who reigned
immediately before us destroyed them and subjected them to disgrace and
injury:  (O may it not be imputed to them, for it had been better for
them had they not laid their hands upon the Church!)—and how they
seduced and brought over to their own opinion all the people who live in
these parts—yea, even the whole of the East, in like manner, up to the
time in which God hath exalted us to this kingdom, who seek his glory in
truth, and hold that which has been handed down by his Apostles together
with all other teachers.  Whence now with pure heart and unfeigned
religion we have, together with all our subjects and our most learned
divines, had constant conferences respecting the things which relate to
God, and by their advice have determined to summon a General Council. 
And we entreat your paternal blessedness, or rather the Lord God
entreats, “who will have all men to be saved and to come to the
knowledge of the truth,” that you will give yourself to us and make no
delay, but come up hither to aid us in the confirmation and
establishment of the ancient tradition of venerable images.  It is,
indeed, incumbent on your holiness to do this, since you know how it is
written—“Comfort ye, comfort ye, my people, ye priests, saith the Lord,”
and “the lips of the priest shall keep knowledge, and the law shall go
forth out of his mouth, for he is the angel of the Lord of Hosts.”  And
again, the divine Apostle, the preacher of the truth, who, “from
Jerusalem and round about unto Illyricum, preached the Gospel,” hath
thus commanded— “Feed with discipline the flock of Christ which he
purchased with his own blood.”  As then you are the veritable chief
priest (*primus sacerdos*) who presides in the place and in the see of
the holy and superlaudable Apostle Peter, let your paternal blessedness
come to us, as we have said before, and add your presence to all those
other priests who shall be assembled together here, that thus the will
of the Lord may be accomplished.  For as we are taught in the Gospels
our Lord saith—“When two or three are met together in my name, there am
I in the midst of them”—let your paternal and sacred blessedness be
certified and confirmed by the great God and King of all, our Lord Jesus
Christ, and by us his servants, that if you come up hither you shall be
received with all honour and glory, and that everything necessary for
you shall be granted.  And again, when the definition (*capitulum*)
shall be completed, which by the good pleasure of Christ our God we hope
shall be done, we take upon us to provide for you every facility of
returning with honour and distinction.  If, however, your blessedness
cannot attend upon us (which we can scarcely imagine, knowing what is
your zeal about divine things), at least, pray select for us men of
understanding, having with them letters from your holiness, that they
may be present here in the person of your sacred and paternal
blessedness.  So, when they meet <span id="page_530">p. 530</span> <span
id="xvi.iii-Page_530"></span>with the other priests who are here, the
ancient tradition of our holy fathers may be synodically confirmed, and
every evil plant of tares may be rooted out, and the words of our Lord
and Saviour Jesus Christ may be fulfilled, that “the gates of hell shall
not prevail against her.”  And after this, may there be no further
schism and separation in the one holy Catholic and Apostolic Church, of
which Christ our true God is the Head.

<span id="xvi.iii-p8"></span>We have had Constantine, beloved in Christ,
most holy Bishop of Leontina in our beloved Sicily, with whom your
paternal blessedness is well acquainted, into our presence; and, having
spoken with him face to face, have sent him with this our present
venerable jussio to you.  Whom, after that he hath seen you, forthwith
dismiss, that he may come back to us, and write us by him concerning
your coming—what time we may expect will be spent in your journeying
thence and coming to us.  Moreover, he can retain with him the most holy
Bishop of Naples, and come up hither together with him.  And, as your
journey will be by way of Naples and Sicily we have given orders to the
Governor of Sicily about this, that he take due care to have every
needful preparation made for your honour and rest, which is necessary in
order that your paternal blessedness may come to us.  Given on the ivth
before the calends of September, the seventh indiction, from the Royal
City.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_515"></span>[529:516](2140675.htm#fr_515) <span
id="xvi.iii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p2"></span> “Divine” here, as usually in such
connections, means “imperial.”

<span id="fn_516"></span>[529:517](2140675.htm#fr_516) <span
id="xvi.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p3"></span> Mendham (*The Seventh General Council, the
Second of Nicæa*.  London, s.d.) by a curious blunder takes the
adjective for the substantive, and translates “The Sacred Divalis.” 
This is a mere trip, for he knows the word “sacra,” as appears a few
pages further on.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Imperial Sacra.](2140676)
