[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140675)  [Next](2140677) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi.iv"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="xvi.iv-p1.1"></span>The Imperial Sacra.</span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xvi.iv-p2.1"></span>Read at the First Session.</span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p3"></span>(*Found in Labbe and Cossart*, Concilia,
*Tom. VII., col. 49*.)

<span id="xvi.iv-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xvi.iv-p4.1"></span>Constantine</span> and Irene—Sovereigns of the
Romans in the Faith, to the most holy Bishops, who, by the grace of God
and by the command of our pious Sovereignty, have met together in the
Council of Nice.

<span id="xvi.iv-p5"></span>The Wisdom which is truly according to the
nature of God and the Father—our Lord Jesus Christ, our true God—who, by
his most divine and wonderful dispensation in the flesh, hath delivered
us from all idolatrous error:  and, by taking on him our nature, hath
renewed the same by the co-operation of the Spirit, which is of the same
nature with himself; and having himself become the first High Priest,
hath counted you holy men, worthy of the same dignity.

<span id="xvi.iv-p6"></span>He is that good Shepherd who, bearing on his
own shoulders that wandering sheep—fallen man, hath brought him back to
his own peculiar folds—that is, the party of angelic and ministering
powers ([Eph. 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#015)<span id="xvi.iv-p6.1"></span>),
and hath reconciled us in himself and having taken away the wall of
partition, hath broken down the enmity through his flesh, and hath
bestowed upon us a rule of conduct tending to peace; wherefore,
preaching to all, he saith in the Gospel, Blessed are the peacemakers,
for they shall be called the children of God ([Matt. v.
9](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#009)<span id="xvi.iv-p6.2"></span>).  Of
which blessedness, confirming as it does the exaltation of the adoption
of sons, our pious Sovereignty desiring above all things to be made
partakers, hath ever applied the utmost diligence to direct all our
Roman Commonwealth into the ways of unity and concord; and more
especially have we been solicitous concerning the right regulation of
the Church of God, and most anxious in every way to promote the unity of
the priesthood.  For which cause the Chiefs of the Sacerdotal Order of
the East and of the North, of the West and of the South, are present in
the person of their Representative Bishops, who have with them
respectively the replies written in answers to the Synodical Epistle
sent from the most holy Patriarch; for such was from the beginning the
synodical regulation of the Church Catholic, which, from the one end of
the earth to the other, hath received the Gospel.  On this account we
have, by the good will and permission of God, caused you, his most holy
Priests, to meet together —you who are accustomed to dispense his
Testimony in the unbloody sacrifice—that your decision may be in
accordance with the definitions of former councils who decreed rightly,
and that the splendour of the <span id="page_531">p. 531</span> <span
id="xvi.iv-Page_531"></span>Spirit may illumine you in all things, for,
as our Lord teaches, No man lighteth a candle and putteth it under a
bushel, but on a candlestick, that it may give light to all that are in
the house; even so, should ye make such use of the various regulations
which have been piously handed down to us of old by our Fathers, that
all the Holy Churches of God may remain in peaceful order.

<span id="xvi.iv-p7"></span>As for us, such was our zeal for the
truth—such our earnest desire for the interests of religion, our care
for ecclesiastical order, our anxiety that the ancient rules and orders
should maintain their ground—that though fully engaged in military
councils—though all our attention was occupied in political cares—yet,
treating all these affairs as but of minor importance, we would allow
nothing whatever to interfere with the convocation of your most holy
council.  To every one is given the utmost freedom of expressing his
sentiments without the least hesitation, that thus the subject under
enquiry may be most fully discussed and truth may be the more boldly
spoken, that so all dissensions may be banished from the Church and we
all may be united in the bonds of peace.

<span id="xvi.iv-p8"></span>For, when the most holy Patriarch Paul, by
the divine will, was about to be liberated from the bands of mortality
and to exchange his earthly pilgrimage for a heavenly home with his
Master Christ, he abdicated the Patriarchate and took upon him the
monastic life, and when we asked him, Why hast thou done this? he
answered, Because I fear that, if death should surprise me still in the
episcopate of this royal and heaven-defended city, I should have to
carry with me the anathema of the whole Catholic Church, which consigns
me to that outer darkness which is prepared for the devil and his
angels; for they say that a certain synod hath been held here in order
to the subversion of pictures and images which the Catholic Church
holds, embraces, and receives, in memory of the persons whom they
represent.  This is that which distracts my soul—this is that which
makes me anxiously to enquire how I may escape the judgment of God—since
among such men I have been brought up and with such am I numbered.  No
sooner had he thus spoken in the presence of some of our most
illustrious nobles than he expired.

<span id="xvi.iv-p9"></span>When our Pious Sovereignty reflected on this
awful declaration (and truly, even before this event, we had heard of
similar questionings from many around), we took counsel with ourselves
as to what ought to be done; and we determined, after mature
deliberation, that when a new Patriarch had been elected, we should
endeavour to bring this subject to some decisive conclusion.  Wherefore,
having summoned those whom we knew to be most experienced in
ecclesiastical matters, and having called upon Christ our God, we
consulted with them who was worthy to be exalted to the chair of the
Priesthood of this Royal and God-preserved city; and they all with one
heart and soul gave their vote in favour of Tarasius—he who now occupies
the Pontifical Presidency.  Having, therefore, sent for him, we laid
before him our deliberations and our vote; but he would by no means
consent, nor at all yield to that which had been determined.  And when
we enquired, Wherefore he thus refused his consent?—at first he answered
evasively, That the yoke of the Chief Priesthood was too much for him. 
But we, knowing this to be a mere pretext coveting his unwillingness to
obey us, would not desist from our importunity, but persisted in
pressing the acceptance of the dignity of the Chief Priesthood upon
him.  When he found how urgent we were with him, he told us the cause of
his refusal.  It is (said he) because I perceive that the Church which
has been founded on the rock, Christ our God, is rent and torn asunder
by schisms, and that we are unstable in our confession, and that
Christians in the East, of the same faith with ourselves, decline
communion with us, and unite them with those of the West; and so we are
estranged from all, and each day are anathematized by all:  and,
moreover, I should demand that an Ecumenical Council should be held, at
which should be found Legates from the Pope of Rome and from the Chief
Priests of the East.  We, therefore, fully understanding these things,
introduced him to the assembled company of the Priests—of our most
illustrious Princes—and of all our Christian people; and then, in their
presence, he repeated to them all that he had before said to us; which,
when they heard, they received him joyfully, and earnestly entreated our
peace-making and <span id="page_532">p. 532</span> <span
id="xvi.iv-Page_532"></span>pious Sovereignty that an Ecumenical Council
might be assembled.  To this their request, we gave our hearty consent;
for, to speak the truth, it is by the good will and under the direction
of our God that we have assembled you together.  Wherefore as God,
willing to establish his own counsel, hath for this purpose brought you
together from all parts of the world, behold the Gospels now lying
before you, and plainly crying aloud, “Judge justly;” stand firm as
champions of religion, and be ready with unsparing hand to cut away all
innovations and new fangled inventions.  And, as Peter the Chief of the
Apostolic College, struck the mad slave and cut off his Jewish ear with
the sword, so in like manner do ye wield the axe of the Spirit, and
every tree which bears the fruit of contention, of strife, or
newly-imported innovation, either renew by transplanting through the
words of sound doctrine, or lay it low with canonical censure, and send
it to the fires of the future Gehenna, so that the peace of the Spirit
may evermore protect the whole body of the Church, compacted and united
in one, and confirmed by the traditions of the Fathers; and so may all
our Roman State enjoy peace as well as the Church.

<span id="xvi.iv-p10"></span>We have received letters from Hadrian, most
Holy Pope of old Rome, by his Legates—namely, Peter, the God-beloved
Archpresbyter, and Peter, the God-beloved Presbyter and Abbot—who will
be present in council with you; and we command that, according to
synodical custom, these be read in the hearing of you all; and that,
having heard these with becoming silence, and moreover the Epistles
contained in two octavos sent by the Chief Priest and other Priests of
the Eastern dioceses by John, most pious Monk and Chancellor of the
Patriarchal throne of Antioch, and Thomas, Priest and Abbot, who also
are present together with you, ye may by these understand what are the
sentiments of the Church Catholic on this point.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Extracts from the Acts.  Session I.](2140677)
