[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140349)  [Next](2140351) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xi.xix"></span>

<span id="xi.xix-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="xi.xix-p1.1"></span>Extracts from the Acts.</span>

<span id="xi.xix-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xi.xix-p2.1"></span>Session XVI.</span>

<span id="xi.xix-p3"></span>(Labbe and Cossart, *Concilia*, Tom. IV.,
col. 794.)

<span id="xi.xix-p4"></span>Paschasinus and Lucentius, the most reverend
bishops, holding the place of the Apostolic See, said:  If your
magnificence so orders, we have something to lay before you.

<span id="xi.xix-p5"></span>The most glorious judges, said:  Say what
you wish.  The most holy Paschasinus the bishop, holding the place of
Rome, said:  The rulers of the world, taking care of the holy Catholic
faith, by which their kingdom and glory is increased, have deigned to
define this, in order that unity through a holy peace may be preserved
through all the churches.  But with still greater care their clemency
has vouchsafed to provide for the future, so that no contention may
spring up again between God’s bishops, nor any schisms, nor any
scandal.  But yesterday after your excellencies and our humility had
left, it is said that certain decrees were made, which we esteem to have
been done contrary to the canons, and contrary to ecclesiastical
discipline.  We request that your magnificence order these things to be
read, that all the brethren may know whether the things done are just or
unjust.

<span id="xi.xix-p6"></span>The most glorious judges said:  If anything
was done after our leaving let it be read.

<span id="xi.xix-p7"></span>And before the reading, Aëtius, the
Archdeacon of the Church of Constantinople said:  It is certain that the
matters touching the faith received a suitable form.  But it is
customary at synods, after those things which are chiefest of all shall
have been defined, that other things also which are necessary should be
examined and put into shape.  We have, I mean the most holy Church of
Constantinople has, manifestly things to be attended to.  We asked the
lord bishops (<span class="Greek"><span id="xi.xix-p7.1"></span>κυρίοις
τοις ἐπισκοποις</span>) from Rome, to join with us in these matters, but
they declined, saying they had received no instructions on the subject. 
We referred the matter to your magnificence and you bid the holy Synod
to consider this very point.  And when your magnificence had gone forth,
as the affair was one of common interest, the most holy bishops,
standing up, prayed that this thing might be done.  And they were
present here, and this was done in no hidden nor secret fashion, but in
due course and in accordance with the canons.

<span id="xi.xix-p8"></span>The most glorious judges said:  Let the acts
be read.

<span id="xi.xix-p9"></span>\[ *The canon (number* XXVIII*.), was then
read, and the signatures, in all* 192*, including the bishops of
Antioch, Jerusalem, and Heraclea, but not Thalassius of Cæsarea who
afterwards assented.  Only a week before* 350*had signed the Definition
of faith.  When the last name was read a debate arose as follows*. 
(Col. 810<span id="xi.xix-p9.1"></span>.).\]

<span id="xi.xix-p10"></span>Lucentius, the most reverend bishop and
legate of the Apostolic See, said:  In the first place let your
excellency notice that it was brought to pass by circumventing the holy
bishops so that they were forced to sign the as yet unwritten canons, of
which they made mention.  \[*The Greek reads a little differently* (*I
have followed the Latin as it is supposed by the critics to be more pure
than the Greek we now have*):  Your excellency has perceived how many
things were done in the presence of the bishops, in order that no one
might be forced to sign the aforementioned canons; defining by
necessity.\]

<span id="xi.xix-p11"></span>The most reverend bishops cried out:  No
one was forced.

<span id="xi.xix-p12"></span><span id="page_293">p. 293</span> <span
id="xi.xix-Page_293"></span>Lucentius the most reverend bishop and
legate of the Apostolic See, said:  It is manifest that the decrees of
the 318 have been put aside, and that mention only has been made of
those of the 150, which are not found to have any place in the synodical
canons, and which were made as they acknowledge eighty years ago.  If
therefore they enjoyed this privilege during these years, what do they
seek for now?  If they never used it, why seek it?  \[*The Greek
reads*:  “It is manifest that the present decrees have been added to the
decrees of the 318 and to those of the 150 after them, decrees not
received into the synodical canons, these things they pretend to be
defined.  If therefore in these times they used this benefit what now do
they seek which according to the canons they had not used?\]

<span id="xi.xix-p13"></span>Aëtius, the archdeacon of the most holy
Church of Constantinople, said:  If on this subject they had received
any commands, let them be brought forward.

<span id="xi.xix-p14"></span>Bonifacius, a presbyter and vicar of the
Apostolic See, said:  The most blessed and Apostolic Pope, among other
things, gave us this commandment.  And he read from the chart, “The
rulings of the holy fathers shall with no rashness be violated or
diminished.  Let the dignity of our person in all ways be guarded by
you.  And if any, influenced by the power of his own city, should
undertake to make usurpations, withstand this with suitable firmness.”

<span id="xi.xix-p15"></span>The most glorious judges said:  Let each
party quote the canons.

<span id="xi.xix-p16"></span> ————————————

<span id="xi.xix-p17"></span>Paschasinus, the most reverend bishop and
representative, read:  Canon Six of the 318 holy fathers, “The Roman
Church hath always had the primacy.  Let Egypt therefore so hold itself
that the bishop of Alexandria have the authority over all, for this is
also the custom as regards the bishop of Rome.  So too at Antioch and in
the other provinces let the churches of the larger cities have the
primacy.  \[*In the Greek* ‘let the primacy be kept to the churches;’ *a
sentence which I do not understand, unless it means that for the
advantage of the churches the primatial rights of Antioch must be
upheld.  But such a sentiment one would expect to find rather in the
Latin than in the Greek*.\]  And one thing is abundantly clear, that if
any one shall have been ordained bishop contrary to the will of the
metropolitan, this great synod has decreed that such an one ought not to
be bishop.  If however the judgment of all his own \[fellows\] is
reasonable and according to the canons, and if two or three dissent
through their own obstinacy, then let the vote of the majority prevail. 
For a custom has prevailed, and it is an ancient tradition, that the
bishop of Jerusalem be honoured, let him have his consequent honour, but
the rights of his own metropolis must be preserved.”

<span id="xi.xix-p18"></span>Constantine, the secretary, read from a
book handed him by Aëtius, the archdeacon; Canon Six of the 318 holy
Fathers. “Let the ancient customs prevail, those of Egypt, <span
id="page_294">p. 294</span> <span id="xi.xix-Page_294"></span>so that
the bishop of Alexandria shall have jurisdiction over all, since this
also is the custom at Rome.  Likewise at Antioch and in the rest of the
provinces, let the rank (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.xix-p18.1"></span>πρεσβεῖα</span>) be preserved to the churches. 
For this is absolutely clear that if anyone contrary to the will of the
metropolitan be ordained bishop, such an one the great synod decreed
should not be a bishop.  If however by the common vote of all, founded
upon reason, and according to the canons, two or three moved by their
own obstinacy, make opposition, let the vote of the majority stand.”

<span id="xi.xix-p19"></span>The same secretary read from the same codex
the determination of the Second Synod.  “These things the bishops
decreed who assembled by the grace of God in Constantinople from far
separated provinces,…and bishops are not to go to churches which are
outside the bounds of their dioceses, nor to confound the churches, but
according to the canons the bishop of Alexandria shall take the charge
of the affairs of Egypt only, and the bishops of Orient shall govern the
Oriental diocese only, the honours due to the Church of Antioch being
guarded according to the Nicene canons, and the Asiatic bishops shall
care for the diocese of Asia only, and those of Pontus the affairs of
Pontus only, and those of Thrace the affairs of Thrace only.  But
bishops shall not enter uncalled another diocese for ordination, or any
other ecclesiastical function.  And the aforesaid canon concerning
dioceses being observed, it is evident that the synod of every province
will administer the affairs of that particular province as was decreed
at Nice.  But the churches of God in heathen nations must be governed
according to the custom which has prevailed from the times of the
Fathers.  The bishop of Constantinople however shall have the
prerogative of honour next after the bishop of Rome, because
Constantinople is new Rome.”

<span id="xi.xix-p20"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xi.xix-p20.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="xi.xix-p21"></span>An attempt has been made to shew that this
statement of the acts is a mere blunder.  That no correct copy of the
Nicene canons was read, and that the council accepted the version
produced by the Roman legate as genuine.  The proposition appears to me
in itself ridiculous, and taken in connexion with the fact that the acts
shew that the true canon of Nice was read immediately afterwards I
cannot think the hypothesis really worthy of serious consideration.  But
it is most ably defended by the Ballerini in their edition of St. Leo’s
works (Tom. iii., p. xxxvij. *et seqq*.) and Hefele seems to have
accepted their conclusions (Vol. III., p. 435).  Bright, however, I
think, takes a most just view of the case, whom I therefore quote.

<span id="xi.xix-p22"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xi.xix-p22.1"></span>Bright.</span>

<span id="xi.xix-p23"></span>If we place ourselves for a moment in the
position of the ecclesiastics of Constantinople when they heard
Paschasinus read his “version,” which the Ballerini gently describe as
“differing a little” from the Greek text, we shall see that it was
simply impossible for them not to quote that text as it was preserved in
their archives, and had been correctly translated by Philo and Evarestus
in their version beginning “Antiqui mores obtineant.”  No comment on the
difference between it and the Roman “version” is recorded to have been
made:  and, in truth, none was necessary.  Simply to confront the two,
and pass on to the next point, was to confute Paschasinus at once most
respectfully and most expressively.

<span id="xi.xix-p24"></span>It should be added that the Ballerini
ground their theory chiefly upon the authority of a Latin <span
class="sc"><span id="xi.xix-p24.1"></span>ms.</span>, the *Codex
Julianus*, now called *Parisiensis*, in which this reading of the true
text of the canon of Nice is not contained, as Baluzius was the first to
point out.

<span id="xi.xix-p25"></span> ————————————

<span id="xi.xix-p26"></span>The most glorious judges said:  Let the
most holy Asiatic and Pontic bishops who have signed the tome just read
say whether they gave their signatures of their own judgment or
compelled by any necessity.  And when these were come into the midst,
the most reverend Diogenes, the bishop of Cyzicum, said:  I call God to
witness that I signed of my own judgment.  \[*And so on, one after the
other*.\]

<span id="xi.xix-p27"></span>The rest cried out:  We signed willingly.

<span id="xi.xix-p28"></span>The most glorious judges said:  As it is
manifest that the subscription of each one of the bishops was given
without any necessity but of his own will, let the most <span
id="page_295">p. 295</span> <span id="xi.xix-Page_295"></span>holy
bishops who have not signed say something.

<span id="xi.xix-p29"></span>Eusebius, the bishop of Ancyra, said:  I am
about to speak but for myself alone.

<span id="xi.xix-p30"></span>\[*His speech is a personal explanation of
his own action with regard to consecrating a bishop for Gangra*.\]

<span id="xi.xix-p31"></span>The most glorious judges said:  From what
has been done and brought forward on each side, we perceive that the
primacy of all (<span class="Greek"><span id="xi.xix-p31.1"></span>πρὸ
πάντων τὰ πρωτεῖα</span>) and the chief honour (<span
class="Greek"><span id="xi.xix-p31.2"></span>τὴν ἐξαίρετον τιμὴν</span>)
according to the canons, is to be kept for the most God-beloved
archbishop of Old Rome, but that the most reverend archbishop of the
royal city Constantinople, which is new Rome, is to enjoy the honour of
the same primacy, and to have the power to ordain the metropolitans in
the Asiatic, Pontic, and Thracian dioceses, in this manner:  that there
be elected by the clergy, and substantial (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.xix-p31.3"></span>κτητόρων</span>) and most distinguished men of
each metropolis and moreover by all the most reverend bishops of the
province, or a majority of them, and that he be elected whom those afore
mentioned shall deem worthy of the metropolitan episcopate and that he
should be presented by all those who had elected him to the most holy
archbishop of royal Constantinople, that he might be asked whether he
\[i.e., the Patriarch of Constantinople\] willed that he should there be
ordained, or by his commission in the province where he received the
vote to the episcopate.  The most reverend bishops of the ordinary towns
should be ordained by all the most reverend bishops of the province or
by a majority of them, the metropolitan having his power according to
the established canon of the fathers, and making with regard to such
ordinations no communications to the most holy archbishop of royal
Constantinople.  Thus the matter appears to us to stand.  Let the holy
Synod vouchsafe to teach its view of the case.

<span id="xi.xix-p32"></span>The most reverend bishops cried out:  This
is a just sentence.  So we all say.  These things please us all.  This
is a just determination.  Establish the proposed form of decree.  This
is a just vote.  All has been decreed as should be.  We beg you to let
us go.  By the safety of the Emperor let us go.  We all will remain in
this opinion, we all say the same things.

<span id="xi.xix-p33"></span>Lucentius, the bishop, said:  The Apostolic
See gave orders that all things should be done in our presence \[*This
sentence reads in the Latin*:  The Apostolic See ought not to be
humiliated in our presence.  *I do not know why Canon Bright in his
notes on Canon XXVIII. has followed this reading*\]; and therefore
whatever yesterday was done to the prejudice of the canons during our
absence, we beseech your highness to command to be rescinded.  But if
not, let our opposition be placed in the minutes, and pray let us know
clearly \[*Lat*. that we may know\] what we are to report to that most
apostolic bishop who is the ruler of the whole church, so that he may be
able to take action with regard to the indignity done to his See and to
the setting at naught of the canons.

<span id="xi.xix-p34"></span>\[John, the most reverend bishop of
Sebaste, said:  We all will remain of the opinion expressed by your
magnificence. <span id="fr_299"></span>[300](#fn_299) \]

<span id="xi.xix-p36"></span>The most glorious judges said:  The whole
synod has approved what we proposed.

<span id="xi.xix-p37"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xi.xix-p37.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="xi.xix-p38"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xi.xix-p38.1"></span>Hefele.</span>

<span id="xi.xix-p39"></span>(*Hist. Counc*., Vol. III., p. 428.)

<span id="xi.xix-p40"></span>That is, the prerogative assigned to the
Church of Constantinople is, in spite of the opposition of the Roman
legate decreed by the Synod.  Thus ended the Council of Chalcedon after
it had lasted three weeks.

<span id="xi.xix-p41"></span>How it is possible after reading the
foregoing proceedings to imagine for an instant that the bishops of this
Council considered the rights they were discussing to be of Divine
origin, and that the occupant of the See of Rome was, *jure divino*,
supreme over all pontiffs I cannot understand.  It is quite possible, of
course, to affirm, as some have done, that the acts, as we have them,
have been mutilated, but the contention involves not only many
difficulties but also no few absurdities; and yet I cannot but think
that even this extreme hypothesis is to be preferred to any attempt to
reconcile the acts as we now have them with the acceptance on the part
of the members of the council of the doctrine of a *jure divino* Papal
Supremacy as it is now held by the Latin Church.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_299"></span>[295:300](2140350.htm#fr_299) <span
id="xi.xix-p34.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xix-p35"></span> These words are found only in the Latin.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Fifth Ecumenical Council.  The Second Council of
Constantinople.](2140351)
