[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140288)  [Next](2140290) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="x.xvi.vii"></span>

<span id="x.xvi.vii-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="x.xvi.vii-p1.1"></span>Excursus on Pelagianism.</span>

<span id="x.xvi.vii-p2"></span>The only point which is material to the
main object of this volume is that Pelagius and his fellow heretic
Celestius were condemned by the Ecumenical Council of Ephesus for their
heresy.  On this point there can be no possible doubt.  And further than
this the Seventh Council by ratifying the Canons of Trullo received the
Canons of the African Code which include those of the Carthaginian
conciliar condemnations of the Pelagian heresy to which the attention of
the reader is particularly drawn.  The condemnation of these heretics at
Ephesus is said to have been due chiefly to the energy of St. Augustine,
assisted very materially by a layman living in Constantinople by the
name of Marius Mercator.

<span id="x.xvi.vii-p3"></span>Pelagius and his heresy have a sad
interest to us as he is said to have been born in Britain.  He was a
monk and preached at Rome with great applause in the early years of the
fifth century.  But in his extreme horror of Manichæism and Gnosticism
he fell into the opposite extreme; and from the hatred of the doctrine
of the inherent evilness of humanity he fell into the error of denying
the necessity of grace.

<span id="x.xvi.vii-p4"></span>Pelagius’s doctrines may be briefly
stated thus.  Adam’s sin injured only himself, so that there is no such
thing as original sin.  Infants therefore are not born in sin and the
children of wrath, but are born innocent, and only need baptism so as to
be knit into Christ, not “for the remission of sins” as is declared in
the creed.  Further he taught that man could live without committing any
sin at all.  And for this there was no need of grace; indeed grace was
not possible, according to his teaching.  The only “grace,” which he
would admit the existence of, was what we may call external grace,
*e.g.* the example of Christ, the teaching of his ministers, and the
like.  Petavius <span id="fr_264"></span>[265](#fn_264) indeed thinks
that he allowed the activity of internal grace to illumine the
intellect, but this seems quite doubtful.

<span id="x.xvi.vii-p6"></span>Pelagius’s writings have come down to us
in a more or less—generally the latter—pure form.  There are fourteen
books on the Epistles of St. Paul, also a letter to Demetrius and his
*Libellus fidei ad Innocentium*.<span class="c16"><span
id="x.xvi.vii-p6.1"></span> </span> In the writings of St. Augustine are
found fragments of Pelagius’s writings on free will.

<span id="x.xvi.vii-p7"></span>It would be absurd to attempt in the
limits possible to this volume to give any, even the most sketchy,
treatment of the doctrine involved in the Pelagian controversy:  the
reader must be referred to the great theologians for this and to aid him
I append a bibliographical table on the subject.

<span id="x.xvi.vii-p8"></span>St. Augustine.

<span id="x.xvi.vii-p9"></span>St. Jerome.

<span id="x.xvi.vii-p10"></span>Marius Mercator, *Commonitorium super
nomine Cœlestii*.

<span id="x.xvi.vii-p11"></span>Vossius, G. J., *Histor. de controv.
quas Pel. ejusque reliquiæ moverunt*.

<span id="x.xvi.vii-p12"></span><span id="page_230">p. 230</span> <span
id="x.xvi.vii-Page_230"></span>Noris.  *Historia Pelagiana*.

<span id="x.xvi.vii-p13"></span>Garnier, J. *Dissertat. in Pelag*. in
*Opera* Mar. Mercator.

<span id="x.xvi.vii-p14"></span>Quesnel, *Dissert. de conc. Africanis in
Pelag. causa celebratis* etc.

<span id="x.xvi.vii-p15"></span>Fuchs, G. D., *Bibliothek der
Kirchenversammlungen*.

<span id="x.xvi.vii-p16"></span>Horn, *De sentent.  Pat. de peccato
orig*.

<span id="x.xvi.vii-p17"></span>Habert, P. L., *Theologiæ Græcorum
Patrum vindicatæ circa univers. materiam gratiæ*.

<span id="x.xvi.vii-p18"></span>Petavius, *De Pelag. et
Semi-Pelag*. <span id="fr_265"></span>[266](#fn_265)

<span id="x.xvi.vii-p20"></span>The English works on the subject are so
well known to the English reader as to need no mention.

<span id="x.xvi.vii-p21"></span>As it is impossible to treat the
theological question here, so too is it impossible to treat the
historical question.  However I may remind the reader that Nestorius and
his heresy were defended by Theodore of Mopsuestia, and that he and
Celestius were declared by Pope Zosimus to be innocent in the year 417,
a decision which was entirely disregarded by the rest of the world, a
Carthaginian Synod subsequently anathematizing him.  Finally the Pope
retracted his former decision, and in 418 anathematized him and his
fellow, and gave notice of this in his “epistola tractoria” to the
bishops.  Eighteen Italian bishops, who had followed the Pope in his
former decision of a twelve month before, refused to change their minds
at his bidding now, and were accordingly deposed, among them Julian of
Eclanum.  After this Pelagius and Celestius found a fitting harbour of
refuge with Nestorius of Constantinople, and so all three were condemned
together by the council of Ephesus, he that denied the incarnation of
the Word, and they twain that denied the necessity of that incarnation
and of the grace purchased thereby.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_264"></span>[229:265](2140289.htm#fr_264) <span
id="x.xvi.vii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="x.xvi.vii-p5"></span> Petav. *De Pelag. et Semi-Pelag.*
*Hær*., Cap. iv.

<span id="fn_265"></span>[230:266](2140289.htm#fr_265) <span
id="x.xvi.vii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="x.xvi.vii-p19"></span> I am chiefly indebted to Michaud for
this list.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon V](2140290)
