[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140499)  [Next](2140501) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iii.iv.vi"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.iv.vi-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="xv.iii.iv.vi-p1.1"></span>Canon VI.</span>

<span id="xv.iii.iv.vi-p2"></span>(*Greek*.)

<span id="xv.iii.iv.vi-p3"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iii.iv.vi-p3.1"></span>Bishop</span> <span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iii.iv.vi-p3.2"></span>Hosius</span> said:  If it happen that in
a province in which there are very many bishops one bishop should stay
away and by some negligence should not come to the council and assent to
the appointment made by the bishops, but the people assemble and pray
that the ordination of the bishop desired by them take place—it is
necessary that the bishop who stayed away should first be reminded by
letters from the exarch of the province (I mean, of course, the bishop
of the metropolis), that the people demand a pastor to be given them.  I
think that it is well to await his \[the absent bishop’s\] arrival
also.  But if after summons by letter he does not come, nor even write
in reply, the wish of the people ought to be complied with.

<span id="xv.iii.iv.vi-p4"></span>The bishops from the neighbouring
provinces also should be invited to the ordination of the bishop of the
metropolis.

<span id="xv.iii.iv.vi-p5"></span>It is positively not permitted to
ordain a bishop in a village or petty town, for which even one single
presbyter is sufficient (for there is no necessity to ordain a bishop
there) lest the name and authority of bishop should be made of small
account, but the bishops of the province ought, as before said, to
ordain bishops in those cities in which there were bishops previously;
and if a city should be found with a population so large as to be
thought worthy of an episcopal see, let it receive one.

<span id="xv.iii.iv.vi-p6"></span>Is this the pleasure of all?  All
answered:  It is our pleasure.

<span id="xv.iii.iv.vi-p7"></span>(*Latin*.)

<span id="xv.iii.iv.vi-p8"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iii.iv.vi-p8.1"></span>Bishop</span> <span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iii.iv.vi-p8.2"></span>Hosius</span> said:  If it shall have
happened, that in a province in which there have been very many bishops,
one \[i.e., but one\] bishop remains, but that he by negligence has not
chosen \[to ordain\] a bishop, and the people have made application, the
bishops of the neighbouring province ought first to address \[by
letter\] the bishop who resides in that province, and show that the
people seek a ruler \[i.e., pastor\] for themselves and that this is
right, so that they also may come and with him ordain a bishop.  But if
he refuses to acknowledge their written communication, and leaves it
unnoticed, and writes no reply, the people’s request should be
satisfied, so that bishops should come from the neighbouring province
and ordain a bishop.

<span id="xv.iii.iv.vi-p9"></span>But permission is not to be given to
ordain a bishop either in any village, or in an unimportant city, for
which one presbyter suffices, lest the name and authority of bishop grow
cheap.  Those \[bishops\] who are invited from another province ought
not to ordain a bishop unless in the cities which have \[previously\]
had bishops, or in a city which is so important or so populous as to be
entitled to have a bishop.

<span id="xv.iii.iv.vi-p10"></span>Is this the pleasure of all?  The
synod replied:  It is our pleasure.

<span id="xv.iii.iv.vi-p11"></span><span id="page_421">p. 421</span>
<span id="xv.iii.iv.vi-Page_421"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xv.iii.iv.vi-p11.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="xv.iii.iv.vi-p12"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iii.iv.vi-p12.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon VI.</span>

<span id="xv.iii.iv.vi-p13"></span>If the bishops were present when the
people were seeking for a bishop, and one was away, let that one be
called.  But if he is willing to answer the call neither by letter nor
in person, let him be ordained whom they desire.

<span id="xv.iii.iv.vi-p14"></span>When a Metropolitan is appointed the
neighbouring bishops are to be sent for.

<span id="xv.iii.iv.vi-p15"></span>In a little city and town, for which
one presbyter suffices, a bishop is not to be appointed.  But if the
city be very populous, it is not unfitting to do so.

<span id="xv.iii.iv.vi-p16"></span>The second portion of this canon is
entirely lacking in the Latin.  The Greek scholiasts, Zonaras, Balsamon,
and Aristenus, understand this to mean “that ‘at the appointment of a
metropolitan the bishops of the neighbouring provinces shall also be
invited,’ probably to give greater solemnity to the act,” so says
Hefele.  And to this agree Van Espen, Tillemont, and Herbst.

<span id="xv.iii.iv.vi-p17"></span>The first part in the Greek and Latin
have different meanings; the Greek text contemplating the case of one
bishop stopping away from a meeting of bishops for an election to fill a
vacancy; the Latin text the case of there being only one bishop left in
a province (after war, pestilence, or the like).  This second meaning is
accepted by Van Espen, Christian Lupus and others.  Moreover, it would
seem from Flodoard’s *History of the Church of Rheims* (*Geschichte der
Rheimser Kirche*, Lib. III., c. 20 \[a book I have never seen\]) that
the Gallican Church acted upon this understanding of this canon.  It is
that also of Gratian.

<span id="xv.iii.iv.vi-p18"></span>Between the Latin and the Greek text
stands the interpretation of Zonaras, which is that if a province once
having many bishops has by any contingency only one left besides the
Metropolitan, and he neglects to be present at the consecration of the
new bishops, he is to be summoned by letter of the Metropolitan, and if
he does not then come, the consecrations are to go on without him.  With
this explanation Harmenopulus also agrees, adding further that the
Metropolitan might alone consecrate the bishops, resting his argument on
the words <span class="Greek"><span id="xv.iii.iv.vi-p18.1"></span>τὸ
ἱκαυὸν κ</span>.<span class="Greek"><span
id="xv.iii.iv.vi-p18.2"></span>τ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xv.iii.iv.vi-p18.3"></span>λ</span>.

<span id="xv.iii.iv.vi-p19"></span>Some scholars have supposed that
neither the present Greek nor the present Latin text represent the
original, but that the Greek text is nearest to it, but must be
corrected by an ancient Latin version found by Maffei in a codex at
Verona.  The Ballerini have devoted careful attention to this point in
their notes to the Works of St. Leo the Great (Tom. iii., p. xxxij. 4). 
It would seem that this might be the canon quoted by the fathers of
Constantinople in 382, and if so, it would seem that they had a Greek
text like that from which the Verona version was made.

<span id="xv.iii.iv.vi-p20"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iii.iv.vi-p20.1"></span>Van Espen.</span>

<span id="xv.iii.iv.vi-p21"></span>The fathers of Sardica \[in the
second part of this canon, which is Canon VII. by the Latin
computation\] decreed two things:  first, that where the people justly
asked for a Pastor to be ordained for them, their demand should be
complied with; but where the people insisted upon having a bishop
ordained for a village or little city, for which one presbyter was all
that was needed, no attention should be paid to their demands, lest the
name and authority of a bishop should become despicable.

<span id="xv.iii.iv.vi-p22"></span>This canon is found in the *Corpus
Juris Canonici*, Gratian’s *Decretum*, P. I., Distinc. lxv., c. ix.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon VII](2140501)
