[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140613)  [Next](2140615) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iv.iv.xci"></span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.xci-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.xci-p1.1"></span>Canon XC.  (Greek xciii.)</span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.xci-p2"></span>Of those who have once read in church,
that they cannot be advanced by others.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.xci-p3"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.xci-p3.1"></span>Item</span>, it seemed good that whoever
in church even once had read should not be admitted to the ministry
(*clericatum*) by another church.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.xci-p4"></span>And they subscribed:  I, Aurelius,
bishop of the Church of Carthage, have consented to this decree, and,
having read it, have signed it.  Likewise also the rest of the bishops
signed.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.xci-p5"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.xci-p5.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon XC.</span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.xci-p6"></span>He who has only once read in a Church
\[i.e., diocese\] shall not be admitted into the clergy by another
Church.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.xci-p7"></span>This is Canon iv. of Milevis, 402.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.xci-p8"></span><span id="page_486">p. 486</span>
<span id="xv.iv.iv.xci-Page_486"></span>*There is set forth in this
council what the bishops did who were sent as legates across seas.*

<span id="xv.iv.iv.xci-p9"></span>In the consulship of those most
illustrious men, the most glorious Emperor Theodosius Augustus, and
Rumoridus, the VIII. <span id="fr_467"></span>[468](#fn_467) Calends of
September, at Carthage, in the basilica of the second region, when
Aurelius the bishop had taken his seat in plenary council, the deacons
standing by, Aurelius, the bishop, said:  From stress of circumstances,
venerable brethren, I, although so small, have been led to assemble you
in council.  For a while ago, as your holinesses will remember, while
holding a council we sent our brothers as legates to the regions beyond
seas.  It is right that these should at this meeting of your holinesses
narrate the course of their now finished legation, and although
yesterday when we were in session concerning this matter, besides
ecclesiastical matters, we paid some prolonged attention to what they
had done, nevertheless it is right that to-day the discussion of
yesterday should be confirmed by ecclesiastical action.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.xci-p11"></span>*Of the bishops of the African
provinces who were not present at this council.* <span
id="fr_468"></span>[469](#fn_468)

<span id="xv.iv.iv.xci-p13"></span>The right order of things demands
that first of all we should enquire concerning our brethren and fellow
bishops, who were to come to this council either from Byzacena or at
least from Mauritania, like as they decreed that they would be present
in this council.  And when Philologius, Geta, Venustianus, and Felician,
bishops of the province of Byzacena had presented and read their letters
of legation, and Lucian and Silvanus, legates of the province of
Mauritania Sitiphensis, had done the same, the bishop Aurelius said: 
Let the text of these writings be placed in the acts.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.xci-p14"></span>Of the Byzacene bishops.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.xci-p15"></span>Numidius, the bishop, said:  We
observe that our brethren and fellow bishops of the province of Byzacena
and of the province of Mauritania Sitiphensis have sent legates to the
council; we now seek whether the legates of Numidia have come, or at
least of the province of Tripoli or of Mauritania-Cæsariensis.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.xci-p16"></span>Of the bishops of Mauritania
Sitiphensis.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.xci-p17"></span>Lucian and Silvanus, the bishops,
legates of the Province of Mauritania Sitiphensis said:  The tractory
came late to our Cæsarian brethren or they would have been here; and
they will certainly come, and we are confident of their attitude of mind
that whatever shall be determined by this council, they without doubt
will assent unto.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.xci-p18"></span>Of the bishops of Numidia.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.xci-p19"></span>Alypius, bishop of the church of
Tagaste said:  We have come from Numidia, I and the holy brethren
Augustine and Possidius, but a legation could not be sent from Numidia,
because by the tumult of the recruits the bishops have either been
prevented from coming or fully occupied by their own necessary affairs
in their sees.  For after I had brought to the holy Senex Xantippus your
holiness’s tractory, this seemed good in the present business that a
council should be appointed, to which a delegation with instructions
should be sent, but when I reported to him in later letters the
impediment of the recruits, of which I have just spoken, he excused them
by his own rescripts.  Aurelius, the bishop, said:  There is no doubt
that the aforesaid brethren and bishops of Numidia, when they shall have
received the acts of the council, will give their consent and will take
pains to carry into effect whatever shall have been adopted.  It is
therefore necessary that by the solicitude of this see what we shall
have determined be communicated to them.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.xci-p20"></span><span id="page_487">p. 487</span>
<span id="xv.iv.iv.xci-Page_487"></span>*Of the bishops of Tripoli.*

<span id="xv.iv.iv.xci-p21"></span>This is what I could learn concerning
our brethren of Tripoli, that they appointed our brother Dulcicius as a
legate: but because he could not come, certain of our sons coming from
the aforesaid province asserted that the aforesaid had taken shipping,
and that it was thought that his arrival had been delayed by storms;
nevertheless also concerning these matters, if your charity is willing,
this form shall be preserved, that the placets of the council be sent to
them.  And all the bishops said:  What your holiness has decreed pleases
us all.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_467"></span>[486:468](2140614.htm#fr_467) <span
id="xv.iv.iv.xci-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.xci-p10"></span> Nine, in some <span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.xci-p10.1"></span>mss.</span>

<span id="fn_468"></span>[486:469](2140614.htm#fr_468) <span
id="xv.iv.iv.xci-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.xci-p12"></span> In the Greek this is made part of
the last sentence, and for “Of” it reads “for the sake of” (<span
class="Greek"><span id="xv.iv.iv.xci-p12.1"></span>διὰ</span>).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon XCI](2140615)
