[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140037)  [Next](2140039) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.vi.xx"></span>

<span id="vii.vi.xx-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="vii.vi.xx-p1.1"></span>Excursus on the Communion of the Sick.</span>

<span id="vii.vi.xx-p2"></span>There is nothing upon which the ancient
church more strenuously insisted than the oral reception of the Holy
Communion.  What in later times was known as “Spiritual Communion” was
outside of the view of those early days; and to them the issues of
eternity were considered often to rest upon the sick man’s receiving
with his mouth “his food for the journey,” the Viaticum, before he
died.  No greater proof of how important this matter was deemed could be
found than the present canon, which provides that even the stern and
invariable canons of the public penance are to give way before the awful
necessity of fortifying the soul in the last hour of its earthly
sojourn.

<span id="vii.vi.xx-p3"></span>Possibly at first the holy Sacrament may
have been consecrated in the presence of the sick person, but of this in
early times the instances are rare and by no means clear.  In fact it
was considered a marked favour that such a thing should be allowed, and
the saying of mass in private houses was prohibited (as it is in the
Eastern and Latin churches still to-day) with the greatest rigour.

<span id="vii.vi.xx-p4"></span>The necessity of having the consecrated
bread and wine for the sick led to their reservation, a practice which
has existed in the Church from the very beginning, so far as any records
of which we are in possession shew.

<span id="vii.vi.xx-p5"></span>St. Justin Martyr, writing less than a
half century after St. John’s death, mentions that “the deacons
communicate each of those present, and carry away to the absent the
blest bread, and wine and water.” <span id="fr_78"></span>[79](#fn_78)  
It was evidently a long established custom in his day.

<span id="vii.vi.xx-p7"></span>Tertullian tells us of a woman whose
husband was a heathen and who was allowed to keep the Holy Sacrament in
her house that she might receive every morning before other food.  St.
Cyprian also gives a most interesting example of reservation.  In his
treatise “On the Lapsed” written in <span class="sc"><span
id="vii.vi.xx-p7.1"></span>a.d.</span> 251, (chapter xxvi), he says: 
“Another woman, when she tried with unworthy hands to open her box, in
which was the Holy of the Lord, was deterred from daring to touch it by
fire rising from it.”

<span id="vii.vi.xx-p8"></span>It is impossible with any accuracy to fix
the date, but certainly before the year four hundred, a perpetual
reservation for the sick was made in the churches.  A most interesting
incidental proof of this is found in the thrilling description given by
St. Chrysostom of the great riot in Constantinople in the year 403, when
the soldiers “burst into the place where the Holy Things were stored,
and saw all things therein,” and “the most holy blood of Christ was
spilled upon their clothes.” <span id="fr_79"></span>[80](#fn_79)   From
this incident it is evident that in that church the Holy Sacrament was
reserved in both kinds, and separately.

<span id="vii.vi.xx-p10"></span>Whether this at the time was usual it is
hard to say, but there can be no doubt that even in the earliest times
the Sacrament was given, on rare occasions at least, in one kind, <span
id="page_31">p. 31</span> <span id="vii.vi.xx-Page_31"></span>sometimes
under the form of bread alone, and when the sick persons could not
swallow under the form of wine alone.  The practice called “intinction,”
that is the dipping of the bread into the wine and administering the two
species together, was of very early introduction and still is universal
in the East, not only when Communion is given with the reserved
Sacrament, but also when the people are communicated in the Liturgy from
the newly consecrated species.  The first mention of intinction in the
West, is at Carthage in the fifth century. <span
id="fr_80"></span>[81](#fn_80)   We know it was practised in the seventh
century and by the twelfth it had become general, to give place to the
withdrawal of the chalice altogether in the West. <span
id="fr_81"></span>[82](#fn_81)   “Regino (*De Eccles. Discip.* Lib. I.
c. lxx.) in 906, Burchard (*Decr.* Lib. V. cap. ix. fol. 95. colon.
1560.) in 996, and Ivo (*Decr.* Pars. II. cap. xix. p. 56, Paris 1647)
in 1092 all cite a Canon, which they ascribe to a council of Tours
ordering ‘every presbyter to have a pyx or vessel meet for so great a
sacrament, in which the Body of the Lord may be carefully laid up for
the Viaticum to those departing from this world, which sacred oblation
ought to be steeped in the Blood of Christ that the presbyter may be
able to say truthfully to the sick man, The Body and Blood of the Lord
avail thee, etc.’” <span id="fr_82"></span>[83](#fn_82)

<span id="vii.vi.xx-p14"></span>The reservation of the Holy Sacrament
was usually made in the church itself, and the learned W. E. Scudamore
is of opinion that this was the case in Africa as early as the fourth
century. <span id="fr_83"></span>[84](#fn_83)

<span id="vii.vi.xx-p16"></span>It will not be uninteresting to quote in
this connection the “Apostolic Constitutions,” for while indeed there is
much doubt of the date of the Eighth Book, yet it is certainly of great
antiquity.  Here we read, “and after the communion of both men and
women, the deacons take what remains and place it in the
tabernacle.” <span id="fr_84"></span>[85](#fn_84)

<span id="vii.vi.xx-p18"></span>Perhaps it may not be amiss before
closing the remark that so far as we are aware the reservation of the
Holy Sacrament in the early church was only for the purposes of
communion, and that the churches of the East reserve it to the present
day only for this purpose.

<span id="vii.vi.xx-p19"></span>Those who wish to read the matter
treated of more at length, can do so in Muratorius’s learned
“Dissertations” which are prefixed to his edition of the Roman
Sacramentaries (chapter XXIV) and in Scudamore’s *Notitia Eucharistica*,
a work which can be absolutely relied upon for the accuracy of its
facts, however little one may feel constrained to accept the logical
justness of its conclusions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_78"></span>[30:79](2140038.htm#fr_78) <span
id="vii.vi.xx-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vi.xx-p6"></span> Just. M. *Apol*. I. cap. lxv.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[30:80](2140038.htm#fr_79) <span
id="vii.vi.xx-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vi.xx-p9"></span> Chrys. *Ep. ad Innoc.* Sec. 3.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[31:81](2140038.htm#fr_80) <span
id="vii.vi.xx-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vi.xx-p11"></span> I give the reference as in Scudamore’s
*Not. Euch*. from which I have taken it.  *De Prom. et Præd. Dei*;
Dimid. Temp. c. 6; inter Opp. Prosperi, p. 161. ed. 1609.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[31:82](2140038.htm#fr_81) <span
id="vii.vi.xx-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vi.xx-p12"></span> Cf. Scudamore, *Not*. *Euch*. p. 705.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[31:83](2140038.htm#fr_82) <span
id="vii.vi.xx-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vi.xx-p13"></span> Cf. Scudamore, *Notit. Euch*. p. 707.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[31:84](2140038.htm#fr_83) <span
id="vii.vi.xx-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vi.xx-p15"></span> W. E. Scudamore, *Notitia Eucharistica*
\[2d. Ed.\] p. 1025.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[31:85](2140038.htm#fr_84) <span
id="vii.vi.xx-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vi.xx-p17"></span> *Apost. Const*. Lib. viii. cap. xiij. 
The word used is <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.vi.xx-p17.1"></span>παστοφόρια</span>, this may possibly mean a
side chapel, and does occur in the Book of Maccabees in this sense; but
its classical use is to signify the shrine of a god, and while so
distinguished a writer as Pierre Le Brun adopts the later meaning, the
no less famous Durant, together with most commentators, translate as I
have done above.  In either case for the present purpose, the quotation
is conclusive of the practice of the primitive church in regard to this
matter.  Liddell and Scott give “<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.vi.xx-p17.2"></span>παστοφόρος</span>, one carrying the image of
a god in a shrine.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon XIV](2140039)
