[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140687)  [Next](2140689) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi.xiv.ii"></span>

<span id="xvi.xiv.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="xvi.xiv.ii-p1.1"></span>Canon II.</span>

<span id="xvi.xiv.ii-p2"></span>That he who is to be ordained a Bishop
must be steadfastly resolved to observe the canons, otherwise he shall
not be ordained.

<span id="xvi.xiv.ii-p3"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xvi.xiv.ii-p3.1"></span>When</span> we recite the psalter, we
promise God:  “I will meditate upon thy statutes, and will not forget
thy words.”  It is a salutary thing for all Christians to observe this,
but it is especially incumbent upon those who have received the
sacerdotal dignity.  Therefore we decree, that every one who is raised
to the rank of the episcopate shall know the psalter by heart, so that
from it he may admonish and instruct all the clergy who are subject to
him.  And diligent examination shall be made by the metropolitan whether
he be zealously inclined to read diligently, and not merely now and
then, the sacred canons, the holy Gospel, and the book of the divine
Apostle, and all other divine Scripture; and whether he lives according
to God’s commandments, and also teaches the same to his people.  For the
special treasure (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xvi.xiv.ii-p3.2"></span>οὐσία</span>) of our high priesthood is the
oracles which have been divinely delivered to us, that is the true
science of the Divine Scriptures, as says Dionysius the Great.  And if
his mind be not set, and even glad, so to do and teach, let him not be
ordained.  For says God by the prophet, “Thou hast rejected knowledge, I
will also reject thee, that thou shalt be no priest to me.”

<span id="xvi.xiv.ii-p4"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xvi.xiv.ii-p4.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="xvi.xiv.ii-p5"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xvi.xiv.ii-p5.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon II.</span>

<span id="xvi.xiv.ii-p6"></span>Whoever is to be a bishop must know the
Psalter by heart:  he must thoroughly understand what he reads, and not
merely superficially, but with diligent care, that is to say the Sacred
Canons, the Holy Gospel, the book of the Apostle, and the whole of the
Divine Scripture.  And should he not have such knowledge, he is not to
be ordained.

<span id="xvi.xiv.ii-p7"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xvi.xiv.ii-p7.1"></span>Aristenus.</span>

<span id="xvi.xiv.ii-p8"></span>Whoso is to be elevated to the grade of
the episcopate should know…the book of the Apostle Paul, and the whole
divine scripture and search out its meaning and understand the things
that are written.  For the very foundation and essence of the high
priesthood is the true knowledge of holy Scripture, according to
Dionysius the Great.  And if he has this knowledge let him be ordained,
but if not, not.  For God hath said by the prophet:  “Thou hast put away
from thee knowledge, therefore I have also put thee away from me, that
thou mayest not be my priest.”

<span id="xvi.xiv.ii-p9"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xvi.xiv.ii-p9.1"></span>Fleury.</span>

<span id="xvi.xiv.ii-p10"></span>The persecution of the Iconoclasts had
driven all the best Christians into hiding, or into far distant exile;
this had made them rustic, and had taken from them their taste for
study.  The council therefore is forced to be content with a knowledge
of only what is absolutely necessary, provided it was united with a
willingness to learn.  The examination with which the ceremony of the
ordination of <span id="page_557">p. 557</span> <span
id="xvi.xiv.ii-Page_557"></span>bishops begins seems to be a remains of
this discipline.

<span id="xvi.xiv.ii-p11"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xvi.xiv.ii-p11.1"></span>Van Espen.</span>

<span id="xvi.xiv.ii-p12"></span>The Synod teaches in this canon that
“all Christians” will find it most profitable to meditate upon God’s
justifyings and to keep his words in remembrance, and especially is this
the case with bishops.

<span id="xvi.xiv.ii-p13"></span>And it should be noted that formerly
not only the clergy, but also the lay people, learned the Psalms, that
is the whole Psalter, by heart, and made a most sweet sound by chanting
them while about their work.

<span id="xvi.xiv.ii-p14"></span>But as time went on, little by little
this pious custom of reciting the Psalter and of imposing its recitation
and a meditation thereon at certain intervals, slipped away to the
clergy only and to monks and nuns, as to those specially consecrated to
the service of God and to meditation upon the divine words, as Lupus
points out.  And from this discipline and practice the appointment of
the Ecclesiastical or Canonical Office had its rise, which imposes the
necessity of reciting the Psalms at certain intervals of time.

<span id="xvi.xiv.ii-p15"></span>This canon is found in the *Corpus
Juris Canonici*, Gratian’s *Decretum*, Pars I., Dist. xxxviij., C. vj.,
in Anastasius’s translation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon III](2140689)
