[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140035)  [Next](2140037) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.vi.xviii"></span>

<span id="vii.vi.xviii-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="vii.vi.xviii-p1.1"></span>Canon XII.</span>

<span id="vii.vi.xviii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="vii.vi.xviii-p2.1"></span>As</span> many as were called by grace,
and displayed the first zeal, having cast aside their military girdles,
but afterwards returned, like dogs, to their own vomit, (so that some
spent money and by means of gifts regained their military stations); let
these, after they have passed the space of three years as hearers, be
for ten years prostrators.  But in all these cases it is necessary to
examine well into their purpose and what their repentance appears to be
like.  For as many as give evidence of their conversions by deeds, and
not pretence, with fear, and tears, and perseverance, and good works,
when they have fulfilled their appointed time as hearers, may properly
communicate in prayers; and after that the bishop may determine yet more
favourably concerning them.  But those who take \[the matter\] with
indifference, and who think the form of \[not\] entering the Church is
sufficient for their conversion, must fulfil the whole time.

<span id="vii.vi.xviii-p3"></span><span id="page_28">p. 28</span> <span
id="vii.vi.xviii-Page_28"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="vii.vi.xviii-p3.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="vii.vi.xviii-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="vii.vi.xviii-p4.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon XII.</span>

<span id="vii.vi.xviii-p5"></span>Those who endured violence and were
seen to have resisted, but who afterwards yielded to wickedness, and
returned to the army, shall be excommunicated for ten years.  But in
every case the way in which they do their penance must be scrutinized. 
And if anyone who is doing penance shews himself zealous in its
performance, the bishop shall treat him more leniently than had he been
cold and indifferent.

<span id="vii.vi.xviii-p6"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="vii.vi.xviii-p6.1"></span>Lambert.</span>

<span id="vii.vi.xviii-p7"></span>The abuse of this power, namely, of
granting under certain circumstances a relaxation in the penitential
exercises enjoined by the canons—led, in later times, to the practice of
commuting such exercises for money payments, etc.

<span id="vii.vi.xviii-p8"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="vii.vi.xviii-p8.1"></span>Hefele.</span>

<span id="vii.vi.xviii-p9"></span>In his last contests with Constantine,
Licinius had made himself the representative of heathenism; so that the
final issue of the war would not be the mere triumph of one of the two
competitors, but the triumph or fall of Christianity or heathenism. 
Accordingly, a Christian who had in this war supported the cause of
Licinius and of heathenism might be considered as a *lapsus*, even if he
did not formally fall away.  With much more reason might those
Christians be treated as *lapsi* who, having conscientiously given up
military service (this is meant by the soldier’s belt), afterwards
retracted their resolution, and went so far as to give money and
presents for the sake of readmission, on account of the numerous
advantages which military service then afforded.  It must not be
forgotten that Licinius, as Zonaras and Eusebius relate, required from
his soldiers a formal apostasy; compelled them, for example, to take
part in the heathen sacrifices which were held in the camps, and
dismissed from his service those who would not apostatize.

<span id="vii.vi.xviii-p10"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="vii.vi.xviii-p10.1"></span>Bright.</span>

<span id="vii.vi.xviii-p11"></span>This canon (which in the Prisca and
the Isidorian version stands as part of canon 11) deals, like it, with
cases which had arisen under the Eastern reign of Licinius, who having
resolved to “purge his army of all ardent Christians” (Mason, *Persec.
of Diocl*. p. 308), ordered his Christian officers to sacrifice to the
gods on pain of being cashiered (compare Euseb. *H. E.* x. 8; *Vit.
Con.* i. 54).  It is to be observed here that military life as such was
not deemed unchristian.  The case of Cornelius was borne in mind.  “We
serve in your armies,” says Tertullian, *Apol.* 42 (although later, as a
Montanist, he took a rigorist and fanatical view, *De Cor.* 11), and
compare the fact which underlies the tale of the “Thundering
Legion,”—the presence of Christians in the army of Marcus Aurelius.  It
was the heathenish adjuncts to their calling which often brought
Christian soldiers to a stand (see Routh. *Scr. Opusc.* i. 410), as when
Marinus’ succession to a centurionship was challenged on the ground that
he could not sacrifice to the gods (Euseb. *H. E.* vii. 15).  Sometimes,
indeed, individual Christians thought like Maximilian in the
Martyrology, who absolutely refused to enlist, and on being told by the
proconsul that there were Christian soldiers in the imperial service,
answered, “Ipsi sciunt quod ipsis expediat” (Ruinart, *Act.* *Sanc.* p.
341).  But, says Bingham (*Antiq.* xi. 5, 10), “the ancient canons did
not condemn the military life as a vocation simply unlawful.…I believe
there is no instance of any man being refused baptism merely because he
was a soldier, unless some unlawful circumstance, such as idolatry, or
the like, made the vocation sinful.”  After the victory of Constantine
in the West, the Council of Arles excommunicated those who in time of
peace “threw away their arms” (can. 2).  In the case before us, some
Christian officers had at first stood firm under the trial imposed on
them by Licinius.  They had been “called by grace” to an act of
self-sacrifice (the phrase is one which St. Augustine might have used);
and had shown “their eagerness at the outset” (“primum suum ardorem,”
Dionysius; Philo and Evarestus more laxly, “primordia bona;” compare
<span class="Greek"><span id="vii.vi.xviii-p11.1"></span>τὴν ἀγάπην σου
τὴν πρώτην</span>, [Rev. ii. 4](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#004)<span
id="vii.vi.xviii-p11.2"></span>).  Observe here how beautifully the
ideas of grace and free will are harmonized.  These men had responded to
a Divine impulse:  it might seem that they had committed themselves to a
noble course:  they had cast aside the “belts” which were their badge of
office (compare the cases of Valentinian and Valens, Soc. iii. 13, and
of Benevolus throwing down his belt at the feet of Justina, Soz. vii.
13).  They had done, in fact, just what Auxentius, one of Licinius’
notaries, had done when, according to the graphic anecdote of
Philostorgius (*Fragm.* 5), his master bade him place a bunch of grapes
before a statue of Bacchus in the palace-court; but their zeal, unlike
his, proved to be too impulsive—they reconsidered their position, and
<span id="page_29">p. 29</span> <span
id="vii.vi.xviii-Page_29"></span>illustrated the maxim that in morals
second thoughts are *not* best (Butler, *Serm.* 7), by making unworthy
attempts—in some cases by bribery—to recover what they had worthily
resigned.  (Observe the Grecised Latinism <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.vi.xviii-p11.3"></span>βενεφικίοις</span> and compare the
Latinisms of St. Mark, and others in Euseb. iii. 20, vi. 40, x. 5.) 
This the Council describes in proverbial language, probably borrowed
from [2 Pet. ii. 22](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#022)<span
id="vii.vi.xviii-p11.4"></span>, but, it is needless to say, without
intending to censure enlistment as such.  They now desired to be
received to penance:  accordingly they were ordered to spend three years
as Hearers, during which time “their purpose, and the nature (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.vi.xviii-p11.5"></span>εἶδος</span>) of
their repentance” were to be carefully “examined.”  Again we see the
earnest resolution of the Council to make discipline a moral reality,
and to prevent it from being turned into a formal routine; to secure, as
Rufinus’ abridgment expresses it, a repentance “fructuosam et
attentam.”  If the penitents were found to have “manifested their
conversion by deeds, and not in outward show (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.vi.xviii-p11.6"></span>σχήματι</span>), by awe, and tears, and
patience, and good works” (such, for instance, Zonaras comments, as
almsgiving according to ability), “it would be then reasonable to admit
them to a participation in the prayers,” to the position of
Consistentes, “with permission also to the bishop to come to a yet more
indulgent resolution concerning them,” by admitting them to full
communion.  This discretionary power of the bishop to dispense with part
of a penance-time is recognized in the fifth canon of Ancyra and the
sixteenth of Chalcedon, and mentioned by Basil, *Epist.* 217, c. 74.  It
was the basis of “indulgences” in their original form (Bingham, xviii.
4, 9).  But it was too possible that some at least of these *lapsi*
might take the whole affair lightly, “with indifference” <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.vi.xviii-p11.7"></span>ἀδιαφόρως</span> —not
seriously enough, as Hervetas renders—just as if, in common parlance, it
did not signify:  the fourth Ancyrene canon speaks of *lapsi* who
partook of the idol-feast <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.vi.xviii-p11.8"></span>ἀδιαφόρως</span> as if it involved them
in no sin (see below on [Eph. 5](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#000)<span
id="vii.vi.xviii-p11.9"></span>, Chalc. 4).  It was possible that they
might “deem” the outward form of “entering the church” to stand in the
narthex among the Hearers (here, as in c. 8, 19, <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.vi.xviii-p11.10"></span>σχῆμα</span> denotes
an external visible fact) sufficient to entitle them to the character of
converted penitents, while their conduct out of church was utterly
lacking in seriousness and self-humiliation.  In that case there could
be no question of shortening their penance time, for they were not in a
state to benefit by indulgence:  it would be, as the Roman Presbyters
wrote to Cyprian, and as he himself wrote to his own church, a “mere
covering over of the wound” (*Epist.* 30, 3), an “injury” rather than “a
kindness” (*De Lapsis*, 16); they must therefore “by all means” go
through ten years as Kneelers, before they can become Consistentes.

<span id="vii.vi.xviii-p12"></span>There is great difficulty about the
last phrase and Gelasius of Cyzicus, the *Prisca*, Dionysius Exiguus,
the pseudo-Isidore, Zonaras and most others have considered the “not” an
interpolation.  I do not see how dropping the “not” makes the meaning
materially clearer.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon XIII](2140037)
