[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140362)  [Next](2140364) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xii.xii"></span>

<span id="xii.xii-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="xii.xii-p1.1"></span>The Decretal Letter of Pope Vigilius.</span>

<span id="xii.xii-p2"></span>(The manuscript from which this letter was
printed was found in the Royal Library of Paris by Peter de Marca and by
him first published, with a Latin translation and with a dissertation. 
Both of these with the Greek text are found in Labbe and Cossart’s
*Concilia*, Tom. V., col. 596 *et seqq*.; also in Migne’s *Patr. Lat*.,
Tom. LXIX., col. 121 *et seqq*.  Some doubts have been expressed about
its genuineness and Harduin is of opinion that the learned Jesuit,
Garnerius, in his notes on the Deacon Leberatus’s *Breviary*, has proved
its supposititious character.  But the learned have not generally been
of this mind but have accepted the letter as genuine.)

<span id="xii.xii-p3"></span>Vigilius to his beloved brother Eutychius.

<span id="xii.xii-p4"></span>No one is ignorant of the scandals which
the enemy of the human race has stirred up in all the world:  so that he
made each one with a wicked object in view, striving in some way to
fulfil his wish to destroy the Church of God spread over the whole
world, not only in his own name but even in ours and in those of others
to compose diverse things as well in words as in writing; in so much
that he attempted to divide us who, together with our brethren and
fellow bishops, are stopping in this royal city, and who defend with
equal reverence the four synods, and sincerely persist in the one and
the same faith of those four synods, by his sophistries and machinations
he tried to part from them; so that we ourselves who were and are of the
same opinion as they touching the faith, went apart into discord,
brotherly love being despised. <span id="fr_320"></span>[321](#fn_320)

<span id="xii.xii-p6"></span>But since Christ our God, who is the true
light, whom the darkness comprehendeth not, hath removed all confusion
from our minds, and hath so recalled peace to the whole world and to the
Church, so that what things should be defined by us have been
healthfully fulfilled through the revelation of the Lord and through the
investigation of the truth.

<span id="xii.xii-p7"></span>Therefore, my dear brothers, I do you to
wit, that in common with all of you, our brethren, we receive in all
respects the four synods, that is to say the Nicene, the
Constantinopolitan, the first Ephesian, and the Chalcedonian; and we
venerate them with devout mind, and watch over them with all our mind.
 And should there be any who do not follow these holy synods in all
things which they have defined concerning the faith, we judge them to be
aliens to the communion of the holy and Catholic Church.

<span id="xii.xii-p8"></span>Wherefore on account of our desire that
you, my brothers, should know what we have done in this matter, we make
it known to you by this letter.  For no one can doubt how many were the
discussions raised on account of the Three Chapters, that is, concerning
Theodore, sometime bishop of Mopsuestia, and his writings, as well as
concerning the writings of Theodoret, and concerning that letter which
is said to have been written by Ibas to Maris the Persian:  and how
diverse were the things spoken and written concerning these Three
Chapters.  Now if in every busi<span id="page_322">p. 322</span> <span
id="xii.xii-Page_322"></span>ness sound wisdom demands that there should
be a retractation of what was propounded after examination, there ought
to be no shame when what was at first omitted is made public after it is
discovered by a further study of the truth.  \[And if this is the case
in ordinary affairs\] how much more in ecclesiastical strifes should the
same dictate of sound reason be observed?  Especially since it is
manifest that our Fathers, and especially the blessed Augustine, who was
in very sooth illustrious in the Divine Scriptures, and a master in
Roman eloquence, retracted some of his own writings, and corrected some
of his own sayings, and added what he had omitted and afterward found
out.  We, led by their example never gave over the study of the
questions raised by the controversy with regard to the before-mentioned
Three Chapters, nor our search for passages in the writings of our
Fathers which were applicable to the matter.

<span id="xii.xii-p9"></span>As a result of this investigation it became
evident that in the sayings of Theodore of Mopsuestia (which are spoken
against on all hands) there are contained very many things contrary to
the right faith and to the teachings of the holy Fathers; and for this
very reason these same holy Fathers have left for the instruction of the
Church treatises which they had written against him.

<span id="xii.xii-p10"></span>For among other blasphemies of his we find
that he openly said that God the Word was one \[Person\] and Christ
another \[Person\], vexed with the passions of the soul and with the
desires of the flesh, and that he little by little advanced from a lower
to a higher stage of excellence by the improvement (<span
class="Greek"><span id="xii.xii-p10.1"></span>προκοπῇ</span>, *per
profectum operum*) of his works, and became irreprehensible in his
manner of life. <span id="fr_321"></span>[322](#fn_321)   And further he
taught that it was a mere man who was baptized in the Name of the Father
and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost, and that he received through his
baptism the grace of the Holy Spirit, and merited his adoption; and
therefore that Christ could be venerated in the same way that the image
of the Emperor is venerated as being the persona (<span
class="Greek"><span id="xii.xii-p11.1"></span>εἰς πρόσωπον</span>) of
God the Word.  And he also taught that \[only\] after his resurrection
he became immutable in his thoughts and altogether impeccable.

<span id="xii.xii-p12"></span>Moreover he said that the union of the
Word of God was made with Christ as the Apostle says the union is made
between a man and his wife:  They twain shall be one flesh; and that
after his resurrection, when the Lord breathed upon his disciples and
said, Receive the Holy Ghost, he did not give to them the Holy Spirit. 
In like strain of profanity he dared to say that the confession which
Thomas made, when he touched the hands and side of the Lord after his
resurrection, saying, My Lord and my God, did not apply to Christ (for
Theodore did not acknowledge Christ to be God); but that Thomas gave
glory to God being filled with wonder at the miracle of the
resurrection, and so said these words.

<span id="xii.xii-p13"></span>But what is still worse is this, that in
interpreting the Acts of the Apostles, Theodore makes Christ like to
Plato, and Manichæus, and Epicurus, and Marcian, saying:  Just as each
of these were the authors of their own peculiar teachings, and called
their disciples after their own names, Platonists, and Manichæans, and
Epicureans, and Marcionites, just so Christ invented dogmas and called
his followers Christians after himself.

<span id="xii.xii-p14"></span>Let therefore the whole Catholic Church
know that justly and irreproachably we have arrived at the conclusions
contained in this our constitution.  Wherefore we condemn and
anathematize Theodore, formerly bishop of Mopsuestia, and his impious
writings, together with all other heretics, who (as is manifest) have
been condemned and anathematized by the four holy Synods aforesaid, and
by the Catholic Church:  also the writings of Theodoret which are
opposed to the right faith, and are against the Twelve Chapters of St.
Cyril, and against the first Council of Ephesus, which were written by
him in defence of Theodore and Nestorius.

<span id="xii.xii-p15"></span>Moreover we anathematize and condemn the
letter to the Persian heretic Maris, which is said to have been written
by Ibas, which denies that Christ the Word was incarnate of the holy
Mother of God and ever-virgin Mary, and was made man, but declares that
a mere man was born of her, and this man it styles a temple, so from
this we are given to understand that God the Word is one \[Person\] and
Christ another \[Person\].  Moreover it calumniates Saint Cyril, the
master and herald of the orthodox faith, calling him a heretic, and
charging him with writing things similar to Apollinaris; and it reviles
the first Synod of Ephesus, as having condemned Nestorius without
deliberation or investigation; it likewise declares the twelve chapters
of St. Cyril to be impious and contrary to the right faith; and further
still it defends Theodore and Nestorius, and their impious teachings and
writings.

<span id="xii.xii-p16"></span>Therefore we anathematize and condemn
<span id="page_323">p. 323</span> <span id="xii.xii-Page_323"></span>the
aforesaid impious Three Chapters, to-wit, the impious Theodore of
Mopsuestia and his impious writings; And all that Theodoret impiously
wrote, as well as the letter said to have been written by Ibas, in which
are contained the above mentioned profane blasphemies.  We likewise
subject to anathema whoever shall at any time believe that these
chapters should be received or defended; or shall attempt to subvert
this present condemnation.

<span id="xii.xii-p17"></span>And further we define that they are our
brethren and fellow-priests who ever keep the right faith set forth by
those afore-mentioned synods, and shall have condemned the above-named
Three Chapters, or even do now condemn them.

<span id="xii.xii-p18"></span>And further we annul and evacuate by this
present written definition of ours whatever has been said by me (*a me*)
or by others in defence of the aforesaid Three Chapters.

<span id="xii.xii-p19"></span>Far be it from the Catholic Church that
anyone should say that all the blasphemies above related or they who
held and followed such things, were received by the before-mentioned
four synods or by any one of them.  For it is most clear, that no one
was admitted by the before-mentioned holy Fathers and especially by the
Council of Chalcedon, about whom there was any suspicion, unless he had
first repelled the above-named blasphemies and all like to them, or else
had denied and condemned the heresy or blasphemies of which he was
suspected.

<span id="xii.xii-p20"></span>Subscription.

<span id="xii.xii-p21"></span>May God preserve thee in health, most
honourable brother.  Dated VI. Id. Dec. in the xxijd year of our lord
the Emperor Justinian, eternal Augustus, the xijth year after the
consulate of the illustrious Basil. <span
id="fr_322"></span>[323](#fn_322)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_320"></span>[321:321](2140363.htm#fr_320) <span
id="xii.xii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xii-p5"></span> In this sentence I have followed De
Marca’s Latin version, but I must confess that I am not at all satisfied
with the construing of the long phrase beginning <span
class="Greek"><span id="xii.xii-p5.1"></span>Οὕτως ὠς</span>.

<span id="fn_321"></span>[322:322](2140363.htm#fr_321) <span
id="xii.xii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xii.xii-p11"></span> The reader will notice that this is
hardly distinguishable from the “moral growth” and “ethical development”
which the modern “kenotists” attribute to the Incarnate Son of God.

<span id="fn_322"></span>[323:323](2140363.htm#fr_322) <span
id="xii.xii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xii-p22"></span> i.e. <span class="sc"><span
id="xii.xii-p22.1"></span>a.d.</span> 553.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Historical Excursus on the After History of the
Council.](2140364)
