[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140676)  [Next](2140678) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi.v"></span>

<span id="xvi.v-p1"></span> <span id="page_533">p. 533</span> <span
id="xvi.v-Page_533"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xvi.v-p1.1"></span>Extracts from the Acts.</span>

<span id="xvi.v-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xvi.v-p2.1"></span>Session I.</span>

<span id="xvi.v-p3"></span>(Labbe and Cossart, *Concilia*, Tom. VII.,
col. 53.)

<span id="xvi.v-p4"></span>\[*Certain bishops who had been led astray by
the Iconoclasts came, asking to be received back.  The first of these
was Basil of Ancyra*.\]

<span id="xvi.v-p5"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xvi.v-p5.1"></span>The</span> bishop Basil of Ancyra read as follows
from a book; Inasmuch as ecclesiastical legislation has canonically been
handed down from past time, even from the beginning from the holy
Apostles, and from their successors, who were our holy fathers and
teachers, and also from the six holy and ecumenical synods, and from the
local synods which were gathered in the interests of orthodoxy, that
those returning from any heresy whatever to the orthodox faith and to
the tradition of the Catholic Church, might deny their own heresy, and
confess the orthodox faith,

<span id="xvi.v-p6"></span>Wherefore I, Basil, bishop of the city of
Ancyra, proposing to be united to the Catholic Church, and to Hadrian
the most holy Pope of Old Rome, and to Tarasius the most blessed
Patriarch, and to the most holy apostolic sees, to wit, Alexandria,
Antioch, and the Holy City, as well as to all orthodox high-priests and
priests, make this written confession of my faith, and I offer it to you
as to those who have received power by apostolic authority.  And in this
also I beg pardon from your divinely gathered holiness for my tardiness
in this matter.  For it was not right that I should have fallen behind
in the confession of orthodoxy, but it arose from my entire lack of
knowledge, and slothful and negligent mind in the matter.  Wherefore the
rather I ask your blessedness to grant me indulgence in God’s sight.

<span id="xvi.v-p7"></span>I believe, therefore, and make my confession
in one God, the Father Almighty, and in one Lord Jesus Christ, his only
begotten Son, and in the Holy Ghost, the Lord and Giver of Life.  The
Trinity, one in essence and one in majesty, must be worshipped and
glorified in one godhead, power, and authority.  I confess all things
pertaining to the incarnation of one of the Holy Trinity, our Lord and
God, Jesus Christ, as the Saints and the six Ecumenical Synods have
handed down.  And I reject and anathematize every heretical babbling, as
they also have rejected them.  I ask for the intercessions (<span
class="Greek"><span id="xvi.v-p7.1"></span>πρεσβείας</span> ) of our
spotless Lady the Holy Mother of God, and those of the holy and heavenly
powers, and those of all the Saints. <span
id="fr_517"></span>[518](#fn_517)

<span id="xvi.v-p11"></span>And receiving their holy and honourable
reliques with all honour (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xvi.v-p11.1"></span>τιμῆς</span>), I salute and venerate these with
honour (<span class="Greek"><span id="xvi.v-p11.2"></span>τιμητικῶς
προσκυνέω</span>), hoping to have a share in their holiness.  Likewise
also the venerable images (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xvi.v-p11.3"></span>εἰκόνας</span>) of the incarnation of our Lord
Jesus Christ, in the humanity he assumed for our salvation; and of our
spotless Lady, the holy Mother of God; and of the angels like unto God;
and of the holy Apostles, Prophets, Martyrs, and of all the Saints—the
sacred images of all these, I salute and venerate—rejecting and
anathematizing with my whole soul and mind the synod which was gathered
together out of stubbornness and madness, and which styled itself the
Seventh Synod, but which by those who think accurately was called
lawfully and canonically a pseudo-synod, as being contrary to all truth
and piety, and audaciously and temerariously against the divinely handed
down ecclesiastical legislation, yea, even impiously having yelped at
and scoffed at the holy and venerable images, and having ordered these
to be taken away out of the holy churches of God; over which assembly
presided Theodosius with the pseudonym of Ephesius, Sisinnius of Perga,
with the surname Pastillas, Basilius of Pisidia, falsely <span
id="page_534">p. 534</span> <span id="xvi.v-Page_534"></span>called
“tricaccabus;” with whom the wretched Constantine, the then Patriarch,
was led (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xvi.v-p11.4"></span>ἐματαιώθη</span>) astray.

<span id="xvi.v-p12"></span>These things thus I confess and to these I
assent, and therefore in simplicity of heart and in uprightness of mind,
in the presence of God, I have made the subjoined anathematisms.

<span id="xvi.v-p13"></span>Anathema to the calumniators of the
Christians, that is to the image breakers.

<span id="xvi.v-p14"></span>Anathema to those who apply the words of
Holy Scripture which were spoken against idols, to the venerable images.

<span id="xvi.v-p15"></span>Anathema to those who do not salute the holy
and venerable images.

<span id="xvi.v-p16"></span>Anathema to those who say that Christians
have recourse to the images as to gods.

<span id="xvi.v-p17"></span>Anathema to those who call the sacred images
idols.

<span id="xvi.v-p18"></span>Anathema to those who knowingly communicate
with those who revile and dishonour the venerable images.

<span id="xvi.v-p19"></span>Anathema to those who say that another than
Christ our Lord hath delivered us from idols.

<span id="xvi.v-p20"></span>Anathema to those who spurn the teachings of
the holy Fathers and the tradition of the Catholic Church, taking as a
pretext and making their own the arguments of Arius, Nestorius,
Eutyches, and Dioscorus, that unless we were evidently taught by the Old
and New Testaments, we should not follow the teachings of the holy
Fathers and of the holy Ecumenical Synods, and the tradition of the
Catholic Church.

<span id="xvi.v-p21"></span>Anathema to those who dare to say that the
Catholic Church hath at any time sanctioned idols.

<span id="xvi.v-p22"></span>Anathema to those who say that the making of
images is a diabolical invention and not a tradition of our holy
Fathers.

<span id="xvi.v-p23"></span>This is my confession \[of faith\] and to
these propositions I give my assent.  And I pronounce this with my whole
heart, and soul, and mind.

<span id="xvi.v-p24"></span>And if at any time by the fraud of the devil
(which may God forbid!) I voluntarily or involuntarily shall be opposed
to what I have now professed, may I be anathema from the Father, the Son
and the Holy Ghost, and from the Catholic Church and every hierarchical
order a stranger.

<span id="xvi.v-p25"></span>I will keep myself from every acceptance of
a bribe and from filthy lucre in accordance with the divine canons of
the holy Apostles and of the approved Fathers.

<span id="xvi.v-p26"></span>Tarasius, the most holy Patriarch, said: 
This whole sacred gathering yields glory and thanks to God for this
confession of yours, which you have made to the Catholic Church.

<span id="xvi.v-p27"></span>The Holy Synod said:  Glory to God which
maketh one that which was severed.

<span id="xvi.v-p28"></span>\[*Theodore, bishop of Myra, then read the
same confession, and was received.  The next bishop who asked to be
received read as follows:*  (col. 60)\]

<span id="xvi.v-p29"></span>Theodosius, the humble Christian, to the
holy and Ecumenical Synod:  I confess and I agree to (<span
class="Greek"><span id="xvi.v-p29.1"></span>συντίθεμαι</span>) and I
receive and I salute and I venerate in the first place the spotless
image of our Lord Jesus Christ, our true God, and the holy image of her
who bore him without seed, the holy Mother of God, and her help and
protection and intercessions each day and night as a sinner to my aid I
call for, since she has confidence with Christ our God, as he was born
of her.  Likewise also I receive and venerate the images of the holy and
most laudable Apostles, prophets, and martyrs and the fathers and
cultivators of the desert.  Not indeed as gods (God forbid!) do I ask
all these with my whole heart to pray for me to God, that he may grant
me through their intercessions to find mercy at his hands at the day of
judgment, for in this I am but showing forth more clearly the affection
and love of my soul which I have borne them from the first.  Likewise
also I venerate and honour and salute the reliques of the Saints as of
those who fought for Christ and who have received grace from him for the
healing of diseases and the curing of sicknesses and the casting out of
devils, as the Christian Church has received from the holy Apostles and
Fathers even down to us to-day.

<span id="xvi.v-p30"></span><span id="page_535">p. 535</span> <span
id="xvi.v-Page_535"></span>Moreover, I am well pleased that there should
be images in the churches of the faithful, especially the image of our
Lord Jesus Christ and of the holy Mother of God, of every kind of
material, both gold and silver and of every colour, so that his
incarnation may be set forth to all men.  Likewise there may be painted
the lives of the Saints and Prophets and Martyrs, so that their
struggles and agonies may be set forth in brief, for the stirring up and
teaching of the people, especially of the unlearned.

<span id="xvi.v-p31"></span>For if the people go forth with lights and
incense to meet the “laurata” and images of the Emperors when they are
sent to cities or rural districts, they honour surely not the tablet
covered over with wax, but the Emperor himself.  How much more is it
necessary that in the churches of Christ our God, the image of God our
Saviour and of his spotless Mother and of all the holy and blessed
fathers and ascetics should be painted?  Even as also St. Basil says: 
“Writers and painters set forth the great deeds of war; the one by word,
the other by their pencils; and each stirs many to courage.”  And again
the same author “How much pains have you ever taken that you might find
one of the Saints who was willing to be your importunate intercessor to
the Lord?” <span id="fr_518"></span>[519](#fn_518)   And Chrysostom
says, “The charity of the Saints is not diminished by their death, nor
does it come to an end with their exit from life, but after their death
they are still more powerful than when they were alive,” and many other
things without measure.  Therefore I ask you, O ye Saints!  I call out
to you.  I have sinned against heaven and in your sight.  Receive me as
God received the luxurious man, and the harlot, and the thief.  Seek me
out, as Christ sought out the sheep that was lost, which he carried on
his shoulders; so that there may be joy in the presence of God and of
his angels over my salvation and repentance, through your intervention,
O all-holy lords!  Let them who do not venerate the holy and venerable
images be anathema!  Anathema to those who blaspheme against the
honourable and venerable images!  To those who dare to attack and
blaspheme the venerable images and call them idols, anathema!  To the
calumniators of Christianity, that is to say the Iconoclasts, anathema! 
To those who do not diligently teach all the Christ-loving people to
venerate and salute the venerable and sacred and honourable images of
all the Saints who pleased God in their several generations, anathema! 
To those who have a doubtful mind and do not confess with their whole
hearts that they venerate the sacred images, anathema!

<span id="xvi.v-p33"></span>Sabbas, the most reverend hegumenus of the
monastery of the Studium, said:  According to the Apostolic precepts and
the Ecumenical Synods he is worthy to be received back.

<span id="xvi.v-p34"></span>Tarasius, the most holy Patriarch, said: 
Those who formerly were the calumniators of orthodoxy, now are become
the advocates of the truth.

<span id="xvi.v-p35"></span>\[*Near the end of this session*, (col.
77)\]

<span id="xvi.v-p36"></span>John, the most reverend bishop and legate of
the Eastern high priests said:  This heresy is the worst of all
heresies.  Woe to the iconoclasts!  It is the worst of heresies, as it
subverts the incarnation (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xvi.v-p36.1"></span>οἰκονομίαν</span> ) of our Saviour. <span
id="fr_519"></span>[520](#fn_519)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_517"></span>[533:518](2140677.htm#fr_517) <span
id="xvi.v-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.v-p8"></span> Thus far there was no expression of opinion
from which the Iconoclasts would have dissented, for in all that
regarded the Blessed Virgin and the Saints and their invocation and
patronage, the heretics agreed with the orthodox.  Protestants have been
in the habit of treating the Iconoclasts as if they were substantially
agreed with them with regard to the cultus of the Blessed Virgin and of
the other Saints.  What an error this is, is easily proved by citing two
of the anathematisms of their Conciliabulum.

<span id="xvi.v-p9"></span>“If anyone shall not confess that the
Ever-virgin Mary is properly and truly the Mother of God, and more
exalted than every creature, whether visible or invisible, and does not
seek her intercessions with sincere faith because she has confidence in
approaching our God. who was born of her, let him be anathema.” (L. and
C., *Conc*., Tom. VII., col. 524.)

<span id="xvi.v-p10"></span>“If anyone does not confess that all the
Saints from the beginning down to now, who whether before the Law, or
under the Law, or in grace pleased God, should be honoured in his
presence both with soul and body, and does not seek their prayers,
according to the tradition of the Church as of those having confidence
to plead for the world, let him be anathema.”  (*Ibid*. col. 528.)

<span id="fn_518"></span>[535:519](2140677.htm#fr_518) <span
id="xvi.v-p31.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.v-p32"></span> Mendham seems to have reversed the sense
here altogether.

<span id="fn_519"></span>[535:520](2140677.htm#fr_519) <span
id="xvi.v-p36.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.v-p37"></span> In the English Hefele (Vol. V., p. 363)
this appears in the following most extraordinary form.  “John…declared
that the veneration of images was the worst of all heresies ‘because it
detracted from the Economy (Incarnation) of the Redeemer.’”  (!)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Extracts from the Acts.  Session II.](2140678)
