[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140220)  [Next](2140222) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.vii.iii.lv"></span>

<span id="viii.vii.iii.lv-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="viii.vii.iii.lv-p1.1"></span>Canon L.</span>

<span id="viii.vii.iii.lv-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.vii.iii.lv-p2.1"></span>The</span> fast must not be broken on
the fifth day of the last week in Lent \[i.e., on Maunday Thursday\],
and the whole of Lent be dishonoured; but it is necessary to fast during
all the Lenten season by eating only dry meats.

<span id="viii.vii.iii.lv-p3"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="viii.vii.iii.lv-p3.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="viii.vii.iii.lv-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.vii.iii.lv-p4.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon L.</span>

<span id="viii.vii.iii.lv-p5"></span>It is not right on the fifth feria
of the last week of Lent to break the fast, and thus spoil the whole of
Lent; but the whole of Lent should be kept with fasting on dry food.

<span id="viii.vii.iii.lv-p6"></span>That long before the date of the
Quinisext Synod the fasting reception of the Holy Eucharist was the
universal law of the Church no one can doubt who has devoted the
slightest study to the point.  To produce the evidence here would be out
of place, but the reader may be referred to the excellent presentation
of it in Cardinal Bona’s *De Rebus Liturgicis*.

<span id="viii.vii.iii.lv-p7"></span>I shall here cite but one passage,
from St. Augustine:

<span id="viii.vii.iii.lv-p8"></span>“It is clear that when the
disciples first received the body and blood of the Lord they had not
been fasting.  Must we then censure the Universal Church because *the
sacrament is everywhere partaken of by persons fasting*?  Nay, verily;
for from that time it pleased the Holy Spirit to appoint, for the honour
of so great a sacrament, that the body of the Lord should take the
precedence of all other food entering the mouth of a Christian; and it
is for this reason that the custom referred to is universally observed. 
For the fact that the Lord instituted the sacrament after other food had
been partaken of does not prove that brethren should come together to
partake of that sacrament after having dined or supped, or imitate those
whom the Apostle reproved and corrected for not distinguishing between
the Lord’s Supper and an ordinary meal.  The Saviour, indeed, in order
to commend the depths of that mystery more affectingly to his disciples,
was pleased to impress it on their hearts and memories by making its
institution his last act before going from them to his passion.  And,
therefore, he did not prescribe the order in which it was to be
observed, reserving this to be done by the Apostles, through whom he
intended to arrange all things pertaining to the churches.  Had he
appointed that the sacrament should be always partaken of after other
food, I believe that no one would have departed from that practice.  But
when the Apostle, speaking of this sacrament, says, ‘Wherefore, my
brethren, when ye come together to eat, tarry one for another, and if
any man hunger let him eat at home, that ye come not together unto
condemnation,’ he immediately adds, ‘And the rest will I set in order
when I come.’  Whence we are given to understand that, since it was too
much for him to prescribe completely in an epistle the method observed
by the Universal Church throughout the world it was one of the things
set in order by him in person; for we find its observance uniform amid
all the variety of other customs.” <span
id="fr_197"></span>[198](#fn_197)

<span id="viii.vii.iii.lv-p10"></span><span id="page_156">p. 156</span>
<span id="viii.vii.iii.lv-Page_156"></span>In fact the utter absurdity
of the attempt to maintain the opposite cannot better be seen than in
reading Kingdon’s *Fasting Communion*, an example of special pleading
and disingenuousness rarely equalled even in controversial theological
literature.  A brief but crushing refutation of the position taken by
that writer will be found in an appendix to a pamphlet by H. P. Liddon,
*Evening Communions contrary to the Teaching and Practice of the Church
in all Ages*.

<span id="viii.vii.iii.lv-p11"></span>But while this is true, it is also
true that in some few places the custom had lingered on of making Maundy
Thursday night an exception to this rule, and of having then a feast, in
memory of our Lord’s Last Supper, and after this having a celebration of
the Divine Mysteries.  This is the custom which is prohibited by this
canon, but it is manifest both from the wording of the canon itself and
from the remarks of the Greek commentators that the custom was condemned
not because it necessitated an unfasting reception of the Holy
Eucharist, but because it connoted a feast which was a breaking of the
Lenten fast and a dishonour to the whole of the holy season.

<span id="viii.vii.iii.lv-p12"></span>It is somewhat curious and a
trifle amusing to read Zonaras gravely arguing the point as to whether
the drinking of water is forbidden by this canon because it speaks of
“dry meats,” which he decides in the negative!

<span id="viii.vii.iii.lv-p13"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.vii.iii.lv-p13.1"></span>Balsamon.</span>

<span id="viii.vii.iii.lv-p14"></span>Those, therefore, who without
being ill, fast on oil and shell-fish, do contrary to this law; and much
more they who eat on the fourth and sixth ferias fish.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_197"></span>[155:198](2140221.htm#fr_197) <span
id="viii.vii.iii.lv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vii.iii.lv-p9"></span> Aug. *Epist. ad Januar.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon LI](2140222)
