[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140692)  [Next](2140694) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi.xiv.vii"></span>

<span id="xvi.xiv.vii-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="xvi.xiv.vii-p1.1"></span>Canon VII.</span>

<span id="xvi.xiv.vii-p2"></span>That to churches consecrated without
any deposit of the reliques of the Saints, the defect should be made
good.

<span id="xvi.xiv.vii-p3"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xvi.xiv.vii-p3.1"></span>Paul</span> the divine Apostle says:  “The
sins of some are open beforehand, and some they follow after.”  These
are their primary sins, and other sins follow these.  Accordingly upon
the heels of the heresy of the traducers of the Christians, there
followed close other ungodliness.  For as they took out of the churches
the presence of the venerable images, so likewise they cast aside other
customs which we must now revive and maintain in accordance with the
written and unwritten law.  We decree therefore that relics shall be
placed with the accustomed service in as many of the sacred temples as
have been consecrated without the relics of the Martyrs.  And if any
bishop from this time forward is found consecrating a temple without
holy relics, he shall be deposed, as a transgressor of the
ecclesiastical traditions.

<span id="xvi.xiv.vii-p4"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xvi.xiv.vii-p4.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="xvi.xiv.vii-p5"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xvi.xiv.vii-p5.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon VII.</span>

<span id="xvi.xiv.vii-p6"></span>Let reliques of the Holy Martyrs be
placed in such churches as have been consecrated without them, and this
with the accustomed prayers.  But whoever shall consecrate a church
without these shall be deposed as a transgressor of the traditions of
the Church.

<span id="xvi.xiv.vii-p7"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xvi.xiv.vii-p7.1"></span>Balsamon</span>.

<span id="xvi.xiv.vii-p8"></span>But someone may be surprised that
oratories to-day are consecrated without any deposition of reliques. 
And they may ask why the Divine Liturgy is not celebrated in them by
bishops and not by priests only.  The answer is that the superaltars
(<span class="Greek"><span
id="xvi.xiv.vii-p8.1"></span>ἀντιμένσια</span>) which are made by the
bishops when a church is consecrated, suffice oratories in lieu of
consecration or enthronement when they are sent to them, on the occasion
of their dedication or opening.  They are called <span
class="Greek"><span id="xvi.xiv.vii-p8.2"></span>ἀντιμένσια</span>
because they are in place of, and are antitypes of those many like
tables which furnish thoroughly the holy Lord’s table.

<span id="xvi.xiv.vii-p9"></span><span id="page_561">p. 561</span> <span
id="xvi.xiv.vii-Page_561"></span>On the rite of consecrating churches
with reliques see Cardinal Bona.  (*De Rebus Lit*., Lib. I., cap. xix.)

<span id="xvi.xiv.vii-p10"></span>The Antimensia are consecrated at the
same time as the church; a full account of the ceremony is found in the
Euchologion (Goar’s ed., p. 648).  A piece of cloth is placed on the
altar and blessed, and then subsequently, as need requires, pieces are
cut off from it and sent to the various oratories, etc.  The main
outline of the ceremony of consecration is as follows.

<span id="xvi.xiv.vii-p11"></span>J. M. <span class="sc"><span
id="xvi.xiv.vii-p11.1"></span>Neale</span>.

<span id="xvi.xiv.vii-p12"></span>(*Int. Hist. East. Ch*., p. 187. )

<span id="xvi.xiv.vii-p13"></span>Relics being pounded up with fragrant
gum, oil is poured over them by the bishop, and, distilling out to the
corporals, is supposed to convey to them the mysterious virtues of the
relics themselves.  The holy Eucharist must then be celebrated on them
for seven days, after which they are sent forth as they are wanted.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon VIII](2140694)
