[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140245)  [Next](2140247) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.viii.vi"></span>

<span id="ix.viii.vi-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="ix.viii.vi-p1.1"></span>Canon V.</span>

<span id="ix.viii.vi-p2"></span>(Probably adopted at a Council held in
Constantinople the next year, 382.  *Vide*. Introduction on the number
of the Canons.)

<span id="ix.viii.vi-p3"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.viii.vi-p3.1"></span>In</span> regard to the tome of the Western
\[Bishops\], we receive those in Antioch also who confess the unity of
the Godhead of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

<span id="ix.viii.vi-p4"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="ix.viii.vi-p4.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="ix.viii.vi-p5"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.viii.vi-p5.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon V.</span>

<span id="ix.viii.vi-p6"></span>The Tome of the Westerns which
recognizes the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit as consubstantial is
highly acceptable.

<span id="ix.viii.vi-p7"></span>Beveridge and Van Espen translate this
canon differently, thus, “With regard to the tome of the Westerns, we
agree with those in Antioch \[i.e. the Synod of 378\] who (accepted it
and) acknowledged the unity of the Godhead of the Father etc.”  In
opposition to this translation Hefele urges that <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.viii.vi-p7.1"></span>ἀποδέχεσθαι</span> in
ecclesiastical language usually refers to receiving persons and
recognizing them, not opinions or doctrines.

<span id="ix.viii.vi-p8"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ix.viii.vi-p8.1"></span>Hefele.</span>

<span id="ix.viii.vi-p9"></span>This canon probably does not belong to
the second General Council, but to the Synod held in the following year
at Constantinople consisting of nearly the same bishops.

<span id="ix.viii.vi-p10"></span>It is certain that by the “Tome of the
Westerns” a dogmatic work of the Western bishops is to be understood,
and the only question is which Tome of the Westerns is here meant. 
Several—for instance, the Greek commentators, Balsamon and Zonaras, and
the spokesman of the Latins at the Synod of Florence in 1439 (Archbishop
Andrew of Rhodes)—understood by it the decrees of the Synod of Sardica;
but it seems to me that <span id="page_182">p. 182</span> <span
id="ix.viii.vi-Page_182"></span>this canon undoubtedly indicates that
the Tome of the Westerns also mentioned the condition of the Antiochian
Church, and the division into two parties of the orthodox of that
place—the Meletian schism.  Now, as this was not mentioned, nay, could
not have been, at the Synod of Sardica—for this schism at Antioch only
broke out seventeen years later—some other document of the Latins must
certainly be meant.  But we know that Pope Damasus, and the synod
assembled by him in 369, addressed a Tome to the Orientals, of which
fragments are still preserved, and that nine years later, in 379, a
great synod at Antioch of one hundred and forty-six orthodox Oriental
bishops, under Meletius, accepted and signed this Tome, and at the same
time sought to put a stop to the Meletian schism.  Soon afterwards, in
380, Pope Damasus and his fourth Roman Synod again sent a treatise on
the faith, of which we still possess a portion, containing anathemas, to
the Orientals, especially to Bishop Paul of Antioch, head of the
Eustathians of that city.  Under these circumstances, we are justified
in referring the expression “the tome of the Westerns” either to the
Roman treatise of 369 or to that of 380, and I am disposed to give the
preference to the former, for the following reasons:—

<span id="ix.viii.vi-p11"></span>(1.)  As has been already observed,
this canon belongs to the Synod held at Constantinople in 382.

<span id="ix.viii.vi-p12"></span>(2.)  We still possess in Theodoret a
Synodal Letter to the Latins from this later Synod.

<span id="ix.viii.vi-p13"></span>(3.)  The canon in question, as
proceeding from the same source, is, of course to a certain extent,
connected with this letter.

<span id="ix.viii.vi-p14"></span>(4.)  In this Synodal Letter, the
Eastern bishops, in order to convince the Latins of their orthodoxy,
appeal to two documents, the one a “tome” of an Antiochian Synod, and
the other a “tome” of the Ecumenical Council held at Constantinople in
381.

<span id="ix.viii.vi-p15"></span>(5.)  By the Antiochian Synod here
mentioned, I understand the great synod of 378, and, as a necessary
consequence, believe the “tome” there produced to be none other than the
Roman Tome of 369, which was then accepted at Antioch.

<span id="ix.viii.vi-p16"></span>(6.)  It is quite certain that the
Synod of Antioch sent a copy of this Tome, with the declaration of its
acceptance and the signatures of the members, back to Rome, as a
supplement to its Synodal Letter; and hence Lucas Holstenius was still
able to find fragments of it in Rome.

<span id="ix.viii.vi-p17"></span>(7.)  The Synod of Constantinople of
382 might well call this Tome, sent back to Rome with the acceptance and
signatures of the Easterns, a “Tome established at Antioch,” although it
was really drawn up at Rome.

<span id="ix.viii.vi-p18"></span>(8.)  If, however, the Synod of
Constantinople in its Synodal Letter speaks of this Tome, we are
justified in supposing that the one mentioned in its canon is the same.

<span id="ix.viii.vi-p19"></span>(9.)  That which still remains of the
Roman Tome of 369, treats expressly of the oneness of the Godhead of the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost; and such were the contents of the
Tome according to this canon.

<span id="ix.viii.vi-p20"></span>(10.)  It is true that the fragments
still preserved of this Tome contain no passage directly referring to
the Antiochian schism; but, in the first place, very little remains of
it, and there is the more reason to suppose that the Meletian schism was
spoken of in the portion which has been lost, as it was the same
Antiochian Synod that accepted the Tome which urged the putting an end
to that schism.  It is still more to the purpose that the Italian
bishops, in their letter to the Easterns in 381, expressly say that they
had already long before (*dudum*) written to the Orientals in order to
put an end to the division between the orthodox at Antioch.  By this
“*dudum*” I conclude that they refer to the Roman Tome of 369; and if
the Westerns in their letter to the Easterns in 381 pointed to this
Tome, it was natural that the Synod of Constantinople of 382 should also
have referred to it, for it was that very letter of the Latins which
occasioned and called the synod into being.

<span id="ix.viii.vi-p21"></span>Lastly, for the full understanding of
this canon, it is necessary to observe that the Latins, in their letter
just mentioned of 381, say that “they had already in their earlier
missive (i.e. as we suppose, in the Tome of 369) spoken to the effect
that both parties at Antioch, one as much as the other, were orthodox.” 
Agreeing with this remark of the Westerns, repeated in their letter of
381, the Easterns in this canon say, “We also recognise all Antiochians
as orthodox who acknowledge the oneness of the Godhead of the Father,
the Son, and the Holy Ghost.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon VI](2140247)
