[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140308)  [Next](2140310) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xi.ix"></span>

<span id="xi.ix-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="xi.ix-p1.1"></span>Session III.</span>

<span id="xi.ix-p2"></span>\[*The imperial representatives do not seem
to have been present, and after Aëtius the Archdeacon of Constantinople
had opened the Session*,\]

<span id="xi.ix-p3"></span>Paschasinus the bishop of Lilybæum, in the
province of Silicia, and holding the place of the most holy Leo,
archbishop of the Apostolic see of old Rome, said in Latin what being
interpreted is as follows:  It is well known to this beloved of God
synod, that divine <span id="fr_284"></span>[285](#fn_284) letters were
sent to the blessed and apostolic pope Leo, inviting him to deign to be
present at the holy synod.  But since ancient custom did not sanction
this, nor the general necessity of the time seemed to permit it, our
littleness in the place of himself he <span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.ix-p4.1"></span>τὰ τῆς ἁγίας συνόδου επέτρεψε</span>, and
therefore it is necessary that whatever things are brought into
discussion should be examined by our interference (<span
class="Greek"><span id="xi.ix-p4.2"></span>διαλαλιᾶς</span>).  \[The
Latin reads where I have placed the Greek of the ordinary text, thus,
“commanded our littleness to preside in his place over this holy
council.”\]  Therefore let the book presented by our most beloved-of-God
brother, and fellow-bishop Eusebius be received, and read by the beloved
of God archdeacon and primicerius of the notaries, Aëtius.

<span id="xi.ix-p5"></span>And Aëtius, the archdeacon and primicerius of
the notaries, took the book and read as follows.

<span id="xi.ix-p6"></span>\[*Next follows the petition of Eusebius* et
post nonnulla *four petitions each addressed to* “The most holy and
beloved-of-God ecumenical archbishop and patriarch of great Rome Leo,
and to the holy and ecumenical Synod assembled at Chalcedon, etc.,
etc.;”  *The first two by deacons of Alexandria, the third by a quondam
presbyter of the diocese, and the fourth by a layman also of
Alexandria.  After this Dioscorus was again summoned and, as he did not
come, sentence was given against him, which was communicated to him in a
letter contained in the acts.*  (L. and C., *Conc*., Tom. IV., col.
418.)  *The Bishops expressed their opinions for the most part one by
one, but the Roman Legates spoke together, and in their speech occurs
the following* (Col. 426<span id="xi.ix-p6.1"></span>:)\]

<span id="xi.ix-p7"></span>Wherefore the most holy and blessed Leo,
archbishop of the great and elder Rome, through us, and through this
present most holy synod together with <span
id="fr_285"></span>[286](#fn_285) the thrice blessed and all-glorious
Peter the Apostle, who is the rock and foundation of the Catholic
Church, and the foundation of <span id="page_260">p. 260</span> <span
id="xi.ix-Page_260"></span>the orthodox faith, hath stripped him of the
episcopate, and hath alienated from him all hieratic worthiness. 
Therefore let this most holy and great synod sentence the before
mentioned Dioscorus to the canonical penalties.

<span id="xi.ix-p9"></span>\[The bishops then, one by one, spoke in
favour of the deposition of Dioscorus, but usually on the ground of his
refusal to appear when thrice summoned.\]

<span id="xi.ix-p10"></span>And when all the most holy bishops had
spoken on the subject, they signed this which follows.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_284"></span>[259:285](2140309.htm#fr_284) <span
id="xi.ix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ix-p4"></span> i.e. Imperial.

<span id="fn_285"></span>[259:286](2140309.htm#fr_285) <span
id="xi.ix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ix-p8"></span> The translation of the English Hefele (iv.
328) “in communion with” is most extraordinary.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Condemnation Sent by the Holy and Ecumenical Synod to
Dioscorus.](2140310)
