[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140633)  [Next](2140635) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iv.iv.cxi"></span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.cxi-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.cxi-p1.1"></span>Canon CX.  (Greek cxii. *bis*)</span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.cxi-p2"></span>That infants are baptized for the
remission of sins.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.cxi-p3"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.cxi-p3.1"></span>Likewise</span> it seemed good that
whosoever denies that infants newly from their mother’s wombs should be
baptized, or says that baptism is for remission of sins, but that they
derive from Adam no original sin, which needs to be removed by the laver
of <span id="page_497">p. 497</span> <span
id="xv.iv.iv.cxi-Page_497"></span>regeneration, from whence the
conclusion follows, that in them the form of baptism for the remission
of sins, is to be understood as false and not true, let him be anathema.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.cxi-p4"></span>For no otherwise can be understood
what the Apostle says, “By one man sin is come into the world, and death
through sin, and so death passed upon all men in that all have sinned,”
than the Catholic Church everywhere diffused has always understood it. 
For on account of this rule of faith (*regulam fidei*) even infants, who
could have committed as yet no sin themselves, therefore are truly
baptized for the remission of sins, in order that what in them is the
result of generation may be cleansed by regeneration.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.cxi-p5"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.cxi-p5.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.cxi-p6"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.cxi-p6.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon CX.</span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.cxi-p7"></span>Whoso affirms that those newly born
and baptized contract nothing from Adam’s transgression, which needs to
be washed away by baptism, is to be execrated:  for through one both
death and sin invaded the whole world.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.cxi-p8"></span>This is Canon ij. of Carthage, <span
class="sc"><span id="xv.iv.iv.cxi-p8.1"></span>a.d.</span> 418 \[Greek
Canon 112\].

<span id="xv.iv.iv.cxi-p9"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.cxi-p9.1"></span>Johnson.</span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.cxi-p10"></span>See Can. 63, 104, both which are
double, as this likewise is in the old Greek scholiasts.

<span id="xv.iv.iv.cxi-p11"></span>\[Also it seemed good, that if anyone
should say that the saying of the Lord, “In my Father’s house are many
mansions” is to be understood as meaning that in the kingdom of heaven
there will be a certain middle place, or some place somewhere, in which
infants live in happiness who have gone forth from this life without
baptism, without which they cannot enter the kingdom of heaven, which is
eternal life, let him be anathema.  For after our Lord has said: 
“Except a man be born again of water and of the Holy Spirit he shall not
enter the kingdom of heaven,” what Catholic can doubt that he who has
not merited to be coheir with Christ shall become a sharer with the
devil:  for he who fails of the right hand without doubt shall receive
the left hand portion.\]

<span id="xv.iv.iv.cxi-p12"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xv.iv.iv.cxi-p12.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="xv.iv.iv.cxi-p13"></span>The foregoing, says Surius, is found
in this place in a very ancient codex.  It does not occur in the Greek,
nor in Dionysius.  Bruns relegates it to a foot-note.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon CXI](2140635)
