[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140497)  [Next](2140499) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iii.iv.iv"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.iv.iv-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="xv.iii.iv.iv-p1.1"></span>Canon IV.</span>

<span id="xv.iii.iv.iv-p2"></span>(*Greek*.)

<span id="xv.iii.iv.iv-p3"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iii.iv.iv-p3.1"></span>Bishop</span> <span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iii.iv.iv-p3.2"></span>Gaudentius</span> said:  If it seems good
to you, it is necessary to add to this decision full of sincere charity
which thou hast pronounced, that <span id="fr_389"></span>[390](#fn_389)
if any bishop be deposed by the sentence of these neighbouring bishops,
and assert that he has fresh matter in defence, a new bishop be not
settled in his see, unless the bishop of Rome judge and render a
decision as to this.

<span id="xv.iii.iv.iv-p5"></span>(*Latin*.)

<span id="xv.iii.iv.iv-p6"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iii.iv.iv-p6.1"></span>Bishop</span> <span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iii.iv.iv-p6.2"></span>Gaudentius</span> said:  It ought to be
added, if it be your pleasure, to this sentence full of sanctity which
thou hast pronounced, that—when any bishop has been deposed by the
judgment of those bishops who have sees in neighbouring places, and he
\[the bishop deposed\] shall announce that his case is to be examined in
the city of Rome—that no other bishop shall in any wise be ordained to
his see, after the appeal of him who is apparently deposed, unless the
case shall have been determined in the judgment of the Roman bishop.

<span id="xv.iii.iv.iv-p7"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xv.iii.iv.iv-p7.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="xv.iii.iv.iv-p8"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iii.iv.iv-p8.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon IV.</span>

<span id="xv.iii.iv.iv-p9"></span>If a bishop has been deposed and
affirms that he has an excuse to urge, unless Rome has judged the case,
no bishop shall be appointed in his room.  For he might treat the decree
with scorn either through his nuncios or by his letters.

<span id="xv.iii.iv.iv-p10"></span>There are two distinct understandings
of this canon.  The one view is that the “neighbours” of this canon are
the same as the “neighbours” of the preceding canon (number iij.) and
that the meaning of this canon therefore is—If the court of second
instance, correlating of the bishops of the neighbouring province, has
pronounced the accused guilty, he still has one more appeal to a third
court, viz., Rome.  This is the view taken by the Greeks, Zonaras and
Balsamon, by the <span id="page_419">p. 419</span> <span
id="xv.iii.iv.iv-Page_419"></span>Ballerini, Van Espen, Palma, Walter,
Natalis Alexander and many others.

<span id="xv.iii.iv.iv-p11"></span>In direct opposition to this is the
view that there is no third but only a second appeal mentioned by the
canon.  The supporters of this interpretation are Peter de Marca,
Tillemont, Dupin, Fleury, Remi Ceillier, Neander, Stolberg, Echhorn,
Kober, and with these Hefele sides and states his reasons for doing so.

<span id="xv.iii.iv.iv-p12"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iii.iv.iv-p12.1"></span>Hefele.</span>

<span id="xv.iii.iv.iv-p13"></span>There must be added to the reasons of
the connexion of this canon with the preceding, the course of events,
etc.:

<span id="xv.iii.iv.iv-p14"></span>1.  That it certainly would be very
curious if in the third canon mention was made of the appeal to Rome as
following the judgment of the court of first instance; in the fourth,
after that of the court of second instance; and again in the fifth,
after the judgment of the court of first instance.

<span id="xv.iii.iv.iv-p15"></span>2.  That if the Synod had really
intended to institute a court of third instance, it would have done so
in clearer and more express terms, and not only have, as it were,
smuggled in the whole point with the secondary question, as to “what was
to be done with the bishop’s see.”

<span id="xv.iii.iv.iv-p16"></span>3.  Farther, that it is quite devoid
of proof that the expression “neighbouring bishops” is identical with
“Bishops in the neighbourhood of the said Province,” that, indeed this
identification is throughout unwarrantable and wrong, and it is far more
natural to understand by the neighbouring bishops, the comprovincials,
therefore the court of first instance.

<span id="xv.iii.iv.iv-p17"></span>4.  That by this interpretation we
obtain clearness, consistency, and harmony in all three canons.

<span id="xv.iii.iv.iv-p18"></span>5.  That the word <span
class="Greek"><span id="xv.iii.iv.iv-p18.1"></span>πάλιν</span> in the
fourth canon presents no difficulty; for even one who has only been
heard in the court of first instance may say he desires again to defend
himself, because he has already made his first defence in the court of
first instance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_389"></span>[418:390](2140498.htm#fr_389) <span
id="xv.iii.iv.iv-p3.3"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.iv.iv-p4"></span> At this point begins the Greek text
as given in Bev.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon V](2140499)
