[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140329)  [Next](2140331) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xi.xviii.xii"></span>

<span id="xi.xviii.xii-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="xi.xviii.xii-p1.1"></span>Canon XII.</span>

<span id="xi.xviii.xii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xi.xviii.xii-p2.1"></span>It</span> has come to our knowledge that
certain persons, contrary to the laws of the Church, having had recourse
to secular powers, have by means of imperial rescripts divided one
Province into two, so that there are consequently two metropolitans in
one province; therefore the holy Synod has decreed that for the future
no such thing shall be at<span id="page_277">p. 277</span> <span
id="xi.xviii.xii-Page_277"></span>tempted by a bishop, since he who
shall undertake it shall be degraded from his rank.  But the cities
which have already been honoured by means of imperial letters with the
name of metropolis, and the bishops in charge of them, shall take the
bare title, all metropolitan rights being preserved to the true
Metropolis.

<span id="xi.xviii.xii-p3"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xi.xviii.xii-p3.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="xi.xviii.xii-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xi.xviii.xii-p4.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon XII.</span>

<span id="xi.xviii.xii-p5"></span>One province shall not be cut into
two.  Whoever shall do this shall be cast out of the episcopate.  Such
cities as are cut off by imperial rescript shall enjoy only the honour
of having a bishop settled in them:  but all the rights pertaining to
the true metropolis shall be preserved.

<span id="xi.xviii.xii-p6"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xi.xviii.xii-p6.1"></span>Bright.</span>

<span id="xi.xviii.xii-p7"></span>We learn from this canon, there were
cases in which an ambitious prelate, “by making application to the
government” (“secular powers”) had obtained what are called “pragmatic
letters,” and employed them for the purpose of “dividing one province
into two,” and exalting himself as a metropolitan.  The name of a
“pragmatic sanction” is more familiar in regard to medieval and modern
history; it recalls the name of St. Louis, and, still more, that of the
Emperor Charles VI. the father of Maria Theresa.  Properly a “pragmatic”
was a deliberate order promulgated by the Emperor after full hearing of
advice, on some public affair.  We find “pragmatici nostri statuta” in a
law of <span class="sc"><span id="xi.xviii.xii-p7.1"></span>a.d.</span>
431.  (Cod. Theod., xi. 1, 36); and “pragmatici prioris,” “sub hac
pragmatica jussione,” in ordinances in Append. to Cod. Theod., pp. 95,
162; and the empress Pulcheria, about a year before the Council, had
informed Leo that her husband Marcian had recalled some exiled orthodox
bishops “robore pragmatici sui” (Leon., *Epist*. lxxvij.).  Justinian
speaks of “pragmaticas nostras formas” and “pragmaticum typum” (Novel.,
7, 9, etc.).  The phrase was adopted from his legislation by Louis the
Pious and his colleague-son Lothar (compare Novel. 7, 2 with Pertz,
*Mon. Germ, Hist. Leg*., i., 254), and hence it came to be used both by
later German emperors (see, *e.g.*, Bryce’s *Holy Roman Empire*, p.
212), and by the French kings (Kitchin, *Hist. France*, i. 343, 544). 
Augustine explains it by “præceptum imperatoris” (*Brev. Collat. cum
Donatist*. iii., 2), and Balsamon in his comment uses an equivalent
phrase; and so in the record of the fourth session of Chalcedon we have
<span class="Greek"><span id="xi.xviii.xii-p7.2"></span>θεῖα
γράμματα</span> (“divine” being practically equivalent to “imperial”)
explained by <span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.xviii.xii-p7.3"></span>πραγματικοὺς τύπους</span> (Mansi, vii.,
89).  We must observe that the imperial order, in the cases contemplated
by the canon, had only conferred the title of “metropolis” on the city,
and had not professed to divide the province for civil, much less for
ecclesiastical, purposes. Valens, indeed, had divided the province of
Cappadocia, when in 371 he made Tyana a metropolis:  and therefore
Anthimus, bishop of Tyana, when he claimed the position of a
metropolitan, with authority over suffragans, was making a not unnatural
inference in regard to ecclesiastical limits from political
rearrangements of territory, as Gregory of Nazianzus says (*Orat.*
xliii., 58), whereas Basil “held to the old custom,” i.e., to the
traditional unity of his provincial church, although after a while he
submitted to what he could not hinder (see Tillemont, ix., 175, 182,
670).  But in the case of Eustathius of Berytus, which was clearly in
the Council’s mind, the Phœnician province had not been divided; it was
in reliance on a mere title bestowed upon his city, and also on an
alleged synodical ordinance which issued in fact from the so-called
“Home Synod” that he declared himself independent of his metropolitan,
Photius of Tyre, and brought six bishoprics under his assumed
jurisdiction.  Thus while the province remained politically one, he had
*de facto* divided it ecclesiastically into two.  Photius petitioned
Marcian, who referred the case to the Council of Chalcedon, and it was
taken up in the fourth session.  The imperial commissioners announced
that it was to be settled not according to “pragmatic forms,” but
according to those which had been enacted by the Fathers (Mansi, vii.,
89).  This encouraged the Council to say, “A pragmatic can have no force
against the canons.”  The commissioners asked whether it was lawful for
bishops, on the ground of a pragmatic, to steal away the rights of other
churches?  The answer was explicit:  “No, it is against the canon.”  The
Council proceeded to cancel the resolution of the Home Synod in favour
of the elevation of Berytus, ordered the 4th Nicene canon to be read,
and upheld the metropolitical rights of Tyre.  The commissioners also
pronounced against Eustathius.  Cecropius, bishop of Sebastopolis,
requested them to put an end to the issue of pragmatics made to the
detriment of the canons; the Council echoed <span id="page_278">p.
278</span> <span id="xi.xviii.xii-Page_278"></span>this request; and the
commissioners granted it by declaring that the canons should everywhere
stand good (Mansi, vii., 89–97).  We may connect with this incident a
law of Marcian dated in 454, by which “all pragmatic sanctions, obtained
by means of favour or ambition in opposition to the canon of the Church,
are declared to be deprived of effect” (Cod. Justin, i., 2, 12).

<span id="xi.xviii.xii-p8"></span>To this decision the present canon
looks back, when it forbids any bishop, on pain of deposition, to
presume to do as Eustathius had done, since it decrees that “he who
attempts to do so shall fall from his own rank (<span
class="Greek"><span id="xi.xviii.xii-p8.1"></span>βαθμοῦ</span>) in the
Church.  And cities which have already obtained the honorary title of a
metropolis from the emperor are to enjoy the honour only, and their
bishops to be but honorary metropolitans, so that all the rights of the
real metropolis are to be reserved to it.”  So, at the end of the 6th
session the emperor had announced that Chalcedon was to be a titular
metropolis, saving all the rights of Nicomedia; and the Council had
expressed its assent (Mansi, xii., 177; *cf*. Le Quien, i., 602). 
Another case was discussed in the 13th session of the Council. 
Anastasius of Nicæa had claimed to be independent of his metropolitan
Eunomius of Nicomedia, on the ground of an ordinance of Valens,
recognising the city of Nicæa as by old custom a “metropolis.” 
Eunomius, who complained of Anastasius’s encroachments, appealed to a
later ordinance, guaranteeing to the capital of Bithynia its rights as
unaffected by the honour conferred on Nicæa:  the Council expressed its
mind in favour of Eunomius, and the dispute was settled by a decision
“that the bishop of Nicomedia should have metropolitical authority over
the Bithynian churches, while the bishop of Nicæa should have merely the
honour of a metropolitan, being subjected, like the other
comprovincials, to the bishop of Nicomedia (Mansi, vii., 313).  Zonaras
says that this canon was in his time no longer observed; and Balsamon
says that when the primates of Heraclea and Ancyra cited it as upholding
their claim to perform the consecration of two “honorary metropolitans,”
they were overruled by a decree of Alexius Comnenus, “in presence and
with consent” of a synod (on Trullan, canon xxxviij.).

<span id="xi.xviii.xii-p9"></span>The first part of this canon is found
in the *Corpus Juris Canonici*, Gratian’s *Decretum*, Pars I., Dist.
ci., canon j.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon XIII](2140331)
