[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140363)  [Next](2140365) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xii.xiii"></span>

<span id="xii.xiii-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="xii.xiii-p1.1"></span>Historical Excursus on the After History of
the Council.</span>

<span id="xii.xiii-p2"></span>Pope Vigilius died on his way home, but
not until, as we have seen, he had accepted and approved the action of
the council in doing exactly that which he “by the authority of the
Apostolic See” in his *Constitutum* had forbidden it to do. <span
id="fr_323"></span>[324](#fn_323)   He died at the end of 554 or the
beginning of 555.

<span id="xii.xiii-p4"></span>Pelagius I., who succeeded him in the See
of Rome, likewise confirmed the Acts of the Fifth Synod.  The council
however was not received in all parts of the West, although it had
obtained the approval of the Pope.  It was bitterly opposed in the whole
of the north of Italy, in England, France, and Spain, and also in Africa
and Asia.  The African opposition died out by 559, but Milan was in
schism until 571, when Pope Justin II. published his “Henoticon.”  In
Istria the matter was still more serious, and when in 607 the bishop of
Aquileia-Grado with those of his suffragans who were subject to the
Empire made their submission and were reconciled to the Church, the
other bishops of his jurisdiction set up a schismatical Patriarchate at
old Aquileia, and this schism continued till the Council of Aquileia in
700.  But before this the II. Council of Constantinople was received all
the world over as the Fifth Ecumenical Council; and was fully recognized
as such by the Sixth Council in 680.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_323"></span>[323:324](2140364.htm#fr_323) <span
id="xii.xiii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xiii-p3"></span> The last sentence of the *Constitutum*,
the sentence which the Pope gave and which the council rejected, is as
follows:  “We ordain and decree that it be permitted to no one who
stands in ecclesiastical order of office, to write or bring forward, or
undertake, or teach anything contrary to the contents of this
*Constitutum* in regard to the Three Chapters, or, after this
declaration begin a new controversy about them.  And if anything has
already been done or spoken in regard of the Three Chapters in
contradiction of this our ordinance by anyone whomsoever, this we
declare void by the authority of the Apostolic See.”  It is perfectly
clear that the Emperor is the “anyone” referred to.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Sixth Ecumenical Council.  The Third Council of
Constantinople.](2140365)
