[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140034)  [Next](2140036) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.vi.xvii"></span>

<span id="vii.vi.xvii-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="vii.vi.xvii-p1.1"></span>Excursus on the Public Discipline or
Exomologesis of the Early Church.</span>

<span id="vii.vi.xvii-p2"></span>(Taken chiefly from Morinus, *De
Disciplina in Administratione Sacramenti Pœnitentiæ*; Bingham,
*Antiquities*; and Hammond, *The Definitions of Faith, etc*.  Note to
Canon XI. of Nice.)

<span id="vii.vi.xvii-p3"></span>“In the Primitive Church there was a
godly discipline, that at the beginning of Lent, such persons as stood
convicted of notorious sin were put to open penance, and punished in
this world that their souls might be saved in the day of the Lord; and
that others, admonished by their example, might be the more afraid to
offend.”

<span id="vii.vi.xvii-p4"></span>The foregoing words from the
Commination Service of the Church of England may serve well to introduce
this subject.  In the history of the public administration of discipline
in the Church, there are three periods sufficiently distinctly marked. 
The first of these ends at the rise of Novatianism in the middle of the
second century; the second stretches down to about the eighth century;
and the third period shews its gradual decline to its practical
abandonment in the eleventh century.  The period with which we are
concerned is the second, when it was in full force.

<span id="vii.vi.xvii-p5"></span>In the first period it would seem that
public penance was required only of those convicted of what then were
called by pre-eminence “mortal sins” (*crimena mortalia* <span
id="fr_74"></span>[75](#fn_74) ), viz:  idolatry, murder, and adultery. 
But in the second period the list of mortal sins was greatly enlarged,
and Morinus says that “Many Fathers who wrote after Augustine’s time,
extended the necessity of public penance to all crimes which the civil
law punished with death, exile, or other grave corporal penalty.” <span
id="fr_75"></span>[76](#fn_75)   In the penitential canons ascribed to
St. Basil and those which pass by the name of St. Gregory Nyssen, this
increase of offences requiring public penance will be found intimated.

<span id="vii.vi.xvii-p8"></span>From the fourth century the penitents
of the Church were divided into four classes.  Three of these are
mentioned in the eleventh canon, the fourth, which is not here referred
to, was composed of those styled <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.vi.xvii-p8.1"></span>συγκλαίοντες</span>, flentes or weepers. 
These were not allowed to enter into the body of the church at all, but
stood or lay outside the gates, sometimes covered with sackcloth and
ashes.  This is the class which is sometimes styled <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.vi.xvii-p8.2"></span>χειμοζομένοι</span>,
hybernantes, on account of their being obliged to endure the inclemency
of the weather.

<span id="vii.vi.xvii-p9"></span>It may help to the better understanding
of this and other canons which notice the different orders of penitents,
to give a brief account of the usual form and arrangement of the ancient
churches as well as of the different orders of the penitents.

<span id="vii.vi.xvii-p10"></span>Before the church there was commonly
either an open area surrounded with porticoes, called <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.vi.xvii-p10.1"></span>μεσάυλιον</span> or
atrium, with a font of water in the centre, styled a cantharus or
phiala, or sometimes only an open portico, or <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.vi.xvii-p10.2"></span>προπύλαιον</span>.  The first variety may
still be seen at S. Ambrogio’s in Milan, and the latter in Rome at S.
Lorenzo’s, and in Ravenna at the two S. Apollinares.  This was the place
at which the first and lowest order of penitents, the weepers, already
referred to, stood exposed to the weather.  Of these, St. Gregory
Thaumaturgus says:  “Weeping takes place outside the door of the church,
where the sinner must stand and beg the prayers of the faithful as they
go in.”

<span id="vii.vi.xvii-p11"></span>The church itself usually consisted of
three divisions within, besides these exterior courts <span
id="page_26">p. 26</span> <span id="vii.vi.xvii-Page_26"></span>and
porch.  The first part after passing through “the great gates,” or doors
of the building, was called the Narthex in Greek, and Færula in Latin,
and was a narrow vestibule extending the whole width of the church.  In
this part, to which Jews and Gentiles, and in most places even heretics
and schismatics were admitted, stood the Catechumens, and the Energumens
or those afflicted with evil spirits, and the second class of penitents
(the first mentioned in the Canon), who were called the <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.vi.xvii-p11.1"></span>ἀκοῶμενοι</span>,
audientes, or hearers.  These were allowed to hear the Scriptures read,
and the Sermon preached, but were obliged to depart before the
celebration of the Divine Mysteries, with the Catechumens, and the
others who went by the general name of hearers only.

<span id="vii.vi.xvii-p12"></span>The second division, or main body of
the church, was called the Naos or Nave.  This was separated from the
Narthex by rails of wood, with gates in the centre, which were called
“the beautiful or royal gates.”  In the middle of the Nave, but rather
toward the lower or entrance part of it, stood the Ambo, or
reading-desk, the place for the readers and singers, to which they went
up by steps, whence the name, Ambo.  Before coming to the Ambo, in the
lowest part of the Nave, and just after passing the royal gates, was the
place for the third order of penitents, called in Greek <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.vi.xvii-p12.1"></span>γονυκλίνοντες</span>,
or <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.vi.xvii-p12.2"></span>ὑποπίπτοντες</span>,and in Latin
Genuflectentes or Prostrati, i.e., kneelers or prostrators, because they
were allowed to remain and join in certain prayers particularly made for
them.  Before going out they prostrated themselves to receive the
imposition of the bishop’s hands with prayer.  This class of penitents
left with the Catechumens.

<span id="vii.vi.xvii-p13"></span>In the other parts of the Nave stood
the believers or faithful, i.e., those persons who were in full
communion with the Church, the men and women generally on opposite
sides, though in some places the men were below, and the women in
galleries above.  Amongst these were the fourth class of penitents, who
were called <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.vi.xvii-p13.1"></span>συνεστῶτες</span>, consistentes, i.e.,
co-standers, because they were allowed to stand with the faithful, and
to remain and hear the prayers of the Church, after the Catechumens and
the other penitents were dismissed, and to be present while the faithful
offered and communicated, though they might not themselves make their
offerings, nor partake of the Holy Communion.  This class of penitents
are frequently mentioned in the canons, as “communicating in prayers,”
or “without the oblation;” and it was the last grade to be passed
through previous to the being admitted again to full communion.  The
practice of “hearing mass” or “non-communicating attendance” clearly had
its origin in this stage of discipline.  At the upper end of the body of
the church, and divided from it by rails which were called Cancelli, was
that part which we now call the Chancel.  This was anciently called by
several names, as Bema or tribunal, from its being raised above the body
of the church, and Sacrarium or Sanctuary.  It was also called Apsis and
Concha Bematis, from its semicircular end.  In this part stood the
Altar, or Holy Table (which names were indifferently used in the
primitive Church), behind which, and against the wall of the chancel,
was the Bishop’s throne, with the seats of the Presbyters on each side
of it, called synthronus.  On one side of the chancel was the repository
for the sacred utensils and vestments, called the Diaconicum, and
answering to our Vestry; and on the other the Prothesis, a side-table,
or place, where the bread and wine were deposited before they were
offered on the Altar.  The gates in the chancel rail were called the
holy gates, and none but the higher orders of the clergy, i.e., Bishops,
Priests, and Deacons, were allowed to enter within them.  The Emperor
indeed was permitted to do so for the purpose of making his offering at
the Altar, but then he was obliged to retire immediately, and to receive
the communion without.

<span id="vii.vi.xvii-p14"></span>(Thomassin.  *Ancienne et Nouvelle
Discipline de l’Eglise*.  Tom. I. Livre II. chap. xvj. somewhat
abridged.)

<span id="vii.vi.xvii-p15"></span><span id="page_27">p. 27</span> <span
id="vii.vi.xvii-Page_27"></span>In the West there existed always many
cases of public penance, but in the East it is more difficult to find
any traces of it, after it was abolished by the Patriarch Nectarius in
the person of the Grand Penitentiary.

<span id="vii.vi.xvii-p16"></span>However, the Emperor Alexis Comnenus,
who took the empire in the year 1080, did a penance like that of older
days, and one which may well pass for miraculous.  He called together a
large number of bishops with the patriarch, and some holy religious; he
presented himself before them in the garb of a criminal; he confessed to
them his crime of usurpation with all its circumstances.  They condemned
the Emperor and all his accomplices to fasting, to lying prostrate upon
the earth, to wearing haircloth, and to all the other ordinary
austerities of penance.  Their wives desired to share their griefs and
their sufferings, although they had had no share in their crime.  The
whole palace became a theatre of sorrow and public penance.  The emperor
wore the hairshirt under the purple, and lay upon the earth for forty
days, having only a stone for a pillow.

<span id="vii.vi.xvii-p17"></span>To all practical purposes Public
Penance was a general institution but for a short while in the Church. 
But the reader must be careful to distinguish between this Public
Penance and the private confession which in the Catholic Church both
East and West is universally practised.  What Nectarius did was to
abolish the office of Penitentiary, whose duty it had been to assign
*public* penance for *secret* sin; <span id="fr_76"></span>[77](#fn_76)
a thing wholly different from what Catholics understand by the
“Sacrament of Penance.”  It would be out of place to do more in this
place than to call the reader’s attention to the bare fact, and to
supply him, from a Roman Catholic point of view, with an explanation of
why Public Penance died out.  “It came to an end because it was of human
institution.  But sacramental confession, being of divine origin, lasted
when the penitential discipline had been changed, and continues to this
day among the Greeks and Oriental sects.” <span
id="fr_77"></span>[78](#fn_77)   That the reader may judge of the
absolute candour of the writer just quoted, I give a few sentences from
the same article:  “An opinion, however, did prevail to some extent in
the middle ages, even among Catholics, that confession to God alone
sufficed.  The Council of Châlons in 813 (canon xxxiij.), says:  ‘Some
assert that we should confess our sins to God alone, but some think that
they should be confessed to the priest, each of which practices is
followed not without great fruit in Holy Church.…Confession made to God
purges sins, but that made to the priest teaches how they are to be
purged.’  This former opinion is also mentioned without reprobation by
Peter Lombard (*In Sentent*. Lib. iv. dist. xvij.).”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_74"></span>[25:75](2140035.htm#fr_74) <span
id="vii.vi.xvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vi.xvii-p6"></span> Cyprian.  *De Bono Patient.*, cap.
xiv.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[25:76](2140035.htm#fr_75) <span
id="vii.vi.xvii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vi.xvii-p7"></span> Morinus, *De Pœnitent*., lib. v., cap.
5.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[27:77](2140035.htm#fr_76) <span
id="vii.vi.xvii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vi.xvii-p18"></span> Vide, Thomassin.  *Lib*. *cit*. Livre
II. Chapitre vii. § xiii. where the whole matter of Nectarius’s action
is discussed.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[27:78](2140035.htm#fr_77) <span
id="vii.vi.xvii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vi.xvii-p19"></span> Addis and Arnold.  *A Catholic
Dictionary; sub voce* Penance, Sacrament of.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon XII](2140036)
