[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140053)  [Next](2140055) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xi"></span>

<span id="vii.xi-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="vii.xi-p1.1"></span>Excursus on the Subsequent History of the Easter
Question.</span>

<span id="vii.xi-p2"></span>(Hefele:  *Hist. of the Councils*, Vol. I.,
pp. 328 *et seqq*.)

<span id="vii.xi-p3"></span>The differences in the way of fixing the
period of Easter did not indeed disappear after the Council of Nicea. 
Alexandria and Rome could not agree, either because one of the two
Churches neglected to make the calculation for Easter, or because the
other considered it inaccurate.  It is a fact, proved by the ancient
Easter table of the Roman Church, that the cycle of eighty-four years
continued to be used at Rome as before.  Now this cycle differed in many
ways from the Alexandrian, and did not always agree with it about the
period for Easter—in fact (a), the Romans used quite another method from
the Alexandrians; they calculated from the epact, and began from the
*feria prima* of January.  (b.) The Romans were mistaken in placing the
full moon a little too soon; whilst the Alexandrians placed it a little
too late.  (c.) At Rome the equinox was supposed to fall on March 18th;
whilst the Alexandrians placed it on March 21st.  (d.) Finally, the
Romans differed in this from the Greeks also; they did not celebrate
Easter the next day when the full moon fell on the Saturday.

<span id="vii.xi-p4"></span>Even the year following the Council of
Nicea—that is, in 326—as well as in the years 330, 333, 340, 341, 343,
the Latins celebrated Easter on a different day from the Alexandrians. 
In order to put an end to this misunderstanding, the Synod of Sardica in
343, as we learn from the newly discovered festival letters of S.
Athanasius, took up again the question of Easter, and brought the two
parties (Alexandrians and Romans) to regulate, by means of mutual
concessions, a common day for Easter for the next fifty years.  This
compromise, after a few years, was not observed.  The troubles excited
by the Arian heresy, and the division which it caused between the East
and the West, prevented the decree of Sardica from being put into
execution; therefore the Emperor Theodosius the Great, after the
re-establishment of peace in the Church, found himself obliged to take
fresh steps for obtaining a complete uniformity in the manner of
celebrating Easter.  In 387, the Romans having kept Easter on March
21st, the Alexandrians did not do so for five weeks later—that is to
say, till April 25th—because with the Alexandrians the equinox was not
till March 21st.  The Emperor Theodosius the Great then asked
Theophilus, Bishop of Alexandria for an explanation of the difference. 
The bishop responded to the Emperor’s desire, and drew up a
chronological table of the Easter festivals, based upon the principles
acknowledged by the Church of Alexandria.  Unfortunately, we now possess
only the prologue of his work.

<span id="vii.xi-p5"></span><span id="page_56">p. 56</span> <span
id="vii.xi-Page_56"></span>Upon an invitation from Rome, S. Ambrose also
mentioned the period of this same Easter in 387, in his letter to the
bishops of Æmilia, and he sides with the Alexandrian computation.  Cyril
of Alexandria abridged the paschal table of his uncle Theophilus, and
fixed the time for the ninety-five following Easters—that is, from 436
to 531 after Christ.  Besides this Cyril showed, in a letter to the
Pope, what was defective in the Latin calculation; and this
demonstration was taken up again, some time after, by order of the
Emperor, by Paschasinus, Bishop of Lilybæum and Proterius of Alexandria,
in a letter written by them to Pope Leo I.  In consequence of these
communications, Pope Leo often gave the preference to the Alexandrian
computation, instead of that of the Church of Rome.  At the same time
also was generally established, the opinion so little entertained by the
ancient authorities of the Church—one might even say, so strongly in
contradiction to their teaching—that Christ partook of the passover on
the 14th Nisan, that he died on the 15th (not on the 14th, as the
ancients considered), that he lay in the grave on the 16th, and rose
again on the 17th.  In the letter we have just mentioned, Proterius of
Alexandria openly admitted all these different points.

<span id="vii.xi-p6"></span>Some years afterwards, in 457, Victor of
Aquitane, by order of the Roman Archdeacon Hilary, endeavoured to make
the Roman and the Alexandrian calculations agree together.  It has been
conjectured that subsequently Hilary, when Pope, brought Victor’s
calculation into use, in 456—that is, at the time when the cycle of
eighty-four years came to an end.  In the latter cycle the new moons
were marked more accurately, and the chief differences existing between
the Latin and Greek calculations disappeared; so that the Easter of the
Latins generally coincided with that of Alexandria, or was only a very
little removed from it.  In cases when the <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xi-p6.1"></span>ιδ'</span> fell on a Saturday, Victor did not
wish to decide whether Easter should be celebrated the next day, as the
Alexandrians did, or should be postponed for a week.  He indicates both
dates in his table, and leaves the Pope to decide what was to be done in
each separate case.  Even after Victor’s calculations, there still
remained great differences in the manner of fixing the celebration of
Easter; and it was Dionysius the Less who first completely overcame
them, by giving to the Latins a paschal table having as its basis the
cycle of nineteen years.  This cycle perfectly corresponded to that of
Alexandria, and thus established that harmony which had been so long
sought in vain.  He showed the advantages of his calculation so
strongly, that it was admitted by Rome and by the whole of Italy; whilst
almost the whole of Gaul remained faithful to Victor’s canon, and Great
Britain still held the cycle of eighty-four years, a little improved by
Sulpicius Severus.  When the Heptarchy was evangelized by the Roman
missionaries, the new converts accepted the calculation of Dionysius,
whilst the ancient Churches of Wales held fast their old tradition. 
From this arose the well-known British dissensions about the celebration
of Easter, which were transplanted by Columban into Gaul.  In 729, the
majority of the ancient British Churches accepted the cycle of nineteen
years.  It had before been introduced into Spain, immediately after the
conversion of Reccared.  Finally, under Charles the Great, the cycle of
nineteen years triumphed over all opposition; and thus the whole of
Christendom was united, for the Quartodecimans had gradually
disappeared. <span id="fr_113"></span>[114](#fn_113)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_113"></span>[56:114](2140054.htm#fr_113) <span
id="vii.xi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xi-p7"></span> It is curious that after all the attempts
that have been made to get this matter settled, the Church is still
separated into East and West—the latter having accepted the Gregorian
Calendar from which the Eastern Church, still using the Julian Calendar,
differs in being twelve days behind.  And even in the West we have
succeeded in breaking the spirit of the Nicene decree, for in 1825 the
Christian Easter coincided with the Jewish Passover!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Canons of the Councils of Ancyra, Gangra, Neocæsarea, Antioch
and Laodicea, which Canons were Accepted and Received by the Ecumenical
Synods.](2140055)
