[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140352)  [Next](2140354) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xii.ii"></span> <span id="page_299">p. 299</span> <span
id="xii.ii-Page_299"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p1"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xii.ii-p1.1"></span>Historical Introduction.</span>

<span id="xii.ii-p2"></span>(Hefele, *History of the Councils*, Vol.
IV., p. 289.)

<span id="xii.ii-p3"></span>In accordance with the imperial command, but
without the assent of the Pope, the synod was opened on the 5th of May
<span class="sc"><span id="xii.ii-p3.1"></span>a.d.</span> 553, in the
Secretarium of the Cathedral Church at Constantinople.  Among those
present were the Patriarchs, Eutychius of Constantinople, who presided,
Apollinaris of Alexandria, Domninus of Antioch, three bishops as
representatives of the Patriarch Eustochius of Jerusalem, and 145 other
metropolitans and bishops, of whom many came also in the place of absent
colleagues.

<span id="xii.ii-p4"></span>(Bossuet, *Def. Cleri Gall*., Lib. vii.,
cap. xix.  Abridged.  Translation by Allies.)

<span id="xii.ii-p5"></span>The three chapters were the point in
question; that is, respecting Theodore of Mopsuestia, Theodoret’s
writings against Cyril, and the letter of Ibas of Edessa to Maris the
Persian.  They examined whether that letter had been approved in the
Council of Chalcedon.  So much was admitted that it had been read there,
and that Ibas, after anathematizing Nestorius, had been received by the
holy Council.  Some contended that his person only was spared; others
that his letter also was approved.  Thus inquiry was made at the fifth
Council how the writings on the Faith were wont to be approved in former
Councils.  The Acts of the third and fourth Council, those which we have
mentioned above respecting the letter of St. Cyril and of St. Leo, were
set forth.  Then the holy Council declared:  “It is plain, from what has
been recited, in what manner the holy Councils are wont to approve what
is brought before them.  For great as was the dignity of those holy men
who wrote the letters recited, yet they did not approve their letters
simply or without inquiry, nor without taking cognizance that they were
in all things agreeable to the exposition and doctrine of the holy
Fathers, with which they were compared.”  But the Acts proved that this
course was not pursued in the case of the letter of Ibas; they inferred,
therefore, most justly, that that letter had not been approved.  So,
then, it is certain from the third and fourth Councils, the fifth so
declaring and understanding it, that letters approved by the Apostolic
See, such as was that of Cyril, or even proceeding from it, as that of
Leo, were received by the holy Councils not simply, nor without
inquiry.  The holy Fathers proceed to do what the Bishops at Chalcedon
would have done, had they undertaken the examination of Ibas’s letter. 
They compare the letter with the Acts of Ephesus and Chalcedon.  Which
done, the holy Council declared—“The comparison made proves, beyond a
doubt, that the letter which Ibas is said to have written is, in all
respects, opposed to the definition of the right Faith, which the
Council of Chalcedon set forth.”  All the Bishops cried out, “We all say
this; the letter is heretical.”  Thus, therefore, is it proved by the
fifth Council, that our holy Fathers in Ecumenical Councils pronounce
the letters read, whether of Catholics or heretics, or even of Roman
Pontiffs, and that on matter of Faith, to be orthodox or heretical,
according to the same procedure, after legitimate cognizance, the truth
being inquired into, and then cleared up; and upon these premises
judgment given.

<span id="xii.ii-p6"></span>What! you will say, with no distinction, and
with minds equally inclined to both parties?  Indeed, we have said, and
shall often repeat, that there was a presumption in favour of the
decrees of orthodox Pontiffs; but in Ecumenical Councils, where judgment
is to be passed in matter of Faith, that they were bound no longer to
act upon presumption, but on the truth clearly and thoroughly
ascertained.

<span id="xii.ii-p7"></span>Such were the Acts of the fifth Council. 
This it learnt from the third and fourth Councils, and approved; and in
this argument we have brought at once in favour of our opinion the
decrees of three Ecumenical Councils, of Ephesus, of Chalcedon, and the
second Con<span id="page_300">p. 300</span> <span
id="xii.ii-Page_300"></span>stantinopolitan.  The Emperor Justinian
desired that the question concerning the above-mentioned Three Chapters
should be considered in the Church.  He therefore sent for Pope Vigilius
to Constantinople.  There he not long after assembled a council.  He and
the Orientals thought it of great moment that these Chapters should be
condemned, against the Nestorians, who were raising their heads to
defend them; Vigilius, with the Occidentals, feared lest this occasion
should be taken to destroy the authority of the Council of Chalcedon: 
because it was admitted that Theodoret and Ibas had been received in
that Council, whilst Theodore, though named, was let go without any mark
of censure.  Though then both parties easily agreed as to the substance
of the Faith, yet the question had entirely respect to the Faith, it
being feared by the one party lest the Nestorian, by the other lest the
Eutychian, enemies of the Council of Chalcedon should prevail.  Vigilius
on the 11th of April, 548, issues his “Judicatum” against the Three
Chapters, saving the authority of the Council of Chalcedon.  Thereupon
the Bishops of Africa, Illyria, and Dalmatia, with two of his own
confidential Deacons, withdraw from his communion.  In the year 550 the
African Bishops, under Reparatus of Carthage, not only reject the
Judicatum, but anathematize Vigilius himself, and sever him from
Catholic Communion, reserving to him a place for repentance.  At length
the Pope publicly withdraws his “Judicatum.”  While the Council is
sitting at Constantinople he publishes his “Constitutum,” in which he
condemns certain propositions of Theodore, but spares his person; the
same respecting Theodoret; but with respect to Ibas, he declares that
his letter was pronounced orthodox by the Council of Chalcedon.  However
this may be, so much is clear, that Vigilius, though invited, declined
being present at the council:  that nevertheless the council was held
without him; that he published a “Constitutum,” in which he disapproved
of what Theodore, Theodoret, and Ibas were said to have written against
the Faith; but decreed that their names should be spared because they
were considered to have been received by the fourth Council, or to have
died in the communion of the Church, and to be reserved to the judgment
of God.  Concerning the letter of Ibas, he published the following,
that, “understood in the best and most pious sense,” it was blameless;
and concerning the three Chapters generally, he ordered that after his
present declaration ecclesiastics should move no further question.

<span id="xii.ii-p8"></span>Such was the decree of Vigilius, issued upon
the authority with which he was invested.  But the council, after his
Constitution, both raised a question about the Three Chapters, and
decided that question was properly raised concerning the dead, and that
the letter of Ibas was manifestly heretical and Nestorian, and contrary
in all things to the Faith of Chalcedon, and that they were altogether
accursed, who defended the impious Theodore of Mopsuestia, or the
writings of Theodoret against Cyril, or the impious letter of Ibas
defending the tenets of Nestorius:  and all such as did not anathematize
it, but said it was correct.

<span id="xii.ii-p9"></span>In these latter words they seemed not even
to spare Vigilius, although they did not mention his name.  And it is
certain their decree was confirmed by Pelagius the Second, Gregory the
Great, and other Roman Pontiffs.  These things prove, that in a matter
of the utmost importance, disturbing the whole Church, and seeming to
belong to the Faith, the decrees of sacred councils prevail over the
decrees of Pontiffs, and that the letter of Ibas, though defended by a
judgment of the Roman Pontiff, could nevertheless be proscribed as
heretical.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Excursus on the Genuineness of the Acts of the Fifth
Council.](2140354)
