[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140731)  [Next](2140733) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvii.xii"></span>

<span id="xvii.xii-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="xvii.xii-p1.1"></span>The Second Canonical Epistle of the
Same.</span>

<span id="xvii.xii-p2"></span>(*This is found translated in the same
volume last referred to*, Epistle cxcix., *p*. 236 *et seqq*.)

<span id="xvii.xii-p3"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xvii.xii-p3.1"></span>Canon XVII.</span>

<span id="xvii.xii-p4"></span>I made a canon, that they at Antioch, who
had sworn not to perform the sacred offices should not do it publicly,
but in private only:  As to Bianor, he is removed from thence to
Iconium, and therefore is more at liberty; but let him repent of his
rash oath which he made to an infidel for avoiding a small danger.

<span id="xvii.xii-p5"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xvii.xii-p5.1"></span>Canon XVIII.</span>

<span id="xvii.xii-p6"></span>That the ancients received a professed
virgin that had married, as one guilty of digamy, viz., upon one year’s
penance; but they ought to be dealt with more severely than widows
professing continency, and even as adulterers:  But they ought not to be
admitted to profess virginity till they are above sixteen or seventeen
years of age, after trial, and at their own earnest request; whereas
relations often offer them that are under age, for their own secular
ends, but such ought not easily to be admitted.

<span id="xvii.xii-p7"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xvii.xii-p7.1"></span>Canon XIX.</span>

<span id="xvii.xii-p8"></span>That men, though they seem tacitly to
promise celibacy, by becoming monks, yet do it not expressly; yet I
think fit that they <span id="page_606">p. 606</span> <span
id="xvii.xii-Page_606"></span>be interrogated too, and that a profession
should be demanded of them, that if they betake themselves to a carnal
life, they may be punished as fornicators.

<span id="xvii.xii-p9"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xvii.xii-p9.1"></span>Canon XX.</span>

<span id="xvii.xii-p10"></span>Women professing virginity, though they
did marry while they were heretics, or catechumens, yet are pardoned by
baptism.  What is done by persons in the state of catechumens, is never
laid to their charge.

<span id="xvii.xii-p11"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xvii.xii-p11.1"></span>Canon XXI.</span>

<span id="xvii.xii-p12"></span>A married man committing lewdness with a
single woman, is severely punished as guilty of fornication, but we have
no canon to treat such a man as an adulterer; but the wife must co-habit
with such a one:  But if the wife be lewd, she is divorced, and he that
retains her is \[thought\] impious; such is the custom, but the reason
of it does not appear.

<span id="xvii.xii-p13"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xvii.xii-p13.1"></span>Canon XXII.</span>

<span id="xvii.xii-p14"></span>That they who have stolen virgins, and
will not restore them, be treated as fornicators; that they be one year
mourners, the second hearers, the third received to repentance and the
fourth be co-standers, and then admitted to communion of the Good
Thing.  If the virgins be restored to those who had espoused them, it is
at their discretion to marry them, or not; if to their guardians, it is
at their discretion to give them in marriage to the raptors, or not.

<span id="xvii.xii-p15"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xvii.xii-p15.1"></span>Canon XXIII.</span>

<span id="xvii.xii-p16"></span>That a man ought not to marry two
sisters, nor a woman two brothers:  That he who marries his brother’s
wife, be not admitted till he dismiss her.

<span id="xvii.xii-p17"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xvii.xii-p17.1"></span>Canon XXIV.</span>

<span id="xvii.xii-p18"></span>A widow put into the catalogue of widows,
that is, a deaconess being sixty years old, and marrying, is not to be
admitted to communion of the Good Thing, till she cease from her
uncleanness; but to a widower that marries no penance is appointed, but
that of digamy.  If the widow be less than sixty, it is the bishop’s
fault who admitted her deaconess, not the woman’s.

<span id="xvii.xii-p19"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xvii.xii-p19.1"></span>Canon XXV.</span>

<span id="xvii.xii-p20"></span>He that marries a woman that he has
corrupted, shall be under penance for corrupting her, but may retain her
for his wife.

<span id="xvii.xii-p21"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xvii.xii-p21.1"></span>Canon XXVI.</span>

<span id="xvii.xii-p22"></span>Fornication is neither marriage, nor the
beginning of marriage.  If it may be, it is better that they who have
committed fornication together be parted; but if they be passionate
lovers, let them not separate, for fear of what is worse.

<span id="xvii.xii-p23"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xvii.xii-p23.1"></span>Canon XXVII.</span>

<span id="xvii.xii-p24"></span>As for the priest that is engaged,
through ignorance, in an unlawful marriage, I have decreed, that he
retain the honour of the chair; but forbear all sacred operations, and
not give the blessing either in private, or public, nor distribute the
Body of Christ to another, nor perform any liturgy; but let him bewail
himself to the Lord, and to men, that his sin of ignorance may be
pardoned.

<span id="xvii.xii-p25"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xvii.xii-p25.1"></span>Canon XXVIII.</span>

<span id="xvii.xii-p26"></span>That it is ridiculous to vow not to eat
swine’s flesh, and to abstain from it is not necessary.

<span id="xvii.xii-p27"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xvii.xii-p27.1"></span>Canon XXIX.</span>

<span id="xvii.xii-p28"></span>That princes ought not to swear to wrong
their subjects:  that such rash oaths ought to be repented of, and evil
not to be justified under pretence of religion.

<span id="xvii.xii-p29"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xvii.xii-p29.1"></span>Canon XXX.</span>

<span id="xvii.xii-p30"></span>That they who steal women, and their
accomplices, be not admitted to prayers, or be co-standers for three
years.  Where no violence is used, there no crime is committed, except
there be lewdness in the case.  A widow is at her own discretion.  We
must not mind vain pretences.

<span id="xvii.xii-p31"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xvii.xii-p31.1"></span>Canon XXXI.</span>

<span id="xvii.xii-p32"></span>She, whose husband is absent from home,
if she co-habits with another man, before she is persuaded of his death,
commits adultery.

<span id="xvii.xii-p33"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xvii.xii-p33.1"></span>Canon XXXII.</span>

<span id="xvii.xii-p34"></span>The clergyman who is deposed for mortal
sin, shall not be excommunicated.

<span id="xvii.xii-p35"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xvii.xii-p35.1"></span>Canon XXXIII.</span>

<span id="xvii.xii-p36"></span>That a woman being delivered of a child
in a journey, and taking no care of it, shall be reputed guilty of
murder.

<span id="xvii.xii-p37"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xvii.xii-p37.1"></span>Canon XXXIV.</span>

<span id="xvii.xii-p38"></span>That the crime of women under penance for
adultery, upon their own confession, or <span id="page_607">p.
607</span> <span id="xvii.xii-Page_607"></span>otherwise convicted, be
not published, lest it occasion their death; but that they remain out of
communion the appointed time.

<span id="xvii.xii-p39"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xvii.xii-p39.1"></span>Canon XXXV.</span>

<span id="xvii.xii-p40"></span>If a woman leave her husband, and if it
do upon inquiry appear, that she did it without reason, she deserves to
be punished; but let him continue in communion.

<span id="xvii.xii-p41"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xvii.xii-p41.1"></span>Canon XXXVI.</span>

<span id="xvii.xii-p42"></span>A soldier’s wife marrying after the long
absence of her husband, but before she is certified of his death, is
more pardonable than another woman, because it is more credible that he
may be dead.

<span id="xvii.xii-p43"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xvii.xii-p43.1"></span>Canon XXXVII.</span>

<span id="xvii.xii-p44"></span>That he, who having another man’s wife or
spouse taken away from him, marries another, is guilty of adultery with
the first, not with the second.

<span id="xvii.xii-p45"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xvii.xii-p45.1"></span>Canon XXXVIII.</span>

<span id="xvii.xii-p46"></span>If a woman run after him that has
corrupted her, she shall be under penance three years, though the
parents be reconciled to her.

<span id="xvii.xii-p47"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xvii.xii-p47.1"></span>Canon XXXIX.</span>

<span id="xvii.xii-p48"></span>She, who continues to live with an
adulterer, is all that time an adulteress.

<span id="xvii.xii-p49"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xvii.xii-p49.1"></span>Canon XL.</span>

<span id="xvii.xii-p50"></span>She that \[being a slave\] gives herself
up to the will of a man, without the consent of her master, commits
fornication; for pacts of those who are under the power of others are
null.

<span id="xvii.xii-p51"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xvii.xii-p51.1"></span>Canon XLI.</span>

<span id="xvii.xii-p52"></span>A widow being at her own discretion, may
marry to whom she will.

<span id="xvii.xii-p53"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xvii.xii-p53.1"></span>Canon XLII.</span>

<span id="xvii.xii-p54"></span>Slaves marrying without the consent of
their masters, or children without consent of their fathers, it is not
matrimony but fornication, till they ratify it by consenting.

<span id="xvii.xii-p55"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xvii.xii-p55.1"></span>Canon XLIII.</span>

<span id="xvii.xii-p56"></span>That he who gives a mortal wound to
another is a murderer, whether he were the first aggressor, or did it in
his own defence.

<span id="xvii.xii-p57"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xvii.xii-p57.1"></span>Canon XLIV.</span>

<span id="xvii.xii-p58"></span>The deaconess that has committed lewdness
with a pagan is not to be received to communion, but shall be admitted
to the oblation, in the seventh year—that is, if she live in chastity. 
The pagan, who after \[he has professed\] the faith, betakes himself
again to sacrilege, returns \[like the dog\] to his vomit:  we therefore
do not permit the sacred body of a deaconess to be carnally used.

<span id="xvii.xii-p59"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xvii.xii-p59.1"></span>Canon XLV.</span>

<span id="xvii.xii-p60"></span>He that assumes the name of a Christian,
but reproaches Christ, shall have no advantage from his name.

<span id="xvii.xii-p61"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xvii.xii-p61.1"></span>Canon XLVI.</span>

<span id="xvii.xii-p62"></span>She that marries a man who was deserted
for a while by his wife, but is afterward dismissed upon the return of
the man’s former wife, commits fornication, but ignorantly:  she shall
not be prohibited marriage, but it is better that she do not marry.

<span id="xvii.xii-p63"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xvii.xii-p63.1"></span>Canon XLVII.</span>

<span id="xvii.xii-p64"></span>Encratites, Saccophorians, and
Apotactites, are in the same case with the Novatians.  We re-baptize
them all.  There is a diversity in the canons relating to the Novatians,
no canon concerning the other.  If it be forbid with you, as it is at
Rome for prudential causes, yet let reason prevail.  They are a branch
of the Marcionists; and though they baptize in the name of the three
divine Persons, yet they make God the author of evil, and assert, that
wine and the creatures of God, are defiled.  The bishops ought to meet,
and so to explain the canon, that he who does \[baptize such heretics\]
may be out of danger, and that one may have a positive answer to give to
those that ask it.

<span id="xvii.xii-p65"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xvii.xii-p65.1"></span>Canon XLVIII.</span>

<span id="xvii.xii-p66"></span>A woman dismissed from her husband, ought
to remain unmarried, in my judgment.

<span id="xvii.xii-p67"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xvii.xii-p67.1"></span>Canon XLIX.</span>

<span id="xvii.xii-p68"></span>If a slave be forced by her master, she
is innocent.

<span id="xvii.xii-p69"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xvii.xii-p69.1"></span>Canon L.</span>

<span id="xvii.xii-p70"></span>We look on third marriages as disgraceful
to the Church, but do not absolutely condemn them, as being better than
a vague fornication.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Third Epistle of the Same to the Same.](2140733)
