[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140291)  [Next](2140293) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="x.xvi.x"></span>

<span id="x.xvi.x-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="x.xvi.x-p1.1"></span>Canon VII.</span>

<span id="x.xvi.x-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="x.xvi.x-p2.1"></span>When</span> these things had been read, the
holy Synod decreed that it is unlawful for any man to bring forward, or
to write, or to compose a different (<span class="Greek"><span
id="x.xvi.x-p2.2"></span>ἑτέραν</span>) Faith as a rival to that
established by the holy Fathers assembled with the Holy Ghost in Nicæa.

<span id="x.xvi.x-p3"></span>But those who shall dare to compose a
different faith, or to introduce or offer it to persons desiring to turn
to the acknowledgment of the truth, whether from Heathenism or from
Judaism, or from any heresy whatsoever, shall be deposed, if they be
bishops or clergymen; bishops from the episcopate and clergymen from the
clergy; and if they be laymen, they shall be anathematized.

<span id="x.xvi.x-p4"></span>And in like manner, if any, whether
bishops, clergymen, or laymen, should be discovered to hold or teach the
doctrines contained in the Exposition introduced by the Presbyter
Charisius concerning the Incarnation of the Only-Begotten Son of God, or
the abominable and profane doctrines of Nestorius, which are subjoined,
they shall be subjected to the sentence of this holy and ecumenical
Synod.  So that, if it be a bishop, he shall be removed from his
bishopric and degraded; if it be a clergyman, he shall likewise be
stricken from the clergy; and if it be a layman, he shall be
anathematized, as has been afore said.

<span id="x.xvi.x-p5"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="x.xvi.x-p5.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="x.xvi.x-p6"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="x.xvi.x-p6.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon VII.</span>

<span id="x.xvi.x-p7"></span>Any bishop who sets forth a faith other
than that of Nice shall be an alien from the Church:  if a layman do so
let him be cast out.

<span id="x.xvi.x-p8"></span>The heading is that found in the ordinary
Greek texts.  The canon itself is found *verbatim* in the Acts—Actio VI.
(Labbe and Cossart, *Concilia*, Tom. III., col. 689.)

<span id="x.xvi.x-p9"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="x.xvi.x-p9.1"></span>Beveridge.</span>

<span id="x.xvi.x-p10"></span>“When these things had been read.” 
Balsamon here makes an egregious mistake, for it was not after the
reading of the decree of this council and of the Nicene Creed, that this
canon was set forth, as Balsamon affirms; but after the reading of the
*libellum* of Charisius, and of the Nestorian Creed, as is abundantly
evident from what we read in the Acts of the <span id="page_232">p.
232</span> <span id="x.xvi.x-Page_232"></span>council.  From this it is
clear that Balsamon had never seen the Acts of this council, or at least
had never carefully studied them, else he could not have written such a
comment.

<span id="x.xvi.x-p11"></span>\[With regard to Charisius, Balsamon\]
makes another mistake.  For not only did this presbyter not follow the
evil opinions of Nestorius, but as a matter of fact exhibited to the
synod his *libellum* written against Nestorius; in which so far from
asserting that Nestorius was orthodox, he distinctly calls him <span
class="Greek"><span id="x.xvi.x-p11.1"></span>κακόδοξος</span>.

<span id="x.xvi.x-p12"></span>Photius has included this canon in his
Nomocanons, Title I., cap. j.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Excursus on the Words πίστιν ἑπέραν.](2140293)
