[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140420)  [Next](2140422) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiv.iii.xxxviii"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii.xxxviii-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="xiv.iii.xxxviii-p1.1"></span>Canon XXXVII.</span>

<span id="xiv.iii.xxxviii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xiv.iii.xxxviii-p2.1"></span>Since</span> at different times there
have been invasions of barbarians, and therefore very many cities have
been subjected to the infidels, so that the bishop of a city may not be
able, after he has been ordained, to take possession of his see, and to
be settled in it in sacerdotal order, and so to perform and manage for
it the ordinations and all things which by custom appertain to the
bishop:  we, preserving honour and veneration for the priesthood, and in
no wise wishing to employ the Gentile injury to the ruin of
ecclesiastical rights, have decreed that those who have been ordained
thus, and on account of the aforesaid cause have not been settled in
their sees, without any prejudice from this thing may be kept \[in good
standing\] and that they may canonically perform the ordination of the
different clerics and use the authority of their office according to the
defined limits, and that whatever administration proceeds from them may
be valid and legitimate.  For the exercise of his office shall not be
circumscribed by a season of necessity when the exact observance of law
is circumscribed.

<span id="xiv.iii.xxxviii-p3"></span><span id="page_383">p. 383</span>
<span id="xiv.iii.xxxviii-Page_383"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xiv.iii.xxxviii-p3.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="xiv.iii.xxxviii-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xiv.iii.xxxviii-p4.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon XXXVII.</span>

<span id="xiv.iii.xxxviii-p5"></span>A bishop who, on account of the
incursions of the barbarians, is not set in his throne, shall have his
own chair of state, and shall ordain, and shall enjoy most firmly all
the rights of the priesthood.

<span id="xiv.iii.xxxviii-p6"></span>By Canon XVIII. of Antioch the
principle of this canon was enunciated, that when a bishop did not take
possession of his see because he could not do so, he was not to be held
responsible or to lose any of his episcopal rights and powers, in that
case the impossibility arose from the insubordination of the people, in
this from the diocese being in the hands of the barbarians.

<span id="xiv.iii.xxxviii-p7"></span>It has been commonly thought that
the Bishops *in partibus infidelium* had their origin in the state of
things calling for this canon.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon XXXVIII](2140422)
