[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140384)  [Next](2140386) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiv.iii.ii"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="xiv.iii.ii-p1.1"></span>Canon II.</span>

<span id="xiv.iii.ii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xiv.iii.ii-p2.1"></span>It</span> has also seemed good to this holy
Council, that the eighty-five canons, received and ratified by the holy
and blessed Fathers before us, and also handed down to us in the name of
the holy and glorious Apostles should from this time forth remain firm
and unshaken for the cure of souls and the healing of disorders.  And in
these canons we are bidden to receive the Constitutions of the Holy
Apostles \[written\] by Clement.  But formerly through the agency of
those who erred from the faith certain adulterous matter was introduced,
clean contrary to piety, for the polluting of the Church, which obscures
the elegance and beauty of the divine decrees in their present form.  We
therefore reject these Constitutions so as the better to make sure of
the edification and security of the most Christian flock; by no means
admitting the offspring of heretical error, and cleaving to the pure and
perfect doctrine of the Apostles.  But we set our seal likewise upon all
the other holy canons set forth by our holy and blessed Fathers, that
is, by the 318 holy God-bearing Fathers assembled at Nice, and those at
Ancyra, further those at Neocæsarea and likewise those at Gangra, and
besides, those at Antioch in Syria:  those too at Laodicea in Phrygia: 
and likewise the 150 who assembled in this heaven-protected royal city: 
and the 200 who assembled the first time in the metropolis of the
Ephesians, and the 630 holy and blessed Fathers at Chalcedon.  In like
manner those of Sardica, and those of Carthage:  those also who again
assembled in this heaven-protected royal city under its bishop Nectarius
and Theophilus Archbishop of Alexandria.  Likewise too the Canons \[i.e.
the decretal letters\] of Dionysius, formerly Archbishop of the great
city of Alexandria; and of Peter, Archbishop of Alexandria and Martyr;
of Gregory the Wonder-worker, Bishop of Neocæsarea; of Athanasius,
Archbishop of Alexandria; of Basil, Archbishop of Cæsarea in Cappadocia;
of Gregory, Bishop of Nyssa; of Gregory Theologus; of Amphilochius of
Iconium; of Timothy, Archbishop of Alexandria; of Theophilus, Archbishop
of the same great city of Alexandria; of Cyril, Archbishop of the same
Alexandria; of Gennadius, Patriarch of this heaven-protected royal
city.  Moreover the Canon set forth by Cyprian, Archbishop of the
country of the Africans and Martyr, and by the Synod under him, which
has been kept only in the country of the aforesaid Bishops, according to
the custom delivered down to them.  And that no one be allowed to
transgress or disregard the aforesaid canons, or to receive others
beside them, supposititiously set forth by certain who have attempted to
make a traffic of the truth.  But should any one be convicted of
innovating upon, or attempting to overturn, any of the afore-mentioned
canons, he shall be subject to receive the penalty which that canon
imposes, and to be cured by it of his transgression.

<span id="xiv.iii.ii-p3"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xiv.iii.ii-p3.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="xiv.iii.ii-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xiv.iii.ii-p4.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon II.</span>

<span id="xiv.iii.ii-p5"></span>Whatever additions have been made
through guile by the heterodox in the Apostolic Constitutions edited by
Clement, shall be cut out.

<span id="xiv.iii.ii-p6"></span>This canon defines what canons are to be
understood as having received the sanction of ecumenical authority, and
since these canons of the Council in Trullo were received at the Seventh
Ecumenical Council in its first canon as the canons of the Sixth
Ecumenical (of which the Quinisext claimed to be a legitimate
continuation) there can be no doubt that all these canons enumerated in
this canon are set forth for the guidance of the Church.

<span id="xiv.iii.ii-p7"></span>With regard to what councils are
intended:  there is difficulty only in two particulars, viz., the
“Council of Constantinople under Necta<span id="page_362">p. 362</span>
<span id="xiv.iii.ii-Page_362"></span>rius and Theophilus,” <span
id="fr_343"></span>[344](#fn_343) and the “Council under Cyprian;” the
former must be the Council of 394, and the latter is usually considered
to be the III. Synod of Carthage, <span class="sc"><span
id="xiv.iii.ii-p8.1"></span>a.d.</span> 257.

<span id="xiv.iii.ii-p9"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xiv.iii.ii-p9.1"></span>Fleury.</span>

<span id="xiv.iii.ii-p10"></span>(*H. E*. Liv. xl., chap. xlix.)

<span id="xiv.iii.ii-p11"></span>The Council of Constantinople under
Nectarius and Theophilus of Alexandria must be that held in 394, at the
dedication of Ruffinus’s Church; but we have not its canons.…“The canon
published by St. Cyprian for the African Church alone.”  It is difficult
to understand what canon is referred to unless it is the preface to the
council of St. Cyprian where he says that no one should pretend to be
bishop of bishops, or to oblige his colleagues to obey him by tyrannical
fear.

<span id="xiv.iii.ii-p12"></span>It will be noticed that while the canon
is most careful to mention the exact number of Apostolic canons it
received, thus deciding in favour of the larger code, it is equally
careful not to assign them an Apostolic origin, but merely to say that
they had come down to them “in the name of” the Apostles.  In the face
of this it is strange to find Balsamon saying, “Through this canon their
mouth is stopped who say that 85 canons were not set forth by the holy
Apostles;” what the council did settle, so far as its authority went,
was the number not the authorship of the canons.  This, I think, is all
that Balsamon intended to assert, but his words might easily be quoted
as having a different meaning.

<span id="xiv.iii.ii-p13"></span>This canon is found, in part, in the
*Corpus Juris Canonici*, Gratian’s *Decretum*, Pars I., Dist. XVI, c.
VII.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_343"></span>[362:344](2140385.htm#fr_343) <span
id="xiv.iii.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii.ii-p8"></span> The Ultramontane Roisselet de
Sauclières, in his *Histoire chronologique et dogmatique des Conciles de
la Chrétieté*, Tome III., p. 131, curiously divides this into two
councils.  This blunder is also made by Ivo, cf. Gratian’s *Dec*., P.
I., Dist. xvi., c. vii., note by correctors.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon III](2140386)
