[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140413)  [Next](2140415) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiv.iii.xxxi"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii.xxxi-p1"></span> <span id="page_379">p. 379</span>
<span id="xiv.iii.xxxi-Page_379"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xiv.iii.xxxi-p1.1"></span>Canon XXX.</span>

<span id="xiv.iii.xxxi-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xiv.iii.xxxi-p2.1"></span>Willing</span> to do all things for the
edification of the Church, we have determined to take care even of
priests who are in barbarian churches.  Wherefore if they think that
they ought to exceed the Apostolic Canon concerning the not putting away
of a wife on the pretext of piety and religion, and to do beyond that
which is commanded, and therefore abstain by agreement with their wives
from cohabitation, we decree they ought no longer to live with them in
any way, so that hereby they may afford us a perfect demonstration of
their promise.  But we have conceded this to them on no other ground
than their narrowness, and foreign and unsettled manners.

<span id="xiv.iii.xxxi-p3"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xiv.iii.xxxi-p3.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="xiv.iii.xxxi-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xiv.iii.xxxi-p4.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon XXX.</span>

<span id="xiv.iii.xxxi-p5"></span>Those priests who are in churches
among the barbarians, if with consent they have abstained from commerce
with their wives shall never afterwards have any commerce with them in
any way.

<span id="xiv.iii.xxxi-p6"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xiv.iii.xxxi-p6.1"></span>Fleury.</span>

<span id="xiv.iii.xxxi-p7"></span>(*Hist. Eccl*., Liv. XL., chap. l.)

<span id="xiv.iii.xxxi-p8"></span>“Priests who are among the
barbarians,” that is to say, it would seem, in Italy and in the other
countries of the Latin rite.  “Their narrowness and foreign and
unsettled manners,” that is to say that according to them it is an
imperfection to aspire after perfect continence.

<span id="xiv.iii.xxxi-p9"></span>I do not think that this explanation
of Fleury’s can be sustained, and it would seem that Van Espen is more
near the truth when he says:  “Some priests in barbarous countries
thought they should abstain after the Latin custom even from wives taken
before ordination.  And although this was contrary to the discipline of
the Greeks, and also to Canon V. of the Apostles, nevertheless the
Fathers thought it might be tolerated, provided such priests should also
not live any longer with their wives.”  There seems no reason to
introduce anti-Roman bitterness where it is not already found.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon XXXI](2140415)
