[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140435)  [Next](2140437) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiv.iii.liii"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii.liii-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="xiv.iii.liii-p1.1"></span>Canon LII.</span>

<span id="xiv.iii.liii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xiv.iii.liii-p2.1"></span>On</span> all days of the holy fast of
Lent, except on the Sabbath, the Lord’s day and the holy day of the
Annunciation, the Liturgy of the Presanctified is to be said.

<span id="xiv.iii.liii-p3"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xiv.iii.liii-p3.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="xiv.iii.liii-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xiv.iii.liii-p4.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon LII.</span>

<span id="xiv.iii.liii-p5"></span>Throughout the whole of Lent except
upon the Lord’s day, the Sabbath, and upon the day of the Annunciation,
the presanctified gifts shall be offered.

<span id="xiv.iii.liii-p6"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xiv.iii.liii-p6.1"></span>Balsamon.</span>

<span id="xiv.iii.liii-p7"></span>We do not call the service of the
Presanctified the unbloody sacrifice, but the offering of the previously
offered, and of the perfected sacrifice, and of the completed priestly
act.

<span id="xiv.iii.liii-p8"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xiv.iii.liii-p8.1"></span>Van Espen.</span>

<span id="xiv.iii.liii-p9"></span>The Greeks therefore confess that the
bread once offered and consecrated, is not to be consecrated anew on
another day; but a new offering is made of what was before consecrated
and presanctified:  just as in the Latin Church the consecrated or
presanctified bread of Maundy Thursday is offered on Good Friday.

<span id="xiv.iii.liii-p10"></span>The Patriarch Michael of
Constantinople is quoted by Leo Allatius as saying that “none of the
mystic consecratory prayers are said over the presanctified gifts, but
the priest only recites the prayer that he may be a worthy communicant.”

<span id="xiv.iii.liii-p11"></span>Some among the later Greeks have been
of opinion that the unconsecrated wine was consecrated by the commixture
with the consecrated bread, and (without any words of consecration) was
transmuted into the sacred blood, <span
id="fr_373"></span>[374](#fn_373) and with this seems to agree the
already quoted Michael, Patriarch of Constantinople, who is cited by Leo
Allatius in his treatise on the rite of the presanctified.  “The
presanctified is put into the mystic chalice, and so the wine which was
then in it, is changed into the holy blood of the Lord.”  And with this
agrees Simeon, Archbishop of Thessalonica, in his answer to Gabriel of
Pentapolis, when he writes:  “In the mass of the Presanctified no
consecration of what is in the chalice is made by the invocation of the
Holy Spirit and of his sign, but by the participation and union of the
life-giving bread, which is truly the body of Christ.”

<span id="xiv.iii.liii-p13"></span>From this opinion, which was held by
some of the Greeks, it gradually became the practice at Constantinople
not to dip the bread in the Sacred Blood, as Michael the patriarch of
this very church testifies.  But in the ordinary Euchologion of the
Greeks it is expressly set forth that the presanctified bread before it
is reserved, should be dipped in the sacred blood, and for this a rite
is provided.

<span id="xiv.iii.liii-p14"></span>Leo Allatius’s *Dissertatio de Missa
Præsanctificatorum* should be read; an outline of the service as found
in the *Euchologion*, and as reprinted by Renaudotius is as follows.

<span id="xiv.iii.liii-p15"></span>First of all vespers is said.  After
some lessons and prayers, including the “Great Ectenia” and that for the
Catechumens, these are dismissed.

<span id="xiv.iii.liii-p16"></span>After the Catechumens have departed
there follows the Ectenia of the Faithful.  After which, “Now the
heavenly Powers invisibly minister with us; for, behold, the King of
Glory is borne in.  Behold the mystic sacrifice having been perfected is
borne aloft by angels.

<span id="xiv.iii.liii-p17"></span>“Let us draw near with faith and
love, that we may become partakers of life eternal.  Alleluia, Alleluia,
Alleluia.

<span id="xiv.iii.liii-p18"></span>“*Deacon*.  Let us accomplish our
evening prayer to the Lord.

<span id="xiv.iii.liii-p19"></span>“For the precious and presanctified
gifts that are offered, let us pray to the Lord.  “That our man-loving
God, etc.” as in the <span id="page_390">p. 390</span> <span
id="xiv.iii.liii-Page_390"></span>ordinary liturgy past the Lord’s
prayer, and down to the *Sancta Sanctis*, which reads as follows:

<span id="xiv.iii.liii-p20"></span>*Priest*.  Holy things presanctified
for holy persons.

<span id="xiv.iii.liii-p21"></span>*Choir*.  One holy, one Lord Jesus
Christ, to the Glory of God the Father—Amen.

<span id="xiv.iii.liii-p22"></span>Then the Communion Hymn and the
Communion, and the rest as in the ordinary liturgy, except “this whole
evening,” is said for “this whole day,” and another prayer is provided
in the room of that beginning “Lord, who blessest them, etc.” <span
id="fr_374"></span>[375](#fn_374)

<span id="xiv.iii.liii-p24"></span>It is curious to note that on Good
Friday, the only day on which the Mass of the Presanctified is
celebrated in the West, its use has died out in the East, and now it is
used “on the Wednesdays and Fridays of the first six weeks of the Great
Quadragesima, on the Thursday of the fifth week, and on the Monday,
Tuesday, and Wednesday of Holy Passion Week.  It may also be said,
excepting on Saturdays and Sundays, and on the Festival of the
Annunciation, on other days during the Fast, to wit, on those of
festivals and their Vigils, and on the Commemoration of the Dedication
of the Church.”

<span id="xiv.iii.liii-p25"></span>Symeon, who was bishop of
Thessalonica, and flourished in the early part of the <span
class="sc"><span id="xiv.iii.liii-p25.1"></span>XV</span>th Century,
complains of the general neglect of the Mass of the Presanctified on
Good Friday in his time, and says that his church was the only one in
the Exarchate that then retained it.  He ascribes the disuse to the
example of the Church of Jerusalem.  See the matter treated at length in
his *Quæstiones*, lv.–lix. Migne’s *Pat. Græc*.

<span id="xiv.iii.liii-p26"></span>*Cf*. J. M. Neale *Essays on
Liturgiology*, p. 109.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_373"></span>[389:374](2140436.htm#fr_373) <span
id="xiv.iii.liii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii.liii-p12"></span> Gerbert makes it quite evident that
from about 850 until 1200, that is from Amalarius until Durand, the same
view was held in the West.  *Vide* Gerbertus.  *Vetus Liturgia
Allomanica,* p. 855 *et. seqq*.

<span id="fn_374"></span>[390:375](2140436.htm#fr_374) <span
id="xiv.iii.liii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii.liii-p23"></span> The English reader is referred to G.
V. Shann, *Euchology*, and *The Book of Needs,* for excellent
translations of the Greek offices; J. M. Neale’s *Introduction to the
History of the Holy Orthodox Eastern Church* will, of course, be
consulted.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon LIII](2140437)
