[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140156)  [Next](2140158) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xx"></span>

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xx-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="viii.vi.iv.xx-p1.1"></span>Canon XX.</span>

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xx-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.vi.iv.xx-p2.1"></span>With</span> a view to the good of the
Church and the settlement of disputes, it is decreed to be well that
synods of the bishops, (of which the metropolitan shall give notice to
the provincials), should be held in every province twice a year, one
after the third week of the feast of Easter, so that the synod may be
ended in the fourth week of the Pentecost; and the second on the ides of
October which is the tenth \[or fifteenth\] day of the month
Hyperberetæus; so that presbyters and deacons, and all who think
themselves unjustly dealt with, may resort to these synods and obtain
the judgment of the synod.  But it shall be unlawful for any to hold
synods by themselves without those who are entrusted with the
Metropolitan Sees.

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xx-p3"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="viii.vi.iv.xx-p3.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xx-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.vi.iv.xx-p4.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon XX.</span>

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xx-p5"></span>On account of ecclesiastical
necessities the synod in every province shall meet twice a year, in the
fourth week of Pentecost and on the tenth day of Hyperberetæus.

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xx-p6"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.vi.iv.xx-p6.1"></span>Schelestratius (</span>*cit*<span
class="sc"><span id="viii.vi.iv.xx-p6.2"></span>. Van Espen).</span>

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xx-p7"></span>The time fixed by the Council of Nice
before Lent for the meeting of the synod was not received in the East,
and the bishops kept on in the old custom of celebrating the council in
the fourth week after Easter, for the time before Lent often presented
the greatest difficulties for those in the far separated cities to come
to the provincial metropolis.

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xx-p8"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.vi.iv.xx-p8.1"></span>Van Espen.</span>

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xx-p9"></span>In this canon the decree of Nice in
canon v. is renewed, but with this difference that the Nicene synod
orders one synod to be held before Lent, but this synod that it should
be held the fourth week after Easter.

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xx-p10"></span>It will be remembered that the whole
period of the great fifty days from Easter to Whitsunday was known as
“Pentecost.”

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xx-p11"></span>Compare with this Apostolic Canon
number XXXVII.

<span id="viii.vi.iv.xx-p12"></span>This canon is found in the *Corpus
Juris Canonici*, Gratian’s *Decretum*, Pars I., Dist. XVIII., c. xv.,
attributed to a council held by Pope Martin.  The Roman Correctors point
out that this “Pope Martin” was a bishop of Braga (*Bracarensis*) from
whose collection of the decrees of the Greek synods Gratian often
quotes; the Correctors also note, “For bishops in old times were usually
called Popes” (*Antiquitus enim episcopi Papæ dicebantur*).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon XXI](2140158)
