[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140266)  [Next](2140268) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="x.ix.vi"></span>

<span id="x.ix.vi-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="x.ix.vi-p1.1"></span>V.</span>

<span id="x.ix.vi-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="x.ix.vi-p2.1"></span>If</span> anyone shall dare to say that the
Christ is a Theophorus \[that is, God-bearing\] man and not rather that
he is very God, as an only Son through nature, because “the Word was
made flesh,” and “hath a share in flesh and blood as we do:”  let him be
anathema.

<span id="x.ix.vi-p3"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="x.ix.vi-p3.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="x.ix.vi-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="x.ix.vi-p4.1"></span>Nestorius.</span>

<span id="x.ix.vi-p5"></span>V.

<span id="x.ix.vi-p6"></span>If any one ventures to say that, even after
the assumption of human nature, there is only one Son of God, namely, he
who is so in nature (*naturaliter filius* = Logos), while he (since the
assumption of the flesh) is certainly Emmanuel; let him be anathema.

<span id="x.ix.vi-p7"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="x.ix.vi-p7.1"></span>Petavius.</span>

<span id="x.ix.vi-p8"></span>It is manifest that this anathematism is
directed against the blasphemy of Nestorius, by which he said that
Christ was in this sense Emmanuel, that a man was united and associated
with God, just as God had been said to have been with the Prophets and
other holy men, and to have had his abode in them; <span
id="page_213">p. 213</span> <span id="x.ix.vi-Page_213"></span>so that
they were properly styled <span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ix.vi-p8.1"></span>Θεοφόροι</span>, because, as it were, they
carried God about with them; but there was no one made of the two.  But
he held that our Lord as man was bound and united with God only by a
communion of dignity.

<span id="x.ix.vi-p9"></span>Nestorius \[in his Counter Anathematism\]
displays the hidden meaning of his heresy, when he says, that the Son of
God is not one after the assumption of the humanity; for he who denied
that he was one, no doubt thought that he was two.

<span id="x.ix.vi-p10"></span>Theodoret in his criticism of this
Anathematism remarks that many of the Ancients, including St. Basil had
used this very word, <span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ix.vi-p10.1"></span>Θεοφόρος</span>, for the Lord; but the
objection has no real foundation, for the orthodoxy or heterodoxy of
such a word must be determined by the context in which it is used, and
also by the known opinions of him that uses it.  Expressions which are
in a loose sense orthodox and quite excusable before a heresy arises,
may become afterwards the very distinctive marks and shibboleths of
error.  Petavius has pointed out how far from orthodox many of the
earliest Christian writers were, at least verbally, and Bp. Bull
defended them by the same line of argument I have just used and which
Petavius himself employs in this very connection.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Anathematism VI](2140268)
