[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140502)  [Next](2140504) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iii.iv.ix"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.iv.ix-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="xv.iii.iv.ix-p1.1"></span>Canon IX.</span>

<span id="xv.iii.iv.ix-p2"></span>(*Greek*.)

<span id="xv.iii.iv.ix-p3"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iii.iv.ix-p3.1"></span>Bishop</span> <span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iii.iv.ix-p3.2"></span>Hosius</span> said:  This also, I think,
follows, that, <span id="fr_391"></span>[392](#fn_391) if in any
province whatever, bishops send petitions to one of their brothers and
fellow-bishops, he that is in the largest city, that is, the metropolis,
should himself send his deacon and the petitions, providing him also
with letters commendatory, writing also of course in succession to our
brethren and fellow-bishops, if any of them should be staying at that
time in the places or cities in which the most pious Emperor is
administering public affairs.

<span id="xv.iii.iv.ix-p5"></span>But if any of the bishops should have
friends at the Court and should wish to make requests of them as to some
proper object, let him not be forbidden to make such requests through
his deacon and move these \[friends\] to give their kind assistance as
his desire.

<span id="xv.iii.iv.ix-p6"></span>But those who come to Rome ought, as I
said before, to deliver to our beloved brother and fellow-bishop,
Julius, the petitions which they have to give, in order that he may
first examine them, lest some of them should be improper, and so, giving
them his own advocacy and care, shall send them to the Court.

<span id="xv.iii.iv.ix-p7"></span>All the Bishops made answer that such
was their pleasure and that the regulation was most proper.

<span id="xv.iii.iv.ix-p8"></span>(*Latin*.)

<span id="xv.iii.iv.ix-p9"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iii.iv.ix-p9.1"></span>This</span> also seems to follow, that
from whatever province bishops shall send petitions to that brother and
fellow-bishop of ours who has his see in the metropolis, he \[the
metropolitan\] should dispatch his deacon with the petitions, providing
him with commendatory letters of like tenour to our brethren and
fellow-bishops at that time resi<span id="page_424">p. 424</span> <span
id="xv.iii.iv.ix-Page_424"></span>dent in those regions and cities in
which the fortunate and blessed Emperor is ruling the State.

<span id="xv.iii.iv.ix-p10"></span>If however a bishop who seeks to
obtain some petition (a worthy one, that is) has friends in the palace,
he is not forbidden to make his request through his deacon and to advise
those who, he knows, can kindly intercede for him in his absence.

<span id="xv.iii.iv.ix-p11"></span>X.  But let those who come to Rome,
deliver, as before said, to our most holy brother and fellow-bishop, the
bishop of the Roman church, the petitions which they bear, that he also
may examine whether they are worthy and just, and let him give diligence
and care that they be forwarded to the Court.

<span id="xv.iii.iv.ix-p12"></span>All said that such was their pleasure
and that the regulation was proper.

<span id="xv.iii.iv.ix-p13"></span>Bishop Alypius said:  If they have
incurred the discomforts of travel for the sake of orphans and widows or
any in distress and having cases that are not unjust, they will have
some good reason \[for their journey\]; but now since they chiefly make
requests which cannot be granted without envy and reproach, it is not
necessary for them to go to Court.

<span id="xv.iii.iv.ix-p14"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xv.iii.iv.ix-p14.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="xv.iii.iv.ix-p15"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iii.iv.ix-p15.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon IX.</span>

<span id="xv.iii.iv.ix-p16"></span>If one brother sends to another, let
the Metropolitan fortify the nuncio with letters; and let him write to
the bishops, who have the matter in hand, to protect the nuncio.

<span id="xv.iii.iv.ix-p17"></span>Here the Latin is not only a
translation but an interpretation of the Greek text, for it distinctly
says that every bishop shall send the petition he intends to present at
court first to his Metropolitan, who shall send it in.  This is not
clearly in the Greek, and yet the Greek Commentators find it there.

<span id="xv.iii.iv.ix-p18"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iii.iv.ix-p18.1"></span>Christian Lupus.</span>

<span id="xv.iii.iv.ix-p19"></span>The authority of the bishop alone is
not sufficient to send a deacon to Court, there must be added the
judgment of the Metropolitan who shall examine the petition, prove,
sign, and commend it, not only to the Prince, but also to the bishop in
whose diocese he may happen to be.

<span id="xv.iii.iv.ix-p20"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xv.iii.iv.ix-p20.1"></span>Hefele.</span>

<span id="xv.iii.iv.ix-p21"></span>Zonaras, Balsamon, and Aristenus
explained this canon somewhat differently, thus:  “If a bishop desires
to send his petitions addressed to the Emperor to the bishop of the town
where the Emperor is staying, he shall first send them to the
Metropolitan of that province (according to Aristenus, his own
Metropolitan) and the latter shall send his own deacon with letters of
recommendation to the bishop or bishops who may be at court.”  This
difference rests upon the various meanings of “to the brother and
fellow-bishop” in the beginning of the canon.  We understand by this his
own Metropolitan, and treat the words:  <span class="Greek"><span
id="xv.iii.iv.ix-p21.1"></span>ὁ ἐν τῇ μείζονι κ</span>.<span
class="Greek"><span id="xv.iii.iv.ix-p21.2"></span>τ.λ</span>., as a
more exact definition of “fellow-bishop,” and the participle <span
class="Greek"><span id="xv.iii.iv.ix-p21.3"></span>τυγχάνων</span> as
equivalent to <span class="Greek"><span
id="xv.iii.iv.ix-p21.4"></span>τυγχάνει</span>, and make the principal
clause begin at <span class="Greek"><span
id="xv.iii.iv.ix-p21.5"></span>αὐτὸς καὶ τὸν διάκονον</span>.  Beveridge
translated the canon in the same way.  Zonaras and others, on the
contrary, understood by “fellow-bishop,” the bishop of the Emperor’s
residence for the time being, and regarded the words <span
class="Greek"><span id="xv.iii.iv.ix-p21.6"></span>ὁ ἐν τῇ μείζοη
κ</span>.<span class="Greek"><span
id="xv.iii.iv.ix-p21.7"></span>τ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xv.iii.iv.ix-p21.8"></span>λ</span>. not as a clearer definition of
what had gone before, but as the principal clause, in the sense of “then
the Metropolitan shall,” etc.  According to this interpretation, the
words conveying the idea that the bishop must have recourse to the
Metropolitan are entirely wanting in the canon.

<span id="xv.iii.iv.ix-p22"></span>The first part of this Canon is the
last part of Canon IX. of the Latin.  The last part is Canon X. of the
Latin, but the personal part about *Alypius* is omitted from the Greek.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_391"></span>[423:392](2140503.htm#fr_391) <span
id="xv.iii.iv.ix-p3.3"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.iv.ix-p4"></span> Here the Greek text in Bev. begins.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon X](2140504)
