[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140144)  [Next](2140146) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.vi.iv.viii"></span>

<span id="viii.vi.iv.viii-p1"></span> <span id="page_112">p. 112</span>
<span id="viii.vi.iv.viii-Page_112"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="viii.vi.iv.viii-p1.1"></span>Canon VIII.</span>

<span id="viii.vi.iv.viii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.vi.iv.viii-p2.1"></span>Let</span> not country presbyters give
letters canonical, or let them send such letters only to the
neighbouring bishops.  But the chorepiscopi of good report may give
letters pacifical.

<span id="viii.vi.iv.viii-p3"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="viii.vi.iv.viii-p3.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="viii.vi.iv.viii-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.vi.iv.viii-p4.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon VIII.</span>

<span id="viii.vi.iv.viii-p5"></span>A country presbyter is not to give
canonical letters, or \[at most\] only to a neighbouring bishop.

<span id="viii.vi.iv.viii-p6"></span>These “letters canonical” were
called in the West letters “formatæ,” and no greater proof of the great
influence they had in the early days of the Church in binding the
faithful together can be found than the fact that Julian the Apostate
made an attempt to introduce something similar among the pagans of his
empire.

<span id="viii.vi.iv.viii-p7"></span>“Commendatory letters” (<span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.vi.iv.viii-p7.1"></span>ἐπιστολαὶ
συστατικαὶ</span>) are spoken of by St. Paul in [2 Cor. iii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#001)<span
id="viii.vi.iv.viii-p7.2"></span>, and the reader will find some
interesting remarks on this and cognate subjects in J. J. Blunt’s, *The
Christian Church during the first three Centuries* (Chapter II).

<span id="viii.vi.iv.viii-p8"></span>By means of these letters even the
lay people found hospitality and care in every part of the world, and it
was thrown up against the Donatists as a mark of their being schismatics
that their canonical letters were good only among themselves.

<span id="viii.vi.iv.viii-p9"></span>Pseudo-Isidore informs us that it
was stated at the Council of Chalcedon by Atticus, bishop of
Constantinople, that it was agreed at the Council of Nice that all such
letters should be marked <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.vi.iv.viii-p9.1"></span>Π. Υ. Α. Π</span>. (i.e. Father, Son,
Holy Spirit), and it is asserted (Herzog, *Real-Encyk., s.v.* Literæ
Formatæ) that this form is found in German documents of the sixth
century.

<span id="viii.vi.iv.viii-p10"></span>As will be seen among the Canons
of Chalcedon, the old name, Letters Commendatory, is continued, but in
this canon and in the 41st of Laodicea the expression “Canonical
Letters” is used.  In the West, at least, these letters received the
episcopal seal of the diocese to avoid all possibility of imposture. 
Dean Plumptre (whom I am following very closely in this note) believes
the earliest evidence of this use of the diocesan seal is in Augustine
(*Epist*. lix. *al*. ccxvij.)  He also refers to Ducange, *s.v.*
Formatæ.

<span id="viii.vi.iv.viii-p11"></span>As these letters admitted their
bearers to communion they were sometimes called “Communion letters”
(<span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.vi.iv.viii-p11.1"></span>κοινωνικαὶ</span> ), and are so
described by St. Cyril of Alexandria; and by the Council of Elvira
(canon xxv.), and by St. Augustine (*Epist*. xliii. *al*. clxii).

<span id="viii.vi.iv.viii-p12"></span>The “Letters Pacifical” appear to
have been of an eleemosynary character, so that the bearers of them
obtained bodily help.  Chalcedon in its eleventh canon ordains these
“Letters pacifical” shall be given to the poor, whether they be clerics
or laics.  The same expression is used in the preceding canon of the
synod.

<span id="viii.vi.iv.viii-p13"></span>A later form of ecclesiastical
letter is that with which we are so familiar, the “letter dimissory.” 
This expression first occurs in Canon XVII. of the Council in Trullo. 
On this expression Suicer (*Thesaurus, s.v.* <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.vi.iv.viii-p13.1"></span>ἀπολυτικὴ</span>) draws from the
context the conclusion that “letters dimissory” were given only for
permanent change of ecclesiastical residence, while, “letters
commendatory” were given to those whose absence from their diocese was
only temporary.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon IX](2140146)
