[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140325)  [Next](2140327) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xi.xviii.viii"></span>

<span id="xi.xviii.viii-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="xi.xviii.viii-p1.1"></span>Canon VIII.</span>

<span id="xi.xviii.viii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xi.xviii.viii-p2.1"></span>Let</span> the clergy of the poor-houses,
monasteries, and martyries remain under the authority of the bishops in
every city according to the tradition of the holy Fathers; and let no
one arrogantly cast off the rule of his own bishop; and if any shall
contravene this canon in any way whatever, and will not be subject to
their own bishop, if they be clergy, let them be subjected to canonical
censure, and if they be monks or laymen, let them be excommunicated.

<span id="xi.xviii.viii-p3"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xi.xviii.viii-p3.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="xi.xviii.viii-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xi.xviii.viii-p4.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon VIII.</span>

<span id="xi.xviii.viii-p5"></span>Any clergyman in an almshouse or
monastery must submit himself to the authority of the bishop of the
city.  But he who rebels against this let him pay the penalty.

<span id="xi.xviii.viii-p6"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xi.xviii.viii-p6.1"></span>Van Espen.</span>

<span id="xi.xviii.viii-p7"></span>From this canon we learn that the
synod of Chalcedon willed that all who were in charge of such pious
institutions should be subject to the bishop, and in making this decree
the synod only followed the tradition of the Fathers and Canons. 
Although in its first part the canon only mentions “clergymen,” yet in
the second part monks are named, and, as Balsamon and Zonoras point out,
both are included.

<span id="xi.xviii.viii-p8"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xi.xviii.viii-p8.1"></span>Bright.</span>

<span id="xi.xviii.viii-p9"></span>What a <span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.xviii.viii-p9.1"></span>πτωχεῖον</span> was may be seen from what
Gibbon calls the “noble and charitable foundation, almost a new city”
(iii. 252), established by St. Basil at a little distance from Cæsarea,
and called in consequence the Basiliad.  Gregory Nazianzen describes it
as a large set of buildings with rooms for the sick, especially for
lepers, and also for house-less travellers; “a storehouse of piety,
where disease was borne philosophically, and sympathy was tested”
(*Orat.*, xliii., 63, compare Basil himself, *Epist*., xciv., on its
staff of nurses and physicians and cl., 3).  Sozomen calls it “a most
celebrated resting-place for the poor,” and names Prapidius as having
been its warden while acting as “bishop over many villages” (vi. 34, see
on Nic., viij.).  Another <span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.xviii.viii-p9.2"></span>πτωχοτροφεῖον</span> is mentioned by
Basil (*Epist*., cxliij.) as governed by a chorepiscopus.

<span id="xi.xviii.viii-p10"></span>St. Chrysostom, on coming to the see
of Constantinople, ordered the excess of episcopal expenditure to be
transferred to the hospital for the sick (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.xviii.viii-p10.1"></span>νοσοκομεῖον</span> ), and “founded other
such hospitals, setting over them two pious presbyters, with physicians
and cooks.…so that foreigners arriving in the city, on being attacked by
disease, might receive aid, both because it was a good work in itself,
and for the glory of the Saviour” (Palladius, *Dial.*, p. 19).  At
Ephesus Bassian founded a <span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.xviii.viii-p10.2"></span>πτωχεῖτον</span> with seventy pallets
for the sick (Mansi, vii., 277), and there were several such houses in
Egypt (*ib.*, vi., 1013; in the next century there was a hospital for
the sick at Daphne near Antioch (Evagr., iv., 35).  “The tradition of
the holy fathers” is here cited as barring any claim on the part of
clerics officiating in these institutions, or in monasteries or
martyries, to be exempt from the jurisdiction of the ordinary.  They are
to “abide under it,” and not to indulge selfwill by “turning restive”
against their bishop’s authority” (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.xviii.viii-p10.3"></span>ἀφηνιάζω</span> is literally to get the
bit between the teeth, and is used by Aëtius for <span id="page_274">p.
274</span> <span id="xi.xviii.viii-Page_274"></span>“not choosing to
obey,” Mansi, vii., 72).  Those who dare to violate this clearly defined
rule (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.xviii.viii-p10.4"></span>διατύωσιν</span>, comp. <span
class="Greek"><span id="xi.xviii.viii-p10.5"></span>τύπος</span> in
Nic., xix.), and to refuse subjection to their own bishop, are, if
clerics, to incur canonical censure, if monks or laics, to be
excommunicated.  The allusion to laics points to laymen as founders or
benefactors of such institutions.

<span id="xi.xviii.viii-p11"></span>This canon is found in the *Corpus
Juris Canonici*, Gratian’s *Decretum*, Pars II., Causa <span
class="sc"><span id="xi.xviii.viii-p11.1"></span>XVIII</span>., Q. II.,
canon x., § 3.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon IX](2140327)
