[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140701)  [Next](2140703) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi.xiv.xvi"></span>

<span id="xvi.xiv.xvi-p1"></span> <span id="page_566">p. 566</span>
<span id="xvi.xiv.xvi-Page_566"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xvi.xiv.xvi-p1.1"></span>Canon XVI.</span>

<span id="xvi.xiv.xvi-p2"></span>That it does not become one in holy
orders to be clad in costly apparel.

<span id="xvi.xiv.xvi-p3"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xvi.xiv.xvi-p3.1"></span>All</span> buffoonery and decking of the
body ill becomes the priestly rank.  Therefore those bishops and clerics
who array themselves in gay and showy clothing ought to correct
themselves, and if they do not amend they ought to be subjected to
punishment.  So likewise they who anoint themselves with perfumes.  When
the root of bitterness sprang up, there was poured into the Catholic
Church the pollution of the heresy of the traducers of the Christians. 
And such as were defiled by it, not only detested the pictured images,
but also set at naught all decorum, being exceedingly mad against those
who lived gravely and religiously; so that in them was fulfilled that
which is written, “The service of God is abominable to the sinner.”  If
therefore, any are found deriding those who are clad in poor and grave
raiment, let them be corrected by punishment.  For from early times
every man in holy orders wore modest and grave clothing; and verily
whatever is worn, not so much because of necessity, as for the sake of
outward show, savours of dandyism, as says Basil the Great.  Nor did
anyone array himself in raiment embroidered with silk, nor put many
coloured ornaments on the border of his garments; for they had heard
from the lips of God that “They that wear soft clothing are in kings’
houses.”

<span id="xvi.xiv.xvi-p4"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xvi.xiv.xvi-p4.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="xvi.xiv.xvi-p5"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xvi.xiv.xvi-p5.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon XVI.</span>

<span id="xvi.xiv.xvi-p6"></span>Bishops and clergymen arraying
themselves in splendid clothes and anointed with perfumes must be
corrected.  Should they persist, they must be punished.

<span id="xvi.xiv.xvi-p7"></span>Balsamon and Zonaras tell of the
magnificence in dress assumed by some of the superior clergy among the
Iconoclasts, wearing stuffs woven with threads of gold, and their loins
girt with golden girdles, and sentences embroidered in gold on the edge
of their raiment.  It is curious to note how often heretics fall into
extremes.  We have seen how Eustathius wore a conspicuous garb and was
not willing to appear in the ordinary dress of a clergyman of his day. 
His was the one extreme of ultra clerical or, I should say, ascetic
clothing.  These Iconoclasts went to the other extreme and dressed
themselves like men of the world, giving themselves the dandy airs of
the fops of the day, thus, as always, making themselves ridiculous in
the eyes of the wise, and their office contemptible in the eyes of the
common people.

<span id="xvi.xiv.xvi-p8"></span>This canon is found in the *Corpus
Juris Canonici*, Gratian’s *Decretum*, Pars. II., Causa XXI., Quæst.
IV., canon j.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon XVII](2140703)
