[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140319)  [Next](2140321) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xi.xviii.ii"></span>

<span id="xi.xviii.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="xi.xviii.ii-p1.1"></span>Canon II.</span>

<span id="xi.xviii.ii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xi.xviii.ii-p2.1"></span>If</span> any Bishop should ordain for
money, and put to sale a grace which cannot be sold, and for money
ordain a bishop, or chorepiscopus, or presbyters, or deacons, or any
other of those who are counted among the clergy; or if through lust of
gain he should nominate for money a steward, or advocate, or
prosmonarius, or any one whatever who is on the roll of the Church, let
him who is convicted of this forfeit his own rank; and let him who is
ordained be nothing profited by the purchased ordination or promotion;
but let him be removed from the dignity or charge he has obtained for
money.  And if any one should be found negotiating such shameful and
unlawful transactions, let him also, if he is a clergyman, be deposed
from his rank, and if he is a layman or monk, let him be anathematized.

<span id="xi.xviii.ii-p3"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xi.xviii.ii-p3.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="xi.xviii.ii-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xi.xviii.ii-p4.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon XIX.</span>

<span id="xi.xviii.ii-p5"></span>Whoso buys or sells an ordination, down
to a Prosmonarius, shall be in danger of losing his grade.  Such shall
also be the case with go-betweens, if they be clerics they shall be cut
off from their rank, if laymen or monks, they shall be anathematized.

<span id="xi.xviii.ii-p6"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xi.xviii.ii-p6.1"></span>Bright.</span>

<span id="xi.xviii.ii-p7"></span>A great scandal in the “Asian diocese”
had led to St. Chrysostom’s intervention.  Antoninus, bishop of Ephesus,
was charged, with “making it a rule to sell ordinations of bishops at
rates proportionate to the value of their sees” (Palladius, *Dial. de
vita Chrysost*., p. 50).  Chrysostom held a synod at Ephesus, at which
six bishops were deposed for having obtained their sees in this manner. 
Isidore of Pelasium repeatedly remonstrated with his bishop Eusebius on
the heinousness of “selling the gift” of ordinations (*Epist*. I., 26,
30, 37); and names Zosimus, a priest, and Maron, a deacon, as thus
ordained (*ib.* 111, 119).  A few years before the council, a court of
three bishops sat at Berytus to hear charges brought against Ibas,
bishop of Edessa, by clerics of his diocese.  The third charge was thus
curtly worded:  “Moreover he receives for laying on hands” (Mansi, vii.
224).  The xxvijth Trullan canon repeated this canon of Chalcedon
against persons ordained for money, doubtless in view of such a state of
things as Gregory the Great had heard of nearly a century earlier, “that
in the Eastern Churches no one comes to holy order except by the payment
of premiums” (*Epist*. xi. 46, to the bishop of Jerusalem; compare
Evagrius’s assertion that Justin II. openly sold bishoprics, V. 1).  It
is easy to understand how the scruples of ecclesiastics could be abated
by the courtly fashion of calling bribes “eulogiæ” (Fleury, XXVI, 20),
just as the six prelates above referred to had regarded their payments
as an equivalent for that “making over of property to the Curia,” which
was required by a law of 399 (Cod. Theod., xii. 1, 163, see notes in
Transl. of Fleury, i. 163, ij. 16).

<span id="xi.xviii.ii-p8"></span>The <span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.xviii.ii-p8.1"></span>ἔκδικος</span>, “defensor,” was an official
Advocate or counsel for the Church.  The legal force of the term
“defensor” is indicated by a law of Valentinian I. “Nec idem in eodem
negotio defensor sit et quæsitor” (Cod. Theod., ii. 10, 2).  In the East
the office was held by ecclesiastics; thus, John, presbyter and
“advocate” was employed, at the Council of Constantinople in 448, to
summon Eutyches (Mansi, vii. 697).  About 496, Paul the “Advocate” of
Constantinople saved his archbishop from the sword of a murderer at the
cost of his own life (Theodor., Lect. ii. 11).  In the list of the
functionaries of St. Sophia, given by Goar in his Euchologion (p. 270),
the Protecdicos is discribed as adjudicating, with twelve assessors, in
smaller causes, on <span id="page_269">p. 269</span> <span
id="xi.xviii.ii-Page_269"></span>which he afterwards reports to the
bishop.  In Africa, on the other hand, from <span class="sc"><span
id="xi.xviii.ii-p8.2"></span>a.d.</span> 407 (see Cod. Theod., xvi. 2,
38), the office was held by barristers, in accordance with a request of
the African bishops (Cod. Afric., 97; Mansi, iii., 802), who, six years
earlier, had asked for “defensores,” with special reference to the
oppression of the poor by the rich (Cod. Afric., 75; Mansi, iii. 778,
970).  The “defensores” mentioned by Gregory the Great had primarily to
take care of the poor (*Epist*., v. 29), and of the church property
(*ib*., i. 36), but also to be advocates of injured clerics (*ib.*, ix.
64) and act as assessors (*ib.*, x. 1), etc.

<span id="xi.xviii.ii-p9"></span>The next office is that of the
Prosmonarius or, according to a various reading adopted by many (*e.g.*
Justellus, Hervetus, Beveridge, Bingham), the Paramonarius.  Opinions
differ as to the functions intended.  Isidore gives simply
“paramonarius:”  Dionysius (see Justellus, *Biblioth*., i., 134) omits
the word; but in the “interpretatio Dionysii,” as given in the Concilia,
freedom has been taken to insert “vel mansionarium” in a parenthesis
(vii. 373; see Beveridge, *in loc*.).  Mansionarius is a literal
rendering; but what was the function of a mansionarius?  In Gregory the
Great’s time he was a sacristan who had the duty of lighting the church
(*Dial.*, i. 5); and “ostiarium” in the *Prisca* implies the same idea. 
Tillemont, without deciding between the two Greek readings, thinks that
the person intended had “some charge of what pertained to the church
itself, perhaps like our present bedells” (xv. 694).  So Fleury renders,
“concièrge” (xxviij. 29); and Newman, reading “paramonarion,” takes a
like view (note in Transl. of Fleury, vol. iii., p. 392).  But Justellus
(i. 91) derives “paramonarius” from <span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.xviii.ii-p9.1"></span>μονή</span> “mansio,” a halting-place, so
that the sense would be a manager of one of the church’s farms, a
“villicus,” or, as Bingham expresses it, “a bailiff” (iii. 3, 1). 
Beveridge agrees with Justellus, except in giving to <span
class="Greek"><span id="xi.xviii.ii-p9.2"></span>μονή</span> the sense
of “monastery” (compare the use of <span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.xviii.ii-p9.3"></span>μονή</span> in Athan., *Apol. c. Arian*,
67, where Valesius understands it as “a station” on a road, but others
as “a monastery,” see Historical Writings of St. Athanasius, Introd., p.
xliv.).  Bingham also prefers this interpretation.  Suicer takes it as
required by “paramonarios” which he treats as the true reading: 
“prosmonarios” he thinks would have the sense of “sacristan.”

<span id="xi.xviii.ii-p10"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xi.xviii.ii-p10.1"></span>Hefele.</span>

<span id="xi.xviii.ii-p11"></span>According to Van Espen, however, who
here supports himself upon Du Cange, by “prosmonarios” or
“mansionarius,” in the same way as by “oiconomos,” a steward of church
property was to be understood.

<span id="xi.xviii.ii-p12"></span>The canon is found in the *Corpus
Juris Canonici*, Gratian’s *Decretum*, Pars II., Causa I., Quæst. i.,
can. viij.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon III](2140321)
