[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140247)  [Next](2140249) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.viii.viii"></span>

<span id="ix.viii.viii-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="ix.viii.viii-p1.1"></span>Warning to the Reader Touching Canon
VII.</span>

<span id="ix.viii.viii-p2"></span>(Beveridge, *Synodicon*, Tom. II., *in
loc.*)

<span id="ix.viii.viii-p3"></span>This canon, I confess, is contained in
all the editions of the Commentaries of Balsamon and Zonaras.  It is
cited also by Photius in *Nomocanon*, Tit. xii.<span
id="ix.viii.viii-p3.1"></span> ch. xiv., besides it is extant in a
contracted form in the Epitome of Alexius Aristenus.  But it is wanting
in all the Latin versions of the Canons, in the ancient translations of
Dionys. Exig., Isidore Mercator, etc.; also in the Epitome of Sym.
Logothet., and the Arabic paraphrase of Josephus Ægyp., and what is
particularly to be observed, in the collection and nomocanon of John of
Antioch; and <span id="page_185">p. 185</span> <span
id="ix.viii.viii-Page_185"></span>this not through want of attention on
his part, as is clear from this namely, that in the order of the Canons
as given by him he attributes six Canons only to this second General
Council, saying “…of the Fathers who assembled at Constantinople, by
whom six Canons were set forth,” so that it is clear the present was not
reckoned among the canons of this council in those days.  Nay, the whole
composition of this canon clearly indicates that it is to be ascribed,
neither to this present council, nor to any other (unless perhaps to
that of Trullo, of which we shall speak afterwards).  For nothing is
appointed in it, nothing confirmed, but a certain ancient custom of
receiving converted heretics, is here merely recited.

<span id="ix.viii.viii-p4"></span>(Hefele, *History of the Councils*,
Vol. II., p. 368.)

<span id="ix.viii.viii-p5"></span>As we possess a letter from the Church
at Constantinople in the middle of the fifth century to Bishop Martyrius
of Antioch, in which the same subject is referred to in a precisely
similar way, Beveridge is probably right in conjecturing that the canon
was only an extract from this letter to Martyrius; therefore in no way a
decree of the second General Council, nor even of the Synod of 382, but
at least eighty years later than the latter.  This canon, with an
addition, was afterwards adopted by the Quinisext Synod as its
ninety-fifth, without, however, giving its origin.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon VII](2140249)
