[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140080)  [Next](2140082) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.iii.iii.xx"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.iii.xx-p1"></span> <span id="page_72">p. 72</span>
<span id="viii.iii.iii.xx-Page_72"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="viii.iii.iii.xx-p1.1"></span>Excursus on Second Marriages, Called
Digamy.</span>

<span id="viii.iii.iii.xx-p2"></span>To distinguish contemporaneous from
successive bigamy I shall use throughout this volume the word “digamy”
to denote the latter, and shall thus avoid much confusion which
otherwise is unavoidable.

<span id="viii.iii.iii.xx-p3"></span>The whole subject of second, and
even of third and fourth marriages has a great interest for the student
of early ecclesiastical legislation, and I shall therefore treat the
matter here (as I shall hope) sufficiently and refer the reader for its
fuller treatment to books more especially upon the subject.

<span id="viii.iii.iii.xx-p4"></span>The general position of the Church
seems to have been to discourage all second marriages, and to point to a
single matrimonial connexion as the more excellent way.  But at the same
time the principle that the marriage obligation is severed by death was
universally recognised, and however much such fresh marriages may have
been disapproved of, such disapproval did not rest upon any supposed
adulterous character in the new connexion.  I cite a portion of an
admirable article upon the subject by an English barrister of Lincoln’s
Inn.

<span id="viii.iii.iii.xx-p5"></span>(J. M. Ludlow, in Smith and
Cheetham, *Dictionary of Christian Antiquities, sub voce* Digamy.)

<span id="viii.iii.iii.xx-p6"></span>Although among the earlier
Romans <span id="fr_119"></span>[120](#fn_119) there was one form of
marriage which was indissoluble, viz., that by *confarreatio*, still
generally a second marriage either after death or divorce was by no
means viewed with disfavour.…Meanwhile an intensifying spirit of
asceticism was leading many in the Church to a condemnation of second
marriage in all cases.  Minucius Felix (*Octavius*, c. 31, § 5) only
professes on behalf of the Christians a preference for monogamy. 
Clement of Alexandria (<span class="sc"><span
id="viii.iii.iii.xx-p8.1"></span>a.d.</span> 150–220) seems to confine
the term marriage to the first lawful union (*Stromata*, Bk. ii.).…It
would seem, however, that when these views were carried to the extent of
absolute prohibition of second marriages generally by several heretical
sects, the Montanists (see Augustine, *De Hæresibus*, c. xxvi.), the
Cathari (*ib.*, c. xxxviii.), and a portion at least of the Novatianists
(see Cotel., *Patr. Apol*., vol. i., p. 91, n. 16) the Church saw the
necessity of not fixing such a yoke on the necks of the laity.  The
forbiddance of second marriage, or its assimilation to fornication, was
treated as one of the marks of heresy (Augustin. *u. s.*; and see also
his *De Bono Vid*., c. vi.).  The sentiment of Augustine (in the last
referred to passage) may be taken to express the Church’s judgment at
the close of the fourth century:  “Second marriages are not to be
condemned, but had in less honour,” and see also Epiphanius, in his
*Exposition of the Catholic Faith*.

<span id="viii.iii.iii.xx-p9"></span>To these remarks of Mr. Ludlow’s, I
may add that St. Ambrose had written (*De Viduis*, c. xi.), “We do not
prohibit second marriages, but we do not approve marriages frequently
reiterated.”  St. Jerome had spoken still more strongly (Ep. lxvii.<span
id="viii.iii.iii.xx-p9.1"></span>, *Apol. pro libris adv. Jovin*.), “I
do not condemn digamists, or even trigamists or, if such a thing can be
said, octagamists.”  It does not seem that the penance which was imposed
in the East upon those entering into second nuptials was imposed in the
West.  The *Corpus Juris Canonici* contains two decretals, one of
Alexander III. and another of Urban III., forbidding priests to give the
nuptial benediction in cases of reiterated marriage.  In the East at
second marriages the <span id="page_73">p. 73</span> <span
id="viii.iii.iii.xx-Page_73"></span>benediction of the crown is omitted
and “propitiatory prayers” are to be said.  Mr. Ludlow points out that
in the “Sanctions and Decrees,” falsely attributed to the Council of
Nice and found in Mansi (vol. ii., col. 1029) it is expressly stated
that widowers and widows may marry, but that “the blessing of the crowns
is not to be imparted to them, for this is only once given, at first
marriages, and is not to be repeated.…But if one of them be not a
widower or widow, let such one alone receive the benediction with the
paranymphs, those whom he will.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_119"></span>[72:120](2140081.htm#fr_119) <span
id="viii.iii.iii.xx-p6.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.iii.xx-p7"></span> The reader may recall the words of
Dido:  Ille meos, primusqui me sibi junxit, amores

<span id="viii.iii.iii.xx-p8"></span>Abstulit; ille habeat secum
servetque sepulcro

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon XX](2140082)
