[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140024)  [Next](2140026) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.vi.vii"></span>

<span id="vii.vi.vii-p1"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="vii.vi.vii-p1.1"></span> Excursus on the Word</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.vi.vii-p1.2"></span>Προσφέρειν</span><span
class="c4"><span id="vii.vi.vii-p1.3"></span> .</span>

<span id="vii.vi.vii-p2"></span>(Dr. Adolph Harnack:  *Hist. of Dogma*
\[Eng. Tr.\] Vol. I. p. 209.)

<span id="vii.vi.vii-p3"></span>The idea of the whole transaction of the
Supper as a sacrifice, is plainly found in the *Didache*, (c. 14), in
Ignatius, and above all, in Justin (I. 65f.)  But even Clement of Rome
presupposes it, when (in cc. 40–44) he draws a parallel between bishops
and deacons and the <span id="page_14">p. 14</span> <span
id="vii.vi.vii-Page_14"></span>Priests and Levites of the Old Testament,
describing as the chief function of the former (44.4) <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.vi.vii-p3.1"></span>προσφέρειν τὰ
δῶρα</span>.  This is not the place to enquire whether the first
celebration had, in the mind of its founder, the character of a
sacrificial meal; but, certainly, the idea, as it was already developed
at the time of Justin, had been created by the churches.  Various
reasons tended towards seeing in the Supper a sacrifice.  In the first
place, [Malachi i. 11](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#011)<span
id="vii.vi.vii-p3.2"></span>, demanded a solemn Christian sacrifice: 
see my notes on *Didache*, 14.3.  In the second place, all prayers were
regarded as a sacrifice, and therefore the solemn prayers at the Supper
must be specially considered as such.  In the third place, the words of
institution <span class="Greek"><span id="vii.vi.vii-p3.3"></span>τοῦτο
ποιεῖτε</span>, contained a command with regard to a definite religious
action.  Such an action, however, could only be represented as a
sacrifice, and this the more, that the Gentile Christians might suppose
that they had to understand <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.vi.vii-p3.4"></span>ποιεῖν</span> in the sense of <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.vi.vii-p3.5"></span>θύειν</span>.  In the
fourth place, payments in kind were necessary for the “agapæ” connected
with the Supper, out of which were taken the bread and wine for the Holy
celebration; in what other aspect could these offerings in the worship
be regarded than as <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.vi.vii-p3.6"></span>προσφοραί</span> for the purpose of a
sacrifice?  Yet the spiritual idea so prevailed that only the prayers
were regarded as the <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.vi.vii-p3.7"></span>θυσία</span> proper, even in the case of
Justin (*Dial.* 117).  The elements are only <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.vi.vii-p3.8"></span>δῶρα, προσφοραί</span>, which obtain their
value from the prayers, in which thanks are given for the gifts of
creation and redemption, as well as for the holy meal, and entreaty is
made for the introduction of the community into the Kingdom of God (see
*Didache*, 9. 10).  Therefore, even the sacred meal itself is called
<span class="Greek"><span id="vii.vi.vii-p3.9"></span>εὐχαριστία</span>
(Justin, *Apol*. I. 66:  <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.vi.vii-p3.10"></span>ἡ τροφὴ αὕτη καλεῖται παρ᾽ ἡμῖν
εὐχαριστία</span> .  *Didache*, 9. 1:  Ignat.), because it is <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.vi.vii-p3.11"></span>τραφὴ
εὐχαριστηθεῖσα</span>.  It is a mistake to suppose that Justin already
understood the body of Christ to be the object of <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.vi.vii-p3.12"></span>ποιεῖν</span>, <span
id="fr_59"></span>[60](#fn_59) and therefore thought of a sacrifice of
this body (I. 66).  The real sacrificial act in the Supper consists
rather, according to Justin, only in the <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.vi.vii-p4.7"></span>εὐχαριστίαν ποιεῖν</span> whereby the <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.vi.vii-p4.8"></span>κοινὸς ἄρτος</span>
becomes the <span class="Greek"><span id="vii.vi.vii-p4.9"></span>ἄρτος
τῆς εὐχαριστίας</span> . <span id="fr_60"></span>[61](#fn_60)   The
sacrifice of the Supper in its essence, apart from the offering of alms,
which in the practice of the Church was closely united with it, is
nothing but a sacrifice of prayer:  the sacrificial act of the Christian
here also is nothing else than an act of prayer (See *Apol.* I. 14,
65–67; *Dial.* 28, 29, 41, 70, 116–118).

<span id="vii.vi.vii-p6"></span>Harnack (*lib. cit.* Vol. II. chapter
III. p. 136) says that “Cyprian was the first to associate the specific
offering, i.e. the Lord’s Supper with the specific priesthood. 
Secondly, he was the first to designate the *passio Domini*, nay, the
*sanguis Christi* and the *dominica hostia* as the object of the
eucharistic offering.”  In a foot-note (on the same page) he explains
that “*Sacrificare, Sacrificium celebrare* in all passages where they
are unaccompanied by any qualifying words, mean to celebrate the Lord’s
Supper.”  But Harnack is confronted by the very evident objection that
if this was an invention of St. Cyprian’s, it is most extraordinary that
it raised no protest, and he very frankly confesses (note 2, on same
page) that “the transference of the sacrificial idea to the consecrated
elements which in all probability Cyprian already found in existence,
etc.”  Harnack further on (in the same note on p. 137) notes that he has
pointed out in his notes on the *Didache* that in the “Apostolic Church
Order” occurs the expression <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.vi.vii-p6.1"></span>ἥ προσφορὰ τοῦ σώματος καὶ τοῦ
αἵματος</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_59"></span>[14:60](2140025.htm#fr_59) <span
id="vii.vi.vii-p3.13"></span>

<span id="vii.vi.vii-p4"></span> Harnack seems to know only the printed
(and almost certainly incorrect) reading of the modern texts of the I.
Apology (Chapter LXVI) where <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.vi.vii-p4.1"></span>τοῦτο ἐστι</span> has taken the place of
<span class="Greek"><span id="vii.vi.vii-p4.2"></span>τούτεστι</span>. 
The passage did read, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.vi.vii-p4.3"></span>τοῦτο ποιεῖτε, εἰς τὴν ἀνάμνησίν μου,
τούτεστι τὸ σῶμά μου</span>; in which it is evident that the words “my
body” are in apposition with <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.vi.vii-p4.4"></span>τοῦτο</span> and the object of <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.vi.vii-p4.5"></span>ποιεῖτε</span>, which
has its sacrificial sense “to offer,” as in the Dialogue with Trypho,
<span class="Greek"><span id="vii.vi.vii-p4.6"></span>ὁ κύριος ἡμῶν
παρέδωκε ποιεῖν</span> (chapter xlj).

<span id="fn_60"></span>[14:61](2140025.htm#fr_60) <span
id="vii.vi.vii-p4.10"></span>

<span id="vii.vi.vii-p5"></span> Harnack evidently does not fully
appreciate the Catholic doctrine of the Sacrifice in the Holy
Eucharist.  No catholic theologian teaches that the essence of that
sacrifice is to offer up the already present Body of Christ, but that
the essence of the Sacrifice is the act of consecration; the “making the
Eucharistic Sacrifice,” as he accurately says, “whereby the common bread
becomes the Bread of the Eucharist.”  Harnack says truly that “the
sacrificial act of the Christian here also is nothing else than an act
of prayer,” but he does not seem to know that this is the Catholic
doctrine to-day, nor to appreciate at its Catholic value the “Prayer of
Consecration.”  The act of consecration is the essence of the Christian
Sacrifice according to the teaching of all Catholics.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon VI](2140026)
