[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Age of
Reason](../../index)  [Darwin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](or15.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002FGUD04/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Origin of Species*, by Charles Darwin, 6th ed. \[1872\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Glossary

#### Glossary of the Principal Scientific Terms Used In the Present Volume

I am indebted to the kindness of Mr. W. S. Dallas for this Glossary,
which has been given because several readers have complained to me that
some of the terms used were unintelligible to them. Mr. Dallas has
endeavoured to give the explanations of the terms in as popular a form
as possible.

ABERRANT  
Forms or groups of animals or plants which deviate in important
characters from their nearest allies, so as not to be easily included in
the same group with them, are said to be aberrant.

ABERRATION (in Optics)  
In the refraction of light by a convex lens the rays passing through
different parts of the lens are brought to a focus at slightly different
distances,- this is called spherical aberration; at the same time the
coloured rays are separated by the prismatic action of the lens and
likewise brought to a focus at different distances, this is chromatic
aberration.

ABNORMAL  
Contrary to the general rule.

ABORTED  
An organ is said to be aborted, when its development has been arrested
at a very early stage.

ALBINISM  
Albinos are animals in which the usual colouring matters characteristic
of the species have not been produced in the skin and its appendages.
Albinism is the state of being an albino.

ALGAE  
A class of plants including the ordinary seaweeds and the filamentous
fresh-water weeds.

ALTERNATION OF GENERATIONS  
This term is applied to a peculiar mode of reproduction which prevails
among many of the lower animals, in which the egg produces a living form
quite different from its parent, but from which the parent-form is
reproduced by a process of budding, or by the division of the substance
of the first product of the egg.

AMMONITES  
A group of fossil, spiral, chambered shells, allied to the existing
pearly nautilus, but having the partitions between the chambers waved in
complicated patterns at their junction with the outer wall of the shell.

ANALOGY  
That resemblance of structures which depends upon similarity of
function, as in the wings of insects and birds. Such structures are said
to be analogous, and to be analogues of each other.

ANIMALCULE  
A minute animal: generally applied to those visible only by the
microscope.

ANNELIDS  
A class of worms in which the surface of the body exhibits a more or
less distinct division into rings or segments, generally provided with
appendages for locomotion and with gills. It includes the ordinary
marine worms, the earthworms, and the leeches.

ANTENNAE  
Jointed organs appended to the head in insects, Crustacea and
centipedes, and not belonging to the mouth.

ANTHERS  
The summits of the stamens of flowers, in which the pollen or
fertilising dust is produced.

APLACENTALIA, APLACENTATA or Aplacental Mammals.  
See [MAMMALIA](#MAMMALIA.md).

ARCHETYPAL  
Of or belonging to the Archetype, or ideal primitive form upon which all
the beings of a group seem to be organised.

ARTICULATA  
A great division of the animal kingdom characterised generally by having
the surface of the body divided into rings called segments, a greater or
less number of which are furnished with jointed legs (such as insects,
crustaceans and centipedes).

ASYMMETRICAL  
Having the two sides unlike.

ATROPHIED  
Arrested in development at a very early age.

BALANUS  
The genus including the common acorn shells which live in abundance on
the rocks of the sea-coast.

BATRACRIANS  
A class of animals allied to the reptiles, but undergoing a peculiar
metamorphosis, in which the young animal is generally aquatic and
breathes by gills. (Examples, frogs, toads, and newts.)

BOULDERS  
Large transported blocks of stone generally imbedded in clays or gravel.

BRACHIOPODA  
A class of marine Mollusca, or softbodied animals, furnished with a
bivalve shell, attached to submarine objects by a stalk which passes
through an aperture in one of the valves, and furnished with fringed
arms, by the action of which food is carried to the mouth.

BRANCHIAE  
Gills or organs for respiration in water.

BRANCHIAL  
Pertaining to gills or branchiae.

CAMBRIAN SYSTEM  
A series of very ancient Palaeozoic rocks, between the Laurentian and
the Silurian. Until recently these were regarded as the oldest
fossiliferous rocks.

CANIDAE  
The dog-family, including the dog, wolf, fox, jackal, etc.

CARAPACE  
The shell enveloping the anterior part of the body in crustaceans
generally; applied also to the hard shelly pieces of the cirripedes.

CARBONIFEROUS  
This term is applied to the great formation which includes among other
rocks, the coal-measures. It belongs to the oldest, or Palaeozoic ,
system of formations.

CAUDAL  
Of or belonging to the tail.

CEPHALOPODS  
The highest class of the Molluscs or soft-bodied animals, characterised
by having the mouth surrounded by a greater or less number of fleshy
arms or tentacles, which, in most living species, are furnished with
sucking-cups. (Examples, cuttle-fish, nautilus.)

CETACEA  
An order of Mammalia, including the whales, dolphins, etc., having the
form of the body fish-like, the skin naked, and only the forelimbs
developed.

CHELONIA  
An order of reptiles including the turtles, tortoises, etc.,

CIRRIPEDES  
An order of crustaceans including the barnacles and acorn-shells. Their
young resemble those of many other crustaceans in form; but when mature
they are always attached to other objects, either directly or by means
of a stalk, and their bodies are enclosed by a calcareous shell composed
of several pieces, two of which can open to give issue to a bunch of
curled, jointed tentacles, which represent the limbs.

COCCUS  
The genus of insects including the cochineal. In these the male is a
minute, winged fly, and the female generally a motionless, berry-like
mass.

COCOON  
A case usually of silky material, in which insects are frequently
enveloped during the second or resting-stage (pupa) of their existence.
The term "cocoon-stage" is here used as equivalent to "pupa-stage."

COELOSPERMOUS  
A term applied to those fruits of the Umbelliferae which have the seed
hollowed on the inner face.

COLEOPTERA  
Beetles, an order of insects, having a biting mouth and the first pair
of wings more or less horny, forming sheaths for the second pair, and
usually meeting in a straight line down the middle of the back.

COLUMN  
A peculiar organ in the flowers of orchids, in which the stamens, style
and stigma (or the reproductive parts) are united.

COMPOSITAE, or COMPOSITOUS PLANTS  
Plants in which the inflorescence consists of numerous small flowers
(florets) brought together into a dense head, the base of which is
enclosed by a common envelope. (Examples, the daisy, dandelion, etc.)

CONFERVAE  
The filamentous weeds of fresh water.

CONGLOMERATE  
A rock made up of fragments of rock or pebbles, cemented together by
some other material.

COROLLA  
The second envelope of a flower usually composed of coloured, leaf-like
organs (petals), which may be united by their edges either in the basal
part or throughout.

CORRELATION  
The normal coincidence of one phenomenon, character, etc., with another.

CORYMB  
A bunch of flowers in which those springing from the lower part of the
flower stalk are supported on long stalks so as to be nearly on a level
with the upper ones.

COTYLEDONS  
The first or seed-leaves of plants.

CRUSTACEANS  
A class of articulated animals, having the skin of the body generally
more or less hardened by the deposition of calcareous matter, breathing
by means of gills. (examples, crab, lobster, shrimp, etc.)

CURCULIO  
The old generic term for the beetles known as weevils, characterised by
their four-jointed feet, and by the head being produced into a sort of
beak, upon the sides of which the antennae are inserted.

CUTANEOUS  
Of or belonging to the skin.

DEGRADATION  
The wearing down of land by the action of the sea or of meteoric
agencies.

DENUDATION  
The wearing away of the surface of the land by water.

DEVONIAN SYSTEM or formation  
A series of Palaeozoic rocks, including the Old Red Sandstone.

DICOTYLEDONS, or DICOTYLEDONOUS PLANTS  
A class of plants characterised by having two seed-leaves, by the
formation of new wood between the bark and the old wood (exogenous
growth) and by the reticulation of the veins of the leaves. The parts of
the flowers are generally in multiples of five.

DIFFERENTATION  
The separation or discrimination of parts or organs which in simpler
forms of life are more or less united.

DIMORPHIC  
Having two distinct forms.- Dimorphism is the condition of the
appearance of the same species under two dissimilar forms.

DIOECIOUS  
Having the organs of the sexes upon distinct individuals.

DIORITE  
A peculiar form of greenstone.

DORSAL  
Of or belonging to the back.

EDENTATA  
A peculiar order of quadrupeds, characterised by the absence of at least
the middle incisor (front) teeth in both jaws. (Examples, the sloths and
armadillos.)

ELYTRA  
The hardened fore-wings of beetles, serving as sheaths for the
membranous hind-wings, which constitute the true organs of flight.

EMBRYO  
The young animal undergoing development within the egg or womb.

EMBRYOLOGY  
The study of the development of the embryo.

ENDEMIC  
Peculiar to a given locality.

ENTOMOSTRACA  
A division of the class Crustacea, having all the segments of the body
usually distinct, gills attached to the feet or organs of the mouth, and
the feet fringed with fine hairs. They are generally of small size.

EOCENE  
The earliest of the three divisions of the Tertiary epoch of geologists.
Rocks of this age contain a small proportion of shells identical with
species now living.

EPHEMEROUS INSECTS  
Insects allied to the May-fly.

FAUNA  
The totality of the animals naturally inhabiting a certain country or
region, or which have lived during a given geological period.

FELIDAE  
The cat-family.

FERAL  
Having become wild from a state of cultivation or domestication.

FLORA  
The totality of the plants growing naturally in a country, or during a
given geological period.

FLORETS  
Flowers imperfectly developed in some respects, and collected into a
dense spike or head, as in the grasses, the dandelion, etc.

FOETAL  
Of or belonging to the foetus, or embryo in course of development.

FORAMINIFERA  
A class of animals of very low organisation, and generally of small
size, having a jellylike body, from the surface of which delicate
filaments can be given off and retracted for the prehension of external
objects, and having a calcareous or sandy shell, usually divided into
chambers, and perforated with small apertures.

FOSSILIFEROUS  
Containing fossils.

FOSSORIAL  
Having a faculty of digging. The Fossorial Hymenoptera are a group of
wasp-like insects, which burrow in sandy soil to make nests for their
young.

FRENUM (pl. FRENA)  
A small band or fold of skin.

FUNGI (sing. FUNGUS)  
A class of cellular plants, of which mushrooms, toadstools, and moulds,
are familiar examples.

FURCULA  
The forked bone formed by the union of the collar-bones in many birds,
such as the common fowl.

GALLINACEOUS BIRDS  
An order of birds of which the common fowl, turkey, and pheasant, are
well-known examples.

GALLUS  
The genus of birds which includes the common fowl.

GANGLION  
A swelling or knot from which nerves are given off as from a centre.

GANOID FISHES  
Fishes covered with peculiar enamelled bony scales. Most of them are
extinct.

GERMINAL VESICLE  
A minute vesicle in the eggs of animals, from which development of the
embryo proceeds.

GLACIAL PERIOD  
A period of great cold and of enormous extension of ice upon the surface
of the earth. It is believed that glacial periods have occurred
repeatedly during the geological history of the earth, but the term is
generally applied to the close of the Tertiary epoch, when nearly the
whole of Europe was subjected to an arctic climate.

GLAND  
An organ which secretes or separates some peculiar product from the
blood or sap of animals or plants.

GLOTTIS  
The opening of the windpipe into the oesophagus or gullet.

GNEISS  
A rock approaching granite in composition, but more or less laminated,
and really produced by the alteration of a sedimentary deposit after its
consolidation.

GRALLATORES  
The so-called wading-birds (storks, cranes, snipes, etc.), which are
generally furnished with long legs, bare of feathers above the heel, and
have no membranes between the toes.

GRANITE  
A rock consisting essentially of crystals of felspar and mica in a mass
of quartz.

HABITAT  
The locality in which a plant or animal naturally lives.

HEMIPTERA  
An order or sub-order of insects, characterised by the possession of a
jointed beak or rostrum, and by having the fore-wings horny in the basal
portion and membranous at the extremity, where they cross each other.
This group includes the various species of bugs.

HERMAPHRODITE  
Possessing the organs of both sexes.

HOMOLOGY  
That relation between parts which results from their development from
corresponding embryonic parts, either in different animals, as in the
case of the arm of man, the fore-leg of a quadruped, and the wing of a
bird; or in the same individual, as in the case of the fore and hind
legs in quadrupeds, and the segments or rings and their appendages of
which the body of a worm, a centipede, etc., is composed. The latter is
called serial homology. The parts which stand in such a relation to each
other are said to be homologous, and one such part or organ is called
the homologue of the other. In different plants the parts of the flower
are homologous, and in general these parts are regarded as homologous
with leaves.

HOMOPTERA  
An order or sub-order of insects having (like the Hemiptera) a jointed
beak, but in which the fore-wings are either wholly membranous or wholly
leathery, The Cicadae, frog-hoppers, and Aphides, are well-known
examples.

HYBRID  
The offspring of the union of two distinct species.

HYMENOPTERA  
An order of insects possessing biting jaws and usually four membranous
wings in which there are a few veins. Bees and wasps are familiar
examples of this group.

HYPERTROPHIED  
Excessively developed.

ICHNEUMONIDAE  
A family of hymenopterous insects, the members of which lay their eggs
in the bodies or eggs of other insects.

IMAGO  
The perfect (generally winged) reproductive state of an insect.

INDIGENES  
The aboriginal animal or vegetable inhabitants of a country or region.

INFLORESCENCE  
The mode of arrangement of the flowers of plants.

INFUSORIA  
A class of microscopic animalcules, so called from their having
originally been observed in infusions of vegetable matters. They consist
of a gelatinous material enclosed in a delicate membrane, the whole or
part of which is furnished with short vibrating hairs (called cilia), by
means of which the animalcules swim through the water or convey the
minute particles of their food to the orifice of the mouth.

INSECTIVOROUS  
Feeding on insects.

INVERTEBRATA, or INVERTEBRATE ANIMALS  
Those animals which do not possess a backbone or spinal column.

LACUNAE  
Spaces left among the tissues in some of the lower animals and serving
in place of vessels for the circulation of the fluids of the body.

LAMELLATED  
Furnished with lamellae or little plates.

LARVA (pl. LARVAE)  
The first condition of an insect at its issuing from the egg, when it is
usually in the form of a grub, caterpillar, or maggot.

LARYNX  
The upper part of the windpipe opening into the gullet.

LAURENTIAN  
A group of greatly altered and very ancient rocks, which is greatly
developed along the course of the St. Laurence, whence the name. It is
in these that the earliest known traces of organic bodies have been
found.

<span id="LEGUMINOSAE"></span>LEGUMINOSAE  
An order of plants represented by the common peas and beans, having an
irregular flower in which one petal stands up like a wing, and the
stamens and pistil are enclosed in a sheath formed by two other petals.
The fruit is a pod (or legume).

LEMURIDAE  
A group of four-handed animals, distinct from the monkeys and
approaching the insectivorous quadrupeds in some of their characters and
habits. Its members have the nostrils curved or twisted, and a claw
instead of a nail upon the first finger of the hind hands.

LEPIDOPTERA  
An order of insects, characterised by the possession of a spiral
proboscis, and of four large more or less scaly wings. It includes the
well-known butterflies and moths.

LITTORAL  
Inhabiting the seashore.

LOESS  
A marly deposit of recent (Post-Tertiary) date, which occupies a great
part of the valley of the Rhine.

MALACOSTRACA  
The higher division of the Crustacea, including the ordinary crabs,
lobsters, shrimps, etc., together with the woodlice and sand-hoppers.

<span id="MAMMALIA"></span>MAMMALIA  
The highest class of animals, including the ordinary hairy quadrupeds,
the whales and man, and characterised by the production of living young
which are nourished after birth by milk from the teats (Mammae, Mammary
glands) of the mother. A striking difference in embryonic development
has led to the division of this class into two great groups; in one of
these, when the embryo has attained a certain stage, a vascular
connection, called the placenta, is formed between the embryo and the
mother; in the other this is wanting, and the young are produced in a
very incomplete state. The former, including the greater part of the
class, are called Placental mammals; the latter, or Aplacental mammals,
include the marsupials and monotremes (Ornithorhynchus).

MAMMIFEROUS  
Having mammae or teats (see [MAMMALIA](#MAMMALIA).md)

MANDIBLES  
in insects, the first or uppermost pair of jaws, which are generally
solid, horny, biting organs. In birds the term is applied to both jaws
with their horny coverings. In quadrupeds the mandible is properly the
lower jaw.

MARSUPIALS  
An order of Mammalia in which the young are born in a very incomplete
state of development, and carried by the mother, while sucking, in a
ventral pouch (marsupium), such as the kangaroos, opossums, etc. (see
[MAMMALIA](#MAMMALIA).md).

MAXILLAE  
in insects, the second or lower pair of jaws, which are composed of
several joints and furnished with peculiar jointed appendages called
palpi, or feelers.

MELANISM  
The opposite of albinism; an undue development of colouring material in
the skin and its appendages.

METAMORPHIC ROCKS  
Sedimentary rocks which have undergone alteration, generally by the
action of heat, subsequently to their deposition and consolidation.

MOLLUSCA  
One of the great divisions of the animal kingdom, including those
animals which have a soft body, usually furnished with a shell, and in
which the nervous ganglia, or centres, present no definite general
arrangement. They are generally known under the denomination of
"shellfish"; the cuttle-fish, and the common snails, whelks, oysters,
mussels, and cockles, may serve as examples of them.

MONOCOTYLEDONS, or MONOCOTYLEDONOUS PLANTS  
Plants in which the seed sends up only a single seed-leaf (or
cotyledon); characterised by the absence of consecutive layers of wood
in the stem (endogenous growth), by the veins of the leaves being
generally straight, and by the parts of the flowers being generally in
multiples of three. (Examples, grasses, lilies, orchids, palms, etc.)

MORAINES  
The accumulations of fragments of rock brought down by glaciers.

MORPHOLOGY  
The law of form or structure independent of function.

MYSIS-STAGE  
A stage in the development of certain crustaceans (prawns), in which
they closely resemble the adults of a genus (Mysis) belonging to a
slightly lower group.

NASCENT  
Commencing development.

NATATORY  
Adapted for the purpose of swimming.

NAUPLIUS-FORM  
The earliest stage in the development of many Crustacea, especially
belonging to the lower groups. In this stage the animal has a short
body, with indistinct indications of a division into segments, and three
pairs of fringed limbs. This form of the common fresh-water cyclops was
described as a distinct genus under the name of Nauplius.

NEURATION  
The arrangement of the veins or nervures in the wings of insects.

NEUTERS  
Imperfectly developed females of certain social insects (such as ants
and bees), which perform all the labours of the community. Hence, they
are also called workers.

NICTITATING MEMBRANE  
A semi-transparent membrane, which can be drawn across the eye in birds
and reptiles, either to moderate the effects of a strong light or to
sweep particles of dust, etc., from the surface of the eye.

OCELLI  
The simple eyes or stemmata of insects, usually situated on the crown of
the head between the great compound eyes.

OESOPHAGUS  
The gullet.

OOLITIC  
A great series of secondary rocks, so called from the texture of some of
its members, which appear to be made up of a mass of small egg-like
calcareous bodies.

OPERCULUM  
A calcareous plate employed by many Molluscae to close the aperture of
their shell. The opercular valves of cirripedes are those which close
the aperture of the shell.

ORBIT  
The bony cavity for the reception of the eye.

ORGANISM  
An organised being, whether plant or animal.

ORTHOSPERMOUS  
A term applied to those fruits of the Umbelliferae which have the seed
straight.

OSCULANT  
Forms or groups apparently intermediate between and connecting other
groups are said to be osculant.

OVA  
Eggs.

OVARIUM or OVARY (in plants)  
The lower part of the pistil or female organ of the flower, containing
the ovules or incipient seeds; by growth after the other organs of the
flower have fallen, it usually becomes converted into the fruit.

OVIGEROUS  
Egg-bearing.

OVULES (of plants)  
The seeds in the earliest condition.

PACHYDERMS  
A group of Mammalia, so called from their thick skins, and including the
elephant, rhinoceros, hippopotamus, etc.

PALAEOZOIC  
The oldest system of fossiliferous rocks.

PALPI  
Jointed appendages to some of the organs of the mouth in insects and
Crustacea.

PAPILIONACEAE  
An order of plants (see [LEGUMINOSAE](#LEGUMINOSAE).md), The flowers of
these plants are called papilionaceous, or butterfly-like, from the
fancied resemblance of the expanded superior petals to the wings of a
butterfly.

PARASITE  
An animal or plant living upon or in, and at the expense of, another
organism.

PARTHENOGENESIS  
The production of living organisms from unimpregnated eggs or seeds.

PEDUNCULATED  
Supported upon a stem or stalk. The pedunculated oak has its acorns
borne upon a footstool.

PELORIA or PELORISM  
The appearance of regularity of structure in the flowers of plants which
normally bear irregular flowers.

PELVIS  
The bony arch to which the hind limbs of vertebrate animals are
articulated.

PETALS  
The leaves of the corolla, or second circle of organs in a flower. They
are usually of delicate texture and brightly coloured.

PHYLLODINEOUS  
Having flattened, leaf-like twigs or leafstalks instead of true leaves.

PIGMENT  
The colouring material produced generally in the superficial parts of
animals. The cells secreting it are called pigment-cells.

PINNATE  
Bearing leaflets on each side of a central stalk.

PISTILS  
The female organs of a flower, which occupy a position in the centre of
the other floral organs. The pistil is generally divisible into the
ovary or germen, the style and the stigma.

PLACENTALIA, PLACENTATA, or Placental Mammals  
See [MAMMALIA](#MAMMALIA.md).

PLANTIGRADES  
Quadrupeds which walk upon the whole sole of the foot, like the bears.

PLASTIC  
Readily capable of change.

PLEISTOCENE PERIOD  
The latest portion of the Tertiary epoch.

PLUMULE (in plants)  
The minute bud between the seed-leaves of newly-germinated plants.

PLUTONIC ROCKS  
Rocks supposed to have been produced by igneous action in the depths of
the earth.

POLLEN  
The male element in flowering plants; usually a fine dust produced by
the anthers, which, by contact with the stigma effects the fecundation
of the seeds. This impregnation is brought about by means of tubes
(pollen-tubes) which issue from the pollen-grains adhering to the
stigma, and penetrate through the tissues until they reach the ovary.

POLYANDROUS (flowers)  
Flowers having many stamens.

POLYGAMOUS PLANTS  
Plants in which some flowers are unisexual and others hermaphrodite. The
unisexual (male and female) flowers, may be on the same or on different
plants.

POLYMORPHIC  
Presenting many forms.

POLYZOARY  
The common structure formed by the cells of the Polyzoa, such as the
well-known seamats.

PREHENSILE  
Capable of grasping.

PREPOTENT  
Having a superiority of power.

PRIMARIES  
The feathers forming the tip of the wing of a bird, and inserted upon
that part which represents the hand of man.

PROCESSES  
Projecting portions of bones, usually for the attachment of muscles,
ligaments, etc.

PROPOLIS  
A resinous material collected by the hivebees from the opening buds of
various trees.

PROTEAN  
Exceedingly variable.

PROTOZOA  
The lowest great division of the animal kingdom. These animals are
composed of a gelatinous material, and show scarcely any trace of
distinct organs. The Infusoria, Foraminifera, and sponges, with some
other forms, belong to this division.

PUPA (pl. Pupae)  
The second stage in the development of an insect, from which it emerges
in the perfect (winged) reproductive form. In most insects the pupal
stage is passed in perfect repose. The chrysalis is the pupal state of
butterflies.

RADICLE  
The minute root of an embryo plant.

RAMUS  
One half of the lower jaw in the Mammalia. The portion which rises to
articulate with the skull is called the ascending ramus.

RANGE  
The extent of country over which a plant or animal is naturally spread.
Range in time expresses the distribution of a species or group through
the fossiliferous beds of the earth's crust.

RETINA  
The delicate inner coat of the eye, formed by nervous filaments
spreading from the optic nerve, and serving for the perception of the
impressions produced by light.

RETROGRESSION  
Backward development. When an animal, as it approaches maturity, becomes
less perfectly organised than might be expected from its early stages
and known relationships, it is said to undergo a retrograde development
or metamorphosis.

RHIZOPODS  
A class of lowly organised animals (Protozoa), having a gelatinous body,
the surface of which can be protruded in the form of root-like processes
or filaments, which serve for locomotion and the prehension of food. The
most important order is that of the Foraminifera.

RODENTS  
The gnawing Mammalia, such as the rats, rabbits, and squirrels. They are
especially characterised by the possession of a single pair of
chisel-like cutting teeth in each jaw, between which and the grinding
teeth there is a great gap.

RUBUS  
The bramble genus.

RUDIMENTARY  
Very imperfectly developed.

RUMINANTS  
The group of quadrupeds which ruminate or chew the cud, such as oxen,
sheep, and deer. They have divided hoofs, and are destitute of front
teeth in the upper jaw.

SACRAL  
Belonging to the sacrum, or the bone composed usually of two or more
united vertebrae to which the sides of the pelvis in vertebrate animals
are attached.

SARCODE  
The gelatinous material of which the bodies of the lowest animals
(Protozoa) are composed.

SCUTELLAE  
The horny plates with which the feet of birds are generally more or less
covered, especially in front.

SEDIMENTARY FORMATIONS  
Rocks deposited as sediments from water.

SEGMENTS  
The transverse rings of which the body of an articulate animal or
annelid is composed.

SEPALS  
The leaves or segments of the calyx, or outermost envelope of an
ordinary flower. They are usually green, but sometimes brightly
coloured.

SERRATURES  
Teeth like those of a saw.

SESSILE  
Not supported on a stem or footstalk.

SILURIAN SYSTEM  
A very ancient system of fossiliferous rocks belonging to the earlier
part of the Palaeozoic series.

SPECIALISATION  
The setting apart of a particular organ for the performance of a
particular function.

SPINAL CORD  
The central portion of the nervous system in the Vertebrata, which
descends from the brain through the arches of the vertebrae, and gives
off nearly all the nerves to the various organs of the body.

STAMENS  
The male organs of flowering plants, standing in a circle within the
petals. They usually consist of a filament and an anther, the anther
being the essential part in which the pollen, or fecundating dust, is
formed.

STERNUM  
The breast-bone.

STIGMA  
The apical portion of the pistil in flowering plants.

STIPULES  
Small leafy organs placed at the base of the footstalks of the leaves in
many plants.

STYLE  
The middle portion of the perfect pistil, which rises like a column from
the ovary and supports the stigma at its summit.

SUBCUTANEOUS  
Situated beneath the skin.

SUCTORIAL  
Adapted for sucking.

SUTURES (in the skull)  
The lines of junction of the bones of which the skull is composed.

TARSUS (pl. TARSI)  
The jointed feet of articulate animals, such as insects.

TELEOSTEAN FISHES  
Fishes of the kind familiar to us in the present day, having the
skeleton usually completely ossified and the scales horny.

TENTACULA or TENTACLES  
Delicate fleshy organs of prehension or touch possessed by many of the
lower animals.

TERTIARY  
The latest geological epoch, immediately preceding the establishment of
the present order of things.

TRACHEA  
The windpipe or passage for the admission of air to the lungs.

TRIDACTYLE  
Three-fingered, or composed of three movable parts attached to a common
base.

TRILOBITES  
A peculiar group of extinct crustaceans, somewhat resembling the
woodlice in external form, and, like some of them, capable of rolling
themselves up into a ball. Their remains are found only in the
Palaeozoic rocks, and most abundantly in those of Silurian age.

TRIMORPHIC  
Presenting three distinct forms.

UMBELLIFERAE  
An order of plants in which the flowers, which contain five stamens and
a pistil with two styles, are supported upon footstalks which spring
from the top of the flower stem and spread out like the wires of an
umbrella, so as to bring all the flowers in the same head (umbel) nearly
to the same level. (Examples, parsley and carrot.)

UNGULATA  
Hoofed quadrupeds.

UNICELLULAR  
Consisting of a single cell.

VASCULAR  
Containing blood-vessels.

VERMIFORM  
Like a worm.

VERTEBRATA: or VERTEBRATE ANIMALS  
The highest division of the animal kingdom, so called from the presence
in most cases of a backbone composed of numerous joints or vertebrae,
which constitutes the centre of the skeleton and at the same time
supports and protects the central parts of the nervous system.

WHORLS  
The circles or spiral lines in which the parts of plants are arranged
upon the axis of growth.

WORKERS  
See neuters.

ZOEA-STAGE  
The earliest stage in the development of many of the higher Crustacea,
so called from the name of Zoea applied to these young animals when they
were supposed to constitute a peculiar genus.

ZOOIDS  
In many of the lower animals (such as the corals, Medusae, etc.)
reproduction takes place in two ways, namely, by means of eggs and by a
process of budding with or without separation from the parent of the
product of the latter, which is often very different from that of the
egg. The individuality of the species is represented by the whole of the
form produced between two sexual reproductions; and these forms, which
are apparently individual animals, have been called zooide.

END GLOSSARY
