[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Miscellaneous](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ml07)  [Next](ml09.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1558881867/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

DEATH AND BURIAL

 

200\. The cause of the Death Rattle is thus explained by Sir Henry
Halford, the eminent physician:--" The lungs are the last to give up the
performance of their functions and die. As death approaches they become
gradually more and more oppressed; the air-cells are loaded with an
increased quantity of the fluid which naturally lubricates their
surfaces; the atmosphere can now no longer come into contact with the
minute blood-vessels spread over the cells without first permeating this
viscous fluid-hence the rattle; nor is the contact sufficiently perfect
to change the black venous into the red arterial blood; an unprepared
fluid consequently issues from the lungs into the heart, and is thence
transmitted to every other organ of the body."

 

201\. The custom of flying a Flag Half-Mast High as a mark of mourning
and respect arose out of the old naval and military practice of lowering
the flag in time of war as a sign of submission. The vanquished always
lowered his flag, while the victor fluttered his own flag above it from
the same staff. To lower a flag, therefore, is a token of respect to
one's superior, and a signal of mourning and distress.

 

202\. Tolling the Church Bells on the death of a distinguished person
arose out of the Passing Bell formerly tolled in the parish church, the
moment any member of the congregation passed away, to invite the prayers
of all the other parishioners for the repose of his soul, and also to
drive away wicked spirits, who could not bear to hear the sound. Says
Jurandus, "It is said that the wicked spirits that be in the region of
the air fear much when they hear the bells ringing; and this is the
cause why the bells be ringing when it thundereth: to the end that the
foul fiend and wicked spirits should be abashed, and flee, and cease
from moving of the tempest."

 

203\. "Why does the judge in a criminal court assume the Black Cap when
pronouncing sentence of death?" is a question frequently asked. This is
because covering the head has from the earliest times been regarded as a
sign of mourning. Numerous examples of this occur in the Scriptures, in
the classics, and in modern literature. "The ancient English," says
Dudley Fosbrooke, in his monumental work on archology, "drew their hoods
over their heads at funerals." We read also in Peck's "Dissertata
Curiosa," of "the congregation, a very great one, sitting in the choir
to hear the funeral sermon, all covered," at the burial of Bishop Cox in
Ely Cathedral in the year 1581. Not only do the Jews keep their hats on
their heads at funerals, but in some countries they still wear black
caps at weddings, in token of mourning for the destruction of the
Temple. Another reason is that the black cap forms part of the full
dress of a judge, which is worn only on extraordinary occasions. When
the new Lord Mayor is presented in the Court of Exchequer on the 9th of
November, the judges receive him with their heads so covered.

 

204\. The Black Flag hoisted upon prison walls as a signal that the last
sentence of the law has been carried out, was first employed by
Tamerlane, Khan of the Tartars, in the fourteenth century. Whenever a
beleaguered city refused to surrender after a certain period, he
displayed a black flag, to proclaim that "the time for mercy is now
past, and the city is given up to destruction."

 

205\. A Military Funeral is always an impressive spectacle. When such a
one takes place in time of peace, the ceremonial is exactly the same as
it would be in camp or on the battle-field. A gun-carriage forms an
improvised hearse, the drums are muffled out of respect for the dead
comrade, and all arms are carried reversed to show that the company
deputed to perform the sad office count upon the forbearance of the
enemy for the time being, consequently they do not fear an attack (see
379). In the case of a cavalry officer being buried, his horse is led
behind the body; this is a survival of ancient times, when an officer's
charger was universally sacrificed at the grave-side and buried with its
master. At the conclusion of the ceremony a salute is fired over the
grave to intimate to the enemy that they are once more ready to act on
the defensive.

 

206\. The Mourning Colours of Different Nations are not devoid of
meaning. BLACK is the accepted colour throughout Europe. It expresses
the solemn midnight gloom, the total deprivation of light and joy on
account of the loss sustained. In Shakespeare's time the stage was
draped with black during the performance of a tragedy. This accounts for
the opening line in his "Henry VI.," "Hung be the heavens with black;"
the "heavens" answering to our "borders" and "flies." WHITE is the
emblem of Hope, the Chinese colour of mourning. The ladies of Rome and
Sparta dressed in white during the period of mourning. Prior to the year
1498, when Anne, queen of Charles VIII., of France, surrounded her coat
of arms with black drapery and dressed herself in black on the death of
her husband, in opposition to the prevailing custom, widows in England,
France, and Spain generally adopted white mourning. Mary, Queen of
Scots, received the name of "the White Queen," because she mourned in
white for the death of her husband, Lord Darnley. White coffins for
children are still popular; while in some parts of the country white
hat-bands in mourning for the unmarried are the rule rather than the
exception. BLACK AND WHITE STRIPED express Sorrow and Hope. This is the
mourning colour of the South Sea Islanders. The ancient Egyptians
mourned in yellow, "the sere and yellow leaf." So do the Burmese, whose
monastic habit is the same colour. In Brittany widows' caps are
invariably yellow. PALE BROWN, the colour of withered leaves, is the
Persian mourning colour. The inhabitants of Ethiopia affect GREYISH
BROWN, the colour of the earth, to which the dead return. In Syria and
Armenia SKY-BLUE is the colour of mourning, indicative of the assurance
that the deceased has gone to heaven. PURPLE was formerly the mourning
colour of all Christian princes. All the kings of France mourned in
purple. Charles II. of England mourned in purple for his brother Henry,
Duke of Gloucester, when he died in the year1660. On Good Friday the
cardinals, who bear the style of "Princes of the Church," wear purple
habits because they are then in mourning for the death of Christ. So,
also, on the death of the Pope, or of one of their number. This mourning
colour of Christian princes in general, and of the princes of the Roman
Catholic Church in particular, has been derived from the purple garment
which the Roman soldiers. put about our Lord, and mockingly saluted him
as "King of the Jews" (see 18, 373, 379).

 

207\. Mourning Hat-bands are a survival of the liripipe, or long tippet,
depending from the hood worn by males. In this country during the
Plantagenet period. When the hood was exchanged for the hat in the reign
of Henry VIII. the tippet was retained in the form of the hat-band.
Modern hat-bands, designed for ordinary wear, are so narrow as almost to
pass unnoticed, but our mourning hat-bands are identical with those
adopted during the Tudor period.

 

208\. Widows' Caps are accounted for in this way: The Egyptians and
Greeks shaved off their beards and cut off their hair in times of
mourning. The Romans did not cultivate beards, but cutting off the hair
as a sign of mourning was common to both sexes. To supply the want of a
natural head-covering, the men wore wigs, and the women caps. This
practice fell into disuse after the Romans abandoned Britain;
nevertheless, widows studiously concealed their hair during the whole
period of mourning.

 

209\. The Piece of Crape worn on the Sleeve, which has latterly
superseded the hat-band as a sign of mourning, is the recognized
military badge of mourning, derived from the scarf tied by each
"Sovereign Lady" round the left arm of her chosen knight, in the days of
chivalry, to bind him to her faithful service. No good knight and true
was ever known to part with his lady's kerchief except at the cost of
his life.

 

210\. White Gloves are presented to the undertaker's men at a funeral
for the same reason that they were formerly given to the coachmen at a
wedding, viz., because they are the emblem of innocence. At such a time
the mourners, like the bride and bridegroom of a bygone day, wish to
show that they are at peace with all the world; and as the undertaker's
men are virtually strangers to them, they well represent the world at
large. In former times a white glove was usually suspended in the high
street or in the marketplace of a country town during the annual fair;
this ensured to criminals and debtors immunity from arrest for the time
being.

 

211\. Undertakers' Mutes were originally Roman lictors dressed in black
who marched in the funeral procession under the direction of the master
of ceremonies. The object of stationing a couple of mutes at the
house-door, from the moment when the undertaker was called in until the
funeral, was to guard the body on behalf of their master until his
responsibility in the matter had ceased with the interment. Latterly
their presence seems to have been required only on the day of the
funeral. They are rarely to be met with nowadays.

 

212\. The Pall-bearers at the obsequies of the great are invariably well
chosen. When the Duke of Wellington was buried in St. Paul's Cathedral,
the pall was borne by the officers who had fought by his side in his
many campaigns. This custom of appointing such pall-bearers as the
deceased worthy might have desired to carry him to the grave has been
derived from the Romans. lmilius Paulus had for pallbearers the chief
men of Macedonia who happened to be in Rome at the time of his death;
Julius Caesar had magistrates; Augustus Caesar had senators; while
Caligula had tribunes and centurions.

 

213\. Throwing a Handful of Earth upon the Coffin, after it has been
lowered into the grave, was first ordered by a rubric of the Church in
the year 1542. This is in allusion to the passage in Scripture, "For
dust thou art, and unto dust thou shalt return." By a rubric of 1552 it
was permitted to be done "by someone standing by." Nevertheless, the
priest who reads the Burial Service is still regarded as the proper
person to perform this duty.

 

214\. Funeral Feasts were instituted by the Romans, who made the public
exposure of a corpse on the day of the funeral the occasion of a solemn
festival. The object of such exposure was to satisfy the relatives and
friends of the deceased that he had died in a perfectly natural manner.
In this may be traced the origin of Viewing the Body at an Inquest. When
all the persons so convoked had practically exculpated the heir from the
least share in the death, an offering of wine, milk, and honey, mingled
together in a small plate decorated with flowers, was made to the manes
of the deceased. This singular rite arose out of the pagan belief that
the dead were capable of drinking the health of their friends on earth.
Subsequently the whole company sat down to a feast of baked meats. At
the conclusion of the repast everything that remained was distributed
among the former employees of the deceased.

 

215\. The popular notion that Burial at the Cross Roads, where a cross
was generally set up, was reserved in former times for executed
malefactors and suicides, as the next best place to consecrated ground,
is not quite correct. The true reason was this: the Teutonic nations
always set up their altars at such places, and as criminals were
sacrificed to the gods, the place of execution was there. Hence, after
the introduction of Christianity, malefactors and suicides were buried
at the cross roads during the night, in order to convey as strong an
impression as possible of a heathen burial. Christian burials, on the
other hand, were, and are, conducted in the broad light of day, in
contradistinction to the pagan Romans, who laid their dead to rest by
night; the word Funeral being derived from the Latin funeralis, a
torchlight procession, from funis, a torch.

 

216\. The carved representation of a Skull and Crossbones at the
entrance to some of the old disused churchyards in the City, is
indicative of the burial-place of the early victims of the Great Plague
of London. When these consecrated burying-grounds were all filled up,
recourse was had to enormous plague-pits outside the City.

 

217\. The Yew Tree and the Weeping Willow are appropriate to
churchyards; the former on account of its umbrageousness and gloomy
aspect; the latter, because its drooping branches are typical of sorrow
and desolation. The suggestion that yew trees were first planted in
English churchyards so that a sufficient supply of bow-staves might be
forthcoming for the encouragement of archery practice, is by no means
well supported. To commence with, it would have required a full
century's growth to meet the demands of a single year. Secondly, that
the bow-staves of the Tudor period were obtained from abroad is shown by
certain enactments of Henry VIII., whereby all shipowners were compelled
to import bow-staves in proportion to their ordinary cargo, such
compulsory cargo being admitted duty free.

 

218\. In these days the full significance of Monumental Brasses and
Sepulchral Effigies is little "understanded of the people." The
following hints may, therefore, be of some service. SAINTS AND MARTYRS
always lie to the east of the high altar (see 23), and are elevated
above the ground exactly in proportion to their acknowledged sanctity.
HOLY MEN, not canonised, lie level with the ground, while FOUNDERS OF
CHAPELS may be known by their monuments built into the wall.
CROSS-LEGGED FIGURES are Crusaders, or those who at any time during
their lives made a vow to proceed to Palestine, there to fight the
Infidel under the banner of the Cross; where the figure is in the act of
sheathing his sword, it means that his vow has been fulfilled. RECUMBENT
AND KNEELING FIGURES are ordinary knights; those with a chalice in their
hands are priests, or if with mitre, crosier or crook, and pontificals,
prelates; whereas female figures wearing a mantle and a ring are nuns
(see 34). When HUSBAND AND WIFE lie close together on a table-tombstone,
it is not difficult to tell if they lived during the age of chivalry or
after. In the former event, the universal homage paid to woman demanded
that she should occupy the place of honour, viz., at a man's right hand.
Since the decline of chivalry she has everywhere been placed on his
left-hand side. The presence of A LION AT THE FEET of a monumental
effigy of a man is symbolical of courage and magnanimity, exactly as A
DOG AT THE FEET of a woman symbolizes affection and fidelity. Crusaders
are often represented with a dog at their feet, indicating by this means
that they followed the standard of the Cross as faithfully as a dog
follows his master. The effigy of Edward the Black Prince in Canterbury
Cathedral furnishes an example of this kind. KNEELING Boys on tombs
remind us that formerly children were not allowed to sit down unless
bidden, but were expected to kneel upon cushions when in the presence of
their parents.

 

219\. It is not unusual in old churchyards to meet with tombstone
inscriptions commencing with the words, " Stop, Traveller! " Now,
although it is true that, except in cases where a cross-cut from the
public high-road leads directly through the God's acre, few "travellers"
ever visit the earthly mansions of the dead, it should be remembered
that the Romans invariably buried their warriors by the side of some
great military road, and placed a monument over their bodies, the
inscription on which was headed Siste, viator (Stop, traveller). In
their case, at least, the injunction was sufficiently appropriate.

 

220\. The Jewish Mode of Burial is simplicity itself. There is not the
slightest need to call in an undertaker, the whole of the arrangements
being carried out by the officials of the synagogue at a fixed charge.
From the moment of death until the interment the body is never left
alone. Two days is the limit of time during which the dead are allowed
to remain above ground. There is no adornment of the wooden coffin, nor
are flowers permitted to be placed either inside or on the lid. Velvet
and feathers are likewise prohibited. All expenses over and above those
incurred in respect of the actual interment are discountenanced. The
burial-grounds are euphemistically called "Houses of Life," though they
are virtually mansions of the dead. Family vaults are unknown, because a
corpse can on no account be suffered to repose on a shelf; it must be
placed six feet beneath the surface of the earth. Neither is it
permitted for one coffin to be placed above another. No prayers are said
at the grave-side, except "May he \[or she\] go into his \[or her\]
place in peace." The orations which on rare occasions are delivered at
the interment of a distinguished person must be brief. Hats are not
removed at any time. Females are never allowed to follow a corpse to the
grave. Priests may not enter a burial-ground at all, except at the
interment of a near relative, such as a father or mother. In Biblical
times, those who had suffered defilement by coming in contact with a
dead body were compelled to attend a purification service in the Temple;
nowadays, all persons on leaving the cemetery must wash their hands. The
only food laid before the mourners on returning to the house consists of
hard-boiled eggs and salt, the respective symbols of regeneration and
incorruptibility. For seven days all mirrors are covered over, so that
none shall see the reflection of his face or any sign of joy. During
this period the members of the household sit on lower chairs than usual;
they do not wear boots, and all manner of work is suspended. To meet the
case of the poor in this respect a monetary allowance is made.

 

221\. The Parsee mode of disposing of the dead is exposure on The Towers
of Silence. Perfectly naked, the bodies deposited on these lofty
structures become the prey of vultures perpetually hovering around. To
make room for fresh arrivals, it is the business of an attendant to
topple the newly-pecked bones to the foot of the tower with the aid of a
pair of tongs. This final destruction of the body awaits all classes,
from the highest to the lowest. According to the Zoroastrian religion
neither fire, which is the common object of worship, nor the earth,
which produces fruit, must be defiled by contact with a dead body.

 

222\. The custom, universal among the ancient Egyptians, of Embalming
the Dead Body is easily accounted for. It was one of the fundamental
articles of their religion that after a period of three or four thousand
years the soul would return to the body, therefore the latter had to be
preserved from corruption. Meantime the soul was destined to occupy the
bodies of a succession of inferior animals. This was why most of the
lower animals were held sacred, and flesh meat was never eaten.

 

223\. Modern researches have proved beyond a doubt that the Pyramids of
Egypt, both great and small, were constructed for no other purpose than
to contain the embalmed bodies of notable personages. Knowing this, one
need not be surprised to learn that the entire number of pyramids in
Egypt--between sixty and seventy--are spread over that extensive
necropolis near the city of Memphis in which the people were known to
bury their dead. When first explored all the chambers in the interior of
these pyramids contained sarcophagi. In one case the sarcophagus
enclosed a coffin, the inscription upon which showed that it had at one
time contained the mummy of a king. The chief reason why the aristocracy
of Egypt affected this costly and enduring mode of sepulchre was the
universal dread which the pillagers of the tombs anciently inspired
among the people. Not even the tombs of the kings were safe from the
visitations of these plunderers. The three largest and principal
pyramids were certainly constructed by three kings of the fourth dynasty
as places of sepulture for themselves. Labour was cheap in those days,
and kings were tyrants. Cheops, the builder of the Great Pyramid, had no
compunction about impressing a hundred thousand men during a period of
twenty yearsleaving out of count the ten years required to construct a
causeway from the Nile bank to the actual site of the work -in the
colossal undertaking upon which he had set his heart. On the outside of
the pyramid, when completed, was set forth in Egyptian characters the
enormous sums expended while the work was in progress for the radishes,
onions, and garlic supplied to the labourers, but nothing is mentioned
about wages. It is a sad reflection that the greatest monuments which
now excite the wonder and admiration of our species were reared at the
cost, of an incalculable amount of human suffering in an age when a
monarch's will was law, and a universal system of slavery prevailed.

 

224\. There is no longer any room for doubt concerning the primary
object of the Roman Catacombs. Neither disused sandpits, turned to good
account by the early Christians for places of refuge and secret worship,
nor puticoli, or pits, into which, as has been said, the Romans flung
the bodies of their slaves, because they considered them unworthy of
decent sepulture, were originally these subterranean galleries, which,
after having been closed and forgotten for hundreds of years, may now
once more be traversed. The arenarioe, or sandpits, which are common
enough around Rome, exist in a different stratum altogether from the
Catacombs. When persecution increased in severity, and the ordinary
approaches to the hiding-places of the Christians became known to their
persecutors, a secret entrance through some disused sandpit may in many
cases have been constructed for greater convenience and security. But
that the Catacombs themselves, with their storied galleries one above
another, and countless ramifications extending for miles in different
directions, could ever have been excavated without the knowledge of the
authorities was impossible. The whole truth of the matter is this: the
Catacombs were, from the first, the recognized burial-places of the
early Christians. The pagan Romans had their family burial-places, too,
but these, styled columbaria, from their resemblance to dovecotes, were
simply depositories for the urns containing the ashes of the cremated
body. The Christians, on the other hand, as Minucius Felix reminds us,
"execrated funeral pyres, and condemned the sepultures of flame." This
is easy to understand. Being for the most part a Greek-speaking
community of converted Jews, the earliest followers of the new religion
desired to bury their dead, as had always been the Jewish custom, and
because the Son of God had Himself been laid in a rocky tomb. Although
advocates of cremation themselves, the Romans placed no restrictions
upon those who held an opposite view. Those who wished to bury their
dead, either out of preference for such a mode of sepulture, or because
they could not afford to pay the usual charges for cremation and the
exclusive right to a columbarium, had full liberty to do so. This
liberty was extended also to the Christians; indeed, it was the only
Christian office that they were allowed to perform undisturbed.
Fortunately for the Christians the Romans paid the utmost respect to all
places set apart for the burial of the dead, such places enjoying the
special protection of the municipal authorities. The formation of the
Catacombs had very humble beginnings. First of all a small plot of
ground was secured and consecrated. The next step was to run an
underground gallery around the enclosed area, and construct stairways in
connection therewith. On both sides of the gallery, loculi, or cavities
for the accommodation of the dead, were then cut. As soon as the first
series of galleries was fully tenanted, a second series was commenced on
a lower level; and, in due course, a third, on a still lower level.
Frequently as many as five such stories of galleries are to be met with.
If it chanced that a person of distinction in a wealthy family desired a
private vault, such a one, called a cubiculum, was excavated out of the
earth lying between two main corridors. In these small rectangular
chambers the martyrs were usually buried, their tombs serving as altars
upon which Mass was celebrated. Thus, when the persecutions at length
broke out, this subterranean city became at once a secure asylum for the
living, and a safe burialplace for the dead. For three centuries it was
the palace of the Popes, and the home of the Spouse of Christ.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Amusements of the People](ml09.md)
