[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Miscellaneous](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ml10)  [Next](ml12.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1558881867/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

FESTIVALS OF THE CHURCH

 

357\. Annual Festivals in honour of the saints and martyrs were
instituted by Gregory, Bishop of Csarea, in the third century, to
facilitate the conversion of the pagans, who were unwilling to forego
the recreations incidental to the festivals of their gods. This example
once set, the institution of Holy Days--a term now corrupted into
"holidays"--in commemoration of some of the most important events in the
history of the Church was easy. In old almanacks such holy days were set
forth in red ink, and the rest in black. Hence the expression,
Red-Letter Day.

 

358\. The first day of the Christian Year commemorates the Circumcision
of our Lord. It was instituted as a solemn festival in the sixth
century, to atone for the excesses committed by the pagans on this day.
In accordance with the Jewish custom, the Child Christ was circumcised
in the Temple on the eighth day after His Birth, and on the same
occasion he received the name of JESUS, as made known to the Virgin by
the angel Gabriel (Luke i. 31). Circumcision on the eighth day after the
birth of a male child is still enjoined upon all Jews. The Mohammedans
have recourse to circumcision too, but it is not performed by them until
the child is old enough to make his own profession of faith: "There is
no God but God, and Mohammed is the Apostle of God." It was practised by
the Arabs ages before the time of Mohammed, having been introduced by
the Ishmaelites, the descendants of the son of Hagar, from whom the Arab
al Mostéreba, or naturalized Arabs (in contradistinction to the Arab al
Ariba, or pure Arabs), trace their origin. From the Jews, likewise, the
Egyptians, Colchians, Phoenicians, and Ethiopians derived the custom,
but, as is the case among the Mohammedans to-day, these ancient peoples
performed it merely from motives of cleanliness, to promote health, and
secure immunity from certain painful diseases to which males in hot
climates are subject. It is only among the Jews that circumcision is
regarded as a religious rite. Its meaning is explained in Genesis xvii.

 

359\. The Feast of the Epiphany (January 6th), so called from the Greek
Epiphaneia, a showing or appearance, commemorates Christ's manifestation
to the Gentiles, represented by the three kings, or Magi, named Gaspar,
Meichior, and Baithazar, who, guided by a miraculous star, came to adore
Him. It may be mentioned here that the bodies of the Magi repose in
Cologne Cathedral, whither they were removed from Milan in 1162, when
Frederick Barbarossa laid waste that city.

 

360\. An odd religious observance took place in olden times on January
14th, known as the Feast of the Ass. A beautiful girl, seated on an ass
with gay trappings, and holding an infant child at her breast, was led
through the town to the church, and there placed at the Gospel side of
the altar while Mass was being said. This was in commemoration of the
Flight into Egypt.

 

361\. In connection with the Feast of St. Anthony (January 17th), there
is a curious blessing of beasts of all kinds at the church dedicated to
that saint at Rome, and possibly elsewhere. Everyone, from the Pope
himself to the peasant, who possesses a horse, mule, ass, or dog, sends
it with a small donation to St. Anthony's Church, to be there sprinkled
with holy water, and so placed under the special protection of the
saint. The life-long solicitude of St. Anthony for the lower animals is
a sufficient explanation for the existence of this singular custom.

 

362\. The Festival of St. Peter's Chair (January 18th) was instituted as
an act of gratitude for the Primacy of St. Peter. Alban Butler, the
author of the "Lives of the Saints," informs us that it is of
considerable antiquity, being mentioned in a martyrology copied during
the lifetime of St. Wihibrod, viz., in the year 720. He adds:
"Christians justly celebrate the founding of this Mother Church, the
centre of Catholic Communion, in thanksgiving to God for I us mercies,
and to implore His future blessing." On this solemn festival, which is
one of the few "functions," as they are called, celebrated in the
magnificent church of St. Peter, the Pope is borne on the shoulders of
twelve men in his Sedia Geslatoria, or Pontifical Chair of State,
attired in vestments of gold, and wearing the tiara, or triple crown
(see 24). On each side of His Holiness is carried a large fan of ostrich
feathers, into which are set the eye-like portions of peacocks'
feathers, symbolical of vigilance and universal supervision.

 

363\. The ceremony of Kissing the Pope's Foot on the Feast of St. Peter
has always been a fruitful theme for comment. But this kissing of the
foot is an ancient Oriental rite, expressive of esteem and affection. At
the present time it is no uncommon thing for a Mohammedan to wash and
kiss the feet of a guest who has travelled a long distance to pay him
honour. Instances are recorded of the Roman emperors having their feet
kissed by their subjects as a mark of homage. The same act of
humiliation is performed by the Pope himself on Maundy Thursday (see
378). Did not the penitent Magdalen kiss the feet of our Lord? We read
that Cornelius, the centurion, cast himself at the feet of Simon Peter
in veneration of the Divine messenger. It would appear that this mode of
paying homage to the successors of St. Peter existed from very early
times, because it is related of St. Susanna, a virgin who suffered
martyrdom in the year 294, that she kissed the feet of Pope Caius,
"according to custom." The most powerful princes of the Christian world
have paid homage to the Pope by kissing his feet. Yet this homage is not
intended for the Pope himself. Since the time of Gregory the Great, so
the Rubricists remind us, the Popes have been accustomed to wear the
Cross on their sandals, so that the homage might be referred to Christ
crucified.

 

364\. On the Feast of St. Agnes (January 21st) two chosen lambs are
blessed by the priest in the church of St. Peter ad Vincula, at Rome,
which stands on the site of the martyrdom of St. Agnes. This has a
two-fold significance. In the first place, it commemorates the lamb
which appeared by the side of the saint when she manifested herself in a
vision to the early Christians (see 256). Secondly, it was a custom
among the Romans to invoke the blessing of sheep by Pales, the goddess
of sheepfolds and pastures; and as the early Christians could not easily
be weaned from this pagan observance, the blessing of a lamb on the
altar as the symbol of purity and innocence, together with the reading
of the Gospel of the Good Shepherd, was permitted in all churches
throughout Christendom on St. Agnes' Day. In most cases this lamb, gaily
decorated, was first led through the streets by a holiday-making
populace. But at the church of St. Agnes, at Rome, two lambs are blessed
for a very special purpose. Perhaps it will be more correct to say that
it is the fleeces of these lambs which receive the blessing, since it is
from them that the material for the pallium of a Roman Catholic
archbishop is provided. After Mass on St. Agnes' Day the sheep are
carefully guarded until shearing time, when the wool is woven in
old-fashioned style by the nuns of St. Lawrence. On the vigil of the
Festival of SS. Peter and Paul, the newlymade pallia are carried on
gilded trays to the Altar of the Confession in the magnificent church
dedicated to St. Peter, and at the conclusion of the first vespers
appointed for that (lay they are solemnly blessed by the Pope. All night
long they are left lying upon the shrine, and on the following (lay are
locked up in a silver coffer close to the relics of St. Peter, where
they remain until required for the investiture of new archbishops. It is
on account of their deposition on the tomb of the Prince of the Apostles
that the pallia, when forwarded to their intended wearers, are said to
come "from the body of St. Peter."

 

365\. On St. Paul's Day (January 25th) in the olden time, a fat buck and
doe were annually presented to the Dean and Chapter in St. Paul's
Cathedral, in the presence of the Bishop of London, and a priest from
each parish within his diocese. This singular custom had its origin in
the obligation incurred by Sir Walter de Band, an Essex knight, in the
year 1375, when he obtained permission to enclose twenty acres of the
Dean's land, subject to the presentation by him to the clergy of the
cathedral of a fat buck and doe every year on the Festival of the
Conversion of St. Paul.

 

366\. The Feast of the Purification (February 2nd) commemorates the
Purification of the Virgin in the Temple on the fortieth day after
childbirth, and the presentation of our Lord on the same occasion, in
accordance with the

 Jewish custom. It is called Candlemas Day, because on this day the
Catholic Church blesses her candles for the whole year, and invites the
congregation to attend Mass with lighted candles in their hands, in
memory of the Divine light with which Christ illuminated the whole
Church at this presentation, when holy Simeon took Him into his arms,
saying: "Lord, now lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace, according
to Thy word; for mine eyes have seen Thy salvation which Thou hast
prepared before the face of all people: a light to lighten the Gentiles,
and the glory of Thy people Israel." With this meaning the festival was
instituted by Pope Gelasius in the fifth century, under the following
circumstances, as set forth by Pope Innocent XII. in the course of a
sermon: "Why do we in this feast carry candles? Because the Gentiles
dedicated the month of February to the infernal gods, and as at the
beginning of it Pluto stole Proserpine, and her mother Ceres sought her
in the night with lighted candles, so they, at the beginning of this
month, walked about the city with lighted candles; because the holy
fathers could not extirpate this custom they ordained that Christians
should carry about candles in honour of the Blessed Virgin Mary, and
thus, what was done before to the honour of Ceres, is now done to the
honour of the Virgin." In olden times the people were accustomed to walk
with lighted candles through the streets in procession to early Mass on
this day. It is in honour of the Purification of the Virgin, too, that
Catholic women hold a lighted candle in their hands at their "churching"
after childbirth.

 

367\. The Feast of the Annunciation (March 25th) was instituted in
memory of the day upon which "the angel of the Lord appeared unto Mary"
and announced that she was to become the mother of the Son of God. It
will be noticed that it occurs exactly nine months before Christmas Day.
The secular term for this festival, Lady Day, is obviously a corruption
of "Our Lady's Day" or Feast of our Lady.

 

368\. Shrove Tuesday received its name from the shriving or confession
enjoiiied upon all devout Catholics in pre-Reformation times as a
fitting preparation for the penitential season of Lent (see 425).

 

369\. The word Lent is an abbreviation of the Old English and
Anglo-Saxon term for Spring. As everyone knows, the season of Lent
commemorates the miraculous forty days' fast of our Saviour in the
desert. Counted from Ash Wednesday to Holy Saturday inclusive, there are
forty-six days, but since, with the exception that flesh meat and fish
are not allowed at the same meal, the six Sundays do not count, the
number of actual fast days is reduced to forty. In olden times the
Lenten fast was observed in a very strict manner. Not only was flesh
meat forbidden during the whole forty days, but even the things derived
from flesh, such as milk, eggs, butter, cheese, and lard, were
interdicted for the like period. Consequently they had to be used up on
Shrove Tuesday, and were invariably made into pancakes (see 425). Fish
was the common diet of the people at this season. The historian
Froissart tells us that "there were daily delivered to the Germans in
the army ten tons of herrings for Lent, and 8oo carp, without counting
different sorts of fish, which cost the king immense sums." There was,
however, a reason for this. He adds: "The fast was encouraged for
political purposes, to promote the fisheries and naval service, to the
saving and increase of butcher's meat."

 

370\. Ash Wednesday ushers in the penitential season of Lent. On this
day, in the Roman Catholic Church, the ashes obtained by the burning of
the palms used on the Palm Sunday previous, are blessed and distributed
by the priest, who makes the sign of the Cross with them on the forehead
of every member of the congregation, saying, "Remember, man, thou art
but dust, and unto dust thou shalt return." This ceremony commemorates
God's curse of Adam after the Fall, and its celebration at the
commencement of Lent is appropriate, inasmuch as the Jews in ancient
times were accustomed to cover their heads with ashes, and wear garments
of sackcloth during a period of mourning and penance. In the Anglican
Church, the reading of the curses directed against impenitent sinners
takes the place of the distribution of ashes on this day.

 

371\. Every Friday in Lent an impressive service, styled The Way of the
Cross, takes place in the Roman Catholic churches. Around the walls of
the church will be found fourteen pictures representing the progress of
our Lord from the judgment hall of Pontius Pilate to Mount Calvary, His
Death upon the Cross, and the deposition of His Sacred Body in the
sepulchre. These are called "the Stations of the Cross." The priest,
attended by the altar and choirboys, and often followed by members of
the congregation, passes from station to station, there to meditate upon
a particular incident of Christ's Passion. This devotion originated in
the pilgrimages which so many pious people of the olden time undertook
to the Holy Land during Lent, in order to walk in the very footsteps of
our Saviour, and to pray upon the very spot where He suffered. As it was
impossible for every one to make these pilgrimages, the Church
authorized the erection or representation of corresponding "Stations" in
the churches, and granted to all who visited them the same Indulgences
as were claimed by the pilgrims who went to Jerusalem.

 

372\. Ember Days, so called in allusion to the ancient mode of doing
penance in sackcloth and ashes, are days set apart for special fasting
and prayer in each of the four seasons of the year. They were instituted
by Pope Calixtus in the third century, primarily to prepare the clergy
for ordination, according to the manner set forth in Acts xiii. 3; and
secondly, as a means of supplicating the Divine blessing upon the
produce of the earth. The Council of Placentia of 1095 fixed the days
uniformly as follows: the Wednesday, Thursday, and Saturday after the
first Sunday in Lent, Whit Sunday, September 14th, and December 13th.
The weeks in which these days occur are styled Ember Weeks.

 

373\. Passion Sunday, or the Sunday before Palm Sunday, is so called
because it is set apart in the Roman Catholic Church for a general
commemoration of the Passion. From the eve of this day until Easter
Sunday, all pictures and statues in the churches are covered over, so as
to concentrate the attention of the congregation upon the Passion and
Death of our Lord. The cloths employed for this purpose are purple,
which is the mourning colour of the Church (see 379).

 

374\. According to local tradition, the origin of The Ober-Ammergau
Passion Play was as follows. When, in the year 1633, a deadly plague
threatened to depopulate the districts of Partenkirchen, Eschelohe, and
Kohigrub, which are separated from Ammerthal, or the Valley of the
Ammer, by a rampart of mountains, the Ammerthalers succeeded for a time
in protecting themselves against the dread contagion; but one day a
native who had been working all the summer at Eschelohe, evaded the
quarantine, and entered the Ammerthal by a secret path in order to
celebrate an annual Church festival with his family. Two days afterwards
he was a corpse, and in less than three weeks the plague had carried off
eighty-four of the Ammerthalers. Despairing of all human succour, the
terrified survivors addressed themselves to God, and registered a solemn
vow that if He heard their prayer and removed the scourge, they would
represent every ten years "for thankful remembrance and edifying
contemplation, and by the help of the Almighty, the sufferings of Jesus,
the Saviour of the world." Presumably their prayer was heard, for we are
told that "not a single person died of the plague after the vow was
made, though many were infected by it." The first representation of the
Passion Play, in fulfilment of the vow of these simple villagers took
place at Ober-Ammergau in the following year, and it has been repeated
every ten years without a single omission.

 

375\. Palm Sunday owes its name to the distribution of palms to the
congregations in the Roman Catholic churches to commemorate the
triumphal entry of our Lord into Jerusalem seated on an ass, while the
populace strewed palm branches in His path, crying, "Hosanna to the Son
of David!" In olden times, the better to impress this incident upon the
minds of the people, a wooden figure of an ass mounted upon wheels, and
with an effigy of the Saviour upon it, was drawn through the church, and
as the priests walked in front chanting the service, the congregation
threw their palm twigs down before it.

 

376\. The commemoration services of The Passion commence on Wednesday in
Holy Week, because it was on this day that the Jews at their great
council resolved to take the life of our Lord by charging Him with
sundry crimes before Pontius Pilate, the Roman governor. This is the
reason also why Lent begins on a Wednesday, and why Wednesday as well as
Friday is observed as a fast day during Lent and Advent. In olden times
Wednesday, like Friday, was a fast day throughout the year.

 

377\. On Wednesday, Thursday, and Friday evenings in Holy Week, a solemn
and impressive service is chanted in the Roman Catholic churches. This
is called the Tenebr, literally, darkness. On a triangular candlestick,
placed at the Epistle side of the high altar, are fifteen candles, seven
yellow ones on each side, and a white one on the top. These correspond
to the number of psalms recited. As each psalm is concluded one of the
yellow candles is extinguished, until the white one alone remains. At
the same time, while the Benedictus or Canticle of Zachary is sung, the
lights on the altar and in the body of the church are also extinguished.
Then the white candle is taken down and concealed behind the altar, and
a loud rapping on their prayer-books on the part of the congregation
takes place. Eventually, after the recital of the fifteenth psalm, the
white candle is restored. The extinction of the yellow candles
represents the death of the prophets who lived and died before the time
of our Lord; and the concealment and reappearance of the white candle
His own death, burial, and resurrection. The rapping on the prayer-books
is in allusion to the splitting of the rocks and the opening of the
tombs at the Crucifixion.

 

378\. Maundy Thursday is so called from the Mandate, or washing of the
feet appointed for the day in imitation of our Lord before the Last
Supper. This act of humiliation is still performed by the Pope, bishops,
and superiors of religious houses, as it was also in former times by
Christian sovereigns and princes throughout the world (see 429). The
predecessors of Leo XIII. invariably washed the feet of thirteen
bishops, representing the twelve apostles, and the angel who appeared to
Gregory the Great while he was performing a special act of charity on
behalf of some poor people. After the washing and drying His Holiness
reverently kissed the right foot of each bishop, and then waited upon
them with his own hands at the supper-table. Instead of the feet of
thirteen bishops, the present Pope washes those of twelve poor men,
literally beggars. The apron that he wears over his soutane during this
ceremony is regarded as a great treasure, and is afterwards made by the
Benedictine nuns into palls to cover the chalices for all the convents
of their Order. The washing, and kissing of the right foot concluded,
His Holiness serves the supper to these twelve beggars in a room
adjoining his study. The discovery of a bank-note for a hundred francs
under the table-napkin of each doubtless adds a pleasurable zest to his
appetite.

 

379\. Good Friday is a very solemn day in all the churches of the Roman
Catholic Communion. It was anciently styled Long Friday on account of
the length of the service. The high altar is stripped of all its
decorations, and the Eucharist is removed to a side altar, or
"Sepulchre," so that visitations to the latter will not interfere with
the due observance of the Passion at the chief altar of the church,
which the rubrics require to be left without any ornament whatsoever.
For the ordinary wax candles and torches, ghastly-looking yellow ones
are substituted. At Rome, the nakedness of the Papal throne, and the
seats of the cardinals indicate the utter desolation of the Church
consequent on the death of the Saviour. On this occasion only the
cardinals appear in robes of purple, which is their mourning colour (see
206). Neither they nor the bishops wear their rings. Even the Pope lays
his signet aside for the day. The Papal mace and the arms of the Papal
guards are carried reversed (see 205). All over the city, from Maundy
Thursday until after the Gloria at Mass on Holy Saturday morning, the
bells are silenced. Even in hotels and private houses, what is called a
Iroccofa, or pair of small wooden clappers, takes the place of the usual
handbell rung at meals for the time being.

 

380\. Holy Saturday owes its name primarily to the commemoration of the
burial of our Lord, and, secondly, to the various holy offices which are
performed by the Roman Catholic clergy on this day against the solemn
festival of Easter. It has always been the custom of the Church to bless
those things which the people make use of in ordinary life; hence fire
and water are annually blessed on Holy Saturday. All lights and fires
being first put out, a new fire is struck from a flint, and blessed.
"This new fire," says St. John Chrysostom, ' represents Christ rising to
kindle in our hearts a new spiritual fire of His love; the old profane
fire of our earthly profane passions being first extinguished in us by
His victory over sin. It likewise serves symbolically to put us in mind
of our obligation of walking in the newness of a spiritual heavenly
life, being now risen with Christ by His grace." The blessing of the
baptismal font, the water used for sprinkling, and the Paschal candle
are also peculiar to this day (see 381).

 

381\. Easter, commemorative of the Resurrection of our Lord, is one of
the greatest festivals of the year. The term itself has no Christian
significance, being derived from Eoster, the goddess of light, or
Spring, in whose honour the pagan Saxons celebrated an annual festival
at this season (see 432). On Easter Sunday the churches are gaily
decorated, and the organ, which has been silent during Lent, once more
breaks out into solemn harmony. The Paschal Candle, on the Gospel side
of the high altar is particularly noticeable. This great candle was in
ancient times employed to give light during the watchings of the
congregants in the church on Easter Eve. From Easter until the end of
Paschal-time, or Pentecost, it is always lighted during Mass and
Vespers, as an illustrious emblem of Christ, the Light of the World,
having risen from the dead. The five grains of frankincense stuck into
it symbolically represent His five precious wounds, and the sweet spices
brought by the devout women to the sepulchre. It may be mentioned here
that the term Pasch comes from the French asque, the Latin aschalis, the
Greek ascha, and the Hebrew Fesach, or Passover, which festival occurs
about the same time as our Easter (see 397). As determined by Gregory
the Great, the reformer of the Christian Calendar, Easter must be the
Sunday which follows the fourteenth day of the Paschal moon; if that
fourteenth day be a Sunday, then Easter must be the Sunday following. It
is by Easter that all the other movable feasts of the year are
determined.

 

382\. As symbols of the Resurrection, White Lilies enter largely into
the Eastertide decoration of the churches. This is in accordance with a
Judan legend that after the Saviour rose from the tomb, the places
whereon He trod were marked by white lilies which sprang up and
blossomed in His footsteps.

 

383\. The Spital Sermon annually preached at Christ Church, Newgate
Street, on Easter Tuesday, in the presence of the Lord Mayor, the
Sheriffs, the Governors of Christ's I lospital, and the Blue-coat boys,
is a relic of an ancient custom, pursuant to which the Bishop of London
preached a sermon at St. Paul's Cross on Good Friday on the subject of
Christ's Passion, and three other divines upheld the doctrine of the
Resurrection during Eastertide at the pulpitcross of the Spital,
otherwise the churchyard of St. Mary of the Spittle (now Spitalfields),
where the "Blues" had a gallery erected for them. The Spital sermons
were afterwards preached at St. Bride's Church, Fleet Street, and then,
having been reduced to two, were continued at Christ Church, where only
one sermon is now preached. Previous to attending the church the
Blue-coat boys generally wait upon the Lord Mayor at the Mansion House
to receive certain gratuities.

 

384\. What are called Rogation Days, from the Latin rogare, to beseech,
occur on the three days preceding Ascension Day. These are days of
special supplication for pardon of sins, peace, blessings on the fruits
of the earth, and protection from the power of the arch enemy of
mankind. On these days, in ancient times, the clergy, accompanied by the
churchwardens, the school-boys, and a goodly number of the congregation
made a perambulation of the parish boundaries, where, at certain
prescribed places, prayers were offered up for the good of the harvest
and the confusion of the devil. If the parish boasted of a fine oaktree,
the Gospel of the day-or rather of the preceding Sunday, called Rogation
Sunday, because the Gospel appointed for it teaches us how to ask of God
in order that we may receive-was read, and a short sermon was preached
under it. On this account the tree received the name of a Gospel Oak. At
certain other places near the parochial boundaries the school-boys
received a whipping, with the object of fixing them firmly in their
minds (see 428). In all cases a representation of the Evil One, in the
form of a dragon, was carried at the head of the procession, side by
side with the image of the patron saint of the parish, and at times also
of our Saviour. As often, however, as a pause was made for prayer the
dragon was taken to a place quite out of earshot, and left there until
the procession moved on again. This explains why so many parishes have
their dragon localities, such as the "Dragon's Rock," the "Dragon's
Well," etc., denoting the places where the dragon was left at
prayertime, or, as may have happened in some cases, where it was kicked,
stoned, buffeted, and even pulled to pieces by the processionists at the
close of the third day's rogation.

 

385\. The Feast of the Ascension is celebrated on the fortieth day after
Easter Sunday, in memory of the Ascension of our Lord into Heaven from
the summit of Mount Olivet, in the presence of His Mother, and His
Apostles, and disciples. Originally the Paschal candle was removed after
High Mass on Ascension Day, but it is now allowed to remain in its
accustomed place until Whitsuntide (see 386).

 

386\. The Feast of Pentecost, signifying "the fiftieth day," is
synonymous with Shovuos, the second great festival of the Jewish
ecclesiastical year, in commemoration of the giving of the Law to Moses
on Mount Sinai fifty days after the deliverance of the Israelites out of
Egypt. By Christians,, Pentecost is kept as a great festival in honour
of the descent of the Holy Ghost upon the Apostles in the form of fiery
tongues. In olden times, the better to impress this incident upon the
minds of the people, a dove was let down from the roof of the church in
the course of the Mass on this day. Another name for this festival is
Whitsuntide, so called because the catechumens who had received the rite
of Baptism on the previous day were clothed in white while attending
Mass during Pentecost. Hence Whit Sunday is really a corruption of "
White Sunday."

 

387\. The annual Flower Sermon preached at the church of St. Katherine
Cree, Leadenhall Street, on Whit Tuesday evening, was instituted by the
Rev. Dr. W. M. Whittemore, the rector, because, as he himself states, he
"thought it would be a good opportunity of leading our youthful hearers
to a closer contemplation of God's wisdom and love as manifested by the
beautiful and fragrant flowers which He scatters around us in such rich
profusion." The first flower sermon was preached in the year 1853, and
the subject has always been a floral one. On this occasion a beautiful
offering of flowers adorns the pulpit, and every member of the
congregation is armed with a bouquet. The flowers are afterwards
presented to various orphanages.

 

388\. The Feast of the Holy Trinity, which occurs on the first Sunday
after Whitsuntide, was instituted in honour of the Three Persons in One
Godhead by Pope Gregory IV., in the year 828. It is believed to have
been introduced into England by St. Thomas a Becket towards the end of
the twelfth century.

 

389\. The Feast of Corpus Christi, in honour of the Body and Blood of
Christ, which, as all Roman Catholics believe, are ever present in the
Sacrament of the Holy Eucharist as instituted by our Lord Himself at the
Last Supper, is celebrated on the first Thursday after Trinity Sunday in
order to reanimate the devotion of the faithful towards that adorable
mystery. As such a high festival could not well have been observed
during Holy Week, it was most fittingly transferred to the Thursday
within the octave of Trinity Sunday. Corpus Christi Day is a great day
of religious processions in Catholic countries, as it was also in
England in pre-Reformation times. On the eve of this festival the
choristers of Durham Cathedral ascend the tower in their surplices and
sing the 2'e .Deum. This is to commemorate the miraculous preservation
of the tower on Corpus Christi Eve, A. D. 1429, when it was struck by
lightfling and set on fire; for though the flames raged all night and
till the middle of the next day, the tower and its bells remained
uninjured. The extinction of the flames was by everyone imputed to the
special intervention of St. Cuthbert, whose relics are enshrined in the
Cathedral.

 

390\. Harvest Festivals are, so far as the Anglican Church is concerned,
a latter-day institution. This is strange, seeing that in
pre-Reformation times Lammas Day, so called from the Anglo-Saxon hlaf a
loaf; and nuesse, a feast, and which fell on August 1st, was marked by
the presentation of a loaf made of new wheat in the churches by every
member of the congregation. Previous to the reformation of the Calendar
in 17 52, Lammas-tide ushered in the second quarter of the year. Since
then the term has fallen into total disuse. Different peoples have
different seasons for harvest thanksgiving. When the Jews inhabited
Palestine the festival of Pentecost embraced a thanksgiving for a
bountiful harvest; but as the wheat is not gathered in Northern Europe
at the time of Pentecost, flowers take the place of the first-fruits in
the synagogues. The Druids had their harvest festival on November 1st;
the Chinese and Japanese have theirs at the year's close; while in
America November 24th is everywhere observed as Thanksgiving Day for the
blessings of the year in general and the bounties of the harvest in
particular. This "Thanksgiving Day" is a legacy of the Puritans, who
abolished Christmas out of their hatred of the prelacy.

 

391\. The Feast of the Holy Rosary (October 1st) was instituted by Pope
Pius IV., in thanksgiving for the Christian victory over the Turks at
Lepanto, which was believed to have been due to the special intercession
of the Virgin in response to the prayers of the Rosarians to this end.
The original title of the annual commemoration was "The Feast of St.
Mary of Victory," but Pope Gregory XIII. afterwards changed it to "The
Feast of the Holy Rosary." It was St. Dominic who established the
devotion of the Rosary, out of his intense veneration for the Blessed
Virgin. Chaplets of beads for counting prayers and pious ejaculations
had been in use centuries before his time among the Benedictines and the
followers of Mohammed, both of whom derived them from the Egyptian
anchorites. St. Dominic was responsible only for the arrangement of the
chaplet in its present form, and the meditations upon the life of our
Saviour in association with His Blessed Mother as set forth in the
prayer-books. This devotion became so popular among the poorer classes,
particularly women, that it is said he made more converts by its means
than by all his preaching. The term Rosary had its origin in the rose--a
flower specially dedicated to the Virgin--with which each individual
bead was anciently impressed.

 

392\. On October 16th every year what is known as The Lion Sermon is
preached at the church of St. Katherine Cree, Leadenhall Street. This is
in commemoration of the miraculous deliverance of Sir John Gayer, an
opulent City merchant, and erstwhile Lord Mayor, from the jaws of a lion
in an Arabian desert, two centuries and a half ago. By some means this
good knight missed his caravan, and while in search of it, a huge lion
stalked up to him. Perfectly defenceless, he gave himself up for lost,
and on bended knee offered up his soul in prayer to God. To his intense
astonishment, the huge animal "eyed him, and gently walked away."
Shortly afterwards Sir John rejoined his caravan none the worse for his
extraordinary adventure; yet so fully impressed was he with the peril he
had passed through, and the Divine interposition on his behalf, that he
resolved to make an adequate provision for an annual thanksgiving sermon
at the church of his "beloved Aldgate," in which his mortal remains now
rest. He also founded some almshouses at Plymouth, his native place. The
foregoing particulars may be gleaned from the brass tablet which has
been placed within the last year or two in the chancel of St. Katherine
Cree church.

 

393\. The Feast of All Saints (November 1st) was instituted by Pope
Boniface in the seventh century, to commemorate the conversion of the
Roman Pantheon into a Christian church, and its dedication to the Virgin
and all the martyrs. This festival was for many years kept on May ist,
but after the institution of "All Souls' Day" (November 2nd), it was
transferred to the day preceding that solemn commemoration. The
alternative designation for "All Saints' Day," is All Hallows' Day,
conformably to the Anglo-Saxon halligan, holy. On this day Anglicans, as
well as Roman Catholics, honour all the saints, and especially those who
have no fixed days appointed to them throughout the year.

 

394\. All Souls' Day (November 2nd) is a day set apart by the Roman
Catholic Church for the remembrance of all the faithful departed, and
the offering up of special prayers for the release of the suffering
souls in purgatory. This solemn commemoration was instituted by St. Odo,
Abbot of Cluny, in consequence of what was told him by a pilgrim
returning from the Holy Land. The pilgrim having been compelled in the
course of his voyage to land on a rocky island, whose sole inhabitant
was a hermit, was assured by the latter that there existed among the
cliffs an opening into the infernal regions, whence huge flames
ascended, and the groans of the suffering souls could be distinctly
heard. Moved by compassion for these poor souls, St. Odo appointed the
day following, which was November 2nd, for a special Mass and
commemorative service for the dead, a pious observance which was
repeated on each anniversary as long as he lived. It is worthy of note
in this connection, that the Chinese have in their seventh month what is
called a "Feast of All Souls," upon which they offer up prayers for the
deceased relatives; while the anniversaries of the dead were observed
with peculiar solemnity by the Greeks, Romans, and Druids. The
visitation by all classes in Paris of the beautiful cemetery of Père la
Chaise on All Saints' Day is a trait which goes far towards redeeming
the frivolities of the gay Parisians.

 

395\. The Festival of the Nativity, or Christmas, literally the Feast of
Christ, was not always celebrated on December 25th; but as soon as the
Feast of the Annunciation was instituted it became fixed, as we now have
it (see 367). It is customary for every Roman Catholic priest to say
three Masses on this day, in honour of the three births of our Lord,
viz.: His eternal birth in the bosom of the Father; His temporal birth
in the stable at Bethlehem; and his spiritual birth in the hearts of the
just. The Crib in the churches was first introduced by the Franciscan
Friars in the thirteenth century (see 242).

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jewish Fasts and Festivals](ml12.md)
