[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](aec06)  [Next](aec08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*An Eternal Career*, by Frank and Lydia Hammer, \[1947\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

### IV

### UNITY

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top"><p>"<em>All are but parts of one stupendous whole,<br />
 Whose body Nature is, and God the soul;<br />
 Lives through all life, extends through all extent;<br />
 Spreads undivided, operates unspent</em>."<br />
                                        —POPE</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

There is no law so little understood as the law of unity or oneness. Few
are the people who have any conception of the inseparable relation
existing among all created things; but imagine that they are separate
and unrelated to their fellowbeings; and that it is possible to inflict
atrocities and cruelties upon others without injury to themselves.

This illusion has caused untold suffering and destroyed the peace of the
world. Undoubtedly, permanent peace could be ours today if, by some
miracle, men might know this truth—that they are members of one body
whose spirit is God; and that what they do unto others they are doing to
themselves. This is certain, men never will have surcease from their
woes until they do understand and apply this basic law of oneness in
their daily life.

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

Tragically, the greatest obstacle to unity is that those who should be
uniting men, instead divide them into factions, sects, cliques and
parties, and foment national, political, racial and religious strife.
For example, this is true of rulers who sow seeds of dissension between
brother and brother to forward their policy of "divide and rule." And
scientists consider it of greater importance how to split the atom than
how to unite mankind.

Not only do rulers divide men into factions and cliques, but they also
attempt to apportion freedom by granting it to some peoples but
withholding it from others. Freedom and liberty they consider
commodities to be bestowed or withdrawn at will. But freedom and liberty
are not tangibles, they are realities and realities have no separable
parts. They are rooted in man's nature and not something superimposed or
artificially constructed for him. They exist nowhere if they do not
exist everywhere. No nation, no race can endure which outrages the law
of brotherhood, for all men share the ONE life.

That national isolationism is no longer feasible is apparent to most
people. But that religious isolationism is equally impracticable is not
yet obvious to the leaders of the numerous religious denominations.
True, clergymen publicly observe Brotherhood Week once a year, but their
profession of brotherhood is not followed by practise. Religious heads
of different denominations will not officiate before the same altars,
nor will they countenance their parishioners attending other forms of
worship.

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> This is the
greatest single barrier to the furtherance of unity.

Furthermore, this lack of religious unity is one of the greatest
barriers to peace, for all men are deeply religious and should be
permitted to unite first on this basis. Spiritualization of humanity is
imperative to world harmony. Moreover, united men would have a fuller
understanding of truth; divided, each has only a partial understanding.
And if people would learn to live together in peace, they would not have
to die together in war. The common people of all countries have the
warmest friendliness for one another; it is only their stupid and
astigmatic rulers who cannot agree.

Unfortunately men know as little about the law of unity as cats do of
calculus. The only cure for ignorance is knowledge; that all men have
their being in God and are eternally One. They are bound and related to
every other being in the universe through the law of attraction and
sympathy. All are integral parts and members of one body; and no member
can say to another member: "I have no need of thee."

What is this force which unites men with all other things and makes the
universe a whole? What is the principle of oneness? Good intentions are
not sufficient, and are no substitute for knowledge in any realm of
endeavor whether in music, mathematics, mechanics or oneness. Unity in
order to be usable must be understood.

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

MIND is the subtle, invisible and unbreakable force which unites all
into oneness. MIND is the universal substance which contains and unites
all individual minds. MIND permeates and pervades the entire universe
and unites all creation. Through this medium we are forever bound to the
lowest forms of life as well as to the highest. In reality there is no
more space between bodies, minds, suns and universes than there is
between one grain of sand and the grain adjacent.

When we view ourselves in space and time we are conscious of ourselves
as separate individuals. But when we pass beyond space and time, they
form ingredients of a single continuous stream of life. The phenomenon
or illusion is that individuals carry on separate existences in space
and time, while in the deeper reality beyond space and time, they are
all members of one body.

Life is ONE, but it has many aspects. It is the diversities of forms
which give the illusion of separateness and which are only superimposed
upon life, but do not separate it. Forms are the externalities, the
objective effects of causes which are the reality. Forms are projections
of materialized substances and different proportions of the same
qualities. Reduce them to their elementary substance and they are one
and the same. Forms continually change, but the underlying life
principle remains forever the same.

Life regarded objectively has the same illusion of multiplicity as the
stars, when seemingly we behold

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

them as countless orbs of light, because we are un- able to observe the
stellar system as a whole. But when viewed from the vantage point of
celestial distance, they appear not as perforations in the heaven, but
as one immense flame. So with men, they are separated no more than are
the planets and the stars.

Yet another illustration: On a map of the earth the continents seem to
be separated by bodies of water. This is illusion for under the water
the earth is united. So with life; on the surface all things appear
unrelated and dissociated; but when reality is contemplated, the unity
and harmony appear.

Similarly, our idea of time is an arbitrary division of eternity related
to a standard of consciousness. We speak of time being divided into
hours, days, months and years, a method enabling us to establish order
in our lives. But clocks and calendars split time no more than forms
separate life. TIME like LIFE is ONE, eternal and indivisible.

The contagion of physical diseases should be proof that men cannot be
separated even bodily. Plagues often have wiped out entire communities,
as during World War I influenza claimed more victims than did the
battlefield. Science has made marvelous strides conquering physical
plagues, but the moral and mental epidemics still await conquest. The
latter are infinitely more dangerous than those which destroy only the
body.

Sociologists and criminologists lag behind because of their abysmal
ignorance of man's true nature.

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> They believe the
body is the man, and assume that incarceration will end his anti-social
activities. It is easy enough to quarantine bodies, but it is impossible
to quarantine ideas.

At present there is in progress the execution of war criminals. The
complacent public believes that their lives are being extinguished,
whereas the truth is, instead of exterminating them they are increasing
their sphere of action. Destruction of the body frees men from the
impediment of the flesh enabling them to travel to any part of the earth
in a few seconds. But the mirage called society imagines itself safe,
whereas it is in greater danger than before and constantly menaced by
the vicious and vindictive thoughts with which criminals populate the
atmosphere.

Unfortunately the wicked and depraved do return to earth, often obsessed
with thoughts of vengeance and hatred for the injustice once inflicted
upon them. They influence whoever they can to do their work of
vengeance, often those not any too well-balanced.

The prologue and epilogue of war is hate. A country cannot discourage
murder by imitating murderers and killing on a larger scale. Killing
criminals does not destroy crime. Murder by the state or by a country
should be discontinued because it defeats its own object; it tends to
increase evils instead of decreasing them. Society treats the crime but
not the criminal. Those who would injure others should be restrained and
surrounded with educational

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

influences. They should be shown the error of their conduct so they will
not be inclined to evil practises after being discharged from prison, or
after passing over.

For no man can be segregated from the society of which he is a part and
a product. No individual mind can be separated from the Universal Mind.
So long as a part of humanity is treated as pariahs and criminals and
ostracized, so long will we all suffer.

"Crime waves" puzzle many people. But they are no enigma to those
acquainted with the power of suggestion and the contagion of thought.
During war and even more so afterwards, crime is always rampant. For
what is war but the greatest of crimes? War deluges the mental
atmosphere with thoughts of hate, lust, murder, vengeance and
destruction affecting the minds of everyone, particularly the unstable
and impressionable. Many heinous crimes are committed by those who never
before entertained such ideas. For the greatest tragedy of war is its
effect upon the human mind.

Recently a boy of ten who killed his playmate was asked why he did it
replied: "I just felt like shooting him." Those who are indifferent to
the implications of such an answer are guilty of ignorance greater than
the boy's.

More and more murders are being committed by children. Who is to blame?
The criminals are not the children, but the adults who generated the
thoughts of hate and murder, Children are the victims of the destructive
and evil thinking of their

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

elders; they do not plan the murder, but only act upon suggestions in
the atmosphere.

How often people make injurious and wicked statements! They hope that a
dire calamity will befall some malefactor; or that a dreadful fate will
overtake their enemies, particularly foreign ones. They wish that death
or worse will occur to one who has wronged them. What frequently does
happen, is that the fate they wished for another befalls a member of
their own household. Their thoughts were intercepted, with resultant
tragedy. Thoughts boomerang; hence the paramount importance of never
sending out aught but what is good.

Since the source of social and moral ills originates in the minds of
men, it is there the cure must begin. Just as physical plagues were
abolished by eradicating their causes, so the roots of mental and moral
diseases must be extirpated.

Education is the cure for crime, collectively as well as individually,
and in it lies the basis of the solution. Experience has shown that it
is cheaper to educate children than to punish criminals; hence it is of
vital importance that every individual become educated. By education we
do not mean veneer; we mean ethical training, the inculcation of
morality, and an understanding of life and its spiritual significance.
Not getting degrees, not how to make money, but how to think
constructively and to live in harmony with the laws of God.

Formation of character should be the primary duty of those entrusted
with the guidance of the

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

young. Better thinking is necessary for a better world and this should
be commenced in the highchair and not in the high-school. Crippled and
deformed bodies can often be straightened; but twisted and perverted
minds are usually beyond repair.

MIND is the most inflammable substance in the universe and on it
thoughts travel with a rapidity exceeding light. Unfortunately few
people realize the tremendous responsibility incumbent upon right
thinking. Few have any idea that their thinking governs their lives and
affects the lives of others. People who wouldn't dream of polluting a
city's water supply are frequently guilty of a far greater
crime—contaminating the Universal Mind, the fount of all individual
minds. The unspeakable tragedies, the epidemics of hatred, suspicion,
intolerance resulting in war are all caused by people poisoning the
thought atmosphere. War, like all other evils, exists in the mind before
it exists objectively.

We have recently seen in Europe the revolting effects of the
indoctrination of hate. The unspeakable brutality of the masses when
their minds have been incessantly subjected to the vicious lies and evil
propaganda of current Cains.

Here again education is the only solution. However, rulers have little
faith in education, but adhere to the stupid belief in the efficacy of
force, and now are attempting to segregate and police entire nations.
This method, which has never achieved any

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

individual reformation, they now propose to duplicate on an
international scale.

A formidable armed police may compel mock obedience and feigned
deference; but the souls within the captive bodies will hate and defy
their captors and show their contempt in innumerable ways. Guns may
force them to bow and salute but cannot bend or break their wills. Blows
reigned upon their bodies will not erase what is engraven upon their
minds. When rulers destroy bodies they reach their bounds of power; they
cannot kill ideas. And a conquered and humiliated nation will deluge the
atmosphere with such an avalanche of destructive and vindictive thoughts
which will make future wars inevitable.

Men being one and inseparable, no ruler or dictator can isolate himself
from the fate he imposes upon the people. When he signs their death
sentence, as in war, he automatically signs his own. History, ancient
and recent proves this. Moreover, whenever a country wages war upon
another, regardless of pretext, the fate inflicted upon their enemies
descends upon their own heads with multiplied fury. Another such Pyrrhic
victory for us and we too will be destroyed.

Thought is the yeast that leavens the mass consciousness, and every good
thought deposited in the ocean of life makes the ocean better. And a
universal knowledge of oneness and a universal adherence to spiritual
and moral principles would render all force, individual and collective,
unnecessary. In

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

reality men own nothing; consequently they have nothing to quarrel or
fight over. Taking what belongs to God and labelling it as mine or
thine, is the acme of folly.

Men must either learn to live together in peace, or die together in war.
They need yet to learn the lesson so ably demonstrated in the organic
and insect world—the lesson of cooperation. In the world of organic
life, no part attempts by force to assert its egoism and control another
part, for its own benefit. There is instead, a reciprocal dependence of
whole and part, each part working for others for their mutual benefit.
This results in harmony and happiness for all. And if men would regain
their lost estate they must respect the Brotherhood of man and live in
harmony and love. Eventually the Universal consciousness will have to be
accepted by all men.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: V. The Mystery of Suffering](aec08.md)
