[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](aec10)  [Next](aec12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*An Eternal Career*, by Frank and Lydia Hammer, \[1947\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

### VIII

### WHERE IS GOD?

"*Do not seek Him—SEE Him!*"

A hindu child once said to his playmate: "If you can tell me where God
is, I will give you a mango." The playmate replied: "If you can tell me
where He is not, I will give you two mangos."

Yes, where is He not? While most religions teach that God is
omnipresent, the majority of people have difficulty in grasping this
truth. They are under the illusion that He must be sought in particular
places and in definite localities, such as in churches and in Heaven.
Many make the mistake of attempting to fit their ideas of the Deity into
their limited intelligence, and liken God unto themselves. They ascribe
to Him hands, feet, face, senses and emotions, and assume that He is
local and individual. The majority are unable to realize His
ever-present nearness, but believe He is remote and separated from the
universe, inaccessible and only to be approached through intermediaries.

Yet Jesus, who knew the Father, has told us that God is Spirit. Spirit
fills all infinitude, is

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

wholly and completely present everywhere and cannot be divided into
segments; nor is Spirit relegated to some parts of the universe and
excluded from others.

God is Pure Intelligence or Spirit; the Primordial Essence of all
things; the eternal basis of all forms. God is everything there is, seen
and unseen, manifest and unmanifested; for nothing is lifeless but
endowed with varying degrees of Intelligence, Spirit or God.

What is His relation to the universe? Deity and Nature are counterparts;
the phenomenal world is the body of God just as the physical form is the
body of man. Just as man's spirit animates all parts of the corporeal
body, so does Infinite Spirit animate all His creations. However, the
objective universe is God no more than the corporeal body is man. God is
in everything, yet all these things are not God. God is in me, but I am
not God.

Is God with form, or is He formless? God is both with form and without
form. God is one but becomes many and is constantly projecting Himself
into all manner of forms. Forms are superimposed upon Spirit and change
continually; while God or Spirit remains forever the same. God creates
by thought and the universe is filled with creations which form His
parts. All things are in reality the same substance with different rates
of vibration. Seen subjectively there is Unity—beheld objectively there
is multiplicity.

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

Is it possible to see God, and what is meant by seeing Him? Is He
perceived or conceived? Never can God be seen with the physical eyes,
but only with the eyes of the soul. Never can the Architect of the
universe be seen sitting on some planet, sun, cloud, throne or mountain.
The only necessary qualification to behold Him is to be pure in heart.
He whose spiritual eyes are open sees God in all existing things.

Those who have difficulty seeing God should begin by looking for Him in
man at his best. It is there we receive the clearest revelation. Every
man is God-made flesh. He dwells equally in all men, the humblest as
well as the greatest, be he man or angel, saint or sinner. God dwells on
earth as well as in Heaven. He mingles with man and in men on the
battlefield, the home, and on the street; in the market-place and in the
mosque. Man is never out of the sight of God.

How can we know God? God and Truth are inseparable, and our knowledge of
the one increases our knowledge of the other. Knowing God is the most
important truth to be known, and a true understanding of Him is found
within oneself. Since man is never separated from God, He can be
contacted instantly and without intercessors. If man wants happiness in
this life, if he wants to know who he is, why he was born, and what is
the purpose of this life, then let him devote himself to knowing God.

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

However, in order to know God we must study more than His forms; we can
do that forever and learn little. We must devote ourselves to observing
His ways, His modes of manifestation, methods of operation, and study
His attributes, which are Wisdom, Beauty, Order, Power, and Love.

Knowing God, or Oneness with the Divine is the supreme goal of spiritual
aspirants. It is the highest spiritual experience, to be attained only
by deep contemplation. Oneness with the Divine implies not only
consciousness of God, but identification with Him. For example, take the
term "body conscious." This means that we are identified with the body
and cannot separate ourselves from it or its conditions. The same state
is true when we are God-conscious; we feel a oneness with Him, and
cannot separate our consciousness from His. It is a blending of
consciousness much as the fragrance of flowers intermingle with the
summer breeze.

Oneness with the Divine is the intuitive recognition of being one with
the source of all life and all created things. It is a kinship with the
leaves, grass, flowers, birds, animals and all forms of life. It is a
love and sympathy for all which breathes and lives, an affinity with all
nature, animate and inanimate.

God-conscious people are known by their great compassion for their
fellowmen, and labor unceasingly for their improvement and
enlightenment. They know that when one man falls, all fall; that when
one man rises, all rise, as all share the one

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

life for each is bound to every living being and thing by unbreakable
bonds. Only those who are yet unaware of their relationship to God and
His creations ever injure or exploit their brothers. Those who enslave
and degrade others wind up by becoming enslaved and degraded themselves.
This is true of both nations and individuals who hold people in bondage.

Many people are unable to see God in men, particularly in the
unfortunate members of His family such as the criminal and the depraved.
Nevertheless, despite the repellent exterior, God dwells in them, too;
otherwise they could not exist. Since God dwells in all, there is good
in all. The so-called "good" people who attempt to exterminate the
so-called "bad" people end by becoming like the bad. They should instead
look for the good, or the God, which is in them and appeal to it; the
spirit will respond.

Jesus healed and reformed men because he saw them as perfect expressions
of the Father. He appealed to the Divine or Good within and always got
response. For life is a mirror in which we behold our own reflection
everywhere, and Jesus was too pure to see aught but good. Who, for
instance, had first claim upon him? It was the lepers and sinners, who
were considered outside the pale by the respectable people of the
community.

We do not see God because we are short-sighted, inexperienced and lack
soul vision. We see only . the outside of men, which is often disfigured
with faults and imperfections, and which covers the real

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

man. In order to behold the real man, or the God within, we must pierce
the exterior and see him as he actually is, as God made him, innately
Divine and beautiful. No amount of sin and error can ever defile this
inner man. While it is often impossible to love the outer aspect of man,
it is easy to love God or the Good within. A spiritually minded person
constantly strives to do this, and always thinks of men as spirits, not
as bodies or intellects.

Unfortunately for mankind, rulers are completely unaware that God and
man are one. They arc equally ignorant of man's true nature, for they
believe he is matter and exploit him only to attain their selfish aims.
Life they use primarily to promote their vanity and ambition. They
protect private property and wealth, but desecrate and destroy these
temples of God, the bodies of man. Judas was innocuous compared to the
recent crop of traitors who sold their country and millions of souls to
foreign greed and power.

Leaders are needed who have reverence for human life, who realize that
life has dignity, that every man is an expression of God, and that one
soul is of far greater worth than a continent. "For what shall it profit
a man if he gain the whole world and lose his soul?" The first
consideration of any government should be to safeguard human life and
not to protect territory. When millions are slaughtered for the
multiplication of wealth and the acquisition of real estate, rulers are
guilty of treason against God and man. Those who profess to love

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> God and hate man
are liars and traitors. The masses need to be dehypnotized, to regain
their usurped rights; for no man rules by Divine right, but only by the
consent of the governed.

Never has human life been held so cheaply. Never has the slaughter of
millions occasioned so little comment. When mossy monasteries, ancient
cities and antiquated cathedrals were destroyed there was loud
lamentation. When works of art were in danger they were buried deeply
underground. Yet such loss is not irreparable. Ravaged cities can be
rebuilt; demolished structures replaced; damaged churches repaired and
other works of art created. But temples of God no man can raise again.
There is nothing made by hand in the house of God; they are not made of
steel, stone or wood. "Know ye not that ye are the temple of God, and
that the spirit of God dwelleth in you? And the temple of God is holy,
which temple ye are. And he who those destroy, him God will destroy."

Only man does not trust God. All other forms of life trust God
implicitly to supply their every need. But man with his superior ideas
believes the Creator incapable of providing for him. Man, in his folly,
trusts too much in material wealth, and little does he know how unstable
it is. What is his today, is another's tomorrow. Those who know God
depend upon Him as their source of life, love, health, knowledge, supply
and power. They know nothing can ever separate them from the Infinite.

Those who know Him, never put a limit to His

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Infinitude. To
them, God is not a matter of opinion: HE IS. He is boundless love,
beyond the grasp of the intellect. He alone knows, he alone understands
His mysteries, to whom God in His Infinite mercy reveals Himself. When a
man realizes Him, the gates to infinite knowledge open. When a man
attains enlightenment, he knows for certain that he is in God and that
God is in him. The mysteries of this world and the next are open books
to him.

Do not seek Him—SEE HIM! Where? EVERYWHERE.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IX. Accidents](aec12)
