<span id="P2400_636766"></span> <sup>16</sup> Shgwr in the LXX., "Zoar"
in Eng. ver.

<span id="P2402_636851"></span> <sup>17</sup> "*Simul exoritur sol.*"
But both the LXX. and the Eng. ver. say the sun *was risen* when Lot
entered the city.

<span id="P2410_637294"></span> <sup>18</sup> So Oehler and Migne. But
perhaps we may alter the pointing slightly, and read: -

Crackles with liquid exust."

<span id="P2422_637949"></span> <sup>19</sup> The story of Phaëthon and
his fate is told in Ov., *Met*., ii. 1-399, which may be compared with
the present piece. His two sisters were transformed into white poplars,
according to some; alders, according to others. See Virg., *Aen*., x.
190 sqq., *Ec*., vi. 62 sqq. His hal-brother (Cycnus or Cygnus) was
turned into a swan: and the scene of these transformations is laid by
Ovid on the banks of the Eridanus (the Po). But the fable is variously
told; and it has been suggested that the groundwork of it is to be found
rather in the still-standing of the sun recorded in Joshua.

<span id="P2427_638656"></span> <sup>20</sup> i.e., as she had been
before in the case of Eve. See Gen. iii. 1 sqq.

<span id="P2449_639615"></span> <sup>21</sup> I have hazarded the bold
conjecture - which I see others (Pamelius at all events) had hazarded
before me - that "feritas" is used by our author as - "fertilitas." The
word, of course, is very incorrectly formed etymologically; but
etymology is not our author's *forte* apparently. It will also be seen
that there is seemingly a gap at this point, or else some enormous
mistake, in the mss. An attempt has been made (see Migne) to correct it,
but not a very satisfactory one. For the common reading, which gives two
lines,

Nullas arat," etc.This use of "fratris" in a wide sense may be justified
from Gen. xiii. 8 (to which passage, with its immediate context, there
seems to be a reference, whether we adopt the proposed correction or
no), and similar passages in Holy Writ. But the transition is still
abrupt to the "nullus arat," etc.; and I prefer to leave the passage as
it is, without attempting to supply the hiatus.

<span id="P2456_641065"></span> <sup>22</sup> This use of "easely" as a
dissyllable is justifiable from Spenser.

<span id="P2465_641419"></span> <sup>23</sup> This seems to be the
sense, but the Latin is somewhat strange: "morsest maris illa quieti,"
i.e., illa (quies) maris quieti mors est. The opening lines of "Jonah"
(above) should be compared with this passage and its context.

<span id="P2478_642167"></span> <sup>24</sup> Inque picem dat terrae
haerere marinam.

<span id="P2489_642623"></span> <sup>25</sup> "Pressum" (Oehler);
"pretium" (Migne): "it will yield a prize, namely, that," etc.

<span id="P2497_642996"></span> <sup>26</sup> Luciferam.
