<span id="P2704_652073"></span> <sup>34</sup> Or,

Full many sighs may furnish anxious food."

<span id="P2714_652531"></span> <sup>35</sup> The writer makes
"cherubim" - or "cherubin" - singular. I have therefore retained his
mistake. What the "hot point" - "calidus apex" - is, is not clear. It
may be an allusion the "flaming sword" (see Gen. iii. 24); or it may
mean the top of the flame.

<span id="P2724_653204"></span> <sup>36</sup> Or, "origins" - "orsis" -
because Cain and Abel were original types, as it were, of two separate
classes of men.

<span id="P2729_653512"></span> <sup>37</sup> "Perpetuo;" "in process of
time," Eng. ver.; meq hmeraj, LXX. in Gen. iv. 3.

<span id="P2733_653728"></span> <sup>38</sup> Quae porsata fuerant. But,
as Wordsworth remarks on Gen. iv., we do not read that Caïn's offerings
were first-fruits even.

<span id="P2739_654082"></span> <sup>39</sup> Quod propter gelida Cain
incanduit ira. If this, which is Oehler's and Migne's reading, be
correct, the words *gelida* and *incanduit* seem to be intentionally
contrasted, unless *incandescere* be used here in a supposed sense of
"growing white," "turning pale." *Urere* is used in Latin of heat and
cold indifferently. Calida would, of course, be a ready emendation; but
*gelida* has the advantage of being far more startling.

<span id="P2768_655614"></span> <sup>1</sup> The reader is requested to
bear in mind, in reading this piece, tedious in its elaborate struggles
after effect, that the constant repetitions of words and expressions
with which his patience will be tried, are due to the original. It was
irksome to reproduce them; but fidelity is a translator's first law.

<span id="P2781_656415"></span> <sup>2</sup> Luciferas.

<span id="P2784_656495"></span> <sup>3</sup> Helicon is not named in the
original, but it seems to be meant.

<span id="P2786_656611"></span> <sup>4</sup> i.e., in another clime or
continent. The writer is (or feigns to be) an African. Helicon, of
course, is in Europe.

<span id="P2790_656843"></span> <sup>5</sup> Virtus.

<span id="P2794_657024"></span> <sup>6</sup> Saeculo.
