<span id="P3400_685423"></span> <sup>2</sup> The "tectis" of the edd. I
have ventured to alter to "textis," which gives (as in my text) a far
better sense.

<span id="P3403_685617"></span> <sup>3</sup> i.e., the Evil One.

<span id="P3408_685771"></span> <sup>4</sup> i.e., the Son of God.

<span id="P3421_686285"></span> <sup>5</sup> i.e., the Magi.

<span id="P3433_686835"></span> <sup>6</sup> i.e., arms which *seemed*
unequal; for the cross, in which Christ *seemed* to be vanquished, was
the very means of His triumph. See Col. ii. 14, 15.

<span id="P3436_687030"></span> <sup>7</sup> i.e., the Enemy.

<span id="P3440_687192"></span> <sup>8</sup> i.e., with the Holy Spirit,
the "Pledge" or "Promise" of the Father (see Acts i. 4, 5), "outpoured"
upon "the peoples" - both Jewish and Gentile - on the day of Pentecost
and many subsequent occasions; see, for instances, Acts x. and xix.

<span id="P3442_687480"></span> <sup>9</sup> The "mirandae virtuitis
opus, invisaque facts," I take to be the miracles wrought by the
apostles through the might (virtus) of the Spirit, as we read in the
Acts. These were objects of "envy" to the Enemy, and to such as - like
Simon Magus, of whom we find record - were his servants.

<span id="P3453_688172"></span> <sup>10</sup> i.e., excommunicated, as
Marcion was. The "last impiety" (*extremum nefas*), or "last atrocity"
(*extremum facinus*), - see 218, lower down - seems to mean the
introduction of *heretical teaching*.

<span id="P3458_688504"></span> <sup>11</sup> This use of the ablative,
though quite against classical usage, is apparently admissible in late
Latinity. It seems to me that the "his" *is* an ablative here, the men
being regarded for the moment as merely *instruments*, not *agents*; but
it *may* be a dative = "*to* these he preaches," etc., i.e., he dictates
*to* them what they afterwards are to teach in public.

<span id="P3460_688952"></span> <sup>12</sup> It must be borne in mind
that "Dominus" (the Lord), and "Deus" (God), are kept as distinct terms
throughout this piece.

<span id="P3477_689763"></span> <sup>13</sup> i.e., for which reason.

<span id="P3483_689997"></span> <sup>14</sup> i.e., as Marcion is stated
by some to have taught, in the fifteenth year of Tiberius; founding his
statement upon a perverted reading of Luke iii. 1. It will be remembered
that Marcion only used St. Luke's Gospel, and that in a mutilated and
corrupted form.
