<span id="P3500_690923"></span> <sup>15</sup> Orbi.

<span id="P3511_691373"></span> <sup>16</sup> i.e., of the Jews.

<span id="P3517_691610"></span> <sup>17</sup> "In fossa," i.e., as
Fabricius (quoted in Migne's ed.) explains it, "in *de*fossa." It is the
past part. of *fodio*.

<span id="P3526_692035"></span> <sup>18</sup> If this line be correct, -
"Speratis pro pace truces homicidia blanda," - though I cannot see the
propriety of the "truces" in it, it seems to mean, "Do ye hope or expect
that the master you are serving will, instead of the gently peace he
promises you, prove a murderer and lead you to death? No, you do not
expect it; but so it is."

<span id="P3534_692630"></span> <sup>19</sup> Mundi.

<span id="P3537_692770"></span> <sup>20</sup> Animalia.

<span id="P3551_693368"></span> <sup>21</sup> The sentence breaks off
abruptly, and the verb which should apparently have gone with "e'en one"
is joined to the "ye" in the next line.

<span id="P3559_693818"></span> <sup>22</sup> The Latin is: -

Seductos, ad Marcionis tulit infima nomen."The rendering in my text, I
admit, involves an exceedingly harsh construction of the Latin, but I
see not how it is to be avoided; unless either (1) we take *nomen*
absolutely, and "ad Marcionis infima" together, and translate, "A name
has carried you to Marcion's lowest depthes;" in which case the question
arises, What name is meant? can it be the name "Electi"? Or else (2) we
take "tulit" as referring to the "terrible renegade," i.e., the
arch-fiend, and "infima" as in apposition with "ad Marcionis nomen," and
translate, "He has carried you to the name of Marcion - deepest
degradation."

<span id="P3565_694748"></span> <sup>23</sup> i.e., the Gospels and
other parts of Holy Scripture.

<span id="P3568_694900"></span> <sup>24</sup> i.e., I take it, the
resurrection. Cf. 2 Tim. ii. 17, 18.

<span id="P3570_695023"></span> <sup>25</sup> Whether this be the sense
(i.e., "either tell us what it is which displeases you in *our* God,
whether it be His too great patience in bearing with you, or what; or
else tell *us* what is to hinder us from believing *your* God to be an
*incredible* being") of this passage, I will not venture to determine.
The last line in the edd. previous to Oehler's ran: "Aut incredibil*e*
quid differt craedere vestrum?" Oehler reads "incredibil*em*" (sc.
Deum), which I have followed; but he suggests, "Aut incredibil*em qui*
differt caedere vestrum?" Which may mean "or else" - i.e., if it were
not for his "too great patience" - "why" - "qui" - "does He delay to
smite your incredible god?" and thus challenge a contest and prove His
own superiority.

<span id="P3572_695793"></span> <sup>26</sup> i.e., the "terrible
renegade."

<span id="P3583_696223"></span> <sup>27</sup> The reference here is to
Simon Magus; for a brief account of whom, and of the other heretics in
this list, down to Hebion inclusive, the reader is referred to the *Adv.
omn. Haer.*, above. The words "to roam, to fly," refer to the alleged
wanderings of Simon with his paramour Helen, and his reported attempt
(at Rome, in the presence of St. Peter) to fly. The tale is doubtful.

<span id="P3587_696708"></span> <sup>28</sup> The Latin runs thus: -

Triginta tribuit caelos, patremque Profundum."But there seems a
confusion between Valentine and his aeons and Basilides and his heavens.
See the *Adv. omn. Haer*., above.

<span id="P3596_697254"></span> <sup>29</sup> i.e., the Evil One's, as
before.
