<span id="P3703_702467"></span> <sup>43</sup> For "Quod c*u*pit his
fieri, deest hoc virtute reduci," I venture to read, "Quod c*a*pit,"
etc., taking "capit" as = "capax est." "By these," of course, is by
wisdom and art; and "virtue" = "power."

<span id="P3706_702733"></span> <sup>44</sup> i.e., the Evil One.

<span id="P3708_702849"></span> <sup>45</sup> i.e., may learn *to know.*

<span id="P3711_702952"></span> <sup>46</sup> Oehler's "vi*s*us" seems
to be a mistake for "vi*v*us," which is Migne's reading; as in the
fragment "*De exsecrandis gentium diis,*" we saw (*sub. fin*.)
"vi*d*entem" to be a probable misprint for "vi*v*entem." If, however, it
is to be retained, it must mean "appearing" (i.e., in presence of God)
"wholly," in body as well as soul.

<span id="P3716_703465"></span> <sup>47</sup> i.e., the double gift of a
saved soul and a saved body.

<span id="P3719_703604"></span> <sup>48</sup> In aeternum.

<span id="P3723_703716"></span> <sup>49</sup> I have so frequently had
to construct my own text (by altering the reading or the punctuation of
the Latin) in this book, that, for brevity's sake, I must ask the reader
to be content with this statement once for all, and not expect each case
to be separately noted.

<span id="P3726_704060"></span> <sup>50</sup> The "foe," as before, is
Satan; his "breathing instruments" are the men whom he uses (cf.
Shakespeare's "*no breather*" = no man, in the dialogue between Orland
and Jacques, *As you Like it,* act iii. sc. 2); and they are called
"renegades," like the Evil One himself, because they have deserted from
their allegiance to God in Christ.

<span id="P3728_704433"></span> <sup>51</sup> Heresy.

<span id="P3745_705140"></span> <sup>52</sup> Cf. John xv. 2, 4, 5, 6;
Rom. xi. 17-20. The writer simply calls them "abruptos homines;" and he
seems to mean *excommunicated*, like Marcion.

<span id="P3749_705421"></span> <sup>53</sup> i.e., those recorded in
the Old Testament.

<span id="P3752_705549"></span> <sup>54</sup> I have followed Migne's
suggestion here, and transposed one line of the original. The reference
seems to be to Isa. lxiv. 4, quoted in 1 Cor. ii.9, where the Greek
differs somewhat remarkably from the LXX.

<span id="P3763_706179"></span> <sup>55</sup> Unless some line has
dropped out here, the construction, harsh enough in my English, is yet
harsher in the Latin. "Accipitur" has no subject of any kind, and one
can only guess from what has gone before, and what follows, that it must
mean "*one Testament.*"

<span id="P3765_706480"></span> <sup>56</sup> Harsh still. It must refer
to the four Gospels - the "coat without seam" - in their quadrate unity;
Marcion receiving but one - St. Luke's - and that without St. Luke's
name, and also in a mutilated and interpolated form.

<span id="P3771_706901"></span> <sup>57</sup> This seems to be the
sense. The allusion is to the fact that Marcion and his sect accepted
but *ten* of St. Paul's Epistles: leaving out entirely those to Timothy
and Titus, and *all* the other books, except his one Gospel.

<span id="P3773_707169"></span> <sup>58</sup> It seems to me that the
reference here must evidently be to the Epistle to the Hebrews, which
treats specially of the old covenant. If so, we have some indication as
to the authorship, if not the date, of the book: for Tertullian himself,
though he frequently cites the Epistle, appears to hesitate (to say the
least) as to ascribing it to St. Paul.

<span id="P3775_707588"></span> <sup>59</sup> Comp. Isa. vi. 9, 10, with
Acts xxviii. 17-29.

<span id="P3782_707875"></span> <sup>60</sup> The reference seems to be
to Rom. i. 28; comp., too, Tit. i. 15, 16.

<span id="P3789_708214"></span> <sup>61</sup> The reference is to Gen.
ii. 9-14.

<span id="P3794_708407"></span> <sup>62</sup> Fata mortua. This
extraordinary expression appears to mean "dead *men*;" men who, through
Adam, are *fated*, so to speak, to die, and are under the sad *fate* of
being "*dead* in trespasses and sins." See Eph. ii. 1. As far as
*quantity* is concerned, it might as well be "*facta* mortua," "dead
*works*," such as we read of in Heb. vi. 1, xi. 14. It is true *these*
works cannot strictly be said to be ever *vivified*; but a very similar
inaccuracy seems to be committed by our author lower down in this same
book.
