<span id="P4409_740849"></span> <sup>164</sup> "Ar*a*s" should probably
be "ar*am*."

<span id="P4411_740945"></span> <sup>165</sup> See 2 Kings (in LXX. 4
Kings) i. 9-12.

<span id="P4413_741042"></span> <sup>166</sup> For "transgressas *et*
avia fecit," I read "transgress*us* avia fecit," taking "transgressus"
as a subst.

<span id="P4417_741259"></span> <sup>167</sup> Sortis.

<span id="P4419_741313"></span> <sup>168</sup> Sortem.

<span id="P4422_741400"></span> <sup>169</sup> Our author has somewhat
mistaken Elisha's mission apparently; for as there is a significant
difference in the meaning of their respective names, so there is in
their works: Elijah's miracles being rather miracles of judgment, it has
been remarked; Elisha's, of mercy.

<span id="P4429_741939"></span> <sup>170</sup> The reference is to a
famine in Elisha's days, which - 2 Kings (in LXX. 4 Kings) viii. i. -
was to last *seven years*; whereas that for which Elijah prayed, as we
learn in Jas. v. 17., lasted *three* and *six months*. But it is not
said that Elisha *prayed for* that famine.

<span id="P4430_742244"></span> <sup>171</sup> We only read of *one*
leprosy which Elisha cleansed - Naaman's. He *inflicted* leprosy on
Gehazi, which was "to cleave to him and to his seed for ever."

<span id="P4442_742815"></span> <sup>172</sup> Praestata vi*am* vitae
atque probata per ipsam est. I suspect we should read "vi*a*," quantity
being of no importance with our author, and take "praetestata" as
passive: "The way of life was testified before, and proved, through
him."

<span id="P4454_743478"></span> <sup>173</sup> This seems to be the
meaning, and the reference will then be to Jer. xxxiv. 8-22 (in LXX.
xli. 8-22); but the punctuation both in Oehler and Migne makes nonsense,
and I have therefore altered it.

<span id="P4484_744819"></span> <sup>174</sup> See the apocryphal
"Susanna."

<span id="P4489_745046"></span> <sup>175</sup> For "servat*is*que palam
cunctis in pace quievit," which the edd. give, I suggest
"servat*us*que," etc., and take "palam" for governing "cunctis."
