<span id="P4700_755485"></span> <sup>211</sup> Migne's pointing is
followed, in preference to Oehler's.

<span id="P4703_755625"></span> <sup>212</sup> "Un*um hunc* esse
Patrem;" i.e., "that *this One* (God) is the Father." But I rather
incline to read, "un*umque* esse;" or we may render, "This One is the
Sire."

<span id="P4706_755873"></span> <sup>213</sup> See 1 Cor. viii. 5, 6
(but notice the prepositions in the Greek; our author is not accurate in
rendering them); Eph. iv. 4, 5, 6.

<span id="P4708_756066"></span> <sup>214</sup> Ad quem se curvare genu
plane omne fatetur. The reference is to Phil. ii. 10; but our author is
careless in using the present tense, "se curvare."

<span id="P4710_756247"></span> <sup>215</sup> The reference is to Eph.
iii. 14, 15; but here again our author seems in error, as he refers the
words to *Christ*, whereas the meaning of the apostle appears clearly to
refer them *to the Father*.

<span id="P4716_756674"></span> <sup>216</sup> Legitimos. See book iv.
91.

<span id="P4721_756872"></span> <sup>217</sup> See Gal. iii. 20. But
here, again, "Galatas" seems rather like an error; for in speaking to
the *Corinthians* St. Paul uses an expression more like our author's:
see 2 Cor. xi. 2. The Latin, too, is faulty: "Talem *se* Paulus zelum
*se* scripsit habere," where, perhaps, for the first "*se*" we should
read "*sic.*"

<span id="P4725_757339"></span> <sup>218</sup> Comp. Ex. xx. 5; Deut. v.
9.

<span id="P4750_758343"></span> <sup>219</sup> See Isa. i. 10-15; Jer.
vi. 20.

<span id="P4755_758558"></span> <sup>220</sup> Causa etenim fidei
rationis imagine major.

<span id="P4756_758625"></span> <sup>221</sup> Comp. 1 Cor. xiii. 12;
Heb. x. 1.

<span id="P4763_758872"></span> <sup>222</sup> Moses. See Heb. ix.
19-22, and the references there.

<span id="P4768_759109"></span> <sup>223</sup> Comp. Heb. ix. 13.

<span id="P4772_759256"></span> <sup>224</sup> Alluding probably to our
Lord's bearing of the *cross-beam* of His *cross* - the beam being the
"yokes," and the upright stem of the cross the "plough-beam" - on His
shoulders. - See John xix. 17.

<span id="P4777_759642"></span> <sup>225</sup> Templum. Comp. John ii.
19-22; Col. ii. 9.

<span id="P4783_759915"></span> <sup>226</sup> Libro. The reference is
to the preceding lines, especially 89, and Heb. ix. 19, auto to Biblion.
The use of "libro" is curious, as it seems to be used partly as if it
would be equivalent to *pro libro*, "in the place of a book," partly in
a more truly datival sense, "to serve the purposes of a book;" and our
"for" is capable of the two senses.

<span id="P4785_760290"></span> <sup>227</sup> For this comparison of
"speaking" to "sprinkling," comp. Deut. xxxii. 2, "My *doctrine shall
drop as the rain*; my *speech shall distil as the dew*," etc.; Job xxix.
22, "My *speech dropped* upon them;" with Eph. v. 26, and with our
Lord's significant action (recorded in the passage here alluded to, John
xx. 22) of "*breathing on*" (enefushsen) His disciples. Comp., too, for
the "witnesses" and "words of presage," Luke xxiv. 48, 49; Acts i. 6-8.

<span id="P4791_760968"></span> <sup>228</sup> i.e., the chief of the
Levites, the high priest.

<span id="P4796_761221"></span> <sup>229</sup> Comp. Heb. xiii. 12, 13;
John xix. 19, 20.
