<span id="P5100_777987"></span> <sup>290</sup> Cf. John i. 11, and see
the Greek.

<span id="P5115_778585"></span> <sup>291</sup> Whether this be the sense
I know not. The passage is a mass of confusion.

<span id="P5120_778832"></span> <sup>292</sup> i.e., according to
Marcion's view.

<span id="P5123_778972"></span> <sup>293</sup> i.e., as spirits, like
himself.

<span id="P5128_779141"></span> <sup>294</sup> Mundum.

<span id="P5133_779338"></span> <sup>295</sup> i.e., Marcionite.

<span id="P5135_779399"></span> <sup>296</sup> See book ii. 3.

<span id="P5137_779458"></span> <sup>297</sup> i.e., apparently on the
day of Christ's resurrection.

<span id="P5142_779689"></span> <sup>298</sup> Rep*l*esset, i.e.,
replevisset. If this be the right reading, the meaning would seem to be,
"would have taken away all further desire for" them, as satiety or
*repletion* takes away all appetite for food. One is almost inclined to
hazard the suggestion "rep*r*esset," i.e., repressisset, "he would have
*repressed*," but that such a contraction would be irregular. Yet, with
an author who takes such liberties as the present one, perhaps that
might not be a decisive objection.

<span id="P5149_780415"></span> <sup>299</sup> "Junct*u*s," for the
edd.'s "junct*is*," which, if retained, will mean "in the case of beings
still joined with (or to) blood."

<span id="P5156_780795"></span> <sup>300</sup> "Doc*e*tur," for the
edd.'s "doc*en*tur." The sense seems to be, if there be any, exceedingly
obscure; but for the idea of a half-salvation - the salvation of the
"inner man" without the outer - being no salvation at all, and unworthy
of "the Good Shepherd" and His work, we may compare the very difficult
passage in the *de Pudic.*, c. xiii. *ad fin*.

<span id="P5168_781605"></span> <sup>301</sup> This sense, which I
deduce from a transposition of one line and the supplying of the words
"*he did exhort*," which are not expressed, but seem necessary, in the
original, agrees well with 1 Cor. vii., which is plainly the passage
referred to.

<span id="P5181_782396"></span> <sup>302</sup> "Causa;" or perhaps
"*means*." It is, of course, the French "chose."

<span id="P5186_782638"></span> <sup>303</sup> i.e., you and your like,
through whom sin, and in consequence death, is disseminated.

<span id="P5194_783043"></span> <sup>304</sup> Here, again, for the sake
of the sense, I have transposed a line.

<span id="P5198_783241"></span> <sup>305</sup> i.e., "the other," the
"inner man," or spirit.
