<span id="P5200_783341"></span> <sup>306</sup> i.e., through flesh.

<span id="P5217_784038"></span> <sup>307</sup> i.e., in His own person.

<span id="P5224_784321"></span> <sup>308</sup> I hope I have succeeded
in giving some intelligible sense; but the passage as it stands in the
Latin is nearly hopeless.

<span id="P5229_784565"></span> <sup>309</sup> I read "lege*m*" for
"lege*s*."

<span id="P5230_784625"></span> <sup>310</sup> I read "*v*alle" for
"*c*alle."

<span id="P5236_784837"></span> <sup>311</sup> Alios.

<span id="P5237_784873"></span> <sup>312</sup> Altera.

<span id="P5247_785292"></span> <sup>313</sup> i.e., "the gifts of
baptism."

<span id="P5257_785757"></span> <sup>314</sup> This seems to give sense
to a very obscure passage, in which I have been guided more by Migne's
pointing than by Oehler's.

<span id="P5259_785892"></span> <sup>315</sup> I read here "qu*i*d" for
"qu*o*d."

<span id="P5262_786031"></span> <sup>316</sup> i.e., to make men live by
recognising that. Comp. the Psalmist's prayer: "Give me *understanding*
and I shall live" (Ps. cxix. 144; in LXX., Ps. cxviii. 144).

<span id="P5265_786284"></span> <sup>317</sup> The "f*u*rentes" of Pam.
and Rig. is preferred to Oehler's "f*e*rentes."

<span id="P5270_786490"></span> <sup>318</sup> "Complexis," lit.
"embracing."

<span id="P5272_786590"></span> <sup>319</sup> i.e., both Jews and
Gentile heretics, the "senseless frantic men" just referred to probably:
or possibly the "ambo" may mean "*both sects*," viz., the Marcionites
and Manichees, against whom the writer whom Oehler supposes to be the
probable author of these "Five Books," Victorinus, a rhetorician of
Marseilles, directed his efforts. But it may again be the acc. neut.
pl., and mean "let them" - i.e., the "senseless frantic men" - "learn to
believe *as to both facts*," i.e., the incarnation and the resurrection;
(see vers. 179, 180;) "the testimony at least of human reason."

<span id="P5282_787530"></span> <sup>320</sup> I would suggest here, for

In cujus manu regnantis cor *regis, egisset*,"which would only add one
more to our author's false quantities. "Regum egisset" would avoid even
that, while it would give some sense. Comp. Prov. xxi. 1.

<span id="P5287_788009"></span> <sup>321</sup> Maria cum conjuge feta.
What follows seems to decide the meaning of "feta," as a child could
hardly be included in a census before birth.

<span id="P5296_788468"></span> <sup>322</sup> Again I have had to
attempt to amend the text of the Latin in order to extract any sense,
and am far from sure that I have extracted the right one.

<span id="P5298_788642"></span> <sup>323</sup> "Fatentur," unless our
author use it passively = "are confessed."
