<span id="P5508_801461"></span> <sup>1</sup> Possibly as late as a.d.
230. Comp. Wordsworth, *Hippol*., p. 126.

<span id="P5509_801808"></span> <sup>2</sup> A condensed and valuable
view of this matter may be seen in Dr. Schaff's *History*, etc., vol.
iii. pp. 834-841.

<span id="P5512_803847"></span> <sup>3</sup> See Bishop Jewell, *Works*,
vol. i. pp. 386, 441. Cambridge, 1845.

<span id="P5514_804287"></span> <sup>4</sup> Vol. I. of this series, pp.
23, 24. See also Bunsen, *Hippol*., i. p. 244.

<span id="P5518_804925"></span> <sup>5</sup> *De Viris Illustribus*, c.
58.

<span id="P5519_805031"></span> <sup>6</sup> \[His connection with the
Roman courts is inferred from cap. ii. *infra*.\]

<span id="P5522_806809"></span> <sup>7</sup> Milman's *Hist. of
Christianity*, vol. iii. book iv. ch. iii.

<span id="P5526_808202"></span> <sup>8</sup> \[Dr. Wallis, the learned
translator of the *Octavius*, is described in the Edinburgh edition as
"Senior Priest-Vicar of Wells Cathedral, and incumbent of Christ Church,
Coxley, Somerset."\]

<span id="P5534_809465"></span> <sup>1</sup> \[Sallust, *Catiline*,
"Idem facere atque sentire," etc. Also, Catiline's speech, p. 6 of *The
Conspiracy*.\]

<span id="P5535_810208"></span> <sup>2</sup> \[Beautiful tribute to
Christian friendship, in a primitive example. We must bear in mind that
the story is of an earlier period than that of the work itself, written
at Cirta.\]

<span id="P5545_816445"></span> <sup>3</sup> "Ita ut me ex tribus medium
lateris ambitione protegerent."

<span id="P5549_818084"></span> <sup>4</sup> The ms. and first edition
read "more;" Ursinus suggested *minus* instead of *magis*.

<span id="P5550_818413"></span> <sup>5</sup> This clause is otherwise
read: "Therefore we must be indignant, nay, must be grieved."

<span id="P5551_818605"></span> <sup>6</sup> Otherwise for "even,"
"except."

<span id="P5552_819083"></span> <sup>7</sup> The reading of the ms. is
"stuprari," as above. "Scrutari," "sciari," or "lustrare" and
"suspicari," are proposed emendations.

<span id="P5553_820230"></span> <sup>8</sup> Or, "although its weight
may have established the earth."

<span id="P5554_820346"></span> <sup>9</sup> Or, "although the moisture
may have flowed into the sea."

<span id="P5555_820550"></span> <sup>10</sup> Variously read, "is raised
up," or "and is raised up." The ms. has "attollitur," which by some is
amended into "et alitur," or "et tollitur."

<span id="P5556_821530"></span> <sup>11</sup> Either "delectu" or
"dilectu."

<span id="P5557_822300"></span> <sup>12</sup> Or, "it is extolled."

<span id="P5561_823555"></span> <sup>13</sup> "To think of rather than
to know" in some texts.

<span id="P5562_823856"></span> <sup>14</sup> Neander quotes this
passage as illustrating the dissatisfied state of the pagan mind with
the prevailing infidelity at that time.

<span id="P5563_824200"></span> <sup>15</sup> Or, "the great mother"
\[i.e., Cybele. S.\].

<span id="P5564_824897"></span> <sup>16</sup> Or, "which another people,
when angry, would have despised."

<span id="P5568_826553"></span> <sup>17</sup> Otherwise, "the goddess
mother."

<span id="P5569_826751"></span> <sup>18</sup> *Scil*. Castor and Pollux.

<span id="P5570_826870"></span> <sup>19</sup> Otherwise, "who breathless
with horses foaming," etc.

<span id="P5571_827093"></span> <sup>20</sup> Otherwise, "the offence of
Jupiter, the renewal of the games," etc.

<span id="P5575_829651"></span> <sup>21</sup> According to the codex,
"the Milesian." \[See note in Reeve's *Apologies of Justin Martyr,
Tertullian*, and *Minucius Felix*, vol. ii. p. 59. S.\]

<span id="P5576_830238"></span> <sup>22</sup> Some have corrected this
word, reading "without consideration," *scil*. "inconsulte;" and the
four first editions omit the subsequent words, "concerning the
divinity."

<span id="P5577_831606"></span> <sup>23</sup> There are various
emendations of this passage, but their meaning is somewhat obscure. One
is elaborately ingenious: "Ita illis pavorum fallax spes solatio
redivivo blanditur," which is said to imply, "Thus the hope that
deceives their fears, soothes them with the hope of living again."

<span id="P5581_833047"></span> <sup>24</sup> Otherwise read
"abominable."

<span id="P5582_833402"></span> <sup>25</sup> This charge, as Oehler
thinks, refers apparently to the kneeling posture in which penitents
made confession before their bishop.

<span id="P5583_834511"></span> <sup>26</sup> This calumny seems to have
originated from the sacrament of the Eucharist.

<span id="P5584_834760"></span> <sup>27</sup> *Scil*. Fronto of Cirta,
spoken of again in ch. xxxi. \[A recent very interesting discovery goes
to show that our author was the chief magistrate of Cirta, in Algeria,
from a.d. 210 to 217. See Schaff, vol. iii. p. 841.\]

<span id="P5588_836532"></span> <sup>28</sup> Otherwise, "no consecrated
images."

<span id="P5589_838228"></span> <sup>29</sup> Otherwise, "we are
contained and bound together."

<span id="P5590_838304"></span> <sup>30</sup> \[These very accusations,
reduced back to Christian language, show that much of the Creed was, in
fact, known to the heathen at this period.\]

<span id="P5594_838787"></span> <sup>31</sup> \[1 Tim. iv. 7.\]

<span id="P5595_840116"></span> <sup>32</sup> "And I have already shown,
without any trouble," is another reading.

<span id="P5596_840747"></span> <sup>33</sup> Otherwise, "without a body
or with."

<span id="P5597_841565"></span> <sup>34</sup> Otherwise, "too
credulous."
