<span id="P6200_1080387"></span> <sup>2</sup> Cant. i. 4.

<span id="P6209_1086036"></span> <sup>1</sup> John xiv. 6.

<span id="P6210_1086876"></span> <sup>2</sup> \[Here, and frequently
elsewhere (some two hundred times in all), Origen, in his extant works,
ascribes the authorship of the Epistle to the Hebrews to St. Paul.
Eusebius (*Ecclesiastical History*, vi. 25) quotes Origen as saying, "My
opinion is this: the thoughts are the apostle's; but the diction and
phraseology belong to some one who has recorded what the apostle said,
and as one who noted down what his master dictated. If, then, any Church
considers this Epistle as coming from Paul, let if be commended for
this; for neither did those ancient men deliver it as such without
cause. But who it was that committed the Epistle to writing, is known
only to God." S.\]

<span id="P6211_1087857"></span> <sup>3</sup> Heb. xi. 24-26.

<span id="P6212_1088038"></span> <sup>4</sup> 2 Cor. xiii. 3.

<span id="P6214_1088409"></span> <sup>5</sup> Dominationes.

<span id="P6215_1088448"></span> <sup>6</sup> Virtutes.

<span id="P6218_1090313"></span> <sup>7</sup> Species.

<span id="P6221_1091368"></span> <sup>8</sup> John i. 3.

<span id="P6223_1092161"></span> <sup>9</sup> Innatus. The words which
Rufinus has rendered "natus an innatus" are rendered by Jerome in his
*Epistle to Avitus* (94 *alias* 59), "factus an infectus." Criticising
the errors in the first book of the *Principles*, he says: "Origen
declares the Holy Spirit to be third in dignity and honour after the
Father and the Son; and although professing ignorance whether he were
created or not (factus an infectus), he indicated afterwards his opinion
regarding him, maintaining that nothing was uncreated except God the
Father." Jerome, no doubt, read genhtoj h agenhtoj, and Rufinus gennhtoj
h agennhtoj. - R.

<span id="P6225_1093304"></span> <sup>10</sup> Substantia.

<span id="P6226_1093874"></span> <sup>11</sup> 1 Cor. xv. 42, 43.

<span id="P6227_1094114"></span> <sup>12</sup> Virtutes.

<span id="P6231_1096420"></span> <sup>13</sup> Sacramentorum.

<span id="P6233_1096982"></span> <sup>14</sup> Eusebius (*Hist.
Eccles*., iii. c. 36), treating of Itgantius, quotes from his Epistle to
the Church of Smyrna as follows: "Writing to the Smyraeans, he
(Ignatius) has employed words respecting Jesus, I know not whence they
are taken, to the following effect: \`But I know and believe that He was
seen after the resurrection; and when He came to Peter and his
companions, He said to them, Take and handle Me, and see that I am not
an incorporeal spirit.0'" Jerome, in his catalogue of ecclesiastical
writers, says the words are a quotation from the Gospel of the
Nazarenes, a work which he had recently translated. Origen here quotes
them, however, from *The Doctrine of Peter*, on which Ruaeus remarks
that the words might be contained in both of these apocryphal works.

<span id="P6234_1097840"></span> <sup>15</sup> Daemonium.

<span id="P6235_1098630"></span> <sup>16</sup> Subtile.

<span id="P6238_1100041"></span> <sup>17</sup> \[See note, *infra*, at
end of cap. vi. S.\]

<span id="P6240_1100243"></span> <sup>18</sup> Hos. x. 12. The words in
the text are not the rendering of the Authorized Version, but that of
the Septuagint, which has fwtisate eautoij fwj gnwsewj. Where the
Masoretic text has t(w

(*et tempus*) Origen evidently read t(r@

(*scientia*), the similarity of *Vau* and *Daleth* accounting for the
error of the transcriber.

<span id="P6248_1101243"></span> <sup>1</sup> Deut. iv. 24.

<span id="P6249_1101387"></span> <sup>2</sup> John iv. 24.

<span id="P6250_1101700"></span> <sup>3</sup> 1 John i. 5.

<span id="P6251_1101890"></span> <sup>4</sup> Ps. xxxvi. 9.

<span id="P6253_1103514"></span> <sup>5</sup> John xiv. 23.

<span id="P6254_1103988"></span> <sup>6</sup> 2 Cor. iii. 6.

<span id="P6255_1104377"></span> <sup>7</sup> 2 Cor. iii. 15-17.

<span id="P6257_1105483"></span> <sup>8</sup> Disciplina.

<span id="P6258_1106270"></span> <sup>9</sup> Subsistentia.

<span id="P6260_1107217"></span> <sup>10</sup> John iv. 20.

<span id="P6261_1107807"></span> <sup>11</sup> John iv. 23, 24.

<span id="P6263_1108505"></span> <sup>12</sup> "Inaestimabilem."

<span id="P6265_1110675"></span> <sup>13</sup> "Simplex intellectualis
natura."

<span id="P6266_1111248"></span> <sup>14</sup> "Natura illa simplex et
tota mens."

<span id="P6268_1115036"></span> <sup>15</sup> Some read "visivle."

<span id="P6269_1116336"></span> <sup>16</sup> "Substantia quaedam
sensibilis propria."

<span id="P6271_1118211"></span> <sup>17</sup> Col. i. 15.

<span id="P6272_1118607"></span> <sup>18</sup> John i. 18.

<span id="P6273_1119550"></span> <sup>19</sup> "Constat inter Patrem et
Filium."

<span id="P6274_1119827"></span> <sup>20</sup> Matt. xi. 27.

<span id="P6276_1120462"></span> <sup>21</sup> Matt. v. 8.

<span id="P6277_1121340"></span> <sup>22</sup> Cf. Prov. ii. 5.

<span id="P6281_1122903"></span> <sup>23</sup> Prov. viii. 22-25. The
reading in the text differs considerably from that of the Vulgate.

<span id="P6282_1123100"></span> <sup>24</sup> Col. i. 15.

<span id="P6283_1123307"></span> <sup>25</sup> 1 Cor. i. 24.

<span id="P6285_1123391"></span> <sup>26</sup> Aliquid insubstantivum.

<span id="P6286_1123817"></span> <sup>27</sup> Substantialiter.

<span id="P6287_1124391"></span> <sup>28</sup> Ad punctum alicujus
momenti.

<span id="P6288_1125559"></span> <sup>29</sup> Omnis virtus ac
deformatio futurae creaturae.

<span id="P6290_1126739"></span> <sup>30</sup> This work is mentioned by
Eusebius, *Hist. Eccles*., iii. c. 3 and 25, as among the spurious
writings current in the Church. The *Acts of Paul and Thecla* was a
different work from the *Acts of Paul*. The words quoted, "Hic est
verbum animal vivens," seem to be a corruption from Heb. iv. 12, awn gar
o logoj tou Qeou. \[Jones on the *Canon*, vol. ii. pp. 353-411, as to
*Paul and Thecla*. As to this quotation of our author, see Lardner,
*Credib*., ii. p. 539.\]

<span id="P6291_1127453"></span> <sup>31</sup> Or, "and the Word was
God."

<span id="P6294_1130181"></span> <sup>32</sup> "Quoniam hi qui videntur
apud nos hominum filii, vel ceterorum animalium, semini eorum a quibus
seminati sunt respondent, vel earum quarum in utero formantur ac
nutriuntur, habent ex his quidquid illud est quod in lucem hanc
assumunt, ac deferunt processuri." Probably the last two words shour be
"deferunt processuris" - "and hand it over to those who are destined to
come forth from them," i.e., to their descendants.

<span id="P6295_1130731"></span> <sup>33</sup> Subsistentia. Some would
read here, "substantia."

<span id="P6296_1131335"></span> <sup>34</sup> Per adoptionem Spiritus.
The original words here were probably eispoihsij tou pneumatoj, and
Rufinus seems to have mistaken the allusion to Gen. ii. 7. To
"adoption," in the technical theological sense, the words in the text
cannot have any reference. - Schnitzer.

<span id="P6298_1131931"></span> <sup>35</sup> Col. i. 15.

<span id="P6299_1132075"></span> <sup>36</sup> Heb. i. 3.
