<span id="P7200_1597591"></span> <sup>340</sup> Eos quos obsederint.

<span id="P7201_1597735"></span> <sup>341</sup> Energumenos.

<span id="P7202_1598267"></span> <sup>342</sup> John xix. 2.

<span id="P7204_1599136"></span> <sup>343</sup> \[See Oehler's *Old
Testament Theology*, §207, "Psychological Definition of the Prophetic
State in Ancient Times," pp. 468, 469. S.\]

<span id="P7206_1600094"></span> <sup>344</sup> Jer. i. 5, 6.

<span id="P7207_1600376"></span> <sup>345</sup> Divinasse.

<span id="P7209_1602644"></span> <sup>346</sup> 1 Pet. v. 8.

<span id="P7210_1602935"></span> <sup>347</sup> Heb. i. 14.

<span id="P7211_1603032"></span> <sup>348</sup> Hospitium.

<span id="P7216_1606531"></span> <sup>349</sup> Gal. v. 17.

<span id="P7217_1606802"></span> <sup>350</sup> Lev. xvii. 14.

<span id="P7218_1607687"></span> <sup>351</sup> Rom. vii. 23.

<span id="P7219_1607908"></span> <sup>352</sup> Sensum vel sapientiam.

<span id="P7220_1608363"></span> <sup>353</sup> Passiones animae.

<span id="P7221_1609056"></span> <sup>354</sup> Veneficia. Farmakeia.
"Witchcraft" (Auth. Version).

<span id="P7222_1609249"></span> <sup>355</sup> Gal. v. 19-21.

<span id="P7223_1609617"></span> <sup>356</sup> 1 Cor. i. 26.

<span id="P7224_1610107"></span> <sup>357</sup> Gal. v. 17.

<span id="P7225_1611138"></span> <sup>358</sup> Rom. viii. 9.

<span id="P7227_1611630"></span> <sup>359</sup> The text here is very
obscure, and has given some trouble to commentators. The words are:
"Quae ergo ista est praeter haec voluntas animae quae extrinsecus
nominatur," etc. Redepenning understands "extrinsecus" as meaning
"seorsim," "insuper," and refers to a note of Origen upon the Epistle to
the Romans (tom. i. p. 466): "Et idcirco *extrinsecus* eam (animam,
corporis et spiritus mentione facta, Rom. i. 3, 4) apostolus non
nominat, sed carnem tantum vel spiritum," etc. Schnitzer supposes that
in the Greek the words were, Thj ecw kaloumenhj, where ecw is to be
taken in the sense of katw, so that the expression would mean "anima
inferior."

<span id="P7229_1613111"></span> <sup>360</sup> In quâ necesse est ex
singulis quibusque partibus quae possunt moveri discutere.

<span id="P7230_1614747"></span> <sup>361</sup> Priusquam - unum
efficiatur cum eo.

<span id="P7233_1616075"></span> <sup>362</sup> Passiones.

<span id="P7234_1616439"></span> <sup>363</sup> Quibus nunc quidem
arguimur, nunc vero nosmet ipsos amplectimur.

<span id="P7235_1617935"></span> <sup>364</sup> Evacuantur.

<span id="P7236_1619011"></span> <sup>365</sup> Cf. Rom. viii. 2.

<span id="P7237_1619143"></span> <sup>366</sup> Abusive = improperly
used.

<span id="P7238_1619375"></span> <sup>367</sup> Recomponi vult.

<span id="P7239_1619668"></span> <sup>368</sup> Gen. iv. 10.

<span id="P7240_1619963"></span> <sup>369</sup> Rom. vii. 23.

<span id="P7242_1620821"></span> <sup>370</sup> Plus studii vel
propositi.

<span id="P7243_1621316"></span> <sup>371</sup> Rom. viii. 7.

<span id="P7244_1621768"></span> <sup>372</sup> Naturaliter.

<span id="P7248_1622364"></span> <sup>373</sup> De ecclesiasticis
definitionibus unum.

<span id="P7249_1622616"></span> <sup>374</sup> Consummationem saeculi.

<span id="P7251_1623105"></span> 83 \* The printed text of the Eerdman's
reprint is damaged or unreadable here.

<span id="P7252_1623965"></span> <sup>375</sup> Gen. xlix. i. The
Vulgate has, "In diebus novissimis;" the Sept. Ep esxatwn twn hmerwn:
the Masoretic text, tyrx)b@

<span id="P7253_1624466"></span> <sup>376</sup> Ps. cii. 26, 27.

<span id="P7254_1624598"></span> <sup>377</sup> Matt. xix. 4.

<span id="P7255_1624763"></span> <sup>378</sup> Matt. xxiv. 35.

<span id="P7256_1625141"></span> <sup>379</sup> Rom. viii. 20, 21.

<span id="P7257_1625288"></span> <sup>380</sup> 1 Cor. vii. 31.

<span id="P7259_1626103"></span> <sup>381</sup> Auctoritate Scripturae
nostrae, vel fidei.

<span id="P7261_1627545"></span> <sup>382</sup> Regulam pietatis.

<span id="P7262_1628071"></span> <sup>383</sup> Cf. Isa. lxvi. 22.

<span id="P7263_1628476"></span> <sup>384</sup> Cf. Eccles. i. 9, 10.
The text is in conformity with the Septuag.: Ti to gegonoj\\ Auto to
genhsomenon. Kai ti to pepoihmenon\\ Auto to poihqhsomenon. Kai ouk esti
pan prosfaton upo ton hlion. Oj lalhsei kai erei. Ide touto kainon estin
hdh gegonen en toij aiwsi toij genomenoij apo emtrosqen hmwn.

<span id="P7264_1628845"></span> <sup>385</sup> Saecula.

<span id="P7266_1629788"></span> <sup>386</sup> Matt. xxiv. 21.

<span id="P7267_1630073"></span> <sup>387</sup> Eph. i. 4.

<span id="P7268_1630277"></span> <sup>388</sup> The following is
Jerome's version of this passage (*Epistle to Avitus*): "A divine
habitation, and a true rest above (*apud superos*), I think is to be
understood, where rational creatures dwell, and where before their
descent to a lower position, and removal from invisible to visible
(worlds), and fall to earth, and need of gross bodies, they enjoyed a
former blessedness. Whence God the Creator made for them bodies suitable
to their humble position and created this visible world, and sent into
the world ministers for the salvation and correction of those who had
fallen: of whom some were to obtain certain localities, and be subject
to the necessities of the world; others were to discharge with care and
attention the duties enjoined upon them at all times, and which were
known to God, the Arranger (of all things). And of these, the sun, moon,
and stars, which are called \`creature0' by the apostle, received the
more elevated places of the world. Which \`creature0' was made subject
to vanity, in that it was clothed with gross bodies, and was open to
view, and yet was subject to vanity not voluntarily, but because of the
will of Him who subjected the same in hope." And again: "While others,
whom we believe to be angels, at different places and times, which the
Arranger alone knows, serve the government of the world." And a little
further on: "Which order of things is regulated by the providential
government of the whole world, some powers falling down from a loftier
position others gradually sinking to earth: some falling voluntarily,
others befog cast down against their will: some undertaking, of their
own accord, the service of stretching out the hand to those who fall
others being compelled to persevere for so long a time in the duty which
they have undertaken." And again: "Whence it follows that, on account of
the various movements, various worlds also are created, and after this
world which we now inhabit, there will be another greatly disimilar, But
no other being save God alone, the Creator of all things,can arrange the
deserts (of all), both to the time to come and to that which preceded.
suitably to the differing lapses and advances (of individuals), and to
the rewards of virtues or the punishment of vices, both in the present
and in the future, and in all (times), and to conduct them all again to
one end: for He knows the causes why He allows some to enjoy their own
will, and to fall from a higher rank to the lowest condition: and why He
begins to visit others, and bring them back gradually, as if by giving
them His hand to their pristine state, and placing them in a lofty
position" (Ruaeus).

<span id="P7269_1633366"></span> <sup>389</sup> \[According to Hagenbach
(*History of Doctrines*, vol. i. p.. 167), "Origen formally adopts the
idea of original sin, by asserting that the human soul does not come
into the world in a state of innocence, because it has already sinned in
a former state... And yet subsequent times, especially after Jerome,
have seen in Origen the precursor of Pelagius. Jerome calls the opinion
that man can be without sin. *Origenis ramusculus*." S.\]

<span id="P7270_1634287"></span> <sup>390</sup> Cf. Rom.. viii. 20, 21.

<span id="P7271_1634992"></span> <sup>391</sup> Dispersi.

<span id="P7274_1637536"></span> <sup>392</sup> Exinanivit semet ipsum.

<span id="P7275_1637787"></span> <sup>393</sup> Regendi regnandique.

<span id="P7277_1639039"></span> <sup>394</sup> \[Elucidation II.\]

<span id="P7278_1639579"></span> <sup>395</sup> 1 Cor. xv. 28.

<span id="P7279_1640536"></span> <sup>396</sup> Cum non solum regendi ac
regnandi summam, quam in universam emendaverit creaturam, verum etiam
obedientae et subjectione correcta reparataque humani generis Patri
offerat instituta.

<span id="P7281_1643006"></span> <sup>397</sup> By a profession of faith
in baptism.

<span id="P7282_1643095"></span> <sup>398</sup> Indubitatam ceperit
salutem.

<span id="P7283_1643514"></span> <sup>399</sup> It was not until the
third Synod of Toledo, a.d. 589, that the "Filoque" clause was added to
the Creed of Constantinople, - this difference forming, as is well
known, one of the dogmatic grounds for the disunion between the Western
and Eastern Churches down to the present day, the latter Church denying
that the Spirit proceedeth from the Father *and the Son*. \[See
Elucidation III.\]

<span id="P7287_1644495"></span> <sup>400</sup> Finis omnium: "bonorum"
understood.

<span id="P7288_1644957"></span> <sup>401</sup> Gen. i. 26.

<span id="P7289_1645133"></span> <sup>402</sup> Gen. i. 27, 28.

<span id="P7290_1645190"></span> <sup>403</sup> Imago.

<span id="P7291_1645272"></span> <sup>404</sup> Similitudo.

<span id="P7292_1646103"></span> <sup>405</sup> Cf. 1 John iii. 2.

<span id="P7293_1646736"></span> <sup>406</sup> Cf. John xvii. 24; cf.
21.

<span id="P7294_1646917"></span> <sup>407</sup> Ex simili unum fieri.

<span id="P7295_1647076"></span> <sup>408</sup> Jerome, in his *Epistle
to Avitus*, No. 94, has the passage thus: "Since, as we have already
frequently observed, the beginning is generated again from the end, it
is a question whether then also there will be bodies, or whether
existence will be maintained at some time without them when they shall
have been annihilated, and thus the life of incorporeal beings must be
believed to be incorporeal, as we know is the case with God And there is
no doubt that if all the bodies which are termed visible by the apostle,
belong to that sensible world, the life of incorporeal beings will be
incorporeal." And a little after: "That expression, also, used by the
apostle, \`The whole creation will be freed from the bondage of
corruption into the glorious liberty of the children of God0' (Rom..
viii. 21). we so understand, that we say it was the first creation of
rational and incorporeal beings which is not subject to corruption,
because it was not clothed with bodies: for wherever bodies are,
corruption immediately follows. But afterwards it will be freed from the
bondage of corruption, when they shall have received the glory of the
sons of God, and God shall be all in all." And in the same place: "That
we must believe the end of all things to be incorporeal, the language of
the Saviour Himself leads us to think, when He says, \`As I and Thou are
one, so may they also be one in Us0' (John xvii., 21), For we ought to
know what God is, and what the Saviour will be in the end, and how the
likeness of the Father and the Son has been promised to the saints; for
as they are one in Him, so they also are one in them. For we must adopt
the view, either that the God of all things is clothed with a body, and
as we are enveloped with flesh, so He also with some material covering,
that the likeness of the life of God may be in the end produced also in
the saints: or if this hypothesis is unbecoming, especially in the
judgment of those who desire, even in the smallest degree, to feel the
majesty of God, and to look upon the glory of His uncreated and
all-surpassing nature we are forced to adopt the other alternative, and
despair either of attaining any likeness to God, if we are to inhabit
for ever the same bodies, or if the blessedness of the same life with
God is promised to us, we must live in the same state as that in which
God lives." All these points have been omitted by Rufinus as erroneous,
and statements of a different kind here and there inserted instead
(Ruaeus).

<span id="P7296_1649805"></span> <sup>409</sup> Ad unitatis proprietatem

<span id="P7299_1653188"></span> <sup>410</sup> "Here the honesty of
Rufinus in his translation seems very suspicious: for Origen's
well-known opinion regarding the sins and lapses of blessed spirits he
here attributes to others. Nay, even the opinion which he introduces
Origen as ascribing to others, he exhibits him as refuting a little
further on, sec. 6, in these words: \`And in this condition (of
blessedness) we are to believe that, by the will of the Creator, it will
abide for ever without any change,0' etc. I suspect, therefore, that
all this is due to Rufinus himself, and that he has inserted it, instead
of what is found in the beginning of the chapter, sec. I, and which in
Jerome's *Epistle to Avitus* stands as follows: \`Nor is there any doubt
that, after certain intervals of time, matter will again exist, and
bodies be formed, and a diversity be established in the world, on
account of the varying wills of rational creatures who, after (enjoying)
perfect blessedness down to the end of all things, have gradually fallen
away to a lower condition and received into them so much wickedness that
they are converted) into an opposite condition, by their unwillingness
to retain their original state, and to preserve their blessedness
uncorrupted. Nor is this point to be suppressed, that many rational
creatures retain their first condition (*principium*) even to the second
and third and fourth worlds, and allow no room for any change within
them while others, again, will lose so little of their pristine state,
that they will appear to have lost almost nothing, and some are to be
precipitated with great destruction into the lowest pit. And God, the
disposer of all things, when creating His worlds, knows how to treat
each individual agreeably to his merits, and He is acquainted with the
occasions and causes by which the government (*gubernacula*) of the
world is sustained and commenced: so that he who surpassed all others in
wickedness, and brought himself completely down to the earth, is made in
another world, which is afterwards to be formed, a devil, the beginning
of the creation of the Lord (Job xl. 19), to be mocked by the angels who
have lost the virtue of their original condition0' (*exordii
virtutem*)." -Ruaeus.
