[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sd10)  [Next](sd12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766143007/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Spiritual Diary*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1758\], tr. by Bush,
Smithson and Buss \[1883-9\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Spiritual Diary

<span class="margnote"><span id="2001.">2001.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE GENERAL PRINCIPLE \[communi\] WHICH GOVERNS MAN'S
THOUGHTS. There is a certain general something \[quoddam commune\] which
governs mans thoughts, which holds those thoughts within certain limits
which they cannot transgress, nay, which governs the singular and most
singular things of thought. What is the nature of this general principle
cannot be so well expressed, because men have no knowledge of it. It was
represented to me by a waving sphere, which I perceived and felt,
containing within itself thoughts, and holding them within limits, as
already remarked.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2002.">2002.</span></span>

This is sufficiently manifest that there can never be given any
particular without a general, and that the particular is governed by the
general; so also the singular, and the most singular by its own
universal, which not only assigns limits to thought, but even to the
singulars of thought. Thus it is the common sphere which affects and
which persuades. Neither can man speak, or bring forth his sensations,
unless there be a certain universal sphere of thought which governs and
limits all and singulars, so that each word or idea shall flow fitly and
spontaneously as derived from that sphere, and yet in such a way that
man shall not know whence their source. Unless such a sphere governed,
man could by no means think or speak distinctly according to the state
of the sphere.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2003.">2003.</span></span>

In natural things thence originating there is nothing given without a
general sphere which governs singulars; not in the atmospheric world,
where are sounds, sights, and the like; neither in musical matters,
unless there be a co-sounding and equably accordant body; nor in the
kingdoms of nature, as the vegetable and animal, yea, in all the organs
of the body. But those general spheres are not so well known, because
they are little reflected upon.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2004.">2004.</span></span>

But whence are derived the spheres that govern the thoughts, and whence
the things mentioned above, may appear if it be admitted that there are
spheres of persuasions of the false, and of affections of evil, and that
they are derived from the general operation of evil spirits, to wit,
from their thoughts and cupidities.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2005.">2005.</span></span>

But the spheres of persuasions of the true; and of affections of the
good, are all from the Lord, as their appropriate and genuine origin.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2006.">2006.</span></span>

There are given, moreover, indefinite varieties of general spheres,
which cannot be defined except by being referred to genera and species,
according, for instance, as the spheres of angels and spirits are
present. Whatever are the appropriate spheres of angels and spirits,
they are not commingled with the spheres of the Lord, but are tempered
and are in themselves most distinct.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2007.">2007.</span></span>

The spheres governing the thoughts of the man who is in faith are of the
Lord, and peculiar to Him, so much as they have in them of the true and
the good; as to the others combined with them, they pertain to angels
and spirits who are ruled and ordered by the Lord with reference to uses
and ends. - 1748, May 20. See concerning thought in what follows.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2008.">2008.</span></span>

By means of an almost similar general sphere, others are otherwise
governed, everyone according to his nature and genius, but yet within
his proper limits, beyond which he cannot roam, for the general
prescribes limits. These things were observed by a various experience in
regard to spirits, some of whom were at the time, as it were, pained,
saying that they seemed to themselves to be in bonds, because the facts
were reflected upon, which reflection produced a general sphere that
they were unable to sustain, inasmuch as the reflection disclosed their
faults. - 1748, May 20.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2009.">2009.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE THOUGHT OF MAN - HOW SLOW AND OBSCURE. It is known that
man can think in a minute of time what he is unable to express by speech
or writing in the space of an hour; for when he thinks he concludes all
things within the compass of a general idea which governs, and
everything accordant flows consistently from his memory, and from parts
of his general idea; yet this general is of such a quality that he sees
the series of consequences, though obscurely, still he sees them and
connects them, because he draws a conclusion. From this it may be seen
what is the nature of that general principle which governs singulars.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2010.">2010.</span></span>

But this general, which appears to men so quick and momentaneous, is yet
in itself so slow, that the angels of the interior heaven can think more
rapidly and distinctly in one moment than man can within many hours,
during which he will still think obscurely. This was said to spirits,
who were highly indignant thereupon, although, as it was confirmed, it
must stand for truth. - 1748, May 20. There is, however, a very
considerable difference among men as to thoughts. With those in whom
memory predominates, while there is otherwise a certain closure of the
mind, there is less of thought; while with those in whom the mind is
open, and more of the interior memory prevails, there is so much more of
thought, because there are more things inserted into it by the Lord,
according to His good pleasure. - 1748, May 20.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2011.">2011.</span></span>

HOW THE PASSIONS OF MEN ARE BENT SO THAT THEY MAY NOT BE BROKEN. What it
is to bend without breaking a man's affections, in which consists his
life, everyone may know from experience, since friends and wives, when
companions become incensed, study to appease them by various
blandishments and compliances, until the enraged party is turned or bent
from his passion, which anyone may confirm by a multiplied experience.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2012.">2012.</span></span>

This is still better known among spirits, inasmuch as communications are
made by spiritual methods, so that affections and their effects may be
\[more fully\] understood. This is done by means of their intuitions,
and at the same time of their perceptions; and of the same character are
their spiritual ideas. Certain spirits were indignant when their anger
was suddenly snatched from them in a spiritual way; still the
indignation excited by the act remained, though they could not be
enraged. There was then insinuated something that flattered their
self-love, as of praise, administered in a spiritual way, when their
resentment was bent into concord, so that the anger would recede. Hence
conclusions may be drawn as to other things as, for instance, how it is
that the Lord bends without breaking the cupidities of men; as also,
that man is sometimes permitted to be led by his concupiscences, while
yet they are bent in a wonderful manner to good.-1748, May 20.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2012_1/2.">2012\_1/2.</span></span>

THAT EVIL IS ATTRIBUTED TO THE LORD. Nothing is more common in the Word
than the ascribing of evil, wrath, vengeance, and the like to Jehovah,
when yet nothing is farther from being the case. The reason is, that as
man does not know more than that the Lord rules the universe, so he is
of course ignorant how it is that He permits evils, and indefinite
things of a like kind; wherefore, from this simple, most general, and
most obscure idea, the obvious result is the idea that the Lord does
evil, as is read in a multitude of places in the Word.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2013.">2013.</span></span>

The cause, however, with the wicked is, that they derive all evils from
themselves, and yet cast the blame upon Jehovah, which is their constant
wont. To this we may add that some do not know otherwise, inasmuch as
they cherished this persuasion in their lifetime and, moreover, they are
not such as penetrate much beyond the surface, and thus do not grasp the
nature and origin of permissions. Some again do it out of mere malice,
which it has been given me to know by much experience, as oftentimes
when anything of evil has occurred, they have laid the blame upon the
Lord, and what their thoughts were on the subject was communicated to
me. 1748, May 20.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2014.">2014.</span></span>

THAT THERE IS A VARIETY OF ALL THINGS. Very many persons, indeed nearly
all, are persuaded that hell is the same to everyone, and likewise
heaven; thus they have respecting them only a most general and obscure
idea; consequently, they close to themselves the way to a knowledge of
what hell is and what heaven is, when, in fact, the varieties both in
hell and in heaven are so indefinite, that if souls should be multiplied
to eternity, there would never be one that should have precisely the
same hell or the same heaven with another, but there would still exist
an indefinite variety, nay, an indefinite variation of varieties to all
eternity.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2015.">2015.</span></span>

((((((((Thus there can never by any means be one soul precisely similar
to another, which it was given to me to know by the fact that when I
thought, in a spiritual idea, that if any two \[souls\] were one, they
could not be conscious to themselves of a distinct existence, but would
seem to be one; when, I say, I barely thought of a plurality being one,
then the world of spirits and the angelic were so abhorrent to the idea
that it was evident it was contrary to the truth of things. - 1748, May
20.))))))))

<span class="margnote"><span id="2016.">2016.</span></span>

((((((But everyone \[unum\] is formed from the harmony of many; and the
one is such as the harmony is; nor can there ever be an absolute one,
but only a harmonic one. - 1748, May 20.))))))

<span class="margnote"><span id="2017.">2017.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE DRAGON. He has been already described, I think, as being
able to convert himself into a variety of forms, so as to appear as a
good angel, to weep, and, as it were, to repent with a great semblance
of sincerity, to speak to others, as to me, with apparent indifference,
and at the same time to contrive deceits with others, but that was
gathered from the indifference of his speech, in which there was infused
an air of absence, and other like things.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2017_1/2.">2017\_1/2.</span></span>

But that he is tolerated, and not forcibly thrust down, which could be
effected in a moment, as has often been done, one reason is, that those
who worship him in the world are, after the life of the body, or rather
after the death of the body, similar to themselves in the other life,
nor do they know otherwise than that they are living in the body, so
that they are struck with astonishment when otherwise informed. Such,
therefore, having in their minds a veneration for him as for an idol,
they are permitted at first to approach him; for cupidities and
falsities are not taken away in a moment. Inasmuch, then, as souls are
in such a state that they would be broken \[by a sudden and violent
change\], therefore the process is gradual, and toleration and
permission is allowed, till at length they are step by step drawn out
and led forth to other places. The case, indeed, is not unlike that of
the Gentiles, who also resort to their idols, but according to their
states of life in the world they are called away from them as soon as
their peculiar corporeal principle is somewhat worn out. - 1748, May 20.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2018.">2018.</span></span>

It is a matter of most familiar habit with him, as also with evil
spirits, continually to persecute the faithful, or continually to
accuse, blaspheme, and injure them, as far as it is permitted, while the
faithful on the other hand never injure him. He often makes complaint,
as he has just now, that he is so infested by those who are in true
faith; but it is answered that they never infest him, but that, on the
contrary, he infests and impugns them every moment; upon which he
ruminates, not knowing what to say, as he acknowledges the fact. Thus he
is the self-procuring cause of his own harm. - 1748, May 20.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2019.">2019.</span></span>

THE DIFFERENT STATES OF MEN AND SPIRITS IN GENERAL. There are many
differences between the states of spirits as spirits and those that
distinguished them as men, concerning which I have treated fully
elsewhere; this only is to be observed here, that men have various
external objects which move, modify, and bend their internal senses; but
with spirits it is not so: that men live in such societies as they can,
from various causes, associate with, even when their associates are
dissimilar to themselves; it is otherwise with spirits, who associate
only with their like. Men are distinguished by the possession of a
corporeal memory, by means of which their acquisitions are made; but not
so with spirits. Men also from the past conjecture the future, but not
so with spirits, who have no memory of the past, except when it is
excited for certain ends. Men have comparatively little penetration,
spirits much more; they see the thoughts of others, but with a
difference \[from the perceptions of men\], in that they see in others
the things that flow from them. The thoughts of men are bound, as it
were, to corporeal things, like their organic substances; but not so
with spirits. - 1748, May 20.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2020.">2020.</span></span>

THAT THE LORD RULES ALL AND SINGLE THINGS. While speaking with evil
spirits, who would fain arrogate to themselves the rule of all and
singular things, I perceived around me innumerable spirits, who all
contributed somewhat to the train of thoughts, which, as usual, were
connected in a series. I then perceived that while there were such vast
numbers all concurring to the train and connected series of thoughts, it
could not be otherwise than that one should govern all, and dispose them
into series, and that others, who continually dissented and opposed,
ought to agree, so that so many repugnances may not exist to create
impediments; so that, unless there were one \[supreme ruler\], who is
the Lord, because the great object of faith, nothing whatever could be
thought; but from so many, and even countless diversities, nothing but
utter confusion and chaos would exist; and this they could not do
otherwise than acknowledge, because it was given them to perceive it by
a spiritual idea. Hence it may be known that the Lord rules all things,
both general and most special, and that without His control the whole
system would collapse. Those who arrogated to themselves the rule,
inasmuch as one was opposed to another, \[were challenged on this
score,\] but they retorted that they were competent to do it. It was
replied \[by asking\] who could rule them, consisting, as they did, of
legions of legions, and mutually contrary to each, inasmuch as hatred
rules all, for the love of self is predominant. - 1748 May 21.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2021.">2021.</span></span>

THAT THE LORD CAN ENABLE ANYONE, BY A SPIRITUAL IDEA, TO PERCEIVE
INTERIOR THINGS. Certain spirits supposed that I only was in such a
state as to be capable, by a spiritual idea, of perceiving interior
things, and of being as a spirit, from whence, as usual, they drew some
kind of sinister inference; but it was said to them that all could be
such if the Lord pleased, even the most stupid, and I was then reminded
of a certain stupid individual whom I had known many years before. This
man was accustomed at certain times to make public addresses, and he
could then recollect a multitude of things which he could not possibly
at any other time recall to mind. It was then, moreover, shown to me by
experience that upon the withdrawal of such a spiritual idea, I was
altogether like any other person in thought, which was a matter of
wonder to spirits, and that, according to the Lord's good pleasure, not
only was this faculty opened with me, but also with all spirits, to whom
the Lord should see fit to grant it. By experience, moreover, I had
previously learned that spirits, when reduced into a similar state,
would communicate to me such things as pertained to them, that I knew no
otherwise than that I myself had once known them, and thus recollected
them, when yet, afterwards, I knew that it was owing to the operation of
spirits upon me, similar to the operation of man upon spirits, who
suppose that they know what the man knows, the effect being thus
reciprocal. From these and many other facts, it may be concluded that,
with whomsoever the Lord pleases the mind may be opened, so that by a
spiritual idea things may be intuitively perceived - in an orderly
manner with those who are in faith, and in an extraordinary and
miraculous manner with those who are not in faith.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2022.">2022.</span></span>

Additional confirmation was afforded by the fact of the prophetic spirit
in the representative church, which spirit was given to whomsoever it
seemed good to the lord, thus to the seventy elders by the spirit of
Moses who prophesied, as did also Saul; which prophetic spirit was no
other than an influence prompting them to speak and act by words and
ways that were unknown to them, the things \[said and done\] being
external, but signifying what was internal. So, if it pleased the Lord,
a similar spirit could now be given, and one intuitively penetrating
interior things, inasmuch as at this day men are more in knowledges, and
in the faith of verities, only there are certain corporeal things by
which spiritual actings are embarrassed and hindered, upon the death or
separation of which the remains of spiritual things may be excited.
1748, May 21.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2024.">2024.</span></span>

 <span id="fr_21"></span>[2024-1](#fn_21) HOW THE PASSIONS OF SPIRITS
ARE MODERATED. A certain spirit was in the cupidity of having something;
indeed, he burnt, as it were, with the desire, but his state did not
penetrate to my perception, as I experienced at other times; but it was
exhibited to the internal sight. There appeared, as it were, a sphere
somewhat inflamed, which was the sphere of the cupidity wherein he was
held; nor did he then appear to me otherwise than as a very diminutive
something, floating about, as it were, in that sphere, the sphere of
cupidities being circumfused around him. He in that state lamented,
saying that he was in extreme pain from not obtaining what he longed
for. It seemed to me that he would perish; but just at that time another
more subtle sphere entered from the Lord, which was a sphere of uses,
whereupon his pain was mitigated, which he confessed, \[saying\] that he
could receive consolation, and that in the degree in which the rays of
the sphere of use extend. He was thus instructed that nothing should be
covetously desired except from use, and that use ought to excite
affection.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2025.">2025.</span></span>

Moreover, the cupidities prevailing with some of possessing without
regard to use, which they afterwards defend by feigning uses, are also
communicated, a common case with women, respecting which I spoke with
them. 1748, May 20.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2026.">2026.</span></span>

THAT MEN ARE WORSE THAN WILD BEASTS. I conversed today, as I have done
before, with spirits respecting the human race, that they are worse than
wild beasts, because that men live according to inverted order, and wild
beasts according to true order; for men are prompted to extirpate all
society for the sake of self, whereas with beasts it is not so, unless
in the case of certain species when urged, under the goadings of hunger,
their nature being such that, according to order, one species should
feed on another. In a word, it may be demonstrated by many proofs that
the human race, viewed in itself, and when left to itself divested of
restraint, is worse than fierce wild beasts of the forest.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2027.">2027.</span></span>

That fierce wild beasts do also live according to the order impressed
upon them, and not contrary to it, may appear from the fact that such as
their soul is, such is the nature thence derived, wherefore they live
according to order; but as to man, his soul, in his interior and inmost,
is such that he loves his neighbor as himself, but his exterior or his
natural mind, and his corporeal promptings, are altogether contrary; he
does not love, but desires rather to destroy all those who can be termed
near to him, and the nearer they are the more intensely does he feel
opposed to them; wherefore he does not live according to the order of
his soul, but against it, and in a way altogether contrary to that of
the wild beasts; on which account, as I said to the spirits, if the
natural mind of man resembled the wild beasts, it would be much better
for him, but now he is much the worse of the two; to which the spirits
listened, but made no reply. - 1748, May 21.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2028.">2028.</span></span>

Certain species of beasts and fishes eat beasts and fishes of the same
genus and species, but that is when they are pressed by hunger, in which
case they are furnished from this source with food, thus preventing a
too rapid multiplication; but when they are satisfied, they betake
themselves to repose. Man, the more blood he sheds, the more he filches
of his neighbor's goods, the more he desires, being never satisfied; his
cupidity grows and increases till he comes to aspire at the possession
of heaven itself, which desire is in fact involved in the least spark of
self-love. - 1748, May 21.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2029.">2029.</span></span>

Hence it may appear that all who have been and are men tend backward,
or, what is the same, tend downward, consequently to hell; unless the
Lord were to raise them from hell, all would fall headlong hither,
which, when it was said to the spirits, they remained silent. - 1748,
May 21.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2030.">2030.</span></span>

CONCERNING A CERTAIN ONE LATELY DECEASED. A certain spirit came to me at
evening, and spoke with me, and from certain indications it appeared
that he was recently from the earth; and as spirits are covetous of
knowing everything, they were variously desirous of exploring his
quality, and if they found anything discordant, then they were disposed
forthwith to infest him, but were as often withheld from so doing, so
that he was continually defended, and more especially from the fact that
he was a stranger, to whom it is commanded that good shall always be
done. He was therefore shielded from assault by good spirits, by angels,
and by the Lord, although the spirits sought by various methods to
associate him to themselves, and thus to do him harm, as usual; indeed,
they had recourse to their peculiar arts, but in vain. He was at first
above the head, afterwards under the cerebellum, so that they were
unable to ascertain his quality.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2031.">2031.</span></span>

He knew not at first where he was, supposing himself to be in the world
altogether as if living in the body, for of this impression are all
souls recent from the life of the body, inasmuch as they are not then
gifted with reflection upon place,

<span class="margnote"><span id="2032.">2032.</span></span>

time, the objects of the senses, and the like, of which I have spoken
elsewhere, and which would enable them to know that they are in another
life, only that they live as it were in the body, and think accordingly.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2033.">2033.</span></span>

((When it was afterwards given him to know that he was in the other
life, and that he had nothing \[of his former possessions\], such as
house, riches, and the like, but that he was, as it were, in another
region, where he was deprived of all that he had in his earthly life, he
then began to be affected with a certain anxiety, not knowing whither he
should betake himself, where he should dwell, etc., when it was said to
him that the Lord alone provided such things for him and for all.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2034.">2034.</span></span>

He was then left to his own reflections that he might think, as in the
body, what he should do, being now deprived of all things essential to
life; and inasmuch as he was now in the society of good spirits and
angels, his thoughts were so directed that he should entertain no idea
of evil, from which evil spirits could derive a cause of infesting him,
and in this state he remained for a very considerable time. Hence it was
observed that souls think altogether as they are accustomed to do in the
body, and by means of these agencies an exploration was effected, going
to show that the spirit in question could be in the society of the good,
and that he had been a man who was in faith towards the Lord.))

<span class="margnote"><span id="2035.">2035.</span></span>

Then, although evil spirits were disposed continually to infest him, and
to draw him into their societies, aiming by their arts to pluck him from
the fellowship of the good, yet he was still protected; and it was
permitted to these evil spirits to persist in their machinations even to
the point of producing in him a certain degree of fear and anguish, as
is wont to happen to those who are in faith, that they may think that it
is the Lord alone who protects them; for without such a fear and anxiety
they would scarcely acknowledge that fact, etc.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2036.">2036.</span></span>

He was afterwards transferred to another place, even to the province of
the heart, and their good spirits and angels defended and screened him
with much solicitous care from the evil, that they might not know where
he was. This was committed to angels who were then especially in that
solicitude, aiming by every method to defend him, and for that purpose
forming, according to spiritual ideas, a kind of guardian circle around
him. From the same solicitous care they performed a great many other
kind offices in his behalf, from whence it was given to know how the
angels defend good souls, and they in like manner are formed to the
exercise of a similar compassion.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2037.">2037.</span></span>

They also rendered to him every assistance, and whatever he was prompted
to wish and long for in his thoughts, that they gave to him, thus
everything that entered into the range of his thoughts and desires, for
they can give whatever is desired, inasmuch as such things can be
represented, and thus can be made to appear to the person altogether as
if he possessed them in the world, for the possession of goods in the
world is nothing else than imaginary, and when the imagination enjoys
them to the full and has them in its eye, then it possesses them as in
the world, and is delighted with them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2038.">2038.</span></span>

((Being afterwards left to his own cogitations, he began to reflect how
he could be sufficiently grateful for such favors, from which the
conclusion was easily drawn that that soul had been led by the Lord, and
that almost immediately after death he would come among the celestials.
1748, May 22.))

<span class="margnote"><span id="2039.">2039.</span></span>

From the Lord's Prayer which he prayed with me, I perceived that
hitherto he had not advanced beyond the literal sense, thus that he
prayed in simplicity and faith, and that still his interiors might be
immediately opened in the other life. - 1748, May 22.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2040.">2040.</span></span>

THAT CRITICS KNOW NOTHING IN COMPARISON WITH OTHERS WHO ARE NOT CRITICS.
It has often been shown me that critics, or those most skilled in
languages, as the Hebrew, for instance, yea, even those who have
constructed lexicons, and been translators of Moses and the prophets,
were much less intelligent than those who were not critics; for the
weighing of words has the effect of distracting the mind by the various
senses assigned, causing it to adhere in bare words; and when such
critics have seized upon any particular signification of a word, they
hold on to it wholly regardless of the genuine sense, which they impel
hither and thither, and urge with violence, in order to make it coincide
\[with their views\]; which, when once the signification of a word is
assumed, they are enabled to do in a thousand ways. All this was shown
me by a living experience. - 1748, May 22.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2041.">2041.</span></span>

It hence results that not only are they less intelligent in regard to
spiritual things from their inhering in material ideas or words, but
some may even be led astray in dealing with the Word of the Lord, which
from the bare words alone they gather some other than the true sense,
and defend and distort it from the love of self; for when the
signification of a word is assumed, they then torture the sense into
accordance with it, which can be done \[as before remarked\] in a
thousand ways. Hence the spiritual ideas that are falsified by being
mixed with material ideas, and which in the other life occasion them
impediment and detriment, inasmuch as falsities inhere in material
ideas, are to be dispersed. - 1748, May 22.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2042.">2042.</span></span>

CONCERNING SOULS \[PRINCIPLED\] IN FAITH, THAT IN THE OTHER LIFE THEY
CAN BE AT ONCE PRESENT WITH THE CELESTIALS. The reader may refer to what
was said concerning the recent soul above mentioned. He was now among
celestial spirits, and could, without delay, make one in the general
stream of their discourse, nor was there perceived aught to hinder his
advance from anything false inhering in his ideas, nor anything
repugnant from the love of self; for there are falsities and selfish and
worldly loves which hinder the introduction of souls into celestial
associations, as into these no one can be admitted except as he is in
certain states, that is, before falsities and cupidities are vastated,
and, as it were, worn away; these may be compared to sharp angles which
prevent the easy volubility of the gyre in the unanimous discourse of
numbers. - 1748, May 22.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2043.">2043.</span></span>

WHAT IS SIGNIFIED BY BEING NOTHING. Spirits who did not understand what
is implied in its being said that we are to undergo a process of
annihilation, or becoming nothing, inasmuch as they supposed that by
losing those things which were most peculiarly their own, they would be
left so entirely destitute that neither man nor spirit would be
intelligently master of himself, but be like a machine, devoid of all
sense and reflection - such spirits often said to me that I should be
nothing, should become nothing, but in a jesting way, as they did not
understand what was implied in being nothing. But it was given me to
reply to them that this was what I desired, to wit, to be nothing, yea,
absolutely nothing, for then I should first begin to be something.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2044.">2044.</span></span>

They were afterwards instructed that by nothing \[in this case\] was
meant that a man should lose all that was his own, that is, his
cupidities, and so his iniquities, and thus that he should come to exist
as another person, and that they could never be anything until they had
lost that which was theirs, and that in proportion as they experienced
that loss, or was reduced to nothing, they would begin to be something;
and that then they would have whatever they desired or thought, like the
soul above mentioned, for it is given to him by the Lord to desire such
things as are suitable, and those also he obtains in abundance, enjoying
them with delight, and without cessation, so long and so far as he is
nothing to himself. On this ground he has indefinite favors granted him,
which he enjoys with inmost joy and delight, and with a perception
vastly fuller than that of which other men are conscious in the
possession of their delights, to say nothing of the boundless variety
which attends them. The sensation and perception, which they thought
would be extinguished, are infinitely heightened when self-love ceases
to be the ruling principle of their delights. Thus instructed, the
spirits began to reflect and to desire; and although they were not good,
yet they were in a certain species of sleep \[in which their evils were
in abeyance.\] - 1748, May 22.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2045.">2045.</span></span>

But when they came into a state of wakefulness, they began to return
again to their nature, which was given to the contrivance of subtle
deceits, wherefore it was said to me that they could be of such a
quality in a state of sleep, but not so well in a state of waking, in
which the perceptions and sensations are also awake, and of greater
vividness, for they are observant of everything, and are vivid according
to the common state of wakefulness and light. - 1748, May 22.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2046.">2046.</span></span>

It is remarkable that it can be manifestly known what state they are in
from the hearing of their voice when they speak, as, for instance,
whether they are more or less in a state of sleep; so, also, whether
they are deceitful, ((((which is manifested in the speech itself,
although otherwise no deceits are perceived; and this according to the
diversities of the ill intent, so that all the affections may, through
the loving-kindness of the Lord, be known by the angels from the speech
alone, and apart from any special explanation. The speech of the
deceitful is tacit, there being in every tone an image of deceit, which
is recognized by those to whom the Lord gives to perceive it;)))) and in
other things. - 1748, May 22.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2047.">2047.</span></span>

((((It may also be known if one spirit who is deceitful prompts another
to speak, and whether the deceit belongs properly to him that speaks, or
to the other, as nothing is more common among spirits than for one class
to speak through another, the latter being made the subject-speakers of
the former. These things, and what I have previously said respecting
speech, it was given me today to know by lively experience. I had indeed
the opportunity of knowing the same things before, but am not aware that
I bestowed upon it the same degree of reflection. - 1748, May 22.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2048.">2048.</span></span>

In their minutest actions their genius discloses itself, for their most
singular things are effigies of themselves. - 1748, May 22.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2049.">2049.</span></span>

CONCERNING A SPIRIT WHO WAS DISQUIETED FROM ARDENTLY DESIRING HEAVEN. A
spirit like-minded to the one before spoken of, and capable of quite a
subtle perception, addressed me on the right side, under the arm, saying
that there was nothing he so much longed for as heaven; that he had
often desired \[the enjoyment of\] heaven, but that they were unwilling
to admit him; and begging that if I knew by what means he could gain
entrance thither, I would inform him. It was given me to say in reply
that he could not come into heaven till he had laid aside the cupidity
of entering it; for such an engrossing desire, even if he was in the
height of felicity, would hinder his perceiving it; and thus he could
not enter heaven till he had got rid of that cupidity; and all the more
because he did not know what heaven really was, as to which being
interrogated, he said that it was a joy and felicity greater than could
be expressed; he resembling in this respect the mass of men who have no
other than a most general idea of heaven, as being a state of joy; but
in what it consists, and what is its nature, they are utterly ignorant.
1748, May 22.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2050.">2050.</span></span>

As long as such a cupidity inheres \[in man they\] can never come into
heaven, for if they were even in celestial joy, they would not have a
sense and perception of it, by reason of that cupidity; and therefore
they would never be content. - 1748, May 22.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_21"></span>[2024-1](sd11.htm#fr_21) Number 2023 is wanting
in the original.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2051-2100](sd12)
