[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sd30)  [Next](sd32) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766143007/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Spiritual Diary*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1758\], tr. by Bush,
Smithson and Buss \[1883-9\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Spiritual Diary

<span class="margnote"><span id="3001.">3001.</span></span>

but to those who wholly attracted it to themselves, so that I could not
be present: these were not good: considered me as a lifeless instrument,
and themselves alone as alive. Wherefore because they abstracted all the
sense \[thereof\] I had as often to cease and come to an end. Some of
these did not do this from a bad heart, because they wished to pray.
Today they desired not to be so disposed \[tales\], but to leave \[the
prayer\] to me, so that they could also be together \[with me\]; this,
because \[as\] was plainly perceived, they wished to do good of
themselves, and, nevertheless, I had to desist. From these things it may
be evident how the matter stands, when man or spirits wish to do good of
themselves, that they cannot, and that it was plainly perceived from
these things, and that there is no effect \[efficacy\] \[in such
attempt\]. So much does proprium inhere. - 1748, August 31).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3002.">3002.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE FORCE OF INTUITION IN THE OTHER LIFE; THUS, CONCERNING
THE FORCE OF INTUITION THROUGH FAITH, AND THE PERSUASION OF THOSE THINGS
WHICH ARE OF FAITH. (It was shown me this night, in wakefulness, and at
\[in the\] morning, what force, intuition, along with persuasion, has in
the other life. There was a certain one who supposed that by intuition
directed upon others he could lead them and bear them away wherever he
wished, which \[thing\] is so common in the other life, that by means of
intuitions they can allure others, which intuition effects. Such is the
dragon's when he wishes to call together evil doers; such is theirs who
excite others to be present. Hence, therefore, it is a very common magic
in the other life; and spirits suppose that they alone can do all things
by means of such intuition. Many things could be said about this.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3003.">3003.</span></span>

A certain spirit \[was\] persuaded that he could effect everything by
means of the like intuitions, because \[these\] exist from permission.
Wherefore he had so much habituated himself to evoke other spirits and
attract \[them\] to himself by means of such intuition, that from the
habit \[assuefactione\] he has entirely put himself in the person of
another, so as to believe that he is, as it were, other \[persons\] as
is usual with those who are mad, and those who are insane, and so are
secluded from human society in the world. He now \[acted\] by means of
such a strong intuition, as to be, as it were, persuaded that he was the
person of another \[ejus\]; and this with variation, the intuition being
directed upon many, all of whom were so adjoined to him that they could
not have drawn back; and they seemed to be with him in the place where
he is, yet in the lowest earth. There also are presented those upon whom
he has so persuasively fixed \[his\] intuition. Wherefore his persuasive
intuition was perceived by me, as Laos som kommer utur led, som intet
kan wrida tilbakars; thus he is similar to those mad in the world; which
also was confirmed. They also, whom he thus attracted, complained that
they could not be liberated. He had no effect \[efficacam\] upon those
who were in true faith.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3004.">3004.</span></span>

Hence may be concluded, of what avail is intuition, which is a magical
intuition, or the magic exercised by the ancients, especially the
pythons.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3005.">3005.</span></span>

Hence may also be known what \[is\] intuition, through faith, and what
\[is\] faith; for some suppose that faith is of nothing, and yet
intuition by faith can effect all things, and \[there is\] an intuition
of all things that pertain to faith, with persuasion. But faith is of
such a nature that so much of intuition in the Lord \[as comes\] from
man, or from self so much does it recede from the Lord, and is of no
efficacy, but so far \[as it comes\] from the Lord, so far is it
efficacious. It is similar with the persuasion of what belongs to faith,
otherwise they are like that mad man; it is an insanity not unlike
theirs who supposed they were God the Father, and God the Son, yea from
insane persuasion; also \[like his\] who supposed he was Charles XII.
These were put amongst the mad; they also are similar, who wish to
acquire faith to themselves from their \[propriis\] strength. - 1748,
August 31.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3006.">3006.</span></span>

That insane \[spirit\] of whom \[I spoke\] above, because he was evoked
by similar \[ones\] to infest me when asleep; which is wholly forbidden
\[to wit\]: that they should lay in wait for man asleep, was cast down
from a certain upper place, and to the lowest \[part\] of the earth, and
\[was\] there bound to a certain long stake, or fixed axis, and there
bound around, and stretched out as if he was the axis, and not a spirit.
I also was drawn into such a persuasion; and then he was thence put back
into his place, so that he might live secluded from the society of
others, and amongst such as are of similar phantasy, so that everyone
should infest the other by similar phantasies and persuasive intuitions.
Hence may be concluded of what sort were his torments before they grew
into disuse. - 1748, August 31.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3007.">3007.</span></span>

THAT MAN COMMITS ACTUAL EVIL \[EVIL IN ACT\]. In the world of spirits
\[are\] certain who in their lives cherished hatred against another, and
yet in externals, put forward all modesty. \[Their\] hatred now burst
forth, and it was perceived that so far as they have remission, it was
grievous, and that never was such a thing apperceived in them during
life.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3008.">3008.</span></span>

At length, they wished to cast the blame of \[their\] hatred on the
Lord, that He had so ruled them that they could not have been different;
concerning which matter they spoke much, with some small uproar
\[tumultu\], because there were many who conspired. They were told that
all actual evil comes from them, and all good from the Lord; but they
still pertinaciously insisted that they had been of such a nature, not
from themselves, but from the Lord. It was given to say with spiritual
idea, that concerning these things, a thousand volumes can be written,
and all, as it were, confirming. But still the truth is inscribed in
ultimates, that all actual evil \[proceeds\] from them, and all good
from the Lord. It was also shown that so far as they have remission, so
far they have evil and hatred. This \[is the case\] when they are
spirits; in the life of the body \[it is\] not so. The conclusion was,
that it is provided by the Lord, that thus they should do evil in act
\[actualiter\], and that it is provided that they should not precipitate
themselves into the worst death. - 1748, August 31.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3009.">3009.</span></span>

THE REASON THAT THE PHANTASIES OF MEN ARE, IN THE OTHER LIFE, TURNED
INTO SPECIES OF ANIMALS, AND THE LIKE. There was insinuated into me the
reason why many phantasies, in the life of the body, are turned into
forms of animals, and of many similar things, \[so\] that when they are
inspected from the heavens, or there is influx, then \[these
phantasies\] are turned into such animals and such forms, not different
from what occurs in the world of spirits, \[and\] like as appears, from
prophetics, and in sleep. (They are turned into such forms) as are the
ultimates of order; such as also \[exist\] in the earth, and are the
ultimates of representations. For instance \[sicut\], when a sorceress
being inspected, was turned into a ball of serpents \[glomum
serpentinum\]; for correspondences are such that it cannot be otherwise,
than what when borne through order from a corporeal life, which remains,
and so still upwards that in the beginning their phantasies so appear,
otherwise, phantasies cannot be taken from them, and they reformed. -
1748, August 31.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3010.">3010.</span></span>

CONCERNING SPIRITS WHO WISH THAT THEY MAY BE BELIEVED TO BE THE LORD.
There was a spirit with me who stood on my head about the space of an
hour, nor could anything else be perceived in the beginning, than that
he was good; he spoke little, but \[that was\] from \[his\] thought, and
not at all evil. At length when he spoke, he occasionally introduced
into my perception that he was the Lord, which I could perceive from a
few things in the beginning, because he stood upon my head; also,
because this is common with those who are of the Lord, whereby is also
insinuated perception of the Lord's presence, because the Lord
\[speaks\] through them. But this spirit assumed this as an artifice
\[by art\]; and, indeed, so thus he induced in himself the persuasion,
so that he could suppose himself to be the Lord; but inasmuch as such
have been with me previously, and within themselves have a dissimilar
\[contrary\] perception; which, however, was not then granted me to
discern, \[and\] still it was given to know that \[this one\] was evil,
therefore I spoke with him, as with an evil spirit, whereat he was angry
and said,

<span class="margnote"><span id="3011.">3011.</span></span>

that with such art and such persuasion he has been able, previously, to
allure good spirits to himself, and to persuade them that he was sent of
the Lord, thus an angel \[of the Lord\]. This, also, he attempted with
similar persuasion \[on me\], but in vain, for he was detected. From
which it may be evident that spirits are given who can induce with
persuasion that they proceed from the Lord, and can allure into
societies with themselves, many spirits who are upright, and do not know
different; and yet these are evil, and, indeed, insane, as also it was
granted to say to him, \[and\] that he supposed himself to be the Lord,
with mad persuasion, than which nothing can be more mad. It occurs to my
mind, that of such a sort are certain enthusiasts, and Quakers, who also
were such after death, as to be persuaded that the holy spirit spoke
with them, because they suppose \[he is\] from the Lord, who persuades
himself that he is the Lord, when yet this is not a proof of the
presence of the Lord, but is a truth of faith concerning the Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3012.">3012.</span></span>

The same spirit, when he apperceived that he was detected, and spirits
around him were instructed concerning the truth of faith, wished to
extricate himself from their society, which he had also learned to be
expert in, by modes of his own, through various projections of his body,
and turnings to the right, to the left, directly, obliquely, in various
ways; and when he was told that it signified that he wished to snatch
himself away from \[their\] society, for he could not practice upon
those who did not acknowledge him for the \[a\] spirit proceeding from
the Lord, the same confessed that he had learned to do so when he wished
to drive away those who \[were\] with him in society, then afterwards to
call together good spirits, who believe to be of such a character. In
other respects he could be quite acute, and of apparent intelligence,
and angry because I told him that the more intelligent he seemed to
himself, the more insane \[he was\]. - 1748, September l.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3013.">3013.</span></span>

He also said to me, that he did not therefore wonder that, spirits speak
with man, because he also is of such a character, but did not believe
that there was such speech, as in my case; hence, also, it was given to
know that he is a Quaker, or Quaker spirit, which is the same. They
suppose that they alone speak with spirits, or as he now wishes, with
angels. - 1748, August 31.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3014.">3014.</span></span>

THAT SPIRITS DO NOT HAVE LIFE UNLESS THEY ARE PERMITTED THOSE THINGS
WHICH THEY DESIRE. I perceived that they were discussing \[agerent\]
among themselves concerning this; that the life of spirits consists in
their cupidities, without which they could not live, therefore could not
be present among others; which was also shown them by various things
which came more obscurely to my perception; and they acknowledged that
if each one was not permitted such as agrees with his cupidity, that
they could not subsist amongst others, thus could not live; from which
it may be concluded, that the Lord bends everyone by means of his
cupidities. I have previously spoken with them on other occasions
\[alioquin\] concerning this, that their life consists in being
permitted these things, and that otherwise they could not live, unless
permitted to do according to phantasies. - 1748, September 2.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3015.">3015.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE IDEAL SPEECH OF SLEEP. A REPRESENTATIVE VISION CONCERNING
THE QUAKERS. Speech was held with me in a state midway between sleep and
waking, yea, by means of such ideas as cannot at all be expressed; for
like as I have heard at other times \[alioquin\], they bind \[alligant\]
\[their\] speech to anything whatever, which \[speech\] cannot
afterwards be described, although I perceived it plainly in that state.
This speech of sleep belongs to evil spirits of the interior world
((((or to interior evil spirits in sleep, therefore is also
inexpressible, but it never contains anything in itself. Wherefore it
was afterwards represented to me by rubbish and many like things, which
were poured out from a certain vessel, for they illy cohered, and
\[pertained\] to no thing, although \[the speech is\] inexpressible. The
intellectual \[principle\] of the things which \[are\] in this speech is
also represented by the rear parts of a horse, which I plainly saw; for
there came a horse whose anteriors did not appear, but when he turned
his rear parts, these plainly appeared to me, and it was perceived or
said, that the intellectuals of those who are in this ideal speech of
sleep, are thus represented, for they have no true intellectual
\[principle\]. Such, perhaps, is also the intellectual principle of
those spirits who are Quakers and suppose themselves alone to be led by
the Holy Spirit.))))

<span class="margnote"><span id="3016.">3016.</span></span>

There was also exhibited a representative to me, in sleep. I seemed to
be elevated to the ceiling \[tectum\], and to stick there by the head,
and so to rest tranquilly; afterwards, to be let down, and, in midway,
to be securely led around \[circumduci\]. From this circumduction \[I
was\] let down on the table beneath, where a certain woman sat and ate
from a dish. The circumduction took place and was afterwards changed
into the dish, wherein was food thus made, which was eaten. I supposed
that they thus understood that they have acquired a miraculous food; but
when that dish was carried away, which was \[done\] by another woman,
serving, they did not perceive that \[it was\] a new dish, and that the
food was miraculously formed there; whereat I greatly wondered, and when
I tasted what it was, when \[she\] carried it away from thence, there
were \[it was\] peas \[pisa\]; \[seu gron art cum pisce\]; hence may be
apparent what is the nature of their representative; but what is
signified by the vision of sleep, I do not yet know. I perceive that it
respects Quakers, to wit, that they do not know \[that\], anything is
ever miraculously insinuated by the Lord; and although they do not
perceive it, yet it is given to them, to wit, probity of life, and
\[oprigtighet\].

<span class="margnote"><span id="3017.">3017.</span></span>

((((In order that I might know how that inexpressible speech of interior
spirits differs \[from other speech\], it was told me that it is wholly
different with what falls among \[to\] \[ad\] interior good spirits, and
that \[this speech\] falls from heaven to interior evil spirits; that it
might be known of what quality is that which falls \[flows\]
\[laberetur\] through heaven into interior good spirits. I saw, in
wakefulness, a certain virgin, who walked with another \[person\] or man
not seen by me, whom I perceived to be her lover. That virgin was seen
only at the back; she was clad in a common garment of light yellow color
\[albescente flavescente\]. This garment was neatly fitted to her about
the breast, so that the dress \[habitus\] of the body was quite comely,
but only the back was allowed me to see. Thus are represented those
things which flow through heaven into the interior good spirits. - 1748,
September 1.))))

<span class="margnote"><span id="3018.">3018.</span></span>

I also heard spirits speak from me while I was in sleep, scarce
otherwise than when I was awake, but not with the ideas that pertain to
wakefulness, \[sed cum non idea vigilioe\]. Just as was previously
observed, when certain \[ones\] declared \[anything\] from me in the
inferior earth. They speak in like manner, but still there is sleep in
the speech, \[and\] so \[it is\] without efficacy. - 1748, September l.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3019.">3019.</span></span>

THAT SPIRITS EXCEEDINGLY DESIRE TO BE MEN. In general, all spirits, when
with man, do not know other than that they are men. But there are others
who desire to be man, and thus to wholly occupy his body, and thus
consider him with whom they are, as a nobody. Such have many times been
with me and attempted much; some \[act\] more mildly. They were,
nevertheless, affected with shame, in various modes; for they think they
see their faces in the glass, besides other things. Thus are spirits
with drawn from that cupidity. - 1748, September l.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3020.">3020.</span></span>

HOW INFLUX OF SPIRITS TAKE PLACE INTO MAN: CONCERNING INFLUX IN GENERAL.
I have been instructed, that the case stands thus: The Lord inflows into
the universal heaven, and world of spirits, not only immediately from
himself, but mediately through angels into inferior spirits, and these
into interior spirits, and so into man. This is influx in general.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3021.">3021.</span></span>

Further, that all influx of the good and true is received by spirits,
according to their form, or nature: the good and true is received by the
good: by the evil, good is turned into evil, and the true into the
false, with all difference and variety according to their disposition
and states.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3022.">3022.</span></span>

Moreover since man is the ultimate of order, therefore \[his\] ideas are
terminated in his memory, or in the material ideas of his memory: and
since all ideas are there terminated, even \[those\] of spirits and thus
\[these ideas\] are the recipients of the ideas of spirits, and a
continual nexus of order follows up to that point, a spirit cannot
suppose other than that ideas begin in himself and from himself, when
yet his ideas are in the ideas of man, wherein they are terminated, as
may be evident from their appropriating to themselves each and all the
things of man, and that they speak with his language, as if their own,
and cannot know otherwise.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3023.">3023.</span></span>

Hence it flows, since ideas thus fall into the ideas of man's memory,
and man's ideas are variously filled up \[impletoe\] \[that\] to every
idea of his are adjoined innumerable things, which are proximate, which
are contiguous, which are more remote as to distance, which hence are
dependent: and such \[ideas exist\] in all variety according to states,
and with a difference in every man, according to each one's phantasies.
There are many other things, which cannot be so enumerated.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3024.">3024.</span></span>

Hence it flows, since there are many spirits, or spirits of different
disposition, that one \[spirit\] or one genus, snatches up in the idea
this that accords with itself: another genus, that: yea another genus
what is distant thence, and because from its experience \[it also
knows\] that it depends thereon, just as is the case with those who have
seen excrements and nothing else, who aim at nothing but to learn magic
thence, and \[turn\] every good into evil.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3024_1/2.">3024\_1/2.</span></span>

The more that ideas are closed from man, so that he only looks at one
thing, as occurs, from persuasion \[and\] from cupidity, from his
regarding himself and worldly things \[for\] thus are \[ideas\] closed
from man, the less the danger: for then the ideas of spirits cannot be
diffused to \[over\] many things, and so infuse in man evils in addition
to what man has required to himself. But \[with him\] who is in faith,
the less that ideas are determined to one thing, so as to be applicable
to each point \[momentum\]: that is, the more fluid, as I may say, is it
with man, the better it is: and the less persistent and hard, the more
easily is he bent by the Lord to all things which please the Lord, and
to good. - 1748, September l.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3025.">3025.</span></span>

As long as man lives, the ideas of his memory are varied, changed,
diffused to \[over\] many objects, constrained to fewer things through
persuasions; in a word, he can become better and better even till death.
But it is not so with spirits. Besides it is thus with ideas, they can
be diffused to many goods, so as to have other affinities, be otherwise
conjoined, divided, and so contract new affinities, and so forth. -
1748, September l. (((CONCERNING A CERTAIN ONE WHO SUPPOSED THAT HE WAS
ABLE TO DO GOOD AND LOVE THE NEIGHBOR FROM HIMSELF.))) ((((I spoke with
a certain one, who \[was\] on high to the right, at some distance, who
said, that he can do good, yea \[do\] so from himself: but it was
granted to tell him, that no one can do anything, save from will. If the
will is not present, then indeed he can do apparent good: but this is
immediately recognized as not belonging to the will. He said that he
wished to attempt to do good, and so compel the will, then it was
granted to say, that it was love, that rules the \[will\].))))

<span class="margnote"><span id="3026.">3026.</span></span>

CONCERNING A CERTAIN ONE WHO SUPPOSED HE COULD DO GOOD AND LOVE THE
NEIGHBOR FROM HIMSELF. (A certain spirit of intellectual faith, I
believe, supposed that he could do good from himself; to whom it was
granted to say, that no one can do anything, save from will: from will
comes everything that he does, and if and one still does good, and not
from will, this is feigned \[good\], which is immediately apperceived in
the other life, and not tolerated, because feigned; and if he should
still do something good, that then he viewed something outside of
himself, on account of which he did \[so\], therefore not from love.
This was better perceived in spiritual idea. But still he supposed that
he could have compelled the will to act from love, wherefore he
attempted to withdraw himself, as it were, from the command of the will,
so as to put himself into love, so that he might act from love in the
will.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3027.">3027.</span></span>

Wherefore it was told \[him\], that he might attempt how he could
succeed; therefore he sought for a society which was of such a
character, to wit, \[one\] that was in love; and at last found \[one\],
and said that he has found it; thus was raised up into heaven. I
expected what would take place, \[and\] meanwhile spoke with the
remaining spirits \[to the effect\] that if he was of such a nature that
he can receive love from the Lord, he would be able to subsist amongst
them, otherwise, that he would not be able. While we expected \[what
would happen\], \[he\] was seen, or \[they\] were seen who rolled
themselves from heaven; which is a proof that they snatch themselves
forth from a society because they cannot subsist there, as if \[they
were\] in a sphere wherein they cannot subsist. He \[is\] now with
\[spirits\] above the head, \[and\] says that he was there, but could
not live there, but that he was greatly distressed, so that he greatly
rejoices that he could thence have been liberated. - 1748, September l.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3028.">3028.</span></span>

THAT GOOD SPIRITS, WHEN THEY ARE ANGRY, SOMETIMES BURST FORTH ALL AT
ONCE \[CITE\] INTO SUCH THINGS AS CANNOT BE KNOWN TO BE DIFFERENT FROM
WHAT \[PROCEEDS\] FROM THE WORST. It sometimes happened that I have
noticed certain dreadful things, supposing them the effusion of the
worst spirits, but it appeared that they came from the upright when
quickly angered, and indeed for the reason that they are not admitted to
do good, thus burst out into the opposite, through anger, as is also
usually the case with an upright man when angry. - 1748, September l.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3029.">3029.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE JOY OF FELICITY IN HEAVEN THAT THEY HAVE WHO GLORIFY THE
LORD. Very many, now, of the good, glorified the Lord on account of His
advent and their liberation from hell, and there was so much joy of
felicity that some said they could not bear it. - 1748, September l. It
was, as it were, a general glorification, so that certain in hell also
desired to make glorification, as I heard from some who \[came thence\],
but \[they were\] \[it was\] from those who \[live\] in privies. - 1748,
September l. Next morning everything was in a state of tranquillity, so
that I perceived nothing but a tranquil silence around me, which still
continues. - 1748, September 2.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3030.">3030.</span></span>

THAT THE CHURCH OF THE LORD IS PROMOTED TO THE GREATEST POSSIBLE EXTENT
\[ab plurimum\] BY THE EVIL. I spoke, in a tranquil manner, with certain
\[who were\] in that tranquillity, or, I believe with certain apostles,
hearing \[to this effect\], that the church of the Lord is promoted to
the greatest possible extent, by the evil, to wit, by those who \[have\]
other ends \[than its advancement\], yea \[have\] self-loves for an end;
for instance, \[is promoted\] by apostles, whose mind was to judge the
universal world; \[and\] by others in the world who have introduced the
doctrines of faith, from causes that regard self and other things, as
\[was the case\] \[in\] Sweden, England and elsewhere; further, \[it is
promoted\] at this day with \[among the\] popes \[pontificios\] who
preserve the doctrinals of faith in the Lord, for the reason that they
may possess all things of earth and all things of heaven; for they know
that they cannot be adored, and that \[if\] so, they would lose
everything, and that were he called Supreme \[High\] priest \[pontifex
supremus\] and not vicar, that they would thus lose everything. These
things are permitted, for the reason that good \[flows\] thence. - 1748,
September 2. For a not dissimilar reason, the Mohammedan heaven, and the
heaven of Jupiter \[coelum Jiviale\] was opened by those who wished to
seek another Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3031.">3031.</span></span>

RELATIONSHIPS \[affinitates\] IN THE OTHER LIFE. ((((((The communication
of dispositions, and of each and everything in the disposition, in the
other life, is wonderful, \[and\] is recognized immediately. This
communication and recognition \[acknowledgment\] cannot be described
especially \[does this take place\] in the heavens. The communication
and recognition, and hence association, are related like affinities
\[relationships\] in the world, to wit, that they are recognized as
parents, as children, as brothers, as kin \[consanguinei\] and relations
according to differences. The love is such as should be \[might be\] in
life, according to all differences towards the nearest and the more
remote, in order. The consanguinities and relationships belong to love,
and its differences, which are indefinite, and the communications
\[are\] so exquisite that they cannot be described; further, no respect
at all is had to those who have been parents, children, kin and
relations on earth, nor to any person, such as he has been on earth,
therefore not to dignities, riches, or the like, which are worldly and
terrestrial. These things were confirmed by those who are from the
angels. - 1748, September 2.))))))

<span class="margnote"><span id="3032.">3032.</span></span>

Certain \[spirits\] lamented that thus they would lose their
\[relatives\]. This flowed from the residue of bodily \[corporeal\]
love, but the reply was made them, that they would receive thousands in
their place whom they would love much more, and more happily; further,
that \[not only\] ought all to acknowledge the Lord \[as\] only parent
of all, as \[does\] \[is the part of\] innocence, but that the Lord is a
father to all, and thus all are for the Lord \[in the Lord's stead\],
according one's gift of reception, and also that they who are the Lord's
are also in place of parents.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3033.">3033.</span></span>

CONCERNING INFLUX (When I treated \[ageretur\] concerning general and
special influx into everyone whatever; also, that every spirit and angel
whatever, is a center of influxes, so that myriads of myriads inflow
into every idea, which man and spirit supposes a simple \[one\] or
individual \[uniqm\]; then was it granted to certain who were capable of
receiving, to perceive by means of sublime \[exalted\] spiritual ideas,
that the matter is so. Amongst these were both Mohammods, who now say
that they have perceived it so as to have become wholly persuaded that
the matter is so, and that no man, nor likewise any spirit, who supposes
an idea to be simple, can even apprehend it \[the matter\]; therefore
cannot apprehend so long as heaven is not opened to man and spirit, so
that such perception may be infused into them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3034.">3034.</span></span>

Certain spirits who were not able to apprehend it, because it \[heaven\]
was closed, said that they could not comprehend these things, \[and\]
that such was the case. It was granted to reply to them, that in like
manner they do not comprehend that one action, which is regarded \[as\]
simple, exists from so many muscles, and so from innumerable motive
fibers, and from myriads of purer fibers, and still less that to one
action which is considered simple, the universal system of purer parts
concurs, according to proximities and affinities, in a most wonderful
manner. Inasmuch as they do not know this, and if they could not believe
this which is so obvious and familiar, how can they believe that there
is such an influx. - 1748, September 2.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3034_1/2.">3034\_1/2.</span></span>

But here it was also given to perceive, and I marveled thereat, that my
respiration \[was\] then, as it were, taken away, to wit, that I left
off respiration, and breathed inwardly. Hence I perceive, in some
measure, that those spirits could have been able to perceive without
disturbance \[turba\] from me; for external respiration was taken away,
and internal \[respiration\] given. See what \[is said\] concerning
these things in the lungs, \[as to\] what attraction and emission
\[are\], if \[the matter\] \[is treated\] there. - 1748, September 2.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3035.">3035.</span></span>

I perceived also that they were shown that the \[an\] idea of the
societies in the world of spirits can be obtained from the consociation
of the muscles in man, and that the communications of these, by means of
fibers, and indefinite other nexus, inflow according to affinities into
every simplest action; and that the respiration of the lungs is
therefore changed into such, because it is the lungs which operates in
general into the muscular system, as is known from those things which
\[are\] written, concerning the lungs. - 1748, September 2.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3036.">3036.</span></span>

I also perceived that they spoke concerning four provinces in the body,
which are general \[communes\] divisions \[partitiones\], and whose
communications are wonderful, to wit, the province of the genital
members, the province of the abdomen or subdiaphragmatic \[province\],
the thoracic, where \[are\] the heart and lungs, and the province of the
head, which \[is\] above, and that there is into all, a wonderful
general influx by means of teguments, and \[into\] the most singular
\[minutest\] things \[singularissima\] by means of the purest fibers. -
1748, September 2.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="3037.">3037.</span></span>

EVIL SPIRITS ARE THE CAUSE OF EVIL HAPPENING TO THEMSELVES. I spoke with
spirits concerning this: that they cause evil to themselves, when they
purpose \[to do it\] to another; therefore that there is thus \[the
evil\] of retaliation, or that the like \[evil\] responds to them; for
they plotted to do evil to someone, and it was reflected back,
\[retorquebatur\] on them; they said, on account of the appearance, that
the evil came from me and others, though it came from them, or self.
They do not wish to be persuaded. Wherefore speech was held concerning
that, and it was shown that if anyone strikes his head against the wall,
that it is not the wall's fault, but his own; and it was then
illustrated by many things, that there is such a balancing of these
things, and of the single things in the body, so that to every action
responds a reaction; it is so in the least membranes, fibers, \[and\]
the least particle of the animal spirit; and if there were not such a
reaction, nothing at all could subsist, but would wither and grow
infirm, wherefore there is perpetual equilibrium. It is similar in
everything else.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3038.">3038.</span></span>

For instance, among men, such as is one, such is the correspondence of
another, if not in external modes, yet in mind \[animo\]; wherefore men
know this well, and do not go beyond what they \[others\] allow, for
they fear a corresponding evil from them; and this occurs with
indefinite variety, according to each one's state and nature, as may be
known to everyone. So this is inscribed in nature, so that young
chickens, yea, the smallest insects, resist according to insults and
minds \[courage\] \[animos\]. From these things, it is now apparent that
the evil of punishment which they suppose comes from another, is from
themselves, for such a response is given. If \[it is so\] in the least,
and all things of nature, why not in the grand man \[maxime corpore\]?
But in the world of spirits, such happens as in the human race. There is
a different reaction in the heavens, for there on no one is any evil
inflicted, but it is turned into good. - 1748, September 2. \[This\] was
shown by experience.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3039.">3039.</span></span>

Of such a nature are evil spirits, that they wish the good may never
resist, but yield, so that they may be able to bring all evil upon them;
but it was replied to them, that \[the good\] cannot but resist; and if
there were no resistance, these would abuse their goodness, and aim to
destroy all in heaven and earth; wherefore there is resistance, yea, the
world of spirits is therefore such that evil is inflicted on them by
evil, although the good seem to be together \[with them\], when yet it
is not so. - 1748, September 2.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3040.">3040.</span></span>

CONCERNING ANGELIC FORMS. So frequently have angelic forms or choirs
been with me, and been heard by me, that it has grown familiar, So I
have not noted down each observed instance, as, for instance, that
certain learn, without representations or ideas, to flow into such
forms, in order that they may be initiated, and afterwards be amongst
the spirituals and celestials; further, that choirs of Mohammedans have
become so familiar to me that from the sound alone, I could have known
\[that the choirs consisted\] of them. Besides other things which I do
not remember, like as when they have inflowed into the sound of the
mouth without speech.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3041.">3041.</span></span>

When I treated concerning forms, that therefrom is constituted the grand
man \[maximus homo\], and, therefrom, the members or provinces are
formed; and that they who are not initiated to act in society, as one,
to the Lord's glory, are not in the grand man, I perceived indignation
from the world of spirits, because they also were not amongst those who
constituted the grand man; but the reply was made them, at first, to the
evil, that they cannot be \[there\] before, like dung, they are cast on
the earth, and thus that, like those things which serve for the sap of a
plant or tree, have entered thence, then first can they be in society,
or in the tree. The reply was made to others, also evil, that they
cannot be considered in any other light than things which are let into
the stomach, and are again cast out thence, as excrements, because they
conduce not at all to nourishment. Such also would be the case were they
admitted into such choirs or forms. Certain \[ones\] still insisted that
they wished to be in \[societies\], which was permitted, but it was said
that they could not be, because they are so gross. - 1748, September 2.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3042.">3042.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE DRAGON. It is a familiar habit with him, when he wishes
to assemble the Jews, and so with them persecute the faithful, he seems
to himself to go away towards the old Jerusalem, which is to the left, a
little farther away \[distance\] below; he then, sometimes without any
deceit, speaks one thing and thinks another; by means of the interiors
of his nature or thought, he speaks with the Jews; by means of speech,
\[speaks\] with another, which is a proof of his deceit, and he, to whom
he is known, immediately knows it, as well from the speech, as the place
where he is.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3043.">3043.</span></span>

THAT AN IDEA REMAINS ATTACHED TO A WORD \[voci\]. In speech into
spirits, an idea of a word \[vocis\] is observed in the most exquisite
manner; as well that a single \[word\] does not comprehend many ideas,
as that when the word is changed, immediately, confusion is produced;
for instance, when spirits are denominated \[as\] those who \[are\] in
the world of spirits, yea, the evil, \[then\] none of the good wished to
be styled spirits, and because it is on who are in heaven. So with other
\[words\]. Wherefore, when another idea is impressed on a word, and the
former \[word\] changed, it produces much trouble in talking with
spirits, therefore \[such\] words should have a constant use, as have
the idea once impressed on them. - 1748, September 2.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3044.">3044.</span></span>

THE SPIRITS OF JUPITER \[SAY\] CONCERNING THE SPIRITS OF OUR PLANET
\[telluris\], THAT WORSE CANNOT BE GIVEN. (Certain spirits of Jupiter
were with me: at first they did not wish to come, because they knew that
spirits here \[were\] evil: certain ones were still here, and it was
permitted to spirits of this earth to act by means of evils inspired by
their craftiness, by deceit, \[and\] openly: some of whose \[arts\] I
perceived: for interior spirits were acting: I am in doubt, whether this
be my first experience of them. Then the interior evil spirits acted
into \[on\] them, and \[these\] sustained it a long time, for it was
\[granted them\] from the Lord; at last they confessed that they suppose
that worse \[spirits\] are never given. - 1748, September 3; for they
perverted their imaginations and thoughts in such a manner, that \[these
spirits of Jupiter\] were as if bound, so as to seem secure \[capable\]
of being extricated as also I perceived within me).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3045.">3045.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE SPIRITS OF JUPITER (Spirits of Jupiter are with me, and
wonder greatly that I am able to write in this way the ideas of their
thought: (for they have related \[duxerunt\] previously, as also this
day, the things which I wrote concerning them:) and inasmuch as
reflection was given them, they reported it to others who also wondered
that such a thing could take place. It was insinuated in them, that in
this way, can the inhabitants of this earth be informed, and everyone
who reads knows it. This I perceived from their thought and not from
\[their\] speech: from this thought or perception of their thought, I
wrote these things: they also desired to affirm it with a still more
subtle perception. - 1748, September 3).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3046.">3046.</span></span>

The angelic spirits of Jupiter are in celestial perception, and thus it
is granted to associate with them thought which cannot be understood by
the interior evil spirits of this earth: wherefore they are highly
indignant, and say they cannot live and also attempt to understand it;
but this is impossible: yet they do not believe it. It was said that it
is impossible for them \[to understand it\] for cogitative celestial
speech is insinuated by the Lord, but \[the speech\] of those evil
spirits derives its origin from them, and they are immediately revealed
from \[only\] their thought, and endeavor, as to their quality and what
they attempt.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3047.">3047.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE NATURE OF EVIL SPIRITS. Interior evil spirits are of such
a nature, that their wickedness and deceitful nature cannot be
described; that, to wit, the least of the thoughts, that can ever be
perceived by man, while a man is turned \[by them\] into evil with such
skill, as can scarcely be imagined \[cogitari\]: not only are they of
such wickedness, that they turn good into evil, as soon as it appears,
but there are also \[some\] who when they as it were smell that thence
\[proceeds\] good, immediately turn it \[into evil\].

<span class="margnote"><span id="3048.">3048.</span></span>

I thought that thus no man could have thought what was good, but I was
informed that the good spirits are separated from the evil, so that
where the good \[are\] the evil cannot be, thus with man who is led, by
the Lord, and with everyone when he is in a state of faith: Also with me
the like several times occurred, but it was permitted them \[eis I
think\] to have with me their stationary \[agents\]: they could not thus
inflow with their wickedness apart from these \[agents\] as was
experienced this day. - 1748, September 3.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3049.">3049.</span></span>

\[THE SPIRITS\] OF JUPITER, CONCERNING THE LORD. (When I wrote those
things which \[are mentioned\] above, No. 531, I perceived that they did
not wish that I should write of the Lord, that he is man and at the same
time God: because they are ignorant what is God, or what is the highest,
and that it is enough to believe him to be the highest. They greatly
love and are rejoiced to have heard of a single \[unicum\] Lord, \[and\]
that \[he is\] the only man, and that the rest derive from him, that
they are men. - l748, September 3.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3050.">3050.</span></span>

THE TRUE SPEECH OF SPIRITS. The speech of words \[vocum\] is not the
speech peculiar \[propria\] to spirits, but belongs to men or the
corporeal memory: but the true speech of spirits belongs to the interior
memory. Of what nature it is, was this day shown me. It is thought, yea
communicative \[speech\], and inasmuch as I have now spoken with them,
yea concerning this, how all that which they can understand and perceive
is their science \[knowledge\] although they did not previously know
that they were acquainted therewith, for they comprehend at once, and as
they comprehend, it cannot be but that \[the faculty\] \[knowledge\] is
innate, and that it can be said by them as well, as \[by\] another who
says it: wherefore that speech is an interior speech, comprehending many
things: for it is simultaneously intuitive \[into\] another's thought,
and perceptive whether he is in such thought: which \[thought\] is of
such a nature, as scarcely to mistake. In a word their \[speech\] is a
communication of ideas, one of which cannot be explained by many words,
and when explained is still but slightly exhausted \[in extent\]: for it
still has as it were an integral \[whole\] idea with itself, which is
manifested. Such is the speech of spirits with each other. In a word,
\[this speech\] is not words, but ideas of words, for every word has an
idea which is of considerable extent, as is apparent from this,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3051-3100](sd32)
