[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sd32)  [Next](sd34) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766143007/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Spiritual Diary*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1758\], tr. by Bush,
Smithson and Buss \[1883-9\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Spiritual Diary

<span class="margnote"><span id="3101.">3101.</span></span>

CONCERNING A CERTAIN ROBBER WHO WAS A JEW, AND WHO SUPPOSED THAT HE WAS
ABLE TO TAKE AWAY FROM ME GOLD COINS. What is the nature of evil spirits
after death may hence be apparent that sometimes they supposed
themselves able to carry off the things which they saw. Even now, there
was a Jew \[one\] of the robbers, to whom I showed several gold coins,
who supposed that he wished to carry off these things, not knowing other
than that he was a man and thus was able \[to do so\]. ((Wherefore the
coins were left for him to carry off and from phantasy he seemed to
himself to have abstracted them. When I had showed him that \[the
coins\] were \[still\] remaining, and \[that it\] was his phantasy, he
was amazed and said that he now apperceives that he is a spirit. But I
know that immediately \[after\], he still did not know other than
before. Hence may be inferred the quality of life of evil spirits, after
death. But when it is manifest to good spirits that \[they are\]
spirits, reflection is given by the Lord, so that they may know more
than that.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3102.">3102.</span></span>

Moreover the same \[spirit\], although told that he was a spirit, and
the faculty of reasoning given him, still persisted in saying that he
who sees and hears, is a man: so that he could scarcely be brought to
believe that \[he was\] a spirit, for they never have \[any\] reflection
but what the Lord gives them. - 1748, September 8)).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3103.">3103.</span></span>

The first reason, why a spirit, in general, supposes himself to be a
man, is, that reflection is not given him, \[when\] with \[penes\] a man
who does not speak or reply to them: for speaking with a spirit is
conjoined with this, that they reflect upon the other who speaks, so
that they are not the man, but separated from the man; they \[are\]
spirits.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3104.">3104.</span></span>

The reason that a spirit does not know other than that he is the man,
although he does not see through the man's \[ejus\] eyes, and hear
through his ears, is, that he immediately puts on everything which
belongs to men's memory, as if his own: and he who puts on the memory of
a man, also \[puts on\] the man: for man is not constituted a man by his
body, but by his interiors. To me, it is evident from many experiences,
that they have entirely put on my memory. But they do not possess the
interior memory: that \[is possessed\] by the angels of the Lord who
rule \[direct\] those spirits, who are below just as they \[who are\]
with the inhabitants of Jupiter, where are two around \[about\] the
head, and rule \[direct\] the chastising spirit, who does not know other
than that he acts and speaks from himself. When man reaches that point,
that his interior memory is directed \[ruled\] by interior evil spirits
of the world of spirits, a thing never permitted, then can man no longer
live. - 1748, September 8.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3105.">3105.</span></span>

THAT MAN KNOWS MANY TRUTHS; BUT HE DOES NOT ACKNOWLEDGE THEM, AS SOON AS
HE REASONS. It happened on several occasions that, to those who have
preached heavenly truths in life and zealously inculcated them, it was
demonstrated, in the other life, that they denied them, because they
have been in a state of reasoning concerning them: for instance, that
the Lord directs them by his Holy Spirit; this is zealously urged by
preachers, and they pray that the Lord may direct \[them\] by his Holy
Spirit, may dictate words to them, put in their mouth what to say; that
he may be present and lead everyone; that nothing \[comes\] but from
him; that men have no power, and are like stocks in the act of
regeneration: and the like. When the same things were demonstrated to
the sight \[ad oculum\] of the same \[preachers\] to be so, because
\[they have been\] in a state of reasoning, concerning them, and because
their faith has been a scientific \[faith\], they as well as others,
have been astonished, and denied \[it\] in heart: but when it was
recalled into their memory, that till they have urged and preached these
things during their life, yea during \[their\] preaching, seemed to
themselves to believe: then they at once acknowledged and affirmed
\[it\]: from which it could be evident, that it was not a faith of the
heart but of the memory: even when I thought concerning this that man
was so created by the Lord as, while in the world to be also in heaven
with the angels, and thus heaven be conjoined with the world, it
happened that one of the preachers of his time said, that he could have
so enlarged on these things by preaching,

<span class="margnote"><span id="3106.">3106.</span></span>

and with such persuasion, that all would seem to themselves persuaded,
to say the least, that he had preached like an angel. But still, when in
the other life it is demonstrated that such is the case, to wit, that I
am of such a nature by the Lord's \[will\], that I can perceive whatever
they say and do in the world of spirits, and through me in the world, it
seems \[obvenit\] to them so wonderful, and so incredible, that they
have said that they would never have thought this in life: besides other
such \[words.\] - 1748, September 9.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3107.">3107.</span></span>

Wherefore, when man is in church, and does not reflect upon the
arguments which can be objected, he is both preacher and hearer in a
very different state than when he is in arguments. For instance, as
respects the life after death; who does not believe in a life after
death, when he hears the preacher earnest even to sighs and tears: but
who believes in the life after death, when in a state of reasoning.
Certain ones were thrown \[missi\] into the same state of zeal, as when
they preached and heard in church. They were in a state of such a
persuasion, but I knew that (apart from) \[extra\] that state, they are
not of such a nature, but wonder as well as others, that such is the
case, in every point \[in singulis\]. - 1748, September 9. Also in such
a state have been famous preachers, for some space \[moram\] of time, so
as to deem it impossible that man could have spoken with spirits,
because they have held that opinion during life, so that if anyone
perceiving such a thing had told them during life, they would have
wholly denied \[it\],

<span class="margnote"><span id="3108.">3108.</span></span>

and said that these things were illusions. Wherefore \[while\] in such a
state, they have been with me, inquiring whether it is so, and then
supposed that it is an illusion, and that I knew nothing, touching
\[ex\] these things, although they do. But at last they were convinced,
and led into another state, so that they might imagine \[it\]
\[autumarent\]. They are now also in a state of imagining \[autumandi\],
but not in a state of believing. - 1748, September 9. Sometimes, also,
such persuasive preaching occurs \[datur\], that they who believe
nothing, and think they are to die like brutes, then seem to themselves
to be, as it were, elevated to heaven, but yet as soon as they go forth
from the church, believe nothing, and on the other hand \[aliquin\],
make sport of such things. That they are elevated to heaven, I perceived
from a spiritual idea: also from living experience with certain ones. -
1748, September 9. When man is in such persuasive state, and is
elevated, then the Lord operates, and implants \[inseminat\], and
conceals in their minds those things which are called remains: also at
many other times, as when \[men are\] in misfortunes and temptations.
This was now insinuated in my mind \[mihi nunc insinuatum\]. - 1748,
September 9.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3109.">3109.</span></span>

CONCERNING THOSE WHO \[ARE\] IN THE ZENITH, ON HIGH. Those who are on
high in the zenith, are those who during life were hypocrites; in
externals seemed to be angels, but inwardly are wolves, and use
flatteries \[adblandiuntur\], as has been said. The mildness of their
influx also shows this: but they craftily lie in wait: as often as
occasion is given, and they see that man falls, they then assist with
every effort, so that he may fall headlong. I spoke with them, and they
are present when I write.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3110.">3110.</span></span>

These suppose that they are ruled by themselves, and not by the Lord.
Wherefore, they are sometimes so punished \[mulctantur\], that their
consociation which, as it were, resembles one person, is separated. The
separation \[is effected\], as I perceived, by the blowing, as it were,
of certain who are below, near the buttocks. They are then dissociated,
and act as many. This takes place with great molestation \[to them\],
there is uproar amongst them, their complaint is heard, that they knew
not what would hence result: and they then acknowledged that they are of
no power whatever, though at other times \[alioquin\], they suppose they
are able \[to accomplish\] everything. Those who are under the buttocks,
correspond with those who are in the perpendicular line of the zenith,
because they are of such a nature: but they who are below, at the
buttocks \[adnates\], are borne away by the cupidity of punishing
everyone in a subtle manner: for they were not seen by me, but only
perceived by such a mode of blowing \[insuffationis\] \[as that\]
whereby \[they were\] separated.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3111.">3111.</span></span>

I spoke with a certain \[spirit\] concerning these: he said that I might
tell these not to be so insane. It was given to reply that this is like
telling a sick man to be well \[or\] a raving or \[similiter\] insane
man to speak sanely; and that men are of such a nature in their
thoughts, but only external simulation causes them to seem sane.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3112.">3112.</span></span>

Afterwards, this separation ceased, and they acted like a single \[una\]
person as before. I spoke with them \[asking\] if they knew whether they
rule themselves, for their mind \[had just been subject\] \[is ruled\]
to \[by\] punishment: they said that they know that they are not ruled
by themselves, because then there is discord. Then I inquired by what
Lord \[were they ruled\]: whether by the dragon: this they denied; or
whether by somebody else. They did not know. They were not yet willing
to say that \[they were ruled\] by the Lord: for they think that without
concurrence \[agreement\] to one end, and without the Lord, by whom they
are kept in agreement: they may \[even themselves\] thereby manage me,
\[and\] that they are as it were, the man. Thus \[thinks\] everyone: no
matter how many there are. They are kept in such agreement. \[This\] is
the end \[that accords with\] their nature. Such end does not keep them
in agreement, but carries \[brings\] their souls one against another. -
1748, September 8.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3113.">3113.</span></span>

CONCERNING A CERTAIN PROUD SPIRIT WHO WAS INFLATED TO THE HIGHEST
DEGREE. There was a certain \[spirit\], although not amongst those of
the prouder sort, \[fastuosiores\] but yet amongst those who have also
puffed themselves \[inflaverat, I think\] up with pride, in the days of
their life. When the discourse and idea were touching those who despise
others in comparison with themselves, and \[suppose\] it is they alone
who live, and similar \[traits\], which could agree with his disposition
\[ei\]: for there are many genera and species of pride, according to
phantasies \[springing\] from self-love and contempt of others, in
comparison with self: on which account he was permitted to be inflated
according to the phantasy, then belonging \[penes\] to him. He was
\[then\] so inflated as to fill the universe, so that there was no more
any space so that he looked around on every side, where to go: but
\[there being\] no longer \[any space\] anywhere \[remains\] therefore
immovable: and so said that he could not exist \[esse\], unless restored
to his original magnitude. Those who blew him up \[out\]
\[insuffabant\], were at the hinder part of my head: thus a little above
the head. The reason why he was so blown up \[out\] \[insuffatus\], was
because \[his\] idea concerning the angels was, that they \[are\]
wretched \[miseri\] \[beings\], and thus \[are like\] crawling worms.
This idea also continued, inasmuch as such \[spirits\] as think they
live from themselves, thus that they alone live, regard all angels as
such. Wherefore, this was his punishment. - 1748, September 10.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3114.">3114.</span></span>

THAT MAN CAN NEVER BE LED BETTER \[THAN HE IS LED\]. Spirits suppose
that they could have been led differently, and so become better than
they are, thus be kept from actual evils, and many things. The evil
throw the blame on the Lord, but they were told that it is their fault.
I perceived in spiritual idea, that they can never be led better \[than
they are\]: so that there are necessities every moment of their lives,
as you may see previously \[mentioned\]: and it was previded from
eternity, and so previded that each and all things tend to our ultimate
end, to be \[that they may be\] parts in the Grand Man, that is, in the
Lord's kingdom. Inasmuch as this is not perceptible by them, on account
of intuitions of particulars, it was given to perceive that omnipotence,
or infinite power can so dispose; for even man can thus almost similarly
lead man in some particulars, when he knows his evil nature or cupidity.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3115.">3115.</span></span>

so that he may say, that he cannot be led differently, but that such a
leading is the best \[per optima\] unless he perceives otherwise that
hence \[comes\] the greater evil to him, or evil and not good. Wherefore
Infinite Power which sees each and all things at once, and the future as
present, can so dispose; and inasmuch as he is able, does also dispose;
for the leading \[of man\] and the bending of evil, that continually
tends to worse and worse, may be understood \[by this\], that he who is
evil desires \[to proceed\] into the worst, by thus wishing to lead
himself: but that the Lord bends \[him\] to less evil and as little as
is ever possible. In a word all the moments of life are necessities,
because man is of such a nature, that he continually desires and aims to
precipitate himself into the worst evil. - 1748, September 10....

<span class="margnote"><span id="3116.">3116.</span></span>

. . . \[This is\] illustrated by means of a certain one, who said that
he knows what he wills. It was insinuated in him that he knows nothing
else, than what tends to his pleasantness, and nothing besides.
Wherefore pleasantness \[was\] represented by a yellow color as it were,
into which \[he was\] remitted: but was then detained a moment, lest he
should fall therefrom. He \[was\] then actuated by another phantasy, and
perceived, though I did not, that if \[he had\] not been detained, he
would have fallen into his total destruction: therefore he no longer
thus desires, that it may be remitted to him to fall into his pleasant
things which he prevides \[foresees\], and further, though evil,
confessed that the Lord sustained him. In the thought of his fall, he is
said to be now overwhelmed \[premi\] with much anxiety. - 1748,
September 10.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3117.">3117.</span></span>

(THAT SPIRITS IN THE OTHER LIFE ARE NOT ONLY BEHELD IN FIXED \[certis\]
PLACES, BUT THEIR BODIES IN A FIXED POSITION. Certain \[spirits\]
appeared in their places, standing up, who have told me further, that
they walked \[could walk\] and indeed with body erect. Some \[appeared\]
as within the body, with their head down, and back of their shoulders
up. Some \[appeared\] sitting, upon a throne \[solis\]. Some also
\[appeared\] sitting but not on conspicuous seats \[conspicue\]. Some
\[appeared\] otherwise: as comes from various causes. Sometimes certain
\[spirits\] appeared, to lie stretched out, and so forth. - 1748,
September 10.) ((((((THAT ONE SPIRIT IS LED BY ANOTHER, ETC.))))))
(((((((((((From much experience, it is known to me, that one spirit is
led by another, and so forth, so that there is no one who is not led by
another; which they also confessed, when it was shown to
them.)))))))))))

<span class="margnote"><span id="3118.">3118.</span></span>

THAT NATURALS EXIST FROM SPIRITUALS. I spoke with spirits concerning
naturals: that they exist from spirituals, for the reason, that spirits
are given who relate to \[referunt\] the bladder, ureters and the like:
and indeed was confirmed by this, which everyone can know, that the acts
of the body which are natural, exist by thought through the will which
are spiritual things. This is clearly perceived from spiritual idea, so
that natural acts exist from such things as they do not comprehend, to
wit, by thought through the will. So in everything else. - 1748,
September 10.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3119.">3119.</span></span>

So those things, that exist in eggs, the seminal bladders \[vesicis\]
and in everything else, unless they exist in like manner from the Lord,
through spirituals in heaven, can never exist. These, because their
causes are unknown, are called natural functions. These things \[were
spoken\] also with spirits. - 1748, September 10.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3120.">3120.</span></span>

THAT THE GREATEST IN HEAVEN \[IS HE\] WHO \[IS\] LEAST. (((((((I spoke
with spirits, who supposed, to be greatest in heaven, is, as in the
world, to be the most powerful and opulent. But it was granted to reply
that the greatest in heaven \[is he\] who \[is\] least: and \[it was\]
granted to illustrate it by this: that the powerful aspire to earthly
felicity, by increasing their power and the rich \[by increasing\] their
riches, and their end is that thus they be more happy: for they desire
to thus possess in mind, every pleasantness. This is their end. Since
the least in heaven possesses the greatest felicity, it hence follows
that he is the greatest. - 1748, September 10.)))))))

<span class="margnote"><span id="3121.">3121.</span></span>

CONCERNING GENERAL RESPIRATION. A general indulation of heaven was
perceived, and I was told that it is the respiration of heaven, whereby
\[comes\] the respiration of men and of many things. It corresponded to
my respiration about as 3 to 1: for such respiration goes out \[abit\]
into endeavor \[conatum\], from which all things respire.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3122.">3122.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE ODOR OF HUMAN SEED. Several times was perceived the odor
of human seed, and it was given me to know, that it is from those who
represent \[bear reference\] to \[referent\] the seminal bladders
\[vesicas\] and spermatic vessels. - 1748, September 11.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3123.">3123.</span></span>

CONCERNING A SUBTLE VEIL. There were spirits hid above the head of the
family of sirens, who acted so secretly \[latenter\] that it was not
revealed \[pateret\] until after some time \[moram\]. They supposed that
thus they are free because subtle, as if in a purer \[sphere\].
Wherefore \[quod\] they were told that they are not therefore free, and
that their most subtle principle appears to them, like as to others, as
the subtlest of all things. But inasmuch as they still continued
\[pergebant\] to act thus), they disappeared as it were into a subtler
\[principle\] \[wrapped in\] a sort of subtle veil, and were carried
away, around the head as if once by one \[unius\] and downwards.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3123_1/2.">3123\_1/2.</span></span>

They supposed that they were not evil, as is customary with sirens; but
it was given to tell them, that the intention for which they wished to
be so subtle, prevailed in everything else, which end or intention was
that they wished to be purer than others. Wherefore, however they acted,
as that end ruled; everything is still turned into such as favors the
end, which consists in despising others. - 1748, September 11: for they
wished to ridicule others and to rule them according to their
phantasies.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3124.">3124.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE EXCRETORIES IN GENERAL. ((((The cerebrum has its
excretories, and each of the viscera has its excretion: certain of them
serve for uses, for instance the salivas and biles: certain are cast out
as excrementitious through the pores of the skin, and other enunctories,
as the nostrils. There were certain \[spirits\] who were among the
excrementitious things of the cerebrum, in front above, at a little
distance opposite \[ad\] the right part of the nose. These as often as
they had remission, brought down spiritual things to earthly things, and
defiled them, according to use in life, beginning with spiritual, and
bringing them down to earthly things, and then defiling them
\[therewith\]. The more filthy \[earthly\] things were, the more they
had remission.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3125.">3125.</span></span>

But a little farther off, nearly in the same plane, whither they fled,
were those who think and speak nothing but filthy things, and whatever
is presented to speak about, they turn into something filthy, as is
usual with many of the lowest class of common people, sailors, and the
like. Of such a character are many in thought; but they are restrained
by external bonds. - 1748, September 11.))))

<span class="margnote"><span id="3126.">3126.</span></span>

CONCERNING PRAYERS. I perceived in spiritual idea, that prayers to the
Lord, if made from conscience, as a duty, are then good, but if that
thereby something is obtained or merited, it is not good, yea \[etiam\]
is evil. - 1748, September 12.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3127.">3127.</span></span>

THE VARIATIONS OF AFFECTIONS, WITHOUT IDEAS OF THOUGHTS. I have
experienced without reflection, although \[the same thing occurred\]
several times before, that affections can act and be varied, as to
effect, without \[apart from\] ideas of thought. So that there are
indefinite states of affections with their varieties and successions.
These are the principles of thoughts which nevertheless man cannot
perceive without ideas of thought: wherefore \[he cannot perceive\] that
celestial states, from which spirituals \[arise\] are of such a nature.
- 1748, September 12.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3128.">3128.</span></span>

CONCERNING SPEECH WITH SPIRITS. Speech with spirits appears to them
wholly like the speech of men with each other; and anyone may wonder
that they do not perceive other than that it is entirely the same. But
still there is such a difference as between the speech of the mouth and
the speech of thought; so that thought, and not the tongue or mouth
speaks, and that spirits at once perceive if \[one\] wishes to conceal
anything, and if anything else is latent, whatever is simulated, if
there is such, so that if \[one\] wishes to conceal anything, then, at
once, do they the rather draw out his thoughts into the light, and if he
simulates aught, he is immediately charged with falsity. Moreover,
speech with spirits is fuller, so that whatever may be in the ideas of
words is more fully disclosed, besides many things which \[I have said\]
previously concerning spirits and ideas. This \[is written\] in presence
of those who could not perceive other than that the speech of spirits
and men is the same; yea, if man should thus speak with man, in which a
state as he is, his brain \[cerebrum\] would in a few minutes be
distracted and become insane. - 1748, \[September\] 12.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3129.">3129.</span></span>

Wherefore spirits are in a more perfect state than when men, in order to
be of such a character; for they are thus kept by the Lord; with nearly
\[the same\] difference, that there is between hearing, and sight
separate from hearing which they derive from this, that the memory of
particulars is separated from them; from which if they should think in
the other life, at the same time they were with other spirits who are in
ideas, the memory of particulars would be so burst asunder as to become
wholly insane. - 1748, September 12.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3130.">3130.</span></span>

Wherefore, the speech of spirits also flows into the speech of man from
the interior, and therefore no man hears it, although it appears to him
and spirits that it is similar, and thus that men might hear it, since
the speech of men inflows externally through the ear.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3131.">3131.</span></span>

Hence, it may also be apparent, how those things which inflow from the
interior and those which inflow from the exterior, concentrate
themselves into the ear, yea, also into the tongue. - 1748, September
12.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3132.">3132.</span></span>

THAT THE SPHERES OF SPIRITS AND SOCIETIES ARE ALSO REPRESENTED
\[sistantur\] BY ODORS. As soon as any spirits call, then they who are
there, the Lord thus allowing, are perceived as to their quality, as
well the celestial as the spiritual. This happened many times, for it is
immediately insinuated what is the quality of his life and of his faith.
The same, when the Lord so allows, are also represented by odors; yea,
perceptible \[sensibiles\] by spirits; as well by odors of vegetable
things as by animal odors, or the various \[odors\] of the body; besides
spheres of terror, fear, sadness, anxiety, as \[was the case\] today, on
account of which they fled away; also \[the spheres\] of greatness of
mind, which are various \[quae varioe, I think\]. - 1748, September 12.
There are also mixed spheres of thoughts and affections, for instance,

<span class="margnote"><span id="3133.">3133.</span></span>

that the dragon cannot bear it, when they believe him to be less
deceitful than others, and more upright than others; because he desires
to command all; he sometimes complained of that sphere, and betook
himself elsewhere; in general evil spirits cannot tolerate the sphere of
faith, therefore, the perception of spheres is taken away, diminished
and increased by the Lord; and so the spirits to whom it is repugnant
fly away as also a spirit now complained. When they wish to explore the
angelic sphere, as to what and of what nature it is; it so penetrates
the interiors of the spirit that he is turned into such things, and thus
appears, as they are represented, like clouds, flamy, white, black, and
many things; also into animals according to nature and state. - 1748,
September 12.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3134.">3134.</span></span>

THAT SPIRITS SPEAK THOSE THINGS WHICH OTHERS THINK INTERIORLY. It is
known that there are subjects who speak, and he who speaks, speaks from
the thoughts of another; which was now plainly shown me when one spoke,
and I thought him to be a certain one, when yet he who spoke was not so;
immediately another said that the subject spoke the things which he
thought interiorly, which could not be prevented. Hence, it may be
manifest that these things which subjects speak, are the thoughts of
others, as has been observed several times previously. - 1748, September
12.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3135.">3135.</span></span>

A VISION CONCERNING MORE SUBTLE MAGICIANS, AND THOSE WHO ARE RASHLY
DESPERATE. There first appeared to me a bunch of large red grapes, upon
a plate, at whose size I was astonished; then appeared to me a face in a
window, from which I could infer that I would see something worthy of
observation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3136.">3136.</span></span>

Then a certain one \[from\] amongst the extremely audacious in the
world, inasmuch as he could not, as he said, endure those things which
had happened to him, being excited by fear of the loss of his
reputation, which he was very solicitous about in the world, then took
counsel to seek another Lord, as certain evil spirits \[did\]
previously; but no matter what was told him; it was in vain, \[as he
was\] obstinate for going, wherefore he withdrew \[elongavit se\]
backwards \[a tergo\] more and more in mind in order to seek another
Lord, and another heaven, where he could be without such loss of
reputation, which was all that tormented him, together with other things
which happened that he had to endure before he could enter heaven.
Wherefore, he withdrew backwards more and more, and did not wish to
return, although those sent to him said many things \[to induce him\] to
return. The distance backwards was farther than I supposed could be
given within the space of the Grand Man \[maximo corpore\].

<span class="margnote"><span id="3137.">3137.</span></span>

At first he came to those who furnished him everything sweet, so that
they lived together in delights; thus in performing mutual offices, with
such a life for an end, so that their life might be sweet; thus
simulated friendships, for the sake of sweet conversations. At first he
said that he has there found others with whom he could live. But it was
shown me that they were interior magicians, charmers, and the like, who
are sent thither at first, when they came from the life of the body, so
that similar things might be recalled, in order that they may be finally
vastated. That they were of such a nature, was shown me, by means of an
angelic view \[intuitum\] of such things. There appeared attenuated
\[tenuia\] and bloody intestines. Hence was given to know that such are
there at a distance backwards, who indulge similar things, so that they
live for the sake of the mere end of thus enjoying a sweet life, and
thinking they mutually love one another. But the end shows the quality
of the love. In the other life, these are also devoted to magic arts,
divinations, and the like.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3138.">3138.</span></span>

When he was told that they were of such a character, and that as he was
unaccustomed in the life of the body to such things \[he was so\]
afterwards, \[that\] he afterwards came into the soul and nature which
he acquired to himself, then he removed himself farther and farther
backwards, till he was told \[that he was\] at the bounds of the
universe. He then came into the society of those who said that to die or
live is the same, whether life or death, and cared nothing whether they
lived or died. He then found such as are farthest backwards, and because
\[he was\] similar in life, he was hence kept in that acquired nature,
was then in his own life, and shouted a long time \[kackt folck, kackt
folck\], and those with whom there was perceived no such thing, were of
no estimation in his mind; he ran farther, and farther, and shouted
kackt folck; and then was communicated to me the quality of his life,
which was such, that the respiration was, as it were, in the greatest
liberty, because \[he was\] with such as he is. Hence \[came\] his free
thought \[which was\] as it were, diffused into all, with the
respiration entirely remitted \[remississima\] into the general
principle of all whom he esteemed, as if he might be as one with them.
Such was his life.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3139.">3139.</span></span>

I spoke with him concerning the nature of that life, to wit, that when
they are in battles and dangers, they must not fear death, but outside
of battles to have such life \[springing\] from persuasion that they
alone are men, and worthy of living; this is mad. In like manner they
are in madness in whom a false persuasion is induced like beasts, when
they are so bent back \[retorquentur\] that they cannot be drawn back
\[reduci\] any farther.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3140.">3140.</span></span>

Afterwards he returned in an instant, for distance of place and removals
are phantasies in the other life; they are induced by magicians to
whomsoever permitted.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3141.">3141.</span></span>

It was then also granted me to know that such esteem, above all others,
them that are without fear, without reverence, and without shame. -
1748, September 13.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3142.">3142.</span></span>

HOW GOOD SPIRITS APPEAR WHEN INSPECTED BY THE ANGELS. There was shown
me, as it were, a long porch, where there were many men and virgins. I
did not \[well\] see or remember the decorations. I was told that thus
appear angelic spirits; when beheld from heaven, that is, from the Lord.
- 1748, September 13.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3143.">3143.</span></span>

THAT SCIENTIFICS ARE ALSO IMPLANTED IN SPIRITS. It was made known to me
by experience, that spirits retain in the interior memory, what they
hear, see, \[and\] perceive, just as men \[do in\] the exterior memory:
but that they cannot recall these things, \[but\] only the Lord \[can\].
It was made known to me, that they occupy the memory of some, so that
they who have been the longest with me know better than others what has
been transacted, with \[in\] \[apud\] me. Again, I perceived that it was
also recalled into the memory of some what had befallen them after
death, as \[per instance\] what they have endured, concerning which I
had no knowledge: besides other things, which I do not recollect. -
1748, September 13.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3144.">3144.</span></span>

Still more \[is this the case\] amongst the interior: for instance,
amongst the angels, with whom remain the minutest things, according to
degree of perfection: for the law is, that nothing is ever without a
use.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3145.">3145.</span></span>

THAT ANGELS CAN KNOW FROM A SINGLE IDEA OF MAN OR SPIRIT HIS WHOLE
NATURE. A certain spirit, when he heard that angels can know the whole
nature of man, from but a single idea of a word, was astonished, and
wished to be confirmed concerning it, through experience: wherefore an
angel came to him, and disclosed what he perceived from a single idea of
his, which however did not seem so \[very\] evil, and told him its
quality; who, inasmuch as he had as an end, the glory of reputation and
name after death, and indeed so much so, that no other man \[could\]
more desire \[fame\] \[the angel\] showed him of what quality \[was his
idea\], having found, to wit, that if he could have killed the universal
human race, for only the glory of his name, he would thence derive the
greatest pleasure, so that he had no mercy. He had acquired this by that
actuality, inasmuch as he took glory and pleasure from \[in the sight
of\[ thousands stretched and lying in blood after battles. - 1748,
September 13.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3146.">3146.</span></span>

CONCERNING CHANGES \[variationibus\] OF STATE. It is also usual in the
other life for them to be reduced into an infantile, youthful, and
adolescent state so completely that they do not know other than that
\[they are\] in infancy, boyhood, adolescence. A certain one was now
also reduced into that state, and did not then know other, nor speak
other, than as if then in early adolescence: yea \[was\] with his
parents and ancestors, who previously had not been able to love him on
account of actualities which he had contracted: but then the love in the
parents towards children or storge was excited, and they loved him
tenderly. Their love was also communicated to me. He spoke indeed in
such a manner, that if he were not a boy, he could have made his parents
indignant: for from controversy with a brother in infancy, he said that
he would take away everything: by this also \[his\] infantile
\[principle\] could be perceived, that he would take away the love of
parents. Inasmuch as there were many infantile, this principle was what
they loved, and they comforted him \[telling him\], that he could carry
away nothing: and now I perceive \[his\] brother who, though he died in
infancy, is now a man, insinuating that he was willing to give him all
that was his, and then \[showed\] a tender love, whereby the other was
so affected even in opposition to \[his\] actuality, that he shed tears.
- 1748, September 13.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3147.">3147.</span></span>

THAT EVERYONE IN THE OTHER LIFE MUST PERFORM USE, AND FROM USE, POSSESS
HAPPINESS. I spoke with spirits \[to the effect\] that in the human body
even the excretions perform use: for instance, the three biles which
otherwise \[for other reasons\] are to be cast out, yet still perform
signal uses to the intestines, and in the digestion of food: then when
the remaining parts are carried out, they perform a use to the fields:
hence useful \[things\], through barley and the like, again perform use
in the body, and so on still farther. Hence it was spoken concerning
those in the other life that \[they\] all must perform use, so that
there must be no one who does not perform use to his world, the human
race, the world of spirits \[and\] to heaven: finally, that in heaven
their felicity consists in the performance of use, so that thence they
obtain felicity from the Lord. That \[their\] felicity \[springs\] from
performing use is evident from this, that the Lord grants them to love
ends, which are uses. etc. - 1748. September 13. It was illustrated by
this, that in an army there ought to be no one who is not of use: it is
the same in general society, and the kingdom: otherwise he is a useless
burden which \[cannot be\] in the other life in the Lord's kingdom,
where nothing lives but uses on ends, and hence loves. - 1748, September
13.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3148.">3148.</span></span>

THAT THE HUMAN BODY IS ENTIRELY FORMED FROM THE GRAND MAN. It was
insinuated from heaven that this may be evident from man, whose body is
entirely formed according to all the judgments \[arbitria\] of the will,
so that it may bring it forth into act; the will is of love. Moreover,
the human cerebrum is formed after \[ad\] the idea, as they call it, of
the universal heaven of angels, and world of spirits: and from the
cerebrum, as from heaven, exists all the form or structure of the body,
so as to be able to correspond to its nod. Hence it is evident, that
everything \[pertaining\] to the body, is representative of celestial
and spiritual things. - 1748, September 13.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3149.">3149.</span></span>

THAT FEAR IS OF SHAME ALSO \[tum\] OF REVERENCE. From a living idea
\[and\] at the same time from living experience, it was given me to know
that they who are devoid of all fear of dangers, as has been already
said, concerning an audacious \[spirit\], unless he had possessed in a
like degree the fear of loss of reputation, name, and the like, which
would expose him not only in the eyes of the world \[mund\], but of
himself that he would have been such a base urinous excrementitious
\[principle\] that a baser could not be conceived. Wherefore, he
possessed such a fear as cannot be described, which restrained from
wandering \[beyond limits\] such a mind, as was completely devoid of
fear of death in dangers. For fear of losing the name of bravery
\[fortitudinis\] was so great,

<span class="margnote"><span id="3150.">3150.</span></span>

as to be in a completely similar degree with fear, in danger of death.
Hence may also be evident how the Lord led him, so that he might not be
a baser excrement than ever anyone in the world \[could be\]. This he
also acknowledged, and confessed that there would have been such an
indescribable excrementitious \[principle\], were he not the most timid
of all in the world \[universo orbe terrarum\]. - 1748, September 14.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3151-3200](sd34)
