[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sd33)  [Next](sd35) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766143007/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Spiritual Diary*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1758\], tr. by Bush,
Smithson and Buss \[1883-9\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Spiritual Diary

<span class="margnote"><span id="3151.">3151.</span></span>

Hence occurred a certain indescribable state amongst those who were
conjoined in the idea, whether such a state could exist as respects
filial reverence towards parents, namely: whether in reverence and shame
\[there could be\] a similar \[state\] with fear, involving obedience
towards parents. Such was their state, which can never be perceived by
any mortal from the various \[natures\] of their disposition. - 1748,
September 14.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3152.">3152.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE EDUCATION OF INFANTS. \[Those\] who most tenderly love
infants, so that they only \[love\] the fetus, and infants \[and\] are
as most tender mothers, so that they can scarce live, but in a state
where the tender love of infants prevails, these constitute a province
in the quarter \[vico\] of the testicles, and organs dependent thence:
and in woman \[the province\] of the neck of the womb, and of the womb
with the ovaries, and each of its appendages. They who are in such
province, live in the sweetest, most agreeable \[and\] happy life, that
it cannot be described, only \[that\] its state \[is\] agreeableness and
sweetness. Their province is between the loins.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3153.">3153.</span></span>

The opposite thereof is above the head, where nothing exists, but what
causes man to be as it were mad, as is the case when youth \[juvenes\]
\[are\] in yrhet thence, which is manifested by such \[traits\] as
existed in the audacious \[spirit\] previously mentioned, who was in his
adolescence, of such a nature, that no other \[was\] ever more insane.
This was the very \[prorsus\] extreme of insanity, bursting out into the
like, in the extremes, of corporeal ultimates; as may be known from
those who are insane from such things. - 1748, September 14.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3154.">3154.</span></span>

THE QUALITY OF THEIR IDEAS, WHO DO NOT BELIEVE, BECAUSE THEY DO NOT
UNDERSTAND. I saw by spiritual idea, and it was given to hold
communication with spirits \[to this effect\], that the ideas of those
who do not wish to believe, unless they know and understand, are formed
from innumerable \[ideas\] of such as reason falsely concerning every
object of sight: for spirits have such a cupidity that they think they
know everything, and reason concerning everything: some indeed from
persuasion, when yet \[it is\] a false \[persuasion\]. Such innumerable
ideas concur in each idea of those who do not wish to believe, unless
they understand. Wherefore, if that idea \[formed\] from all these
\[ideas\] were presented before their eyes, by representation of a face,
or something else, there would be such base and hideous \[faces\], that
nothing could ever appear more base and hideous. - 1748, September 14.
This was seen in spiritual idea, with spirits around me. A certain
spirit said that he saw represented the idea of someone, who was not so
\[very\] evil, and that he never saw anything more hideous. - 1748,
September 14. And it was only a general idea, as obscure as if it were
nothing. Another merely said that he did not believe such things could
have been seen in the other life; his idea was immediately represented,
and surpassed others in ugliness \[turpidine\]. - 1748, September 14.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3155.">3155.</span></span>

HOW IT HAPPENS \[se habet\] THAT A SPIRIT SEEMS TO BE PERSUADED
\[persuaderi, I think\] THAT ANYTHING IS OF HIMSELF \[suum\]. A certain
spirit to whom it was shown in various ways that he seems to live, yea,
seems to seem to see, was thereby confused, and thought that thus there
was nothing of him that lived: wherefore it was shown him in various
ways that he thought he saw with his eyes, thought he touched with the
hand: therefore that he seemed to himself to have eyes, and have hands.
It was further told them that it is so with everything else
\[coeteris\], just as with the external senses, which he seems to
himself to enjoy like as when he was a man. It was equally the case with
his thought, which he then supposed to be his alone, \[and\] this, when
it was previously shown that he thought from others. Then the society
from or with which he thought, was taken away from him: then his
interiors seemed to think, yea in a more innocent manner. The thought
which was removed was placed over my head, that he might there receive
it. Hence it may be evident that it was only the society and its
intuition which caused thought, and that force which was placed above
the head: and that the rest \[remainder\] by which he lives was a purer
society. It is just as when callosities \[callis\] are removed. - 1748,
September 14.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3156.">3156.</span></span>

A certain good spirit also heard it, to whom it was granted to say that
since it is so what more does he wish to desire for himself than that he
may seem to himself to live: so that he may be like nothing else: and
further, what more can he wish, than to live the life of the Lord? When
he heard this, he was amazed, saying that he never heard of such a
thing. - 1748, September 14.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3157.">3157.</span></span>

THAT A SPIRIT SUPPOSED THAT HE WAS SURELY MYSELF ALSO THAT HE WAS
FURNISHED WITH A BODY. (The same spirit told me that he spoke with me,
in his language, to whom it was granted to reply, that it was not his
\[language\] but mine; \[our tongues were\] like persons foreign to each
other \[sicut ii qui longinqui\]: and further, whether he supposes that
he has lips and tongue, wherewith to speak, and what need \[was there\]
of lips and tongue in the other life. But he thought that be had them.
Another spirit also, when I stretched out \[my\] hand, and he supposed
from the reflection given \[him\] that he took hold \[of it\], said that
it was he who took hold \[of it\]: to whom it was granted to say that so
he supposes, but that it was I who took hold \[of it\]; and further,
when other spirits insisted that they were as it were my body, it was
granted to tell \[them\] that my body is adjoined to my spirit, so that
there is a body of my spirit, and that the body of his spirit was dead:
and therefore, that \[he\] merely inflowed into my spirit, as if a
spirit into another \[spirit\].

<span class="margnote"><span id="3158.">3158.</span></span>

And then when my spirit acts \[facit\] with my body, they suppose that
they acted with my body: and now that this is impossible for another
spirit to possess another body, unless it should act as it were
obsessed: for no spirit suits \[quadrat ad\] my body but mine: according
to my spirit do each and all things of the body accord or correspond, so
as to make a one by corresponding. There is a nexus between my spirit
and body, which can never be given between another spirit and my body. -
1748, September 14.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="3159.">3159.</span></span>

I am informed that since it is external bonds which restrain a spirit,
such as honor, shame, fear, \[and\] various cupidities, therefore such
spirits are associated therewith and hold \[him\] in those bonds. But as
soon as these \[spirits\] are removed, he rushes like an insane
\[person\] freed from external bonds: thus reason is also taken away
from them: for they then have no reason, but act from nature. - 1748,
September 14.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3160.">3160.</span></span>

CONCERNING THOSE WHO REPRESENT \[referunt\] THE GENERAL \[communem\]
SENSE. To a considerable height and extent above me there came spirits,
who sounded like many together, who it seemed to me, were in no distinct
idea, but in a general \[commune\] \[idea\] of all things: I supposed
that no distinct \[principle\] was perceived by them, but \[only\] a
general indistinct and obscure \[principle\], as is usually the case.
But yet they spoke with me through other spirits adjoined to them, so
that there was a sound, whose ideas I could thus perceive: for such a
general \[principle\] could not fall into ideas which pertain to speech,
save through others who are of such a nature. That they simultaneously
thought the general \[principle\] of all I plainly perceived from so
many flowing \[alluentibus\] simultaneously and as it were innumerable
\[flowing\] indistinctly into my thought: with whom I spoke, as I have
said, telling \[them\],

<span class="margnote"><span id="3161.">3161.</span></span>

that such generals cannot contain \[habere\] a distinct idea of
anything, as is usually the case with the general thought of man, which
is not only obscure, but a nothing \[nulla\]. I said that there are
indeed granted variations of generals, but still \[they are\] similar,
for \[they are\] obscure, as it were nothing \[nulloe\]. Nevertheless
they showed me for a quarter, if not a half hour, that they had a
distinct idea of generals, at the same time of everything in the
general; for all the variations and changes of my thoughts together with
each and all things that existed about \[circa\] the variations and
changes of my thought and affection, they observed so accurately, that
no other spirits \[could have observed them\] better. From which it may
plainly be inferred that they had a distinct idea of generals, and that
\[this\] better than others \[et quod melius quam alibi\], inasmuch as
they spoke true \[dicebant vera\], and at the same time beheld each and
all that was necessary to the conclusion.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3162.">3162.</span></span>

yea, so that I began, as it were, to fear to think anything more, for
they discussed those things which I was not so willing to be discovered,
as touching the affections and the like, which were hid \[latebant\] in
the variety of my thought and affection. Wherefore I also perceived in
\[apud\] me a listlessness as regards any more speaking with them. When
this listlessness \[torpor\] was observed, there appeared a head with
long hair \[crinitum\] not far from \[my\] face which brought itself
within my body, and spoke something harshly. It was a spirit that so
appeared, because, as is now insinuated, there was signified merely a
\[principle\] similar to the body, to wit, a general \[commune\]
corporeal correspondent. Wherefore, also, he at length fell into sleep.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3163.">3163.</span></span>

This day early, I again spoke with them: who, as they say, likewise
spoke with me, \[during\] the night, but it was given to say that I was
in sleep, so \[that they must have spoken\] with others. I now also
perceive \[that they had\] a general perception - not obscure, but as I
may so say, a lucid \[perception\] of all that exists in my thought: so
that man can be better led by them than by others; for the general
states of thought, so also of particulars, are, as it were varied,
because they are referred \[related\] \[referunt se\], to the general
\[principle\], like as they also follow from the general. This can be
evident from many things.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3164.">3164.</span></span>

These are they who represent \[referunt\] the internal general sense in
man, yea, the general sense, not \[pertaining\] to the corporeal memory,
that is, to particulars: but the general \[sense\] of the memory next
interior. But whence they are I do not know. It was granted me to
consider \[expendere\] whether similar \[spirits\] are given in our
earth, and to conclude, as it were, that the like are given, but are
such as are in an obscure general idea or notion. It is not yet clear to
me whether these can come after death into such general \[idea\] of many
things. I perceive that they wish to be \[considered\] in heaven as from
another world. But they do not say so they only perceive \[so\].

<span class="margnote"><span id="3165.">3165.</span></span>

Hence it may be apparent quite clearly, that there exists a general of
many things, wherein the many are distinctly perceived; what \[may there
not be\] in things more interior, and in more interiors \[still\], and
so amongst angels. And what \[may not be\] in the Lord who rules the
universe, and is in the Providence of the most singular things, when he
is in the universal \[Providence\]. - 1748, September 15.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3166.">3166.</span></span>

THAT LOVE CANNOT SLEEP. From a spiritual idea I perceived that love can
by no means \[not at all\] sleep, as may be apparent from many things in
the life of the body, from parents, when \[their\] children are in any
danger, likewise from friends, so that in itself love is wakeful. -
1748, September 15.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3167.">3167.</span></span>

THAT RESPECT OF PERSONS IS ALSO OBSERVED IN THE OTHER LIFE WHEN THEY ARE
GOOD. ((((((It was many times observed, that persons \[who\] in the
world \[were\] endowed with the greatest dignity, for instance, kings,
who are born kings, and have derived from infancy \[their\] endowment
with dignity and superiority to others, that these cannot conceal or
throw off that sphere, until after many years, perhaps 100 \[or\] 1000.
But still the sphere of that dignity is so conjoined with the sphere of
probity and goodness, as not to be troublesome to anyone. To those who
are born so, and are upright and good, there is also shown a certain
kind of corresponding subordination by moral spirits: for it \[belongs\]
to a good spirit to injure no one, but to do a favor to everyone.
Wherefore, a certain one, who did not have such a corresponding sphere,
being discovered to be of another character, it was given to tell him,
that there was something lacking to him in external bonds: which, as it
was lacking, he easily rushed into his own nature. - 1748, September
15.))))))

<span class="margnote"><span id="3168.">3168.</span></span>

THAT IN All THINGS OF THE WORLD OF SPIRITS AND HEAVEN AN EQUILIBRIUM
EXISTS. That mere equilibriums exist, was also shown by \[my\] goings
\[gressus\], when certain wished that I should go here, others \[that I
should go there\]; also by something else \[aliud\] as was previously
\[done\]: and I spoke with spirits concerning equilibriums \[saying\]
that each and all things in the universal body, are held in equilibrium:
it is so in the atmospheric world, and in each and all the things of
nature. It was further shown that in equilibrium, the slightest and
least force moves, and causes that even what appears very strong and
resistant, is moved. Thus is it in the world of spirits and in heaven,
where there are equilibriums of all things: and thus each and all things
are ruled by the Lord very easily, and with no trouble: wherefore
equilibriums are preserved: hence the reason that souls must through
sufferings \[vexationes\] divest \[themselves\] of whatever is not in
equilibrium. - 1748, September 15.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3169.">3169.</span></span>

THOSE WHO CONDEMN OTHERS WITHIN THEMSELVES AND UTTER DIFFERENT THINGS
WITH THE MOUTH. \[There is\] a certain one who, during life, could
\[posset, I think\] live in externals with others, and be esteemed by
others, because he spoke cautiously respecting others, on account of his
reputation and name: but still inwardly he condemned everyone but his
own \[connections\], and \[those\] joined to him by especial friendship.
So that he condemned them to hell, so to speak, insomuch that they who
heard him speaking from the state of his thought into which \[he was\]
reduced; (and into which and every \[state\] of his life, he can easily
be reduced, and then thinks the same): and others then hear his
thoughts, as he speaks them, for they are \[his\] ideas: they who heard
him speaking his thoughts, said often faseligit, faseligit.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3170.">3170.</span></span>

He suffered the grievous punishment of discerption as to the entire
\[universum\] head. Resistance being induced, and repentance long
delayed; others beheld \[it\], but I did not see it. - 1748, September
15.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3171.">3171.</span></span>

He said afterwards, that in civil life he was cautious in speaking, and
so that he might not injure anyone; \[that\] therefore he ought not to
have suffered such a punishment in the other life, and inasmuch as it
was only \[his\] thought, and it did not burst forth into act. But it
was replied to him by others, that he was cautious for the sake of
honors for himself and that if he had been free, he would thus have
acted: further, that he was rewarded for his civil prudence, to wit, by
being conveyed to dignities: but in the other life it is thoughts that
are punished. Since he said that he could not have abstained from
thinking, therefore that he should not be punished for his thoughts,
they said to him, wherefore did he thus condemn others, when yet they
were also cautious in civil life. He said because they thought evils:
thus he convinced himself. Wherefore he confessed that he had sinned. -
1748, September 15.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3172.">3172.</span></span>

WHAT PHANTASIES ARE AND WHAT ARE IMAGINATIONS. I spoke with spirits
concerning phantasies, yea, with those who supposed that they are wholly
bodily \[corporeal\] men, although they knew that they were spirits,
besides other things also, that they seemed to themselves to attempt the
lowest functions of the body. Wherefore we spoke concerning phantasies,
and it was granted to tell him that hence may be known what is phantasy,
and that man seems to live from himself and yet it is such a phantasy,
and that it is not wonderful that there exist phantasies of this sort
concerning the body and corporeal things, so long as that phantasy of
living in or from himself remains.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3173.">3173.</span></span>

Afterwards we spoke concerning angelic representations, that still they
are not, although they appear. Concerning which it was granted to say,
that such things are imaginations, or representative imaginations,
signifying celestial and spiritual truths, and are thus exhibited to
angels and angelic spirits. Wherefore, they are not phantasies, for they
feel \[them\], and are intimately delighted by them. Such delight and
felicity cannot come from any other source than from the truths of faith
which are therein. - 1748, September 15.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3174.">3174.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE INTELLIGENCE OF ANGELS. I spoke with spirits concerning
the intelligence of angels, that it is such as can \[not\] be described
nor conceived: as may be apparent from this one \[question\] that was
propounded, what \[is\] the fear of love. Spirits who were present had
no idea thereof. Wherefore it was said that what the fear of love is
\[may be comprehended\] in that state alone, whereof it was then said
\[that, therein\] so many things can be simultaneously comprehended in
the idea of angels as can \[not\] be described by a great volume. \[It
may be\] but one idea, and yet not the half could have been expressed to
human understanding. - 1748, September 15.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3175.">3175.</span></span>

THAT THERE ARE GIVEN TWO CONTRARIES IN MAN AND SPIRIT. I have been
taught by experience, that in man or spirit can be given two contraries,
to will, and not to will, \[quod velit et non velit\], and the external
\[may be\] so strong that he never wills, but the internal \[be\] such
that he cannot \[do\] other than will: one experience is in a certain
one, in whom such a thing was granted to perceive; the other
\[experience\] is in spirits of Jupiter, who were infested by spirits of
our planet, who confessed that they do not wish to remain: but from
internals confessed that they could not but wish to remain. \[It is\] so
in many other things. - 1748, September 16.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3176.">3176.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE SPEECH OF ANGELS THROUGH SPIRITS. It was observed, that
when angels speak so manifestly through spirits, that spirits are as it
were in a stream or river of ideas, and thus that few things of
celestial ideas can reach me, into and through words. This is
circumstanced according to spirits. - 1748, September 16.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3177.">3177.</span></span>

THAT THE LORD RULES THE HUMAN RACE IN THE MOST SINGULAR THINGS. That
everything in my previous \[past\] \[anteactoe\] life, has been governed
by the Lord, could be evident to me, from those things which were
brought forth \[displayed\] concerning my past life: but still more
plainly from him of whom \[mention was made\] previously, who was the
most audacious of all: the governance of his life was examined. He, had
he not been so detained in a nearly similar degree, in external bonds,
as respects reputation of his name, and pre-eminent glory as compared
with others, would have become excrementitious above all \[others\], for
it was only such \[a bond\] that restrained him: thus was he led by the
Lord, as was shown, seen \[and\] confirmed by the angels. In like
manner, it was today demonstrated, as I could plainly perceive in
spiritual idea, that unless he had been so detained from love of women;
also from intoxicating drink, so as to have drunk simply water, he would
then have so fallen, as to have existed \[as\] an exceedingly
excrementitious \[principle\]. 1748, September 16.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3178.">3178.</span></span>

CONCERNING THOSE WHICH \[BELONG\] TO THE WILL \[BUT\] NOT TO THE ACT.
Certain spirits, as was previously the case, wish to be justified
because they have done no evil, although they have thought \[it\]:
wherefore it was insinuated into me, that the matter stands thus, that
whatever comes into \[enters\] the thought \[and\] not into the will,
this is not a sin: then if \[it comes\] \[enters\] into the will or
\[what is\] like the will, and he thinks that this is a sin, contrary to
the Lord's word, \[and\] will burden \[his\] conscience, and so shakes
it off: this also cannot be a sin, but \[is\] a temptation. But if
anything comes into \[enters\] the thought, and the will, so that he
desires to cause only that external bonds may not hinder, this is a sin:
like as the Lord says, he who looks on a girl with lust, has already
committed whoredom. - 1748, September 16.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3179.">3179.</span></span>

CONCERNING INTERIOR AND OTHER PUNISHMENTS. ((((((They who have thought
other than they did, and have prevented themselves from acting by \[ex\]
external bonds, and so have exercised their thoughts, and thus have
given these active life, these in the other life are also tormented, by
a punishment of discerption by means of thoughts, so that interior
thoughts combat \[pugnent\] with exterior tacit \[thoughts\] like as I
have learned, when long in such thought that I was exercised \[agerer\]
with strife \[pugna\] and discerption: also with other punishments
besides, as shame and the like. - 1748, September 16. To those who are
overwhelmed with shame, there appears a head nodding in front. - 1748,
September 16)))))).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3180.">3180.</span></span>

THAT CERTAIN SPIRITS OR SOCIETIES OF SPIRITS CANNOT ABIDE \[versari\] IN
THE NEXT PURER SPHERE. It happened when I spoke with spirits, that I
seemed to remove \[subtrahere\] from myself a sphere of a grosser sort,
as is done in a spiritual manner, which man cannot understand: and when
the grosser sphere was thus removed, then spirits at a distance in front
began to lament that thus they could not be present: wherefore they fled
away: and this also is one kind of dispersion of spirits, as is the east
wind \[another\]. - 1748, September 16. By removal \[subtractionem\] as
it were of shade or a grosser cloud \[nimbus\], it is understood that
there are societies of such a region, that fly away; this is so
represented: so that I did not then know other than that it is some sort
of dispersion of shade which was often done by me previously, when I was
brought to severer and purer \[things\] of the senses and understanding.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3181.">3181.</span></span>

CONCERNING DREAMS, HOW AND BY WHOM THEY ARE PRODUCED. ((((I have learned
by much experience, how dreams are produced, and what spirits produce
them. When in a state of wakefulness, and when another \[was\] in a
state of sleep, or in sleep, I was then as it were a spirit in company
with spirits: and thus it was granted to me to be present with those
spirits who introduce dreams, and it was also granted me to introduce
dreams; and that it was so I have learned from experience, inasmuch as
another waked up, three or four times, after dreams were introduced by
me, and I then related the things \[of his dream\] which he
acknowledged. It was granted me to introduce such things as were
delightful and pleasant. I was then instructed by living experience, who
they were that introduced dreams and how. It occurred by means of
representations, for the end that the sleeper might be delighted, and
there are those whose office it is to watch over man, when he sleeps,
that he may not be infested by evil spirits. They discharge this office
in wakefulness with the greatest delight, so that they strive
\[aemulentur\] which of them may be present; and because they are good
spirits, they love those things which are most pleasant and delightful
to those \[asleep\].))))

<span class="margnote"><span id="3182.">3182.</span></span>

These are they who in the life of the body were delighted by similar
things, so that they loved with all earnestness and love to make the
life of others pleasant: as \[for instance\] certain mothers \[do\] by
means of sports with their infants and children; also nurses
\[alumnae\], and who delight to act in an infantile manner, and \[were\]
so accustomed in the life of the body.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3183.">3183.</span></span>

((((They especially stand near above \[man's\] head, to wit, his
occiput, where the cerebellum \[is situated\], with whom I also then
spoke, and who are now also present, and direct these things which I
write: I also somewhat apperceive their pleasantness in doing these
things. These are they to whom is granted the province of the
cerebellum, but not of the cerebrum, concerning which matter I spoke
with angelic spirits \[saying\] that they cannot have anything from \[to
do with\] \[de\] the cerebrum, but \[they can\] from \[with the
cerebellum\]. For the cerebellum is awake in the night-time, and the
cerebrum sleeps: and the cerebellum, as it were, sleeps in the day-time,
when the cerebrum is awake.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3184.">3184.</span></span>

There are other spirits besides, who occupy the province of the thorax
or left breast, whom I also sensibly perceived at the same time; by whom
those superior \[upper\] \[spirits\] are infested: for they wish to be
present: but because they are envious and such as desire to possess
those things, they are not permitted \[to go\] higher than to the upper
ribs: otherwise the more they are permitted to act, and infest the
superior \[upper\] \[spirits\], so far are dreams troublesome and of no
account.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3185.">3185.</span></span>

There are other spirits around about, who also desire to infest them,
but good spirits do not fear them, and so disperse such things as
infest, so that there are, as it were, conflicts \[pugnae\] and
victories. From which it could also be evident to me, how evil spirits
contend to infest man when he is asleep, and how the Lord every moment
guards every man. - 1748 September 17.))))

<span class="margnote"><span id="3185_1/2.">3185\_1/2.</span></span>

((They also said that they could introduce sleep, whenever they wished,
which was shown by experience; but it was said \[that they could do so\]
when \[it was\] allowed: thus (that it did not originate) from them.))

<span class="margnote"><span id="3186.">3186.</span></span>

CONCERNING THOSE DECEITFUL \[SPIRITS\] WHO DO NOT CARE FOR INTERIOR
THINGS. \[I spoke\] concerning those who do not care for interior
things, of whom \[mention has been\] previously \[made\] in No. 1177 to
1189 (who are of such a character) for reasons there \[given\]. Certain
of those who were of the more deceitful sort, craftily insinuated
themselves into the company of angelic spirits, so that the angelic
spirits were ignorant \[thereof\] before they inserted themselves into
their companies as was perceived from this, that a certain snowy
inanimate \[principle\] was perceived around; wherefore the proof was
given \[indicium factum\] to angelic spirits by means of the ideas of
these \[deceitful spirits\]: they \[who\] perceived this, but endeavored
to steal away: hence also were liberated, and it was insinuated unto
them, \[were\] cast down, yea by a way across the provinces of the
viscera of the body, with which \[provinces\] I was not acquainted,
still downwards, to the urinous \[things\] which are beneath man,
between each foot; the deeper, the more urinous; for they love such
things. - 1748, September 17.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3187.">3187.</span></span>

CONCERNING MARTYRDOMS. I spoke with spirits concerning martyrdoms,
because some have alleged, that because \[they were\] martyrs, and
adorned with the crown of martyrdom, that they therefore should have
preference over others; to whom it was granted to say previously, and is
now here announced and insinuated, that they who place merit in these
things, and so desire to have preference in heaven, are not true
martyrs: because such is not heavenly, or \[a property\] of true faith.
Moreover it was said that many kinds or martyrdoms occur \[dentur\] to
wit, \[those\] of Quakers and others, so that every heresy can have its
martyrs, for they who persuade themselves are willing, yea desire to
undergo death for their persuaded \[phantasies\] whatever they are; in
monasteries \[erected\] for sake of the saints, how many painted
martyrdoms exist, some of whose \[victims\] were thence sainted; and
that it may be illustrated, it was also granted to say, that many have
undergone torments, dangers, and death, for sake of women, with whose
love they were smitten; as may be known to everyone.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3188.">3188.</span></span>

Moreover others desire nothing more ardently \[potius\] than death, in
behalf of their persuaded phantasy: like as those who desire to fall in
battle, for sake of their own glory: these also willingly fall, for sake
of the glory of their persuaded phantasy. Such phantasies can be
represented in the other life by means of women: wherefore there was
also represented to one who was of such a character, his phantasy, as it
were a woman, whom he loved with inmost love: \[yet\] she was so
hideous, that never \[was anything\] more hideous. - 1748, September 17.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3189.">3189.</span></span>

CONCERNING THOSE WHO EXCITE THE URINE. ((((Sometimes my \[apud me\]
urine was excited, and indeed by spirits, as now also \[is the case\];
and I am instructed that \[it is done\] by those who are exceedingly
urinous, or wholly opposed to conjugial love, and yet are carried away
by lust; who, when carried away by lust, excite ardency \[ardorem\] in
the urine: which also on other accounts \[alioquin\], as in my case, is
excited in lust: for that they are conjoined may be known to very many
others. - 1748, September 17.))))

<span class="margnote"><span id="3190.">3190.</span></span>

CONCERNING HEAVEN, THAT IT MAY BE CLOSED. I plainly saw in spiritual
idea, that when anyone commits adultery, heaven is closed, namely, that
the interiors which open towards heaven are closed, and that he who
commits adultery is afterwards only in externals: so that he who rejects
every marriage-duty, so as not to know its nature \[quale\], that is, so
as not to be effected \[tangatur\] by the marriage-duty, that when
adultery is committed by him, heaven is closed, because the
marriage-duty involves the celestial Divine \[principle\] and the love
of celestial \[things\]. \[This is\] more \[the case\] with the \[a\]
woman than the \[a\] man. - 1748, September 18.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3191.">3191.</span></span>

THE QUALITY OF A CERTAIN \[MAN\] VERY CELEBRATED IN EUROPE. A certain
\[man\] very celebrated in Europe, namely Gustavus Adolphus, King of
Sweden \[who was\] so celebrated in his time; he with the rest of that
family spoke with me, for some days; concerning whom, all that I could
perceive, was that \[he was\] among the lower angels: but afterwards he
was discovered to be of such a quality, as was shown me, to wit, that I
first discovered his sphere, when he receded, to be full of adultery: as
he recedes, it is immediately perceived from his sphere. Afterwards it
was shown me of what quality he was, for he retains, even in heaven, the
highest \[summum\] power, in his sphere, to wit, that he sits on a horse
with his face \[appearing\] like as when in battle, or \[going\] to
battle, without a hat \[with no hat on\], with the weapons of war, like
an ordinary soldier, similar as regards his countenance \[facie\]:
afterwards his quality was shown first, by a small dog of yellow color,
which was turned into a cat: next by a fox, in whose mouth, a white foam
was as it were running down \[recedens\]: then also by a great serpent:
next by a certain deceitful animal \[like\] a small panther, which
crossed over to the left side. Then also at the same time \[was seen\] a
lion, from the region of the face, which did not appear plainly \[bene\]
to me. Afterwards it was shown how he lived with women and harlots, yea,
at last, filthily, so they said, nothing \[could be\] more filthy. In
like manner, from the agreement of my observations concerning him, which
I pass over, also from his sphere, I perceived that he was such an
adulterer, as put no esteem on the conjugial \[bond\]. - 1748, September
18.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3192.">3192.</span></span>

THAT YET PERVERTED LOVES DERIVE THEIR ORIGIN FROM TRUE LOVE. I spoke
concerning these, with spirits \[saying\] to wit, that perverted
conjugial, adulterous \[and\] meretricious loves cannot exist, except
from true conjugial love, but that it falls into the perverted, and
becomes so: and it is similar with love towards children, when it is in
the perverse, it is directed \[propter\] to evil ends. Also \[it is
similar with those\] who seek immortality and do not care for life,
because of fame \[reputation\] and \[so with\] very many other things. -
1748, September 19.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3193.">3193.</span></span>

And I spoke further with them \[saying\] that the case is similar with
good from heaven \[which\] is turned into evil, in the world of evil
spirits, yea, according to each one's nature: and still plainer the life
of the Lord inflows into all, yet in the world of evil spirits is so
perverted, that not any vestige \[trace\] of life is observed, yea, with
indefinite variety: in that obscure \[principle\] it does not appear at
all; and \[yet\] indeed to those, who are delighted with such
\[perversions\], it appears as the pleasant \[principle\] of life, so
that they do not know whether or not it \[is\] life: and yet it is an
external \[principle\] thus separated from internals. - 1748, September
19. This, spirits acknowledged, and saw to be so.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3194.">3194.</span></span>

CONCERNING SIRENS \[WHO ARE\] ADULTERERS. There are \[some\] who are
persuaded that there is no impropriety in harlotry and adultery; this
persuasion they finally confirm by many \[considerations\], so that they
are persuaded to place a proper life therein. Such are siren-adulterers:
for when they have a persuasion that they are decent \[honesti\] and
pious, they can then almost lead wrong \[seduce\] angelic spirits, but
it is granted to angels to recognize \[their character\]. Concerning
these, I spoke with spirits, and it was said that such are from Europe,
where Christianity \[prevails\] \[and\] not from Asiatic, African and
American regions. - 1748, September 19.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3195.">3195.</span></span>

Very many things may be related, concerning their most grievous
punishments; which are so grievous: then also, various with discerptions
of the body, head, natural minds, \[with\] resistance, hence anxiety
\[and\] hardenings \[durationibus\] \[that\] they desire nothing but
their death, yea, exceedingly desire death; but cannot die. Many such
punishments were seen by me, upward; high above the head, a little in
front, on high, but they cannot be described, on account of \[their\]
cruelty. These were shown me for continuous hours: one \[uno vel una\]
after another \[was punished\]. - 1748, September 19.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3196.">3196.</span></span>

It was shown me, by manifest spiritual ideas, how such precipitate
themselves into dreadful deaths, or deadly infernal \[things\]. On one
side was presented pleasantness, and felicity, how it opens out into
very many felicities, and thus into more interior felicities, and
towards heaven with all liberty, so that it desires nothing else than to
enter interiorly, and more interiorly into the love of the spouse
\[conjugial love\], thus into the interior, more interior, and inmost
heaves: thus felicity leads, invites, and desires; and because love is
of such a nature. Such \[a principle\] is most free, for the Lord thus
leads man to himself. Wherefore also, never in the universe, is such
delight given as \[pertains to\] conjugial love, which is known from
externals alone: what may not be in the interior, if there are such
\[delights in externals\]: and such conjugial love is heaven on earth.
The reason that it is so, is, first, the love of the Lord towards the
church, next, the propagation of the human race, which is the seminary
of heaven, next, also the existence and subsistence of the universe, or
creation and preservation \[arise\] from conjugial love.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3197.">3197.</span></span>

Next I perceived also in spiritual idea how \[it is\] with love not
conjugial, or the persuasion that the conjugial debt \[duty\] is of no
moment: \[to wit\] that they still place their pleasant and free
\[principle\] in contrary \[things\]: very many of such are in
Christendom. It is not so amongst the gentiles of the world \[universai
orbis\]. I perceived in spiritual idea how by that pleasantness and
persuasive free \[principle\] they remove themselves more and more from
heaven and felicity, yea, as I plainly saw in the other \[life\], till
\[they reach\] at last the most dreadful infernal things, so that
nothing of a human principle remains, but every deadly \[principle\],
which can never be described on account of its horribleness \[ob
horrores\]. A certain spirit, who was with me in spiritual idea, ran
forward in front in the plane of the face, to a considerable distance,
where were \[spirits\] of such a character. He cried out that he would
show them of what character is their love, thus retaining \[tenens\] the
idea. At first a most pleasant \[principle\] was experienced by them
\[iis obvenit\]; but when by degrees he came more to the front the idea
was continued, as if \[it represented\] their progress to hell, and at
length ended in such horror that they could have \[endured it\] no
longer. For they saw the most dreadful hell before \[their\] eyes. Hence
may be apparent what \[is the nature of\] the conjugial debt. - 1748,
September 19.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3198.">3198.</span></span>

Also \[those women\] who observe the conjugial debt, but still do not
love \[their\] husbands, but despise them, and at length count them as
nothing, were first represented \[significatae\] to me by a cock, and
afterwards by a tiger or sort of cat, of obscure color, in which there
was a slight grayish \[griseum\] color \[shade\]. It was thus signified
that such thus begin like cocks, with much speaking and scolding,
\[and\] afterwards are turned into the nature of such a tiger; and
inasmuch as there are many of such a character, it was said that they
still love \[their\] children, but this is not storge or love of
children any more than \[is that\] of the brutes, which thus love
\[their\] children, and indeed more than themselves. Such also are those
with whom there is no spiritual principle in \[their\] natural. - 1748,
September 19. Such also were in front, a little above, who had not even
a spark of conjugial love. They also restrain the conjugial
\[principle\] because they have no such love. An after consideration
comes in to confirm \[this\] that thus they are able to command.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3199.">3199.</span></span>

CONCERNING THOSE WHO IN LIFE INSTRUCTED \[informaverint\] OTHERS. It was
observed several times that \[certain ones\] stand on the head, and I am
informed by experience that they are those who have derived that sphere
with them from life, that they should instruct others, such as preachers
and others, not only good but also evil. - 1748, September 19.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3200.">3200.</span></span>

THAT EVIL PREACHERS CAN ALSO PREACH WITH PERSUASION AND SPURIOUS ZEAL.
Again, there was one who \[was\] reduced into the state of zeal which we
had in congregations; and spirits said that such was \[his\] zeal that
they could scarce have endured it its quality was represented
\[significatus\] to me by the offensive smell \[faetorem\] of the teeth.
- 1748, September 19.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3201-3250](sd35)
