[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sd52)  [Next](sd54) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766143007/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Spiritual Diary*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1758\], tr. by Bush,
Smithson and Buss \[1883-9\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Spiritual Diary

<span class="margnote"><span id="4101.">4101.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE MOST DECEITFUL. It is astonishing that the most deceitful
above the head, who had been pontiffs and the like, cannot refrain, as
soon as anything guileless and innocent appears, from laying hold of
something as a means or occasion of ensnaring. When anything of this
kind occurred, as, for instance, when I counted footsteps in the street;
they immediately seized a wicked subject by which to carry on their
machinations, and it was perceived that they would fain murder whatever
innocent person came in their way. But they were still of such a quality
as to be in fear for themselves, for as often as they did this they were
published. They spoke among themselves, as in the state of their worldly
life, that because I was against the Pope, I should be borne to the
inquisition. - 1748, November 29.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4102.">4102.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE SPEECH OF SPIRITS. The spirits round about me, wherever
they were, kept up a conversation respecting some matter known to me
during the whole night, so that there was a kind of unceasing chat
embracing ratiocinations. The effect was to awaken me repeatedly from
sleep, and their speech flowed into certain representations made in
dreams. They then said to me that they could talk in a continued stream,
and that they had at command such a multitude of arguments and
reasonings on the subject as would be incredible. I perceived that there
was with them such an indefinite series of reasonings on one topic as
would exceed all belief. It was perceived also and said that evil
spirits frame various shadowy things which do not truly relate to the
subject in hand, and these they connect with numerous other shadows and
phantasies of the subject of discourse and which can only be taken as
the imagery of dreams just spoken of, and so on. - 1748, November 30. On
other occasions, they seem to converse with each other altogether as
men, for they do not reflect that it is through ideas. With me, however,
the interaction was wholly like that of one man with another.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4103.">4103.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE POSTERITY OF JACOB AND THE CHURCH. It was insinuated that
when at length they became so immersed in falsities, that nothing but
the false occupied their minds which happened in the time of Jacob, that
then they were vastated, as those are wont to be in the other life who
are in the life of the persuasions of the false, so that they knew
nothing of true worship, and knowledge was then first insinuated into
their mind. This was done from their being in such ignorance and such a
confused mental obscurity, that they neither knew moral nor civil law,
nor that they were forbidden to commit adultery, to kill, or to steal.
They could not be made to know this either by miracles or by prophets,
because such was the life of their cupidities derived from Jacob. -
1748, November 30.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4104.">4104.</span></span>

CONCERNING LOVE. It was perceived that to him who, in the life of the
body, loves his neighbor as himself, it is given in the other life to
love his neighbor better than himself, for the goods of love are then
indefinitely increased. Such is the life of the body, that one cannot go
beyond the point of loving his neighbor as himself, because he is in
corporeals, but with those who have passed out of this life, the love is
more pure and becomes at length angelic, and this is to love others more
than one's self. - 1748, November 30.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4105.">4105.</span></span>

THAT THE LOVE IS THE LIFE. In conversing with spirits respecting love,
it was said that the love is the life and that without love there is no
life, and because spirits are of contrary natures, so there are contrary
loves, as the love of self and the world, whence arise corresponding
delights; and it was perceived by them that unless there be a love of a
particular object, or a cupidity, which is the continuation of love, or
unless there is some delight peculiar to a certain love, there is no
life; which is better perceived in the world of spirits then among men.
They then said from apperception, that there was nothing of life, unless
there were love and consequent delight, and that they knew not that any
degree of life could be given on any other condition; and that as
nothing could vegetate without the vernal and summer heat, so nothing
could live in the spiritual world without love. Hence it was made
manifest that true love is the alone life, and that there is no other
life than that of love. - 1748, December 1.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4106.">4106.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE ANCIENT CHURCH. The Ancient Church, which is called Noah,
and its continuation which is called Shem, is also above the head, but
not so high. Those who were of it spoke with me saying they were of the
Ancient Church. They flowed in pleasantly through the region of the head
into the pectoral region, in the direction of the heart, but not quite
reaching it. - 1748, December 1.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4107.">4107.</span></span>

CONCERNING A CIVIL STATE. There are those in the other life who live in
a so-called civil state, which is pleasant and agreeable, and in which I
was for some time. Living in their own agreeable and pleasant sphere,
they fear no one, and when any spirit not good approaches, they speak
civilly with him as one who is too good to say or do aught that is
amiss; such a spirit is then himself also reduced into a civil state,
and either demeans himself as good, or departs, for the mind or
disposition of the one affects the other. They never in that state say
that anyone is bad; though still it is not a state of dissimulation, but
of sincerity, for they speak from civil promptings, and it is the state
of those who in the world have lived happily and well in the conjugial
relation, and have loved children. - 1748, December 1.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4108.">4108.</span></span>

Others who were evil upon coming among them could not remain there,
because they were put in pain, as I heard from certain ones that they
could not be there, as civil things affected them unpleasantly, just as
they did in the world, and thus they showed themselves evil. They were
very averse to that kind of companionship. In like manner in the world
when anyone has a good opinion of a bad man, he \[the latter\] cannot
well refrain from appearing accordingly; wherefore as their interiors
are fully disclosed in the other life, they are pained and thus
separate. They are prompted to act out their evil, but dare not.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4109.">4109.</span></span>

CONCERNING THINGS IN THE OTHER LIFE. It was observed and insinuated,
that whatever a man had done in the life of the body, this returns in
the other life, for there are perpetual changes of states, through which
spirits are led, so that there is no state which had existed in the life
of the body, but it then returns; thus the hatreds and other things,
which one had not only done, but thought; nay, everything of the kind
which had occurred from infancy to the extreme limit of life. Even the
very persons against whom he had cherished enmity, either open or
concealed, are instantaneously present, so lamentable are the states
into which they are driven. But, what is peculiarly observable, all the
evil deeds and thoughts of the evil return to the very life, but with
the good and those who were in faith it is not so; all these states of
good, of friendship, and of love return with the highest delight and
happiness. - 1748, December 1. Experience, in this respect, testifies
that evil does not reign with me.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4110.">4110.</span></span>

These states return often, and because they are many, as, for instance,
in which the man had cherished open or latent enmities, pretended
friendships, and so on, they occur with much variety, as also other
evils, the indulgence of worldly and selfish love, the commission of
adulteries, etc. All these not only return, but are manifested before
spirits and angels with shame and grief. He thus undergoes not one kind
of punishment, but many; and as often as it occurs, and his character is
exposed, he suffers a punishment conformed to his evil and iniquity; but
still one general kind of punishment, and consequently one hell remains
for him, which is that of his ruling evil and iniquity. - 1748, December
1.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4111.">4111.</span></span>

Such punishments continue for a long time, even through many years and
many ages, as, for instance with the dragon David; and they carry with
them a process of vastation, but yet a final vastation follows, by which
he is dissociated from those of such a character, and because he is then
in scarcely any society he sits in darkness and in torture, with very
little life, until he becomes capable of rendering some kind of use;
thus he continually descends to the ultimate of his punishment.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4112.">4112.</span></span>

But with the upright and the good the case is different. They
continually ascend through the delights and felicities before mentioned,
and thus mount to the Angelic heaven. - 1748, December 1.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4113.">4113.</span></span>

CONCERNING ACTUAL EVIL. I have perceived that so long as evil is in the
thought only, it does not so \[frequently\] recur; but that so soon as
it becomes actual, it passes into the will, when both the thought and
the will, thus, the whole man, conspire \[to the evil\]. Anything may be
extirpated from the thought before it enters the will, but when it is in
the will it is not easily extirpated, for it then also occupies the
thought. - 1748, December 1.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4114.">4114.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE MOST ANCIENT CHURCH. There was exhibited to me a flamy
light above the forehead, and those of the Most Ancient Church spoke
with me, saying, that they have such a light, and much more intense, in
which they dwell. - 1748, December 7. 4114. 1-2. CONCERNING EACH KIND OF
LIFE OF A SPIRIT. There are with a spirit two lives which he takes with
him from the body, and which remain, as it is not given him to use the
corporeal memory; namely, the life of persuasion and the life of
cupidities. As respects the life of persuasions, I wondered that spirits
could converse with each other, as they do, and that whatever they think
and speak they are able to confirm by so many reasons or reasonings as a
man could scarcely believe; for they adduce so many and so various
confirmations, which they have at hand, that I have often been filled
with wonder \[at witnessing it\]. I was given to understand, that
confirmations so various and manifold, which are ever in readiness and,
as it were, present to them, are from the life of persuasions; for when
a spirit is in persuasion, he immediately excites or suggests
confirmations from a man's memory, that is from the things stored up in
his memory; for the persuasion of a thing excites, as anyone may be
aware \[who reflects\]. Hence proceed their discourses replete with such
multiplied confirmations. But with men whose interiors are not opened so
that one can speak with spirits, the case is different; for to him such
spirits apply themselves as are of a nearly similar persuasion; for if
two contrary persuasions were present, there would be a discord. With me
it is otherwise, in order that I may know the qualities of spirits. When
a man changes his persuasions then other spirits apply themselves to
him; wherefore, whatever be the man's persuasion, such is the persuasion
of the spirit, and the spirit continually excites confirmations.
Moreover the spirit that is with a man is led into his persuasion, and
adopts a similar, as I have learnt by experience. The life of cupidities
is distinct from this, but wherever cupidity has induced a persuasion,
then each life acts. Wherefore it is good for a man not to be persuaded
concerning falsities, but to be confirmed in truths; for he is not
easily brought to renounce a pre-assumed persuasion.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4115.">4115.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE LIFE OF PERSUASION. The life which remains after death is
the life of persuasion and the life of cupidity. When a spirit is in the
life of his persuasion he excites everything in the memory of a man,
that is in the conformity with the persuasion, just as if the man knew
it from himself. This it was given to know by experience when spirits
were present in their persuasion, as they then excited whatever was
conformable to the persuasion, so that I sometimes wondered whence
flowed such prudence, astuteness, cunning, and keenness of discovery in
regard to things which they had never known. I supposed it to be taken
from the corporeal memory \[of spirits\], but the fact is not so; it
comes from the memory of the man which is made subservient to them; the
spirit merely comes into his persuasion, when immediately whatever is
conformable is excited. That there are such lives with spirits, that
they are a kind of remaining instinct from the confirming and persuading
things of the bodily life, that by means of this instinct the spirit
excites other confirmations, with many things besides, and that much
more acutely than in the life of the body, things too which were
previously unknown - all this was made evident by much experience.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4116.">4116.</span></span>

There is also a life of cupidity which is altogether a different kind of
life; for the life of persuasion has respect to the true and the false,
and the confirmation of the true, being contracted from the knowledges
of things, and many other sources, but the life of cupidity has respect
to evil and good, thus to whatever is called love.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4117.">4117.</span></span>

It may be manifest that persuasion, in the life of the body, is able to
subdue cupidities, as, for example, when anyone persuades himself that a
particular kind of food is more wholesome than another, although it may
be of no taste at all, or of a disagreeable taste, so that previous to
the persuasion he may have actually nauseated it; still he gives it the
preference, and in process of time it becomes palatable to him, and even
agreeable, so that he is able to prefer the nauseous and the bitter to
the sweet. Thus he subdues cupidity; and similar is the case in other
things. The life of cupidities, however, acts in a great measure to
induce persuasion; for that which is loved perniciously is confirmed on
many grounds, even until the man is persuaded, which might be
illustrated and established by innumerable proofs.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4118.">4118.</span></span>

The life of cupidities remains to spirits, and excites various
cupidities with man, and thus also confirmations, as was made manifest
in many ways.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4119.">4119.</span></span>

There are spirits with a man who are in a like persuasion and a like
cupidity, and who may be called the subjects of many; for the persuasion
and the cupidity of the man immediately excite those who are \[in this
respect\] like him. Every single idea represents the whole man, thus the
whole spirit, whose idea or image being presented, he is immediately
present himself. Such is the order \[of things\] in the other life, as
was evinced to me by a multitude of proofs. Yet there still remains a
common persuasion, or a ruling persuasion, thus also a ruling cupidity.
Thus spirits of a like kind are with man, and they remain with him until
his persuasion and his cupidity are changed, or till he is reformed and
becomes regenerate, when, as a consequence, other spirits succeed \[and
take their place\].

<span class="margnote"><span id="4120.">4120.</span></span>

I spoke with spirits on these points, and they could not but acknowledge
that the fact was so, for all experience agrees with it; only spirits
suppose that they produce, from their own corporeal memory, the things
which they utter, and the fact of this impression was sometimes clearly
evinced to me.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4121.">4121.</span></span>

THAT ALL AND SINGULAR THINGS OF THE WORD ARE VESSELS. The contents of
the Word, viewed in the literal sense, are most general vessels, indeed
so general, and some parts so extremely general, that celestial and
spiritual things, or goods and truths innumerable, may be insinuated
thereby. Externally viewed \[these vessels\] are unsightly, because so
very general but inasmuch as men are of such a quality that they gather
their wisdom solely from sensual things, and have no disposition to know
aught else than things corporeal and most general, therefore it is that
there are such vessels; such, for instance, is the proposition that all
evil is from the Lord, when in fact no evil, not the very least \[is
from Him\]; but because man would fain be wise from corporeals and from
darkness \[itself\], therefore it is thus confirmed that the Lord
governs and foresees all things, and in this way he who simply believes,
without any restriction that there is nothing which is not of the Lord,
thus that it is He alone who does all things, may \[safely\] remain in
such an opinion, as also that the Lord tempts man, and many other things
of the like kind.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4122.">4122.</span></span>

At the same time truths may be applied to those vessels, as that the
Lord does and foresees everything, and is omnipotent, but that evils
accrue mediately through evil spirits; as also that He so orders and
disposes, that all and singular evils are converted into good. In this
way one and the same vessels receives contrary senses, and thus applies
itself to every kind of truth, for it is a truth that no evil can exist
without the Lord's permission. It is a truth also that whatever he
permits takes place through the agency of evil spirits, and that he
would not permit it, were not man so evil that without evil he cannot be
reformed. It is moreover a truth, that there is no evil from the Lord.
In order therefore that the words of the Word may be applicable to
everyone \[according to his state\], they are of this most general
character, in consequence of which they become available to each
individual. Upon these points I conversed with spirits. - 1748, December
8.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4123.">4123.</span></span>

CONCERNING \[MY\] REVELATIONS. There are spirits who are averse to
anything being said concerning the things revealed \[to me\], but it was
replied that they are instead of miracles, and that without them men
would not know the character of the book, nor would they buy it, or read
it, or understand it, or be affected by it, or believe it - in a word,
that they would remain in ignorance \[of the whole subject\] nor would
wish to hear anything respecting the interiors of the Word, which they
regard as mere phantasies. Such as are simply men of learning will for
the most reject them. - 1748, December 9.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4124.">4124.</span></span>

THAT THE KINDS OF CONJUGIAL FELICITIES ARE INDEFINITE. Some time ago,
while in an intermediate state between waking and sleep, I had a
manifest perception, that the universal genera of conjugial felicities
are indefinite. This was related to spirits, and it was said that the
truth on this head can never be perceived and acknowledged, but in an
interior state. Wherefore some of them were remitted by the Lord into an
interior state, and thence spoke with me, saying, that they indeed
apperceived the genera of the felicities of conjugial love to be
indefinite in point of number. - 1748, December 10.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4125.">4125.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE MEMORY OF SPIRITS. If it were permitted to spirits to be
in corporeal memory, they could not possibly be among other spirits, for
then evil spirits would immediately know whatever of evil anyone had
thought or done; for all ideas are communicated in the other life. Thus
they would bring forth from his memory nothing else than evils and
falses, and thus would rush upon him and continually infest and torment
him. Wherefore the Lord alone knows what man thinks and does prior to
his becoming a spirit. - 1748, December 11.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4126.">4126.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE FACE OF A MONKEY. There appeared to me the face of a
monkey, and it was said that those are of such a quality who apply to
themselves what belongs to others, in order to deceive them. In the
other life spirits can impersonate anyone, and present not only the idea
of the man, but also images or representatives of his speech and other
things, as also whatever anyone may be inclined to favor. - 1748,
December 11.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4127.">4127.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE HELL OF THE UNHAPPY. Being asleep, I was infested by a
certain one who was changed into a kind of nondescript monster, composed
of a body at once human and bestial, and distinguished by other
frightful features which cannot be described. From these, and other
things of like nature it may be inferred how the evil, in an interior
sphere, are infested and tormented.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4128.">4128.</span></span>

Angelic spirits then subsequently spoke with me in my sleep by means of
representations, but the representations were such that I clearly
perceived them while asleep, in their entire series, and what they
signified, so that I was myself altogether in the same speech, which,
however, was not properly speech, but vision, accompanied with a
manifest preception of the object in its reality. It was thus indicated
why those direful sights were seen by me, and such things suffered. The
spectacle was sufficiently prolonged in duration, with a clear
perception, and I answered by a like intuitive speech. But when I awoke
I could not understand a single item \[of what I had seen\], still less
declare it. I wished to recall it, but could not, because they were such
things as do not fall under the sense that is expressed by speech; but I
learned from them what is the state of the blessed in an interior
sphere, namely, that their communication with each other through the
representatives of interior thought is such as cannot be described;
wherefore their felicity is supreme, since similar things are conjoined
with the perception of felicity, which is something that is absolutely
unutterable. - 1748, December 22.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4129.">4129.</span></span>

THAT EVIL SPIRITS ARE BOUND TO OBEY. While speaking with myself, or
thinking with myself, concerning the import of the word rib of which the
woman was built, evil spirits spoke and thought with themselves
precisely as I did. Shortly after they said that they had done so, and
yet that subsequently to this they acted in opposition to me. Hence it
was given to know, that while the Lord rules the thoughts and speech of
man through the angels, evil spirits cannot but think in like manner,
and that then they know no otherwise than that it is from themselves.
The case is similar with the preacher of bad life, when he commends what
is good; evil spirits think and excite the same, but when the preacher
is in his true life, then evil spirits have the ascendancy. Thus it is
clearly manifest how the evil bring forth good things. - 1748, December
29.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4130.">4130.</span></span>

CONCERNING EVIL SPIRITS. That evil spirits did continually and for a
long course of years, by cunning and malice, by deceits, threats, and
innumerable machinations, labor to destroy the interior things of the
Word, which machinations, from their long continuance, I am unable to
describe in detail, \[was matter of distinct observation\].

<span class="margnote"><span id="4131.">4131.</span></span>

I observed moreover, that spirits and angels are never able to discover
or utter anything of truth from themselves; as often as they were left
to themselves, with a view to such discovery, they were wholly
incompetent to it. Whatever they lay hold of, it is not truth, as, for
instance, in respect to the interior sense of the Word, they were never
able to discover it of themselves, and when the spirits were sometimes
indignant, I perceived that it was in consequence of this inability. The
case is the same with a man, who is never able of himself to do anything
good or to think anything true, though it seems to himself that he does,
but the impression is false; as when one trusts to his own prudence, he
thinks the result to be due to himself, and yet it tends to evil, if not
in the life of the body, as it seems to him, yet still in the other
life. It hence appears evident that all good and truth is from the Lord.
- 1749, January 4.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4132.">4132.</span></span>

The state of spirits and angels is, in general, a state of comparative
sleep, for since they are in the present \[instead of the past or
future\], they distinctly perceive things as present \[like one
asleep\], but he who sees all things from eternity, and the series of
all results, is in a state of wakefulness, which fully holds of the Lord
alone. That it is a sleep was shown me from the circumstance of my
falling into a sleep with them, in which state I supposed that things
were really so and so, when yet it was afterwards given to know that
such was not the case. Thus spirits and angels can of themselves do
nothing which is good and true. - 1749, January 7.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4133.">4133.</span></span>

THAT THE THINGS WRITTEN BY ME WOULD APPEAR HYPOTHETICAL, AND MARKED BY
BLEMISHES. While in a delightful dream, I seemed to be present at a
great entertainment, and after a time to be clad in very white
hair-cloth, but without any other garments. Prompted by an emotion of
shame, I went out in order to put on additional raiment, and seeming to
myself to be forbidden to assume one of a dark gray color, I handed
another to a servant \[ut stalla saxer\]. <span
id="fr_71"></span>[4133-1](#fn_71) They arrayed me with this, which was
of a slightly yellow color, with long sleeves, the right marked by
spots. Having awoke I spoke concerning the dream with the posterity of
the Most Ancient Church, who were above the head, inquiring as to its
signification. They supposed the import to be that the things written
were not to be confirmed, as I was doing it, by parallel places, but
that if left naked \[or simple\] it would be as if clothed with the very
white sackcloth, whereas, if confirmed by so many \[parallel\] sayings,
it would be as if clothed with the other garment. But it was said and
shown in various ways that it ought to be managed in the mode I had
adopted, for the world is such at this day, that it altogether prefers
such a garment to the hair-cloth described. It was shown that the yellow
color of the garment signifies that which is hypothetical.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4134.">4134.</span></span>

It was shown moreover by various spiritual representations, how they
would look upon what was written if destitute of the parallel
confirmatory matter which was now to be read. These spiritual
representations were effected by a pure light, variously radiating, so
swiftly and beautifully as if it were something spiritual, and that too
by rapid changes of form, one spiritual form passing into another in a
wonderful manner. Spiritual speech, however, is representative,
expressing spiritual things. - 1749, January 9.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4135.">4135.</span></span>

There was shown the right part of a human back naked about the arms, by
which was said to be signified, that that only is to be shown at
present, because the Most Ancient Church alone is treated of, while yet
the Word is such as to represent the anterior parts of a man, because it
embraces everything in the universe, both in heaven and the earths, from
eternity to eternity, each one in particular and everything in each
\[singula in singulis\]. - 1749, January 9, which things are anterior.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4136.">4136.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE PULSATION OF THE HEART. It was given me to feel, with the
utmost distinctness, the pulsations of the heart in the occiput. The
pulse of the heart of the spirituals is rapid, vibratory, and strong;
that of the celestials is slow, tacit, and non-vibratory, almost like
the pulse of the human heart. The momentum of the spiritual pulse is to
that of the celestial as two and a half to one. The reason is, that the
celestial pulse is continued through the spirituals, and thus issues
from the celestial. - 1749, January 10.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4137.">4137.</span></span>

HOW THE CASE IS WITH EVILS AND FALSES. Whatever at any time flows from
the proprium of angels, spirits, and men is evil and false. They can
never produce anything, not even the least particle of goodness and
truth. Just so far as they are left to themselves, just so much of the
evil and false is produced, therefore so much of misfortune or disaster,
which if it does not appear at once will yet manifest itself afterwards.
As far \[on the other hand\] as anyone acts from the Lord, so far is he
in the production of goodness and truth, because the Lord is goodness
and truth. Hence it appears from whence flow evils and falses; for the
evil, however much they may will it, cannot do good; thus in general as
to alls and singulars. - 1749, January 11. It was most distinctly
perceived that the fact is as now stated.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4138.">4138.</span></span>

CONCERNING MISFORTUNES. I perceived that no disasters or fortuitous
evils, as they are called, can happen to a man with whom the Lord is:
for when by the agency of evil spirits who were present, a restive horse
threatened injury \[to his rider\], those spirits were suddenly cast
down. They that were with me observed, that from such things it might be
perceived what kind of spirits they are who bring misfortunes with them,
which was afterwards confirmed. - 1749, January 14.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4139.">4139.</span></span>

CONCERNING EVIL SPIRITS. It was perceived why evil spirits are more
cunning than the good, or the sons of the kingdom, and why the evil
assault and the good only defend or resist; namely, because the evil
think nothing but evil and how to injure; in this consists their
delight, but never in good. - 1749, January 22. THAT SPIRITS THOUGH
ABSENT MAY APPEAR AS PRESENT. I have thought in connection with spirits
concerning the fact that spirits may appear present though at a great
distance remote, and that they operate as much in the presence of others
as if they were actually there, nor can it be believed to be otherwise,
as their presence is felt. The case is like that of the sound of the
lips on the ear of one at a distance, in which the perception is as if
the speaker were present to the ear, while yet it is merely the sound
made by the throat and tongue \[of one who is more or less remote\]. So
also is it in regard to the sight which extends itself into the
distance, while the eye remains in its place. Thus it is with thought
which can expatiate abroad in the universe, although its seat is in the
human brain; for thought affects one as sound does the ear, and where
the thought it, there the spirit is supposed to be. It is, however, an
appearance, for place cannot be predicated of thought, but only of the
organic substance from which thought flows; and because thought affects
\[the percipient\], nothing else is believed than that the spirit itself
is locally there. It is therefore an appearance, although the effect is
the same as if there was an actual presence. - 1749, February 2.
CONCERNING THE NEW CHURCH CALLED ENOSCH. - \[Gen. iv. 26\]. Certain
persons spoke with me who were of the church called Enosch, Gen. 4:26,
and spoken of in the end of that chapter, which church held charity as
the principal point of faith. It was perceived that they approached very
gently, near the head upwards, and that they spoke modestly, saying that
they lived in charity, among themselves, and performed offices of
friendship to others, but that they did not think so very much
concerning the Lord, though still something; from which it appeared that
their charity was the charity of friendship, and but in a slight degree
the charity of faith. They live in quiet, and like good citizens,
causing inconvenience to no one. - 1749, February 4.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4140.">4140.</span></span>

THE SPEECH OF ANGELIC SPIRITS. THE THOUGHT OF ANGELIC SPIRITS. It is
scarcely possible to describe, even in the most general way, how it is
that ideas are variously bound or tied to things, and that they inhere
in things, which things are a kind of vessels or centers, from which are
numerous issues like rays from the sun. If a thing true and good be
assumed, then that truth and good may be represented in a variety of
ways, and their ideas may be with them, and in them, and thence diffuse
themselves into many other things. Representations also may be formed in
which and to which ideas may be annexed, as white or golden
candlesticks, variously decorated with representative ornament. Thus,
for example, a candlestick so formed may serve for a subject or vessel
from whence may flow innumerable varieties of other subjects represented
at the same time. From whatever affection they think, as from a sigh,
from a laugh, and so forth, in that thing there may be latent multitudes
of other things simultaneously present and inhering; for each thing of
the kind, as a laugh, for instance, exists from many causes, and in
these causes inhere also, as a formative power, the causes of causes,
which are unknown to man, and can never be explored. There are moreover
formed from things various and multiplied spheres, as various spheres of
goodness, with their own light, with the tempering of light, which
exists in innumerable shades and degrees. Such spheres are produced also
by means of affections, and the countless forms of affections; as also
by the bare cogitative or ideal removal of those things which it is
desired should be absent, and which accordingly recede. In this manner
the spheres of objects and of representations are tempered, so that it
is ineffable to what degree these varieties exist; indeed they may be
called, as to number, indefinites of indefinites of indefinites. - 1749,
February 12. Thus, for instance, Ps. 144:12, "That our daughters may be
as corner-stones polished after the similitude of a palace;" daughters
here stand for goods, which may be represented to and by angelic ideas
to the very life in innumerable particulars, but not otherwise.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4141.">4141.</span></span>

CONCERNING EXCREMENTS. I saw how those female spirits who had lived in
pleasures labor in vile excrements. Those filthy bodily excrements they
continue to void, and it was said that they greatly delight in them, or
that they were pleasant to them, for \[corrupt\] pleasures are turned
\[in the other life\] into such things. Others, however, do not feel
this delight \[from such a source\], but on the contrary something
offensive and revolting. It was said that those of this class, whether
males or females, are they who from assumed principles, prefer
voluptuous enjoyments to all others. - 1749, February 14.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4142.">4142.</span></span>

CONCERNING MANSIONS. I have sometimes observed in sleep that in my
garden at Stockholm there were various mansions of doves near the earth
with stone entrances and enclosures and chambers of beautiful
construction within. I wondered that there were such things in my garden
and yet I had not known it; and that at a different height \[above the
earth\], to which it was necessary to ascend by ladders \[a similar
sight was to be seen\], and the same also at a third elevation, where
were shepherds, meadows, and groves. During the last night also I had a
vivid perception in a dream of a mansion near the earth in a garden in
which was a chamber that I saw, and with the tenant of which I spoke in
my dream. On awaking I spoke with the spirits around me, who answered me
as if being themselves in a dream. Near the earth were artisans with
whom a conversation was held concerning a census. - 1749, February 16.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4143.">4143.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE MATERIALS OF WORDS. It happened that when I took certain
words from my collection to insert them in what I was writing, and when
for that purpose I took but a single word from the things which were not
in my memory, there then occurred a change of spirits. Other spirits
succeeded, and the former complained much and with no little lamentation
that thus they could not be present but were driven away because
something foreign had occurred to me. The reason was, that spirits
succeeded who indulged in words, or the materials of speech, while the
former were accustomed solely to thought. I was thus taught by
experience that owing to a mutually contrary sphere these two classes of
spirits could not be present together; for those who inhere in the
materials of the Word take away the faculty of thinking from those who
wish only to think. But the angelic spirits removed them, because they
are within the sphere of thought and thus control the interiors of
thought. But spirits wished to control the exteriors of thought, which
power is now taken from them, because they act by persuasions. - 1749,
February 17. Hence it appears that rational spirits cannot be present
together with scientific, and that they are altogether distinct from
each other.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4144.">4144.</span></span>

CONCERNING PROPRIUM. Spirits are indignant and complain when they
perceive that another leads them. As soon as they observe this it
becomes intolerable to them. Yet they care nothing for it when they do
not observe it; they then think that they lead themselves, or that they
think, speak, and act from themselves. This sometimes happens even when
they are led by others, and the fact is shown them; but they cannot bear
it even when they observe that the teaching is from me. Thus it appears
how difficult it is to persuade them that they do not live of
themselves. Altogether different is the condition of the angels, who do
not wish to think, speak, or act from themselves. - 1749, February 19.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4145.">4145.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE MOST ANCIENT CHURCH. There was to the Most Ancient Church
an internal respiration, thus from the internal man, who was in consort
even as to the external with spirits and angels. But afterwards the way
was closed, and the respiration became external, wherefore all
communication, speech, etc., with spirits ceased. - 1749, February 19.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4146.">4146.</span></span>

THE DISCOURSES OF ANGELS FALL INTO SUCH REPRESENTATIONS AS ARE IN THE
WORD. It was sometimes shown in sleep that the spiritual angels in
conversing together said, that the things written by me were not true,
or to that effect. I then seemed to myself in sleep to be guilty of
scortation and even of adultery; the import of what they said being thus
represented in dreams. From these and similar things it may appear, that
angelic discourses fall into such representations as occur in the Word,
nay into such terms as are found there; which is confirmed also by the
circumstance, that it was given to know the fact, as after a sleep thus
infested I thought it and they then acknowledged it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4147.">4147.</span></span>

So also I was prompted to bite my tongue when they thought against
interior things; and other things of like kind.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4148.">4148.</span></span>

That dreams, when representative, are from this source, may be readily
inferred. - 1749, February 21.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4149.">4149.</span></span>

THAT HOLY TRUTHS ARE TO BE FOUND IN A CERTAIN PLACE OF THE HEAD. When
angelic spirits spoke respecting the circumstance, that it was not the
true internal sense which was written in those days, or in that day, it
was given them to inspect whether the assertion were true. They made
their researches deeply and profoundly, and with a clear sense that the
truth was then in a certain region, to which the thoughts penetrated, in
the left side of the head, where are truths and falsities, just as in
the right side of the head are cupidities. It was, as I remarked, a
certain place in the left region of the head, and it was said to them
that they should search there, which was done \[and with the result
described\]. Hence it may appear that certain truths and falsities are
to be found in certain places on the left side of the head. I wondered
at this, but could come to no other conclusion, but that such is the
fact; so that truths and falses have their own places in the head. Where
the false exists then that part of the head is indurated and is pained
even to torture when inspected or explored by angelic spirits, but when
truths exist, then the part is soft and free from pain, and may thus be
inspected by angelic spirits. - 1749, February 21.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4150.">4150.</span></span>

CONCERNING SPIRITS WHO THINK \[MUCH\] OF THE FUTURE. There are spirits
who ponder upon the future, which they do from a habit and nature
contracted in the world. They appear with a broad face, but it is not
properly a face, but barely the broad area of a face, which becomes
narrow in proportion as the area is narrow, nor is there aught of life
in it; it is, as it were, simply a certain wooden something; neither do
they speak but only think. By their means the sense of a man becomes so
general that he thinks of nothing distinctly, and thus the mind remains
indeterminate. Such is the state of those who give way to prevailing
thoughts of the future, and thence become \[mentally\] emaciated, and
void of understanding. - 1749, February 22.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_71"></span>[4133-1](sd53.htm#fr_71) A Swedish phrase, of
which we are unable to ascertain the import.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4151-4200](sd54)
