[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sd62)  [Next](sd64) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766143007/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Spiritual Diary*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1758\], tr. by Bush,
Smithson and Buss \[1883-9\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Spiritual Diary

<span class="margnote"><span id="4601.">4601.</span></span>

When the sirens arrive, they constantly mutter something, and, at the
same time, they observe whether the muttering becomes fixed anywhere.
They at once note that there must be spirits in that place \[where the
sound becomes fixed\]; and, forth with, by means of their execrable
arts, they thrust themselves into their thoughts, and thus bind them. At
first, they openly follow their thoughts, then they attempt to lead; and
thus they obsess them. The spirits are then in a deplorable state,
without the freedom of thinking; and, unless liberated by the Lord, they
would spiritually perish; for they \[the sirens\] do not desist from
their arts before they enter openly into the thoughts. This it was
granted me to know from much experience, and I wondered how it could
happen; but it was unavoidable, nor could they be expelled thence,
because not approached, as was said, except by the Lord. When they have
occupied the thought, then, in order that anyone who is not willing to
follow them, may be without power to think except in agreement with them
and also from them, they have certain cowbells into which they compel
the spirit to speak, and this continuously, until he falls down as if
hardly master of his own mind. In this manner they make the spirit to
die, as it were; for they are most vicious.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4602.">4602.</span></span>

CONCERNING INFLUX. ((That there is an influx from the spiritual world
into the natural world, and that the natural world subsists thence, as
it had come into existence, is at this day utterly unknown, because it
is not known what the spiritual is, and because \[men\] are not willing
to know anything else than the natural, and, therefore, they, and
especially the learned, deny it \[i. e., the spiritual\]. Wherefore, it
cannot be known that there is influx thence, and that thence is the life
of the thought and of the will.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4603.">4603.</span></span>

Man was created according to the type of each world - his interiors
after the type of the spiritual world, and his exteriors after the type
of the natural world - to the end that they might be conjoined in him.
Hence it is, that his natural world, or microcosm, cannot continuously
live, save by means of an influx from the spiritual world, and that
there is, with everyone, a continual endeavor that each of these worlds
may be conjoined \[with the other\] in him.))

<span class="margnote"><span id="4604.">4604.</span></span>

CONCERNING INFLUX. ((It is according to all appearance that the external
senses of the body, as for instance sight and hearing, inflow into the
thought, and there call forth ideas; for it appears as if objects first
stir the external senses, and thus the internal; and speech likewise.
But, no matter even though this appearance is so strong that it seems
hardly possible to be got rid of, yet is it a fallacy all the while; for
the external, which is gross, can never inflow into the internal, which
is purer; this is contrary to nature; but it is the internal sense,
which, by means of the external sense, feels, and disposes the sensorium
for receiving \[the feeling\] according to its nature. Wherefore, the
sensorium - for instance of sight - adapts itself in a moment to all
objects, which it does not from itself, but from influx out of the
interior; and, moreover, thought and affection, which belong to the
internal sense, determine the sight to objects, which that sense fully
grasps, and which are coordinate with it. Other objects \[i. e., those
not co-ordinate, or on the same level with the sensorium involved\],
transcend it and do not appear.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4605.">4605.</span></span>

Moreover, the externals of man, in like manner with his internals, are
directed by the Lord. The direction of the Lord is in first principles
and in ultimates: hence flow mediates, in their order. That ultimates
are directed, equally with first principles, may be evident from very
many things, concerning which \[see\] where I have spoken concerning
fortune.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4606.">4606.</span></span>

There was often discussion amongst the spirits concerning that
appearance. I heard: and it was constantly decided, by the angels, that
influx by no means takes place from externals to internals, but from
internals to externals, and that it would be contrary to order, and thus
contrary to nature, for the exterior to inflow into the interior, but
vice versa. I also saw a certain one, who had fallen down from a certain
heavenly society, for the reason that he believed, according to the
appearance, reciprocal influx to exist. From these things it is
apparent, how much we are ignorant of, and how much appearance dictates,
as it were, that is different to the truth itself, so that fallacies
carry us away.))

<span class="margnote"><span id="4607.">4607.</span></span>

INFLUX. ((((Man was created after the entire image of the macrocosm -
after the image of heaven, and after the image of the world. His
internal is after the image of heaven, his external after the image of
the world. Wherefore, it was thus provided, by the Divine, that the
Divine may pass over, by means of man, from the spiritual world into the
natural world, and be terminated in the ultimate of nature, to wit, in
the corporeal \[of man\], and thus, through man, there should be
connection of the spiritual world with the natural world; so that, by
means of man, universal nature may glorify the Lord the Creator.))))

<span class="margnote"><span id="4608.">4608.</span></span>

INFLUX. ((Such as man is in his organic principles, such is he in the
whole; for the whole is continuous from those principles just as are the
fibrillae, which flow forth from his principles and spread themselves
throughout the whole body. As those principles are, so are all things
which are from them, thus the whole man; hence the man, however great
his bulk, is such; and hence there is a spiritual sphere around him, not
only from the ideas and affections of the thoughts in the brain, but
from all parts, to wit, from the whole body; for the minutest
particulars make one, by derivation from the principles.))

<span class="margnote"><span id="4609.">4609.</span></span>

CONCERNING IDEAS. Possibly, some wish in themselves to know what and
whence ideas are. To tell it in few words, they are nothing else than
the changes and variations in the interior substances of which the
internal man \[is composed\]; thus they are modifications and
variegations there \[i. e., in the interior substances\]. When the
Lord's life inflows into them, there are presented ideas, which are
called thoughts. He who does not comprehend that the interiors of man
are real substances, and more real than his exteriors, cannot take in
any perception of ideas.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4610.">4610.</span></span>

In the entire body, there is nothing else that constitutes the life than
the changes and variations of the forms in the substances there: as, for
example, when man speaks, then is varied, according to every word, or
sound of articulation, the form of the glottis, of the trachea, of the
lungs, of the throat, of the tongue, of the mouth, and of the plane
about the mouth. Untold numbers of such variations of form are
established there within a minute, although this is in the body. Hence
is the speech of man. What may there not be in the interiors of man,
where all things are more perfect, and thousands and myriads of
variations exist in the time when there is but one in the exteriors, or
corporeals!

<span class="margnote"><span id="4611.">4611.</span></span>

CONCERNING INFLUX. ((There is a continual influx from hell, through
emissary spirits; but, on the other hand, there is a continual influx
from heaven, through angels. These constantly restrict the influx from
hell, and endeavor to turn it aside. But the angels especially inflow
into the truths of faith, and into the goods of his \[the man's\]
charity, which are impressed upon him. Wherefore, if a man has not such
things, and does not care for them, no assistance can be rendered him
from heaven, but, as regards his thoughts, he is carried away like a
stream, by hell. And then the Lord operates, through angels, into his
externals, what are called external bonds, to wit, that he may live
well, and not do evil to the neighbor, lest his wealth should perish
besides his honor, life, reputation, and so forth. Thus he is ruled by
external means.))

<span class="margnote"><span id="4612.">4612.</span></span>

((Spirits were observed a little to the left, in the plane of the crown
of the head, who were there clandestinely, and who drew away the influx
which came from the angels. They were subtle, so that they were able to
do this. Then those things which inflowed, appeared very hard. But they
were detected, and were driven away to the front. There, also, they
practiced the same thing. Afterwards, they were cast into hell. They
were subtle, of insignificant appearance, but malignant.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4613.">4613.</span></span>

That the case is thus - that hell injects evils and falses, and they
pervert goods and truths and assail man by a thousand modes and arts;
and that the Lord, out of heaven, through the angels, averts, carries
away, mitigates, and checks those things, in an instant - I know by many
years experience. This has happened to me constantly for several years.
But the truths of faith must be joined to the goods of charity, into
which they \[the angels\] inflow: otherwise, they have not any plane.))

<span class="margnote"><span id="4614.">4614.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE TONGUE. BY WHOM IT IS AFFECTED WITH PAIN AND RENDERED
RIGID. \[THEIR\] INFLUX. There are spirits, nearly invisible, to the
left, in the plane of the upper part of the head. They make their
appearance in consociation; and these, when they flow near, which is
\[done\] from a far-distant hell, -when these are present, they
immediately affect with pain the top of the left part of the tongue;
and, if they operate more fully, it is still deeper into the tongue,
which, at the part \[on which they operate\], they at length make rigid,
so that I could not have eaten anything on account of the pain which
existed when the tongue was folded at that part; and it also flowed into
my speech, so that I could hardly speak articulately. They operate into
that part of the tongue from which there is a communication from the
left ear, upwards, into the left side of the head, as far as the skull
there, also to the left eye, and, downwards, into the left side of the
breast, right on to certain toes of the sole of the left foot, which
depend on the thigh.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4615.">4615.</span></span>

These are such as in the life of the body spoke much, in external form,
concerning faith and charity, and as feigned piety in every manner, to
the end that they might persuade others that they were \[really\] of
such a character; and yet, inwardly, they were criminal, inclined to
everything nefarious, and destitute of all conscience. And, if those
external appearances could not be produced, or would not remain, they
would then rush into those nefarious and criminal deeds without any
piety, and without any conscience. Such is their true quality.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4616.">4616.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE INTERACTION OF THE SOUL WITH THE BODY. ((Nothing can be
known concerning the interaction of the soul, unless it is known what
the soul is. It is impossible to speak of the interaction of something
known, as is the body, with a thing entirely unknown as to all its
quality. Who, at this day, knows anything as to what the soul is? Do not
some regard it as a flaming something? some as an ethereal something?
others a thinking something, \[existing\] in some such way as in a
subject? others as a pure thinking something, without a substantial form
by which \[to exist\]? What manner of opinion is held concerning the
soul, is plainly manifest from this, that they assign it a seat in some
part of the body: some in the heart, some in some part of the head, in
the corpus striatum in the stomach, in the striated substance, yea, in
the little pineal gland! Yea, indeed, from this it is plain, that, at
this day, it is entirely unknown what the soul is, since \[men\] believe
that, after death, it remains indeed, but is kept in a certain somewhere
(Pu) till the judgment-day. If it should be asked whether it has any
form, it is feared to reply thereto consequently, \[they believe\],
also, that it has no quality.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4617.">4617.</span></span>

Since, therefore, the soul is such an unknown thing, it is not wonderful
that there cannot be known anything concerning its state, and concerning
influx, and concerning interaction - as it is called.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4618.">4618.</span></span>

As respects the soul, concerning which it is said that it lives after
death, it is no other than the man himself, who lives in the body, thus
the purer part of the man, which is conjoined with the body, so that, by
means of the body, it may perform the functions it ought, in the world.
From this the body lives. This, after death, is called a spirit. It
likewise appears, then, entirely in a human form; it has the senses, to
wit, touch, smell, sight, and hearing, much more exquisitely than in the
world. It has appetites, cravings, desires, affections, loves, similar
to those which \[it had\] in the world, but in a less coarse state. It
then thinks, as in the world, but more clearly; speaks with others, and
is in society; and, this being the case, if \[the spirit\] does not
reflect upon the fact that he is in another life, he knows no otherwise
than that he is in the world - as I have heard on several occasions.
This is the soul of man; and, because that is the interior man, to whose
service was formed the body, which, in the world, is supposed to be, and
is called, the man, the interiors of this, also, relate to man, as may
be evident from the angels. These are in interiors, and appear in like
manner as men do, which is also known from the Word, when they appeared
to men. Thence at least, it is evident, that the angelic form is the
human form. The reason that souls appear in the human form, is, because
the universal heaven does not conspire to another form, and because, in
heaven, the case is such, that the universal heaven acts into the least
particulars there, and the least particulars into the universal
\[heaven\]; hence it can never be otherwise than that everyone there,
whether angel or spirit, is in the form of a man. From these things it
is now plain what the soul is; and, inasmuch as, respecting the quality
of the soul, and what it is, man is entirely ignorant in his thought, it
is preferable that it should not be named soul, but, instead thereof,
spirit, since this is the soul of man which lives after death; or, if
you prefer, instead of spirit, let it be called the interior man; for it
is the man himself, which lives. That the matter is so circumstanced, I
ought to know thoroughly, from an eight to nine years almost constant
association with spirits and angels.))

<span class="margnote"><span id="4619.">4619.</span></span>

INFLUX. ((From the Lord, through heaven, inflows all the good of love to
God, because He wishes to conjoin man to Himself out of love or mercy;
and \[it inflows\] by means of the good of love towards the neighbor,
wherein He is present, because Himself is in that love, to wit, \[love\]
towards every man. He inflows into the truths of faith, by means of
those goods; for all those things are called truths which teach what
love is and how it ought to be exercised toward the neighbor, and which
confirm these things, consequently, which cause man to be in charity,
and thus again, which constitute his eternal salvation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4620.">4620.</span></span>

When angels inflow with man, they inflow into his goods, as far as
possible, and, by the goods, into truths, namely, those which man had
impressed on himself and convinced himself of. Thus they restrain him
from falses, and protect him from evils. When they inflow into his
goods, they also inflow into the truths, and when into the truths, they
also inflow into the goods, for they are conjoined. The case is thus:
they inflow into such things as are with man (for they are unable to
call forth others), and, when into the truths, then into the affection
of truth - and the reverse. Especially do they call forth truths by
means of affection. See No. 5893 \[AC\].

<span class="margnote"><span id="4621.">4621.</span></span>

Evil spirits \[inflow\] into the affections of evil and into falses, in
a word, into his \[the man's\] cravings and appetites, and into his
persuasions and principles of the false; and thus they hold him captive.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4622.">4622.</span></span>

If man does not possess truths of faith proceeding from the goods of
charity, angels cannot inflow, because they have no plane. But they
inflow, then, by means of spirits, into his externals, into his regard
for others, proceeding from fear (on account of honors and on account of
gain) lest he lose his reputation, and into his fear of the law and his
life. Thus they hold him in external honorable conduct. This is the
plane into which heaven inflows at this day; but this plane is nothing
in the other life. Man is there in a spiritual world, and, therefore, in
the sphere of his interiors. He is, there, such as he was inwardly, not
as he was outwardly. Externals are there removed. It is thus plain of
what quality a devil was, or of what quality an angel was, in the
world.))

<span class="margnote"><span id="4623.">4623.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE HELL THERE THEY WORSHIP EACH OTHER. There is a hell, at a
medium distance on the left side, where appears an opening, and,
therein, certain ones from that hell. They there mutually compel one
another to worship each other as gods. He who is superior exacts this,
and those who are inferior yield it, and thus, in turn. Occasionally,
some have come thence into the world of spirits, and when they would do
evil to anyone, they suggest that they should make supplication, and
then they would be liberated: but such are cast out with the greatest
abhorrence, and punished; for, in the other life, it is sacrilege to
make supplication to anyone in order that he may not do evil, because
this is \[to pray\] to the devil. The Lord alone ought to be worshipped.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4624.">4624.</span></span>

CONCERNING SIRENS. Sirens are distinguished according to the hells with
which they have established conjunction; For all sirens conjoin
themselves with hells. Among the sirens, are those who do nothing else,
when they flow near, than fix upon certain sonorous words, which they
compel spirits to speak, and this for a long time. They thus, as it
were, mortify the spirit.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4625.">4625.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE HELLS IN KIND. Those who are sent forth, from the hells,
into the world of spirits, appear there in a constant place, at a
constant distance, and in a constant altitude. By this they are
recognized, what kind they are, and whence they come.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4626.">4626.</span></span>

When any hell is opened, or when any devil from thence appears, he
appears deformed according to the quality of the hell. Some, instead of
a face, have only a hairiness or beard; some appear only as a bundle of
teeth; some very hump-backed; some, as it were, beasts, in various
attitudes and gestures. Thence, also, they are recognized.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4627.">4627.</span></span>

INFLUX, LIGHT \[LUX\], THE SENSUAL MAN. (He who does not know about the
interiors of man, can never know of what nature is the communication of
the soul with the body, and this the less, since people have no idea at
all of the soul, and know nothing at all of its quality; consequently,
it is so entirely unknown that it cannot even be defined, save as being
the intellectual and thinking faculty, but of what quality this is, is
unknown, whether it is like a something ethereal, or flaming, or vapory,
or like a very diminutive living something, as reigning in a
hypothetical world of its own, or something else. But very many have no
idea thereof, especially when they know theories concerning it; \[for\]
these quite confuse any ideas respecting it. Inasmuch as it is unknown
of what quality man is as to his interiors, \[let it be stated that\] it
is the corporeal of man that sees terrestrial things and those things
which are of the world, hears those that are speaking, tastes or
relishes those things which are eaten, smells those things that float in
the air, and that feels by touch throughout the entire body. This is
man's corporeal. This dies and becomes a corpse, with those things which
most directly concur in establishing those sensations. The corporeal is
also every action and gesture, and also speech wherefore, it is,
likewise, the muscles, \[and that envelope\] which is properly
denominated flesh. The interiors of man, which do not die, succeed one
another in the following order. There is the sensual, there is the
natural, there is the spiritual-natural: these are of the external of
man. Afterward there is the celestial of the spiritual, the celestial,
and the inmost, which, because it immediately receives the good and
truth which proceed from the Lord, is destitute of a name: these are of
the internal of man. The medium between the external and internal man is
called the spiritual of the celestial. All these do really exist in man,
and succeed each other; and, with every individual, one of them has
dominion: they are, also, distinct from each other. This may be evident,
also, from the fact, that, in universal nature, there are perpetual
compositions and derivations: so also in man. This is also evident from
the heavens, which are similarly divided, and also from the hells: and
man is either a heaven in the least form, or he is a hell in the least
form; for the universal heaven must consist in the general of such
images of itself in particular; otherwise, the particulars do not square
with the general; for the general is nothing of itself, but it is made,
it becomes, and so it is called, a general, from its parts, as far as
they are likenesses of itself.) ((Every division of man's interiors has
a distinct light \[lumen\], and a distinct heat, from the others. The
sensual has comparatively a gross light \[lumen\]; and it was granted
me, by much experience, to discriminate this light \[lumen\] from the
interior lights \[lumen\]; and it was observed, that, as often as I was
let down into this light \[lumen\], just so often there came up, from
the hells, filthy and shameful things, so that this light \[lumen\] is
hurtful, because, in this light \[lumen\], terrestrial, corporeal and
worldly things are.)) ((This light \[lumen\] is set up when such things
occur to the thought as are fully seen, heard and felt; so that when a
man sees, hears and feels those things inwardly, thus when the shameful
deeds which he had seen and about which he had heard, filthy words, and
many things which are inwardly perceived, \[occur to the thought\], they
are clearly, and, as it were, outwardly, discerned, by the senses.))
(((But when man is elevated from this light \[lumen\], so that he is
abstracted, or withdrawn, even a very little, from sensuals, he then
comes into a more interior light \[lumen\], which is not of the sensual
but of the interior natural. When man is in that light \[lumen\] he is
then in a better state, he is then in discernment concerning sensuals,
concerning their quality and concerning causes. If he is able to think
still more interiorly, he is then in a light \[lumen\] still more
interior, to wit, in \[that of\] the spiritual of the natural. This
light \[lux\] is partly from the light \[lux\] of heaven, within natural
light \[lux\]. The ancient philosophers among the gentiles knew this,
and said, as appears by the things in their books, that, if the mind
were withdrawn from sensuals, it would come into superior light \[lux\]
and blessedness. It ought to be thoroughly known and considered, that
all the understanding, and hence the thought, of man, is from the light
\[lux\] which inflows; for, as the sight of the eye beholds objects
which are without itself, by means of the light of the world thrown upon
them, so that it may constantly behold the objects, without, not within,
itself: so, and in such an order, are interiors in externals.))) Thus,
the understanding sees by means of the light \[lux\] of heaven: the
interior understanding by means of the light \[lux\] of heaven
\[simply\]; the exterior by means of the influx of the light \[lux\] of
heaven into the light \[lumen\] of the world. ((Everything intellectual
is thence; for the intellectual is the internal visual faculty, or
understanding is internal sight. Hence it \[i. e., understanding\] is
from the light \[lux\] of heaven, which is from the Lord, in which
\[light\] is wisdom and intelligence, for that light \[lux\] is from
Divine truth proceeding from the Lord. Hence, from light \[lux\] exists
thought, discernment, reflection, attention, prudence, rational
analysis, and the faculty of judging, distinguishing and choosing. All
those things exist from light \[lux\], because they are of the internal
sight. Wherefore, whatever man hears, passes over into that light
\[lux\], in order that it may be perceived.)) ((But everything voluntary
belonging to man, exists from heat. The voluntary of evil is from the
heat of the world, into which the heat of heaven inflows, and in which
it is adulterated. But the voluntary of good is from the heat proceeding
from heaven; for spiritual heat is of the love which proceeds from the
Lord as from the Sun of heaven. That heat is celestial and spiritual
heat, which is love. From that heat is everything good, consequently,
every affection of good and of truth, and, consequently again,
everything of life: and these things pertain to the will. Hence, also,
is all the vital heat in man, which is most perceived when his love is
active; for, so far as his love is active, so far he grows warm, and so
far his life is inflamed, as if with fire.)) (From these things it may
be known what heavenly fire is, and what infernal fire, to wit, that
heavenly fire is the love of doing well to all, and infernal fire the
love of doing ill to all; and, also, that vital fire is not from the
solar fire of the world, but from the solar fire of heaven.) ((From
frequent experience, I have observed - so that it was granted me to know
it thoroughly - that, when I have been let down into the light \[lumen\]
of the sensual, and as often as I came into it, evil spirits infused
filthy and disgraceful things, which at once ceased, when I was raised
out of that light.)) ((One day, at dawn, it was granted me to see, even
by means of sensual light \[lumen\], some spirits who were in that light
in the other life. They appeared in crowds, in a market place, carrying
sacks, in which were raw materials, which they weighed and carried away.
This was a crowd which is in the light \[lumen\] of that sensual, as are
many of the common people, who have thought no more deeply than on those
things which they saw with their eyes and heard with their ears. Certain
sirens were then present: they said that they wish to be here, because
they see men with their eyes, and it was said that those \[sirens\] do
not see except with an obscure sight, or rather that they observe
spirits who are in an interior light \[lumen\], in such a manner that
they, also, were only in the light \[lumen\] of the sensual, or of the
lowest natural.)) (He who is in that gross light \[lumen\], to wit, in
sensual \[light\], is also in the pleasures of the body and of the
sensuals, which to him are the primaries of life; and he is also in such
scientifics as conduce to the furtherance of these; and, when he thinks
from that light \[lumen\] concerning the truths of faith, concerning
heaven, and concerning Divine things, he accounts them as nothing and
rejects them, like such things as are, indeed, asserted, but that do not
exist, because he does not see nor touch them. He believes in the senses
only. Such sensual men are, now, abundant in the world. Wherefore, the
ancients said that if man were withdrawn from sensuals, he would see
marvelous things, and would be elevated towards heaven.) ((Wherefore,
while man is being regenerated, the truths of faith and the goods of
charity are insinuated, by the Lord, into those things which belong to
sensual light \[lumen\] and heat. They are, then, kept in connection
with the interiors. Nor do they \[the goods and truths\] suffer
themselves to be withdrawn; for their spiritual light \[lumen\] is in
that \[sensual\] light \[lumen\], and leads it, like the soul does the
body.)) ((That there is such a sensual light \[lumen\], is because all
who are in the world of spirits from hell, are in such a light
\[lumen\]; and, when anyone is in such light, he is in company with the
infernal crew there.))

<span class="margnote"><span id="4628.">4628.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE SOUL. ((It may be evident how much the perceptions of the
learned differ from the perceptions of the unlearned, concerning the
life after death. The learned, that is, they who are instructed in the
sciences, have, from hypotheses concerning the soul, and from their own
thought, thence, concerning it, made the soul either a something
ethereal, or a something flamy, or a something fiery, or a something
cogitative, and thus \[they have made it\] to be able to reside in some
part of the body, or in a little gland, or in the corpus striatum, or in
the ventricles, or in the heart. Hence they have taken up an idea
concerning the soul, from which idea they can never acquire for
themselves a faith that it is going to live after death, but a notion
that it will be dissipated; and this they confirm with themselves, by
their science. The unlearned who are in good, however, care for nothing
of this sort, but say they are going to live after death; for they
exercise no thought touching the soul. Into this thought \[that they are
going to live after death\], not entangled and defiled by such ideas, is
secretly insinuated \[the truth\] that they are going to live there with
a body like the angels; for into such perception, there is such an
influx. But into the perception of the learned there is the influx, that
the soul, because of such a nature, can by no means live after death;
and, if it should live, that it would be again in the material body.
That the learned are of such a nature, is because they learn the
sciences for the sake of a reputation for learning, in order that they
may be promoted to honors and so to gain, but not that they may grow
wise by means of the sciences: for the sciences are means of becoming
wise; but, to those who thus learn them they are the means of becoming
insane. And when they \[i. e., such learned men\] are exalted to honors,
they live sensually, wholly like others; hence it is, that very many of
the learned, if you except a few, attribute all things to nature, and
believe that they are going to die like the beasts, and are going to
have no life after the death of the body: for sensual men, imbued with
sciences, can confirm themselves in such things; for they apply
fallacies \[to their confirmation\].))

<span class="margnote"><span id="4629.">4629.</span></span>

CONCERNING INFLUX. (The influx into the universal heaven is from the
Divine Human of the Lord. Hence, inasmuch as the Divine Human is there
the all in all, the universal heaven represents a man; and, to all the
societies there, the most minute particulars with man, correspond.)
((The universal heaven in general, and the Lord in particular, inflows
into every single angel - hence his human form; and, since he is in
heaven, he is in the most splendid and beautiful form, so that, if you
saw, you would be amazed, and say that such beauty surpasses all belief:
and he has such a human form, because the Lord inflows, in particular,
into everyone, and heaven in general into everyone, and everyone
reciprocally into heaven. This happens from union, through mutual love,
which belongs to charity, and through conjunction, thence, with the
Lord. Hence it may be clearly apparent, that the Human of the Lord is
Divine; and, in respect to that by virtue of which He is the Lord, and
as to His being the Lord, He is Divine even as to the Human; and that He
put on the Human in order that He might make it like the Human of
Jehovah was previously, to wit, such that when He passed through heaven,
He should be a Divine Man - still more so is He, now. The influx thence
is into every man; for his interiors are formed according to the image
of heaven, his exteriors according to correspondence. Wherefore, the
interiors of man are heaven in the least form. Influx from the Lord,
into him, as into a very little heaven, is into every single part and
into the whole man: heaven also \[inflows\], in a general and in a
particular manner. Hence, now, it is, that evil spirits and genii,
because they do not correspond, appear, in the light \[lux\] of heaven,
as monsters, some so dreadful that they cannot be described, some
manifesting the forms of brute animals, and so forth.))

<span class="margnote"><span id="4629a.">4629a.</span></span>

CONCERNING INFLUX. (Those who are in sensual light \[lumen\], can very
rarely, if ever, be in good and truth, or have for their end good and
truth, consequently, not their country nor justice, but only themselves,
their own profit and their own honor. In sensual light \[lumen\], are
all those adulterers who have taken pleasure in adulteries. These reject
all things of faith and charity, yea also such things as are wont to
introduce to any interior light \[lux\]. In such light \[lumen\], also,
are the voluptuous; and in such light \[lumen\] the avaricious,
likewise, are. I was let into that light \[lumen\]; and, as often as I
came into it, there inflowed evil and falsity; abominable things against
the Lord, against heaven, and against good and truth; and impure and
foul things, especially the lascivious things of adulteries. The reason
is, because spirits of such a character, are in that light \[lumen\];
and then \[when a man is in it\] they inflow - and there are few
\[only\] who have suffered themselves to be regenerated, even as far as
the sensual, or exterior natural, degree. As soon as I was withdrawn
from that light \[lumen\] into the light \[lumen\] of the interior
natural, which occurred at a time when very many foul things presented
themselves, then was I removed from them, and I came into thought and
faith concerning good and truth; but man is, to a great extent, in
sensual light \[lumen\]. Those, however, who are in the light \[lumen\]
of the interior natural, alternately with the former, and who are evil,
are led by interior evil spirits. Those who are deceitful, approach
still more interiorly, and the whole natural is infected; for thoughts
are conducted from their sensuals towards interiors, where are goods and
truths, and these they cast out or profane. Amongst the vile crew, are
very many who have never elevated the thoughts above sensuals, and these
are they who fear neither God nor men. They regard murders, adulteries,
and such things, as of no account. But, amongst those who are in good,
who have elevated their thoughts by means of such things as pertain to
civil and moral and also to spiritual life, some of them are less
sensual than the learned. They perceive interiorly, which the learned do
not do.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="4630.">4630.</span></span>

INFLUX. ((The correspondence of all the organs, members, and viscera,
has been treated of at the end of chapters \[27-42 of Genesis\] in
Arcana Coelestia, to the end that it may thence be known that there is
influx from the spiritual world, not only into the interior man in
general, but also into his separate parts, even to the corporeals; for
the influx is into the functions and uses of the corporeals, and since
into them, it is also into their forms, for uses and their forms make a
one, just as the principal and the instrumental; for these two must be
together in order that anything may be effected; and when anything is
effected, they both make one cause. Thus, when influx from the spiritual
world into the use of an organ takes place, it takes place into the
organ itself; for this is wholly formed for the sake of the use, as is
the instrumental for the sake of its principal, as, for instance, the
eye for the sake of sight. When influx into sight takes place, it also
takes place into the eye, or its organ, and so forth. In order that man
might be convinced that there is influx from the spiritual world into a
man's separate parts, therefore these correspondences have been there
treated of; and, moreover, for the reason that the exteriors of the Word
are significative of spiritual things, whereto they correspond.))

<span class="margnote"><span id="4630a.">4630a.</span></span>

((CONCERNING THOSE WHO PROJECT THEMSELVES INTO THE RESPIRATION. There
were many of the evil spirits, who injected things subject to them
\[subjecta\] into the respiration.))

<span class="margnote"><span id="4631.">4631.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE HELLS. There is a hell in front, at a distance a little
to the left, where are those who plot against conjugial love, and study,
by indescribable arts, to separate minds \[animus\]: they also make
their attempts with those who are united. When they are away from their
own hell, they appear directly over the head, above the fontenelle
there, and they look, when closely regarded like serpents. To help them
they have genii, who are directly under the buttocks, who also inspire
lascivious things, in indescribable ways. There appear, as it were,
coarse points, which are raised upwards from the head, and which they
extend. I have seen these spirits cast down into hell, nor could they be
cast down, until those coarse points were turned downward. Those points,
which are not sharp, but blunt, are representative of the greatest
lasciviousness. It must be observed, that, in all the hells, are deeper
and deeper regions. Those who are worse are in the lower regions, and
those who are still worse, are in regions still deeper. I have seen them
cast down from one depth to another, and this frequently. It was,
likewise, observed, that the deeper they come, so much the denser is the
cloud which surrounds them. That cloud is an exhalation from them; it is
also a proof of the dense light \[lumen\] in which they are, because
they are more remote from the light, \[lux\] of heaven. The former light
\[lumen\] is darkness and fogginess.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4632.">4632.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE HELLS. I saw that sirens descended into the hell which is
before the left foot, and wrought wicked things, in order, namely, that
a communication might be established between that hell, and the new
hell, which belonged to the sirens, behind the left foot. It was then
seen, that an angel, from the regions above, looked into that hell, and
removed all who were there, who were very many, and reduced them into
another order, and this with great force; and that he ejected some of
them headlong from thence into other hells. Such power have the angels,
from the Lord, and such is providence, that even the hells are kept in
order.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4632a.">4632a.</span></span>

Afterwards were seen, as it were, horses and horsemen, interposing, from
above, between those two hells, by which was signified separation, and
guard, that there might not be any crossing over from one into the
other.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4633.">4633.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE HELLS OF REVILERS. In a dream, there were two who
grievously reviled me, and this without any reason, but out of a
depraved nature. They wished not only to beat, but even to injure, even
so far as to inflict grievous harm, almost amounting to death; and this,
also, one repeated in the company of many who had been in authority, in
whose presence he had not any fear or diffidence, etc., etc. When I
awoke, I observed that such a spirit was present: I spoke with him; and
he was of such a quality as he was in the dream. Then was he delivered
to others to be guarded; but he has become acquainted with magical arts,
so as to liberate himself from their hands; but he tried in vain to
escape: he was restrained. Nor did he, then, have any diffidence in
presence of those who were worthier than himself, nor in presence of
others. Because he was of such a wild-beast nature, he was dispatched
into the hell where such are. The hell of such was in front, before the
left foot, at a considerable distance, so that he seemed to be outside
the other hells. Thither was he sent; and, in that part is the hell of
such ones; for such characters fear neither God nor men, and desire to
do evil to everyone, and regard murder as a trifling matter.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4634.">4634.</span></span>

Afterwards, others came and behaved abusively without any cause; but
they were not of so fierce a disposition as to wish to beat, and inflict
harm on the body; but they reviled with words, thus esteeming another as
vile, whom they could treat contemptuously with words. They were
youthful ones, who have not yet learned the moral and civil life and,
being convicted that they were such, they were also remitted forwards,
to some distance before the left foot, where also there were such
characters. Thus it was not a hell, because not in the deep but above.
There, they complained that they were reviled by those there, and that
\[those\] there would hear nothing; but it was said to them that
\[those\] there could not be restrained, until they \[the complainers\]
had laid aside that wild-beast nature, or it should be removed by means
of such revilings from others; and that they would remain there a long
time, according to their longer or shorter life in those things, and
according to the principles embraced, that such things were allowable
and almost heroic.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4635.">4635.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE SIRENS. It was observed that sirens are of manifold
kinds; for, when they passed to their hell, some passed by beneath, some
above, some through the province of the stomach, some through the
province of the soles of the foot, some through other provinces; and
some are imperceptible, who are above: but all those are thrust down
into hell, through openings, which I have seen, below and above; and
those of them, in their hell, who wished to extricate themselves thence,
were thrust down more deeply. In a word, the sirens are the most
pernicious of all. They make a league with various hells. They intermix
in all evil, and think of nothing else than how they may obsess the
interiors. They at once inject themselves thither, and first follow the
thought of another, and next lead it; in this way, they take away all
freedom of thinking well and truly; thus, they all take away spiritual
life. Such are in immense number, at this day, from Europe.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4636.">4636.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE HELL OF THOSE WHO ARE OPPOSED TO THE INMOST OF HEAVENLY
LOVE. There are those who are opposed to those who are in the province
of the womb, in heaven, in which province are those who are in the
inmost of heavenly love. When those appear in the world of spirits, they
are a little in front, above, quite high; and they are in such
wickedness, that they induce their respiration on others so that they
may possess them. Their hell is in front, a little to the left, deep
down. Their operation is directed towards the womb.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4637.">4637.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE INFERNALS. Those who appear to lie down, are more
obdurate than others, and are with difficulty driven away. Such were
with me on several occasions, and could only be ejected after a lapse of
time. The Lord can, indeed, cast them forth in a moment; but, inasmuch
as it is according to order that contumacy should hold out, therefore
that happened. Very many such were the most grievous adulterers.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4638.">4638.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE HELL OF THOSE WHO PLOT AGAINST CONJUGIAL LOVE. Their hell
is under the hinder part of the knees, where these are joined to the
lower part of the thighs. They plot so maliciously, and also cunningly,
against conjugial love, as can scarcely be told. Their operation
penetrates towards the heart. Those who are so malicious, were driven
somewhat backwards, and deeply, into the hell there, where they were
shut up so that they may not be able to injure anybody any more. They
were those who, in the life of the body, would not tolerate married
partners living together in love.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4639.">4639.</span></span>

CONCERNING HEAVEN, AND THE SUN THERE. ((There was shown me, by a vision,
a sun, which is the Lord as He appears in the third or inmost heaven. To
those \[in this heaven\], there appears a very fiery redness, and a very
gleaming flame, <span id="fr_83"></span>[4639-1](#fn_83) whose redness
and gleaming cannot be described. The whole \[of the sun\] is such,
since it is everything. When it verges towards noon, then that very
fiery flaming \[color\] forms a great zone, and in the middle is
obscurity: when towards evening, the flaming \[color\] first begins to
be less red, then less, and afterwards to become as it were white, and,
at length, so that it is a cloudy white; and then it is the first
evening state. When it has so appeared, then, that quasi lucidity begins
to advance towards the right there, in the direction of the moon, and to
add itself to the moon; from this the moon begins to gather luster, and
then it becomes morning, in the spiritual heaven. There, also, the
splendor of the moon diminishes by degrees; and then morning thus begins
in the inmost heaven, and so forth. For, when it is morning in the
inmost heaven, it is evening in the second or spiritual heaven. The
reason is, because the flaming \[quality\], or celestial good, in the
second heaven produces that change, since they are not able to admit it.
There are such general changes of state; and they are changes of state
as to wisdom, and, in the second heaven, as to intelligence. To these
alternations correspond the alternations of the times of day in the
world. There, states appear as the times of day from the appearance of
the daily gyration of the sun; but, in, themselves, they are states: in
heaven they are states, because it is wisdom and intelligence which are
varied, and because the sun, there, does not gyrate as in the world; but
\[the equivalent of\] its absence becomes apparent by a diminution of
the flaming redness. In the heavens are things which eye has not seen,
nor ear heard; wherefore, if they were described, they would not be
believed. Who would credit that there are palaces there, in which they
live, of the most magnificent character, and that in them, there, there
are utensils of every kind? But why relate such things? they would not
be believed.))

<span class="margnote"><span id="4640.">4640.</span></span>

Between the third heaven and the second there is a medium. Through the
medium there is conjunction. \[In\] the third heaven, the internal is
represented \[by\] Judah, the external by Joseph, the medium by
Benjamin. \[In\] the second heaven, the internal \[is representd\] by
Israel, the external by Jacob. In the lowest or first heaven, are
spirits who are simple, to whom correspond the exteriors of man, as, for
instance, the skins.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4641.">4641.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE HELLS. At the left side, in front, are abominable and
most filthy hells. Certain ones from thence, appeared there in the
gates. They appeared as frightful monsters - some as corpses clothed in
their shrouds; some bony as to the head; some in a most filthy
situation, and in a frightful form. I am not able to describe these
things. They are horrible. Those who appear there, in the gates, are
images of those who are in the hells: from the former is known of what
quality the latter are. But when these were seen, they \[the hells\]
were immediately closed, lest they should infect the sphere. Those who
are on the left, farthest to the front, are bold; they care neither for
God nor men.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4642.">4642.</span></span>

They who are at a distance on the left, in an oblique line,
\[inclining\] a little backward, are those who compel people to worship
them as God; and he who can subjugate another is worshipped for so long
as he can retain the upper hand; and it is thus, in succession. These
things were also seen in a gate. This hell is lower down. The gate of
the hell of those who are in front at the right, appears quite high,
and, in fact, in the plane of the armpit, under the upper aim. On the
right hand, towards the front, are those who are in the knowledge of
faith, but in an evil life, thus not in a life according to the precepts
of faith.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4643.">4643.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE HELLS. To the right, a little in front, at some distance,
is a hell where are those who are in the evils of violation of charity,
by reason of falses - like those who do nothing else during all their
life but kill and plunder, as do many in Asia, and \[in places\] where
there are great deserts. These are in that hell.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4644.">4644.</span></span>

CONCERNING HEAVEN WITH MAN. The communication of heaven with man is
wonderful; and, unless one is instructed by the Lord, it can never be
known, nor, if known, believed. Influx is rarely of such a kind that it
falls into manifest thought; for this \[that falls into manifest
thought\] comes from spirits who are near man - but influx is of the
following character. With man are such things as he believes, and by
which he is affected from the heart. When the angels who are with him
are in such things, and speak together concerning them, then inflows
with the man cheerfulness, contentment, and tranquillity of mind; but,
when such things are not in the faith and affection of the man, then
inflows sadness and disquiet, and similar things; and this influx no
otherwise falls into the thought of the man - who may be thinking of
quite another matter, at the time. Concerning this, I have been at
length instructed by much experience; for I did not know whence was
sadness, and whence cheerfulness of mind, when I was not thinking or
speaking, of such things as occasion them - but I then perceived that
the cause was thence.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4645.">4645.</span></span>

From this it may be evident, that the affection of truth and the will of
good, is heaven with man. When this is delightful and pleasant to man,
then angels inflow and communicate to them \[i. e., men\] the sphere of
their pleasantness and delight, and so produce \[it in him\]. It is the
communication of spheres which causes it; and one sphere has
communication with another, according to similitude. Similar is the case
with the evil; if evil spirits speak of things agreeable to the man,
then \[men\] have pleasantness and tranquillity; but, if otherwise, they
have disquiet and unpleasantness.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4646.">4646.</span></span>

Spirits spoke together, and thence was communicated a sphere which
produced that effect on me. I wondered whence it was; and, at length, it
was granted me to know whence, and that it was from that cause. This has
happened very often: it is in order that I may be certified that this is
how the matter stands.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4647.">4647.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE HELLS. I was conducted through a hell which was under the
hell of adulterers, where were those who were in faith separated from
charity and in a life of evil, thus, who were from the church; and when
I was conducted through it, I was withheld from all thought, and, so,
protected, lest falses from evils should be injected, and should infest
me. When I was being conducted along, I felt, as it were, waters around
me. This is the hell which is represented by the sea Suph. <span
id="fr_84"></span>[4647-1](#fn_84) When I came to another region, then I
came into thoughts concerning worldly things, and heard those who were
there, saying that they were in temptations; and it was granted me to
comfort them. That place is what is represented by the desert, where the
sons of Israel were for forty years. It was dark there; it was not given
me to see anything, but \[only\] to hear them speaking. Afterwards, I
was conducted along back from the upper region, to the left, in the
plain of the scapula, or highest part of the shoulder; and it was
perceived that there is a way there for those who are liberated from
\[their\] temptations, and elevated into heaven. It is that passage
which is signified by the Jordan, which the sons of Israel crossed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4648.">4648.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE HELLS. There was a certain one, who, in the world, took
pleasure in exasperating others, and leading them to reply in anger,
that so he might have a handle for doing them ill. He, or another one
like him, appeared to me, and wished to bite me, which was also a
customary practice with him, in the world. It also appeared, that, with
an axe, which was not then seen, he lightly turned over something
continually before himself, which was, \[or, represented\] his
exasperating conduct, and his perpetual wish to do ill. But, with those
who appear with an axe, the axe is tied to the left arm. Afterwards
\[something else\] is many times whirled round by the right arm, and by
means of the neck, which is a sign that \[these are the ones who\]
appear with an axe, and also who \[appear\] with knives. This appears
afterwards; and they are not able to cast off \[the appearance\]. So
also this one. He was afterwards let down under the sole of the left
foot, almost to the hell there; and it was observed, that, as often as
he moved himself, a noise was heard, beneath, like the noise of
punishings which comes thence, because, by many exasperating actions,
and endeavors to do evil, he had opened to himself the hells which
punish; and so, it happened, that when he moved himself, which
representation occurs when he thinks actively concerning others, such
punishings commenced there. This was often heard before, but it was not
granted to know the cause. He was transferred towards the back, to the
hells of the malicious genii; and, there, likewise, as often as he moved
himself a similar noise was heard. At length he was conducted still
farther, until he came to that place, \[i. e., the hells which punish\],
that he himself might be punished by the means by which he wished to
punish or do ill to others, thus that they \[i. e., his efforts\] might
as often return upon him. Such is the fate of those who continually
endeavor, and as far as they can and dare, do actually harass, injure,
and do ill to, others.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4649.">4649.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE HELLS. Sometimes there are burstings forth, as it were
expulsions, by way of the back, which are efforts \[on the part of the
hells\] to struggle forth; but they are repressed by the Lord, and those
from whom such efforts come are let down into deeper places, and are
also grievously punished there by their associates.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4650.">4650.</span></span>

\[A CONVERSATION\] WITH THE JEWS CONCERNING THE INTERNAL MAN. There were
Jews, who were not of the worst sort, and who also listened to reasons.
At first, they were not willing to hear the internal man named. I
perceived that this was because Christians so often speak concerning the
internal man. They asked whether it is not enough to worship God with
the external worship enjoined; but they were told that they must also be
humble before God, interiorly as well as exteriorly. They did not
understand this; but when it was said that they should also be humble in
heart, they began to understand somewhat. Then I made use of a
comparison, to wit, of a comedian on the stage, who carries himself most
humbly in presence of some one who acts the king, and, yet, in his
heart, utterly despises him. It was asked whether they wished to be like
such comedians; they said, No, but that they ought to be entirely humble
in the presence of God. In this way they better understood what the
internal is, to wit, \[that they have it\] who thought \[as well as
acted\] humbly, before God. It was said that externals are but gestures
significant of the internal: if these were separated it would appear
ridiculous. It was said, moreover, that we read, in the Word, that this
people worship me with the mouth, but their heart is far from me. From
this saying, they understood that the heart ought to be in unison \[with
the mouth\], and then the state would be internal. They then declared
that they now knew what the internal man is. They added that they had
supposed that those who are internal men did almost nothing with the
body, that they scarcely spoke, but only thought, and, so, that the
thing was a phantasy. Nor did they understand what faith is. They
supposed it was to think, and wondered that this should effect anything.
It was said to them that faith embraces that which ought to be known,
acknowledged and done: as, for instance, that Jehovah is the only God,
and that He is to be acknowledged as the only God - this belongs to
faith; also, that they should believe, from the Word, that Messiah is to
come and save; likewise, that they ought to comport themselves humbly in
the presence of Jehovah - this is of faith, namely, it ought to be
known, acknowledged and done. I wished to say that this ought to be
believed; but they were not willing to allow that word.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_83"></span>[4639-1](sd63.htm#fr_83) Sidenote: "Brillancy."

<span id="fn_84"></span>[4647-1](sd63.htm#fr_84) Called, in the
Authorized English version of the Bible, "the Red Sea."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4651-4700](sd64)
