[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sd68)  [Next](sd70) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766143007/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Spiritual Diary*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1758\], tr. by Bush,
Smithson and Buss \[1883-9\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Spiritual Diary

<span class="margnote"><span id="4901.">4901.</span></span>

CONCERNING THOSE WHO ARE IN SELF-INTELLIGENCE. There are some who
investigate the laws of order in the heavens, and apply them to the
commission of evils of many kinds. They know how to institute
communication with the heavens; they know, also, how to vary ideas in
many ways, and to infest ideas. They know very many other things; but
the application of them to evils takes place from self-intelligence;
therefore, they are grievously punished. Some of them sit in a lower
place, wearing a cap which is drawn down as far as over the eyes - which
signifies that they think inwardly, and with considerable clearness,
concerning evils that are to come; and their speech issues from between
the teeth. These persons are plucked away with great difficulty, for
they adjust and abuse all things to the purpose of defending themselves;
but yet they are at length vastated, and then they also are put into
that darksome pit where Charles XII is.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4902.">4902.</span></span>

CONTINUATION CONCERNING THE DRAGON AND HIS CREW, AND CONCERNING THE
FALLING OF SPIRITS FROM THE HEAVENS. For several days, spirits, who are
the crew of the dragon, fell down from the heavens and were cast down
into hell. Amongst them, were also very many who had believed themselves
to be saved by a faith of doctrinals, and in fact by the knowledge of
them alone, and have cared nothing at all about the life. They have
lived in the evils of the loves of self and of the world, in malice,
craftiness, deceits and also adulteries.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4903.">4903.</span></span>

Moreover, there were very many who had no doctrine, but merely
acknowledged the Word, saying that it is sufficient to read the Word;
nor did they care to be enlightened concerning the genuine sense of the
Word. Wherefore they were able to apply the Word, so far as regards the
external sense, to any heresy whatever that they wished, and thus to
defend evils and reject goods. The case would have been otherwise if
they had acknowledged doctrine, which, also, is drawn thence, but by the
enlightened. Inasmuch as these lived an evil life, their number was
immense.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4904.">4904.</span></span>

There were also some who have rejected the priestly office, saying that
the priesthood is universal, thus with all. Certain of these have read
the Word quite diligently, but, inasmuch as they have lived ill, they
have taken up thence abominable dogmas. Of this class there are many.
These likewise are cast down from heaven, but at the back, because they
have preached clandestinely, and have wished to thus subvert the
doctrine of the Church by stealth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4905.">4905.</span></span>

CONCERNING ELEVATION TO HEAVEN BY MEANS OF PHANTASIES. Evil spirits have
learned to raise themselves upwards by means of phantasies - the mode
cannot be described; and when they are there, they see all things that
are beneath. Those who are proud elevate themselves to a high position;
so also, by execrable arts, do others. The rest go to heaven; but these
present themselves there in a moment.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4906.">4906.</span></span>

There are also some impious spirits, who are able to project themselves
from one heaven into another, and thus cause that no one may know where
they are; and then they infest the people who are lower down with their
ideas, and bring injury upon them. As soon as these are discovered, they
appear elsewhere in heaven, in a moment. This crew is an impious one. In
such practices are they trained who knew how to act and write, in
various ways, such things as are fictitious and lying, for the purpose
of deceiving. Those who have delighted in such an exercise, become of
such a character in the other life, and thus also, unseen, they injure
others in various ways.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4907.">4907.</span></span>

CONTINUATION CONCERNING THE HEAVENS AND THE HELLS. I was conducted, in
spirit, to the right, where are the mountains and rocks of which I have
spoken above, and, at length, on to the rocks, and, to a small extent,
beneath them. In the rocks dwell those who are in the good of faith; in
the mountains around, those who are in the good of charity - who are
understood by the "mountains of Israel." Higher up, there, are the
celestials, who are the "mountain of Zion," and of Jerusalem. In the
depths, there, are various hells: under and amongst the rocks are also
the hells of those who are in revenge. Some of these hells are of such a
character that they cannot be crossed over; and when I approached, a
torpor, and as it were deadness, laid hold of my arms and hands; in
fact, they failed me, for there exhales from thence a deadly sphere. The
hells there are extended lengthwise, and they differ, in quality and
quantity, according to distance and also according to depth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4908.">4908.</span></span>

Some of the inhabitants of these were revengeful even to the utter
destruction of the soul, but yet have practiced piety. These were cast
down from a certain height of the mountain; and, when they were beneath,
their effort to ascend to the height appeared like a crocodile of a
hideous color, with a long and broad tail, ascending on high close to a
certain thing erected perpendicularly; and this continued as long as
they still had good spirits around themselves, and communicated with the
angels; but, in proportion as that communication was taken away and
diminished, in the same proportion the crocodile descended; and when,
afterwards, the communication was altogether taken away, they were cast
down into a deep hell; for such was their vindictiveness that they
wished, for a trivial cause, to kill not the body but the soul; as was
also proved by various attempts made by them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4909.">4909.</span></span>

CONTINUATION CONCERNING THOSE WHO ARE IN SELF-INTELLIGENCE; ALSO, WHENCE
MAGIC IS DERIVED. There are at this day, very many, especially of the
more reputable sort in the world, who altogether disbelieve that
anything inflows from heaven or from God, and that they have blessings
in this way, -thinking that such things are from self-intelligence, and
saying and believing that everyone is the architect of his own fortune.
The reason is, because they do not believe that heaven exists, nor God,
but that all things flow from blind instinct, and from that alone; and
\[they believe\] thus because they are intelligent, and also successful;
for it is according to the order in the world, that everyone employs his
reason, and that such things follow according to reason; but, since they
do not believe that God inspires reason with such as are good, they
therefore reject the Divine guidance, and follow the guidance of
self-intelligence. They would have acted differently if they had
believed in God and the life after death. Another reason is, that they
place all blessing in wealth and dignity they do not know, nor are they
willing to know, there, what heavenly wealth and dignity are; hence,
also, they suppose that nothing else is given by God, as blessing,
\[save wealth and dignity\]. These things, also, do come to those who
act from self-intelligence; but to them they are not a blessing but a
curse, for they do not place blessing in heavenly life and eternal
felicity, to which, nevertheless, those are brought who suffer
themselves to be led by the Lord. To these, also, it is matter of
indifference even if they are not wealthy and placed in honor; they are
content with their lot, because they know that all things are led to
those issues which pertain to true blessing.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4910.">4910.</span></span>

Those who have fully believed themselves to owe everything to
self-intelligence, appear to sit at a table and there to write. Their
speech issues at the teeth and becomes sibilant. They have a cap, or
mossa, right down to the eyes, under which, as it were, they think. They
are most malicious, and are sent away to that infernal den where Charles
XII is. It is not so with the rest, who are not of such a character:
they are in hells under the mountains to which, in opposites, they
correspond. They are innumerable, and they think of nothing else but
that they may enter into the affections of others whose wealth they wish
to possess. They plot in many ways; wherefore they also inflow with man,
from the head as far as to the mouth, and to the breast - others
\[inflow\] from the feet as far as to the genitals. The latter plot by
means of the loves of others, into which they insinuate themselves; the
former \[insinuate themselves\] into those things which are of the
thought. I was infested by them in various ways. They wish, in every
effort, to possess and lead man, by imitating his nature and those
things which are of his life, to such a degree as to penetrate
considerably, according to practice in the world. They contrive various
deceptions.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4911.">4911.</span></span>

Inasmuch as to seek after honors and riches, and to obtain them from
self-intelligence, is an abuse of the laws of order in the natural
world, consequently, an abuse of the rationals of the mind also - for
they proceed in inverted order, and from self - therefore, those of them
who, by arts, craftiness and deceptions, bring themselves to that,
become magicians in the other life, and there - also, they learn and
drink in such things as relate to the law of order there - which,
likewise, they abuse to the doing of evil. They cannot accept the
principle of following the laws of order from the Divine influx, because
they have taken all things, from themselves. In a word, there is with
them an inversion of order in both worlds. In the world they meet with
joy, but in the other life with mourning.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4912.">4912.</span></span>

Hence is the reason why it is believed by very many that the Providence
of the Lord is not universal in every single event, but that a
particular ordering is given to the man \[as a whole\], when yet it is
not so; and, inasmuch as they consider as blessings merely fortunate and
pleasant worldly and corporeal things, therefore they confirm themselves
\[in their belief\] by all things that happen in the world; especially
by the fact that the evil become honored and rich and the good not so.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4913.">4913.</span></span>

CONCERNING THOSE OF THE CATHOLIC RELIGION WHO HAVE PERSUADED THEMSELVES
THAT THEY HAVE POWER FROM THE LORD OVER THE SOULS OF MEN. There are very
many such of that religion, who have exercised ecclesiastical functions
under the pope, namely, cardinals, bishops, prelates, abbots, priors,
and the rest who live in monasteries; for they have persuaded themselves
that they have the keys of the Universe, and with them are able to open
heaven, and let in whomsoever they please, thus, to rule over souls.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4914.">4914.</span></span>

But there are many kinds of these. They appear on an eminence on the
right and left side of the sun where the Lord is, and diffuse from
themselves a sphere as if it were from the Lord - for they believed that
they were His vicars. They thus scrutinize from on high those who are
below, and rule them; neither will they endure that they utter a sound
against them, nor say to them anything that is not pleasing, nor even
that they look at them - out of reverence to their being in the stead of
the Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4915.">4915.</span></span>

There are some on the right hand and some on the left; some are higher
and higher there, even to the highest positions; there are also some on
high, on both sides, at the back; but they all differ. They who are on
the left in front, are those who have been learned and have confirmed
themselves in those principles; but they who are in front, there, on the
right, are different. Those below are such as are not learned, and yet
have believed that the case is as just stated.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4916.">4916.</span></span>

They do not ascend thither by the legitimate way; and they go up in
gangs, believing that heaven is there; but when they come thither, they
do not see any angel nor dwellings, but, some, sandy places, others,
something grassy; and they proceed forwards, so that they may see from
above those who are beneath. The reason that they do not see the angels
there, is, because their eyes are closed by pride and such things as
belong to pride, since there are, nevertheless, very many dwellings
there. The angels there see them, and suffer them to pass by, knowing
that they descend shortly.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4917.">4917.</span></span>

When any from the lower regions dare to speak with them, or look at
them, and still more when they refuse to obey, they are angry; and then
they withdraw and consult, and, according to their interiors, they
decide either to destroy, or injure, or punish the offenders. They are,
for the most part, sunk in hatred and revenge against them; and then, if
they cannot do it from above, they descend, for the purpose of taking
vengeance; and when they reach the lower regions, they are scattered,
and everyone of them is borne to the places suitable to his disposition
acquired in the world. Thus those who are in hatreds and vindictiveness
\[are borne\] to the hells where those of such a character are.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4918.">4918.</span></span>

In the descent, they are deprived of the holy sphere - which is the
Lord's - that they possess on the mountain. They were told that they
have that sphere of the Lord around them, and that they are inside that
sphere, with their pride, hatreds, revenges and the like, but that
angels have the sphere of the Lord in themselves, or within them; so
that the latter are angels of the Lord, but they, from pride, hatred,
revenges and the like, are devils. There are very many such; and they
raise themselves up there, and they descend.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4920.">4920.</span></span>

 <span id="fr_119"></span>[4920-1](#fn_119) CONCERNING THE HELLS. I was
brought into a hell which is under the feet, where there appeared a
great city, and many houses therein. I was conducted through the
streets, and there appeared there robbers in great abundance, who sought
to do one another mischief in various ways. And when anyone comes
thither from elsewhere - which happens when good spirits do not know
what and of what quality hell is, and what are the torments and fire of
hell, in order that they may know - then, \[for example\] when I was
there, they came to me, and intended to do me evil; and there was, as it
were, a dog about me; but, before they were able to do it, I was
snatched away from their ferocity.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4921.">4921.</span></span>

A certain one of the spirits around me took from the world the notion
that there are no such hells. He began to doubt concerning such great
evils there, saying that in the houses there they are good; but he was
brought to that place, and let in to one house, and introduced there
into the chambers, in which he saw a multitude of the infernals. In one
chamber they were in such evil that they were attempting to kill one
another; in another they were mutilating each other, and were one after
another overcome. In other chambers they ate vile things, such as filthy
intestines; in another other things. Those who are in similar evil are
in a similar chamber, and are there detained in prison; for sentinels
stand without, to prevent them going away, and to prevent any from
entering but those who are permitted.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4922.">4922.</span></span>

Of such hells there are very many, even, as you may say, several hundred
thousands. Those who are at length taken out of them are so far deprived
of intellectual faculty as to be stupid; some are as it were fools.
There are extensive places filled with such.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4923.">4923.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE HEAVENS. It was further shown that where heaven is, there
appear as it were mountains and hills; and that, from those mountains,
are seen mountains still higher, whose tops are, as it were, in clouds
of a dark blue color, and that there the celestials are. It was also
shown, that, when a state of sunset comes to them, then those mountains
appear to subside, or to sink to the level of the lower mountains, or
even lower, according to the state of sunset at that time; and that they
are afterwards elevated as before. From the mountains, there appears,
from above, as it were a sky, with intermingled, or variegated, little
white clouds, as it were.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4924.">4924.</span></span>

CONCERNING HEAVEN AND CONCERNING THOSE WHO ARE IN FAITH SEPARATE. There
were certain priests from those who dwell upon a certain rock in front,
a little to the right. One of them was known to me, by name, in the
world, and was extolled for his preaching. This one came to me, and
then, while I spoke with him, his intellectual faculty was opened so
that he could apprehend quite intelligently all the things that were
said; and, inasmuch as he supposed, as was observed by another priest,
that he was in truths more than others, therefore he was brought with
many spirits who were intermediates \[i. e. subject spirits\] to a
mountain on the right; and, when they came thither, they were introduced
into a cloud, from whence certain ones spoke with me, saying that they
saw magnificent things there, and angels in the angelic form, at which
they wondered; and, at first, by means of the tempering mediums, they
sustained the light there. They were led to loftier places where they
had light; but afterwards, the light began to be obscured, so that they
saw those who were below there in considerable obscurity, when yet they
were in light. Afterwards, they were led where there was heat there; and
then they began to suffer pain in the knees, presently, in the region of
the stomach, and at last, about the breast; but, lest that pain should
become more grievous, it was moderated by the tempering mediums - as,
also, they were told. From that place they then turned their faces to
the rock from whence they came, which appeared to them like a dark
cloud. They wondered that their dwellings are in that darkness, while
yet, when they themselves are in that place, they are in light there;
but they were told, that still they have no other light, because it is
as it were the light of winter, which is seen from the light of spring
which is in the heavens, to be of such a character. That they might be
confirmed in this, it was granted them to speak with certain known
priests there, from the habitations of the latter, where was a similar
and even greater darkness. Thus they were instructed in what light of
truth they were. Then \[as they advanced\] towards higher places, the
pain became grievous and began to torment them; and they hastened to
descend from thence as quickly as possible, saying that it is not heaven
to them, there, but rather hell, and that they had no further desire to
ascend thither.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4925.">4925.</span></span>

CONCERNING HEAVEN AND THE LAST JUDGMENT. There also appeared many on the
mountains and rocks who were evil; for they mount up by means of good
affections to which they have accustomed themselves in the world, and
thus insinuate themselves into societies. But it was often seen that the
evil there were separated from the good in various modes, and cast down
from the mountains and rocks.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4926.">4926.</span></span>

There was one rock, upon which was quite a large city, where were those
who are in faith alone, separated from charity. They believed, as in the
world, that faith alone saves, and, at the same time, that it is from
mercy, whatever might be the quality of the life. These reveled in the
lust of governing; wherefore, they stood at the sides of the rock, and
infested, in various ways, those that were beneath. They were often told
that they should not do so; and the worst ones were also separated from
thence; but yet the rest did not wish that they should be separated, nor
to drive them away from themselves: thus, they consented to their evils
and misdeeds. Wherefore, as all exhortation was in vain, that rock began
to sink, and at length even into the depth, with that city and its
inhabitants. It was also said that the same thing occurs in other places
where they do not live the life of faith: the better ones there,
however, departed previously. It was said that such are they who are
understood by the goats at the left hand of the Lord, of whom mention is
made in Matthew. When the rock sinks down, there is then only a city
there, in which is an assemblage of evil spirits, who, while they were
men, were in faith separate from charity; but, before this happens, the
good are removed thence - that is, they who have lived in faith and at
the same time in charity; thus, who are in the good of faith and in the
good of charity. Then, consequently, a chasm appears there. There remain
houses of wood, in which, in such a city, those live who are in the
environs; for these \[i. e. dwellers in the environs\] are in the good
of charity and faith.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4927.">4927.</span></span>

They - along with two cities upon the rocks - sank down to a great depth
according to the quantity and quality of their evil. This I saw happen.
When the whole of the rocks settle down and become valleys, then all is
well; and it signifies that those who were there are suffering
themselves to be regenerated.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4928.">4928.</span></span>

From those rocks, since they are lofty, they look afar off to a great
distance; and all of those who are within the circuit of the rocks, in
the valleys, which are well cultivated, and where are the spirits who
are instructed and led to good - these, those on the rocks assail in
many ways, so that they cannot be safe from them in any manner; and,
whithersoever they flee, they pursue them with their eyes, and harass
them. That they do this at a considerable distance, was shown by
experience in myself, who was so far off that they could scarcely be
seen. Therefore, their cities there, to a considerable number, sank
down; but those who were in the good of faith and charity were saved.
This is understood by those things in Matthew, chap. 25, about the sheep
on the right hand, and the goats on the left.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4929.">4929.</span></span>

CONCERNING THEIR TEMPLES AND HOW \[THE WORSHIPPERS\] ARE SEATED. I was
also several times in the temples, to which great numbers resort. It was
said that they appear to sit, there, according to delights. Those who
love to be merely in sanctity and do not desire to be instructed, sit
apart on one side; but those who desire to be instructed, sit on the
other side. They are also distinguished by the priest who is preaching;
for the thoughts of the minds of those present are communicated. But
they who come with the purpose of hearing whether the things that he
preaches are true, thus not for the purpose of being instructed but for
the purpose of picking out those things which do not seem to them to be
true - when these enter the temple, they embarrass the preacher so that
he cannot preach. He, therefore, admonishes them to go away. Hence it is
that other preachers can rarely be in the same place, because they
observe such things; wherefore, those of them who are there, hide
themselves in a particular manner, lest they should take away from the
preacher the spirit of holiness.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4930.">4930.</span></span>

CONTINUATION CONCERNING HEAVEN AND THE LAST JUDGMENT. There are cities
there, large and numerous; and men repair to them in the other life, for
the reason that they take with them, from the world, the ability to live
there - by virtue of fear of their life, of the law, of honor and of
gain - in the appearance of some good. As long as such fears are in
them, they live morally; but, when they are taken away, they then live
according to their interiors, which are then also manifested. Such
cities appear upon rocks and upon mountains. Upon the rocks are those
who are in principles derived from the doctrine of the Church. Upon the
mountains are those who are in loves. Hence it is that rock, in the
Word, signifies faith, and mountain, love. They also differ in many
respects. To such cities there repair, at first, such as are in faith
and have led a moral life in the world; but yet, by degrees, the wicked
also, by means of simulated affections of truth and good and by various
arts, repair thither; and when this happens, then the inhabitants of
that city begin to be infested - for thoughts and affections are
communicated in the other life - and, when this occurs, visitation takes
place. Angels are sent thither, that they may know what is the nature of
the state there; and, when they discover that the state of faith, or the
state of love, is perverted by those wicked ones, then the good are
separated from the evil like the sheep from the goats, and the good go
forth and the evil remain; and then that city sinks down even into the
depths, and thus the evil are let down into hell. I saw this take place
with some of them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4931.">4931.</span></span>

How great is the wickedness of those who come thither can scarcely be
described, as it is inexpressible. It especially takes place by the
abuse of correspondences and representatives - arts that are unknown in
the world. In some cases, they present themselves naked, and so appear
above as innocents, and, under the guise of innocence, perpetrate ill
deeds. Some learn, in addition, the spiritual language, whereby they
conjoin themselves with certain angels, and thus perpetrate ill deeds;
but they do not have such a spiritual language as they have who are in
heaven, but an artificial one; and they speak by it, not in spiritual
but in natural ideas - which is altogether forbidden. Some devise for
themselves another language, and so associate themselves that what they
speak amongst themselves is not perceived by others; but others act
differently, in thousands and thousands of ways. In a word, the
wickedness there is indescribable.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4932.">4932.</span></span>

Four of the good spirits were sent into the cities for the purpose of
there selecting for themselves a mansion; but where they came they found
evil and villainous spirits. In two \[of the cities\], when they entered
a house and an apartment, certain ones of the city entered and asked
whether they wished to go out and commit whoredom: they also wished to
urge them to this, and almost to offer violence; wherefore, they
departed from them. Thus, the affair was almost like what occurred in
Sodom. The reason that there is so much whoredom and adultery in those
cities, is, because, in the world, such things are everywhere regarded
as of no moment and believed to be lawful; further, because they place
the whole of the Church in doctrine and not in the life; as, also,
because they do not care whether doctrinals are false or true: and
falsifications of doctrine are whoredoms, and adulterations of good are
adulteries.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4933.">4933.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE WORST HELL. The worst hell, which was from the men of the
Most Ancient Church, is towards the left, in front, where those are who
were called Nephilim, of whom we read in the Word, and who are called,
by David, Rephaim. It is the worst, because they were exceedingly in
self-persuasion, and the persuasion that there is no Divine except it be
in themselves. They lie there in an exceedingly dense cloud. I have
already treated of them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4934.">4934.</span></span>

Those from among Christians who are in the persuasion that there is no
Divine, have their hell a little back, to the left, in a corner there,
where those are deepest who have been in the greatest persuasiveness;
for there are degrees of persuasion. He who was in the greatest was
Charles XII. He was let down to a very great depth, because he was in so
deadly a persuasive faculty that he was able to destroy men by his
persuasive art. This was also shown to many.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4935.">4935.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE FAITH OF DOCTRINALS AND OF THE WORD, WITHOUT DOING. A
faith which believes those things that are in the Word, may exist apart
from a belief in God. Believing in God is hearing and doing. Believing
those things which are from God, however, is called faith, but it is not
faith. It was granted me to perceive this in a spiritual idea. There
were with me two from the celestial kingdom who were naked, and one who
was in such a faith; and it was then clearly ascertained that a faith
which consists in believing those things which are from God, and also
those which are in the Word, is by no means the faith which saves, but
that, without the former kind, it is a faith in which there is nothing
saving. It is a species of persuasive faith.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4936.">4936.</span></span>

CONCERNING CHURCHES IN THE OTHER LIFE, AND CONCERNING EXTERNAL AND
INTERNAL SANCTITY. They have churches in the other life; and in some
places they preach continually, so that persons can enter and go away at
all times. They recline therein according to the state of their life; so
that they can be discriminated by the preacher as to their quality,
merely from the situation of the place in which they are. On the right
are those who are in the good of love; on the left, those who are in the
truths of faith - both the former and the latter according to the good
and according to the truth with them; and in the middle, those who
conjoin; from which it is manifest that even a society there represents
a man; and those in it correspond, as far as possible.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4937.">4937.</span></span>

But when one of another doctrine comes thither, and from that other
doctrine thinks about those things which are being preached, the
preacher is disturbed and is not able to preach; wherefore they either
sit with averted face, or go away from the place. That this is so, the
intelligent, and especially the wise, preachers, also know; for the
affection is altogether changed according to the looking, or turning of
the face to them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4938.">4938.</span></span>

In the churches there exist various kinds of sanctity amongst those who
are there: in general, there is external sanctity and internal sanctity.
Those who are in external sanctity sit at the door of the temple; those
who are in internal sanctity are diametrically opposite, a long way
within. I was in such a temple and heard one preaching - but with
averted face, because I have the habit of thinking about the things that
are preached; nor was I then led by the Lord to inspire affection into
any doctrinal if only it is from good, as, however, happened afterwards.
I spoke with those there afterwards, and it was given me to say that
there is external sanctity and internal sanctity; and the sanctity is
external where the internals - which are either filthy or not evil, with
all variety - are closed; for, when the internal is not as yet good, it
is then closed that it may not disturb the thoughts of those who think
and are affected from the internal. In a word, there are all varieties
\[of sanctity\], which are, besides, held in order by the Lord by means
of closings and openings of the interiors, and temperings of the
exteriors thence.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4940.">4940.</span></span>

 <span id="fr_120"></span>[4940-1](#fn_120) Afterwards, a certain prayer
(bon <span id="fr_121"></span>[4940-2](#fn_121)) was uttered by a woman,
who was permitted to utter it because she could be in external devotion;
and they were then variously affected. Thereupon I spoke with them,
saying, that women are indeed able to enunciate with affection and thus
to excite to devotion and sanctity, but not to teach. It must be added
that still it is rarely that such ones are interiorly devout. The woman
who uttered the prayer in that church with such sanctity that all were
moved and believed that she was the best of them all - she, on being
examined as to the life, thus as to interiors, was wicked - wicked
against her husband and against all who did not extol her. She wished to
kill me by magic, and, with another woman, plotted foully against me.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4941.">4941.</span></span>

After this, I was led along, unawares - according to my custom of
meditating; but I did not know at that time, any \[of those things\]
that were said; but still, in this way, they \[in the church\] were also
able to be affected by the things said, by virtue of their
instructiveness.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4942.">4942.</span></span>

As respects the preachers, there are very many of such a character
(because they are such in the world, and rarely otherwise, save the
simple or less learned) that they are in a persuasive faith that a thing
is according to their doctrinal, because they have confirmed that with
themselves; and thus, because they are in external affection and not in
internal there inwardly reigns what is envious and hostile when anything
is even said in any way about things of such a kind as are the interiors
of man. But, still, there are some who are interiorly good, that is, who
suffer themselves to be led by the Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4943.">4943.</span></span>

They \[i. e. those in the church mentioned\] said that they also
perceive in what affection the preacher is, whether he is in an
affection of spiritual and celestial love, or, whether he is
\[preaching\] from an affection of the love of reputation, of honor, of
gain and such things. Preachers are also distressed by this, hardly
knowing what they are going to say. In this, there is a difference
between preachings in the other life and preachings in the world: in the
world, an altogether filthy affection of the love of self and of gain
may yet sound to the hearing like an affection of the love of good. The
reason is, because the sensual-corporeal which is in the world receives
what is said, but with them \[i. e. with those in the spiritual world\]
it is the interior sensual.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4944.">4944.</span></span>

CONCERNING HEAVEN AND THE LAST JUDGMENT. It was again seen that great
cities were destroyed: one sank down; another was transferred. The one
which sank down, sank to a very great depth, not slowly but quickly; it
sank in the middle, and the inclined sides followed, and thus \[it went
down\] into the depths. And while they were in the depth, the sides were
pressed together above, and thus it was closed up at the top. But the
better sort, who were previously called forth, got away.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4945.">4945.</span></span>

The other city did not sink down, but was transferred to another place
which was at quite a remarkable distance. The removal then proceeded in
a circuit, and it appeared as though a cloud was transferred; and when
it came to its destination, it likewise sank down in this place, in the
manner already related. Before it was transferred, all who were in it
were put into a sort of stupor; for there was a general change of state.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4946.">4946.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE WORST MAGICIANS OF ALL, WHO COME FROM AFRICA - THE
CEREBRAL. There was brought, from a certain hell to behind the back, a
certain one who was able with great power to inspire fear and horror in
the spirits who came. He was placed at my occiput; and all spirits who
came under his gaze were terrified and fell back, as it were, out of
horror and terror. But, afterwards, there came a certain woman who had,
wrapped in a linen cloth, some of the flesh of a leg, which she called a
morsel, and which she gave him to eat. He approached and stretched out
\[his hand\]; and from it he was stupefied, as if deprived of his life,
nor was he able any longer to think at all, but stood like a statue.
Hence I could infer that such were those who are called by the ancients
Cerberi, and who were in the entrance to the lower places. This woman
was there also. The place corresponds in position to the occiput.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4947.">4947.</span></span>

The same woman then went further below, under that place, and there
tarried. Afterwards, she raised herself up and poured out something from
a bowl, as it were liquor to drink, saying that she gave drink to those
that were beneath - of which also they drank; and then those who were
the guards, there, began to be insane.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4948.">4948.</span></span>

After this, she wished to enter by magical arts into the hells of the
sirens, into which no one is admitted. She wished to take certain ones
away from thence; and this she effected through dreadful magical arts -
by turning herself into various serpentine forms - and, as it were,
penetrated in thither. She thus drew to herself those whom she wished to
take away from thence, who were the worst of all; but when she had done
that execrable deed, she was cast in with violence, and there she lay.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4949.">4949.</span></span>

It was discovered whence such characters were. There were enchantresses
at a certain height above, in front, who spoke, and said that the former
ones inflicted such things by their means. The angels said that such
exist in Africa, and that they are interiorly religious but exteriorly
vicious, and that thence they receive influx from the celestials, and
turn it into such magic - for the things by which they act are
correspondences; so that those arts come from an interior sphere, and
were irresistible in a lower sphere.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4950.">4950.</span></span>

It was afterwards granted me to hear those speak from whom the influx
came. It was said to them that through their influx such characters
perpetrate an enormous crime. But they were not willing to abstain,
saying that they \[who receive the influx\] receive goods, and that,
therefore, they do not wish to avert themselves from them. It was
discovered that they also were of such a character in the world, and
tolerated such as were inwardly religious but outwardly vicious. <span
id="fr_122"></span>[4950-1](#fn_122) Therefore were they also cast down
from their place. They were on high upon a mountain; and when they came
below, they went through a certain gallery towards the hell of sirens
and let themselves down, \[as to\] the head, a certain number of paces,
and proceeded in this manner - whereby it happened that that hell was
opened, in places, to their associates. It was said of them that they
took out certain ones from that hell; but they were afterwards cast into
another.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_119"></span>[4920-1](sd69.htm#fr_119) Number 4819 is
wanting from the Latin text.

<span id="fn_120"></span>[4940-1](sd69.htm#fr_120) There is no number
4939 in the original.

<span id="fn_121"></span>[4940-2](sd69.htm#fr_121) A Swedish word
meaning "prayer."

<span id="fn_122"></span>[4950-1](sd69.htm#fr_122) The meaning here
would seem to be religious in profession and precept, but not in
practice. -Ed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4951-5000](sd70)
