[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sd77)  [Next](sd79) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766143007/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Spiritual Diary*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1758\], tr. by Bush,
Smithson and Buss \[1883-9\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Spiritual Diary

<span class="margnote"><span id="5351.">5351.</span></span>

Afterwards, an immense number of those called Protestants, and who
proclaimed the doctrine of faith alone and yet had no life of faith,
both the learned and the more unlearned, who said that they possess true
doctrine, have the Word, know the Lord, and many things besides, and
that therefore they should be saved rather than others; and yet they had
not any of the life of faith - these were brought forth in a vast
multitude; at first, in a westerly direction towards the sea there, and
were conducted to its southern side, and thence brought back towards the
south in another part of the vastated Babylonish tract, and as far as to
the east there, and also still farther, beyond the middle of it. From
that point they were separated; and some were scattered towards the
north, and were seen no more. The rest of them were brought back towards
the south, and there borne hither and thither, now forward, now back,
and were there explored as to whether they had any faith; for there, in
the south, places are distinguished according to Divine truths.
Everywhere they were explored as to whether they have had the faith
which they professed; and, in every case, it was ascertained that they
have had no faith, because no life, since, where there is not life there
is no faith, for, apart from life, faith is a mere matter of knowledge.
This lasted for the space of an hour; and everywhere they were told
whether they believe, or have faith; and it was ascertained that they
had none at all. This, also, they themselves there confessed; and,
likewise, that they do not even know what a life of charity is, or that
the doctrine of faith is separate from the doctrine of charity, and that
they do not know the latter nor care for the former; because, \[say
they\], faith alone, without life, saves.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5352.">5352.</span></span>

When they were in the southern quarter, there went out, near to a gulf
there, a multitude which was concealed there from former times, who
likewise said that they believe and therefore would be saved - and
thought nothing at all about the life. That multitude was mingled with
the former.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5353.">5353.</span></span>

Again, from that mountain-region and from the cities, was led forth a
multitude who lived morally; not, however, from any conscience, or from
religion, but only from fear of the law and of the loss of reputation,
profit and honor. They were thus devoid of any Christian life:
wherefore, it had been nothing to them to do evil against God and
against the neighbor, save when their own advantage restrained them. And
because they had not any life of faith, and thus no communication with
heaven, they were also cast out towards the southern and towards the
western quarter, and led somewhat round about; and it was ascertained,
by investigation, that they had no religion - for where there is not
life, there is no religion: religion regards living and not merely
thinking. Living enters the man, and makes him of its own quality; but
not thinking only.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5354.">5354.</span></span>

Lastly, those were brought forth who have been well-versed in the
doctrinals of the Church, and also have led a moral life, though not
from doctrine but only on account of the laws - because, living in
society, they were bound by the laws - and on account of reputation,
profit, honors; therefore, with a regard to men and not with a regard to
God; and thus for the sake of themselves, and not for the sake of the
truths of faith. These, also, were examined as to whether they had
anything of conscience; and it was ascertained that they had nothing -
therefore, also, nothing of religion; for a religion which does not
teach life, and which the life is not in accordance with, is not
religion. These, also, were cast out of the mountain-region.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5355.">5355.</span></span>

All of these were arranged into three classes, and driven far away,
until, at the last, they could not be seen except like a cloud - and
this was separated and dispersed; and it was said from heaven, that they
were all cast into uninhabited and desert places and wholly separated
from one another, that they might no longer associate together; and they
wander about in that desert, like people possessed of no religion. Such
as were of the first class, were cast forth into separate deserts and
uninhabited places, outside of the tract where the Church is, since they
have no religion because no life. Those who were of the second and third
classes, were scattered into more interiorly situated desert places.
Amongst the Gentiles are some of no religion, who lead a wild-beast
life.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5355a.">5355a.</span></span>

Their dispersion was made to every quarter, to the west, to the south,
to the east, and also to the north. They can never return thence, since,
in the places whither they have been dispersed, they are deprived of
every knowledge of religion and every doctrinal of the Church. In the
desert places this occurs, and they therefore pass a wretched life.
5355b. It is wonderful that all these should be ignorant that religion
pertains to life, and that they should altogether separate religion from
life - to such a degree, as not even to think of a life according to
religion, but only of the civil life which obliges them to live morally
in externals.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5356.">5356.</span></span>

All those who have thought in themselves that evil ought not to be done,
and that good ought to be done, on account of God, and because the Word
so teaches, consequently, who have thus received somewhat of conscience
- all such are saved, inasmuch as they all communicate with heaven. The
rest do not.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5357.">5357.</span></span>

OF WHAT QUALITY THE ENGLISH, DUTCH, GERMANS AND SWEDES ARE, AS REGARDS
RELIGION. It was ascertained, by investigation, of what character the
English are, as regards the truths of the Church - that, namely, with
the exception of the priests, they do not care to learn them; but yet
that they have a fairly keen perception that a thing is so when it is
reasonably stated, consequently, they have an interior sight as regards
religion; still, however, not an active, but a receptive sight. The
reason is because they deal sincerely with each other, without deceit;
and because it is customary, when any act otherwise, for others to shun
them, etc.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5358.">5358.</span></span>

The Dutch have no such receptive perception, but still they are very
penetrating, adhering to their doctrine, and not receding from their
faith in it: if clearly shown that it is not true, they understand, but
turn their back; for they are unwilling to recede from their own
position.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5358a.">5358a.</span></span>

The Germans remain in their doctrine; nor are they willing to accept
anything else. The Swedes do not care to know anything of doctrine,
excepting what they have learned in boyhood. Alter that, with the
exception of the priests, they learn nothing. Certain Englishmen had a
ready reception.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5359.">5359.</span></span>

Afterwards, the clearing away from the middle space of all the cities,
and also of the neighboring mansions, continued. Every spot \[was
cleared\] of all those who have lived in the Church without the Church,
or in religion without religion, in that they never regarded the life,
and, whatever they did, did all for the sake of self, and, moreover,
lived in ease and luxury. Such characters were cast, part of them into
the northern chasm, part into the western, some, also, into a chasm in
the south, besides into the desert places in every direction. This went
on for quite a long time. The number was immense.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5360.">5360.</span></span>

It was observed, that, in one city, almost a fourth part of those who
appeared there - who were of a different genius from, and, consequently,
turned their back to, the others - only appeared when they turned
themselves into some similarity of affection. The portion that was of a
wholly different genius, and did not accord with the citizens, were
allotted quarters under the city, and this in various places. I beheld,
in the London there, the ground heaped up in the shape of a small hill,
and an entrance under it. Under the hill there, although it was small,
there was an immense number of the wicked, amounting to many thousands,
all of whom were then cast into the hells - because from them, as long
as they are there, an exhalation arises to the inhabitants of the city,
which infests them and changes their affections and thoughts. On some
occasions, also, certain ones go out from thence, and make their
appearance; but they return again. This occurs under the cities, in many
places. Thus, also, are the cities always cleansed by the Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5361.">5361.</span></span>

Moreover, outside of the cities, in the environs, and sometimes within
the cities, are very many, such as, although wicked, are not cast down,
and such as, although good, are not immediately raised up to heaven.
These are such as have arrived from the world within the last 10 to 20
years, who minister to men, and through whom, as subjects, communication
is effected with the hells and with the heavens. These are the ones who
are in the world of spirits; for those who are in the hells can not be
drawn out of them after having been fully vastated. Sometimes, some
\[may be drawn out\] who have not been fully vastated; for those who
have been vastated are kept in hell, neither can they be drawn out
thence, for as soon as ever they thrust forth their head from thence,
they are tormented dreadfully. They who are from the world, and serve as
subjects, are vastated in the meanwhile; and this occurs from head to
foot; for every single particle of the body of man and spirit,
corresponds to some society - if good, to a society in heaven; if evil,
to a society in hell. The evil are vastated as to all the hypocritical,
or external, truths and goods they possessed in the eyes of the world,
their evils and falses thus remaining. But the good are vastated as to
evils and falses of act, which are separated from them, their goods and
truths thus remaining; and so they are raised up to heaven. Thus all
things follow on.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5362.">5362.</span></span>

It was observed, that, after that Last Judgment, the hells were
completely changed: namely, that the hells of the evil ones of the
Catholic religion are now at a great depth in a region around the
middle, in the northern and southern quarter. The hells that were
formerly there, were cast into other places - which has been previously
treated of. But the hells of the evil Protestants are open, round about,
to the north, west and south, in a great chasm stretching obliquely
under the district of those \[places\] where Babylon is; so that these
hells are now under Babylon. Besides this, they are also elsewhere, as
in the western sea, in the gulfs, in the chasms of the mountains and in
the deserts - all of which has been before described.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5363.">5363.</span></span>

Those who are cast into the hells, into the chasms, into the gulfs and
into the seas, can never afterwards ascend from them; and, if they do
ascend, even so much as only to raise the head, they are tormented in a
dreadful manner; which, also, I several times witnessed. They protruded
the head and arms but a little bit; but they instantly drew them back,
for a dreadful pain and torment assailed them. The reason is, because
all places, wherever they are, are appearances of Divine Truth in
ultimates. Divine Truth in ultimates appears in such forms as those of
nature, and all places receive Divine Truth variously - one differently
from another. Hence it is that spirits and angels can at once see, from
the gait of another spirit there, his quality as to truth and good, or
as to falsity and evil. The paths of truth and good are everywhere
varied. Hence, also, it is, that the abodes of good spirits and angels
are variously distanced, and situated according to their truths and
goods. Wherefore, the evil who are cast into the hells, into the gulfs,
the chasms and the seas - where evils are beneath - if they thrust forth
their heads, or shoulders, fall into the hands of the Divine Truth from
Good which is there. They cannot endure this at all; for thence they
suffer torment.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5364.">5364.</span></span>

That this is the case, was also discovered by the circumstance that such
as said they had faith because they were somewhat versed in doctrine
though they did not live according to it, were led round about to where
were the kinds of Divine Truth which they said they believed; and,
before they arrived there, they cried out, "We believe it;" but, as soon
as they came to that place, they themselves discovered that they have
believed nothing. And this occurred at all those places where was the
truth which they said they had believed. A similar thing occurs with all
others when explored as to whether they believe the truth when they have
not lived it, or received it in their will by life. I was also conducted
through various places, below and above; and it was ascertained that
there were variations everywhere. In hell are similar variations - but
they are opposite.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5365.">5365.</span></span>

I also saw many persons sitting round a table in a certain house. They
all looked like rich merchants; and still more of them in turn
approached. In external form, they appeared as if good, and they were
also well dressed. But I saw that they were all cast down, in
succession, from there into the desert places; thus, outside the
societies of the upright. The reason was stated to be, because, in the
world, they lived just like Christians in external form, and did right,
but merely for the sake of obtaining a reputation for honor, so that
they might make gain out of and be trusted by, others; and they have
done nothing at all for the sake of God or the neighbor, but for the
sake of self; and that, thus, they had no communication with heaven.
Hence it was, that such ones were cast into the desert places, where
they roam amongst robbers, and commit robbery; for, with such as do
nothing from religious principles, externals are taken away, and they
become robbers. They would also become such in the world, did not
externals hold them in bonds.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5366.">5366.</span></span>

I afterwards heard how it was with the Last Judgment upon the Dutch. All
of those were cast out of their cities, mansions and lands, who have
done nothing good from any religious or conscientious motives, but only
for reputation - in order that they may appear honest - with an eye to
gain. For, when their regard for reputation and gain is removed, as
happens in the other life, then such ones rush into every crime,
plundering everybody without any mercy. There was an immense number of
such characters, amounting to many myriads. I saw and heard them
expelled, and cast into the dark chasm that sloped obliquely under the
eastern district; and part also into a chasm extending beneath the
southern district, on the side where it verges towards the east, but yet
not into that same one into which the Catholic crew was cast, but
somewhat more to the front. This continued quite a long time. It
occurred on the 9th day of January, 1757. Those who had something of
conscience, and something of religion, thus remained.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5367.">5367.</span></span>

The Dutch nation dwell at the right, in front, in the middle space where
the Protestants are, - chiefly in the plane of the arm. They who are
somewhat humble, are in a city which is covered from above - which has
been mentioned previously - and the bulk of these are preserved.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5368.">5368.</span></span>

The Dutch nation are such that, from natural lumen, they excel in
judgment. From that lumen, they take an exceedingly just view of
matters, especially such as are in the world. And, inasmuch as they
constantly think upon their business, they do not appear to be
interiorly in heavenly light \[lux\]; but, yet, this is concealed in
their natural light \[lumen\]. <span
id="fr_168"></span>[5368-1](#fn_168) For this reason, they are also able
to apprehend whatever is true in religion; but yet, although convinced,
they turn their backs, and care little. They do not act thus out of
regard for profit, so much as on account of their business itself.
Business itself is their end and love, and money is a means. They
therefore love the latter for the sake of the former. The avaricious are
otherwise; to them, money is the end and love and business is a means.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5369.">5369.</span></span>

The English, however, appear a little forward, to the right, higher up,
in a plane above the head. Inasmuch as they are of an entirely different
genius, light \[lux\] appears to exist interiorly amongst them, and a
spiritual element is received in it. They perceive, instantly, whatever
inflows, and also receive it instantly. Those of them who have thought
about God from a religious ground, and have hence acted honorably, see
the truths of faith quite clearly; nor do they let them down into their
natural mind, inasmuch as this is not so much occupied and filled with
worldly things, and hence so obscure, as with others. The reason is,
because they love sincerity, and act from it, and because this is a
general characteristic with them. <span
id="fr_169"></span>[5369-1](#fn_169)

<span class="margnote"><span id="5370.">5370.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE DRAGON. By the Dragon, in the Word, are meant those who
have no desire for doctrine, but only for the Word in the letter, and
who, by it, justify all people in their loves and principles in order to
obtain their good-will, confirming those things by the Word in the
letter - for they thus excuse all evils to whomsoever they will, whether
they be robberies, pilferings, murders or adulteries; and who also
justify themselves and their own life in like manner, thus living
according to their own pleasure and strengthening evils and falses in
themselves. Such are mostly sensual and merely external men. They are
distinguished from others only by the fact that they read the Word; but
they do it without doctrine for a lamp to enlighten them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5371.">5371.</span></span>

In the other life, these persons justify all, merely in order that they
may be called wise and be extolled above others; and some thus explain
and bend \[all things\] at their pleasure, if only they may gain
something by it. These are meant by filthy adulterers, those, namely,
who lie with their daughters-in-law, and who love adulteries of sons
with their mothers, or stepmothers. Just such is the character of their
religion. But there are different kinds of them; for together they make
up the whole of the dragon. Those who are altogether sensual are the
ones who constitute its tail.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5372.">5372.</span></span>

Many such persons were seen; and it was heard how they mislead the
multitude and patronize every evil, abusing true doctrine and wholly
rejecting the internal sense of the Word. They were gathered into one
mass and sent into an abyss. Their abyss is in the southern quarter, at
some distance from the boundary where it is joined with the eastern
quarter. I beheld, there, a burning as it were of coal - which is the
love of self and the world; and they were cast in there, some higher up,
some lower down, and they are kept there, bound. Hence it is that it is
said of the dragon, that he is sent into the abyss and kept there bound
a thousand years. <span id="fr_170"></span>[5372-1](#fn_170)

<span class="margnote"><span id="5373.">5373.</span></span>

I also saw a crowd of vast number cast down out of heaven - and, in
fact, on to the earth at the west towards the north there - and they
were scattered in a desert country; for that crowd cared nothing for
doctrine, but remained merely in the sense of the letter of the Word.
Hence, they had no faith, and applied the Word \[to favor\] any matter,
love or principle; wherefore, they had not any religion, because no
certainty touching any subject. These were the ones of whom the
Apocalypse speaks, who were cast down out of heaven to the earth by the
tail of the dragon; <span id="fr_171"></span>[5373-1](#fn_171) because,
namely, they have no knowledges; nor can heaven be opened to them,
because they are in no doctrine; nor can they be arranged and kept in
any fixed place where Divine truth is, because they have no certainty.
Hence they rove everywhere, and wander in the desert; nor are they
received by anyone.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5374.">5374.</span></span>

I saw those who were of such a character cast down, out of a heaven
which is in the highest part, to the number of many thousands. They
were, then, at the northern side of that region. The casting down
appeared as often as any execrable adultery was perceived below. They
entered heaven by reason of piety of life, and because they have thought
about God.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5375.">5375.</span></span>

After this, I saw multitudes brought down from the heavens to the
eastern quarter, in order that they might wander there.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5376.">5376.</span></span>

((Moreover, all those are dragons who have the Word and doctrine from
the Word, and only speak about them but do not practice them, thus,
also, those who are in faith alone. Some constitute the head of the
dragon, some the body and some the tail. Those who talk and do not
practice, are the very lowest sensual men.))

<span class="margnote"><span id="5377.">5377.</span></span>

CONCERNING THE DESTRUCTION OF THE OLD HEAVEN, OR CONCERNING THE CHANGES
THERE. There is a still higher expanse above the middle space where
Christians are. It did not appear to me before, neither did it appear to
those who are beneath. It is high up over the head, round about. Some
said, that they do not see it, but that yet they saw some ascending as
it were into a cloud, who, however, vanished at a certain height.
Thither ascended all from the Christian world, who have thought about
God and led a life of piety; thus, whose interiors were slightly open,
but this only by their life of piety and thought about God.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5378.">5378.</span></span>

I heard and saw them let down from the heaven, there, to the number of
many myriads; first towards the north, next towards the west, and lastly
towards the south. In a word, an immense multitude was heard; and it was
said that they were those who have lived piously and thought about God,
but, yet, not about the Lord except as of a man like themselves, and not
of Him as God; also, who have thought about the Father alone, and
otherwise of the Lord than was proper - in a word, have always directed
their thoughts to God the Father, in order that He might save them for
the sake of the Son; and, when they thought of the one God, it was not
at the same time of the Lord; consequently, they have not worshipped the
Lord, when yet the Father cannot be approached save by Him, since He is
The Way, and no one comes to the Father but by Him, and also because no
one could see the Father unless He teach them, as He says in John 1:18,
and elsewhere - in a word, \[they are those\] who have not had the Lord
in the life of their piety, when, yet, without the Lord there is no
salvation. For they who are of such a character, howsoever they think
about God still cannot be led \[of Him\], for they always think
indeterminately, and have no bond of connection with the Lord, who,
nevertheless, is the God of heaven and earth. Neither were they able to
think about God under any human form, and thus under any determinate
form; hence their thought falls into a sort of nonentity. Indeed,
neither do they think of a Trinity - as, however, they suppose they do
when they think about God - inasmuch as they have passed by the Lord,
and are then in forgetfulness, or in no thought about His Divine, no
matter how openly the Church teaches it. Their thought about the Lord
falls away from \[His\] Divine (which to them is nothing), to the
likeness of a common man, thus to what they could not direct their
thoughts \[of God\] to, because their idea concerning Him was like that
concerning a mere man, and not God. Such pietists were not able to be
with the angels in heaven; and they were, therefore, brought down
thence, to the number of many myriads.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5379.">5379.</span></span>

Also, the angels complained that their thoughts concerning the Lord were
spoiled, on account of the multitude of such persons round about, and on
account of their thoughts; for, in the other life, thoughts which are of
affections are communicated. They were all round about.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5380.">5380.</span></span>

All of them were brought down to those quarters, as above stated, and to
the level earth there, or to where the plains were, and where there
appeared a gloom, greater and greater according to the distance; and,
afar off, woods. And this was according to their life; inasmuch as they
were not able to have love and faith in God except so very dimly,
because they then worshipped the Lord in such obscurity, and in so low
and slight a manner.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5389.">5389.</span></span>

 <span id="fr_172"></span>[5389-1](#fn_172) Then, also, I saw that there
were brought forth, from the western quarter, and raised into heaven, to
their place, as many as a multitude of people, who were those who have
been concealed in that part in various places there, from the first
times of Christianity, and guarded by the Lord lest they should be
seduced by the evil, especially by the Papists who are at the front
there. A multitude of Christians was there hidden, and guarded by the
Lord - who are they who are treated of in the Apocalypse, chapter 20,

<span class="margnote"><span id="5390.">5390.</span></span>

of whom it is said that they have been slain, and that they were raised
up out of the sepulchres; and who are of the first resurrection - verses
4, 5, 6, 12, in that chapter. <span id="fr_173"></span>[5390-1](#fn_173)

<span class="margnote"><span id="5391.">5391.</span></span>

That the Lord is to be approached, and God to be worshipped thus, the
Lord teaches in many places, even in the Old Testament, where He is
called Father of Eternity, God, Hero, <span
id="fr_174"></span>[5391-1](#fn_174) also God with us, or Emanuel, <span
id="fr_175"></span>[5391-2](#fn_175) as also Jehovah our
Righteousness, <span id="fr_176"></span>[5391-3](#fn_176) etc.; in which
places it is His Human that is treated of. It is also known that the
Father and Son are One, and that the one is of the other, and the one in
the other, reciprocally; and the Divine is still One. Wherefore, those
who have thought only of the Divine of the Father, and of the Lord as a
man apart from the idea of Divinity - these can by no means receive the
Divine, for the Lord's Divine is the all-in-all of heaven, and as soon
as this inflows \[into them\] it is not adopted but rejected; and the
Divine is received by them without the idea of a human, which is without
any idea; for no idea can be conceived of a Divine apart from a human.
This is the reason that they were rejected, inasmuch as they were not
able to receive the Divine influx relating to the Lord, thus neither
that concerning faith and love, nor respecting all and everyone of the
things that belong to faith and love to God.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5392.">5392.</span></span>

Afterwards, I saw brought out of heaven, men and women who have led a
life of piety, and in fact an idle life, who continually meditated about
God and were in prayer and supplications, but did not know, from
doctrine, anything except that God remits their sins. They did not know
what sins are; and this because they were ignorant of truth. They were
also such, that, when they beheld worldly matters and civil cares in
others, they said that these things ought to be abandoned and God
worshipped, and therefore condemned others, and despised them in
comparison with themselves - placing all things relating to salvation in
such a life of piety, and not in a life according to the Lord's
commandments. Those in heaven said of these, that they dwelt there at
one side, and that if they encounter them or direct a look thither, they
occasion a sadness which corrupts their joys, and also deadens the
truths of their intelligence and wisdom and causes them to be as it were
oblivious to what is going on; but that \[such characters\] are
tolerated, although they \[i.e. the rest\] wished them away.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5394.">5394.</span></span>

 <span id="fr_177"></span>[5394-1](#fn_177) All of them were brought
down to a place in the north, that they might not harass, and plunge in
sadness, others, who are in heaven. They were brought down to the
northern quarter, because they were in ignorance of such things as lead
to heaven; and it was said that they were allowed to dwell together, but
that they ought by no means to pass a slothful life and thus hang their
heads and go as it were melancholy, inasmuch as such conduct has never
been commanded.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5395.">5395.</span></span>

The German Protestants appear more towards the north; the Swedes, at the
north and west, in the middle; the Danes, in the west; the Dutch,
towards the east and south; the English, in the midst amongst them. All
appear according to their genius as regards religion.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5396.">5396.</span></span>

When the visitation of the Germans, Swedes and Danes occurred, those
were first cast out to whom religion was not a matter of very much
concern, thus, those who thought about civil and worldly matters and but
little about religion save that it exists - not even that it ought to
exist. Their perception respecting it was also deadened, as if it were
not a matter of very much moment. They said that they did not know the
difference between living civilly and morally well, and living well in a
Christian way; and that it is just the same thing whether they refrain
from evil in the state merely because they would be punished by the laws
thereof, or whether they shun evil out of regard to religion, thinking
about the precepts of the Church derived from the Word; when, yet, the
difference is so great, that they who do well only on account of civil
laws, still have no conscience, nor, consequently, influx from heaven.
But these were merely external men; and, when the externals of such ones
are removed, as happens in the other life, they rush into every crime,
into which they are led by the hells, according to their cupidities,
without restraint, since they are not inwardly ruled by the Lord; and,
in the other life, they are in dense darkness as regards all things
which belong to intelligence, and in torpor and listlessness concerning
everything that pertains to the life there: in a word, the whole of
their life is open outwards, or downwards, and not inwards, or upwards.
This is the difference between doing well from religion, and doing well
from a civil standpoint, out of regard to the laws and fear for their
reputation, profit, or honor.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5396a.">5396a.</span></span>

There appeared a multitude of so-called Protestants, upon quite a high
mountain and also around the mountain, who have been, in the world, of
such a temper, that they esteemed themselves better Christians and
worshippers of God than other men. They believed this because, they say,
they have performed the work of repentance, and have done so as often as
they attended the Holy Supper; and that they have also prayed on their
knees, at other times, that their sins might be forgiven: this they have
called repentance; while, yet, they neither examined themselves, nor
knew, nor cared to know what their sins were; only that they believed
they were born in sins. Wherefore, when they returned from the Holy
Supper and from their prayers, they led a life not at all different from
their previous one. They supposed that not to act contrary to the civil
laws from fear of punishments, nor contrary to moral laws from fear of
the loss of reputation, profit and honor, was to live Christianly.
5396b. Evils of thought and will they did not suppose were sins; when,
yet, these are the sins that condemn. To do well outwardly, when such
things are within, is hypocrisy, and, in relation to God and the
neighbor, fraud and deceit. Such was the quality of their repentance and
fear of God; for, when externals are removed, no bonds of conscience,
which are of the thought and will, bridle or restrain them from rushing
into evils and falses of every kind, without any mercy. Such are those
who do not think from religion, and will, and thus act, from it; and,
inasmuch as they had the intention of injuring the righteous whom the
Lord defended (which also they knew), they were told that they do not
fear any God. This they denied, though they said that they were, indeed,
aware that the Lord defends the righteous, but, still, they do not
regard the Lord otherwise than as a man, and have never thought
otherwise about Him. 5396c. But they were asked whether they do not know
that the Divine is also in the Lord, and that the Divine is the same as
God the Father; also, that His Divine and Human act as one; also, that
one is never contrary to the other; also, that the oneness is like that
of soul and body in man - as, moreover, the Creed received in universal
Christendom teaches; and likewise that no one cometh to God the Father
except by the Lord; as well as that He is The Way - whence it follows,
that he who acts against the Lord acts against God the Father; and that
those all acknowledge no God, but are atheists, who deliberately, or
knowingly, thus disparage the lord. They confessed that, from doctrine,
they know such things, but that they never think so, but think no
differently about the Lord than about a man just like other men.
Inasmuch as these persons were of such a character, that mountain sank
down to a level surface, and those who were worse than the rest were
kept there on a certain summit, and cast into a hell in the neighborhood
of the north.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5397.">5397.</span></span>

In the Creed called the Athanasian, the following things are said: that
the three persons are not commixed, nor separated; as to the Divine, and
that as the Father is, so also is the Son, uncreate, infinite, eternal,
omnipotent, God and Lord; but, yet, they are not three \[Gods\] but one
God; The Father not made, created, or born; The Son not made, or
created, but born of the Father; The Holy Spirit not made, created, or
born, but proceeding; No one of them is first or last, nor greatest or
least, but the three are alike eternal and great; That Christ is very
man; that He is the Son of God: God and man; God from the nature of the
Father, man from the nature of the mother; equal to the Father as
touching His Divinity, less than the Father as touching his Humanity:
but, although God and man, yet, nevertheless, those are not two, but He
is one Christ: He is one, but not in such wise that the Divine is
changed into the Human, but the Divine takes the Human to itself; He is
one altogether, but not in such wise that the two natures are mixed; but
there is one only person, because just as body and soul makes one man,
so God and man is one Christ - who suffered for our salvation,
etc. <span id="fr_178"></span>[5397-1](#fn_178)

<span class="margnote"><span id="5398.">5398.</span></span>

In the western quarter was a multitude, whose speech sounded sincere, so
that, from the speech, they might be believed to be as it were sincerity
itself, and who, by means of this fact, were able to induce the
simple-minded to believe that they were sincere. They were those who so
appeared in the world, and tried to obtain a reputation for sincerity,
but, inwardly, were destitute of conscience and without religion. They
consult together how they may subjugate and rule the simple-minded. They
assail others behind the back, and not to their face; and they thus
inspire such things as they think, and at length subjugate them. They
were also cast into a hell in front there, under the western region. For
the most part, they were, inwardly, wickednesses - devisers of arts to
get gain, with the end of ruling.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5399.">5399.</span></span>

Those were explored who had not any charity towards the neighbor - not
those who are unmerciful, and of such a disposition; for these are at
once seen to be infernal - but they who do not appear so in words and in
outward form, but yet are so in heart and internally. They are those who
say they are for their country and its good, and likewise act and speak
as if they were for it, and yet are not; for those who are for the good
of their country have charity towards the neighbor - for the good of
their country is the neighbor, and more the neighbor than a
fellow-citizen is. These were explored by the following criterion,
namely, as to whether they wished well to the Lord's Kingdom, thus to
heaven; for they who wish well to their country also wish well to the
Kingdom of the Lord; for after death this is their country: in the other
life; no other country is recognized. They were those who have thus
acted and spoken in favor of the Lord's Kingdom, by thus speaking and
acting well towards those whom they knew to be of the Lord's Kingdom,
but, when they believed it would fail in any way, and saw its states
changed, then, at once joined those who destroyed, and bore them help.
They \[i.e. those thus explored\] were scattered round about; and, when
any of such a quality were perceived, they were cast into chasms and
deserts on every side. It was observed that they constantly preferred
their own good to that of the public, and only favored the public good
so far as good would thence accrue to them. Good, also, did accrue to
them; and so long as this was the case, no notice was taken of them;
but, when the change of state was perceived, they cast themselves at
once on to the opposite side, thus hoping, by virtue of their
persuasion, to get good out of evils.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5400.">5400.</span></span>

All those were afterwards cast out who cared nothing at all about the
truths of the Church: which they did not even desire to know, and
declined to become acquainted with as being far removed from them, and
interior truths as being inimical to them. There was a vast number of
such; for they have all thought nothing about religion, but only about
external worship arising in habit inculcated from childhood, and from
regard for their good name, lest they should be reputed irreligious. For
he who does \[not\] care for the truths of the Church, cannot be led by
the Lord to heaven; for it is by those truths that he is led, because he
is imbued with the faith and love of them, and is thus led to think them
and do them. All these persons, also, were of such a character that they
wished to rule and lead others, thus, not to be themselves led, - which,
also, was ascertained by the fact, that, wherever they saw anyone,
outside of their region, they immediately infested him, by subjugating
him, leading him as their slave, not even suffering him to think for
himself: thus did they desire to obsess others. All who have hated the
truths of faith are of such a character. Gentiles, however, care for
their religious principles, and love to know interior truths and to live
according to them; but amongst Christians there are very few like this,
excepting priests and elders, of whom many, and even the greater part,
learn these things for the sake of a reputation for learning, so that
they may be promoted to honors and held in esteem, and for the sake of
applause - thus for self's sake, and not in order to live according to
them and thus amend their lives.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_168"></span>[5368-1](sd78.htm#fr_168) We have ventured here
to read lumine (=light) in preference to the Latin Editor's homine
(=man). -ED.

<span id="fn_169"></span>[5369-1](sd78.htm#fr_169) It must be remembered
that this description and that in no. 5357, above, were penned 130 years
ago. It is to be feared, that, since that time, the English character
has undergone considerable deterioration in the matter of plain dealing.
-ED.

<span id="fn_170"></span>[5372-1](sd78.htm#fr_170) Revelation 20:2, 3.

<span id="fn_171"></span>[5373-1](sd78.htm#fr_171) Chapter 12:4.

<span id="fn_172"></span>[5389-1](sd78.htm#fr_172) The numbering in the
original leaps from 5380 to 5389, as here. -ED.

<span id="fn_173"></span>[5390-1](sd78.htm#fr_173) Revelation 20.

<span id="fn_174"></span>[5391-1](sd78.htm#fr_174) The Latin Editor here
reads Herus, Master. But Swedenborg's reading of Isaiah 9:6, is, et
vocabitur nomen illius, Mirabilis, Consiliarius, DEUS, HEROS, Pater
aeternitatis, Princeps pacis, = "and His name shall be called Wonderful,
Counselor, God, Hero \[not the Mighty God, as in the English Authorized
Version\], the Father of Eternity, the Prince of Peace," (see Arcana
Coelestia 2005). Knowing this, and noticing that, in the present text,
Swedenborg unquestionably has in mind the Lord's titles as recited in
Isaiah 9:6, we cannot doubt that he here wrote, Deus, Heros = "God,
Hero. " We have made the English translation, therefore, to read
accordingly. -ED.

<span id="fn_175"></span>[5391-2](sd78.htm#fr_175) Isaiah 7:14.

<span id="fn_176"></span>[5391-3](sd78.htm#fr_176) Jeremiah 23:6.

<span id="fn_177"></span>[5394-1](sd78.htm#fr_177) The numbering
strictly follows the original, omitting number 5393. -ED.

<span id="fn_178"></span>[5397-1](sd78.htm#fr_178) This paragraph is in
italics indicating a quotation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 5401-5450](sd79)
