[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Gnosticism](../../gno/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ps055) 
[Next](ps057) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5HQY/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Pistis Sophia*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1921\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER 52

<span class="margnote">Jesus commendeth James and promiseth the first
place unto the disciples.</span>When James then had said this, Jesus
said unto him: "Well said, finely, James. This is the solution of the
ninth repentance of Pistis Sophia. Amēn, amēn, I say unto you: Ye shall
be the first in the kingdom of heaven before all invisibles and all gods
and rulers who are in the thirteenth æon and in the twelfth æon; and not
only ye, but also every one who shall accomplish my mysteries."

And when he had said this, he said unto them: "Understand ye in what
manner I discourse with you?"

<span class="margnote">Mary interpreteth the words of Jesus.</span>Mary
started forward again and said: "Yea, O Lord, this is what thou didst
say unto us aforetime: 'The last shall be first and the first shall be
last.' The first then, who were created before us, are the invisibles,
for indeed they arose before mankind, they and the gods and the rulers;
and the men who shall receive mysteries, will be first into the kingdom
of heaven."

Jesus said unto her: "Well said, Mary."

<span class="margnote">The repentance of Sophia is accepted. Jesus is
sent to help her.</span>Jesus continued again and said unto his
disciples: "It came to pass then, when Pistis Sophia had proclaimed the
ninth repentance, that the lion-faced power oppressed her again,
desiring to take away all powers from her. She cried out again to the
Light, saying: \|<span class="rmargnote">**99**.</span>

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

"'O Light, in whom I have had faith from the beginning, for whose sake I
have endured these great pains, help me.'

"And in that hour her repentance was accepted from her. The First
Mystery hearkened unto her, and I was sent off at his command. I came to
help her, and led her up out of the chaos, because she had repented, and
also because she had had faith in the Light and had endured these great
pains and these great perils. She had been deluded through the god-like
Self-willed, and had not been deluded through anything else, save
through a light-power, because of its resemblance to the Light in which
she had had faith. For this cause then was I sent forth at the command
of the First Mystery to help her secretly. I did not however yet go to
the region of the æons at all; but I passed down through the midst out
of them, without any single power knowing it, either those of the
interior of the interior or those of the exterior of the exterior, save
only the First Mystery.

"It came to pass then, when I came into the chaos to help her, that she
saw me, that I was understanding and shone exceedingly and was full of
compassion for her. For I was not self-willed as the lion-faced power,
which had taken away the light-power from Sophia, and had also oppressed
her in order to take away from her the whole light in her. Sophia then
saw me, that I shone ten-thousand times more than the lion-faced power,
\|<span class="rmargnote">**100**.</span> and that I was full of
compassion for her. And she knew that I came out of the Height of
heights, in whose light she had had faith from the beginning. Pistis
Sophia then

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

took courage and uttered the tenth repentance, saying:

<span class="margnote">The tenth repentance of Sophia.</span>"'1. I have
cried unto thee, O Light of lights, in my oppression and thou hast
hearkened unto me.

"'2. O Light, save my power from unjust and lawless lips and from crafty
traps.

"'3. The light which was being taken from me in crafty snaring, will not
be brought unto thee.

"'4. For the traps of Self-willed and the nooses of the merciless
\[one\] are spread out.

"'5. Woe unto me, that my dwelling was far off, and I was in the
dwellings of the chaos.

"'6. My power was in regions which are not mine.

"'7. And I entreated those merciless \[ones\]; and when I entreated
them, they fought against me without a cause.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 53](ps057)
