[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Gnosticism](../../gno/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ps054) 
[Next](ps056) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5HQY/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Pistis Sophia*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1921\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER 51

It came to pass, when Jesus had finished saying these words unto his
disciples, that he said unto them: "Who is sober among you, let him
proclaim their solution."

James came forward, kissed the breast of Jesus and said: "My Lord, thy
spirit hath sobered me, and I am ready to proclaim their solution.
Concerning them indeed thy power hath prophesied aforetime through David
in the thirty-fourth Psalm, saying thus concerning the ninth repentance
of Pistis Sophia:

<span class="margnote">James interpreteth the ninth repentance from
Psalm xxxiv.</span>"'1. Give sentence, O Lord, on them who do me
injustice, and fight against them who fight against me.

"'2. Lay hand on weapon and shield and stand up to help me.

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

"'3. Draw forth a sword and conceal it \[*sic*\] from my oppressors. Say
unto my soul: I am thy salvation.

"'4. Let them be put to shame and abashed who strive after my soul; let
them fall back and be put to shame who imagine evil against me.

"'5. Let them be as chaff \|<span class="rmargnote">**94**.</span>
before the wind, and let the angel of the Lord pursue after them.

"'6. Let their way be darkness and slippery, and let the angel of the
Lord oppress them.

"'7. For without cause have they hid a snare for me for their own
spoiling, and they have mocked at my soul in vain.

"'8. Let a snare come upon them which they know not, and let the net
which they have hid for me, catch them, and let them fall into this
snare.

"'9. But my soul will exult in the Lord and rejoice in its salvation.

"'10. All my bones shall say: O Lord, who can be like unto thee?--thou
who settest free the wretched from the hand \|<span
class="rmargnote">**95**.</span> of him who is stronger than him; and
thou savest a wretched and poor \[one\] from the hands of them who spoil
him.

"11. Unjust witnesses came forward and have asked me that which I knew
not.

"'12. They have requited me evil for good and childlessness for my soul.

"13. But when they molested me, I clothed me in a sack and humbled my
soul with fasting, and my prayer will return into my breast.

"'14. I was pleasing unto thee, as unto my neighbour and as unto my
brother; and I

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

humbled myself as one in mourning and as one who is sad.

"'15. They have rejoiced over me, and they are put to shame. Scourges
have gathered themselves together against me and I knew not; they were
cut off and were troubled.

"'16. They have brought me to trial and mocked me with mocking; they
have ground \|<span class="rmargnote">**96**.</span> their teeth against
me.

"'17. O Lord, when wilt thou look upon me? Restore again my soul from
their evil works and save my only one from the hands of the lions.

"'18. I will confess to thee, O Lord, in the great assembly, and I will
sing praises to thee in the midst of a countless people.

"'19. Let not them who unjustly treat me as a foe, rejoice over me, who
hate me without a cause and wink with their eyes.

"'20. For indeed they discourse with me with words of peace, though they
plot wrath with craft.

"'21. They opened their chops wide against me and said: Well indeed, our
eyes have filled our sight with him.

"'22. Thou hast seen, O Lord. Keep not silence, O Lord, withdraw not
thyself from me.

"'23. Arise, O Lord, \|<span class="rmargnote">**97**.</span> and give
heed to my vindication, give heed to my vengeance, my God and my Lord.

"'24. Judge me, O Lord, according to thy justice; let them not rejoice
over me, my God.

"'25. And let them not say: Well done, our soul. Let them not say: We
have consumed him.

"'26. Let them be put to shame and be scorned, who rejoice at my
mischance. Let

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

them be clothed with shame and disgrace who speak boastingly against me.

"'27. Let them who desire my justification, exult and rejoice and let
them who desire the peace of his slave, say: May the Lord be great and
arise.

"'28. My tongue will exult over thy justification and over thy honour
all the day long.'" \|<span class="rmargnote">**98**.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 52](ps056)
