[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Gnosticism](../../gno/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ps061) 
[Next](ps063) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5HQY/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Pistis Sophia*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1921\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER 58

<span class="margnote">Jesus sendeth forth a light-power to help
Sophia.</span>And Jesus continued again in the discourse and said unto
his disciples: "It came to pass then, when Pistis Sophia had said these
words, that the time was fulfilled that she should be led out of the
chaos. And of myself, without the First Mystery, I despatched out of
myself a light-power, and I sent it down to the chaos, so that it might
lead Pistis Sophia forth from the deep regions of the chaos, and lead
\[her\] to the higher regions of the chaos, until the command should
come from the First Mystery that she should be led entirely forth out of
the chaos. And my light-power led Pistis Sophia up to the higher regions

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

of the chaos. It came to pass then, when the emanations of Self-willed
had noticed that Pistis Sophia was led forth into the higher regions of
the chaos, that they also sped after her upwards, desiring to bring her
again into the lower regions of the chaos. And my light-power, which I
had sent to lead up Sophia out of the chaos, shone exceedingly. It came
to pass then, when the emanations of Self-willed pursued Sophia, \|<span
class="rmargnote">**113**.</span> when she had been led into the higher
regions of the chaos, that she again sang praises and cried out unto me,
saying:

<span class="margnote">Sophia uttereth a song of praise.</span>"'1. I
will sing praises unto thee, O Light, for I desired to come unto thee. I
will sing thee praises, O Light, for thou art my deliverer.

"'2. Leave me not in the chaos. Save me, O Light of the Height, for it
is thou that I have praised.

"'3. Thou has sent me thy light through thyself and hast saved me. Thou
hast led me to the higher regions of the chaos.

"'4. May the emanations of Self-willed which pursue me, sink down into
the lower regions of the chaos, and let them not come to the higher
regions to see me.

"'5. And may great darkness cover them and darker gloom come over them.
And let them not see me in the light of thy power, which thou hast sent
unto me to save me, so that they may not again get dominion over me.

"'6. And let not their resolution which they have formed, to take away
my power, take effect for them. And as they have spoken against me, to
take from me my light, take rather from them theirs instead of mine.

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

"'7. And they have proposed to take away my whole light and have not
been able to take it, for thy light-power was with me.

"'8. Because they have taken counsel without thy commandment, O Light,
therefore have they not been able to take away my light.

"'9. Because I \|<span class="rmargnote">**114**.</span> have had faith
in the Light, I shall not be afraid; and the Light is my deliverer and I
shall not fear.'

"Now, therefore, let him whose power is exalted, speak the solution of
the words which Pistis Sophia hath uttered."

And it came to pass, when Jesus had finished speaking these words unto
his disciples, that Salome came forward and said: "My Lord, my power
constraineth me to speak the solution of the words which Pistis Sophia
hath uttered. Thy power hath prophesied aforetime through Solomon,
saying:

<span class="margnote">Salome interpreteth the song of Sophia from the
Odes of Solomon.</span>"'1. I will give thanks unto thee, O Lord, for
thou art my God.

"'2. Abandon me not, O Lord, for thou art! my hope.

"'3. Thou hast given me thy vindication for naught, and I am saved
through thee.

"'4. Let them who pursue me, fall down and let them not see me.

"'5. May a smoke-cloud cover their eyes and an air-mist darken them, and
let them not see the day, so that they may not seize me.

"'6. May their resolution be impotent, and may what they concoct come
upon them.

"'7. They have devised a resolution, and it hath not taken effect for
them.

"'8. And they are vanquished, although they

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

be mighty, and what they have wickedly pre-pared is fallen upon them.

"'9. My hope is in the Lord, and I shall not be afraid, for thou art my
God, my Saviour.'"

It came to pass then, when Salome had finished saying these words, that
Jesus said unto her: "Well said, \|<span
class="rmargnote">**115**.</span> Salome; and finely. This is the
solution of the words which Pistis Sophia hath uttered."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 59](ps063)
