[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Gnosticism](../../gno/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ps080) 
[Next](ps082) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5HQY/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Pistis Sophia*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1921\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER 76

"And thereafter I said again unto her: 'Hearken that I \|<span
class="rmargnote">**167**.</span> may speak with thee about their time,
when this which I have said unto thee, will come to pass. It will come
to pass when \[the\] three times are completed.'

"Pistis Sophia answered and said unto me:

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 'O Light, by what
shall I know when the three times will take place, so that I may be glad
and rejoice that the time is near for thee to bring me to my region, and
moreover rejoice therein that the time is come when thou wilt take the
light-power from all them which hate me, because I have had faith in thy
light?'

<span class="margnote">How Sophia will know that the time of her final
deliverance hath come.</span>"And I answered and said unto her: 'If thou
seest the gate of the Treasury of the Great Light which is opened after
the thirteenth æon, and that is the left \[one\],--when that gate is
opened, then are the three times completed.'

"Pistis Sophia again answered and said: 'O Light, by what shall I
know,--for I am in this region,--that that gate is opened?'

<span class="margnote">What will come to pass at that time.</span>"And I
answered and said unto her: 'When that gate is opened, they who are in
all the æons will know because of the Great Light which will obtain in
all their regions. But see, I have now settled that they shall venture
no ill against thee, until the three times are completed. And thou wilt
have the power of going down into their twelve æons, \|<span
class="rmargnote">**168**.</span> when it pleaseth thee, and also of
returning and going into thy region, which is below the thirteenth æon,
and in which thou now art. But thou wilt not have the power of passing
through the gate of the Height which is in the thirteenth æon, so as to
enter into thy region whence thou didst come down. Moreover, if then the
three times are completed, Self-willed and all his rulers will again
constrain thee, to take thy light from thee, being enraged against thee
and thinking that thou hast imprisoned his power in the chaos, and
thinking that thou hast taken its light from it. He will then be
embittered

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

against thee, to take from thee thy light, in order that he may send it
down into the chaos and it may get down to that emanation of his, so
that it may be able to come up out of the chaos and go to his region.
Adamas will attempt this. But I will take all thy powers from him and
give them unto thee, and I will come to take them. Now, therefore, if
they constrain thee at that time, then sing praises to the Light, and I
will not delay to help thee. And I will quickly come unto thee to the
regions which are below thee. And I will come down to their regions to
take their light from them. And I will come to this region whither I
have removed thee, and which is below the thirteenth \|<span
class="rmargnote">**169**.</span> æon, until I bring thee to thy region
whence thou art come.'

"It came to pass then, when Pistis Sophia had heard me say these words
unto her, that she rejoiced with great joy. But I removed her to the
region which is below the thirteenth æon. I went to the Light and
departed from her."

And all these adventures the First Mystery told to the disciples, that
they should come to pass for Pistis Sophia. And he sat on the Mount<span
class="margnote">The time for the final deliverance of Sophia is
completed.</span> of Olives, narrating all these adventures in the midst
of the disciples. And he continued again and said unto them: "And it
came to pass again after this, while I was in the world of men and sat
in the way, that is in this region which is the Mount of Olives, before
my vesture was sent unto me, which I had deposited in the
four-and-twentieth mystery from the interior, but the first from the
exterior, which is the Great Uncontainable, in which I am enwrapped, and
before I had gone to the Height to receive my second vesture,--

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

while I sat with you in this region, which is the Mount of Olives, that
the time was completed of which I had said to Pistis Sophia: 'Adamas and
all his rulers will constrain thee.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 77](ps082)
