[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Gnosticism](../../gno/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ps094) 
[Next](ps096) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5HQY/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Pistis Sophia*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1921\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER 90

<span class="margnote">Mary again questioneth Jesus.</span>It came to
pass then, when Jesus had finished saying these words unto his
disciples, that Mary Magdalene came forward again, continued and said
unto Jesus: "My Lord, in what type will

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

be those who have received the mystery of the Light, in the midst of the
last Helper?"

<span class="margnote">Of those who receive the mystery in the last
Helper.</span>And Jesus answered and said unto Mary in the midst of the
disciples: "They who have received the mystery of the Light, if they
come out of the body of the matter of the rulers, then will every one be
in his order according to the mystery which he hath received. Those who
have received the higher mysteries, will abide in the higher order;
those who have received the lower mysteries will be in the lower orders.
In a word, up to what region every one hath received mysteries, there
will he abide in his order in the Inheritance of the Light. For which
cause I have said unto you aforetime: 'Where your heart is, there will
your treasure be,'--that is up to what region every one hath received
mysteries, there shall he be."

It came to pass, when Jesus had finished saying these words unto his
disciples, that John came forward and said unto Jesus: "My Lord and my
Saviour, give me also commandment that I discourse before thee, and be
not wroth with me if I question concerning all with precision and
certainty; for thou, my Lord, hast promised me in a promise to make
revelation unto us of all concerning which I shall question thee. Now,
therefore, my Lord, hide nothing from us at all in the matter on which
we shall question thee."

And Jesus answered in great compassion and said unto John: "To thee
also, blessed John, and beloved, I give commandment to speak the word
which pleaseth thee, and I will reveal it unto thee face to face without
similitude, and I

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

will say unto thee \|<span class="rmargnote">**203**.</span> all on
which thou wilt question me with precision and certainty."

<span class="margnote">John questioneth Jesus.</span>And John answered
and said unto Jesus: "My Lord, will then every one abide in the region
up to which he hath received the mysteries, and hath he no power to go.
into other orders which are above him; and hath he no power to go into
the orders which are below him?"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 91](ps096)
