[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Gnosticism](../../gno/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ps106) 
[Next](ps108) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5HQY/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Pistis Sophia*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1921\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

# A THIRD BOOK

### CHAPTER 102

<span class="margnote">Of the proclamation of the disciples.</span>JESUS
continued again in the discourse and said unto his disciples: "When I
shall have gone into the Light, then herald it unto the whole world and
say unto them: Cease not to seek day and night and remit not yourselves
until ye find the mysteries of the Light-kingdom, which will purify you
and make you into refined light and lead you into the Light-kingdom.

<span class="margnote">What men should renounce.</span>"Say unto them:
Renounce the whole world and the whole matter therein and all its care
and all its sins, in a word all its associations which are in it, that
ye may be worthy of the mysteries of the Light and be saved from all the
chastisements which are in the judgments.

"Say unto them: Renounce murmuring, that ye may be worthy of the
mysteries of the Light and be saved from the fire of the dog-faced
\[one\].

"Say unto them: Renounce eavesdropping \[?\], that ye may \[be worthy of
the mysteries of the Light\] and be saved from the judgments of the
dog-faced \[one\].

"Say unto them: Renounce litigiousness \[?\], that ye may be worthy of
the mysteries of the Light and be saved from the chastisements of Ariēl.

"Say unto them: Renounce false slander, that ye may be worthy of the
mysteries of the

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Light and be saved
from the fire-rivers of the dog-faced \[one\].

"Say unto them: Renounce false witness, that ye may be worthy of the
mysteries of the Light and that ye may escape and be saved from the
fire-rivers of the dog-faced \[one\].

"Say unto them: Renounce pride and haughtiness, that ye may be worthy of
the mysteries of the Light and be saved from the fire-pits of Ariēl.

"Say unto them: Renounce belly-love, that ye may be worthy of the
mysteries of the Light and be saved from the judgments of Amente.

"Say unto them: Renounce babbling, that ye may be worthy of the
mysteries of the Light and be saved from the fires of Amente.

"Say unto them: \|<span class="rmargnote">**256**.</span> Renounce
craftiness, that ye may be worthy of the mysteries of the Light and be
saved from the chastisements which are in Amente.

"Say unto them: Renounce avarice, that ye may be worthy of the mysteries
of the Light and be saved from the fire-rivers of the dog-faced \[one\].

"Say unto them: Renounce love of the world, that ye may be worthy of the
mysteries of the Light and be saved from the pitch- and fire-coats of
the dog-faced \[one\].

"Say unto them: Renounce pillage, that ye may be worthy of the mysteries
of the Light and be saved from the fire-rivers of Ariēl.

"Say unto them: Renounce evil conversation, that ye may be worthy of the
mysteries of the Light and be saved from the chastisements of the
fire-rivers . . . .

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

"Say unto them: Renounce wickedness, that ye may be worthy of the
mysteries of the Light and be saved from the fire-seas of Ariēl.

"Say unto them: Renounce pitilessness, that ye may be worthy of the
mysteries of the Light and be saved from the judgments of the
dragon-faced \[ones\].

"Say unto them: Renounce wrath, that ye may be worthy of the mysteries
of the Light and be saved from the fire-rivers of the dragon-faced
\[ones.\]

"Say unto them: Renounce cursing, that ye may be worthy of the mysteries
of the Light and be saved from the fire-seas of the dragon-faced
\[ones\].

"Say unto them: Renounce thieving, that ye may be worthy of the
mysteries of the Light and be saved from the bubbling seas of the
dragon-faced \[ones\]. \|<span class="rmargnote">**257**.</span>

"Say unto them: Renounce robbery, that ye may be worthy of the mysteries
of the Light and be saved from Yaldabaōth.

"Say unto them: Renounce slandering, that ye may be worthy of the
mysteries of the Light and be saved from the fire-rivers of the
lion-faced \[one\].

"Say unto them: Renounce fighting and strife, that ye may be worthy of
the mysteries of the Light and be saved from the seething rivers of
Yaldabaōth.

"Say unto them: Renounce all unknowing, that ye may be worthy of the
mysteries of the Light and be saved from the servitors of Yaldabaōth and
the fire-seas.

"Say unto them: Renounce evil doing, that

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

ye may be worthy of the mysteries of the Light and be saved from all the
demons of Yaldabaōth and all his judgments.

"Say unto them: Renounce sloth, that ye may be worthy of the mysteries
of the Light and be saved from the seething pitch-seas of Yaldabaōth.

"Say unto them: Renounce adultery, that ye may be worthy of the
mysteries of the Light-kingdom and be saved from the sulphur- and
pitch-seas of the lion-faced \[one\].

"Say unto them: Renounce murder, that ye may be worthy of the mysteries
of the Light and be saved from the crocodile-faced ruler,--this one who
is in the cold, \|<span class="rmargnote">**258**.</span> is the first
chamber of the outer darkness.

"Say unto them: Renounce pitilessness and impiety, that ye may be worthy
of the mysteries of the Light and be saved from the rulers of the outer
darkness.

"Say unto them: Renounce atheism, that ye may be worthy of the mysteries
of the Light and be saved from the howling and grinding of teeth.

"Say unto them: Renounce \[magic\] potions, that ye may be worthy of the
mysteries of the Light and be saved from the great cold and the hail of
the outer darkness.

"Say unto them: Renounce blasphemy, that ye may be worthy of the
mysteries of the Light and be saved from the great dragon of the outer
darkness.

"Say unto them: Renounce the doctrines of error, that ye may be worthy
of the mysteries of the Light and be saved from all the chastisements

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

of the great dragon of the outer darkness.

"Say unto those who teach the doctrines of error and to every one who is
instructed by them: Woe unto you, for, if ye do not repent and abandon
your error, ye will go into the chastisements of the great dragon and of
the outer darkness, which is exceedingly evil, and never will ye be cast
\[up\] into the world, but will be non-existent until the end. \|<span
class="rmargnote">**259**.</span>

"Say unto those who abandon the doctrines of truth of the First Mystery:
Woe unto you, for your chastisement is sad compared with \[that of\] all
men. For ye will abide in the great cold and ice and hail in the midst
of the dragon and of the outer darkness, and ye will never from this
hour on be cast \[up\] into the world, but ye shall be frozen up \[?\]
in that region and at the dissolution of the universe ye will perish and
become non-existent eternally.

<span class="margnote">The boundaries of the ways of the
worthy.</span>"Say rather to the men of the world: Be calm, that ye may
receive the mysteries of the Light and go on high into the
Light-kingdom.

"Say unto them: Be ye loving-unto-men, that ye may be worthy of the
mysteries of the Light and go on high into the Light-kingdom.

"Say unto them: Be ye gentle, that ye may receive the mysteries of the
Light and go on high into the Light-kingdom.

"Say unto them: Be ye peaceful, that ye may receive the mysteries of the
Light and go on high into the Light-kingdom.

"Say unto them: Be ye merciful, that ye may receive the mysteries of the
Light and go on high into the Light-kingdom.

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

"Say unto them: Give ye alms, that ye may receive the mysteries of the
Light and go on high into the Light-kingdom.

"Say unto them: Minister unto the poor and the sick and distressed, that
ye may receive the mysteries \|<span class="rmargnote">**260**.</span>
of the Light and go on high into the Light-kingdom.

"Say unto them: Be ye loving-unto-God, that ye may receive the mysteries
of the Light and go on high into the Light-kingdom.

"Say unto them: Be ye righteous, that ye may receive the mysteries \[of
the Light\] and go on high into the Light-kingdom.

"Say unto them: Be good, that ye may receive the mysteries \[of the
Light\] and go on high into the Light-kingdom.

"Say unto them: Renounce all, that ye may receive the mysteries of the
Light and go on high into the Light-kingdom.

"These are all the boundaries of the ways for those who are worthy of
the mysteries of the Light.

<span class="margnote">Unto whom are the mysteries of the Light to be
given.</span>"Unto, such, therefore, who have renounced in this
renunciation, give the mysteries of the Light and hide them not from
them at all, even though they are sinners and they have been in al! the
sins and all the iniquities of the world, all of which I have recounted
unto you, in order that they may turn and repent and be in the
submission which I have just recounted unto you. Give unto them the
mysteries of the Light-kingdom and hide them not from them at all;<span
class="margnote">The mysteries are for the forgiveness of sins.</span>
for it is because of sinfulness that I have brought the mysteries into
the world, that I may forgive all their sins which they have committed
from the beginning on. For this cause

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

have I said unto you aforetime: 'I am not come to call the righteous.'
Now, \|<span class="rmargnote">**261**.</span> therefore, I have brought
the mysteries that \[their\] sins may be forgiven for every one and they
be received into the Light-kingdom. For the mysteries are the gift of
the First Mystery, that he may wipe out the sins and iniquities of all
sinners."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 103](ps108)
