[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Gnosticism](../../gno/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ps109) 
[Next](ps111) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5HQY/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Pistis Sophia*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1921\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER 105

<span class="margnote">John continueth his questioning.</span>When then
the Saviour had said this, John started forward and said: "My Lord, bear
with me if I question thee, for from now on I will begin to, question
thee on all things concerning the manner, how we are to herald it to
mankind.

"If, therefore, I give that brother a mystery out of the mysteries of
the beginning which are in the first space from without, and if I give
him many mysteries and he doeth not what \|<span
class="rmargnote">**266**.</span> is

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

worthy of the kingdom of heaven,--desirest thou that we let him pass
through to the mysteries of the second space? Perchance we win the soul
of that brother, and he turneth, repenteth and inheriteth the
Light-kingdom. Desirest thou that we let him pass through to the
mysteries \[which are in the second space\] or not?"

<span class="margnote">That the mysteries shall be given again unto a
repentant brother even up to the three of the second space.</span>And
the Saviour answered and said unto John: "If it is a brother who is not
play-acting, but in truth longeth after God, if ye have given him many
times the mysteries of the beginning and because of the necessity of the
elements of the Fate he hath not done what is worthy of the mysteries of
the Light-kingdom, then forgive him, let him pass through and give him
the first mystery which is in the second space. Perchance ye win the
soul of that brother.

"And if he hath not done what is worthy of the mysteries of the Light
and hath committed transgression and divers sins, and thereafter hath
turned; again and been in great repentance and hath renounced the whole
world and ceased from all the sins of the world, and ye know with
certainty that he doth not play-act but in truth longeth after God, then
turn ye anew, forgive him, let him pass on through and give him the
second mystery in the second \|<span class="rmargnote">**267**.</span>
space of the First Mystery. Perchance ye win the soul of that brother
and he inheriteth the Light-kingdom.

"And again if he hath not done what is worthy of the mysteries, but hath
been in transgression and divers sins, and thereafter again hath turned
and been in great repentance and hath renounced the whole world and the
whole matter therein and ceased from the sins of the world, so that

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

ye know truly that he is not play-acting but longeth truly after God,
then turn ye anew, forgive him and receive his repentance, because the
First Mystery is compassionate and merciful-minded; let also that man
pass through and give him the three mysteries together which are in the
second space of the First Mystery.

<span class="margnote">The limit of the power of the disciples to
forgive sins.</span>"If that man \[then\] transgresseth and is in divers
sins, from that moment onwards ye are not to forgive him nor to receive
his repentance; but let him be among you as a stumbling-block and as a
transgressor.

"For, amēn, I say unto you: Those three mysteries will be witnesses for
his last repentance, and he hath not repentance from this moment
onwards. For, amēn, I say unto you: The soul of that man will not
\|<span class="rmargnote">**268**.</span> be cast back into the world
above from this moment onwards, but will be in the abodes of the dragon
of the outer darkness.

<span class="margnote">A former saying explained.</span>"For regarding
the souls of such men I have spoken unto you aforetime in a similitude,
saying: 'If thy brother sinneth against thee, bring him over between
thee alone and him. If he hearkeneth unto thee, thou wilt win thy
brother; if he hearkeneth not unto thee, take with thee yet another. If
he hearkeneth not unto thee and the other, bring him to the assembly. If
he hearken not unto the others, let him be for you as a transgressor and
as a stumbling-block.'--That is: If he is not usable in the first
mystery, give him the second; and if he is not usable in the second give
him the three, assembled together, which is 'the assembly'; and if he is
not usable in the third mystery, let him be for you as a stumbling-block
and as a transgressor.

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

<span class="margnote">Of the master-mystery of the forgiveness of
sins.</span>"And the word which I have spoken unto you aforetime: 'So
that through two to three witnesses every word may be established,'--it
is this: Those three mysteries will witness for his last repentance. And
amēn, \|<span class="rmargnote">**269**.</span> I say unto you: If that
man repenteth, no mystery can forgive him his sins, nor can his
repentance be received, nor can he at all be hearkened to through any
mystery, save through the first mystery of the First Mystery and through
the mysteries of the Ineffable. It is these alone which will receive the
repentance of that man and forgive his sins; for those mysteries in
sooth are compassionate and merciful-minded and forgiving at every
time."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 106](ps111)
