[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Gnosticism](../../gno/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ps120) 
[Next](ps122) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5HQY/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Pistis Sophia*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1921\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER 116

When then \|<span class="rmargnote">**301**.</span> the Saviour had said
this, he said unto his disciples: "Understand ye in what manner I
discourse with you?"

<span class="margnote">Mary interpreteth the same from a former
saying.</span>Then Mary started forward and said: "Yea, my Lord, in
truth I enquire closely into all the words which thou sayest. Concerning
the word then of the forgiveness of sins thou hast spoken unto us in
similitude aforetime, saying: 'I am come to cast fire on the earth,' and
again: 'What will I that it burn?' And again thou hast distinguished

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

it clearly, saying: 'I have a baptism, to baptize in it; and how shall I
endure until it is accomplished? Think ye I am come to cast peace on the
earth? Nay, but I am come to cast division. For from now on five will be
in one house; three will be divided against two, and two against three.'
This, my Lord, is the word which thou hast spoken clearly.

"The word indeed which thou hast spoken: 'I am come to cast fire on the
earth, and what will I that it burn?'--that is, my Lord: Thou hast
brought the mysteries of the baptisms into the world, and thy pleasure
is that they should consume all the sins of the soul and purify them.
And thereafter again thou hast distinguished it clearly, saying: 'I have
a baptism, to baptize in it; and \|<span
class="rmargnote">**302**.</span> how shall I endure until it is
accomplished?'--that is: Thou wilt not remain in the world until the
baptisms are accomplished and purify the perfect souls.

"And moreover the word which thou hast spoken unto us aforetime: 'Think
ye I am come to cast peace on the earth? Nay, but I am come to cast
division. For from now on five will be in one house; three will be
divided against two, and two against three,'--that is: Thou hast brought
the mystery of the baptisms into the world, and it hath effected a
division in the bodies of the world, because it hath separated the
counterfeiting spirit and the body and the destiny into one portion; the
soul and the power on the other hand it hath separated into another
portion;--that is: Three will be against two, and two against three."

And when Mary had said this, the Saviour

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

said: "Well said, thou spiritual and light-pure Mary. This is the
solution of the word."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 117](ps122)
