[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Gnosticism](../../gno/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ps123) 
[Next](ps125) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5HQY/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Pistis Sophia*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1921\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER 119

Mary continued again and said: "My Lord, but if on the other hand they
who have received the mysteries of the First Mystery, turn and
transgress, and if they come out of the body before they have repented,
will they inherit the kingdom or not, because indeed they have received
the gift of the First Mystery?"

<span class="margnote">Of such initiated who sin and die without
repentance.</span>The Saviour answered and said unto Mary: "Amēn, amēn,
I say unto you: Every man who hath received mysteries in the First
Mystery, \| having transgressed for the first and the second and the
third time, and if he cometh out of the body before he hath repented,
his judgment is far sorer than all the judgments; for his dwelling is in
the midst of the jaws of the dragon of the outer darkness, and at the
end of all this he will be frozen up \[?\] in the chastisements and
perish for ever, because he hath received the gift of the First Mystery
and hath not abided in it \[*sc.* the gift\].

<span class="margnote">Of the unending forgiveness of those who have
received the mystery of the Ineffable.</span>Mary answered and said: "My
Lord, all men who shall receive the mysteries of the mystery of the
Ineffable, and have turned again, have transgressed and have ceased in
their faith, and again thereafter, when they are still in life,

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

have turned and have repented, how many times will it be forgiven them?"

The Saviour answered and said unto Mary: "Amēn, amēn, I say unto you: To
every man who shall receive the mysteries of the Ineffable, not only if
he transgresseth once, turneth again and repenteth, will it be forgiven,
but if at any time he transgresseth, and if, when still in life, he
turneth again and repenteth, without play- acting, and again if he
turneth and repenteth and prayeth in any of his mysteries, then will it
be forgiven him, because he hath received of the gift of the mysteries
of \|<span class="rmargnote">**307**.</span> the Ineffable, and moreover
because those mysteries are compassionate and forgive at every time."

And Mary answered again and said unto Jesus: "My Lord, those who shall
receive the mysteries of the Ineffable, and have again turned, have
transgressed and have ceased in their faith and are moreover come out of
the body before they have repented, what will befall such?"

<span class="margnote">Of such initiated who sin and die without
repentance.</span>And the Saviour answered and said unto Mary: "Amēn,
amēn, I say unto you: All men who shall receive the mysteries of the
Ineffable, blessed indeed are the souls which shall receive of those
mysteries; but if they turn and transgress and come out of the body
before they have repented, the judgment of those men is sorer than all
the judgments, and it is exceedingly violent, even if those souls are
new and it is their first time for coming into the world. They will not
return to the changes of the bodies from that hour onwards and will not
be able to do anything, but they will be cast out into the outer

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

darkness and perish and be non-existent for ever."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 120](ps125)
