[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Gnosticism](../../gno/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ps138) 
[Next](ps140) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5HQY/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Pistis Sophia*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1921\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER 134

When then Jesus had said this, Mary answered and said: "My Lord, if men
go to seek and they come upon the doctrines of error, I whence then are
they to know whether they belong to thee or not?"

The Saviour answered and said unto Mary: "I have said unto you
aforetime: 'Be ye as skilful money-changers. Take the good, throw the
bad away.'

<span class="margnote">The criterion of orthodoxy.</span>"Now,
therefore, say unto all men who would seek the godhead: 'If north wind
cometh, then ye know that there will be cold; if south wind cometh, then
ye know that there will be burning and fervent heat.' Now, therefore,
say unto them: 'If ye have known the face of the heaven and of the earth
from the winds, then know ye exactly, if then any come now unto you and
proclaim unto you a godhead, whether their words have harmonized and
fitted with all your words which I have spoken unto you through two up
to three witnesses, and whether they have harmonized in the setting of
the air and of the heavens and of the circuits and of the stars and of
the light-givers and of the whole earth and all on it and of all waters
and all in them.' Say unto them: 'Those who shall come unto you, and
their words fit and harmonize in the whole gnosis with that which I have
said unto you, I will receive as belonging unto us.' This is what ye
shall say unto men, if ye make proclamation unto them in order that they
may guard themselves from the doctrines of error. \|<span
class="rmargnote">**354**.</span>

<span id="page_292">p. 292</span>

<span class="margnote">The Books of Yew.</span>"Now, therefore, for the
sake of sinners have I rent myself asunder and am come into the world,
that I may save them. For even for the righteous, who have never done
any evil and have not sinned at all, it is necessary that they should
find the mysteries which are in the Books of Yew, which I have made
Enoch write in Paradise, discoursing with him out of the tree of the
Gnosis and out of the tree of the Life. And I made him deposit them in
the rock Ararad, and set the ruler Kalapataurōth, who is over Skemmūt,
on whose head is the foot of Yew, and who surroundeth all æons and
Fates,--I set up that ruler as watcher over the Books of Yew on account
of the flood, and in order that none of the rulers may be envious of
them and destroy them. These will I give you, when I shall have told you
the expansion of the universe."

When then the Saviour had said this, Mary answered and said: "My Lord,
who now then is the man in the world who hath not sinned at all, who is
pure of iniquities? For if he is pure of one, he will not be able to be
pure of another, so that he may find the mysteries which are in the
Books of Yew? For I say: A man in this world will not be able to be pure
of sins; for if he is pure of one, he will not be able to be pure of
another."

<span class="margnote">Few only will accomplish the mystery of the First
Mystery.</span>The Saviour answered and said unto Mary: "I say unto you:
They will find one in a thousand and two in ten-thousand for the
accomplishment of the mystery of the First Mystery. This will I tell
unto you when I have explained to you the expansion of the universe. For
this cause, therefore, I have rent myself asunder and have brought

<span id="page_293">p. 293</span>

the mysteries into the world, because all are under sin and all are in
need of the gift of the mysteries."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 135](ps140)
