[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Gnosticism](../../gno/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ps131) 
[Next](ps133) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5HQY/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Pistis Sophia*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1921\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER 127

When the Saviour had said this, Mary Magdalene answered and said: "My
Lord, will then the souls which shall be led into that region, be led
through these twelve doors of the dungeons, every one according to the
judgment of which it is deserving?"

<span class="margnote">What souls pass into the dragon, and
how.</span>The Saviour answered and said unto Mary: "No soul at all will
be led into the dragon through these doors. But the soul\[s\] of the
blasphemers and of those who are in the doctrines of error and of all
who teach doctrines of error, and of those who have intercourse with
males, and of those stained and impious men and of atheists and
murderers and adulterers and sorcerers,--all such souls then, if while
still in life they do not repent but \|<span
class="rmargnote">**323**.</span> remain persistently in their sin, and
all the souls which have stayed behind without, that is those which have
had the number of the circuits which are appointed them in the sphere,
without having repented,--well, at their last circuit will those souls,
they and all the souls of which I have just told you, be led out of
\[?\] the jaws of the tail of the dragon into the dungeons of the outer
darkness. And when those souls of the doors of the dungeons.

<span id="page_268">p. 268</span>

have been led into the outer darkness into the jaws of his tail, he
turneth his tail into his own mouth and shutteth them in. Thus will the
souls be led into the outer darkness.

<span class="margnote">The nature of the names of the dragon.</span>"And
the dragon of the outer darkness hath twelve authentic names on his
doors, a name on every one of the doors of the dungeons. And these
twelve names are different one from another; but the twelve are one in
the other, so that he who speaketh one name, speaketh all. These then
will I tell you at the expansion of the universe. Thus then is fashioned
the outer darkness,--that is the dragon."

When then the Saviour had said this, Mary answered and said \|<span
class="rmargnote">**324**.</span> unto the Saviour: "My Lord, are then
the chastisements of that dragon far more terrible compared with all the
chastisements of the judgments?"

<span class="margnote">Of the severity of the chastisements of the
dragon.</span>The Saviour answered and said unto Mary: "Not only are
they more painful compared with all the chastisements of the judgments,
but all the souls which are led into that region, will be frozen up
\[?\] in the violent cold and the hail and exceedingly violent fire
which is in that region, but also at the dissolution of the world, that
is at the ascension of the universe, those souls will perish through the
violent cold and the exceedingly violent fire and be non-existent for
ever."

Mary answered and said: "Woe unto the souls of sinners! Now, therefore,
my Lord, is the fire in the world of mankind fiercer, or the fire in
Amente?"

<span class="margnote">Of the degrees of the fires of the
chastisements.</span>The Saviour answered and said unto Mary: "Amēn, I
say unto thee: The fire in Amente is nine times fiercer than the fire in
mankind.

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

"And the fire in the chastisements of the great chaos is nine times more
violent than that in Amente.

"And the fire in the chastisements of the rulers who \[are\] on the way
of the midst, is nine times more violent than the fire of the
chastisements in the great chaos.

"And the fire \|<span class="rmargnote">**325**.</span> in the dragon of
the outer darkness and in all the chastisements in him is seventy times
more violent than the fire in all the chastisements and in all the
judgments of the rulers who \[are\] on the way of the midst."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 128](ps133)
