[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Gnosticism](../../gno/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ps143) 
[Next](ps145) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5HQY/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Pistis Sophia*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1921\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER 139

Jesus continued in the discourse and said: "It came to pass then
thereafter, that the father of my father,--that is Yew,--came and took

<span id="page_301">p. 301</span>

<span class="margnote">Of the constitution of the way of the
midst.</span>other three-hundred-and-sixty rulers from the rulers of
Adamas who had not had faith in the mystery of the Light, and bound them
into these aërial regions, in which we are now, below the sphere. He
established another five great rulers over them,--that is these who are
on the way of the midst.

<span class="margnote">Of Paraplēx.</span>"The first ruler of the way of
the midst is called Paraplēx, a ruler with a woman's shape, whose hair
reacheth down to her feet, under whose authority stand five-and-twenty
archdemons which rule over a multitude of other demons. And it is those
demons which enter into men and seduce them, raging and cursing and
slandering; and it is they which carry off hence and in ravishment the
souls and dispatch them through their dark smoke and their evil
chastisements."

Mary said: \|<span class="rmargnote">**365**.</span> "I shall behave
badly to question thee. Be not wroth with me if I question on all
things."

Jesus said: "Question what thou wilt."

Mary said: "My Lord, reveal unto us in what manner they carry off hence
the souls in ravishment, that also my brethren may understand it."

<span class="margnote">Of Yew and Melchisedec.</span>Jesus,--that is
Aberamenthō,--said: "Since indeed the father of my father,--that is
Yew,--is the fore-minder of all the rulers, gods and powers who have
arisen out of the matter of the Light of the Treasury, and Zorokothora
Melchisedec is the envoy to all the lights which are purified in the
rulers, leading them into the Treasury of the Light,--these two alone
are the great Lights, and their ordinance is that they down go to the
rulers and purify them, and that Zorokothora Melchisedec carrieth away
the purification of

<span id="page_302">p. 302</span>

the lights which they have purified in the rulers and leadeth them into
the Treasury of the Light,--when the cipher and the time of their
ordinance cometh, that they go down to the rulers and oppress and
constrain them, carrying away the purification from the rulers.

"But straightway when they shall cease from the oppressing and
constraining and return to the regions of the Treasury of the Light, it
cometh to pass that, if they reach the regions of the Midst, Zorokothora
Melchisedec carrieth off the lights and leadeth them unto \|<span
class="rmargnote">**366**.</span> the gate of those of the Midst and
leadeth them into the Treasury of the Light, and that Yew withdraweth
himself into the regions of those of the Right.

<span class="margnote">How the demon rulers carry off souls.</span>"Up
to the time of the cipher for them to come forth again, the rulers
mutiny through the wrath of their wickedness, going straightway up to
the lights, because they \[Yew and Melchisedec\] are not with them at
that time, and they carry off the souls which they may be able to snatch
away in ravishment, and destroy them through their dark smoke and their
evil fire.

<span class="margnote">The chastisements of Paraplēx.</span>"At that
time then this authority, with name Paraplēx, along with the demons
which stand under her, carrieth off the souls of the violently
passionate, of cursers and of slanderers and dispatcheth them through
the dark smoke and destroyeth them through her evil fire, so that they
begin to be undone and dissolved. One-hundred-and-thirty-and-three years
and nine months do they spend in the chastisements of her regions, while
she tormenteth them in the fire of her wickedness.

"It cometh to pass then after all these times,

<span id="page_303">p. 303</span>

when the sphere turneth itself and the little Sabaōth, Zeus, cometh to
the first of the æons of the sphere, which is called in the world the
Ram of Boubastis, that is of Aphroditē; \[and\] when she \[Boubastis\]
cometh to the seventh house of the sphere, that is to the Balance, then
the veils which are between those of the Right and those of the Left,
draw themselves aside, and there looketh from the height out of those of
the Right the \|<span class="rmargnote">**367**.</span> great Sabaōth,
the Good; and the whole world and the total sphere \[become alarmed\]
before he hath looked forth. And he looketh down on the regions of
Paraplēx, so that her regions may be dissolved and perish. And all the
souls which are in her chastisements, are carried and cast back \[up\]
into the sphere anew, because they are ruined in the chastisements of
Paraplēx."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 140](ps145)
