[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Gnosticism](../../gno/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ps150) 
[Next](ps152) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5HQY/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Pistis Sophia*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1921\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER 146

<span class="margnote">Peter protesteth against the women.</span>Peter
said: "My Lord, let the women \|<span class="rmargnote">**383**.</span>
cease to question, in order that we also may question."

Jesus said unto Mary and the women: "Give opportunity to your men
brethren, that they also may question."

Peter answered and said: "My Lord, a robber and thief, whose sin is this
persistently, when he cometh out of the body, what is his chastisement?"

<span class="margnote">Of the chastisement of the thief.</span>Jesus
said: "If the time of such an one is completed through the sphere, the
receivers of Adōnis come after him, and lead his soul out of the body,
and they spend three days circling round with it and instructing it
concerning the creatures of the world.

"Thereafter they lead it down into the Amente before Ariēl, and he
taketh vengeance on it in his chastisements three months, eight days and
two hours.

"Thereafter they lead it into the chaos before Yaldabaōth and his
forty-and-nine demons, and every one of his demons taketh vengeance on
it another three months, eight days and two hours.

<span id="page_319">p. 319</span>

"Thereafter they lead it on to the way of the midst, and every one of
the rulers of the way of the midst taketh vengeance on it through his
dark smoke and his wicked fire another three months, eight days and two
hours.

"Thereafter they lead it up unto the Virgin of Light, who judgeth the
righteous and the sinners, that she may judge it. And when the sphere
turneth itself, she handeth it over to her receivers, that they may cast
it into the æons of the sphere. And they lead it forth into a water
which is below the sphere; \|<span class="rmargnote">**384**.</span> and
it becometh a seething fire and eateth into it until it purifieth it
utterly.

"Thereafter cometh Yaluham, the receiver of Sabaōth, the Adamas,
bringeth the cup of forget-fulness and handeth it unto the soul; and it
drinketh it and forgetteth all things and all the regions to which it
had gone. And they cast it into a lame, halt and blind body.

"This is the chastisement of the thief."

Andrew answered and said: "An arrogant, overweening man, when he cometh
out of the body, what will happen to him?"

<span class="margnote">Of the chastisement of the arrogant.</span>Jesus
said: "If the time of such an one is completed through the sphere, the
receivers of Ariēl come after him and lead out his soul \[out of the
body\] and spend three days travelling round in the world \[with it\]
and instructing it concerning the creatures of the world.

"Thereafter they lead it down into the Amente before Ariēl; and he
taketh vengeance on it with his chastisements twenty months.

"Thereafter they lead it into the chaos before Yaldabaōth and his
forty-and-nine demons; and

<span id="page_320">p. 320</span>

he and his demons, one by one, take vengeance on it another twenty
months.

"Thereafter they carry it on to the way of the midst; and every one of
the rulers of the way of the midst taketh vengeance on it another twenty
months.

"And thereafter they lead it unto the Virgin of Light, that she may
judge it. And when the sphere turneth itself, she handeth it over to her
receivers, that they may cast it into the æons of the sphere. And the
servitors of the sphere \|<span class="rmargnote">**385**.</span> lead
it into a water which is below the sphere; and it becometh a seething
fire and eateth into it until it purifieth it.

"And Yaluham, the receiver of Sabaōth, the Adamas, cometh and bringeth
the cup with the water of forgetfulness and handeth it to the soul; and
it drinketh and forgetteth all things and all the regions to which it
had gone. And they cast it up into a lame and deformed body, so that all
despise it persistently.

"This is the chastisement of the arrogant and overweening man."

Thomas said: "A persistent blasphemer, what is his chastisement?"

<span class="margnote">Of the chastisement of the
blasphemer.</span>Jesus said: "If the time of such an one is completed
through the sphere, the receivers of Yaldabaōth come after him and bind
him by his tongue to a great demon with a horse's face; they spend three
days travelling round with him in the world, and take vengeance on him.

"Thereafter they lead him into the region of the cold and of the snow,
and take vengeance on him there eleven years.

"Thereafter they lead him down into the

<span id="page_321">p. 321</span>

chaos before Yaldabaōth and his forty-and-nine demons, and every one of
his demons taketh vengeance on him another eleven years.

"Thereafter they lead him into the outer darkness until the day when the
great ruler with the dragon's face \|<span
class="rmargnote">**386**.</span> who encircleth the darkness, shall be
judged. And that soul becometh frozen up \[?\] and destroyed and
dissolved.

"This is the judgment of the blasphemer."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 147](ps152)
