[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [English Folklore](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](meft19)  [Next](meft21) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Scrapefoot

<span id="img_020"></span> [![](tn/020.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/020.jpg)

ONCE upon a time, there were three Bears who lived in a castle in a
great wood. One of them was a great big Bear, and one was a middling
Bear, and one was a little Bear. And in the same wood there was a Fox
who lived all alone, his name was Scrapefoot. Scrapefoot was very much
afraid of the Bears, but for all that he wanted very much to know all
about them. And one day as he went through the wood he found himself
near the Bears' castle, and he wondered whether he could get into the
castle. He looked all about him everywhere, and he could not see anyone.
So he came up very quietly, till at last he came up to the door of the
castle, and he tried whether he could open it. Yes! the door was not
locked, and he opened it just a little way, and put his nose in and
looked, and he could not see anyone. So then he opened it a little way
farther, and put one paw in, and then another paw, and another and
another, and then he was all in the Bears' castle. He found he was in a
great hail with three chairs in it -- one big, one middling, and one
little chair; and he thought he would like to sit down and rest and look
about him; so he sat down on the big chair. But he found it so hard and
uncomfortable that it made his bones ache, and he jumped down at once
and got into the middling chair, and he turned round and round in it,
but he couldn't make himself comfortable. So then he went to the little
chair and sat down in it, and it was so soft and warm and comfortable
that Scrapefoot was quite happy; but all at once it broke to pieces
under him and he couldn't put it together again! So he got up and began
to look about him again, and on one table he saw three saucers, of which
one was very big, one was middling, one was quite a little saucer.
Scrapefoot was very thirsty, and he began to drink out of the big
saucer. But he only just tasted the milk in the big saucer, which was so
sour and so nasty that he would not taste another drop of it. Then he
tried the middling saucer, and he drank a little of that. He tried two
or three mouthfuls, but it was not nice, and then he left it and went to
the little saucer, and the milk in the little saucer was so sweet and so
nice that he went on drinking it till it was all gone.

Then Scrapefoot thought he would like to go upstairs; and he listened
and he could not hear anyone. So upstairs he went, and he found a great
room with three beds in it; one was a big bed, and one was a middling
bed, and one was a little white bed; and he climbed up into the big bed,
but it was so hard and lumpy and uncomfortable that he jumped down again
at once, and tried the middling bed. That was rather better, but he
could not get comfortable in it, so after turning about a little while
he got up and went to the little bed; and that was so soft and so warm
and so nice that he fell fast asleep at once.

And after a time the Bears came home, and when they got into the hail
the big Bear went to his chair and said, 'WHO'S BEEN SITTING IN MY
CHAIR?' and the middling Bear said, 'WHO'S BEEN SITTING IN MY CHAIR?'
and the little Bear said, *'Who's been sitting in my chair and has
broken it all to pieces?'* And then they went to have their milk, and
the big Bear said, 'WHO'S BEEN DRINKING MY MILK?' and the middling Bear
said, 'WHO'S BEEN DRINKING MY MILK?' and the little Bear said, *'Who's
been drinking my milk and has drunk it all up?'* Then they went upstairs
and into the bedroom, and the big Bear said, 'WHO'S BEEN SLEEPING IN MY
BED?' and the middling Bear said, 'WHO'S BEEN SLEEPING IN MY BED?' and
the little Bear said, *'Who's been sleeping in my bed?* -- *and see here
he is!'* So then the Bears came and wondered what they should do with
him; and the big Bear said, 'Let's hang him!' and then the middling Bear
said, 'Let's drown him!' and then the little Bear said, 'Let's throw him
out of the window.' And then the Bears took him to the window, and the
big Bear took two legs on one side and the middling Bear took two legs
on the other side, and they swung him backwards and forwards, backwards
and forwards, and out of the window. Poor Scrapefoot was so frightened,
and he thought every bone in his body must be broken. But he got up and
first shook one leg -- no, that was not broken; and then another, and
that was not broken; and another and another, and then he wagged his
tail and found there were no bones broken. So then he galloped off home
as fast as he could go, and never went near the Bears' castle again.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Pedlar of Swaffham](meft21)
