[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Christianity](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](bct04) [Next](bct06)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

 

\[THE SECOND THOUSAND YEARS: YÂRÊD TO THE FLOOD.\]

 

> OF THE TRANSMISSION OF THE ART OF PLAYING THE HARP, THAT IS TO SAY, OF
> MUSIC, AND SINGING AND DANCING.

 

   Yôbâl (Jubal) and Tôbal<u>k</u>în (Tubal-Cain), the two brethren, the
sons of Lamech, the blind man, who killed Cain, invented and made all
kinds of instruments of music. Jôbâl made reed instruments, and harps,
and flutes, and whistles, and the devils went and dwelt inside them.
When men blew into the pipes, the devils sang inside them, and sent out
sounds from inside them. Tôbal<u>k</u>în made \[<span
id="fol_12a2"></span>Fol. 12*a*, col. 2\] cymbals, and sistra, and
tambourines (or drums). And lasciviousness and fornication increased
among the children of Cain, and they had nothing to occupy them except
fornication--now they had no obligation \[to pay\] tribute, and they had
neither prince nor governor--and eating, and drinking, and
lasciviousness, and drunkenness, and dancing <span id="page_88">p.
88</span> and singing to instruments of music, and the wanton sportings
of the devils, and the laughter which affordeth pleasure to the devils,
and the sounds of the furious lust of men neighing after women. And
Satan, finding \[his\] opportunity in this work of error, rejoiced
greatly, because thereby he could compel the sons of Seth to come down
from that holy mountain. There they had been made to occupy the place of
that army \[of angels\] that fell \[with Satan\], there they were
beloved by God, there they were held in honour by the angels, and were
called "sons of God," even as the blessed David saith in the psalm, "I
have said \[<span id="fol_12b1"></span>Fol. 12*b*, col. 1\], Ye are
gods, and all of you sons of the Most High." ([Ps. lxxxii.
6](../../bib/kjv/psa.htm#82:6).)

   Meanwhile fornication reigned among the daughters of Cain, and
without shame \[several\] women would run after one man. And one man
would attack another, and they committed fornication in the presence of
each other shamelessly.      \*      \*      \*      For all the devils
were gathered together in that camp of Cain, and unclean spirits entered
into the women, and took possession of them. The old women were more
lascivious than the maidens, fathers and sons defiled themselves with
their mothers and sisters, sons respected not even their own fathers,
and fathers made no distinction between <span id="page_89">p. 89</span>
their sons \[and other men\]. And Satan had been made ruler (or prince)
of that camp \[<span id="fol_12b2"></span>Fol. 12*b*, col. 2\]. And when
the men and women were stirred up to lascivious frenzy by the devilish
playing of the reeds which emitted musical sounds, and by the harps
which the men played through the operation of the power of the devils,
and by the sounds of the tambourines and of the sistra which were beaten
and rattled through the agency of evil spirits, the sounds of their
laughter were heard in the air above them, and ascended to that holy
mountain.

   And when the children of Seth heard the noise, and uproar, and shouts
of laughter in the camp of the children of Cain, about one hundred of
them who were mighty men of war gathered together, and set their faces
to go down to the camp of the children of Cain. When Yârêd heard their
words and knew their intention, he became sorely afflicted, and he sent
and called them to him, and said unto them, "By the holy blood of Abel,
I will have you swear that not one of you shall go down from this holy
mountain. Remember ye \[<span id="fol_13a1"></span>Fol. 13*a*, col. 1\]
the oaths which our fathers Seth, and Ânôsh, and <u>K</u>ainân, and
Mahlâlâîl made you to swear." And Enoch also said unto them, "Hearken, O
ye children of Seth, no man who shall transgress the commandment of
Yârêd, and \[break\] the oaths of our fathers, <span id="page_90">p.
90</span> and go down from this mountain, shall never again ascend it."
But the children of Seth would neither hearken to the commandment of
Yârêd, nor to the words of Enoch, and they dared to transgress the
commandment, and those hundred men, who were mighty men of war, went
down \[to the camp of Cain\]. And when they saw that the daughters of
Cain were beautiful in form and that they were naked and unashamed, the
children of Seth became inflamed with the fire of lust. And when the
daughters of Cain saw the goodliness of the children of Seth, they
gripped them like ravening beasts and defiled their bodies. And the
children of Seth slew their souls by fornication with the daughters of
Cain. And when the children of Seth wished to go up \[again\] to that
holy mountain \[<span id="fol_13a2"></span>Fol. 13*a*, col. 2\], after
they had come down and fallen, the stones of that holy mountain became
fire in their sight, and having defiled their souls with the fire of
fomication, God did not permit them to ascend to that holy place. And,
moreover, very many others made bold and went down after them, and they,
too, fell.

 

   **\[**NOTES.--This story is told at great length in the *Book of
Adam* (ii. 20). Satan appeared in the form of one Gunnun and taught him
to make horns and trumpets, stringed instruments, <span id="page_91">p.
91</span> cymbals, psalteries, lyres, harps and flutes. Into these Satan
himself entered, and made the music which came from them. Gunnun made
corn spirit, and established drinking booths, in which men assembled and
drank and ate fruit. Then Satan taught Gunnun to make weapons of war out
of iron, and when men were drunk they killed each other with them. Next
Satan taught men how to dye their garments crimson and purple, and they
arrayed themselves in gaudy attire, and began to race their horses.
Little by little the children of Seth began to wish to join the sons of
Cain, and when the devils had shown them a way down the mountain, one
hundred of them went down to the plain, and were led astray by the women
whose hands and feet were stained with bright colours and whose faces
had tattoo marks on them. When the Sethites tried to return to the top
of the mountain, the stones turned into coals of fire, and they could
not pass over them. Company after company of the children of Seth went
down to the plain, and at length only Yârêd and a few others remained on
the mountain. The Ethiopic *Book of Enoch* (*see* the translations by
Archbishop Lawrence, Oxford, 1838, by Dillmann, Leipzig, 1853, and Canon
Charles, Oxford, 1893) supplies interesting details about the fall of
the children of Seth. The leaders of those who went down <span
id="page_92">p. 92</span> from Ardis on Mount Hermon were Semyâzâ, the
commander-in-chief, Urâkîbarâmê´êl, Kôkabî´êl, Tâmi´êl, Râmu´êl, Dân´êl,
Za<u>k</u>îlô, Sarâkuyâl, Asâ´êl, Armârôs, Batraal, ´Anânî,
Za<u>k</u>êbê, Samsâwe´êl, Sarta´êl, Tur´êl, Yomyâ´êl, and ´Azâzyâl.
Each of these was over a company of ten. The names of two of the
dekarchs of the 200 angels are omitted. These angels took to themselves
wives, and taught them the use of spells and enchantments, and the use
of plants and trees \[for medicinal purposes ?\]. The daughters of Cain
conceived, and a tradition in the *Kebra Nagast* says that the children
were so large that they could not be born in the ordinary way, but had
to be removed from their mothers by the umbilicus.<span
id="page_92_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_92_note_1) These children grew up
and became giants 3,000 cubits in height, and when they had devoured all
the provisions which their neighbours had collected, they began to fight
against men and to eat them, and at length they ate the flesh and drank
the blood of each other. Concerning these giants, the *Book of Enoch*
(chapter xv) says, "Now, the giants, who were produced from the spirits
and the flesh, shall be called evil spirits on earth, and their
habitation shall be on the earth. Evil spirits shall proceed from their
bodies. . . . And the spirits of the <span id="page_93">p. 93</span>
giants shall consume, and persecute, and lay waste, and fight and work
destruction on the earth and afflict \[men\]. They shall neither eat
food of any kind, nor suffer thirst, and they shall remain invisible.
And these spirits shall attack the children of men and women, for from
them have they come forth." The wickedness of these giants became so
great that the earth complained \[to God\]. At this time ´Azâz´êl taught
men the art of working in metals, and the use of stibium, or eye-paint,
and the art of dyeing stuffs in bright colours. ´Amêzârâk taught
enchantments (*i.e.* magic) and the knowledge of herbs; ´Armârôs taught
how spells were to be broken; Barak\`âl taught astrology; Kôkab´êl
taught the knowledge of signs; Tem´êl taught astronomy; and ´Asrâdêl
taught concerning the moon \[*Book of Enoch*, chapter viii.\] The
originals of these Seven Sages were probably the Seven Wise Men who were
revered by the Babylonians.**\]**

 

   And when Yârêd had lived nine hundred and sixty years, and the day of
his departure approached, and came nigh, and arrived, all the Patriarchs
gathered themselves together and came unto him, viz. Enoch, his
first-born, and Methuselah, and Lamech, and Noah, they and their wives
and their children, and were blessed <span id="page_94">p. 94</span> by
him. And he prayed over them, and said unto them, "I will make you to
swear by the holy blood of Abel that you will not go down from this holy
mountain; for I know that God will not allow you to remain very much
longer in this holy country. Inasmuch as \[<span
id="fol_13b1"></span>Fol. 13*b*, col. 1\] ye have transgressed the
commandment of your fathers, ye shall surely be cast out into that outer
country, and ye shall no longer have your habitation on the skirts \[of
the mountain\] of Paradise. And take ye good heed to this. Let him that
is among you who shall go forth from that holy country take with him the
body of our father Adam, and the offerings \[of gold, frankincense, and
myrrh\] that are in the Cave of Treasures, and let him carry away and
deposit the body in the place wherein he shall be commanded by God to
set it down. And thou, my son Enoch, depart thou not from before the
body of Adam, but minister before God purely and holily all the days of
thy life." And Yârêd died, \[being\] nine hundred and sixty-two years
old, on the thirteenth day of the month of Îyâr (May), on the day of the
Eve of the Sabbath (Friday), at sunset, in the three hundred and
sixty-sixth year of the life of Noah. And Enoch his son embalmed him,
and buried him in the Cave of Treasures; and they made mourning for him
forty days.

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

 

   **\[**NOTES.--The *Book of the Bee* says that Yârêd was 962 years old
when he died, and that he begot Enoch when he was 162 years old. The
*Book of Adam* says that he was 989 years old when he died, and that he
died on Friday, the 12th day of the month of Takhsâs (December) in the
360th year of the life of Noah (ii. 21).**\]**

 

\[<span id="fol_13b2"></span>Fol. 13*b*, col. 2\] \[The Rule of Enoch\].

   And Enoch stood up to minister before God in the Cave of Treasures.
And the children of Seth turned aside from the right path and willed to
go down \[to the children of Cain on the plain\]. And Enoch and
Methuselah, and Lamech and Noah mourned over them. And Enoch had
ministered before God for fifty years in the three hundred and \[sixty\]
fifth year of the life of Noah. And when Enoch knew that God was about
to remove him \[from the earth\], he called Methuselah, and Lamech, and
Noah, and said unto them, "I know that God is wroth with this
generation, and that a pitiless judgment hath been decreed for the
people thereof. Ye are the chiefs of this generation and the remnant
thereof, for no other man shall be born on this mountain who shall be
the chief of the children of his people. But take ye good heed to
yourselves, and see that ye minister before God in purity and holiness."
And when Enoch had given them <span id="page_96">p. 96</span> his
commandment in these words, God removed him to the Land of Life, and to
the \[<span id="fol_14a1"></span>Fol. 14*a*, col. 1\] delectable
mansions which are round about Paradise, and to that country which is
beyond the reach of death. And of all the children of Seth there
remained only these three Patriarchs in the "Mountain of the Triumphant
Ones," viz. Methuselah, Lamech, and Noah, for all the others had betaken
themselves to the encampment of the sons of Cain.

 

   **\[**NOTES.--Then Michael, Gabriel, Suriel, and Uriel looked down
from heaven, and saw the wickedness which ´Azâz´êl had done in the
world, and they heard the appeal which the souls of the dead were making
to heaven, and they reported the matter to the Most High. When God heard
their words He sent the angel ´Arsyalâlyûr to the son of Lamech, *i.e.*
Noah, with the command, "Hide thyself." No mention is made of
Methuselah, who begot Lamech when he was 187 years old, and who lived
969 years, and Lamech, who lived 777 years, and begot Noah in the 182nd
year of his age, was passed over in favour of his son. Noah consolidated
his position by marrying the daughter of Enoch. The angel revealed to
Noah that a flood was about to cover the earth, and told him how to
escape from it. Then God commanded <span id="page_97">p. 97</span>
Rafa´êl to bind ´Azâz´êl hand and foot, and to thrust him into a dark
hole in the desert of Dudâ´êl (a place near Jerusalem ?), and heap
stones and rocks upon him. There he was to remain until the Day of
judgment, when he would be cast into the fire and consumed. Gabriel was
sent to destroy all the children of fornication; and Michael was sent to
bind Semyâzâ and the other dekarchs of the children of Seth, and to
imprison them under the mountains of the earth for 70 generations, after
which time they were to be taken to the abyss of fire and tortured there
for ever. *Book of Enoch* (chapter x).\]

 

   \[The *Book of the Mysteries of Heaven and Earth*, by Abbâ
Bakhayla-Mîkâ´êl (ed. Perruchon), says that it was the men who taught
man the arts of civilisation, who caused God to bring the Flood on the
earth. This work gives the names of these men and describes their
inventions thus:--

   Pîpîrôs understood the sun, Rûrîdê quarried stones, Zar´êl instituted
the month, Pînênê introduced horse-riding (or racing), Gâlê invented the
axe, Tîgana invented the shield, Hôrêrî taught men to play musical
instruments, Yuebê taught working in iron, Mêgêd taught horse-riding,
Negôdî discovered medicinal springs, and made known the planetary hours
when the waters were most effective, Gargê made the first corn-grinder,
<span id="page_98">p. 98</span> Sêtêr taught men how to mix dough, Gîmêr
taught the use of earthenware vessels for food, Zârê taught men to milk
animals, <u>H</u>eggê taught men to make roofs, and <u>T</u>entôreb
showed them how to make doors, Sâpêr taught butter-making, Halâgê
discovered how to carve wood and stone, Hêder was the first to cultivate
trees, Sînô taught house-building, and <u>T</u>ôf invented the potter's
craft, Artôrbegâs invented agricultural implements, <u>S</u>êbêdêgâz
introduced the use of *ko<u>h</u>l* (eye-paint, stibium), Zârê invented
the brewing of beer, Bêtênêlâdâs invented the oven, Nâfîl taught men to
make plantations and gardens, Yârbe<u>h</u> discovered how to fell trees
and saw them up, ´Êlyô taught dancing, Pênêmûs invented architecture and
writing, ´Agâlêmûn taught the use of beasts in ploughing and how to
drive furrows, Kueses invented ploughs and leather whips, ´Akôr
discovered bronze (copper ?), certain men taught working in cedar and
willow-wood, Wasag and ´Abêregyâ taught men the game of <u>T</u>âbat,
and Nêr and Zabêrêgued taught them to play the games of ´Atâwemâ and
´Akîs, and the games of the circus.\]

 

\[The Rule of Noah.\]

   And when Noah saw that sin had increased in his generation, he
preserved himself in virginity for five hundred years. Then God spake
unto <span id="page_99">p. 99</span> him and said unto him, "Take unto
thee to wife Haykêl, the daughter of Namûs (or Haykêl Namûs), the
daughter of Enoch, the brother of Methuselah." And God revealed unto him
concerning the Flood which He was making ready to produce, and He spake
to him and said unto him) "One hundred and thirty years from this moment
I will make a Flood."

 

   **\[**NOTES.--The *Book of Adam* says that Haykêl was the daughter of
Abaraz, who was one of the children of the family of Enos, who went into
perdition. If this be so, Noah married a woman who was akin to the
children of Cain. The *Book of the Bee* ([chapter xx](../bb/bb20))
merely states that Noah's wife was of the children of Seth.**\]**

 

\[The Building of the Ark.\]

   And God said unto Noah, "Make for thyself an ark for the saving of
the children of thy house, and build it \[in the plain\] below \[this
mountain\], in the encampment of the children of Cain, and ye shall cut
down the timber for the same \[from the trees that are on\] this
mountain \[<span id="fol_14a2"></span>Fol. 14*a*, col. 2\]. And thus
shall be the dimensions thereof. Its length shall be three hundred
cubits according to thy cubit, its breadth shall be fifty cubits, and
its height thirty cubits; and above it shall be finished off one cubit.
And make three storeys in it: the lowermost shall be for wild animals
<span id="page_100">p. 100</span> and cattle, the middle one shall be
for the birds and feathered fowl, and the topmost shall be for thee and
the children of thy house. And make in it cisterns for water and
cupboards for food. And make to thyself a striking board of *eshkar\`a*
wood which will not rot, three cubits long and a cubit and a half in
breadth; and there shall be a hammer of the same kind of wood, and with
it thou shalt strike \[the board\] three times in the day. Once in the
morning that the workmen may be gathered together for the work of the
ark, and once at midday that they may eat food, and once at sunset so
that they may cease from their labour. And when thou strikest the board,
and men hear the sound of the blows, and say unto thee, 'What is this
that thou doest?' \[<span id="fol_14b1"></span>Fol. 14*b*, col. 1\],
thou shalt say unto them, 'God is going to make a flood of waters.'" And
Noah did as God commanded him. And there were born unto him three sons
within the space of a hundred years, Shem, Ham, and Japhet, and they
took unto them wives of the daughters of Methuselah.

 

   **\[**NOTES.--According to the *Book of the Bee*, the storeys were to
have boards and projecting ledges, each board being one cubit long and
one span broad. The wood used was either box or teak, and the Ark was
pitched within and <span id="page_101">p. 101</span> without. The *Book
of Adam* (iii. 2) says that each storey was 10 cubits high. The first
was for lions and other animals, and ostriches, the second was for birds
and reptiles, and the third for Noah and his sons, Shem, Ham, and
Japhet, and their wives. The cisterns were to be lined with lead, inside
and out. Noah begot his sons during the hundred years in which he was
building the Ark; during these years he ate no animal food, and he wore
the same pair of sandals, which did not wear out, and the same apparel
and head cloth, and carried the same staff. His hair neither increased
nor diminished. His sons married daughters of Methuselah.**\]**

 

\[The Death of Lamech.\]

   And when Lamech had lived seven hundred and seventy years, he died
during the lifetime of Methuselah, his father, forty years before the
Flood, on the twenty-first day of the month of Ilûl (September), on the
first day of the week (Sunday), in the sixty-eighth year of the life of
Shem, the firstborn of Noah. And Noah his firstborn embalmed him, and
Methuselah his father swathed him for burial, and they buried him in the
Cave of Treasures, and mourned for him forty days.

 

   **\[**NOTES.--The *Book of Adam* says that Lamech was 553 years old
when he died, but the *Book <span id="page_102">p. 102</span> of the
Bee* gives his age as 774 or 777 years; the former work says that Lamech
died seven years before the Flood.**\]**

 

\[The Rule of Methuselah and Noah.\]

   And Methuselah and Noah remained alone on the mountain, for all the
children of Seth had gone down from the skirts of the mountain of
Paradise to the plain where the children of Cain lived \[<span
id="fol_14b2"></span>Fol. 14*b*, col. 2\]. And men, the children of
Seth, had intercourse with the daughters of Cain, who conceived of them,
and brought forth men, giants and the sons of giants, who were like unto
towers. Now because of this certain ancient writers have fallen into
error, and have written, "The angels came down from heaven, and had
intercourse with men, and by them these famous giants have been
produced." But this is not true, for those who have written in this
manner did not understand \[the facts\]. Behold, O my brother-readers,
and know ye that it is not in the nature of beings of the spirit to
beget, neither is it in the nature of the devils--who are unclean
beings, and workers of wickedness, and lovers of adultery--to beget,
because there are neither males nor females among them. And since the
time when the angels fell, not another angel has been added to their
number. And if the devils were able to <span id="page_103">p. 103</span>
have intercourse with women they would not leave unravished a single
virgin \[<span id="fol_15a1"></span>Fol. 15*a*, col. 1\] in all the race
of the children of men.

 

\[The Death of Methuselah.\]

   And when Methuselah had lived nine hundred and sixty-nine years, and
the day of his departure had drawn nigh, Noah, and Shem, and Ham, and
Japhet, and their wives, came unto him. Now of all the posterity of Seth
who had not betaken themselves down to the plain, only these eight souls
were left, viz. Noah, Shem, Ham, Japhet, and their wives; for no
children were born to them before the Flood. And when these gathered
themselves together to Methuselah, and they had been blessed by him, he
embraced them, and kissed them sorrowfully, and wept over the fall of
the children of Seth. And he said unto them, "Of all the tribes and
families of your fathers, this remnant \[consisting\] of eight souls
\[<span id="fol_15a2"></span>Fol. 15*a*, col. 2\] alone is left. May the
Lord God of our fathers bless you! The Lord God who formed our father
Adam and Eve by themselves (and they were fruitful, and multiplied, and
the whole of the blessed land which was round about Paradise was filled
with their progeny), shall make you to be fruitful, and to multiply, and
the whole earth shall be filled with you. He shall save you from the
<span id="page_104">p. 104</span> terrible wrath which hath been decreed
against this rebellious generation, and He shall be with you, and He
shall protect you. And the gift which was given by God unto our father
Adam shall go forth with you from this holy country. And these three
measures of the wheat of blessings which God gave unto your father Adam
shall serve as leaven, and shall be kneaded into your seed, and into the
seed of your children, that is to say, Royalty, Priesthood, and
Prophecy.

   "Hearken thou, Noah, thou blessed of the Lord. Behold \[<span
id="fol_15b1"></span>Fol. 15*b*, col. 1\], I am going forth from this
world, like all my fathers, but thou and thy children shall be saved.
And thou shalt do everything which I am commanding you to do this day,
\[for\] God will make the Flood. When I die, embalm my body, and bury me
in the Cave of Treasures with my fathers. Take thy wife, and thy sons,
and the wives of thy sons, and get thee down from this holy mountain.
And take with thee the body of our father Adam, and these three
offerings, gold, and myrrh, and frankincense; set the body of Adam in
the middle of the Ark, and lay these offerings upon him. Thou and thy
sons shall occupy the eastern part of the Ark, and thy wife and thy
son's wives shall occupy the western part thereof; thy wives shall not
pass over to you, <span id="page_105">p. 105</span> and ye shall not
pass over to them. Ye shall neither eat nor drink with them, and ye
shall have no intercourse whatsoever with them until ye go forth \[<span
id="fol_15b2"></span>Fol. 15*b*, col. 2\] from the Ark. Now this
generation hath provoked God to wrath, and He will neither permit them
to be neighbours of \[those who are in\] Paradise, nor to praise Him
with the angels.

   "And when the waters of the Flood have subsided from the face of the
earth, and ye go forth from the Ark, and ye take up your abode in that
land, thou, O Noah, the blessed of the Lord, shall not depart from the
Ark, from the body of our father Adam, but minister thou before God in
the Ark purely and holily all the days of thy life. And these offerings
shall be placed in the east. And command thou Shem, thy firstborn, to
take up with him, after thy death, the body of our father Adam, and to
carry it and deposit it in the middle of the earth. And let him
establish there a man from among his descendants who shall minister
there. And he shall be one who is set apart (*nezîrâ*) all the days of
his life. He shall not take a wife, he shall not shed blood, he shall
not offer up \[<span id="fol_16a1"></span>Fol. 16*a*, col. 1\] these
offerings of wild animals and feathered fowl; but he shall offer unto
God bread and wine, for by these redemption shall be made for Adam and
all his posterity. And <span id="page_106">p. 106</span> the Angel of
God shall go before him, and he shall show him the place where the
middle of the earth is situated. And the apparel of him that shall stand
up there to minister before the body of Adam shall be the skins of wild
animals. He shall not shave off the hair of his head, and he shall not
cut his nails, but he shall remain alone (in his natural state ?)
because he is the priest of God, the Most High."

 

   **\[**NOTES.--According to the *Book of Adam*, (iii. 5), Shem was to
appoint Melchisedek (*see* [Gen. xiv.
18](../../bib/kjv/gen.htm#14:18)-24; [Heb., chapter
vii.](../../bib/kjv/heb.htm#7:1)), the son of <u>K</u>ainân, and
grandson of Arphaxad, to be the priest of the Most High; and he was to
stand and minister on the mountain which is in the middle of the earth.
He was to wear a garment of skin, and have a leather girdle about his
loins, and his apparel was to be humble and without ornament.**\]**

 

   And when Methuselah had commanded Noah \[to do\] all these things, he
died with tears in his eyes, and sorrow in his heart. He was nine
hundred and sixty-nine years old when he died, on the fourteenth day of
the month Âdhâr (March), on the first day of the week (Sunday), in the
seventy-ninth year \[<span id="fol_16a2"></span>Fol. 16*a*, col. 2\] of
the life of Shem, the son of Noah. And Noah, his grandson, embalmed the
body of Methuselah <span id="page_107">p. 107</span> with myrrh, and
cassia, and stakte, and Noah and his sons buried him in the Cave of
Treasures; and they and their wives made mourning for him forty days.

   And when the days of his mourning had passed, Noah went into the Cave
of Treasures, and embraced and kissed the holy bodies of Seth, and
Ânôsh, and <u>K</u>ainân, and Mahlâlâîl, and Yârêd, and Methuselah, and
Lamech his father, and he was greatly moved and tears gushed from his
eyes. And Noah carried the body of our father Adam, and \[the body of\]
Eve, and his firstborn Shem carried the gold, and Ham carried the myrrh,
and Japhet the frankincense, and they went forth from the Cave of
Treasures. \[The *Book of Adam* does not mention Eve.\]. And as they
were coming down from that holy mountain they were smitten sorely with
grief: and they wept in agony because they were to be deprived of that
\[<span id="fol_16b1"></span>Fol. 16*b*, col. 1\] holy place, and the
habitation of their fathers. And weeping painfully, and wailing
sorrowfully, and enveloped in gloom, they said,

   "Remain in peace! O holy Paradise, thou habitation of our father
Adam.  
   He went forth from thee alive, but stripped \[of glory\] and naked.  
   And behold, at his death he was deprived of thy nearness.  
    <span id="page_108">p. 108</span> He and his progeny were cast out
into exile in that land of curses, to pass their days there in pain, and
sicknesses, and in labour, and in weariness, and in trouble.  
   Remain in peace, O Cave of Treasures!  
   Remain in peace, O habitation and inheritance of our Fathers!  
   Remain ye in peace, O our Fathers and Patriarchs!  
   Pray ye for us, O ye who live in the dust, ye friends and beloved
ones of the Living God.  
   Pray ye for the remnant of your posterity which is left.  
   O ye who have propitiated God, make supplication unto Him on our
behalf in your prayers. \[<span id="fol_16b2"></span>Fol. 16*b*, col.
2.\]  
   Remain in peace, O Ânôsh!  
   Remain ye in peace, O ye ministers of God, <u>K</u>ainân, and
Mahlâlâîl, and Yârêd, and Methuselah, and Lamech, and Enoch! Cry out in
sorrow on our behalf.  
   Remain in peace, O Haven and Asylum of the Angels!  
   O ye our Fathers, cry out in sorrow on our behalf, because ye will be
deprived of our society!  
   And we will cry out in sorrow, because we are cast out into a bare
land, for our habitation will be with the wild beasts."

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

   And as they were coming down from that holy mountain, they kissed the
stones thereof, and embraced the delectable trees thereof. And in this
wise they came down, and they wept with great sorrow, and shed scalding
(or bitter) tears, and suffering sorely they descended to the plain. And
Noah went into the Ark, and deposited the body of Adam in the middle
thereof, and he placed these \[<span id="fol_17a1"></span>Fol. 17*a*,
col. 1\] offerings upon it.

 

   Now in the year wherein Noah went into the Ark <span
class="small">THE SECOND THOUSAND YEARS OF THE POSTERITY OF</span>
A<span class="small">DAM TO THE TIME OF THE</span> F<span
class="small">LOOD CAME TO AN END</span>, according to what the Seventy
Wise Writers have told us.

 

   **\[**NOTES.--The *Book of Adam* (iii. 6) says that when Noah and his
sons were carrying the body of Adam out of the Cave, the bodies of the
other Patriarchs cried out, and asked the body of Adam if they were to
be separated from it. Adam replied that he must leave the holy mountain,
and told them that he knew God would bring their bodies together again
on another occasion, and bade them wait patiently. Adam asked God to
allow the lighted lamp to remain with the bodies in the Cave, until the
resurrection. This God did, and then He closed <span id="page_110">p.
110</span> the Cave until the day of the resurrection. Noah and his sons
marvelled greatly when they heard the bodies of the Patriarchs talking
together in the Cave. Having carried away the body of Adam and the gold,
myrrh and frankincense, they returned to the mountain, intending to
enter the Cave once agaln; they sought carefully, but could not find the
Cave, and then they knew that God had sealed it, and had hidden it from
them, so that they might never dwell therein again.**\]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](bct06)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_92"></span>p. 92

<span id="page_92_note_1"></span>[1](#page_92_fr_1) See *Kebra Nagast*
(Budge's translation), chapter c. *Concerning the Angels who rebelled*.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
