[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric/Occult](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](twp07)  [Next](twp09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

### CHAPTER VI

I might of course fill volumes with modern records of this kind and I
therefore have chosen only a few witnessed by men celebrated for one
reason or another and certainly not lacking in perspicuity. I now turn
to one of the most remarkable of modern times. I do not know what others
may think of it but it seems to me worth attention and I have chosen it
because though the events described were in India and the performer was
Indian the observer was European, and writes with the necessary
suspension of judgment.

His name was Jacolliot. He was Chief Justice of Chandernagore, one of
the portions of India which still remain French. The events took place
(roughly speaking) about sixty years ago.

This man spent much of a long residence in India in looking into the
question of the "occult." You may live all your life there and never
come up against anything of the kind, but if you are

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

interested and evince sympathy and understanding along the right lines
you will have plenty of food for reflection. Jacolliot seems to have
been profoundly interested in comparative religion and a student of the
Kabala, in which he asserts he found many resemblances with the
doctrines of the Brahmins. (It must be understood that I condense but
never alter.) He describes himself as no partizan but a man who records
what he saw; adding:

"An ardent partizan would have been too credulous and have taken all on
trust. A rabid opponent would have made it his business to disparage and
discredit. I shall tell what I saw with my own eyes and shall faithfully
record such explanations as I received. The facts which are simply
magnetic are indisputable. As to the facts which are purely spiritual I
was only able to explain those in which I participated either as actor
or as spectator upon the hypothesis that I was the victim of
hallucination, unless I am willing to admit that there was an occult
intervention."

He prefaces his book with the quotation from the words spoken by the
Brahmins on receiving a candidate for initiation:

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

"Learn that this is a mystery which should never be revealed to the
vulgar herd, otherwise great harm may befall you."

Into his long and interesting comparisons of the teachings of Zoroaster
and the Kabala with the books of the Brahmins I will not enter, except
to say that he describes the Brahmin teachers of his time as holding the
doctrine that these strange powers were manifestations of the powers of
the Pitris--that is, the ancestral spirits, under the power of the
triune Divinity known under the names of Brahma, Siva and Vishnu. He
gives all the rites of initiation for the boy, the householder, and for
those who pass beyond into the ascetic life which leads to the higher
powers--in other words, the three degrees of initiation.

The teaching is that the ancient scriptures of India (the Vedas) contain
this knowledge hidden within them as the soul is contained in the body.
So, in our own Scriptures, Origen, one of the early Christian fathers
traced a mystic meaning in much that we consider that he who runs may
read.

I pass however to what Jacolliot actually saw and the summing up. The
following pages are

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

quoted from him. Where the word "I" appears, Jacolliot must be
understood as speaking.

 

I had been a resident of Pondicherry, the capital of the French
possessions in the Carnatic for several years, when one morning I was
informed that a faquir wanted to see me. I had left Europe without the
slightest idea of the phenomena which the spiritualists attribute to
their mediums. As to the Hindu faquirs I conceived them to be simple
magicians yet I had heard a great deal of their marvelous skill and was
anxious to see a specimen. I received him in one of the verandas. His
face was thin and bony as that of an anchorite and his eyes, which
seemed half dead, produced a sensation such as I once experienced when
looking at the motionless orbs of a large shark. Bowing with his hands
raised to his forehead he murmured:

"I greet you respectfully, sahib. May the immortals watch over your
days. The guru (Master) said to me this morning, 'Go and glean at
random,' and Ganesha the God of Travelers has led me to you. What do you
want of me?"

"You are said to move inert bodies without contact. I wish to see."

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

"I have no such power. I evoke spirits who lend their aid."

"Evoke, and show me what they can do."

He resumed his squatting position on the pavement, placing his
seven-knotted stick between his crossed legs.

He then asked to have my man bring seven small flower-pots full of
earth, seven thin sticks of wood and seven leaves taken from any tree.

Without touching them himself he had them placed in a horizontal line
about six feet from his outstretched arm. He told my servant to put a
stick in each pot and impale a leaf on each. This being done the leaves
dropped down to the pots.

The faquir then pronounced an invocation, stretched out his hands in the
direction of the pots and stood motionless in a sort of ecstasy.

Suddenly it seemed to me that my hair was moved by a slight current of
air. This was repeated several times. At the end of about a quarter of
an hour, the leaves began to move slowly upward along the sticks of
wood, and then as slowly to descend. I passed and repassed several times
between the Hindu and the pots but there was no interruption. I asked to
examine

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

his arrangements and he agreed without delay. I removed the leaves and
sticks and emptied out the earth. I ordered fresh pots, earth and
leaves, divided the bamboo stick myself into seven pieces and having
thus rearranged everything placed it all at about four yards from the
faquir, who looked on unconcernedly.

He extended his arms and five minutes had hardly elapsed when the leaves
moved up and down the stick as before. Still I would not acknowledge
defeat. I had seven holes bored in a plank in which I placed the sticks.
The phenomena recurred as before. I repeated the experiment in twenty
different ways but always with the same result. He said:

"Ask anything you will. The leaves will remain still if the leaves have
nothing to say. Otherwise they will move up the sticks."

I had a set of raised brass letters and figures upon a zinc block which
I used to stamp my name and numbers upon the books in the library. I
thought of a friend who had died some years before and extracted the
letters and numbers one by one.

As I took out the letter A, the leaves began to move to the top of the
sticks and fell again. The

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

first letter of my friend's name. Letter by letter and figure by figure
I obtained the following words:

"Albain Brunier, died at Bourg-en-Bresse. (Ain) January 3, 1856." What
made my astonishment greater was that I was totally unprepared. I wanted
to be alone and reflect. I dismissed the faquir and made him promise to
return next day at the same hour. My excitement had disappeared but I
was no nearer to a belief in the supernatural on the morrow. I repeated
the phenomenon changing the spelling in my mind; dwelling strongly upon
each letter. I got: "Halbin Pruniet, died," etc., but could never change
the remainder. I got such changes in the name that no one would have
recognized it, but never in the name of the city. Hence I concluded that
I could not sufficiently isolate my mind from the correct spelling of
all the words in the sentence.

\[Here I think we have an interesting case of mind-reading.\]

In the last sitting the faquir gave, he lowered one balance of a pair of
scales with a peacock's feather while the other contained about 170
pounds. By the mere imposition of hands he

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

made a crown of flowers float in the air, the atmosphere was filled with
vague and indistinct sounds and a shadowy hand drew luminous figures in
space. At the time I considered the two latter simply as phantasmagoria.
I did not even give them the benefit of a doubt nor note them. But in
regard to the purely material facts I applied the severest tests.

Such were my first observations at Pondicherry. My judicial duties and
special studies concerning ancient India did not give me time to
continue them. From this time forward I made notes of all the material
phenomena by which the faquirs seek to prove the existence of the powers
they claim. I am convinced there are in nature and in man, who is a part
of nature, immense forces the laws of which are yet unknown to us. I
think that one day man will discover these laws, that things we now
regard as dreams will appear as realities, and that we shall witness
phenomena of which we have no conception. Who knows whether this force
of the ego, according to the Hindus, may not be shown to be one of the
greatest forces in nature?

Among ourselves have we not seen scientific societies regard the
telegraph as a toy fit only

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

for sending messages from one room to another? In the open air the wire
was not to be relied on! As I have been led to speak of my own views I
will say that the conclusion I have drawn from what I have seen in India
is that aside from the claptrap by which it is surrounded and of which
the Hindus are very fond, there is in man a special force acting in an
unknown direction and often intelligently, the laws of which require to
be studied by unprejudiced and liberal-minded specialists.

I lost no opportunity of attentively observing any manifestations that
bore any relation to the subject.

Leaving Chandernagore on 3rd January 1866 I arrived at Benares. I
intended to remain there a couple of months. The Peishwa, a Mahratta
Prince at Benares with whom I had become acquainted through the Rajah of
Chandernagore, hearing of my arrival sent to offer me apartments in his
magnificent seven-storied palace on the banks of the Ganges.

Here I met the most extraordinary faquir, perhaps, that I had ever
encountered in India. He came from the extreme south of India and his
mission was to take charge of the remains of

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

a rich Malabar man. The Peishwa, who was in the habit of extending
hospitality to pilgrims, had found lodgings for him in a small thatched
cottage upon the very banks of the river in which he had to perform his
ablutions for the next three weeks in honor of the dead. His name was
Govindaswami.

I had him brought to my apartment one day at noon. The room in which I
received him looked out upon the terrace which in turn overlooked the
Ganges. In the middle of the terrace was a water-spout which fell in a
fine shower into a marble basin.

I asked him to go out upon the terrace, which was much lighter than the
room and where I could better watch him.

"Do you know whether any power is developed in you when you perform? Did
you ever feel any change in your brain or muscles?"

"I am but an instrument. I invoke the ancestral spirits and it is they
who manifest their power."

The faquir was already in position with both hands extended towards an
immense bronze vase full of water. Within five minutes it began to rock
gently to and fro upon its base and to

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

approach the faquir gently and with a regular motion. As the distance
lessened metallic sounds escaped from it as if someone had struck it
with a steel rod. I asked if I could give directions. He consented at
once.

The vase advanced, receded, or stood still, according to my request. At
one time at my command the blows changed into a continuous roll like
that of a drum, at another they had the slowness and regularity of a
ticking clock.

Upon the table of the drawing-room stood a musical box. I had it brought
to the terrace by my servant and I asked the force to tune the blows
struck upon the vase to accompany any air on the instrument.

I wound up the box and a whirlwind of notes was the result. Quick sharp
strokes accompanied the time like the baton of a conductor.

All this was done without fuss, parade or mystery upon a terrace a few
yards square. The vase could hardly, when empty, have been moved by two
men. It received the falling jet of water from the fountain and was used
for the morning ablutions. What was the force which moved this mass?

The faquir, who had not left his place, then

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

rested the tips of his fingers for a short time upon the edge of the
vase. It began to rock to and fro in regular time, gradually quickening
its speed. But what surprised me most was to see that the water was
stationary as if there were a strong pressure which prevented its
regaining its equilibrium.

Three times during these oscillations the vase rose to a distance of
seven to eight inches completely from the ground and when it fell to the
pavement again it did so without perceptible shock. The performance
lasted several hours during which I took copious and careful notes and
also took the precaution of having each phenomenon repeated in a
different manner. The faquir promised to return every day as long as he
should remain at Benares. He was glad to have met me. I had lived for
many years in the south of India and knew the beautiful language of the
Tamils.

I should mention that the French in India appear to use the term faquir
alike for the Hindu and Mohammedan ascetics. This man was of course a
Hindu. His name indicates one who has a special reverence for the Divine
in the aspect of Krishna.

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

He returned next day and resumed his experiments with the great vase.

He asked me to lend him a small stick. I handed him an unsharpened lead
pencil. He placed it in the water and by the imposition of, his hands
\[upon the surface of the water\] made it move in every direction like a
magnet in contact with an iron bar. When he placed a finger quietly on
the middle of the pencil so as not to affect its position on the water I
saw it slowly sink beneath the surface until it had reached the bottom
of the vase. I state the facts without further comment.

His third visit was short. At my request he consented to perform a
phenomenon of levitation which I had already seen others successfully
accomplish without taking any particular notice of how they did it.

Taking an ironwood cane which I had brought from Ceylon he leaned
heavily on it, resting his right hand on the handle with his eyes fixed
on the ground. He then uttered incantations.

Leaning upon the cane with one hand the faquir rose gradually about two
feet from the ground. His legs were crossed beneath him very like a
bronze statue of the Buddha.

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

For more than twenty minutes I tried to see how Govindaswami could thus
fly in the face of all known laws of gravity. The stick gave him no
visible support and there was no apparent contact between that and his
body except through his right hand.

On his next visit, at night, he resumed his performances.

Taking a small bamboo stool he sat upon it with his legs crossed and
arms folded on his chest. The terrace was lighted like day. At the end
of a few minutes the stool began to move noiselessly along the terrace
by short jerks. The Hindu was motionless. The terrace was about seven
yards long and as many wide. It took about ten minutes to traverse it.
The faquir's legs crossed beneath him were distant from the ground the
whole height of the stool. Three vases of flowers so heavy that none but
a strong man could have lifted them (and he only with an effort) stood
at one end of the terrace. He touched the edge of one with his
finger-tips. It began to move to and fro and left the floor. It appeared
to me to be floating in the air, going from right to left at the will of
the faquir. I

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

have always regarded this as caused by an illusion of the senses.

On his next visit--

Taking a small stand of teak which I could lift with my thumb and
forefinger I placed it in the middle of the terrace and asked the faquir
if he could fix it there so that it could not be moved. He imposed both
hands on it for a quarter of an hour at the end of which time I
approached the table and took hold of it. It would not stir from the
ground. I struggled harder, with the result that the fragile leaf came
off in my hand. I then took hold of the legs, which were united by a
cross brace, but the result was the same. A thought then crossed my
mind. Suppose, I thought, that these phenomena are produced by the
faquir's charging objects with some kind of fluid and a natural force is
thus developed the laws of which we do not know, the supply with which
they are charged must gradually lose its efficiency unless renewed by
the operator. I asked the faquir to go to the other end of the terrace,
which he did. At the end of a few minutes I could handle the stool
without trouble.

"The Pitris \[ancestral spirits\] have gone,"

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

said the Hindu, "because their means of earthly communication was
broken. They are coming back."

He imposed his hands above an immense copper platter inlaid with silver
and almost instantly came such a rapid and violent succession of blows
and knocks that it might have been taken for hailstones on a metal roof,
and I thought I saw a succession of phosphorescent lights pass to and
fro across the platter in every direction.

Among the Peishwa's possessions was a small harmoniflute. With a small
cord tied round the square forming a portion of the bellows I hung it
from one of the iron bars of the terrace so it swung about two feet from
the ground. I asked the faquir if he could make it play without touching
it. He seized the cord by which it was hung and stood motionless. Soon
the harmoniflute began to be gently stirred, the bellows to contract and
expand and it emitted sounds perfectly plain and distinct.

"Cannot you get a tune?"

"I will evoke the spirit of one of the old pagoda musicians."

The instrument first played a series of notes;

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

it then bravely attacked one of the most popular Malabar airs. He stood
perfectly still. He merely held the cord by which he communicated with
the harmoniflute.

I kneeled down to see the various movements of the instrument and I saw,
unless misled by illusion, the up and down motion of the keys.

Another time:

He brought with him a small bag of sand, emptied it on the floor and
leveled it with his hand. He asked me to sit opposite with paper and
pencil. I gave him the handle of a penholder which he placed on the
sand.

"I am about to evoke the Pitris. When you see the object you have just
given me stand upright, one end only in contact with the ground, trace
on the paper any figures you please and you will see a copy on the
sand." He then extended his hands and repeated the formula of evocation.

The wooden rod rose gradually, and at the same moment I moved my pencil,
tracing the strangest figures at random. The piece of wood imitated
every motion and I saw my figures appear successively in the sand, when
I stopped the penholder stopped, when I went on it followed me.

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

Wishing to know if he could see from his position the movements of my
pencil I left the table and placing myself in a similar position to his,
satisfied myself that it was impossible for him to see what I was doing.

Having leveled the sand again he said:

"Think of a word in Sanskrit."

He extended his hands as before. The magic pencil began to move and
wrote the word:

"Purusha" (The Heavenly Generator).

That was the word I had thought of.

"Think of a phrase."

The pencil wrote in Sanskrit:

"Vishnu sleeps upon Mount Aikonta."

"Can the spirit give me the 243rd shloka of the book of Manu?" I asked.

The pencil wrote before my eyes (in Sanskrit): "The man, the end of all
whose actions is virtue, all of whose sins are erased by acts of piety
and sacrifice, reaches the heavenly mansions radiant with light and
clothed with a spiritual form."

As a last experiment, placing my hands on a closed book containing
extracts from Vedic hymns I asked for the first word of the fifth line
of the twenty-first page. The answer written was:

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

"Devadatta." (Given by a God.)

Comparing, it was correct.

"Will you now put a mental question?" said the faquir. I moved my head
and the following was written on the sand:

"The earth."

I had asked: "Who is our common mother?"

I have no explanation or statement to make with regard to these facts. I
only describe what I saw and assert that the circumstances are
accurately described. Materially speaking I do not think any fraud could
have been committed.

As he was about to leave me to go to his breakfast he stopped in the
embrasure of the door leading from the terrace to the outside stairs and
crossing his arms upon his chest lifted himself up gradually without any
apparent support (in the air) to the height of about ten to twelve
inches. I could determine the distance exactly. Behind his back was a
silk hanging striped in gold and white bands of equal width. His feet
were on a level with the sixth band. I had seized my chronometer: the
entire time from the moment when he began to rise until he touched the
ground again was more than eight

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

minutes. I asked him if he could repeat this when he pleased.

"The faquir," he answered emphatically, "can lift himself as high as the
clouds."

\[Again Jacolliot gives a most interesting account of rapid growth.\]

Among the claims advanced by the faquirs is that they can directly
influence the growth of plants. I had already seen this done a number of
times but regarded it as a successful fraud. On his arrival I told him
what I intended.

"I am entirely at your service."

"May I choose the earth, the vessel, and the seed which you are to make
grow?" I asked.

"The vessel and the seed, yes. The earth must be taken from a nest of
carias."

These little ants, who build for shelter small hills, are very common in
India and there was no difficulty. I told my servant to bring me a
flower-pot and differing seeds. I took them and dismissed him. To the
faquir I handed the flower-pot filled with a whitish earth which must
have been saturated with that milky fluid which the ants secrete and
deposit upon their building earth. I chose at random a pawpaw seed and

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

asked him to allow me to mark it. I made a slight cut in its outer skin,
and gave it to him with a few yards of mosquito cloth. \[This of course
is a kind of muslin.\]

"I shall soon sleep the sleep of the spirits. You must promise you will
neither touch me nor the pot."

I promised.

He then planted the seed in the earth, now like liquid mud, thrusting
his seven-knotted stick into a corner of the vessel, using it as a prop
to hold up the piece of muslin. He sat down upon the floor, stretched
both hands horizontally above him and fell into a deep cataleptic sleep.

At first I could not tell whether his sleep was real, but when at the
end of half an hour he had not stirred I was forced to believe no man
was able except in that condition to hold both his arms stretched
horizontally before him. An hour passed by. He looked like a bronze
statue of evocation.

At first I took my place opposite him but that soon became unendurable.
His eyes seemed half dead but full of magnetic influences. Without
losing sight of him I took a seat at the end of the

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

terrace. I had been waiting for a couple of hours when a low sigh
startled me.

He made signs for me to approach. Removing the muslin that hid the pot
he pointed to a young stalk of pawpaw fresh and green and nearly eight
inches high. He thrust his fingers into the ground and carefully taking
up the plant he showed me upon one of the two cuticles still adhering to
the roots the cut I had made two hours before.

Was it the same seed and the same cut? I noticed no substitution. He had
not left the terrace. I had not lost sight of him. He could not conceal
a plant in his clothes for he was almost entirely naked, and could not
have told in advance that I should choose a pawpaw seed among thirty
different kinds my servant had brought. He said:

"If I had continued my evocations longer the pawpaw tree would have
borne flowers in eight days and fruit in fifteen."

Bearing in mind the accounts of Huc the missionary \[already quoted\]
and what I had myself witnessed in the Carnatic I said there were other
performers who could accomplish this in two hours.

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

"You are mistaken. In the manifestations you speak of there is an
*apport* of fruit trees by the spirits. What I have just shown you is
really spontaneous vegetation, but the pure fluid under the direction of
the Pitris was never able to produce the three phases of germination,
flowering, and fruiting in one day."

There is one fact I should not omit which may be of service. There are a
multitude of kitchen plants which, put at dawn into moist soil and
exposed to the influence of a sun which does wonders, appear above the
ground by noon and at the close of day are nearly half an inch high, on
the other hand I am bound to say at least fifteen days are necessary for
the germination of a pawpaw seed.

The next sitting was devoted to apparitions.

He was entirely naked when he came in and his seven-knotted stick was
fastened to a lock of his long hair.

"Nothing unholy," he said, "should come in contact with the body of the
evocator."

My bedroom was on a level with the terrace. I set apart both for our
experiment, and carefully shut and fastened all outside doors. In the
center of each was a coco-oil lamp protected

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

by a glass shade diffusing a light sufficiently intense to enable anyone
to read the smallest type in the remotest corner. There was a small
copper furnace with burning coals, on which are burned from time to time
a few pinches of perfumed powder. He placed one in the center of the
terrace, by its side a copper platter filled with fragrant powder, took
his seat on the floor with his arms folded across his chest and
commenced a long incantation. This done he remained in the same position
motionless, his left hand on his heart, his right leaning on the
seven-knotted stick.

I thought he would drop into a cataleptic sleep, but no. From time to
time he pressed his hand against his forehead. I experienced a sudden
shock. A slight phosphorescent cloud formed, from which semblances of
hands seemed to come and go with great rapidity. In a few minutes they
lost their vaporous appearance and resembled human hands. Some became as
it were more material; others more luminous. I counted sixteen.

When I asked if I could touch them, one breaking away from the rest flew
toward me and pressed my hand. It was small, supple and

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

moist, like the hand of a young woman. It threw a rosebud at my feet and
vanished.

For nearly two hours a scene ensued calculated to set my head in a
whirl. A hand brushed my face or fanned it with a fan. It would scatter
a shower of flowers or trace in the air characters of fire; words which
vanished as the last letter was written. Some of these were so striking
that I wrote them down hastily. (They were in Sanskrit.)

"I have clothed myself with a fluidic body."

"You will attain bliss when you lay aside this transitory body."

Meanwhile flashes of lightning seemed to dart about. Gradually the hands
disappeared; we found a garland of those yellow flowers with penetrating
perfume \[marigolds\] which the Hindus use in all their ceremonies.

I offer no explanation. I relate. The doors of both rooms were closed. I
had the keys in my pocket and the faquir had not changed his position.
To these succeeded two others.

A cloud hovered near the little brazier, which at the Hindu's request I
had fed. It assumed the human form of an old Brahmin priest kneeling;
the sign of Vishnu on his forehead, girdled with

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

the triple cord. He seemed to pray. He took a pinch of perfumed powder
and threw it on the coals. It emitted a thick smoke; when it dispersed I
noticed the specter less than six feet distant. It held out its hands; I
took them in my own and found them warm and human. "Are you," I asked,
"a former inhabitant of the earth?" The word "Yes" (*Am*) appeared and
disappeared in letters of fire on his bosom.

"Will you leave me something as a token?"

He broke the triple cord, gave it to me and faded away. I supposed the
séance was over and was going to raise the movable curtains which shaded
the terrace, for the heat was suffocating. Suddenly I heard a strange
tune. I saw the phantom of a musician gliding along the wall. He held a
harmoniflute, which appeared impossible, as the Peishwa had sent for his
the day before. When he had made the circuit of my room and the terrace
he disappeared and I found the instrument where he had vanished. It was
actually the Rajah's harmoniflute.

Govindaswami then rose. He was covered with perspiration and seemed
exhausted. He accepted my presents, made the parting salaam and
disappeared. I threw myself on a hammock

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

for a few hours' rest. When I woke and remembered, it seemed a dream.
Yet there was the harmoniflute. The floor of the terrace was still
strewn with flowers, the garland lay on the divan and the notes I had
written had not vanished.

 

Jacolliot in an interesting passage gives the conditions in which the
true yogins operate. These should be noted. They are as follows:

They are accompanied by no assistant or confederate.

They are completely naked save for a small piece of linen about as large
as the hand.

They are acquainted with none of the apparatus our European jugglers
need.

They have nothing in their possession but a small wand of seven knots of
young bamboo as big as the handle of a penholder, which they hold in the
right hand, and a small whistle about three inches long which they
fasten to one of the locks of their long straight hair, for, having no
clothes, they must otherwise hold it.

They operate as the person they visit desires, either sitting or
standing or on the marble,

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

granite or stucco pavement of the veranda or the bare ground.

When they need a subject for magnetic or [somnambulistic](errata.htm#0)
phenomena they take any of the servants you may choose, or a European if
he is willing to serve.

If they need any article such as a musical instrument, a cane, a paper,
a pencil, etc., they will ask you to furnish it.

They will repeat any experiments in your presence as many times as you
require and will submit to any test.

They never ask any pay, merely accepting as alms for their temple
whatever you choose to offer.

I have traveled in every direction for many years and can truthfully
state that I have never seen a single faquir who was not willing to
comply with these conditions.

 

Jacolliot is no believer himself in spiritualism in the ordinary sense
of the word. It is true that many of the performers claim, as above,
that these supernormal feats are done by "spirit force" which they some
of them, as above, interpret

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

as the power of the Pitris, the ancestral spirits. Jacolliot, however,
writes:

 

I will say what I mean by the words "spirit force." I mean the alliance
between the intellect and the spiritual in order to act upon inanimate
objects, without predetermining in any way the cause which sets this
force in motion.

The supreme cause of all phenomena according to the Brahmins is the pure
akasha fluid which is diffused through nature and puts animate and
inanimate beings in communication with each other. Heat, electricity,
all the forces of nature are but modes of action and states of this
fluid. The being who possesses an excess of it acquires a proportionate
power over animate beings not so highly favored and over inanimate
beings. Spirits themselves are sensible to this influence.

According to some Brahmins akasha is the moving thought of the Universal
Soul directing all souls, who would be in constant communication with
each other if the gross envelope of the body did not in a measure
prevent. Thus the more the soul disentangles itself from the body by
contemplation the more sensible it becomes.

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

to this Universal fluid by which all beings, visible or invisible are
united. I confine myself to the rôle of an interpreter and nothing more.

So writes Jacolliot. He adds:

As to the last class of cases (apparitions and the production of
material objects) I should have omitted them altogether from the present
work, as shunning scientific investigation if (remembering that all
religions with Christianity at their head included such phenomena in
their mysteries and miracles) I had not thought it would be at least a
matter of historical curiosity to set forth the nature of these singular
practices--in common use in India at the present day--which are so well
adapted to influence the popular mind and which formed the basis of all
the ancient superstitions.

It will be observed that Jacolliot is very cautious in his manner of
statement and rightly so. He calls however for investigation and I
believe he would have done so more loudly had he lived in the present
day and seen the advance of science along lines which would have
appeared to him equally miraculous with those which the faquir developed
before him in the palace of the

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Peishwa in
Benares. I recommend all to read his book "Occult Science in India," the
first and longer part of which is devoted to examining the resemblances
between supernormal beliefs in various parts of the world. All must draw
their own conclusions but I think myself justified in describing him as
a believer in the existence of some powerful and universal force which
can be used by certain people and in certain conditions to produce
results which the uninstructed would describe as "miraculous."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII](twp09)
