[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hchg47)  [Next](hchg49) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1589639057/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### VII

#### THE LONGER PROSE PERCEVAL

Amidst much that is dubious and belonging to the seeming of enchantment,
one thing is certain--that the Perceval Quests leave behind them the
Graal Castle and that nothing is taken absolutely away, for even the
*Conte del Graal* presents the removal of the Hallows as a point of
speculation rather than a thing of certitude. So much is true also of
the only Perceval romance in the Northern French cycle which leans
towards greatness. I have given it a name which is descriptive rather
than its exact title, for, like the *Conte*, it is *Perceval le
Gallois*, the *Perlesvaux* for modern scholarship, while for him who in
recent years recreated rather than rendered it, the proper designation
is *The High History of the Holy Graal*. By its own hypothesis, it is
based upon and was drawn into romance out of a Latin book, said to have
been written by Josephus, which scribe is meant possibly to be Joseph
II. of the *Book of the Holy Graal*--that first priest who sacrificed
the Body of our Lord. So, therefore, as the Lesser Chronicles derive
from a Secret Book allocated to the first Joseph, does this reflection
of the legends which are called greater draw from the records of his
son. But the one is not rendered into the other, for the other derives
from the one many points of reference which it does not set forth
actually.

The *Longer Prose Perceval* is an echo of many texts, including the
*Conte del Graal*, and of things unknown

<span id="page_345">p. 345</span>

which suggest Guiot de Provence, or the group which is covered by his
name. It would seem also that the author, though there was much that he
remembered, had either forgotten not a few episodes of the antecedent
legends, or alternatively he scouted some things and was bent on
inventing more. We have seen that, according to Gautier, the failure of
Perceval to ask the vital question involved the destruction of kingdoms,
but the *Longer Prose Perceval* is the one story in the whole cycle
which, firstly, accounts for the king's languishment, by this failure,
as the sole actuating cause, and, secondly, represents King Fisherman as
dying in the middle way of the narrative, unconsoled and unhealed,
before the word of power is spoken. Further, it is the only story which
describes the Secret Sanctuary as the Castle of Souls, or which
specifies an evil brother of King Fisherman under the title of the King
of Castle Mortal, though this character has analogies with the Klingsor
of Wolfram.

There is little need to speak of the story itself, which is available to
every one in the best of all possible versions, but it should be
understood that its entire action is subsequent to the first visit paid
by Perceval to the Graal Castle and the consequent suppression of the
Word. In the course of the story such suppressions are several. For
example, when the dismembered pageant of the Graal is going about in the
land, a certain Damosel of the Car wanders from place to place, carrying
her arm slung at her neck in a golden stole, and lying on a rich pillow.
Sir Gawain, who meets and converses with her, fails to inquire the
reason, and is told that no greater care will be his at the court of the
Rich King Fisherman. That reason is, however, explained to him
subsequently, namely, that she was the bearer of the Sacred Vessel on
the occasion of Perceval's visit, and nothing else will she carry till
she returns to the Holy House. It will be seen that the romance has
strange vicarious penances besides its strange quests. It does not
appear why the Damosel of the Car

<span id="page_346">p. 346</span>

is constrained to wander on account of Perceval's silence. But we are
moving throughout the narrative in a high region of similitude, and
although it is concerned so chiefly with the perpetuation of a mystery
which is so divine, it creates no secret from the beginning as to the
nature and origin of that mystery, nor does it fail to make plain the
fact of the mystical significance which underlies many of its episodes
and adventures. Sometimes its dealings in allegory are drawn from
materials belonging to another side of the Graal legend, as in one
reference to King Pelles, who for the great love of his Saviour had
renounced his kingdom and entered into a hermitage. It is said that his
son Joseus slew his own mother at a certain castle, which from that time
forward continued burning, burning, and it is testified that from this
hold and from one other there will be enkindled the strong flame which
in fine shall consume the world.

Again, there are many intimations concerning the Earthly Paradise, which
lay behind the Castle of the Graal, showing that this House was really a
place of initiation--the gate of something that was beyond it. According
to Josephus, the soul of any person who passed through the Castle went
to Paradise, from which those who are qualified may infer what grades of
initiation were conferred within its penetralia. The true spiritual
place was therefore not at Sarras--which in this story has gone utterly
out of being--but at the Graal Castle, though before the Earthly
Paradise becomes the Home of Souls it must be assumed into the higher
Garden of Eden. There is another facet of this jewel of meaning which
says elsewhere that the Red Cross symbolises the redeeming blood,
meaning that it is the tincture of the Divine Virtue by which the tree
of the universal disaster becomes the Tree of Life. There are further
allusions designed--as one would imagine--to exhibit the proximity of
this world to the next, and it happens sometimes that one side of the
world beyond thus realised is not of a desirable kind. Perceval visits a
certain Castle of Copper, which is a

<span id="page_347">p. 347</span>

stronghold of evil faith and an abode of perverse spirits. Beside it
there rages a water called the River of Hell, which plunges and ploughs
into the sea with a fell hissing, so that it is a place of danger to
those who sail by the stars.

The story has many questers, and he who attains to the Keepership is not
he who can be said to enter the Mysteries at a saving time. As King
Arthur is accused at the beginning of falling into a supine state,
ceasing from deeds of chivalry and scattering the flock of his
knighthood, so a certain poetical justice is done to him by the
assignment of an important place of vision in the finding of the Graal.
As regards the questers generally, prior to the death of King Fisherman,
the latter received a visit from Gawain, who, in accordance with the
prophecy uttered by the Damosel of the Car, failed in his turn to ask
the vital question, though scarcely--as the romance confesses--through
his own fault, for at the sight of the Graal and the Lance he fell into
an ecstasy, and, for the first and only time recorded of him in all the
literature, the thought of God overflowed his whole consciousness.
Lancelot also visited the Castle prior to the King's death, but there
was no manifestation of the Sacred Vessel on this occasion, because of
that which had been and was between him and Arthur's royal consort, the
reason apparently being less on account of the past than of his long
impenitence in the heart. By the evidence of several texts Gawain also
had led an evil life, but at least for the purposes of the Quest he had
here put it from him in confession. It is just to add that the exalted
legend of Galahad is not so severe upon Lancelot, permitting him to see
all save the inmost heart of the mystery. For such a measure of success
as inhered in his presence and vision at the Graal Castle, Gawain was
indebted to the prowess by which, as a preliminary condition, he was
enabled to wrest from an unlawful custodian the Sword of St. John the
Baptist. Speaking generally, he was the favoured recipient of many
episodical mysteries in this romance, to

<span id="page_348">p. 348</span>

each one of which a suitable interpretation is allocated; in one case
his adventures proved to be an excursion into the mystical domain of the
Fall of Adam and that of the scheme of Redemption; in another he beheld
three maidens grouped about a fountain who dissolved ultimately into a
single maiden, as though they were another symbol of the Holy Trinity
and the superincession of the three Divine Persons. If, this
notwithstanding, he was allotted no better success than Perceval on his
first visit, he learned much, and more indeed than he was qualified to
understand fully.

The High Quest is dolorous enough in its consequences even to worthy
heroes and others illustrious who undertake it without indubitable
election. The realm of Arthur was left sufficiently discounselled when
he set forth on that great errand; he suffered even the death of his
Queen, in defiance of the whole tradition of the cycle. He is a pathetic
and haunting figure moving through the pageant of that one romance which
has enrolled him among the Knights of Quest, and though he saw the Graal
in its processional travels when it was uplifted like a monstrance over
the world of Logres, he did not reach the Castle till after the second
entry of Perceval, as another king in warfare, had been ratified by the
return of the Hallows. Then he was welcomed by Perceval and was led into
the presence of the Graal, or at least into the chapel where it abode
and was accustomed to appear at the serving of the Mass. It is at this
point that the mystery of the subject deepens and that he is said to
have beheld the five changes, corresponding to the five wounds which
Christ received upon the Cross. But the vision had a more withdrawn
meaning, which is held in utter reserve, because it is the secret of the
sacrament. It was through his experiences in the Hidden House that
Arthur, on his return to Cardoil, was enabled to furnish, as we are
told, the true pattern for Eucharistic chalices, previously unknown in
his kingdom, and, in like manner, of bells for church offices.

<span id="page_349">p. 349</span>

It is possible scarcely to say that the numerous allusions to the Sacred
Vessel tend to the increase of our knowledge on the descriptive side of
the object, but on that which may be called historical there is ample
evidence that the story draws from some form of The *Book of the Holy
Graal*, while its specific additions and extensions do not distract its
harmony in respect of this source. It is clear from several statements
that there is to be no rest in the land until the Graal has been
achieved, but the tremor of adventure and enchantment which stirs Logres
in its dream is not characterised clearly by either of those diagnoses
which are found in the Greater or Lesser Chronicles. Prior to the first
arrival of Perceval, and during his keepership subsequently, those
maidens and holy hermits who, in one or another way, have been concerned
with the Graal service have a devotional refuge therein which carries
with it a species of youth renewal. Yet the vessel itself still lies
under a certain cloud of mystery, and during the period of research
there is no man, however well he may be acquainted himself therewith,
who can instruct another in the quest or in the attainment of the Castle
of Desire. The will of God alone can lead the seeker.

Though encompassed by sacramental protections, the Graal and its
companion Hallows were not without danger from the assaults of workers
of evil. We learn early in the story that King Fisherman is challenged
by the King of Castle Mortal in respect of the Graal and Lance. The fact
of this claim and the partial success which follows it constitutes a
departure from the tradition of the whole French cycle, in so far as it
is now extant; but we shall meet with its correspondences in the German
cycle, and shall find that, as they do not derive from one another, they
are branches with a common root which lies beneath the surface of the
literature. The King of Castle Mortal is described as he who sold God
for money; but although there is a full account of the evil ruler taking
possession of the

<span id="page_350">p. 350</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Graal Castle, we
know nothing of his antecedent life, except that he was a brother of him
who was sealed with sanctity and the rightful custodian therefore of the
sacred objects. It follows from this that he was reared, so to speak, in
the sanctuary and must have either betrayed the sanctuary or have been
cast out therefrom. The usurpation takes place after the death of King
Fisherman, which seems to have created the opportunity; but when the
enemy of the Laws of Light entered into the place of God, the Chapel of
the Holy Graal was emptied of its Hallows, which were taken into deeper
retreat. The sanctuary was not destined, however, to remain under the
powers of the darkness, and as in the other romances Perceval returns in
fine to ask the postponed question; as by so doing he restores health to
the King and joy to the Hidden House; so here he visits the usurper with
arms of the body, arms of the soul in purity, invincible arms of grace,
and by his conquest of the Castle he reads himself into the Kingdom,
while the self-destruction of the false King follows on that victory.
The Hallows are then restored, though the witness does not say whether
by hands of men, hands of angels, or borne by the wind of the Spirit.
The sepulchre of King Fisherman was before the altar, and it was covered
with the jewelled tabernacle, which seems to have been moved by a
miracle.

Perceval abode in the Castle, except in so far as his toilsome life
called him temporarily away, and there also were his mother--who did not
die at the beginning of his adventures, as in several of the other
texts--and his virgin sister, till they were called at length from
earth. The call came also to Perceval, but not in the guise of death. He
was instructed, as we have seen in another branch of our inquest, to
divide the Hallows between certain hermits who possessed the "building
word" for churches of all things holy and houses dedicated to sanctity.
From this it follows that the Graal in this story may not in reality
depart, but is removed and

<span id="page_351">p. 351</span>

remains--as it would seem--in some undeclared sanctuary of Britain.
Perceval was not instructed, and made no disposition in respect of his
kingdom or the Castle, for there began the ringing of certain joyful
bells, as if for a bridal. Into the harbour there entered a ship with
white sails emblazoned with the Red Cross, and therein was a fair,
priestly company, robed for the celebration of Mass. The anchor was
cast, and the company went to pray in the Chapel of the Holy Graal,
bearing with them glorious vessels of gold and silver, as if on the
removal of those things which were without price in the order of the
spirit there were left, as a sign of goodwill, the external offerings of
precious metals of this world. Perceval took leave of his household and
entered the ship, followed by those whose high presence made his
departure a pageant. It is said, thereupon, that the Graal would appear
no more in the Chapel or Castle, but that Perceval would know well the
place where it would be.

There can be no question that in spite of several discrepancies this
version of the Quest is the most significant of all its renderings into
the fair language of romance, that being excepted only which is the
exalted Quest of all. I record in conclusion as follows: (1) That there
is no genealogy given of the Graal Keeper; (2) that among the
discrepancies, or as something that is out of reason, there must be
included the allocation of the King's illness to the paralysed
inquisition of Perceval; (3) that so far as enchantments of Britain are
mentioned in this text, the *Longer Prose Perceval* draws a certain
reflection from the Lesser Chronicles; (4) that the final abrogation of
the question through the King's death in misease, and the winning of the
Graal by the chance of war, are things which place this branch of the
Graal literature apart from all other branches; (5) accepting the
judgment of scholarship that the *Mabinogi* of *Peredur* and the English
*Syr Percyvelle* are the last reflections of some primeval non-Christian

<span id="page_352">p. 352</span>

quest, before all marriage with the Graal, it is desirable to note that
the *Longer Prose Perceval* shares with them one characteristic in
common, that in none of them is the question asked; and late though it
be otherwise, as those texts are late, this also seems to embody a
primitive element. I should mention further that the shield borne by
Perceval is said to have been the shield of that Joseph who "took down
the Saviour of the world from hanging on the rood," and that Joseph set
in the boss thereof a relic of the Precious Blood and a piece of our
Lord's garment. It seems obvious that this is a reflection from the
*Book of the Holy Graal* concerning the shield of Evalach, but this was
reserved for Galahad. And in fine, as regards the question, with all
that followed in respect of the King's languishment, it should be
noted--as a suggestion of deeper mystery behind one unaccountable
mystery--that, on the evidence of King Fisher himself, he would have
been whole of his limbs and his body, had he known that the visitor at
the Graal Castle was Perceval, and his own nephew.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VIII. The Quest of the High Prince](hchg49)
