[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hchg48)  [Next](hchg50) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1589639057/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### VIII

#### THE QUEST OF THE HIGH PRINCE

Having passed through many initiations, I can say with the sincerity
which comes of full knowledge that the Graal legend, ritually and
ceremonially presented, is the greatest of all which lies beyond the
known borders of the instituted mysteries. But it is exalted in a place
of understanding of which no one can speak in public, not only because
of certain seals placed upon the sanctuary, but more especially, in the
last resource, because there are no listeners. I know, however, and can
say that the Cup appears; I know that it is the Graal cup; and the
wonders of its manifestation in romance are not so far removed from the
high things which it symbolises,

<span id="page_353">p. 353</span>

whence it follows that the same story is told everywhere. It is in this
way that on these subjects we may make up our minds to say new things,
but we say only those which are old, because it would seem that there
are no others. If Guiot de Provence ever affirmed that the Graal legend
was first written in the starry heavens, he testified to that which is
the shadow of the truth, or more properly its bright reflection.

Let us now set before our minds the image of the Graal Castle, having a
local habitation and a name on the mountain-side of Corbenic. The
inhabitant-in-chief of this sanctuary is the Keeper of the Hallows,
holding by lineal descent from the first times of the mystery. This is
the noble King Pelles, behind whom is that undeclared type of the
consecrated royalty which was--the maimed King Pellehan, whose hurt has
to be healed by Galahad. The maiden who carries the Sacred Vessel in the
pageant of the ceremonial rite is the reigning king's daughter, the
*virgo intacta* Helayne. To the Castle on a certain occasion there comes
the Knight Lancelot, who is the son of King Ban of Benoic, while his
mother Helen is issued from the race of Joseph of Arimathæa, and through
him is of the line of King David. It is known by the Keeper Pelles that
to bring to its final term the mystery of the Holy Graal, his daughter
must bear a child to Lancelot, and this is accomplished under
circumstances of enchantment which seem to have eliminated from the
maiden all sense of earthly passion. It cannot be said that this was the
state of Lancelot, who believed that his partner in the mystery of union
was the consort of Arthur the King, and to this extent the sacramental
imagery offers the signs of failure. In the case of Helayne the
symbolism only deflects from perfection at a single point, which is that
of a second meeting with Lancelot under almost similar circumstances. I
must not specify them here, except in so far as to say that there was a
certain incursion of common motive into that which belonged otherwise to
the sacramental side of things, so far as she

<span id="page_354">p. 354</span>

was concerned. I can imagine nothing in the whole course of literature
to compare with the renunciation of this maiden, on whom the pure light
of the Graal had fallen for seasons and years, and who was called upon
by the exigencies of the Quest to make that sacrifice which is indicated
by the great romance. It is at this point that the Book of the Knight
Lancelot sets aside finally all sense of triviality and is assumed into
the Kingdom of the Mysteries.

The motherhood of King Pelles' daughter, because of her consanguinity
with the mysteries, of which she is an assistant-guardian under the
Hereditary Keeper, occurs as the result of an intercourse which has some
aspects of a magical marriage, and, considering all its circumstances,
it is difficult at this stage to speculate about all that which lies
behind it. We may almost say that the Lesser Mysteries took flesh for a
period under an ordained enchantment and were ill at ease in their
envelope. Having regard to Galahad's election, the response which he
made thereto, and the achievement which in fine crowned it, the manner
of his birth is no longer even a stain; it is a triviality, the
sufficing cause of which removes the suggestion of profanation in
respect of the Holy Place which by that unusual conception drew to the
term of its ministry. I can understand that the mind unversed in the
harmony of the whole scheme may think that the generation of Galahad
should have been left in a cloud of uncertainty and himself without
declared father or mother, like the mystic King of Salem. We have,
however, to remember that what we now term bastardy does not rank in the
romances exactly as a stain upon origin; it is almost a conventional
mode of begetting heroes-in-chief, and that which obtains for Galahad
obtains for the ideal hero and king who was the son according to the
flesh of Uther Pendragon. As no romances ascribe a higher importance to
chastity, and even to virginity, than the Graal legends,
so--antecedently at least--their writers had every reason to attach its
proper degree of value to the pre-eminence

<span id="page_355">p. 355</span>

and sanctity of the nuptial bond; but there was that in the antecedents
of Lancelot which made him the only possible father for the most exotic
flower of chivalry who was the predestined Graal winner, but at the same
time nothing could insure that possibility, except in the absence of his
marriage.

So, therefore, Galahad is begotten in the fulness of time, and over all
connected therewith falls suddenly the veil of concealment. Though on
one occasion he was seen as a babe by Sir Bors in the Holy Place, we do
not know certainly where he was born or by whom nurtured; but if we are
guided by the sequel, as it follows in the Great Quest, it was probably
away from the Graal Castle and with mystic nurses. When we first meet
him he is among the pageants and holy places of the mysteries of
official religion. Subsequently he is led towards his term by one who
seems a steward of other mysteries, and when the quest begins he passes
at once into the world of parable and symbol, having firstly been
consecrated as a knight by his own father, who does not apparently know
him, who acts under the direction of the stewards, while Galahad
dissembles any knowledge that he might be assumed to possess. He has
come, so far as we can say, out of the hidden places of the King. He
bears the outward signs of the Mysteries, and has an imputed prescience
of events in a certain chain of cause and effect. He passes through
adventures as a man passes through visions, and he has many combats, but
they are chiefly of such an order that the alternative title of the
Great Quest might well be the Spiritual Combat. In the quests which he
undertakes, although there is nominally one castle in which the Graal
has its normal abode, it is yet a moving wonder, and a studied
comparison might show that it is more closely connected with the
Eucharistic mystery than it is according to the other romances, the
*Longer Prose Perceval* excepted. Still, an efficacious mass is being
said everywhere in the world. The Graal is more especially the secret of
high sanctity. Galahad himself is the

<span id="page_356">p. 356</span>

mystery of spiritual chivalry exemplified in human form; his history is
one of initiation, and his term is to see God. As compared with the rest
of the literature, we enter in his legend upon new ground, and are on
the eminence of Mont Salvatch rather than among the normal offices of
chivalry. It is more especially this legend which is regarded by
scholarship as the last outcome of the ascetic element introduced into
the Graal cycle; but it is not understood that throughout the period of
the middle ages the mystic life manifested only under an ascetic aspect,
or with an environment of that kind. The Galahad romance is not ascetic
after the ordinary way, or as the term is commonly accepted; it has an
interior quality which places it above that degree, and this quality is
the open sense of the mystic life. But the gate of the mystic life is
assuredly the ascetic gate, in the same manner that the normal life of
religion has morality as the door thereof. Those who have talked of
asceticism meant in reality to speak of the supernatural life, of which
the Galahad romance is a kind of archetypal picture. Though Wolfram, on
the authority of Guiot, may have told what he called the true story,
that story was never recited till the creation of the Galahad legend.
The atmosphere of the romance gives up Galahad as the natural air gives
up the vision from beyond. It is the story of the arch-natural man who
comes to those who will receive him. He issues from the place of the
mystery as Lancelot came from fairyland, or at least a world of
enchantment. The atmosphere is that of great mysteries, the odour that
of the sanctuary withdrawn behind the Hallows of the outward Holy
Places. Galahad's entire life is bound up so completely with the Quest
to which he is dedicated that apart therefrom he can scarcely be said to
live. The desire of a certain house not made with hands has so eaten him
up that he has never entered the precincts of the halls of passion. He
is indeed faithful and true, but earthly attraction is foreign to him,
even in its exaltation. Even

<span id="page_357">p. 357</span>

his meetings with his father are shadowy and not of this world--a
characteristic which seems the more prominent when he is the better
fulfilling what would be understood by his filial duty. It is not that
he is explicitly outside the sphere of sense and its temptations, but
that his actuating motives are of the transmuted kind. In proportion,
his quest is of the unrealised order; it is the working of a mystery
within the place of a mystery; and it is in comparison therewith that we
may understand the deep foreboding which fell upon the heart of Arthur
when the flower of his wonderful court went forth to seek the Graal. In
this respect the old legend illustrates the fact that many are called
but few are chosen; and even in the latter class it is only the rarest
flower of the mystic chivalry which can be thought of as chosen among
thousands. Of the Perceval Quest there are many versions, but of Galahad
there is one story only. So are the peers of the Round Table a great
company, but Galahad is one. So also, of the high kings and princes,
there are some who come again, and of such is the royal Arthur; but
there are some who return no more, and of these is Galahad. He has not
been understood even by great poets, for there could be scarcely a worse
interpretation of his position than a poem, like that of Tennyson, in
which he celebrates his strength on the ground that his heart is pure.
Let me add, in conclusion of this part, that at the time of his coming
the Graal went about in the land, looking for those it belonged to, and
that in this respect Galahad had the true secret of *Le Moyen de
parvenir*. It has its secret place of abiding, its altar of repose, at
Corbenic, the Graal Castle, but it appears at the King's court--and this
is exclusive to the story. The voice of the Quest passed through all
Britain, in part by common report--because all the Arthurian knighthood
bound itself to assume the task--but in part also by the miracle of
unknown voices and of holy fore-knowledge. The Graal itself is not the
official sacrament, or it is that and something which exceeds it. If it
were otherwise

<span id="page_358">p. 358</span>

there would be no sense in the declaration made by a hermit that certain
knights may seek but shall never find it. On the Eucharistic side, it is
the vision of Christ Himself, and the mystery of Divine Providence is
manifested strangely therein; it works through faith, represented as the
way of vision and the gate of things unseen. In the poem of De Borron
and other early versions, the Sacred Vessel is invisible--and that
utterly--to persons of evil life; but, though still under its due veils,
it is shown in the Quest more openly, and on one occasion even to all
who are present--good knights and indifferent. The vision imposes
silence, and this seems to have been always its office, but it is that
kind of silence which comes about by the mode of ecstasy, and in the
case of Lancelot it is described rather fully, as if there were a
particular intention discernible in his advancement through those grades
of his partial initiation, when he sees without participating. One form
of this ecstasy seems to be connected with the working of the Holy
Spirit. But there is no assurance to be inferred from favour to further
favour, since, on another occasion, the Graal is invisible to Lancelot
when it is seen at the same time and in the same place by a company of
white knights.

Of such is the Vessel of the legend and as regards the search after it,
the elect knight is told that God entered into this world to free men
from the wearisome adventures which were on them and from the evil
belief. A close parallel is instituted between the Knight and Christ,
since Galahad came to terminate the adventurous and evil destinies in
this island of Britain. For this reason he is likened to the Son of the
High Father, who brought souls out of thrall, and even a demon confesses
to him as the way of truth.

I conceive that there is little occasion to recite the story of the
Quest which is available after so many manners of English vesture to
young and old alike. At the Vigil of Pentecost, Lancelot was carried by
a gentlewoman to a Holy House, where he was required to

<span id="page_359">p. 359</span>

knight the son of his own body, but, as we have seen, without learning
his name or recognising him after any manner. Galahad, who "was semely
and demure as a dove, with all maner of good features," was acquainted,
undoubtedly, with his geniture, but he made no claim on his father.
After this mode, at the beginning of his progress, was he consecrated by
the secular order and received into the degree of chivalry. He came
forth from the sacred precincts, being a convent of white nuns, wherein
it is said that he had been nourished, and was brought to the Court of
King Arthur by "a good old man and an auncyent clothed al in whyte," who
saluted the company at table with words of peace. Against this arrival
the palace had been prepared strangely by the emblazonment of letters of
gold on the Siege Perilous--testifying that the time had come when it
should be at length occupied--and by the appearance of a great stone in
the river outside, with a sword embedded therein, which none present
could withdraw. The ancient man uplifted the draperies of the chair, and
there was found a new emblazonment: "this is the Sege of Galahalt the
haute prynce." The youth is seated accordingly, as a prince who was not
of this world, and it was seen that he was clothed in red arms, though
without sword or shield. But he had begun to move amidst enchantments;
the sword implanted in the stone was to him predestined, and by him it
was withdrawn, after which he revealed by the word of his own mouth that
it was that weapon wherewith the good Knight Balyn had slain Balan, his
brother. At the festival which followed this episode the Graal, under
its proper veils, appeared in the hall, illuminating all things by the
grace of the Holy Ghost and imposing that sacred silence--already
mentioned--in the presence of the Great Mysteries. As the light
enlightened them spiritually, and to each uplifted the countenance of
each in beauty? so the sacred vision fed them abundantly in their
bodies; but because of those draperies which shrouded the vessel; the
great

<span id="page_360">p. 360</span>

chivalry vowed to go in quest thereof, that they might see it more
openly. After this manner began the mystic inquisition which, by a
messenger from Nascien the Hermit--who was the early Keeper of Galahad
according to the *Vulgate Merlin* and the recipient of those revelations
contained in the *Book of the Holy Graal*--was forbidden to natural
women, like that of Masonry, though the ministers of the Graal were
maidens, and if Masonry had retained its secrets in conscious memory
they would be served by women who were virgins.

The first adventures of Galahad were those which befell him at an Abbey
of white monks, when he who was as yet without shield received that
which Joseph II. gave in the far past to Evalach that he might prevail
against the King of Egypt--that also which Joseph crossed with his blood
on his death-bed. It was a sign that the evil adventures would be ended
by Galahad. Previously, it had been a shield perilous to all who used
it, because it was predestined to one, but I do not find that it had a
special office in the later part of the legend.

Of the Graal and the other Hallows, of their ministry and mystery, and
of all things connected therewith, we have heard in their proper
sections otherwise. After what manner Lancelot, Perceval and Bors passed
through worlds of parable as through places of purification--I do not
speak here, and even in respect of the High Prince, I am concerned only
in so far as his story completes the things which were left over from
other branches of the Greater Chronicles; the healing of Mordrains, the
King--penitent of all the centuries; the release of Simeon; and the
manumission of the unfaithful Moses. But of this last I find nothing in
the Quest. As regards Simeon, the abbey which was visited by Lancelot
was reached by Galahad towards the close of his time of quest, and there
he beheld a burning wood in a croft under the minster, but the
"flammynge faylled, and the fyre staunched" as he drew thereto, and
there paused for a space. The

<span id="page_361">p. 361</span>

voice of Simeon from within greeted him in a good hour when he was to
draw a soul out of earthly pain into the joy of Paradise. It said also
that he who spoke was of his kindred, and that for three hundred and
fifty-four years he had been thus purged of the sin which he had done
against Joseph of Arimathæa. Galahad took the body in his arms, bore it
into the minster, had service said over it, and interred it before the
high altar. Of such was the rest of Simeon.

It was at another abbey that he came upon the age-long vigil of King
Mordrains. Galahad had the hands of healing, and seeing that he was born
in the sanctuary, it may be said that in this romance the healing comes
from within. These were the words of the King: "Galahad the seruant of
Jhesu Cryst whos comynge I haue abyden soo longe, now enbrace me & lete
me reste on thy breste, so that I may reste bitwene thine armes, for
thou art a clene vyrgyn aboue all Knyghtes as the floure of the lely, in
whome vyrgynyte is sygnefyed, & thou art the rose the whiche is the
floure of all good vertues, & in coloure of fyre. For the fyre of the
holy ghoost is taken so in thee that my flesshe which was of dede
oldnesse, is become yong ageyne." When Galahad heard his words, he
covered his whole body in a close embrace, in which position the King
prays Christ to visit him, wherein and whereafter the soul departed from
his body. So was the curious impertinent, who had been called but not
chosen at that time, after his long penance, at length forgiven the
offence, and was taken into the great peace, fortified with all Rites of
the most secret and Holy Church of the Hidden Graal.

The Ship of Solomon had, prior to these episodes, conveyed the questing
knights--Galahad, Perceval and Bors--from point to point of their
progress; it had taken Lancelot a certain distance in his son's company,
till they commended each other to God for the rest of their mortal life;
it had borne the sister of Perceval,

<span id="page_362">p. 362</span>

who of her own hair and of silk, combined with precious stones, had
braided the true and proper girdle for the Sword of David, to replace
the mean girdle attached to it by the wife of Solomon. But she had
yielded her life before the healing and passing in God of Mordrains, and
had been placed by her proper desire in another ship, with a covenant on
her part that it should meet the questers at Sarras, when the Ship of
Solomon brought them to that bourne of their voyaging. It remained only
that those three should now gather at Corbenic for the healing of the
maimed King Pellehan, about whose place and identity we have seen that
the text offers some elements of minor confusion. This is he whom we
must suppose to have received the Dolorous Stroke at the hands of Balyn.

As the path of quest drew towards its central point, the three, who had
traversed various converging roads, met, as it is said, at travers,
knowing that the adventures of Logres were at last achieved. They
entered within the Castle, and King Pelles greeted them with great joy.
In this as in some other romances grave importance is attached to
resoldering the Broken Sword, and that which was brought by Eleazer, the
King's son, was that with which Joseph II. was once stricken through the
thighs. It was set perfectly by Galahad when the others had essayed in
vain, and was then given to Bors, as a good knight and a worthy man.
What followed thereon was the sustenance of the elect Graal knights
after a spiritual manner, to the exclusion of the general assembly, who
were dismissed from the presence. Those who remained were three and
three, namely, Galahad, Perceval and Bors, for the first triad; King
Pelles, his son Eleazar, and a maiden who was the King's niece, for the
second triad. To these were joined certain pilgrims who were knights
also, namely, three of Gaul, three of Ireland, and three of Denmark.
Finally, there was brought in the maimed King, and thereon a voice said
that two of those who were present did not belong to the Quest,

<span id="page_363">p. 363</span>

at which words King Pelles--although he was the Keeper--rose up with his
son and departed. They were, therefore, thirteen in all, and one of
these was a woman, who was present with them when Joseph of Arimathæa,
the first Bishop of Christendom, came down with angels from heaven, and
celebrated an arch-natural Mass in the Holy Place. After the Kiss of
Peace given to Galahad, and communicated by him to his fellows, the
celebrants dissolved, but out of the Graal itself there came the Saviour
of all, with the signs of His passion upon Him, and communicated to them
all in the Eucharist. He also vanished, and Galahad, who had received
his instructions, went up to the maimed King and anointed him with the
blood flowing from the Hallowed Spear. Thereupon, he, being healed, rose
up and gave thanks to God. It is said that, in the sequel of time, he
united himself to a company of white monks.

"Sir," said Galahad to the Great Master at the close of the Mysteries,
"why shalle not these other felawes goo with us?"--that is to say, unto
Sarras, the reference being to the nine mysterious knights. The answer
hereto was significant: "For this cause: for ryght as I departed my
postels, one here and another there soo I will that ye departe, and two
of yow shall dye in my servyse, but one of you shal come ageyne and
telle tydynges." So, therefore, the company of the adepts dissevered;
but we have seen how Galahad, Perceval and Bors were carried by the Ship
of Solomon to Sarras, "in the partyes of Babylone," called an island in
the Quest. There met them, in accordance with her covenant, that other
vessel, which carried the body of Perceval's most holy sister. We have
seen also how the soul of Galahad departed, and it rests only to say
that Perceval died in a hermitage, but Sir Bors returned to Logres,
bearing the messages of his brethren, but especially of Galahad to his
father: "And whanne he had said these wordes Galahad went to Percyual
and kyssed hym & commaunded hym to God, and soo he

<span id="page_364">p. 364</span>

went to sire Bors, & kyssed hym, and commaunded hym  to God, and sayde:
Fayre lord, salewe me to my lord syr launcelot my fader. And as soone as
ye see hym, byd hym remember of this unstable world."

The bodies of Perceval and Galahad were buried in the spiritualities of
Sarras, which may have been in some sense a city of initiation, though
until their coming it was ruled by evil rather than good. It was not the
abiding place, but that of the final trial for the stewards of the
Mystery, and at first they were imprisoned therein; but Galahad was
afterwards made King. The Spear was taken into heaven, together with the
Holy Vessel, but Bors returned--as it has been intimated--carrying the
re-soldered Broken Sword, as if grace had been removed, but not that
which now may have symbolised the coming destruction of the Round Table.
Of the Sword of David we hear nothing further, nor do we know what
became of the Ship of Solomon. As the symbol of Faith, it may have
continued voyaging, but on other considerations it had done its work:
there was no reason why it should remain when Galahad had gone.

But perhaps the saddest mystery of all is the end of King Pelles
himself, and how it fared with him after the departure of the Graal. It
will be seen that the Quest versions offer many alternatives, but there
is one text only which says that the Hereditary Keeper was dispossessed
utterly and left in an empty sanctuary.

We have now, and in fine, to account as we can for the great disaster of
the whole experiment. The earthly knighthood undertakes, in despite of
the high earthly king, a quest to which it is in a sense perhaps called
but for which it is in no sense chosen. The result, as I have said, is
that the chivalry of the world is broken and the kingdom is destroyed,
while the object of all research is said to be taken away. It was not,
therefore, the concealment of the Sacred Vessel, but its manifestation
rather, which brought ruin to the Round Table. It went about in the
world of Logres, and the ruin followed, because the

<span id="page_365">p. 365</span>

world was not worthy. In a certain manner it is the mystery of the Graal
itself which gives forth Galahad as its own manifestation, in the order
of the visible body, and sends him on designed offices of healing, with
a warrant to close a specific cycle of times. When the Graal romances
say that the Sacred Vessel was seen no more, or was carried up to
heaven, they do not mean that it was taken away, in the sense that it
had become unattainable, but that it was--as some of them say also--in
concealment. It is certain that the great things are always in
concealment, and are perhaps the more hidden in proportion to their more
apparently open manifestation. In this respect, the distinction between
the natural and supernatural Graal, which is made by the prose Lancelot,
has a side of highest value. Let us reserve for a moment the
consideration of the Hallows as mere relics, and in so far as the Cup is
concerned, let us remember the two forms of sustenance which it
offered--in correspondence closely enough with the ideas of Nature and
Grace. It should be understood, however, that between the mysteries
themselves there is a certain superincession, and so also there is in
the romances what the light heart of criticism regards as *un peu
confus*, namely, some disposition to talk of the one office in the terms
of the other. At the same time certain romances give prominence to the
greater and others to the lesser office.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IX. The Welsh Quest of Galahad](hchg50)
