[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hchg93)  [Next](hchg95) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1589639057/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_708">p. 708</span>

### PART III

#### PHASES OF INTERPRETATION

The few works which will be included in this section lie outside the
ordinary range of scholarship, and for this reason--whatever their
merits or defects--I have placed them under a sub-title which is
designed to mark their particular distinction of motive.

I. Eugène Aroux: (*a*) *Dante, Hèrètique, Rèvolutionnaire, et
Socialiste: Rèvèlations d’un Catholique sur le Moyen Age*, 1854; (*b*)
*Les Mystères de la Chevalerie et de l’Amour Platonique au Moyen Age*,
1858.  
There are others, but these will suffice, and I have dealt with the
author's standpoint sufficiently in the text of the present work. As
instances of criticism moving under heavy spells of sorcery, as
phenomena of reverie in research, I know few things so profoundly
entertaining. The section entitled *La Massènie du Saint Graal* in the
later work deserves and would receive a crown in any Academy of Fantasy.

II\. F. Naelf: *Opinions Religieuses des Templiers*, 1890.  
The Graal is the symbol of mystic wisdom and of the communion between
God and Man. It is affirmed that the Templars perpetuated a secret
doctrine which did not perish with them, if they indeed perished; it
passed afterwards through Masonry and is there still embedded. The
position of the Johannine sect is considered in the same connection. On
our own part, we have already appreciated and set aside these
interesting views.

III\. Émile Burnouf: *Le Vase Sacrè et ce qu’il contient*, 1896.  
The legend of the Holy Graal contains certain essential elements of the
universal *cultus* which prevailed among the Aryan peoples--which
elements are identical with those of India, Persia and Greece. The
romances are not important for the religious history of the Sacred
Vessel; for that in its Christian aspects we must have recourse to the
liturgical texts and ceremonies of the Catholic Church. The true legend
of the Graal goes back, however, through Christian times, and thence
through the great faiths of the East, to the Vedic Hymns, wherein its
explanation is found--otherwise, in that vase which contains *Agni*
under the appearance of *Soma*.

<span id="page_709">p. 709</span>

IV\. Isabel Cooper-Oakley: *Traces of a Hidden Tradition in Masonry and
Mediæval Mysticism*, 1900.  
Mrs. Cooper-Oakley's chief authorities are Gabriele Rossetti and Eugene
Aroux. This is in respect of her views on Masonic tradition, but
unfortunately neither of these writers was acquainted at first-hand with
the subject, seeing that neither were Masons. As regards the literature
of the Holy Graal, a considerable acquaintance is shown with the German
cycle, though the writer prefers to depend on her somewhat doubtful
precursors rather than on her own impressions. In this way she reflects
the opinions of Burnouf as expressed in *Le Vase Sacrè*. She has written
some interesting papers, but they do not carry us further than the
pre-occupations of those whom she cites. She is right on the fact that
there is assuredly a tradition in Masonry and a tradition in the
literature of the Holy Graal, but on the nature of that tradition she is
of necessity far from the goal because those are far whom she follows.

A. L. Cleather and Basil Crump: *Parsifal, Lohengrin and the Legend of
the Holy Graal*, 1904.  
We have here a summary of Wagner's two operatic dramas from the
standpoint of Wagner himself, or, as the sub-title says, "described and
interpreted" in accordance with his own writings. The Graal in Wagner is
like the Arthurian chronicles in Tennyson, a high and uplifting
ceremonial, but not more faithful to the matter of the German cycle than
is the English poet to Malory whom he followed. In their account of the
sacramental legend, apart from Wagner, Miss Cleather and her
collaborator have been guided in part by accepted critics of the
literature, like Nutt and Simrock, whose views they have combined with
those of Mrs. Cooper-Oakley and her sources. It is said that, according
to tradition, the abode of the Holy Graal is on a lofty mountain of
India--being, I suppose, a reference to the realm of Prester John. It
came also originally from the East, probably from the Himalayas. It
connects with Johannine tradition and Templar chivalry.

It should be added that I published in seven successive issues of Mr.
Ralph Shirley's monthly magazine, *The Occult Review*, some articles on
the Graal and its literature which constituted a first draft or summary
of the present work. They appeared from March to September 1907. Two of
these issues also contain some particulars concerning an alleged
discovery of the Holy Graal at Glastonbury, with remarks upon the claim
and its value.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Index](hchg95)
