[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hchg86)  [Next](hchg88) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1589639057/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### III

#### THE CATHOLIC SECRET OF THE LITERATURE

But if there were custodians of a Secret Tradition at any time during
the Christian centuries there arises the inevitable question: Who were
these mysterious Wardens and also where were they? Can we learn anything
about them? What was this strange power or influence working within the
Church? Well, in the first place, it was not a power at all in any
acting, governing, or intervening sense. When I speak about the region
of a higher consciousness behind the manifest mind of the Catholic
Church, it is equivalent to saying

<span id="page_627">p. 627</span>

that in the uttermost degrees of sanctity, the *consensus omnium
sanctorum* does by a certain participation become the *sensus Spiritus
Sancti*. It is, again, as if within the Church Militant there had been
always a little body which had pursued a peculiar path and had travelled
a great distance, making no obvious sign. We are faced, however, by the
apparent problem of two schools which seem to bear testimony in
conflict, and there is the witness to both in the Graal literature. The
first is that of spiritual alchemy, which knows not the voice of
faltering concerning the *terra viventium* and the *Bona Domini*
therein. Its correspondence in the Graal literature is the grace and
secret knowledge behind the Eucharist, when the sensible veils of bread
and wine and the ultra-sensible veils of thaumaturgic transubstantiation
have utterly dissolved, and God is revealed in Christ. The second is the
testimony of Kabalism and Masonry to the glory departed from the
Sanctuary, and hereof the Graal correspondence is the dispartition of
the Hallows, the removal of the Sacred Vessel and the voiding of the
Holy House. Looking, it will be said, on either side; on the experiment
of alchemy, than which nothing seems lost more obviously at this late
day; on the Quest of the Graal, over which the chivalry of
Logres--except for twelve knights--broke and went to pieces utterly; on
the theosophy of Israel, all dead and all forgotten; on the sad
confession--*ab origine symboli*--of loss and dereliction in Masonry;
how is there any choice to be taken between either school? If "green's
forsaken and yellow's forsworn," in virtue of what melancholy persuasion
can we exercise a preference among them? Surely beneath the title of
this book there should be written the word *Ichabod*, "the glory has
departed." On the contrary I have written: *Vel sanctum invenit, vel
sanctum tacit*, for the implicits of the Graal literature are the
shadowed secrets of a Holy School, or rather their inexpress
formulation. I confess that in either school it may seem difficult on
the surface

<span id="page_628">p. 628</span>

to suppose another construction than that of a treasure which there was
but a treasure which is now withdrawn. And, as if to accentuate the
position, I have said on my own part that the official sanctuary has
closed down on its higher consciousness. But in so recording I have
testified in the same terms that everything remains. The house is not
less mine because I have locked its doors on the outer side; the
ancestral heirlooms are still in my keeping, though I have not opened
the secret chambers for so many moons or years that I have forgotten the
fact of the keys still hanging, with many others, from my girdle. The
Church, in like manner, is still the House of Souls; the Castle behind
which there is the Earthly Paradise and Eden; the Temple with a
Sanctuary on the other side of which there is the Ark of the New
Covenant--the Hidden Altar of Repose, wherein is the Sacred Vessel. It
is obvious therefore that no other House of God is possible in this age,
and that if I or another were to institute a Church of the Holy Graal,
dedicated to the Quest of the Sacred Vessel, and in hope of the grace
thereof, I should have my pains for my recompense and I should
communicate nothing therein. Our part is therefore one of watching and
prayer until such time as the Church herself unfolds from within and all
the doors are opened.

In harmony herewith, the characteristic of the Graal literature is its
great ostensible orthodoxy, and that which is ostensible I regard also
as implied and involved within. Here and there we discern a dubious hint
which might signify a subdued hostility towards Rome; but its sacraments
are still the sacraments; its doctrines are true doctrines, and its
practices are the code of spiritual life. The metrical romance of De
Borron is a Catholic poem, and if the *Early Merlin* and the *Didot
Perceval* are scarcely religious works, there is no tincture of dissent
from either institution or dogma; there are only the Secret Words and
what is signified therein. The *Book of the Holy Graal* is a religious
romance, and

<span id="page_629">p. 629</span>

its one questionable element is the meaning of the Super-Apostolical
Succession. The zeal of the Graal has eaten up the later *Merlin* in
both the texts thereof. The *Longer Prose Perceval* is the Church of
chivalry spiritualised. The *Romance of Lancelot* is the ideal spirit in
the exile of a morganatic marriage, but still remembering Zion. The
*Quest of Galahad* is of him who came forth from Jerusalem and returned
thereto; he was born in the place of the Great Mystery, but it was
necessary that he should be put outside the gates thereof and should win
his way back; he is the only seeker who belonged to the House from his
beginning.

There is another point which is not of less importance, and I hope that
this also will be seen to follow with clearness from what has been said
previously. The rumours and implicits of the Graal literature being in
no sense the voice of any Christian conclave speaking on its own
authority from the hidden places; and Kabalism--though it bears the same
testimony--being a confession of insufficiency on the part of a cognate
but non-Christian school, and therefore only an accessory deponent; it
should be understood further that the voice of Masonry is also not the
authoritative voice of such a conclave; it is the testimony of those who
knew, who derived their symbolism from the old mysteries of spiritual
rebirth, and, for the rest, on their own warrants made an experiment on
the mind of their age. The one voice which we can and must recognise as
the most approximate echo or replica of the Unknown Voice is that of
alchemy--which only adored and exemplified in respect of Church
doctrine. It is understood that I do not put forward the literature of
spiritual alchemy as the *corpus doctrinale* of those who in Christian
times were the Wardens of the Secret Tradition. Masonry, Kabalism, the
root-matter of a few Graal books are all in their special manner and
under their particular reserves the independent channels of the
doctrine. Deeply imbedded in the higher side of the Hermetic

<span id="page_630">p. 630</span>

works I believe that we get nearest to the Secret Tradition. A time came
when the bare possibility of speaking more openly led to more open
speaking, and so in the eighteenth century and the first flush of the
age which followed thereafter, we have two or three text-books wherein
are put forth the, most express intimations on the subject which have so
far transpired in the world. I will speak only of two, which were at
once independent and concurrent--Eckartshausen's *Cloud on the
Sanctuary* and *Characteristics of the Interior Church*, attributed to a
Russian named Lopoukine and said to be translated from the Russian. The
dates of these works are respectively 1800 and 1801.

Such as are acquainted with the literature of the mystic life will not
be unfamiliar with the conception of a Holy Assembly in the hands of
which the guidance of the Christian Church is thought to have rested
during the ages of Christendom. It is not, by the claim put forward,
more especially a corporate union than the life of humanity at large on
this earth is also a corporate 4 union. It will not have occurred of
necessity to my colleagues in thought, but they will understand what is
meant when I say that the hypothetical Holy Assembly should perhaps be
described as the sodality of a consciousness in common, and as I have
spoken already of a consciousness behind the Church as of a region now
untrodden, it will be understood that on the present supposition this
region is not vacant. As we have inferred further from the researches of
the ninth book that there are in specific literatures the records of a
Secret Tradition in Christian times, the written veils of which are
actually those literatures, so in the Doctrine of the Holy Assembly we
find a late, sporadic, but unusually definite witness which, after an
entirely new manner, is saying the same thing. I believe that the mode
in which this claim has been advanced, though in one sense it is the
most temperate and moderate of all, does tend towards a certain
confusion because two streams of influence

<span id="page_631">p. 631</span>

are identified therein--one being the holy, exalted and saving mind of
the official Church at its own highest in the manifest, and the other
that of the Hidden School itself as this is presented in the claim. The
inference, moreover, seems to be that the Holy Assembly is a kind of
head in concealment, and this I reject because of the misconception
which it tends to induce of necessity. If we could suppose for a moment
that man is the last development and issue from the anthropoid ape--much
as one might agree to regard the story of the princess who came out of
the water as a little chronicle of fact--that point--and whatever that
point might be--at which the animal consciousness passed into the human
consciousness would represent the analogical kind of transition by which
the members of the mystical body enter--if they do enter--into the
consciousness of the Holy Assembly. But the human being is not leading
the anthropoid ape, nor are the adepts who devised symbolical Masonry
ruling the Craft from a specific, unseen centre. The worst of all
illustrations would be, in like manner, to say that the Visible Church
is the body and the Secret Church is the head. The Visible Church has
been described most truly as the mystical body of Christ, and the Real
Presence in the Eucharist is the mystical communication in perpetuity of
Christ's life to that body; but this is on the understanding that the
body is the incorporation of souls in sanctity. In respect of the Holy
Assembly a similar description may obtain, but also on the understanding
that it is a generic union of illuminated spirits in Christ--making use
of the term spirit in that sense which attributes to man the possession
of a higher soul. The head is Christ in both cases indifferently, but in
the case of the Secret Church that Divine Union, which here is of faith
or imputation, has been established there under the sun of
consciousness.

Perhaps, within the more familiar forms of expression, the idea of the
Secret Church corresponds most closely

<span id="page_632">p. 632</span>

with that which is understood by a school of the prophets, though the
term describes an advanced spiritual state by one only of the gifts
which belong thereto. The gift itself has little connection with the
external meaning of prophecy; it is not especially the power of seeing
forward, but rather of sight within. In subjects of this kind, as in
other subjects, the greater includes the lesser--it being of minor
importance to discern, for example, the coming of Christ in a glass of
vision than to realise, either before or after, the deep significance of
that coming. So also the interpretation of doctrine is not manifested so
much by the exhibition of meaning behind meaning as of truth
understanding truth.

I suppose that it would be almost impossible to undertake a more arduous
task than that which is imposed on me in these sections of this last
book. My experience in the secret fraternities is that those which work
under any warrants, and with any shadow of tradition behind them,
suggest, in spite of their divergences, a single root of all, and this
is so patent that even in exoteric circles the hand of the Hermetic
brotherhoods has been surmised in Craft Masonry; of the Rosicrucians in
the high grades; of so-called Magian adepts in Knight Templary--and
hence onward and onward. The root fact at the back of all these dreams
is the actuality of an experiment which has always existed in the world,
which has never changed, which has been pursued unceasingly by a few,
the rumours of which are everywhere, which has many literatures, and all
these literatures, are veils. When the German poet Werner produced his
wonderful legend concerning the Sons of the Valley as the guiding hand
behind the old Order of the Temple; when he told how it was afterwards
withdrawn, so that they were left to their fate in the power of the
French King and the miserable pontiff; he--Werner--was dreaming of this
Experiment and those who pursued it. In after-days he struck out this
hypothesis and all element of life from his two strange

<span id="page_633">p. 633</span>

plays; but apart from any Templar hypothesis he knew that he was on the
right track, in the light of which knowledge he took the path of
Lancelot and died as a priest of the Latin Church, having sung Mass for
I know not how many moons. When Eckartshausen, who had been born in the
sanctuary, and was filled with the spirit of the sanctuary, made an end
of composing little books of popular devotion which took Germany and
France by storm, he saw that the Great Experiment and its great
tradition were in truth the secret of the sanctuary and the heritage
thereof. People who did not understand him said: "This is Deism"--but it
was the higher mystery of the Eucharist in the adyta of a conceived Holy
Assembly, and he it was--as I have hinted--who, on the intellectual
side, drew nearest of all to the heart of truth within.

The scheme of his interpretation of those Mysteries of Compassion which
summarise God's providence towards man for the fulfilment of our return
into union may be divided into a part of preamble and a part of
definition. The preamble announces the conditions by which an entrance
is hypothetically possible into the communion of saints. The requisite
faculty is the interior sense of the transcendental world, and the
opening of this sense is the beginning of Regeneration, understood as
the eradication of that virus which entered into man at the Fall.
Rebirth has three stages--that of the intelligence, that of the heart
and will, but that in fine which--seeing that it embraces the entire
being--is called corporeal rebirth, because the beast is also saved
together with the man, and the Great Quintessence by which the soul is
converted transmutes the body as well. It is held to follow herefrom
that union with God is possible in this life in the opening of the world
within us by a triple gradation through the moral, metaphysical and
plenary worlds, wherein is the Kingdom of the Spirit. This is the
process of Regeneration expressed in other terms. So far as regards the
preamble,

<span id="page_634">p. 634</span>

but the dogmatic part affirms: (1) that an advanced school has existed
from the beginning of our history, deriving directly from Christ, as He
in Whom there dwells substantially the whole plenitude of God; (2) that
this is the enlightened community of the interior Church, disseminated
throughout the world and governed therein by one spirit; (3) that it is
the most hidden of sodalities; (4) that the outer school, which is the
visible Church, is founded thereon, and by its symbols and ceremonies it
gives an external utterance to the truth which abides in the Hidden
Sanctuary; (5) that the work of the Interior Church has been the
building of a Spiritual Temple of regenerated souls; (6) that it
possesses the direct knowledge of those means by which man is restored
to his first estate; (7) that the external Church became a subsequent
necessity by the frailty of man as a whole; (8) that the external
worship fell away automatically from the service within; (9) that the
Church which was founded in Abraham was raised to perfection in Christ;
(10) that the Inmost Sanctuary is without change or shadow of
vicissitude; (11) that it is the union of those who have received the
light and share in the communion of saints; (12) that it unites the
science of the old, external Covenant with that of the new and interior
Covenant; (13) that it has three degrees corresponding to the stages of
Regeneration; (14) that herein repose the mysteries of all true
knowledge; (15) that it resembles no secret society, for all external
forms have passed utterly away; (16) that the path thereto is Wisdom and
the way is Love; (17) that although the Inner Sanctuary has been
separated from the Temple, they are destined for reunion; (18) that the
Way which is Wisdom and Love is also Christ; (19) that the Mystery of
the Incarnation is the deep Mystery of re-union with God; (20) that man
in his first estate was the Temple of Divinity, and God in His wisdom
has projected the rebuilding of this Temple; (21) that the plans of His
scheme are in the Holy

<span id="page_635">p. 635</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Mysteries and
constitute the secret of Regeneration, which is the royal and sacerdotal
science; (22) that man approximates to Regeneration, and does in fine
attain it, by the discernment of the Body and Blood of Christ, or, as I
have myself expressed it continually throughout this work, by the
Mystery of the Eucharist.

The same testimony was given independently at the same time by the
Chevalier Loupoukine in his little tract on the *Characteristics of the
Interior Church*. He defined the higher spiritual mind as that of
consciousness in grace only, by which those who participate therein
become that which Christ is by His nature. Here also the Great Work is
that of Regeneration, which is accomplished in Christ, and the Church
within has the keys of the process. The testimony is also identical as
to the sanctity and indefectible character of the external Church, which
is the means of entrance into the Church of Christ unseen. The way,
again, is Love, as the essence of the Body of Christ; by Regeneration
that Body is reborn in us; and so the whole process--though in neither
case is the truth stated expressly--becomes the arch-natural Mystery of
the Eucharist.

There are errors of expression in both these works, and, as I have said,
there is a certain confusion; they are not to be taken by themselves or
in connection simply with one another; but it will be evident that,
after their own manner, they bear the same testimony as the schools of
tradition in Christian time and as the higher literature of the Graal.

It will be seen otherwise that the Secret Church is an arbitrary name
adopted to describe the penetralia of the tradition in secret; the idea
itself does not correspond to any titular description, and in adopting
of necessity some distinguishing name, I have chosen one which in
several respects is perhaps the most arbitrary of all; but it serves to
particularise the school as essentially Christian. Whether in the East
or the

<span id="page_636">p. 636</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> West, I believe
that there are still custodians in the world, for the hidden truth does
not perish. It is not a sectarian school, and I think that it has even
abandoned all those Houses of Initiation, the fact of which has
transpired in the outer world. Its reflections, however, remain imbedded
therein. For those secret fraternities at the present day which confess
to two incorporated orders and to have recipients in both, it
corresponds to that third Order from which they claim to hold--though
how they do not know. For those Masonic Rites of the past which were, by
their own imputation, under the obedience of Unknown Superiors, whom
they never saw probably, these Superiors would answer to the Holy
School. It is the Holy Assembly of Eckartshausen and the Interior Church
of Loupoukine; it is the Crowned Masters of Alchemy; it is the Unknown
Philosopher of early Martinism, but for Martinism this Leader was the
Repairer Himself, who is certainly the first-fruits of the Great
Transfiguration. I believe that if any member of this school were
authorised to manifest, he would come--and this I shall reiterate--like
Melchisedech out of Salem, carrying Bread and Wine. Meanwhile, their old
rumours are everywhere, and it is not curious that they are in the Graal
literature; having regard to its subject-matter, it would be more
curious if they were not. The mystic life is the way of the Secret
Sanctuary; it is the way of the opening of consciousness towards the
things that are Divine. The makers of the Graal books found certain
elements to their hands, and they incorporated them as they best could.
The literature expresses after several manners its absolute belief in
the truth of doctrinal Christianity, but also that behind all doctrine
there was something great and undemonstrable, the direct knowledge of
which had departed because the world was unworthy. Like the Graal
literature, the Secret Church recognises fully the external Church and
presents something from within it. I conclude that a valid Mass has
always been

<span id="page_637">p. 637</span>

said in Rome and the other assemblies, but unfortunately at the present
time it is a memorial rather than a realisation. Transubstantiation and
reservation are the nearest approaches to the idea of the arch-natural
Eucharist. There is also in the Christian Church generally a consensus
of sanctity at the height, and it is the reflected glory of a greater
height beyond. But this is only an affirmation on the testimony of all
the saints, after every deduction has been made for the decorative
renunciations and denials of the self-abnegating mind.

By summary, therefore, the term of research in the doctrine of the
Secret Church is no instituted Assembly--not even an orthodoxy in
ascension. It does not mean that another Mass is said than that which is
celebrated daily at any high altar in Christendom; it does not mean that
other elements are used or that the words of consecration differ in kind
or genus. The Secret Church is our own Church when it has entered into
the deeper understanding of its proper implicits. In so far as it can be
said that external forms may remain at all, I conceive that it uses the
same forms, but in virtue of interior organs which receive more fully
from the immanence of the Divine Will, so that the priest who begins by
reciting *Introibo ad altare Dei* has the direct experience that God is
truly at His altar, and thus he ascends the steps, discerning the
Presence with his eyes in the spiritual part of his nature, rather than
with faith. I would that it were here and now given me to say how this
condition is reached in the term of sanctity; but I think that it is by
the imagination raised in ecstasy. In the normal sense there is
imagination, but it is not a pure and constant fire; there is also
ecstasy in many stages, and some of these are experienced in the devout
life apart from any shaping spirit. I put it forward tentatively as a
high speculation that the union of which I have spoken is consummated in
the higher consciousness, so that the priest prepared thereto

<span id="page_638">p. 638</span>

enters and attains. What he celebrates there is a Mass of the Beatific
Vision; but this is the Mass of the Graal. At that *Veni Creator* the
Lord Christ comes, and the Comforter. I believe further that these
things are done in the sanctuary of a man's own spirit, as in an Ark of
the Graal.

It is obvious that this is the limit of things at which expression
suffers a complete paralysis. If I say with Elias Ashmole that of what
is beyond I know enough to hold my tongue but not enough to speak, even
then it is obvious that I exceed my narrow measures: "I know not, God
knoweth." It is useless, in any case, to pursue the evidential questions
further than I have taken them up to this point. I might have begun by
saying that what I proposed to present was an hypothesis only; the true
evidences of the Secret Tradition are in the Secret Schools, and of
these it is idle to think that one can produce more than the rumour in
the open day. I have left nothing unstated that it has been in any sense
possible to adduce; those of my own tradition will understand what
remains over and what is indeed involved. I put forward no claims; that
day has passed long since when one man could be so much as desired to
believe on the authority of another where things vital are involved. I
invite no verdict; I care utterly nothing for the impression which the
considerations of this book may occasion in the academies of external
thought, and in the words of one who has preceded me carrying no
warrants but those of his own genius: in any case whatsoever, I shall
not on my own part be "the less convinced or the more discouraged." The
rumours of Graal literature are a part of sanctuary doctrine. I do not
know how they transpired; I am not certain that the question is much of
my concern; no doubt in the historical sense I could desire that I did
know. I am certain that the spiritual alchemists were men after the
heart of Christ; I am not less certain that those who created symbolical
Masonry were the

<span id="page_639">p. 639</span>

members of a lower grade; and when the *Quest of Galahad* takes that
high prince and king among all anointed through the veils of
transubstantiation into the Divine Vision, I know that the sanctuary is
made void for him who has so achieved, the curtains are parted, and it
is given him to depart hence, for there is nothing left to detain him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IV. The Mystery Which Is Within](hchg88)
