[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hchg50)  [Next](hchg52) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1589639057/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_371">p. 371</span>

# BOOK VI

## THE GERMAN CYCLE OF THE HOLY GRAAL

<span id="page_372">p. 372</span> <span id="page_373">p. 373</span>

### THE ARGUMENT

I. THE PARSIFAL OF WOLFRAM VON ESCHENBACH.--*Its valuation by recognised
criticism--Alleged theological and ecclesiastical position--Evidence of
the surface sense--Specific analogies with French romances of the
Perceval cycle--The triad in the Keepership of the Graal--Geniture of
Parsifal--Of Gamuret and Herzeleide--Of Parsifal's cousin Sigune--At the
Court of King Arthur--The Red Knight--The Brother of the Graal
King--Queen Kondwiramur--The marriage of Parsifal--The Fisher King--The
Castle of Mont Salvatch--The pageant and bewrayed question--Of things
which followed thereafter--Of Kundrie, the Graal Messenger--Parsifal
hardens his heart--The pilgrim band--The Hermit's story of the
Graal--Parsifal's election--The King's Healing--Specific Distinctions
from romances of the French cycle--The morganatic union of Gamuret--The
history of Kundrie--The magician Klingsor--Of Feirfeis, the brother of
Parsifal--His union with the maiden of the Graal--Of Prester john--The
history of Lohengrin--The Graal in Wolfram's poem--Its sacramental
connections--Its feeding qualities--Its antecedent history--The bleeding
Lance--The King's wounding--Of the Duchess Orgeluse--The Castle and its
chivalry--The source of Wolfram--The story of Guiot de Provence--The
judgment on Chrétien de Troyes--The* Lapis Exili*s--Of a second sense in
the Parsifal.* II. GLEANINGS CONCERNING THE LOST QUEST OF GUIOT DE
PROVENCE*.--Evidence of the* Saone de Nausay *for the* 

<span id="page_374">p. 374</span>

*existence of Guiot's poem--His alleged identity with a Bishop of
Durham--What follows therefrom--The source of Chrétien--The Graal in
Guiot and Wolfram--The religious position of Guiot--His curious
learning--An illustration from Kabalism.* III. SIDELIGHTS FROM THE
SPANISH AND PORTUGUESE QUESTS*.--The Spanish Merlin and Quest of
Galahad--The Portuguese Quest--A Viennese manuscript--An inference from
these documents.* IV. THE CROWN OF ALL ADVENTURES*.--The Quest-in-chief
of Gawain--Heinrich and Chrétien--Heinrich and Guiot--Keynote of the
story--The House of Glass--The companions of the Quest--The House of
Death--Its dream of splendour--The Order of the Banquet--The Graal
Vision--The King's sustenance--Wine of forgetfulness--The Question
asked--The Hidden Secret--The King's release--The departure of the
Graal--Conclusion as to this Quest.* V. THE TITUREL OF ALBRECHT VON
SCHARFENBERG*.--Literary history of the poem--The incorporations from
Wolfram--Its reversion to the cycle of Northern France--The Graal as a
chalice--Pretensions of the poem as a complete history of the Sacred
Vessel and its Wardens--Ascetic aspects--Removal of the Graal to the
Land of Prester John--Subsequent removal of the ancient
Sanctuary--Parsifal as the heir of the Priest-King--The King's
legend--King Arthur's search for the Graal.* VI. THE DUTCH
LANCELOT*.--Date of this compilation--Outline of its contents--The Quest
of Perceval--His failure and penitence--His restitution--His inclusion
with Galahad in the Quest--Summary as to the Dutch Lancelot--Conclusion
as to the German cycle*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I. The Parsifal of Wolfram Von Eschenbach](hchg52)
