[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hchg24)  [Next](hchg26) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1589639057/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span> <span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

# BOOK III

## THE EARLY EPOCHS OF THE QUEST

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span> <span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

### THE ARGUMENT

I. THE ANTECEDENTS OF THE LEGEND IN FOLK-LORE.--*Old Celtic prototypes
of the Graal literature--Some unconsidered specifics of this subject--A
position by way of alternative--Elements of the whole argument--The
Cauldron of the Dagda--The Cauldron of Bendigeid Vran--Quests which are
not of the Graal--Druidic Mysteries--After what manner these mysteries
and their doctrine dissolved into the light of Christianity--A catholic
conclusion regarding the claims of Folk-Lore The matter which is placed
in our hands.* II. THE WELSH PERCEVAL*.--Presence of early elements in a
late form--Value as a non-Graal Quest The root-matter of the
story--Comparison with the Graal Quests--Analogies with the Graal
Hallows--The Vengeance Legend--Conclusion as to this text.* III. THE
ENGLISH METRICAL ROMANCE OF SYR PERCYVELLE*.--The archaic elements of
this Quest and its claims in comparison with those of the Welsh
Peredur--The story in outline--Analogies in the Italian
Carduino--Conclusion as to this text and generally as to the Proto-
Perceval Quest before the Holy Graal arose on the horizon of
literature.* IV. THE CONTE DEL GRAAL *and in the first place--(A)
Preliminary to the whole subject--(B) Concerning the poetic romance of
Chrétien de Troyes--The state of the story as one of transition from the
folk-tale to the true romance of the Graal--Its connections with the
mystic side of the legend--The silence of Perceval--The exile and
sorrows of the Knight--The speculative intentions of Chrétien* 

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *--(C) The
continuation of Gautier--The development of Perceval's story--The point
to which it is taken--The historical texts of the Graal which intervened
between Chrétien and Gautier--The unfinished Quest in Gautier--(D) The
conclusion according to Manessier--Intervention of the Vengeance
Legend--Elements of Graal history in this conclusion, and inferences
therefrom--The ordination of Perceval as a specific departure from
tradition--The assumption of the Hallows--(E) The alternative conclusion
of Gerbert--The dual failure of Perceval--His penitence and
expiation--The conventional intention of his marriage--His later and
higher intention--An adornment of a spiritual marriage--The Knight of
the Swan--An analogy with Alain le Gros--The process of departure from
Folk-lore in the Conte del Graal--Absence of the Vengeance Legend in
Gerbert--Further consideration of the Prologue to the whole story--(F)
In which Sir Gawain is considered briefly as a Companion of the Holy
Quest--Modern speculations and inferences as to the primary claim of
this hero--The light upon these which can be gathered from the poem of
Heinrich--The judgment of the prose Lancelot and the Quest of
Galahad--Sir Gawain in the story of Chrétien--The burden of this Quest
in Gautier--His recognition that the courtly Knight was predestined at
least to some measure of success--How the false experiment is not
repeated by Manessier or Gerbert--An Advance Note on Gawain in the
Parsifal of Wolfram--The Knight of Courtesy in the Longer Prose
Perceval*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I. The Antecedents of the Legend in Folk-Lore](hchg26)
