[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hchg88)  [Next](hchg90) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1589639057/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### V

#### THE SECLUDED AND UNKNOWN SANCTUARY

It is obvious that the romances of the Graal are either legendary
histories of religion on the external side, and as such are concerned
with the quest of conversion--that is, Christianity colonising--or they
are spiritual histories with a strong individual element but a wide
field of application on the universal side, corresponding to the
province of mysticism--such as the legend of the Church in the world and
the soul in its progress. The first class would include the metrical
Joseph of Arimathæa and the *Book of the Holy Graal*, while the most
notable examples of the second class are the *Longer Prose Perceval* and
the *Quest of Galahad*. The idea of their secret meaning must be held to
reside, as regards the first class, in the claims which they put
forward, and, as regards the second, in the special application

<span id="page_643">p. 643</span>

of the stories. In our consideration of certain successive literatures
which came into existence during the Christian centuries, we have seen
that the books of the Graal do enter into a particular scheme, and they
are the first in time therein. They tell us--now that the secret words,
which were of the essence of the Mystery of Faith, had passed out of all
common knowledge; now that the true succession from Christ had been
resumed into Heaven; again that the sacred mysteries were reserved in an
inaccessible mountain from all but the highest sanctity, or
alternatively that the House of Doctrine stood vacant as a testimony to
the external world. There was also the literature of alchemy, saying
that He is truly here but that the way of His attainment comes only by
the revelation which He gives, and for all else there are only the
age-long processes of Nature. There was further, the literature of
Israel in exile, saying: "By the Waters of Babylon"--yet also to those
who could hear it: "Enter into the nuptial joys of Rabbi Simeon." There
was, lastly, as there is also, the great witness of Masonry, saying "Not
yet, in quiet lie"--to every heart of aspiration seeking to build the
temple otherwise than in the heart. And so from age to age the story of
substitution continues, but with a hint everywhere that still there is
known somewhere that which the sign signifies. The Wardens are
withdrawn, but they are alive. There is a cloud upon the Sanctuary, but
the Sanctuary is within the Church, and other rumours distinguishable
throughout the centuries speak of a Holy Place which is behind the
manifest Altar, of a deeper mystery of love behind the world of grace--a
rumour, a legend, a voice, an unknown witness testifying concerning a
more Holy Assembly and an Interior and more Secret Church.

So far therefore an attempt has been made to justify the hypothesis that
there were rumours abroad in the world which entered into houses of
romance and account for the implicits which have been traced in the
Graal

<span id="page_644">p. 644</span>

literature. All that which lay behind the rumour--an undeclared region,
giving forth strange portents under a cloud of mystery--was apart, and
that utterly, from the connections of romance, and the story-tellers,
working under their proper warrants, went their own way, incorporating,
as we have seen, from all quarters. We get in this manner the three
schools which I mentioned at the beginning: (*a*) the school of
transition from folk-lore; (*b*) the school of Guiot de Provence; and
(*c*) the monastic school. The end of these considerations is now upon
the very threshold, but before I take the closing it is desirable to set
out briefly some possible hypotheses in divergence and decide how far
they have any claim on our attention. When the alchemists of old
intended more than usually to confuse their various issues in unversed
minds, and to distract the curiosity- monger regarding that Mystery
which has been termed throughout all Hermetic times the First Matter of
the Philosopher, they had recourse to concealment by application thereto
of almost opprobrious epithets. It was a vile and unclean matter, a
thing of no account and despised, an object that was found everywhere
and trodden under the feet of the wayfarer. The uninitiated went astray
accordingly in foolish and revolting processes. I do not know whether a
similar subtlety might have commended itself to the writers of Graal
romances--supposing that there had been a common understanding between
them for the attainment of a specific end--but having regard to the
enormous machinery which was put in operation to determine the
enchantments of Britain, "the desolation which fell upon Logres" and the
adventurous times, it is natural to look about for a causation in
proportion thereto--for instance, some event in history; but nothing
emerges in response except a possible conspiracy in matters of religion.
We will therefore begin by assuming that for what purpose soever the
literature concealed in part but in part also put forward an attack upon
the Roman Church.

<span id="page_645">p. 645</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The first
observation to make in this connection is that those who were concerned
with the movement out of which the impeachment originated must have
accepted the sacraments and the body of ecclesiastical procedure. This
is therefore assumed tacitly, as there would be otherwise no working
agreement possible.

Now, seeing that in one case the keeper of the Graal is supposed to have
fallen from righteousness, and that--obscurely enough in respect of
logic in the scheme--he could only look for healing outside his own
House of Doctrine, one might be disposed at first sight to conclude that
the Graal Church may stand for Latin Christianity and the Rich Fisherman
for its central seat of authority. He is the Keeper of the Divine
Mysteries, the possessor of the valid forms, but he and his environment
have been laid waste by the spirit of the world. Alternatively, it might
be a confession of apparent failure in respect of God's work in the
world. From either point of view the literature would be concerned with
the amelioration of the Latin Church by recalling it to its higher part.
The position, however, becomes involved curiously, and that at once, for
the presence of the Hallows may preserve the king alive, but otherwise
they cannot help him. No recitation of the putative, all-powerful words
can ever relieve his sickness, and the House of God is therefore--as it
long remains--in mourning. Here also the difficulty of the unasked
question--of that question which seems exclusive in
symbolism--intervenes for our further confusion. What purpose, in this
connection, could it serve the Hereditary Keeper of the Graal, that an
apparent stranger should visit him and ask the meaning of the Graal and
its pageant? We remember the question in Masonry which is one of
violence, doing outrage to the law and the order and voiding the
erection of a true temple: there it is simple in symbolism, and thus
transparent in meaning; but here is a question which is necessary in
some utterly mystical manner, belonging to the law and

<span id="page_646">p. 646</span>

the order, and one by which the Warden is restored: it is less
intelligible on this hypothesis than are darker corners of thought. It
follows, however this may be, that there is a heavy cloud on the
Sanctuary, and if the symbolism belongs simply to the official Church,
it has the Words of Life, but is still, after some manner, inhibited; it
must be challenged before it can speak and it must communicate before it
can be healed. The Quests are so far external that they involve transit
from place to place, as a pageant passes through a temple; but the
question is an intellectual research. The heroes of research offer no
light on the subject, because Perceval at his highest does not ask in
the end and the romance of Galahad confesses to no question. The *Didot
Perceval* leaves the new Keeper, with all to him belonging, in final
seclusion, where the evidence of things not seen is put away from the
eyes of all, and it is impossible therefore that the Hidden Sanctuary
should represent an official Church. To express it in another way, the
Son of the Doctrine was received into the House of the Doctrine and had
the great secret imparted to him. Faintly and far away the *Didot
Perceval* shows how the æonian Keeper has waited in the castle of the
soul till the natural man, who is the scion of his house, comes in and
asks the question of the union. The natural man understands nothing and
does not ask till he is driven, but he is driven at last. As faintly and
still further away, the *Conte del Graal* tells the same symbolical
story, with many variations; but as it reaches no term till a later
period in time, when it is simply a reflection of other texts, and has
hence no independent implicits, there is no call to examine it in this
connection. It may be noted, however, that the prologue, which is
regarded as its latest part, tells of things which exceed
experience--that is to say, evidence--of sins against spiritual life and
of return to the House of the Father, as aspiration returns to its
source. But it is difficult to connect it with any sanctuary doctrine.
The German *Parsifal* 

<span id="page_647">p. 647</span>

tells how the House is always in the world, but that it is only
attainable by great sanctity, which is sufficient to show that it does
not symbolise the institutes of external religion. It has, however, a
strange sacramental side, which seems to indicate that the Eucharist in
its highest efficacy comes down from Heaven direct. It therefore
incorporates not indeed a distinct motive but the terms of another
school. To conclude concerning it, it is obvious from the beginning that
the Keepers of Mont Salvatch were a secret order of chivalry, after the
manner of the Templars. The *Titurel* recites the building of the
Spiritual House in beauty as a Palace of Art; and its meaning is that
the Mystery of Knowledge was in the custody of a special election,
though there is nothing to suggest that it was opposed to the official
Church. The *Longer Prose Perceval* lifts up a different corner of the
veil, telling how one Keeper died unhealed and that the last Warden of
the Mysteries was taken away, though the Holy Things remained. We have
now only the great and paramount Quest left for consideration, which is
that of Galahad, and it tells how the Warden of the Mysteries, together
with the Holy Things, was removed once and for all, as if the House of
Doctrine were itself nothing and the term of research everything. The
Great Quest was written with the highest sanctity as its actuating
motive, and we can do no otherwise than accept it as an instance of the
literature at its greatest. It forms with the *Longer Prose Perceval*
the consummation of the cycle. These quests are mirrors of spiritual
chivalry, mirrors of perfection, pageants of the mystic life, and it
does not matter what the legend was prior to their appearance. They are
the teaching of the Church spiritualised, if I may be pardoned such a
term, and they offer in romance form a presentation of the soul's
chronicle.

So far therefore from the Graal sanctuary representing the Latin or any
other external Church, we find that the mystery of the sanctuary within
is written through

<span id="page_648">p. 648</span>

all the romances, though it is in the words of the sanctuary without and
the savour of the external incense is more noticeable in some quests
than in others.

In this light we shall still find the *Didot Perceval* a little wanting
in meaning and the *Conte del Graal* too composite to reflect a full
light of intention. As regards the German cycle, it shows how the great
mystery descends and abides in us. The *High History* empties the House
of Doctrine and leaves it as a vacant sign before the face of the world.
The Galahad Quest says that the world was not worthy. Yet in a sense all
this is comparative, constituting the several presentations and various
aspects of that which is one at the root, for the Secret Church does
indeed say: *Mysterium Fidei*, and the official Church says: *Corpus
Domini;* but these two are one.

It will be agreed on these considerations that we can only contemplate
the Church of the Holy Graal as a mystery of secrecy, but it can be
assumed that in this sense it may either have been hostile to Rome or at
peace in its mind concerning it. In connection with the first
alternative, let us imagine for a moment that the Welsh or some other
Celtic Church was making through the medium of the romances a last bid
for recognition. If the prevalence of the Roman Rite constituted the
enchantment and desolation; if the questioning of the Wardens of the
Mystery, on the Mystery itself manifested, signified the illumination of
the elect concerning the faith once delivered to the Celtic saints and
now in danger of extinction; we should have a design adequate to the
machinery, and should be able to understand the magnitude of the claims
in conjunction with the follies which abound in the form of its
expression, for it seems difficult to say that, for example, the
Sanctuary in Wales had a wise church built about it. It was chaotic
rather than in confusion, and in respect of its working was almost a
prolonged abuse. The suggestion is otherwise preposterous;

<span id="page_649">p. 649</span>

but British Christianity generally, and its desire for independence,
centralised, by example, in the crown at the period of Henry II., may be
said to account for a certain complexion sometimes discerned in the
literature in respect of Rome, and to explain why, this notwithstanding,
it is otherwise so catholic at heart. The speculation at the present
time has a certain presumption in its favour because a section of
scholarship is inclined thereto, but a slight study of the texts must, I
think, dispose of it, once and for all.

The short recension, comprised in the Lesser Chronicles, tells how a
warranted company came westward; how it abode for many centuries in a
Veiled Sanctuary; how the Quest for this Sanctuary was instituted; how
it failed in the first instance, but was achieved subsequently; how the
secrets of the Sanctuary were learned; how he who learned them remained
within the Sanctuary, and there is no story afterwards. The metrical
romance of De Borron and the *Lesser Holy Graal* are not a legend
concerning the conversion of England, but the prolegomena thereto. They
leave the real intention doubtful outside the bare fact that something
would be brought into Britain which was unknown to the Church at large,
for the canonical apostles were not present when his great mission was
conferred on Joseph by Christ. There is nothing on the mere surface to
show that any priesthood followed the possession of the Graal Vessel or
the knowledge of the Secret Words. Yet these are Eucharistic; according
to the *Lesser Holy Graal* they are a formula of consecration; and in a
sense Joseph must have been ordained, because it is obvious that at need
he could recite the words effectually. It is certain, moreover, that
Joseph and his company carried no official priests westward. A great
lacuna follows, and then comes the *Early Merlin*, showing that the
Secret Sanctuary is in Britain, that a firebrand prophet is going about
in the land, carrying the warrants of the Graal, and is

<span id="page_650">p. 650</span>

bent upon fulfilling prophecy by instituting the Third Table for the
completion of the Graal Trinity. There are no claims put forward
regarding the sanctuary, and the same statement holds for the *Didot
Perceval*. It remains that the Lesser Chronicles generally intimate the
existence of a particular Eucharistic knowledge, but not of a Church
demanding recognition thereon. As secrecy is the primary seal, it is
obvious that the Graal Church is not the Church in Britain, nor do the
texts contain any counter-picture, object, or character which might by
possibility correspond to the official Church apart from that notion of
enchantment which, in the absence of any warrant, it is arbitrary to
explain along these lines. For example, it would be madness to suggest
that Moses, who was interned in secrecy, represents the Latin Church in
apostasy or rejection. It is obvious, in fine, that Robert de Borron was
acquainted with no tradition which connected Joseph of Arimathæa with
Glastonbury or even with Britain. In the poem, he remains where he was
or returns to Syria, as Moses the Law-giver went up the holy mountain.

The Greater Chronicles bear the same witness, but the evidence of
transubstantiation and other matters of doctrine indicate that the major
texts are typically and militantly Roman. The long recension tells how
the same company, strangely extended, arrived in Britain and there
established, in the person of Joseph II., the beginnings of a supreme
orthodoxy, so that nothing which came after in the name of the Gospel
could abide in competition therewith; how the prophet and enchanter
Merlin carried a strange warrant to connect his work with the Mystery of
the Holy Graal; how he possessed from the beginning of his symbol the
power to promise Blaise that he should be united with the secret
assembly; how the Castle of the Graal, though not altogether hidden from
the world, was encompassed with perils and difficulties, which
notwithstanding there were wars or the rumour of wars about it. The

<span id="page_651">p. 651</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Book of the Holy
Graal* narrates the conversion of Britain by those who carried the
license of super-apostolical succession, the design of which may have
been pan-Britannic, or conceivably the implicit of a plan of campaign
against papal claims over Britain. It is at least the legend *par
excellence* which, if any, would be regarded as devised in this
interest; and it would stand alone as such among the Anglo-Norman texts.
The colonisation, whatever its design, conquered all Britain in all
publicity. When however the later Merlin texts enter the field,
everything has passed into seclusion, and the prophet's personation of
the character of messenger does not carry public knowledge concerning
the Graal further than an echoing rumour. Outside the sacrosaintly
character of ordinary Church-practice, the texts offer no ecclesiastical
element but the implications which are resident in the notion of the
adventurous times and the preparation at the royal court for the Quest
of the Sacred Vessel, the term of which is to break up the Round Table.
The intermediate prose *Lancelot* follows the *Merlin* texts, working
for the same end, and we are already at a far distance from the letter
and spirit of the *Book of the Holy Graal*. In the *Longer Prose
Perceval* the term is to strip the sanctuary, but it remains a
consecrated place, and those who enter therein become thereafter men of
holy lives and saints of the official Church. The *Quest of Galahad*
offers in the term thereof the instance of a Keeper who is dispossessed
without any intimation of his end. It may be said that he is treated
with something almost approaching contumely. There is an apparent
equivalent of an expulsion of the profane in that command for those to
withdraw who are not in the Quest of the Graal. But behind this and
behind the unnamed yet acknowledged warrant of the Knights from Gaul,
Ireland and Denmark, there is some mystery concealed deeply; the latter
took away from their high experience the memory of a glorious vision
which could well serve as the

<span id="page_652">p. 652</span>

basis of a tradition thereafter in various parts of the world; but they
had not received communication of the last secrets. The hidden life of
the Holy Graal during the Arthurian period seems next after one the most
wonderful of all hidden lives. What could King Pelles, with whom the
Graal had abode for years, and it may be for centuries, whose daughter
had also borne it through all the secret rites from her childhood, what
could he learn from the Quest?

I conclude therefore as regards the Greater Chronicles that they offer
in one text, which is one of the latest, a certain aggrandisement of
British ecclesiastical tradition by the incorporation of a rumour which
belonged in its root-matter to a different concern totally; but the
remaining branches have little part in the scheme. The Graal Church is
held in secrecy and mystery, and when the *Quest of Galahad* certifies
that a certain Joseph, not otherwise particularised, was the first
bishop of Christendom, there is no longer any consequence involved in
the ecclesiastical order.

In the German cycle the Graal has nothing to do with any conversion
legend and nothing to do with Britain; that country is not entered at
all in the *Parsifal*. The assumption of a particular concern in the
aspirations or ambitions of the House of Anjou is an irresistible
inference from that portion which contains the Angevin elements; but it
is accidental and not essential to the design of the poem, and is not
its inspiration but its burden. The poem is to be judged wholly by other
standards.

It must, I think, be concluded from this brief and literal schedule
that, except by a bare possibility in a single sporadic instance, we are
not dealing in the Graal literature with an ecclesiastical conspiracy
for the furtherance of any independence in matters of religion; the
scheme of the whole mystery is opposed to such a supposition. It seems
impossible to affirm that the Graal writers were working a similar
scheme under a

<span id="page_653">p. 653</span>

common agreement, as if all were imbued by a pan-Britannic fever, or
were the concealed disciples of an obscure sect in religion. There are
few consecutive documents which offer so little trace of a concerted
effort. Some writers manifest a very high purpose and some no purpose at
all, beyond the true intent which is all for our delight in
story-telling. Otherwise than by simple predilection, we shall never
understand why these chose for their subject a Mystery like that of the
Graal. But the rumours and implicits run through all the texts, as an
echo perpetuated, and in their several degrees the stories are plain
concerning them. Even the *Conte del Graal* enshrines them after its own
manner, in spite of a piecemeal tradition. Apart from this text, the
*Didot Perceval* tells a plain story by interning the Warden-in-chief,
with the Hallows, in that place which it never names; but it knows
nothing of the House made void. The German *Parsifal* tells a plain
story by leaving the great chivalry in the great Temple, all things
completed and all things as they were at the beginning. Again there is
nothing made void. The removal of the Mystery in the *Titurel* and the
transport of the Sacred House cannot signify more than a change of
imputed location and a further withdrawal. The *Longer Prose Perceval*
tells a plain story, but it leaves the voided Castle as a public sign to
the nations, taking the Keeper and the Hallows into that great distance
which is not in time or place. The *Quest of Galahad*, in fine, tells a
plain story also of the voided House and its vacated offices, but it has
byways of allusion from which the infinite opens.

Now, the mystery which covers the sanctuary is never drawn away in the
Lesser Chronicles. We know only that the weight of many centuries
presses heavily upon the Keeper. We infer that the hermit, Blaise, was
taken into the choirs of heaven according to the promise of Merlin, and
is, therefore, in *la joie perdurable*. But we know not of any messenger
who has relieved Perceval;

<span id="page_654">p. 654</span>

so, therefore, in eternal virginity and in utter loneliness he is
waiting till the world shall be worthy. His place is not known; he does
not come out therefrom; and there is none that goes in.

But in the Greater Chronicles there is another version of his legend
which says very surely, although by implication only, that the *Didot
Perceval* is not the whole story, and therein indeed Perceval is taken
away, for the Red Cross ship carries him, as the dark barge bears King
Arthur. This story stands apart almost from everything and is very
difficult to account for, since all things fail therein. The king dies,
the question is not asked, the Hallows are parted from one another, the
Castle of Souls and the Gate of Paradise are left utterly vacant, as a
sign of wrath to the centuries, and the hands of Perceval are empty as
he passes into the unseen. We learn only that he goes through a golden
distance and that he knows that which awaits him.

I have said that there are wars and rumours of wars about Corbenic in
the Galahad Quest, yet is it found by grace only, or special license,
and it is a house of terrors and of marvels. Under these reserves, it is
a house of many visitations, nor is it therefore so utterly unknown as
is that of the Lesser Chronicles. Its building is described at large, as
is that of the Temple in the *Titurel*, and if its location remains a
mystery we are not without some materials for reconstructing its broad
environment.

We have now made a circuitous journey and we return to our
starting-point, being the evidences of a concealed claim, presupposing
its proper custodians working within the Church and in no sort setting
it aside. We have found--as I at least should have expected to find
antecedently--the rationale of that Mystery of Faith which tells us that
the Lamb was slain from the foundation of the world. The makers of the
Anglo-Norman Graal cycle had heard in some undeclared manner of the
secret tradition, and they were so far

<span id="page_655">p. 655</span>

properly informed that they allocated it to the Holy Eucharist, some of
them reflecting it as secret words used in consecrating the elements.
They knew also that it was a mystery of orthodox tradition and therefore
some others perhaps reflected it as super-apostolical succession, but
this particular rumour fell speedily out of sight. The writers did not
register their remembrance of the *Epiclesis* clause in a Celtic
liturgy; they never dreamed of a pan-Britannic Church, though one text
may have reflected hostility to the executive of Rome. Nothing could be
less in correspondence with such an ambition than their conception of a
Mystery of Grace which was at no time intended to prevail in public.
Notwithstanding a certain quasi-publicity during the adventurous times,
to the end it remained a mystery. There is no suggestion that any sect,
company, or institution was intended to replace some public institution,
church, company, or sect. Amidst all the diadems and emblazonments of
the great, wonderful literature, its concern at the highest emerges in
the uttermost clearness, being a tradition of the *panis vivus* in its
deeper understanding. The Mass went on for ever in the lands and the
islands; but in a place apart and out of all declaration there was a
Secret Ark of Alliance, and those who could be present at its service
beheld, in a heart of revelation, how Christ was manifested in the heart
and administered His own Eucharist, as He did at the Last Supper. There
is no other message put forward by the still more secret literatures,
for these testify that he who desires to be dissolved shall be actually
with Christ--but whether in passing through literal or mystical death is
a great question. Every document comprised in the Lesser and Greater
Chronicles may be regarded as beginning in sanctity and culminating in
greater sanctity, which term is to be understood in the sense of the
Catholic Church. In the last resource, even Secret Words and
super-apostolical succession mean only the mind of the

<span id="page_656">p. 656</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Church entering
into its higher part, and all the companies of epopts are joined therein
in a common act of experience. The official Church at its greatest is
not apart really from the Secret Church, and the one is wounded in the
other, nor will they be disjoined in their healing. The Graal is the
sacred legend of the Eucharist, but as behind its Castle of Souls there
was a hidden Paradise, so, as a Graal which is behind the Holy Graal,
there is an inward or transcendent sense of the entire Mystery.

The first lesson which we must put to heart from these considerations is
one of great caution in applying the actual or possible implicits of the
Graal literature. We may suggest in the exercise of our ingenuity that
Logres stands for the colonies of Christianity, as the lesser stands for
the greater, but we shall not be counselled wisely if we think that the
enchantment of Logres was the prevalence of the official Churches,
whether these were Roman or Welsh. We may say that the King's wounding
sometimes signified the dereliction of the Great Experiment in the
isolation of its concealment; but the King's healing--when it happens
that he is healed--was not a dream of some triumph of doctrine over
other doctrines in the world at large. We may say that the
supersanctified Mystery of Faith located in the House of Doctrine is
like the Supernal *Sephiroth* of Kabalism separated from the *Sephiroth*
below by the serpent spirit of the world; but if we chance to be
Kabalists we shall remember that *Daath* remains as a channel of
indirect communication without break or intermission. We must not say
that the removal of the Great Palladium signifies the complete
denudation of the official Church, but we may "remember of this unstable
world" and the spirit thereof. When we say that the House of Doctrine is
voided, we must not mean that the official Church has ceased to be holy
in its teaching, or that the King of Castle Mortal is the Judas spirit
of Rome. Seeing

<span id="page_657">p. 657</span>

that the Graal Castle is the House of the Great Experiment and that King
Fisherman is the custodian of the hidden knowledge concerning it, we
may, however, regard the higher Perceval as the mystic spirit and the
chivalry of sanctity. The question that he ought to have asked concerned
the Greater Office of the Eucharist. This would have caused the Mystery
to manifest. His failure brought the House of Sanctity into desolation,
because there was no heir found to carry on the great tradition. But
when the Keeper of the Hallows perished and the Holy Place fell to the
enemies thereof, the tradition did not die, and in the end it was
restored thereto. The supplement to these things is the complete
agreement in the romances with all church doctrine and practice, from
the least even to the greatest. They have, at the same time, their own
insufficiencies, and it is for this reason that they lend themselves
readily to misconstruction. When rumours came into the hands, let us
say, of some mere neophyte, as it might be Guiot de Provence, we can
understand his misconception and confusion, including why he went
further, as, for example, to the Chronicles of Anjou; in other words, to
the events of the outside world for the explanation of that which
happened only in the secret world of initiation. He was in the position
of some who at this day go to "those holy fields" for living evidence
concerning Him "who brought life and immortality to light." We can
understand also that various successive translators and independent
tellers of the legend did also, after their own fashion, go further
astray, losing all touch with the centre, till the official Church, at
once jealous and zealous, stepped in and took over the dismembered body
of the legend, putting it to its own use. It discerned something which
belonged properly to itself, collected it accordingly out of the débris
of romance-literature and put it again into romance. Of such is the
*Quest of Galahad* and of such is the *Longer Prose Perceval*. The
Mystery, *qua* Mystery of Experience

<span id="page_658">p. 658</span>

in transcendence, was reflected from scoriated glass to scoriated glass,
giving us indeed here and there high intimations of the original, but
not a true likeness, so that we are constrained, like Guiot, to look
elsewhere for a fuller explanation, not indeed in Chronicles of Anjou,
but in unofficial, fragmentary and elusive traces of the true legitimacy
in religion which can be excavated by those who seek them from the tombs
of other dead literatures.

It is after this manner that we reach by insensible stages that point at
which the imperfect testimonies of romance are transferred altogether in
our minds, by the light shining from those higher fields of
consciousness in the mystery of religion; and allowing them to dissolve
for a moment, but in consequence setting aside the literature on its
romantic side, there emerge the grades of the Graal subject in the
harmony of all quests equally with all histories. The inward man, as I
have said, is the wounded Keeper, and he is indeed in the Castle of
Souls, which is the Graal Castle, as it is also Eden, Paradise and the
Body of Man. That is to say, it is the Earthly Paradise, but behind it
there is another Eden. The Keeper has been (*a*) wounded for immemorial
sin; (*b*) he is infirm by reason of his long exile; (*c*) he has become
maimed for some obscure profanation of the mysteries, in the
unsanctified warfare of this world; or (*d*) he suffers from the failure
to ask one little question. This question is: Who is served of the
Graal?--as of those who attain the Divine Life even in the body of them.
What part is the Lord? Art thou He that is to come? Who goeth into the
Mountain of the Lord? The answer to this last is: The innocent of hands
and clean of heart. The Keeper is in fine healed and set free by those
who come from without--by Perceval and Galahad, who lay down their arms
in a state of purity. Gawain cannot help him, because he is the natural
man unconverted, and the day of Sir Bors is not yet. After the former
Keeper's healing, he sometimes remains with the new Keeper,

<span id="page_659">p. 659</span>

his successor, whom he has incorporated into the mysteries, and this
represents one stage of the progress; in others he passes away and is
forgotten. The explanation in either case is that the bondage, the
desolation, the lapse of the immortal spirit into earthly life is here
shadowed forth, in which state he can only be helped from without--that
is to say, by his mortal half, his external nature; and his great
deliverance is in such a transfiguration that the one is succeeded by
the other or the two are joined henceforth. Hereof is the tradition of a
secret sanctuary, and its application may be found by those who will
take out the details, seeing that it prevails through all the quests.
There will be no need to say, even to the unversed student, that in the
wilderness of this mortal life that which maintains the spirit is that
which is involved by the higher understanding of the Holy Graal. But at
the same time it is also a Feeding Dish, a Dish of Plenty, because the
life of the body comes from the same source. When the natural man
undertakes the great quest, all the high kingdoms of this world, which
cannot as such have any part therein, look for the ends of everything.
It is the quest for that which is real, wherein enchantments dissolve
and the times of adventure are also set over. The enchantments are in
the natural world, and so again are the adventures, but the unspelling
quest is in the world of soul. The witness of this doctrine has been
always in the world and therein it has been always secret. The
realisation of it is the Shekinah restored to the Sanctuary; when it is
overshadowed there is a Cloud on the Sanctuary. It is the story of the
individual man passing into the concealment of the interior and secret
life, but carrying with him his warrants and his high insignia. In a
word, it is that doctrine the realisation of which in the consciousness
I have called, under all reserves and for want of a better term, the
Secret Church, even the Holy Assembly--I should say rather, the cohort
of just men made perfect.

<span id="page_660">p. 660</span>

The Graal literature is not only one of growth, with a great mixture of
elements from the standpoint of folk-lore and official scholarship, but
it is such also from the ecclesiastical and mystical standpoint. Many
lights of the past thereon have proved illusory--as, for example, the
western manifestation of Manichæan elements; but the Hidden Church of
the Holy Graal is the reasonable deduction drawn out of certain implied
claims which are supported by identical inferences from independent
evidence, and they do not signify that the rumours with which we are now
so familiar were more than rumours or the romances more than romances,
except in so far as some of them embody the high life of sanctity
manifested in that vehicle. We have seen that the Secret Church is a
term of exaggeration, but it is difficult to characterise exactly by any
formal title the Holy School which perpetuated the mystery of the Great
Experiment. In that Experiment lies the hope of Western Mysticism, but
it does not follow from this statement that I hold a brief for
Eckartshausen or for others who in the past have put forward on their
own basis the claim of a Secret Church up to the point that they have
conceived thereof. The shadows of the Great Experiment which are found
in the Graal literature bear witness to that Quest, to the Mystery of
Initiation and advancement contained therein, but we know otherwise
concerning it. It is in this sense that against all the wonders of a
world no longer realised, the lost legends of folk-lore, the putative
liturgies which have vanished, the implicits in the villainous
transactions of Henry II., the power--possibly unscrupulous--behind the
fidelity to death of St. Thomas à Becket, the sectarian ravings
concerning Protestant succession from apostolic times, the great dream
of undemonstrable archaic heresy behind the Knights Templars, and the
other visions *per omnia sæcula sæculorum*, I set the reasonable and
veridic intimation of a secret tradition in Catholic experience, the
equivalents of which are the super-valid Eucharistic Rite

<span id="page_661">p. 661</span>

and the direct succession from Christ. If in fine it be said that I have
"sat and played with similes," my rejoinder is that they have not been
"loose types of things in all degrees," but rather consanguinities of
the spirit in the following of one quest--we also--unto this
last--seeking *le moyen de parvenir*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VI. The Tradition of St. John the Divine and Other Traces of a
Higher Mind of the Church](hchg90)
