[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hchg05)  [Next](hchg07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1589639057/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### III

#### THE ENVIRONMENT OF THE GRAAL LITERATURE

It is useless to approach the literature of the Holy Graal for any
purpose of special consideration, in the absence of a working
acquaintance with that which encompassed it externally in history, in
church doctrine, in popular devotion and in ecclesiastical legend. As an
acquaintance of this kind must not be assumed in my readers, I will take
the chief points involved as follows: (*a*) The doctrinal position of
the Church in respect of the Holy Eucharist; (*b*) the passage of
transubstantiation into dogma, and other circumstances which led up to
the institution of the feast of Corpus Christi in 1264; (*c*) the cultus
of the Precious Blood; (*d*) the mind exhibited by the higher life and
the mystical literature of sanctity; (*e*) the standing of minstrelsy;
(*f*) the horizon filled by coincident schools

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

of thought within and without the Church; (*g*) the state of the
official Church itself, and more especially (*h*) the position of the
Church in Britain, including its connection with the ambition of the
English king; (*i*) the legendary history of certain relics; (*k*) the
voice of Catholic tradition regarding Joseph of Arimathæa; (*l*) the
true attitude of coincident heresies which have been connected with
Graal literature; (*m*) the discovery of the *Sacro Catino* in 1101;
(*n*) the invention of the Sacred Lance at Antioch; (*o*) the
traditional history of certain imputed relics of St. John the Baptist.

The consideration of some of these points must remain over till we
approach the term of our quest, but for the working acquaintance which I
have mentioned the particulars hereinafter following will serve a
temporary purpose, and will enable the unversed reader to approach the
literature of the Holy Graal with a knowledge of several elements which
entered into its creation and were concerned in its development.

Man does not live by bread alone, because it is certain that there is
the supernatural bread, and although a great literature may arise in
part out of folk-lore, primeval fable and legend; though in this sense
it will have its antecedents in that which was at first oral but
afterwards passed into writing, some records of which may remain after
generations and ages; it does not come about that the development can
proceed without taking over other elements. That these elements were
assumed in the case of the literature of the Holy Graal is so obvious
that there could and would be no call to recite the bare fact if a
particular motive were not I very clearly in view. As regards this, I
desire to establish that every student, and indeed many and any who are
simple readers in passing, will be aware that the first matter of the
literature was, as I have said, folk-lore,; as if broken meat and
garlic, standing for the daily bread of my first illustration. We shall
see, in its proper

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

place, that Celtic folk-lore--Welsh, Irish and what not--had
wonder-stories of cauldrons, dishes and goblets, as it had also of
swords and lances. Those who in the later twelfth and the early
thirteenth century instituted the literature of the Holy Graal--being,
as they were, makers of songs and endless tellers of stories--knew well
enough of these earlier traditions; they were the heritage of the
minstrel from long antecedent generations of Druids and Scalds and
Bards. But there had come over them another and a higher knowledge--a
tradition, a legend, the hint of a secret perpetuated; above all and
more than all, there had come over them the divine oppression, the
secret sense of the mystery which lies behind the surface declaration of
the specifics of Christian doctrine. There was the power and the portent
of the great orthodox Church, there was the abiding presence of the
sacraments, there was the unfailing growth of doctrine, there was the
generation of new doctrine, not indeed out of no elements, not indeed by
the *fiat lux* of the Seat of Peter, but in the western countries of
Europe--at so great a distance from the centre--the growth was
unsuspected sometimes and often seemingly unprefaced, as if there had
been spontaneous generation. Ever magnified and manifold in its
resource, there was the popular devotion, centred about a particular
locality, an especial holy person, and this or that individual holy
object. Under what circumstances and with what motives actuating, we
have to learn if we can in the sequel, but we can understand in the
lesser sense, and perhaps too easily almost, how far the singers and the
song which they knew from the past underwent a great transformation; how
the Bowl of Plenty became the Cup or Chalice of the Eucharist; how the
spear of many battles and the sword of destruction became the Lance
which pierced our Saviour and the weapon used at the martyrdom of His
precursor. I set it down that these things might have intervened
naturally as a simple

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

work of causation which we can trace with comparative ease; but they
would not for this reason have assumed the particular complexion which
we shall find to characterise the cycle; we should not have its
implicits, its air and accent of mystery, its peculiar manifestation of
sacred objects, or its insistence on their final removal. For the
explanation of these things we shall have to go further afield, but for
the moment I need note only that the writers of the literature have
almost without exception certified that they followed a book which had
either come into their hands or of which they had received an account
from some one who had seen or possessed a copy. We can trace in the
later texts and can sometimes identify the particular book which they
followed, but we come in fine to the alleged document which preceded all
and which for us is as a centre of research.

Amidst the remanents of mythic elements and the phantasmagoria of
popular devotion, the veneration of I relics included, there stands
forth that which from Christian time immemorial has been termed the
Mystery of Faith, the grace not less visible because it is veiled so
closely, and this is the Real Presence of Christ in the material symbols
of the Eucharist. Seeing that the literature of the Holy Graal is, by
the hypothesis of its hallow-in-chief, most intimately connected with
this doctrine and the manifestation thereto belonging, it is desirable
and essential before all things to understand the Eucharistic position
at the period of the development of the literature. We have the traces
therein of two schools of thought, though the evidence of the one is
clearer than that of the other; they are respectively the school of
transubstantiation and that which is alternative thereto, but not in a
sectarian sense, namely, the spiritual interpretation of the grace
communicated in the palmary sacrament of the altar.

The means of grace are infinite, but the recognised Sacraments are
seven, and to each of them is allocated a

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

*locus* which is symbolical of its position in the system. Baptism is
conferred at the West in the *pronaos* of the temple, because it is the
rite of entrance and the reception of the postulant. Confirmation takes
place within the sanctuary itself, on the steps of the altar, because
those who have been received in the body by the mediation of sponsors
are entitled, if they are properly prepared, to their inheritance in the
gifts of the Spirit. The place of Penance is in the sideways, because
those who have fallen from righteousness have become thereby
extra-lineal, having deviated from the straight path which leads to the
Holy of Holies, and their rectification is to come. The Eucharist is
administered at the steps of the chancel because it is taken from the
hands of him who has received it from the altar itself, and thus he
comes like Melchisedech carrying bread and wine, or in the signs and
symbols of the Mediator. It is symbolical of the act of Christ in
offering Himself for the redemption of mankind; He comes therefore
half-way to the communicant, because He was manifested in the flesh.
This is the material sign of the union which is consummated within, and
its correspondence in the Sacraments is Matrimony, which is celebrated
in the same place and is another sign of the union, even of the new and
eternal covenant. It is the work of Nature sanctified and Love, under
its proper warrants, declared holy on all planes. The Sacrament of Holy
Orders is conferred on the steps of the altar, and it has more than this
external correspondence with that of Confirmation, of which it is the
higher form; the latter is the rite of betrothal by which on the
threshold of life the candidate is dedicated to the union and the spouse
of the union descends for a moment upon him, with the sign and seal of
possession; the former is the spiritual marriage of the priest, by which
he espouses the Church militant on earth that the Church triumphant in
Heaven may at a proper season intervene for the consummation of the
higher conjugal rights. The sacrament of Extreme Unction is the last act
and

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

the last consolation which the Church can offer to the faithful, and it
is performed outside the temple because the Church follows its children,
even to the gate of death, that their eyes may behold His salvation, Who
has fulfilled according to His Word.

It is only at first sight that this brief interpretation will seem out
of place in the section; its design is to show, by the ritual position
in which the sacraments are administered, that the Holy Eucharist, which
has its place of repose and exposition at the far East on the Altar, is
the great *palladium* of the Christian mystery, that the Orient comes
from on high, moving to meet the communicant, because God is and He
recompenses those who seek Him out. The correspondences hereof in the
romances are (*a*) the rumours of the Graal which went before the Holy
Quests, and (*b*) the going about of the Graal, so that it was beheld in
chapels and hermitages--yes, even in the palace of the King.

The great doctrinal debate of the closing twelfth and the early
thirteenth century was that which concerned the mystery of the
Eucharist, and in matters of doctrine there was no other which could be
called second in respect of it. It filled all men's ears, and there can
be no question that the vast sodality of minstrelsy was scarcely less
versed than the outer section of the priesthood in its palmary elements.
Of this debate France was a particular centre, and Languedoc, in the
persons of the Albigenses, was a place of holocaust, the denial of the
Eucharist being one of the charges against them. As regards the question
itself, I suppose it will be true to say that it turned upon the
doctrine of transubstantiation, which was decreed by the Council of
Lateran in 1215, under Pope Innocent III. The words of the definition
are: "The Body and Blood of Jesus Christ are really contained under the
species of bread and wine in the Sacrament of the Altar, the bread being
transubstantiated into the Body and the Wine into the Blood." Long
anterior to this promulgation, there, can be no

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

doubt that the doctrine represented the mind of the Church at the seat
of its power. In contradistinction thereto were the opinions of the
protesting sects, while external to both was the feeling of a minority
which did not object openly, yet did not less strongly hold to a
spiritual interpretation of the Real Presence. The external devotion to
the Eucharist which was manifested more and more by the extremists on
the side of the Church would scarcely be checked by the exponents of the
middle way, and indeed it might well have been encouraged, though not
with an intention which could be termed the same specifically. In the
thirteenth century the elements were beginning to be elevated for the
adoration of the people; the evidence is regarded as doubtful in respect
of any earlier period. It must have become a general custom in 1216, for
a constitution of Honorius III. speaks of it as of something which had
been done always. In 1229 Gregory IX. devised the ringing of a bell
before consecration as a warning for the faithful to fall on their knees
and worship Christ in the Eucharist. Still earlier in the thirteenth
century Odo, Bishop of Paris, regulated the forms of veneration, more
especially when the Sacred Elements were carried in procession. Hubert,
Archbishop of Canterbury, had taken similar precautions at the end of
the twelfth century. It seems to follow from the constitutions of Odo
that some kind of reservation was practised at his period, and I believe
that the custom had descended from primitive times. There is nothing,
however, in the romances to show that this usage was familiar; the
perpetual presence was for them in the Holy Graal, and apparently in
that only. Church and chapel and hermitage resounded daily with the
celebration of the Mass. In one instance we hear of a tabernacle on the
Altar, or some kind of receptacle in which the Consecrated Elements
reposed. The most usual mediaeval practice was to reserve in a
dove-shaped repository which hung before the Table of the Lord. The

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Book of the Holy
Graal* has, as we shall see, a very curious example of reservation, for
it represents a Sacred Host delivered to the custody of a convert, one
also who was a woman and not in the vows of religion. It was kept by her
in a box, and the inference of the writer is that Christ was, for this
reason, always with her. The reader who is dedicated in his heart to the
*magnum mysterium* of faith will be disposed to regard this as something
approaching sacrilege, and I confess to the same feeling, but it was a
frequent practice in the early church, and not, as it might well be
concluded, a device of romance.

As regards transubstantiation, the voice of the literature in the
absence of an express statement on either side seems to represent both
views. The Greater Chronicles of the Graal are as text-books for the
illustration of the doctrine, but it is absent from the Lesser
Chronicles, and outside this negative evidence of simple silence there
are other grounds for believing that it was unacceptable to their
writers, who seem to represent what I have called already the spiritual
interpretation of the Real Presence, corresponding to what
ecclesiologists have termed a body of Low Doctrine within the Church.

There was another question exercising the Church at the same period,
though some centuries were to elapse before it was to be decided by the
central authority. It was that of communion in both kinds, which was
finally abolished by the Council of Constance in 1415, the decision then
reached being confirmed at Trent in 1562. The ordination of communion in
one kind was preceded by an intermediate period when ecclesiastical
feeling was moving in that direction, but there was another and an
earlier period--that is to say, in the fifth century--when communion
under one kind was prohibited expressly on the ground that the division
of the one mystery could not take place without sacrilege. As a species
of middle way, there was the practice of the intincted or steeped Host
which seems to have been coming into use at the

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

beginning of the tenth century, although it was prohibited at the
Council of Brago in Galicia, except possibly in the case of the sick and
of children. The custom of mixing the elements was defended by Emulphus,
Bishop of Rochester, in 1120, and Archbishop Richard referred to the
intincted Host in 1175. All these problems of practice and doctrine were
the religious atmosphere in which the literature of the Graal was
developed. There were great names on all sides; on that of
transubstantiation there was the name of Peter Lombard, the Master of
Sentences, though he did not dare to determine the nature of the
conversion--whether, that is to say, it was "formal, substantial, or of
some other kind"; on the side of communion under one element there was
that of St. Thomas Aquinas, the Angel of the Schools.

With an environment of this kind it was inevitable that poetry and
legend should take over the mystery of the Eucharist, and should exalt
it and dwell thereon. We shall see very shortly that the assumption was
not so simple as might appear from this suggestion, and that something
which has the appearance of a secret within the sanctuary had been heard
of in connection with the central institution of official Christianity.
In any case, from the moment that the Eucharist entered into the life of
romantic literature, that literature entered after a new manner into the
heart of the western peoples. Very soon, it has been said, the Graal
came to be regarded as the material symbol of the Catholic and Christian
faith, but it was really the most spiritual symbol; I believe that it
was so considered, and the statement does little more than put into
English the inspired words of the Ordinary of the Mass. In the middle of
the mistaken passion for holy wars in Palestine; through the monstrous
iniquity of Albigensian Crusades; the ever-changing struggle
notwithstanding between Pope and King and Emperor; within the recurring
darkness of interdict, when the Sacraments were hidden like the Graal;
the

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Legend of the Holy
Graal grew and brightened, till the most stressful of times adventurous,
the most baleful of all enchantments, shone, as it seemed, in its
shining, and a light which had been never previously on the land or sea
of literature glorified the spirit of romance. It was truly as if the
great company of singers and chroniclers had gathered at the high altar
to partake of the Blessed Sacrament, and had communicated not only in
both kinds, but in elements of extra-valid consecration.

The thesis of this section is that God's immanence was declared at the
time of the literature, through all Christendom, by the Mystery of Faith
and that the development of Eucharistic doctrine into that of
transubstantiation was a peculiar recognition of the corporate union
between Christ and His people. That immanence also was declared by the
high branches of Graal romance, even as by the quests of the mind in
philosophy--in which manner romance, in fine, became the mirror of
religion, and the literature testified, under certain veils, to a
mystery of Divine experience which once at least was manifested in
Christendom.

So I who am about to speak offer a loving salutation to the learned and
admirable souls who have preceded me in the way of research. It is
because I have ascended an untrodden peak in Darien to survey the
prospect of the Quest, and have found that there is another point of
view, that I come forward in these pages carrying strange tidings, but
leaving to all my precursors the crowns and bays and laurels which they
have deserved so well, and offering no contradiction to anything which
they have attained truly. How admirable is the life of the scholar--how
unselfish are the motives which inspire him--and how earnestly we who,
past all revocation, are dedicated to the one subject desire that those
paths which he travels--when even they seem far from the goal--may lead
him to that term which is his as well as ours, for assuredly he seeks
only the truth as he conceives thereof.

As the theory of transubstantiation did not pass into

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

dogma till a late period in the development of the canon of the Graal,
so it can be said that romantic texts like the *Book of the Holy Graal*,
the *Longer Prose Perceval* and the *Galahad Quest*, but the last
especially, which contains the higher code of chivalry, were
instrumental in promoting that dogma by the proclamation of a
sacrosaintly feast of *Corpus Christi* maintained for ever in the Hidden
House of the Graal, till the time came when the great feast of
exaltation and the assumption into heaven of the sacred emblems was held
in fine at Sarras. There was, therefore, a correlation of activity
between the two sides of the work, for it was out of the growing dogma
that the Graal legend in the Greater Chronicles assumes its particular
sacramental complexion.

When all has been granted and, after granting, has been exalted even, it
remains that the Eucharistic symbol is so much the greatest of all that
we can say that there is a second scarcely, because this is the palmary
channel of grace, and--in the last resource--we do not need another. If
it were not that the literature of the Holy Graal offers intimations of
still more glorious things behind this mystery than we are accustomed to
find in theological and devotional handbooks, I suppose that the old
books would have never concerned my thoughts. Now therefore, God
willing, I speak to no one, in or out of churches, sects and learned
societies, who does not realise in his heart that the path of the life
everlasting lies, mystically speaking, within the consecrated elements
of bread and wine, beyond which veils all the high Quests are followed.

Passing from the doctrinal matters expressed and implied in the Graal
literature to the sacred palladia with which it is concerned more
especially, we enter into another species of environment. Out of the
doctrine of transubstantiation, and perhaps more especially out of the
particular congeries of devotional feelings connected therewith, there
originated what may be termed a cultus of

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

the body of God and of His blood, understood in the mystery of the
Incarnation, and the instinct which lies behind the veneration of relics
came into a marked degree of operation. Such veneration is instinctive,
as I have just said, and representing on the external side, invalidly or
not, the substance of things unseen in religion, it is so rooted in our
natural humanity that it would be difficult to regard its manifestation
in Christendom as characteristic more especially of Christianity than of
some other phases of belief. The devotion which, because of its
excesses, is by a hasty and unrooted philosophy termed
superstition--which no instinct can ever be--manifested early enough and
never wanted its objects. There can be scarcely any call to point out
that in the considerations which here follow I am concerned with
questions of fact and not with adjudication thereon. The veneration of
relics and cognate objects, to which some kind of sanctity was imputed,
became not only an environment of Christianity at a very early period,
but it so remains to the present day for more than half of Christendom.
It may be one of the grievous burdens of those ecclesiastical systems
about which it prevails and in which it is still promoted, but having
said what the sense of intellectual justice seems to require, that it
may be exonerated from the false charge of superstition, I have only to
add--and this is to lift the Graal literature out of the common judgment
which might be passed upon memorials of relic worship--that the instinct
of such devotions, as seen at their best in the official churches, has
always an arch-natural implicit; it works upon the simple principle that
God is not the God of the dead but of the living, and the reverence, by
example, for the Precious Blood of Christ depends from the doctrine of
His immanence in any memorials which He has left. I need not add that,
on the hypothesis of the Church itself, the sense of devotion would be
better directed, among external objects, towards the Real Presence in
the symbols of the Eucharist; but in the Graal literature it was round
about the Sacramental Mystery

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

that the Relics of the Passion were collected, operating and shining in
that light.

We know already that the Sacred Vessel of the legends was in the
root-idea a Reliquary, and as such that it was the container and
preserver of the Precious Blood of Christ. The romantic passion which
brought this Reliquary into connection with the idea of that sacrament
which communicated the life of Christ's blood to the believing soul, and
the doctrinal passion which led to the definition concerning
transubstantiation interacted one upon another. John Damascene had said
in the eighth century that the elements of bread and wine were assumed
and united to the Divinity--which took place by the invocation of the
Holy Ghost, for the Spirit descends and changes. The Venerable Bede had
said that the Lord gave us the sacrament of His flesh and blood in the
figure of bread and wine. And again: "Christ is absent as to His Body,
but is present as to His Divinity." And yet further: "The Body and Blood
of Jesus Christ are received in the mouth of believers for their
salvation." I do not know whether the implicits of this presentation
have been realised in any school of interpreters, but there is one of
them which covers all phases of sacramental exegesis, however variant
from each other, and however in conflict with high Roman doctrine
concerning the Eucharist. I state it as one who after long searchings
has found a hidden jewel of the sacrament which might be an eirenicon
for all the sects alive. It has also the simplicity which Khunrath, in
expounding the Hermetic side of Eternal Wisdom, has said to be the seal
of Nature and Art. I testify, therefore, that the true mystery of the
Eucharist resides in the assumption by the Divine Life of the veils of
Bread and Wine, and that even as once in time and somewhere in the world
that life assumed the veils of flesh and blood, which became the Body of
the Lord, so here and now--daily on every worshipful and authorised
altar over the wide, wide world--do those unspotted elements become
again

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

that sacred vehicle, so that he who communicates in the faith of spirit
and of truth, receives that which is not less truly the Divine Body than
the especial polarisation of elements which was born in Nazareth of the
sacred and glorious Virgin. Moreover, I am very certain that the one
mystery was operated as if in the terms and valid forms of the other by
the invocation of the Holy Spirit and the utter consecration of the
elements. The reason is that given by Leo the Great, or another, so long
and long ago--that Mary conceived in her heart before she conceived in
her body. But having so conceived, the elements within her were
transubstantiated into the Divine Body. I desire to add with all
veneration and homage that this root-mystery of redemption is that which
lies behind the devotion to the Mother of God, which has ascended to
such heights in the Latin Church. This Church is the one witness through
the ages whose instinct on the great subjects has never erred, however
long and urgently the powers of the deep and the powers of perdition
have hammered at the outer gates. Among other things, she has always
recognised in the withdrawn and most holy part of her consciousness that
she who conceived Christ--by the desire of the mystery of God satisfied
out of all measure in a consummated marriage of the mind--had entered
through her humanity into assumption with the Divine, and was to be
counted no longer merely among the elected daughters of Zion.

To return therefore, those who say that the Eucharist is flesh and blood
are speaking God's truth, and I ask *in examine mortis*--

"In life's delight, in death's dismay"--

that I may never receive otherwise. And those who say that such things
are understood spiritually say also the truth which is eternal after
their own manner, whence I look to communicate with then when "the
dedely flesh" begins "to beholde the spyrytuel thynges"--or ever I set
forth in that ship of mystic faith which was

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

built from the beginning of this external order that it may carry us in
fine to Sarras, though it is known that we shall go further.

Well, *fratres carissimi, sorores ex omnibus dilectissimæ*, to whom I
speak the wisdom of the other world in a mystery--those who out of all
expectation translated the deep things of doctrine, as they best could,
into the language of romance--out of the Latin, as they said in their
cryptic fashion--the Palladium of all research was that Vessel of
Singular Election which contained, in their ingenuous symbolism, the
Blood of Christ; but seeing that they were in a hurry to show how those
who were worthy to receive the arch-natural sacraments did after some
undeclared manner partake at the Graal Mass of corporeal and incorporeal
elements which were fit to sustain both body and soul, so did the
Reliquary become the Chalice, or alternatively it was elevated and the
Christ came down to distribute His own life with the *osculum
fraternitatis* and the *consolamentum* of all consolation. They
collected, also, under the ecclesiastical and monastic ægis, certain
other relics about the relic-in-chief. Now, the point concerning all is
that most of the minor Hallows were known already as local objects of
sanctity no less than the palmary Hallow, but the sanctity ascribed to
the latter and the devotion thereto belonging were beginning to prevail
generally. It is difficult to trace the growth of this kind of cultus;
but as to the worship of spiritual devotion there was offered everywhere
in Christendom the Body and Blood of Christ in the Sacrament of the
Altar, so at many shrines--as if the more visible symbol carried with it
a validity of its own, a more direct and material appeal--there was the
reputed *sang réal* of Christ preserved in a reliquary. Some of these
local devotions were established and well known before the appearance of
any text of the Holy Graal with which we are acquainted--probably before
those texts which we can discern behind the extant literature.

We have at the present day the Feast of the Precious

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Blood, which is a
modern invention, and perhaps for some even who are within the fold of
the Latin Church, it is classed among the unhappy memorials of the
pontificate of Pius IX. This notwithstanding, it is what may be termed
popular, and has in England its confraternities and other systems to
maintain it in the mind of the laity. It has the London Oratory as its
more particular centre, and it is described as an union and an
apostolate of intercessory prayer. Without such assistance in the Middle
Ages we can understand that the cultus had its appeal to the devotional
side of the material mind, for which flesh and blood profited a good
deal, in spite of asceticism and the complication of implicits behind
the counsels of perfection in the religious life of the age.

The historical antiquity of the local sanctities which centre about
certain relics is shrouded like some Masonic events in the vague
grandeur of time immemorial, and a defined date is impossible. Because
the legends of the Graal are connected with the powers and wonders of
several hallowed objects belonging to 'the Passion of Christ, it is
essential rather than desirable to ascertain whether at the period when
the literature arose--and antedating it, if that be possible--there were
such objects already in existence and sufficiently well known to respond
as a *terminus a quo* in respect of the development of the legends. The
places which appear as claimants to the possession of relics of the
Precious Blood are, comparatively speaking, numerous; among others there
are Bruges, Mantua, Saintes, the Imperial Monastery at Weingarten, and
even Beyrout. According to the story of Mantua, the relic was preserved
by Longinus, the Roman soldier who pierced the side of Christ. Within
the historical period, it is said to have been divided, and some part of
it was secured by the monastery of Weingarten, already mentioned. This
portion was again subdivided and brought from Germany by Richard of
Cornwall, the brother of Henry III. Fractional as the portion was, it is
affirmed to have been a

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

large relic, and the fortunate possessor founded a religious
congregation to guard and venerate it. Later on it was, however, divided
again into three parts, of which one was retained by the congregation,
one was deposited in a monastery built for the purpose at Ashted, near
Berkhampstead, and the third in a third monastery erected at Hailes in
Gloucestershire. All these were foundations by Richard of Cornwall; and
to explain such continual division, it must be remembered that this was
a period when the building of churches and religious houses was
prohibited without relics to sanctify them. Now, the story of Richard
himself may be accepted as tolerably well founded, but there is much
doubt concerning the relics at Weingarten and at Mantua itself. The
alternative statements are (1) that in 1247 the Templars sent to King
Henry III. a *vas vetustissimum*, having the appearance of crystal and
reputed to contain the Precious Blood; (2) that in the same year, and to
the same King, there was remitted by the Patriarch of Jerusalem a
Reliquary termed the Sangreal, which had once belonged to Nicodemus and
Joseph of Arimathæa. Now it is obvious that at the period of Henry III.
the canon of the Graal literature was almost closed; the last of these
stories is obviously a reflection of that literature; it was also the
time when (*a*) the *Sacro Catino* of Geneva may have begun to be
regarded as the Graal, and when (*b*) a similar attribution was given to
a sacred vessel which had been long preserved at Constantinople; but
these objects, whether dishes or chalices, were not reliquaries. It will
be seen that the claim of Mantua remains over with nothing to account
for its origin. Of Beyrout I have heard only, and have no details to
offer. But the relic of Bruges has a clear and methodical history,
passing from legend into a domain which may be that of fact. The legend
is that Joseph of Arimathæa having collected the Blood from the wounds
of Christ, as the literature of the Graal tells us, placed it in a
phial, which was taken to Antioch by St. James the Less, who was the
first

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

bishop of that city. The possible historical fact is that the Patriarch
of Antioch gave the Reliquary about 1130 to a knight of Bruges who had
rendered signal services to the church in Antioch. It was brought back
by the knight to his native place, and there it has remained to this
day. The dubious element in the story is the gift of such a relic under
any circumstances whatever; the point in its favour is that the phial
has the character of oriental work, which is referred by experts in
ancient glass to the seventh or eighth century.

Against, or rather in competition with, this simple and consistent
claim, there is the monstrous invention connected with the monastery of
the Holy Trinity at Fécamp in Normandy. Here there is--or there was at
least in the year 1840--a tabernacle of white marble, decorated with
sculptured figures and inscribed: "Hic SANGUIS D.N., I.H.V., X.P.I." It
is therefore called the Tabernacle of the Precious Blood.

The story is that Joseph of Arimathæa removed the blood from the wounds
of Christ, after the body had been taken down from the Cross, using his
knife for the purpose, and collecting the sacred fluid in his gauntlet.
The gauntlet he placed in a coffer, and this he concealed in his house.
The years passed away, and on his deathbed he bequeathed the uncouth
reliquary to his nephew Isaac, telling him that if he preserved it the
Lord would bless him in all his ways. Isaac and his wife began to enjoy
every manner of wealth and prosperity; but she was an unconverted
Jewess, and seeing her husband performing his devotions before the
coffer, she concluded that he had dealings with an evil spirit, and she
denounced him to the high priest. The story says that he was acquitted,
but he removed with the reliquary to Sidon, where the approaching siege
of Jerusalem was made known to him in a vision. He therefore concealed
the reliquary in a double tube of lead, with the knife and the head of
the Lance which had pierced the side of Christ. The tube itself he
concealed in the trunk of a fig-tree,

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

the bark of which closed over its contents, so that no fissure was
visible. A second vision on the same subject caused him to cut down the
tree, and he was inspired to commit it to the waves. In the desolation
which he felt thereafter an angel told him that his treasure had reached
shore in Gaul, and was hidden in the sand near the valley of Fécamp.

I do not propose to recount the various devices by which the history of
the fig-tree is brought up to the period when the monastery was founded
at the end of the tenth century. The important points in addition are
(*a*) that the nature of the Reliquary did not satisfy the custodians,
and, like the makers of Graal books, they wanted an arch-natural chalice
to help out their central Hallow; (*b*) that they secured this from the
priest of a neighbouring church who had celebrated Mass on a certain
occasion, and had seen the consecrated elements converted into flesh and
blood; (*c*) that a second knife was brought, later on, by an angel;
(*d*) that a general exposition of all the imputed relics took place on
the high altar in 1171; (*e*) that their praises and wonders were
celebrated by a guild of jongleurs attached to the monastery, which
guild is said to have originated early in the eleventh century, and was
perpetuated for over four hundred years; (*f*) that the story is told in
a mediæval romance of the thirteenth century, though in place of Joseph
the character in chief is there said to be Nicodemus; (*g*) that there
are other documents in French and in Latin belonging to different and
some of them to similarly early periods; (*h*) that there is also a Mass
of the Precious Blood, which was published together with the poem in
1840, and this is, exoterically speaking, a kind of Mass of the Graal,
but I fear that a careful examination might create some doubt of its
antiquity, and, speaking generally, I do not see (1) that any of the
documents have been subjected to critical study; or (2) that Fécamp is
likely to have been more disdainful about the law of great inventions
than other places with

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Hallows to
maintain in Christian--or indeed in any other--times.

So far as regards the depositions which it might be possible to take in
the Monastery concerning its Tabernacle; and there is only one thing
more which need be mentioned at this stage. It has been proved by very
careful and exhaustive research into the extant codices of the *Conte
del Graal* that some copies of the continuation by Gautier de Doulens
state that the episode of Mont Douloureux was derived from a book
written at Fécamp. It follows that one early text at least in the
literature of the Holy Graal draws something from the Monastery of the
Holy Trinity, but, lest too much importance should be attributed to this
fact, I desire to note for my conclusion: (*a*) that the episode in
question has no integral connection with the Graal itself; (*b*) that
the tradition of Fécamp, which I have characterised as monstrous, by
which I mean in comparison with the worst side of the general legends of
the Precious Blood, is utterly distinct from that of the Holy Graal in
the texts which constitute the literature; and (*c*) that this
literature passed, as we shall find, out of legend into the annunciation
of a mystic claim. It is the nature of this claim, the mystery of
sanctity which lies behind it, and the quality of perpetuation by which
the mystery was handed on, that is the whole term of my quest, and here
it stands declared.

We have seen how. at Fécamp there occurred a very curious intervention
on the part of an arch-natural chalice, being that vessel into which the
Graal passes by a kind of superincession, if it does not begin and end
therein. But there are other legends of chalices and dishes in the wide
world of reliquaries, and in order to clear the issues I may state in
the 1st place that the Table of the Last Supper is said to be preserved
at St. John Lateran, with no history of its migration attached thereto.
The Church of Savillac in the diocese of Montauban has also, or once
had, a *Tabula Cœnæ Domini* and the Bread used at that Table. As regards
the chalice itself, there is one

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

of silver at Valencia which the Catholic mind of Spain has long regarded
as that of the Last Supper; but I have no records of its history. There
is one other which is world-wide in its repute, and this I have
mentioned already, as if by an accidental reference. The *Sacro Catino*
is preserved in the Church of St. Laurence at Genoa, and it is pictured
in the book which Fra Gaetano di San Teresa dedicated to the subject in
1726. It corresponds by its general appearance--which recalls, broadly
speaking, the calix of an enormous flower more closely to the form which
might, in the absence of expert knowledge, be attributed to a decorative
Paschal Dish than a wine-cup; but there is no need to say that it is not
an archaic glass vessel of Jewry. The history of so well known an object
is rather one of weariness in recital, but at the crusading sack of
Cæsarea in 1101 the Genoese received as their share of the booty, or in
part consideration thereof, what they believed to be a great cup or dish
carved out of a single emerald; it was about forty centimetres in
height, and a little more than one metre in circumference; the form was
hexagonal, and it was furnished with two handles, polished and rough
respectively. Now, Cæsarea was near enough to the Holy Fields for the
purposes of a sacred identification in the hearts of crusaders, and
moreover the vessel had been found in the mosque of Antioch, which might
have helped to confuse their minds by suggesting that it was a stolen
relic of Christian sanctity. But at the time when the city was pillaged
there is no evidence that the notion occurred to the Genoese, unless it
was on some vague ground of the kind that at the return of some of them
it was deposited in their church as a gift. It may well have been a
thank-offering, and this only, but I confess to a certain suspicion
that, vaguely or otherwise, they had assumed its sacred character, and
that its identification, not certainly with the Holy Graal, but with the
dish or chalice of the Last Supper, may have begun earlier than has been
so far supposed--antedating, that is to

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

say, the first record in history. This record is connected with the name
of the author of the *Golden Legend*, Jacobus de Voragine, at the end of
the thirteenth century. There is, however, some reason to believe that
the attribution was common already in Genoa prior to the period in
question. The point which is posed for consideration is whether the wide
diffusion of the Graal literature caused such a claim to be put forward
by the wardens of the *Sacro Catino*. The materials for a decision are
unfortunately not in our hands. With the Graal itself it could not have
been connected properly, seeing that the vessel was empty; but
perversions of this kind are not outside the field of possibility.
Whatever the ultimate value of an empirical consideration like this, the
heaviest fines, and even death itself, were threatened against those who
should touch the vessel with any hard object. A cruel but belated
disillusion, however, awaited its wardens when it was taken to Paris in
1816, and was not only broken on the way back, but, having been
subjected to testing, was proved to be only glass.

Second in importance only to the vessel of the Holy Graal was the Sacred
Lance of the Legend, and as in the majority of texts this is also a
relic of the Passion, our next task is to ascertain its antecedent or
concurrent history in the life of popular devotion. We know already of
the thesis issued at Fécamp, but the claims are so many that no one has
cared especially. The shaft of the spear used by Longinus when he
pierced the side of Christ is preserved in the Basilica of St. Peter.
According to the Roman Martyrology, the Deicide was suffering from
ophthalmia when he inflicted the wound, and some of the Precious Blood
overflowing his face, he was healed immediately--which miracle led, it
is declared, to his conversion. Cassiodorus, who belongs to the fifth
century, says that the Lance was in his days at Jerusalem, but this was
the head and the imbedded part of the shaft, the rest being missing. He
does not account for its preservation from the time of Christ to

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

his own. Gregory of Tours speaks of its removal to Constantinople, which
notwithstanding it was discovered once more at Antioch for the
encouragement of Crusaders, under circumstances of particular suspicion,
even in the history of relics. This was in 1098. There is also a long
story of its being pledged by Baldwin II. to Venice, and of its
redemption by St. Louis, which event brought it to Paris; but this is
too late for our subject. A Holy Lance with an exceedingly confused
history--but identical as to its imputed connection with the
Passion--came also into the possession of Charlemagne. That any history
of such a hallow is worthless does not make it less important when the
object is to exhibit the simple fact that it was well known in this
world before Graal literature, as we find it, had as yet come into
existence. According to St. Andrew of Crete, the head of the Lance was
buried with the True Cross, but it does not seem to have been
disinterred therewith. It is just to add that some who have investigated
the question bear witness that the history of the Hallow is reasonably
satisfactory in the sixth century and thence onwards.

The next relic which may be taken to follow on our list is the Crown of
Thorns; it figures only in one romance of the Graal, but has an
important position therein. The possession of single or several Sacred
Thorns has been claimed by more than one hundred churches, without
prejudice to which there are those which have the Crown itself, less or
more intact. This also is not included among the discoveries of St.
Helena in connection with the True Cross, and there is no early record
concerning it; but it is mentioned as extant by St. Paulin de Nole at
the beginning of the fifth century. One hundred years later, Cassiodorus
said that it was at Jerusalem; Gregory of Tours also bears testimony to
its existence. In the tenth century part of it was at Constantinople,
which was a general centre, if not a forcing-house, of desirable sacred
objects. St. Germain, Bishop of Paris, was in that city and received
part of it

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

as a present from the Emperor Justinian. Much earlier the patriarch of
Jerusalem is supposed to have sent another portion to Charlemagne. In
1106 the treasure at Constantinople is mentioned by Alexis Comnenus.
Another Crown of Thorns is preserved in *Santa Maria della Spina* of
Pisa.

The Sacred Nails of the Passion appear once in the *Book of the Holy
Graal*, and these also have an early history in relics. Some or all of
them were discovered by St. Helena with the True Cross, and, according
to St. Ambrose, one of them was placed by her in the diadem of
Constantine, or alternatively in his helmet, and a second in the bit of
his horse. In the sixth century St. Gregory of Tours speaks of four
nails, and it seems to follow from St. Chrysostom that the bit of
Constantine's charger was coupled with the Lance as an object of
veneration in his days. As regards the diadem fashioned by St. Helena
this was welded of iron and became the Iron Crown of Lombardy, being
given by Gregory I. to Theodolinde in recognition of her zeal for the
conversion of the Lombard people. Charlemagne, Sigismund, Charles V. and
Napoleon I. were crowned therewith. Muratori and others say that the
Nail which hallowed it was not heard of in this connection till the end
of the sixteenth century, and the Crown itself has been challenged.
Twenty-nine places in all have laid claim to the possession of one or
other of the four nails, and there are some commendable devices of
subtlety to remove the sting of this anomaly. It is sufficient for our
own clear purpose to realise that the relics, if not everywhere, were in
"right great plenty."

It is also in the *Book of the Holy Graal*, and there only, that we see
for a moment, in the high pageant of all, a vision of an ensanguined
Cross, a blood-stained Cincture and a bended rod, also dyed with blood.
Of the *Crux vera* and its invention I need say nothing, because its
relics, imputed and otherwise, are treasured everywhere, and I suppose
that their multiplicity, even at the earliest Graal period, made it
impossible to introduce the Cross as an exclusive

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Hallow in the
Sacred House of Relics. By the Cincture there was understood probably
that bandage with which the eyes of Christ were blindfolded, and this,
or its substitute, had been in the possession of Charlemagne and was by
him given to St. Namphasus, who built the Abbey of Marcillac and there
deposited the relic. It is now in a little country church called St.
Julian of Lunegarde. According to St. Gregory of Tours, the reed and the
sponge, which had once been filled with vinegar, were objects of
veneration at his day in Jerusalem. They are supposed to have been taken
to Constantinople, which notwithstanding an informant of the Venerable
Bede saw the sponge with his own eyes, deposited in a silver cup at the
Holy City. He saw also the shorter reed, which served as the derisive
symbol of the Lord's royalty.

The last relic of the Passion of which we hear in the books of the Graal
is the *Volto Santo*, which all men know and venerate in connection with
the piteous legend of Veronica. The memorials of this tradition are, on
a moderate computation, as old as the eighth century, but the course of
time has separated it into four distinct branches. The first and the
oldest of these is preserved in a Vatican manuscript, which says that
Veronica was the woman whose issue of blood was healed by Christ, and
she herself was the artist who painted the likeness. She was carried to
Rome with the picture for the healing of the Emperor Tiberius. The
second branch is contained in an Anglo-Saxon manuscript of the eleventh
century, and this says that the relic was a piece of Christ's garment
which received in a miraculous manner the impression of His countenance.
The origin of the third tradition seems to have been in Germany, but it
is preserved in some metrical and other Latin narrative versions. The
likeness of Christ is said to be very large, apparently full length. It
was in the possession of Veronica, but without particulars of the way in
which it was acquired. In another story--this is perhaps of the twelfth
century--the Emperor who was healed is Vespasian, and

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Christ Himself
impressed His picture on the face-cloth which He used when He washed
before supper at the house of Veronica. She had asked St. Luke, whom
tradition represents as an artist, for a copy of the Master's likeness.
The fourth and last variant is the familiar Calvary legend, wherein the
holy woman offers in His service the cloth which she has on her arm when
Christ is carrying the Cross, and she is rewarded by the impress of His
countenance thereon. The noticeable point is that the story of Veronica,
of the Volta Santo, and of the healing of a Roman Emperor is the
root-matter of the earliest historical account of the Holy Graal, and
this fact has led certain scholars to infer that the entire literature
has been developed out of the Veronica legend, as a part of the
conversion legend of Gaul, according to which the holy woman, in the
company of the three Maries and of Lazarus, took ship to Marseilles and
preached the Gospel therein. They carried the *Volto Santo* and other
Hallows.

I approach now the term of this inquiry, and there remains for
consideration the Sword of the Graal legends, which is accounted for
variously in respect of its history and is also described variously, but
it is not under any circumstances a Hallow of the Passion. A romance
which stands late in the cycle, so far as chronology is concerned,
connects it with the martyrdom of St. John the Baptist. I have found no
story in the world of relics to help us in accounting for this
invention, though there are traces of a sword of St. Michael. In this
respect, as indeed in other ways, the Hallow is complicated in the
literature. It embodies (*a*) matter brought over from folk-lore; (*b*)
deliberate invention, as when one story affirms it to be the sword of
David, and another that of Judas Maccabæus; and (*c*) the
semi-devotional fable to which I have referred above, and this must be
taken in connection with the legends of the head of St. John, served to
Herodias on a charger to satiate her desire for revenge on the precursor
of Christ, he seeming to have reproached her concerning

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

her manner of life. It will be plain from the enumeration subjoined that
the relics of St. John are comprehensive as to the person of his body.
(1) A martyrology tells us that some of his blood was collected by a
holy woman at the time of his decapitation, was put into a vessel of
silver, and was carried into her country of Guienne; there it was placed
in a temple which she erected to his honour. (2) The body was, according
to one account, placed in a temple at Alexandria, which was dedicated to
the Saint. Another says that the head was first interred in the
sepulchre of Eliseus at Samaria. During the reign of Julian the Apostate
it was redeemed from possible profanation, and sent to St. Athanasius,
who concealed it in a wall of his church. At the end of the fourth
century the same remains were removed to a new church, built on the site
of a temple of Serapis. Subsequently they were divided and distributed.
(3) The *Caput Johannis* was carried to Antioch by St. Luke, or
alternatively to Cæsarea. From whichever place, it was afterwards
removed to Constantinople and brought finally into France, where it was
divided into three parts, one of which is at Amiens, another at Angély
in the diocese of Nantes, and the third at Nemours in the diocese of
Sens. A distinct account states that the head was found in Syria in the
year 453, and that the removal to Constantinople took place five
centuries later. When that city was taken by the French in 1204,  a
canon of Amiens, who was present, transported it into France, where it
was divided, but into two portions apparently, one being deposited at
Amiens and the other sent to the Church of St. Sylvester in Rome. I have
also seen a report of two heads, but without particulars of their
whereabouts.

So much concerning the *Caput Johannis*, but I should not have had
occasion to furnish these instances were it not for the apparition of an
angel carrying a head upon a salver when the wonders of the Holy Graal
were first manifested at Sarras. But this vision is not found in the
story which connects the Hallowed Sword with the head

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

of St. John the Baptist. The Dish, with its content, is supposed to be a
complication occasioned by the intervention of folk-lore elements
concerning the head of the Blessed Bran. The Dish, apart from the head,
is almost always the fourth Hallow in the legends of the Graal--perhaps,
as I shall indicate later, because the Sacred Vessel, which is the
central object of all, is sometimes identified with the Paschal Dish of
the Last Supper and sometimes with the Chalice of the First Eucharist.

It follows from the considerations of this section that although there
has been a passage of folk-lore materials through the channel of Graal
literature--which passage has less or more involved their
conversion--its real importation into romance has been various elements
of Christian symbolism, doctrine and legend; it is these, above all,
that we are in a position to know and account for, and I have made a
beginning here. We have, therefore, certain lines laid down already for
our inquiry which assure that it will have the aspect of a religious and
even of an ecclesiastical quest.

There is nothing on our part which can be added to the discoveries of
folk-lore scholars, nor have we--except in a most elementary manner, and
for the better understanding of our own subject--any need to summarise
the result even of such researches--as these now stand. This work has
been done too well already. We are entering a new region, and we carry
our own warrants. I need not add that in assuming Celtic or any other
legends, the Church took over its own, because she had come into
possession, by right and by fact, of all the patrimonies of the Western
world.

I want it to be understood, in conclusion as to this side of the Hallows
of the Holy Graal, that the literature is not to be regarded as a
particular extension of the history of relics, nor should my own design
in presenting the external history of certain sacred objects suffer
misconstruction of this or an allied kind. The compilers of encyclopædic
dictionaries and handbooks have sometimes

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

treated the value of such legends, and of the claims which lie behind
them, in a spirit which has been so far serious that they have pointed
out how the multiplicity of claims in respect of a single object must be
held to militate against the genuineness of any. One Juggernaut effigy
of all that is virulent in heresy took the trouble, centuries ago, to
calculate how many crosses might be formed full-size from the relics of
the one true Cross which were then extant in the world, and an opponent
not less grave took the further trouble of recalculating to prove that
he was wrong. So also Luther, accepting a caution from Judas, lamented
that so much gold had gone to enshrine the imputed relics of the Cross
when it might have been given to the poor. The truth is that the
veneration of relics is open to every kind of charge save that which
Protestantism has preferred, and this an enlightened sense of doctrine
and practice enables us to rule out of court on every count.

It is desirable now to notice a few points which are likely to be
overlooked by the informed student even, while the unversed reader
should know of them that he may be on his guard hereafter. (1) The
German cycle of the Holy Graal has the least possible connection with
Christian relics; speaking of the important branches, it is so much *sui
generis* in its symbolical elements that it enters scarcely into the
same category as the Northern French romances, with which we shall be
dealing chiefly. (2) No existing reliquary and no story concerning one
did more than provide the great makers of romance with raw materials and
pretexts; the stories they abandoned in all cases nearly, and the
symbols they exalted by their genius. (3) As I have once already
indicated, but not so expressly, the knowledge or the rumour of some
unknown book had come to them in an unknown manner, and of this book
neither Fécamp nor its competitive monasteries, abbeys and holy houses
had ever heard a syllable. The general conclusion of this part is
therefore that the growing literature of the Holy Graal drew from the
life of devotion

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

in its application to the Mystery of the Eucharist and to the secondary
veneration of relics at the period; but, on the other hand, it
contributed something of its own life to stimulate and extend the great
doctrine of the mystery, and the devotion also. The elucidations which
have been here afforded represent but a part of the schedule with which
this section opened; it is that, however, which is most needed at the
moment, and all that remains will find its proper place in the later
stages of research.

About that mystery in chief of the faith in Christ which is the only
real concern of the Holy Graal, there are other environments which will
appeal to us, though their time is not yet in our methodical scheme of
progress. There is (*a*) the state of the official church, so glorious
in some respects, so clouded in others, like a keeper of sacred things
who has been wounded for his own sins, or like a House of Doctrine
against which he who sold God for money has warred, and not in vain, for
at times he has invaded the precincts and entered even the sanctuary,
though the holy deposit has not been affected thereby, because by its
nature and essence it is at once removed from his grasp. There is (*b*)
the Church in Britain and its connections of the Celtic world, having
aspirations of its own, as there is no question--having a legitimacy of
its own, as none can dare to deny--but with only a local horizon, a
local mission, and used, for the rest, as a tool for ambitious kings,
much as the orthodox claim of the Church at large was the tool of the
popes at need. There is (*c*) the resounding rumour and there is the
universal wonder of the high impossible quest of holy wars in Palestine,
without which we might have never had the Graal literature, the romances
of chivalry, or the secret treasures of the disdainful East brought to
the intellectual marts and houses of exchange in the restless, roving,
ever-curious kingdoms of the West--kingdoms in travail towards their
puberty. There is (*d*)--and of five things to be enumerated, I count
this the head and crown--there is the higher life of sanctity and its

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

annals at the Graal period, as the outcome of which the West went to the
East, carrying what it believed to be the missing talent of gold,
without which, as the standard of all values, all other talents were
either debased or spurious. It was the age of a thousand reflections, at
centuries sometimes of distance, from Dionysius, Augustine, and the
first great lights of Christendom; it was the age of Hugo de St. Victor,
of Bernard, of Bonaventura; it was the age which Thomas of Aquinas had
taken up as plastic matter in his hands, and he shaped the mind of the
world after the image and the likeness of his own mind in the high
places of the schools; it was the age of many doctors, who would have
known in their heart of hearts what was the real message of the Graal
literature, and where its key was to be sought. There is in fine (*e*)
my fifth branch, but this is the sects of the period, because more than
one division of the Christian world was quaking and working towards the
emancipation which begins by departing from orthodox doctrine in
official religion, but seeing that it begins wrongly and takes turnings
which are the fatalities of true direction, so it ends far from God. As
to all this, it is needful to say at this moment, because it is almost
from the beginning, that the Books of the Holy Graal are among the most
catholic of literature, and that reformations have nothing therein. I
say, therefore, that the vessels are many but the good is one, of which
Galahad beheld the vision.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IV. The Literature of the Cycle](hchg07)
