[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hchg59)  [Next](hchg61) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1589639057/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### II

#### THE FORMULÆ OF THE HYPOTHESIS SCHEDULED

There are traces in the Anglo-Norman romances of a certain fluidic sense
in which Britain and its immediate connections, according to the
subsurface mind of their writers, stood typically for the world. They
were familiar enough with the names of other regions--with Syria, Egypt,
Rome--above all, with the Holy Places in the Jerusalem which is below;
but their world was the Celtic world, comprised, let us say, between
Scotia and Ireland on the one side and central France on the other. This
region came, I think, to signify symbolically, and so we hear that the
failure to ask "one little question" involved the destruction of
kingdoms, while the belated interrogation seems to have lifted the veil
of enchantment from the world itself. The cloud upon the sanctuary was a
cloud over that world; its lifting was a glory restored everywhere. But
as the enchantment, except within very narrow limits, and then *ex
hypothesi*, was only of the imputed order, so the combined restoration
of Nature in common with Grace was but imputed also; the woe and
inhibition were removed as secretly as they were imposed. So again, when
the chivalry of the Round Table--in the Greater Chronicles--covenanted
to go forth on the Quest of the Holy Graal, the universal and proclaimed
object was to terminate the hard times of adventure, which had become
intolerable: *pour deliveir nôtre pais des grans mervelles et des
estrainges auentures qui tant y sont auenues, lonc tans a*. The whole
position reminds one of that chapter in the Apocalypse which presents a

<span id="page_437">p. 437</span>

sheaf of instructions to the Seven Churches of Asia. No one knew better
than the Jews not only concerning Rome, Greece and Alexandria, but of
the world extended further; this notwithstanding, when the great book of
the secret Christian mystery was first written, the world of Christendom
was confined chiefly within narrow limits in Asia, and this was the
world of the Apocalypse. It was actually all *Assiah* of Kabalism,
though the few who have dared to institute a philological connection
between the one name and the other have gone, as usual, astray.
Recurring to the fact out of which this analogy arises, let me add, as a
matter of justice to an hypothesis which I seek to present adequately,
that within this Celtic world the first and most natural sympathies in
the religious order would be indubitably with its own aspirations, and I
set aside therefore for the time being all speculation as to anything
rich and strange in Rite and Doctrine which may have been brought from
the Eastern world by those--whoever they were--who first planted
Christianity on the known confines of the Western world. The chief
points of the hypothesis may be collected into a schedule as follows:

1\. It is certain that the Graal Legend is of Celtic origin and making,
because of the Celtic attributions of the romances and their Celtic
*mise-en-scène* and characters; because of the Celtic names, disguised
and otherwise, which are found in the romances, even in those which
belong to the Teutonic cycle; and because of the undoubted derivations
into the Graal Legend from Welsh folklore. This is agreed on all hands,
and will therefore call of necessity for no extension or comment in this
place.

2\. The romance of the Holy Graal, regarding the cycles synthetically,
is a glorified ecclesiastical legend of Celtic origin; there are other
ecclesiastical legends, referable to the same source, which suggest the
Graal atmosphere. The "Graal Church" was in its earlier stages the
Celtic Church contrasted with the Saxo-Roman.

3\. The nucleus is to be found in the story of St. David and his
miraculous altar. The apostle of South

<span id="page_438">p. 438</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Wales, with some
other saints, made a pilgrimage in the legend to Jerusalem, where the
patriarch of the Holy City invested him as archbishop and gave him "a
consecrated altar in which the body of our Lord once lay." It was
transported to Wales, performed innumerable miracles, but after the
death of St. David it was covered with skins and was never seen by any
one. According to a variant of the legend, this altar--and possibly some
other Hallows--was carried through the air to Britain, and hence was
often described as *e coelo veniens*. Though apparently it was the
rock-hewn sepulchre mentioned in the New Testament, no man could specify
its shape, its colour, or of what material it was fashioned; in addition
to its other wonders, it gave oracles--that is to say, a voice spoke
therein, as it did, according to the romances, in the Graal itself. St.
David died about 601 A.D.; he gave the Mass to Britain; he was of the
lineage of Our Lady; and his birth having been foretold by the finding
of a great fish, he was termed the Waterman--*vir aquaticus*--which
recalls the Rich Fisherman of the later legends. It might be said that
this title was applicable especially to him, as one who was rich in the
conversion of souls to Christ and in the greater gifts of sanctity. His
ancestors bore the name of *Avallach*, whence that of the king .of
Sarras seems to be derived certainly; and he is said to have provided
sacred vessels for the celebration of the Eucharist.

4\. The secret words of the Robert de Borron cycle refer to the
*Epiclesis* of the Celtic Rite. The form of Eucharistic consecration in
the Latin Rite is actually the words of Institution--that is to say, the
New Testament's account of the Last Supper. In the East, however,
consecration is effected by addition of the *Epiclesis* clause--that is,
by the invocation of the Holy Spirit. In its more usual form, it is a
petition for the descent of the Comforter, firstly, upon the
worshippers, and, secondly, upon the Altar gifts, that the elements may
be converted into the Divine Body and Blood. The liturgy of St.

<span id="page_439">p. 439</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> John Chrysostom
may be consulted on this point; indeed, from one passage it would seem
to follow that what was communicated was the Holy Ghost, an idea in
which all that is usually attached to the Eucharistic office seems to
dissolve in a higher light. The evidence is, however, confessedly
somewhat indirect, as no Gallican or other connected liturgy gives the
words of institution, but they are found in full in a North Italian,
perhaps a Milanese, liturgy, and elsewhere, as we shall see shortly. It
has been said that between 750 and 820 A.D. certain words in the Celtic
Rite vanished from the consecration of the Eucharist, which would
correspond, I suppose, *ex hypothesi*, to the intervention of the Roman
Rite. The Celtic was abolished formally about 850, but is said to have
survived to the period of the Graal literature. The Welsh would have
learned from the Crusades that the *Liturgy of the Holy Spirit* was
still used in the East.

5\. The hereditary Graal Keepers, so strongly emphasised in the
romances, are derived from the Hereditary Relic Keepers of the Celtic
Church. Mr. J. Romilly Allen, in his *Monumental History of the Early
British Church*, has said: "The vicissitudes through which the relics
passed in the course of centuries were often of a most romantic
description. The story was generally the same. The book, bell or crozier
belonging to the founder of the Church was supposed to have acquired
peculiar sanctity and even supernatural properties by association with
him; and after his death it was often enclosed in a costly metal shrine
of exquisite workmanship. Each relic had its hereditary custodian, who
was responsible for its safe keeping and who in return received certain
privileges, such as . . . the title to inherit certain land, of which
the relic constituted the tenure." The preservation of relics under
hereditary guardianship seems to have been common among Celtic
families--as, for example, the banner of St. Columba. So also the relics
of certain saints belonging to the Scoto-Irish Church were placed in the
care of families of hereditary keepers;

<span id="page_440">p. 440</span>

these were consecrated objects, not human remains, and they were
regarded as of great virtue when borne in battle by a person who was
free from any deadly sin. Sometimes a venerable cup was deposited in a
special shrine; sometimes the book of the gospels was enclosed in triple
cases--as of wood, copper and silver. The custody of such an object
became an office of dignity from generation to generation in a single
family. The general characteristics of the Celtic relic may be
enumerated as follows, but it is not intended to say that every sacred
object possessed all the qualities: (*a*) It came from heaven, like the
Graal; (*b*) it was of mysterious and incomprehensible matter; (*c*) it
was oracular; (*d*) like the Graal, it had the power of speech; (*e*) it
healed the sick, as the Graal did also occasionally, though this was not
its specific office; (*f*) like the Graal, it must not be seen by
unqualified persons; (*g*) it had the power of miraculous
self-transportation, and the Holy Cup, in certain romances, was also a
wandering vessel; (*h*) it acted as a guide; (*i*) it was a palladium;
(*k*) it executed judgment on the wicked and profane, which is the
characteristic in chief of the Graal in the metrical romance of De
Borron.

6\. In the *Panegyric of St. Columba*, a document ascribed to the last
years of the eleventh century, it is recorded among his other good works
that--like his peer, St. David of Wales--he provided a Mass Chalice for
every Church--presumably within his special sphere of influence or
perhaps even in the islands generally. Readers of the prose *Perceval Le
Gallois* will remember that chalices were so uncommon in Arthurian days
that the King, during a certain quest, seems to have met with one, and
that miraculously, for the first time in his life. The explanation is
that wooden bowls may have been used previously for purposes of
consecration. This was at the Mass of the Graal which Arthur was
permitted to see in the course of his travelling. We should remember at
this point that it is only at the close of the cycle

<span id="page_441">p. 441</span>

in Northern French--that is to say, in the romance which I have just
mentioned, in that of Galahad and in the *Book of the Holy Graal*, that
the Sacred Vessel--its other uses notwithstanding--is connected
expressly and indubitably with the administration of the Eucharist,
though it is not always the vessel of communion.

7\. There are historical memorials of mystic and holy cups, possessing
great virtues and preserved in old Welsh families. Among these is the
Holy Cup of Tregaron, which was made of the wood of the True Cross and
its healing virtues were manifested so recently as the year 1901. The
curious thing in the romances is that the Holy Graal heals every one
except the Keeper himself, who in the Perceval cycle can be cured only
by a question, and in the Galahad legend--but here it is a former
Keeper--by the magnetic touch of his last lineal descendant.

8\. In England during the Middle Ages--but this is a side-issue which is
mentioned only for its possible greater antiquity and origin in Celtic
times--the Eucharist was reserved, as we have seen otherwise, in a
*Columbarium*, or Dove-House, being a vessel shaped like a dove. This
was the Tabernacle of its period, and it recalls (*a*) some archaic
pictures of a Cup over which a dove broods; (*b*) the descent of a dove
on the Graal stone in Wolfram's poem; (*c*) the passage of symbolic
doves in connection with the Graal procession as told by several
romances, but especially in the *Quest of Galahad;* and (*d*) the office
of the Holy Spirit in the Graal legend. But it is also suggested--and
this, I believe, is by Huysman--that the Tabernacle was frequently in
the form of an ivory tower to symbolise Christ in the womb of the
Virgin, who is herself called *Turris eburnea*.

9\. The vanishing of the Graal refers (*a*) to the actual disappearance
of St. David's altar after the death of its custodian; (*b*) to the
disappearance of the Celtic Church before the Roman; and (*c*) to the
subjugation of the British by the Saxons. The Welsh Church was
preeminently

<span id="page_442">p. 442</span>

a monastic church, and, in spite of the existence of bishops, its
government was in the hands of monks. The claim of the ancient British
Church generally, including its legend that the first Church of
Glastonbury was consecrated by our Lord Himself, may help us to explain
the undertone of dissent from Rome which has been noted here and there
in the subsurface of the Graal literature, but especially, as it has
been thought, in the *Longer Prose Perceval*. To appreciate the position
fully, we have to remember that the Latin rite gained ground and
influence with the Norman Conquest, though independently of that rite
there were monasteries in remote valleys where the old liturgy and the
ancient form of consecration may have been still used and where also the
ancient wisdom of the Druids was preserved, though--in spite of certain
testimonies--it could have been scarcely considered consistent for a man
to be a mystic Druid and also a Christian. The Druidic secret was
symbolised by the term *Afalon*, which means the Apple Orchard. The last
Welsh Archbishop of St. David's died in 1115, and was succeeded by a
Norman, that is to say, by a Roman prelate.

10\. Cadwaladr is Galahad. Galahad took away the Holy Graal, because,
according to the *Welsh Quest*, the world was not worthy. His prototype,
in despair of his country, removed certain relics, and, by the testimony
of one tradition, he died in the Holy Land, as if he also had departed
to Sarras, with the intention of proceeding further. Another story says
that he projected the reconquest of Britain in a fleet furnished by his
kinsman Alain of Brittany, where he was then in exile; but an angel
warned him to desist. He was to seek the Pope and confess, and he would
be canonised after his death--which, according to this legend, occurred
at Rome. This chieftain, who loomed so largely in the Welsh imagination,
who, like Bran of pre-Christian legend, was termed the Blessed, was
regarded as of the royal line of David; he is thought to have been the
custodian of holy

<span id="page_443">p. 443</span>

relics belonging to his family before him, and when he died, in reality,
as it seems, of the Yellow Sickness, in 664, his return was confidently
expected. So many legends grew up around him that he appears to have
gathered up in himself all the aspirations of Celtdom. His return is
associated with the second manifestation of his relics and with the
final felicity of the Celts. Awaiting that event, the entire British
Church, for some reason not otherwise explicable, began to droop and
decay. But I may note here that a great Welsh revival was inaugurated in
the year 1077 A.D. by the return of Rhys-ap-Tewdwr from Brittany. Bards
and Druids were at white heat, and Rhys himself was a descendant
traditionally of Cadwaladr the Blessed, who was to restore all things.
He even claimed identity with that departed hero.

11\. When the particular set of claims connected with Glastonbury began
to be manufactured about 1150, to centralise a wide field of interests
at a defined point, Joseph of Arimathæa was substituted for St. David.
There was the supposed body of Joseph, there the phial which he brought
containing the Precious Blood, there also the body of King Arthur, and
by imputation the *Sapphirus*, the lost altar of the Welsh apostle, the
last of these recalling rather plausibly, and accounting for, the
*Lapsit exillis*, or *exilix*, of Wolfram. From this point of view it is
worthy of close attention (*a*) for its sacramental connection; (*b*)
for its association with the body of our Lord; and (*c*) for the mystery
attaching to its form, with which we may compare the vagueness which
characterises nearly all the descriptions of the Graal vessel.

12\. The descent of the Graal *prima materia* from folk-lore no more
explains the Christian legend of the Graal than the words *vir* and
*virtus* explain the particular significance attaching to the term
*virtuoso*. The mythological Salmon of Wisdom as a prototype of the Fish
in De Borron's poem is a case in point. The real approximate progenitor
is the primitive Christian symbol, which was familiar to Celtic
Christianity, and seeing that

<span id="page_444">p. 444</span>

the latter was much like the Church at large of several centuries
earlier, so it may have preserved things which elsewhere had passed out
of memory--the *Ichthus* symbol among them. This signified Christ, and
especially the Eucharistic species. It also symbolised the *Disciplina
Arcani* and was the most general of Christian emblems; it passed into a
specific form of expression for the concealment of the more interior
mysteries, and to partake of the Fish was an evasion for the reception
of the sacrament.

13\. His connection with the Quest of the Graal not only enabled King
Arthur to furnish chalices for churches but bells also, which seem to
have been unknown previously in Logres. In the Celtic veneration for
relics they bear, however, a conspicuous part, the examples being far
too numerous for recitation in this place. I can say only that their
cultus, their care, the keeperships instituted in connection and the
wonders ascribed to them are common to ancient Wales, Scotland and
Ireland.

14\. Reverting once more to St. David, it is reported traditionally that
the first church which he built was situated at Glastonbury, and in
connection with this ascription, it is said to have been consecrated by
Christ Himself; so that in more senses than in one sense merely the
place was a source and fountain of all religion in the Kingdom of
Britain, as affirmed by William of Malmesbury. It was therefore among
ecclesiastical structures what the second Joseph was among the bishops
of Christendom. If ever there was an arch-natural Mass celebrated and a
noumenal Eucharist administered at a specific place in Logres, assuredly
with these warrants it would have been only at Glastonbury, the
connection of which with St. David raises one further point. The Celtic
Church held that the Roman Pontiff was the successor of St. Peter, but
the patriarch of Jerusalem--who ordained the Apostle of Wales--was the
successor of Christ. The subsurface intention which created this legend
seems to have been nearly identical with that which put forward the
super-apostolical succession of Joseph

<span id="page_445">p. 445</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> II., and it
follows that Celtic imagination at work in the field of hagiology
furnished the makers of romance--and the author in particular of the
*Book of the Holy Graal*--with an ample groundwork. The substitution of
the man of Arimathæa for the original patron of Wales was the
appropriation of an independent legend, which served the ecclesiastical
side of Angevin ambition without affording a handle to the troublesome
principality on the western side of the vast dominions of Anjou.

15\. There are "distinct traces of something 'queer' in the Masses of
the earliest Celtic Church--before the coming of St. David in Wales or
of St. Columba in Scotland and Ireland." An allusion to the "queerness"
in question may be found in the following passage of the *Lesser Holy
Graal*, forming part of the discourse of Christ to Joseph of Arimathæa
when He brought the Holy Graal to console the prisoner in his tower:
"*Et ensinc con ge lou dis à la table, seront pluseurs tables establies
à moi sacrefier, qui sénéfiera la croiz, et lov vaissel là où l’an
sacrefiera et saintefiera, la pierre où tu méis mon cors, que li
caalices sénéfiera où mes cors sera sacrez, en samblance d’une oïste, et
la platainne qui sera dessus mises sénéfiera lou couvercle de coi tu me
covris*," &c. Alternatively, seeing that there is no mention of the
Blood, it may be "a manifesto of the party who wished the chalice to be
denied the laity," or, finally, the utterance of some obscure party or
sect. "The latter view finds some support in the Hermit's
story"--referring here to the Prologue of the *Book of the Holy
Graal*--"of his meeting with a knight who had seen him in a place that
he named."

16\. And now as regards the summary of the whole matter, the position
may be expressed as follows: (*a*) The Graal legend is demonstrably of
Celtic stuff--in part of Celtic folk-lore which has turned good
Christian, but more largely of ecclesiastical legend; (*b*) it derives
from the story of St. David and his altar; (*c*) the original Graal book
was probably a legend following a special and peculiar Liturgy; (*d*)
the legend told of

<span id="page_446">p. 446</span>

the Christianising of Britain by St. David, the celebration of the
Christian Mysteries on the saints' miraculous altar, which was actually
the sepulchre of our Lord, of the wonders wrought by this altar, of the
coming of the heathens, the ruin of Britain, the flight of its King--who
was St. David's last descendant--bearing with him the altar relic to the
East. There he died, thence he shall yet return, again bearing the
relic; the Britons shall triumph, the Saxons shall suffer expulsion, and
the mystic words shall be uttered once more over the Thaumaturgic Altar.
It is obvious that, according to this hypothesis, the book, which was
far older than any Graal literature, remained in concealment in Wales
and perhaps was unearthed at the Norman Conquest of Glamorganshire, when
it was modified, varied, exalted, transformed and allegorised by
successive makers of romance, being adapted specifically as an aid to
the House of Anjou, in its struggle with the Pope, by the author of the
*Book of the Holy Graal*--whether Walter Map or another. But Rome proved
more than one part too strong and by more than one interest too many for
the ambition of Henry II., while as regards Wales, it had long and long
already succumbed to the Latin Rite.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III. In What Sense the Plea Must be Held to Fail](hchg61)
