[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hchg22)  [Next](hchg24) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1589639057/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XI

#### THE HEALING OF THE KING

It came about, therefore, at the end of the Quest, that the Suppressed
Word was at last spoken, that the question was asked and answered. There
are certain texts in which the asking and the answering are all that was
required by the hypothesis, and then it was well in the Secret House of
the Wardens. There are other texts, which connect more directly with
folk-lore, in which the king's healing depended upon a dual office, of
which the first part was the question itself, as a kind of interlocutory
discourse, and then upon a mission of vengeance. It was fulfilled in
either case. The head of the Blessed Bran does not appear in the
symbolism of these branches, but the head as the sign of the
accomplished sacrifice is an essential, in these branches, of the Quest
fulfilled, and this is the characteristic in chief of the *Conte del
Graal*. As a Rite of the Observance with Mercy, the question and its
answer were held to be all-sufficient in the Lesser Chronicles, because
the curse on the Keeper is like that on the Wandering Jew--it is the
ages continued henceforward,

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

and he comes at length to his rest. The Greater Chronicles offer another
pageant of the Quest, the particulars of which are as follows: (1) The
Building of the Ship of the Secret Faith, that at the end of a certain
time it might carry into the far distance the most valid and efficacious
symbols of the Mystery of Faith; (2) the healing of a King of the East
who is not to be confused with the Keeper himself, but he dates *ab
initio symboli* and is doubtless the witness in chief of the mystery
even to the times of the Quest: concerning him it may be said that he
tried to take the mystery of faith by violence, outside which his
existence is parallel to that of the Keeper Brons, having been prolonged
through the centuries from the first times of the legend; (3) the
redemption of the Cain of the legend who slew his brethren; (4) an
intercalatory and voided wonder concerning the maiming of the Graal King
when he drew the Sword of David.

The particulars in all branches may be collected shortly as follows: In
the *Conte del Graal* Gautier presents a certain lifting of the heavy
veil of enchantment, so that the desert becomes the sown, and we are
enabled to compare how it was in the dry tree with that which it is in
the green: Winter has passed, so to speak, and the voice of the turtle
is heard again in the land. In Manessier, the keeper, who has suffered
from that illogical maiming occasioned by the death of his brother, is
healed at the sight of his head who committed the original act of
violence. The whole business is foolish, and so unutterably. It was
necessary, for some reason that derived probably its roots from
folk-lore, for the king to be smitten in his thighs; the event conies to
pass under circumstances that are quite and frankly impossible; and
there is also no reason why the wound which was self-inflicted
unconsciously should not have been healed at once, unless death
intervened as the term. Assuming that Gerbert knew nothing of
Manessier's conclusion and that he regarded the last words of
Gautier--in which the

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Rich Fisher hails
Perceval as the Lord of his house--as the term, in fine, of the story,
his own intercalation was intended to account for the closing along
better lines, and he did not concern himself with any explanation of the
King's wounding. On the contrary, his intention was to show that the
proper demand and reply exercised their proper office, and that the one
thing which remained to complete the whole was for Perceval to redeem
his past. The poem does not offer a termination which follows from the
text, while that of Manessier, from any explanatory standpoint, is so
much idle baggage. The *Conte del Graal*, considered as a Graal story,
is therefore at once imperfect and piecemeal. The *Didot Perceval* is by
no means entirely satisfactory as a completion of De Borron's trilogy,
but as a simple term of a quest which is exceedingly simple, it leaves
nothing undone. The Keeper of the Graal, as we have seen, must
communicate his mystery before he departs hence. The mode of
communication presupposes the arbitrary question which is a pretext for
unveiling the mysteries, and the issue, which is clear from the
beginning, is not clouded subsequently by extraneous matters. The king
is healed--that is to say, he is relieved of the long burden of the
centuries, and he is enabled to pass in peace. In the *Great Prose
Quest* it is the hands of Galahad which are the hands of healing. The
Hallow of the ensanguined lance inflicted the wound from which the
unknown king Pellehan suffered through the whole period during which the
Quest was prepared and achieved. The restoration was accomplished by
Galahad with the blood from the same weapon; therewith he anointed the
king. It is after this or another manner that the remedial elements are
sometimes in the House of the Graal, but they must be administered by
one who comes from external places. It may be admitted that, at least on
the surface, both wounding and healing in the Galahad Quest are a burden
to the logical understanding. For what it is worth--which is little--in
other respects,

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

there is on this point a certain consistence in the *Conte del Graal*.
At the beginning it carries the implicit of a vengeance legend, and
though something is forgotten in the antecedence by Gautier and
something else by Manessier, as if they had not read fully their
precursors, that is explicated in fine which was implied at first. The
*Longer Prose Perceval* has a root-difficulty, because there is no
attempt to explain either why the question was necessary, when all was
well with the king, or why--whether necessary or not--the failure of
Perceval should have caused the Keeper of the Holy Graal to fall into
such languishment that ultimately he died unhealed. For these are the
distinctions, among many, between the *High History* and all other
Perceval Quests--that it begins at the middle point of the story and
that the Keeper perishes. Among the correspondences in the reverse order
of these differences is the Quest of Gawain, according to *Diu Crône* by
Heinrich, where the king indeed dies coincidently with his release, but
this is his desired liberation from the condition of death in life.
Speaking generally, the death of the wounded keeper is designed
[throughout](errata.htm#1) to make room for his successor. In the *Didot
Perceval* he is released according to his yearning, and that almost at
once; in the *Conte del Graal* Perceval, far from the Castle, awaits the
keeper's demise, which occurs in the natural course. In the *Parsifal*
of Wolfram there is a kind of abdication by Amfortas in favour of the
Questing Knight, but the two abide together, and, as in the *Didot
Perceval*, there is, in fact, a trinity of keepers. In the *Quest of
Galahad*, that glorious and saintly knight can be called a keeper
scarcely; if I may be pardoned the expression, he and his companions act
as the transport agents of the Sacred Vessel, so far as the term is
concerned, though we may still regard Galahad as the keeper in heaven.
We are not concerned with the healing of King Pellehan, because he is
not the keeper of the Graal, as the text stands, though we feel that
some editor has blundered. I will

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

leave him therefore with the last word which he might have addressed to
Galahad: *Domine, non sum dignus ut intres sub tectum meum, sed tantum
dic verbo et sanabitur corpus meum*. I will leave also at this point the
mystery of the healing of the king. For us and for our salvation, the
quests of the Graal are the exteriorised zeal of the hearts which desire
the bread of heaven and a visible sign that it is more than the daily
bread. Such a romance of sanctity they appear in the story of Galahad,
whose kingdom is not of this world; he is crowned indeed at Sarras, but
it is contrary to the will of him who sought only to be dissolved and to
be with Christ. The first term of the other quests sometimes carried
with it a species of kingship, and, as to these, it was on the king's
healing that it was said of his successor: Long live the King!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XII. The Removal of the Hallows](hchg24)
