[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hchg62)  [Next](hchg64) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1589639057/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_462">p. 462</span> <span id="page_463">p. 463</span>

# BOOK VIII

## MYSTIC ASPECTS OF THE GRAAL LEGEND

<span id="page_464">p. 464</span> <span id="page_465">p. 465</span>

### THE ARGUMENT

I. THE INTRODUCTORY WORDS.--*The Quest of the Holy Graal considered as a
religious experiment--Counsels of Perfection in the Quest--Of poverty,
obedience and virginity--Of partial success in their
absence--Peculiarities in the election of Galahad--The state of
sanctity--The descent of Grace--Perpetuity of conditions for the
experiment--Further as regards virginity in respect of the Quest--The
mystical idea of union--The term of the Quest--Separation of
transubstantiation marvels from the final vision of the Graal--The
experience of Nasciens--Collateral experience of the Mystics--After what
manner grace manifested through the Eucharist--Of a gate of knowledge in
the Eucharist--Declaration of the Graal in its mystic aspects.* II. THE
POSITION OF THE LITERATURE DEFINED*.--A distinction concerning the
literature--Of allegory in the Great Quest--A particular form of
development in the Graal Legend--The Graal and the Official Church--The
case concerning that Church--The implicits of the literature as elements
of the mystic aspects--The Recession of the Graal--How this symbol was
perpetuated from the beginning--A light from the Quest of Guiot--Meaning
of the Stone in the Crown of Lucifer--The Graal and Eucharistic Wisdom.*
III. CONCERNING THE GREAT EXPERIMENT*.--The wonder of all sacredness as
the term of Quest--An analogy from Ruysbroeck--Term of the
Experiment--External places of the Quest--Of helpers therein* 

<span id="page_466">p. 466</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> --*of Secret
Orders--Communication of Divine Substance--The Channel of the
Eucharist--Of Integration in Secret Knowledge--The Office of the
Quests--Of Popular Devotions in the Church and of such Fatalities--Our
Inheritance from the Past--The open Secret of Tradition Of things that
stand in the way in respect of Christian Mysticism--Latin
Christianity--The true way of Experience--An eirenicon in doctrine.* IV.
THE MYSTERY OF INITIATION*.--Of the Graal in its correspondence with
instituted Mysteries--The mind of scholarship on this subject--Analogies
from the literary history of Kabalism and Alchemy--The sacramental
message of the Graal--Points of comparison between Graal literature and
other cycles of books--A distinction on the question of Initiation--The
Hidden Knowledge--An illustration from Masonry--Of a certain leaven
working in the texts of the Graal--Testimony to the existence of the
Great Experiment--The failure of the external world--A caution in
respect of interpretation--The indubitable subsurface sense of Graal
books.* V. THE MYSTERY OF FAITH*.--A first summary of the whole
subject--The Graal Mystery as a declared pageant of the Eucharist--Its
distinctions from the official Sacrament--A profound symbolism--Of
secret memorials--The Five Changes of the Graal--Of what remains over
from the findings of scholarship--The Church teaching on the
Eucharist--Limitations of Graal books--And of books of the Mystics.* VI.
THE LOST BOOK OF THE GRAAL*.--Suggestion concerning a concealed Liturgy
or Mass-Book--Superfluity of this hypothesis in respect of the present
interpretation--General testimony of the literature to a primordial
text--The schedule thereof--Whether the evidences are applicable to one
book--The results obtained therefrom--Conclusion that the literature
could not have arisen from a single prototype--Of admitted* 

<span id="page_467">p. 467</span>

*and indisputable prototypes--The alleged Latin source--Southey's
opinion--Statement of the Comte de Tressan--Middle ground occupied by
Paulin Paris--A lesson from the literature of Alchemy--Of all which
remains after abandoning the hypothesis of a single prototype in the
ordinary sense--Further concerning the implicits and strange rumours
present in Graal literature--Proof that these were not inventions of
romance--Hypothesis of a* Sanctum Graal *which contained these
elements--The negative view of its content--The positive view--The book
not seen by those who wrote the romances--The presumable custodians
thereof--The rumours thereof--How their prevalence does not involve the
existence of any book.* VII. THE DECLARED MYSTERY OF QUEST*.--Exotics of
the whole subject--Of faith and experience--Errors of the Mystic
Quest--The Open Door--The Gates and their Wardens--A condition of
progress in the Quest--The declared and the hidden knowledge--Suddenness
of the Graal Wonders--*Obiter Dicta*--The expression of the whole Quest
after a new manner*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I. The Introductory Words](hchg64)
