[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Evil](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hod03)  [Next](hod05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001VKXOHY/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*History of the Devil*, by Paul Carus, \[1900\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

# DEVIL WORSHIP.

FROM A SURVEYAL of the accounts gleaned from Waitz, Lubbock, and Tylor,
on the Primitive state of religion, the conviction impresses itself upon
the student of demonology that Devil-worship naturally precedes the
worship of a benign and morally good Deity. There are at least many
instances in which we can observe a transition from the lower stage of
Devil-worship to the higher stage of God-worship, and there seems to be
no exception to the rule that fear is always the first incentive to
religious worship. This is the reason why the dark figure of the Devil,
that is to say, of a powerful evil deity, looms up as the most important
personage in the remotest past of almost every faith. Demonolatry, or
Devil-worship, is the first stage in the evolution of religion, for we
fear the bad, not the good.

Mr. Herbert Spencer bases religion on the Unknown, declaring that the
savage worships those powers which he does not understand. In order to
give to religion a foundation which even the scientist does not dare to
touch, he asserts the existence of an absolute Unknowable, and
recommends it as the basis of the religion of the future. But

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

facts do not agree with Mr. Spencer's proposition. A German proverb
says:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Was ich nicht weiss  
Macht mich nicht heiss."</span>

</div>

Or, as is sometimes said in English:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"What the eyes don't see  
The heart doesn't grieve for."</span>

</div>

What is absolutely unknowable does not concern us, and the savage does
not worship the thunder because he does not know what it is, but because
he knows enough about the lightning that may strike his hut to be in awe
of it. He worships the thunder because he dreads it; he is afraid of it
on account of its known and obvious dangers which he is unable to
control.

Let us hear the men who have carefully collected and sifted the facts.
Waitz, in speaking in his *Anthropologie* (Vol. III., pp. 182, 330, 335,
345) of the Indians, who were not as yet semi-Christianised, states that
the Florida tribes are said to have solemnly worshipped the Bad Spirit,
Toia, who plagued them with visions, and to have had small regard for
the Good Spirit, who troubled himself little about mankind. And Martins
makes this characteristic remark of the rude tribes of Brazil:

<span class="small">"All Indians have a lively conviction of the power
of an evil principle over them; in many there dawns also a glimpse of
the good; but they revere the one less than they fear the other. It
might be thought that they hold the Good Being weaker in relation to the
fate of man than the Evil." <span id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1)</span>

Capt. John Smith, the hero of the colonisation of Virginia, in 1607,
describes the worship of Okee (a word

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

which apparently means that which is above our control) as
follows: <span id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2)

"There is yet in Virginia no place discouered to bee so Savage in which
the savages haue not a religion, Deare, and Bow and Arrowes. All thinges
that were able to do them hurt beyond their prevention they adore with
their kinde of divine worship; as the fire, water, lightning, thunder,
our ordinance peeces, horses, &c. But their chiefe God they worship is
the Diuell. Him they call Oke, <span id="fr_3"></span>[2](#fn_3) and
serue him more of feare than loue. They say they haue conference with
him and fashion themselues as neare to his shape as they can imagine. In
their Temples they haue his image euill favouredly carued and then
painted and adorned with chaines, copper, and beades, and couered with a
skin in such manner as the deformity may well suit with such a God."
(Original ed., p. 29.)

"In some part of the Country, they haue yearely a sacrifice of children.
Such a one was at *Quiyoughcohanock*, some 10 miles from *Iames* Towne,
and thus performed.

"Fifteene of the properest young boyes, betweene 10 and 15 yeares of
age, they painted white. Hauing brought them forth, the people spent the
forenoone in dancing and singing about them with rattles.

"In the afternoone, they put those children to the roote of a tree. By
them, all the men stood in a guard, every one hauing a Bastinado in his
hand, made of reeds bound together. This \[these\] made a lane betweene
them all along, through which there were appointed 5 young men to fetch
these children. So every one of the fiue went through the guard, to
fetch a child, each after other by turnes: the guard fearelessly beating
them with their Bastinadoes, and they patiently enduring and receauing
all; defending the children with their naked bodies from the vnmercifull
blowes they pay them soundly, though the children escape. All this
while,

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

the women weepe and crie out very passionately; prouiding mats, skinnes,
mosse, and drie wood, as things fitting their childrens funerals.

"After the children were thus passed the guard, the guard tore down the
tree, branches and boughs, with such violence, that they rent the body
and made wreathes for their heads, or bedecked their haire with the
leaues. What else was done with the children was not seene; but they
were all cast on a heape in a valley, as dead: where they made a great
feast for al the company.

"The *Werowance* \[chief\] being demanded the meaning of this sacrifice,
answered that the children were not all dead, but \[only\] that the
*Oke* or *Divell* did sucke the blood from their left breast \[of
those\], who chanced to be his by lot, till they were dead. But the rest
were kept in the wildernesse by the yong men till nine moneths were
expired, during which time they must not conuerse with any: and of
these, were made their Priests and Coniurers.

"This sacrifice they held to bee so necessarie, that if they should omit
it, their *Oke* or Divel and all their other *Quiyoughcosughes* (which
are their other Gods) would let them haue no Deare, Turkies, Corne, nor
fish: and yet besides, hee would make great slaughter amongst them.

"To divert them from this blind idolatrie, many vsed their best
indeauours, chiefly with the *Werowances* of *Quiyoughcohanock*; whose
devotion, apprehension, and good disposition much exceeded any in those
Countries: who though we could not as yet preuaile withall to forsake
his false Gods, yet this he did beleeue, that our God as much exceeded
theirs, as our Gunnes did their Bowes and Arrows; and many times did
send to the President, at *Iames* towne, men with presents, intreating
them to pray to his God for raine, for his Gods would not send him any.

"And in this lamentable ignorance doe these poore soules sacrifice
themselues to the Diuell, not knowing their Creator." (Original ed., pp.
32, 33, 34.) <span id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_4)

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

Similar practices prevailed among almost all the Indian tribes who
inhabited the islands and the two continents of America a few centuries
ago. M. Bernhard Picart's illustration <span
id="fr_5"></span>[1](#fn_5), drawn according to the report of Peter
Martyr, <span id="fr_6"></span>[2](#fn_6) an eye-witness, proves that
the tribes of Hispaniola, now commonly called Haiti, paid homage to the
Supreme Being under the name of Jocanna, and their practices show that
they were devil-worshippers of the worst kind. Even the most civilised
Americans, the Mexicans, had not as yet outgrown this stage of religious
belief. It is true that the idea of a white God of Love and Peace was as
not quite foreign to them, but the fear of the horrible Huitzilopochtli
still prompted them to stain the altars of his temples with the blood of
human victims.

Human sacrifices are frequently mentioned in the Bible. Thus the King of
Moab, when pressed hard by. the children of Israel, "took his eldest son
that should have reigned in his stead and offered him for a
burnt-offering upon the wall" (2 Kings, iv. 27). He succeeded by this
terrible expedient in saving the city, for the biblical report
continues: "And there was great indignation against Israel; and they
\[the Israelites\] departed from him and returned to their own land."

The prophets were constantly preaching against the pagan practice of
those Israelites who, in imitation of the religion of their neighbors,
sought to "sacrifice their sons and daughters to devils," or let them
"pass through the fire of Moloch to devour them"; but so near to the
religious

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

<span id="img_01100"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![DEMONOLATROUS
CEREMONIES OF THE OLD INHABITANTS OF HAITI. (After
Picart.)](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/01100.jpg)  
DEMONOLATROUS CEREMONIES OF THE OLD INHABITANTS OF HAITI. (After
Picart.)  
</span>

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

conception of the savage was even the purer faith of Israel that Jephtha
still believed that God required of him "to offer his daughter up as a
burnt offering." (Judges, xi. 29-40).

<span id="img_01200"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![HUMAN SACRIFICE
AMONG THE GREEKS.&lt;br&gt; \[Polyxena dies by the hand of Neoptolemus
on the tomb of Achilles.--&lt;i&gt;After an ancient cameo in
Berlin&lt;/i&gt;.\]](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/01200.jpg)  
HUMAN SACRIFICE AMONG THE GREEKS.  
\[Polyxena dies by the hand of Neoptolemus on the tomb of
Achilles.--*After an ancient cameo in Berlin*.\]  
</span>

The most civilised nations on earth still preserve in their ancient
legends traces of having at an early period of their religious
development immolated human beings in propitiation of angry deities.
When the glory of Athens was at its climax, Euripides dramatically
represented the tragic fate of Polyxena who was sacrificed on the tomb
of Achilles in order to pacify the dead hero's spirit and thereby ensure
the safe return of the Greek army.

Progress in civilisation led to a modification but not to a direct
abolition of human sacrifices. We find among more advanced savages, and
even at the dawn of a higher civilisation, a practice whereby the
victim, be it a child, a virgin, or a youth is offered up without
slaughtering, and has a chance either to escape by good luck or to be
rescued by some daring deed. Traces of this conception are found in the
tales of Perseus and Andromeda, of Palnatoke the marksman, who, like
William Tell, shot an apple from his

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

child's head, of Susano, in Japanese folk-lore, who slew the
eight-headed serpent that annually devoured one of the daughters of a
poor peasant, and similar ancient legends. At the same time human
victims were supplanted by animals, as is indicated by various religious
legends. Thus a hind was substituted for Iphigenia and a ram for Isaac.

<span id="img_01300"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![A HIND SUBSTITUTED
FOR IPHIGENIA.&lt;br&gt; \[Agamemnon, her father, veils his head, while
Diomedes and Odysseus deliver the virgin over to Kalchas, the priest.
Artemis appears in the clouds and a nymph brings the
hind.--&lt;i&gt;After a Pompeian fresco&lt;/i&gt;.\]](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/01300.jpg)  
A HIND SUBSTITUTED FOR IPHIGENIA.  
\[Agamemnon, her father, veils his head, while Diomedes and Odysseus
deliver the virgin over to Kalchas, the priest. Artemis appears in the
clouds and a nymph brings the hind.--*After a Pompeian fresco*.\]  
</span>

Human sacrifices are one of the principal characteristic traits of
Devil-worship, but not the only one. There are in addition other
devilish practices which are based on the idea that the Deity takes
delight in witnessing tortures, and the height of abomination is reached
in cannibalism, which, as anthropology teaches us, is not due to
scarcity of food, but can always be traced back to some religious
superstition, especially to the notion that he who partakes of the heart
or brain of his adversary acquires the courage, strength, and other
virtues of the slain man.

The last remnants of the idea that the wrath of the Deity must be
appeased by blood, and that we acquire spiritual powers by eating the
flesh and drinking the blood of the victim still linger with us to-day
in the medieval

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

interpretations of certain church dogmas, and will only disappear before
the searching light of a fearless and consistent religious reformation.
We must remember, however, that certain superstitions, at early stages
of the religious development of mankind, are as unavoidable as the
various errors which science and philosophy pass through in their
natural evolution.

Religion always begins with fear, and the religion of savages may
directly be defined as "the fear of evil and the various efforts made to
escape evil." Though the fear of evil in the religions of civilised
nations plays no longer so prominent a part, we yet learn through
historical investigations that at an early stage of their development
almost all worship was paid to the powers of evil, who were regarded
with special awe and reverence.

Actual Devil-worship continues until the positive power of good is
recognised and man finds out by experience that the good, although its
progress may be ever so slow, is always victorious in the end. It is
natural that the power that makes for righteousness is by and by
recognised as the supreme ruler of all powers, and then the power of
evil ceases to be an object of awe; it is no longer worshipped and not
even propitiated, but struggled against, and the confidence prevails of
a final victory of justice, right, and truth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1"></span>[7:1](hod04.htm#fr_1) Quoted from Tylor,
*Primitive Culture*, II., p. 325.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[8:1](hod04.htm#fr_2) "A map of Virginia. With a
description of the covntrey, etc., written by Captaine Smith, etc.
Oxford. Printed by Joseph Barnes. 1612."

<span id="fn_3"></span>[8:2](hod04.htm#fr_3) In the little dictionary of
the language of the savages of Virginia which is printed in the same
pamphlet, Captain Smith translates "Oke" simply by "gods."

<span id="fn_4"></span>[9:1](hod04.htm#fr_4) See *The Works of Capt.
John Smith* of Willoughby etc. Edited by Edward Arber. Birmingham, 1884,
pp. 74 ff.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[10:1](hod04.htm#fr_5) *The Religious Ceremonies
and Customs of the Several Nations of the Known World*. III., p. 129.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[10:2](hod04.htm#fr_6) See his work, *De rebus
oceanicis et novo orbe*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ancient Egypt](hod05)
