[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Evil](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hod10)  [Next](hod12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001VKXOHY/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*History of the Devil*, by Paul Carus, \[1900\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

# THE DAWN OF A NEW ERA.

*Gnostic Societies and Congregations*.

THE TRANSITION from the Old to the New Testament is an age of unrest.
The Jews had become familiar with the civilisation of Assyria and
Babylonia, and enjoyed friendly relations with the Persians. But the
intercourse and general exchange of thought among the nations of Western
Asia became more extended and grew livelier since Alexander the Great's
time, for now Greek as well as Indian views mixed and produced a
powerful fermentation in the religious beliefs of the people. We may
fairly assume that the doctrines of the Hindu reached Syria in vague and
frequently self-contradictory forms, but they were new and attractive,
and apt to revolutionise the traditional ethics of the people. Formerly
procreation of children was regarded as a duty and the acquisition of
wealth as a blessing, now it became known that there were also people
who sought salvation in absolute chastity and poverty. The highest
morality of the monks of India was no longer the strength of maintaining
oneself in the struggle for existence, but the surrender of all strife
and a radical renunciation of self.

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

There are especially three ideas which dominated the whole movement and
acted as a leaven in the dough: the idea of the spirituality of the
soul, the hope of the soul's escape from bodily existence, and the
method of obtaining this liberation by wisdom (σοφία) or enlightenment
(γνῶσις).

The realisation of the Gnostic ideal was called πληρῶμα or fulfilment,
which was either expected by the soul's attainment of salvation after
the fashion of the Buddhist Nirvana, or for the whole world through the
appearance of a savior--a messiah.

The spirit of the times showed itself in the foundation of various
religious societies, which originated somewhat after the fashion of the
modern theosophical movements. There were bands of students of the new
problems in almost all larger cities, who investigated the doctrines of
salvation and immortality, and in addition there were enthusiasts who
tried to apply the new principles in practical life. The former called
themselves μαϑηταί, learners or disciples, the latter holy ones (ἅγιοι),
or healers (θεραπευταί, therapeutae). <span
id="fr_57"></span>[1](#fn_57)

With regard to the problem of evil, the most peculiar sect were the
Gnostics of Syria whom the Church fathers called serpent-worshippers or
Ophites, because on becoming acquainted with the Biblical books they
regarded Yahveh, the demiurge or author of this visible and material
world, as an evil deity while the serpent

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

with his promise of giving knowledge or gnosis to man, appeared to them
as a messenger of the true and good God. This God of goodness, they
declared, was unlike Yahveh free of passions and full of love and mercy.
He was, as Irenæus informs us, triune, being at once the Father, the
Son, and the Spirit. The Father is the prototype of man, an idea which
is carried out in the Cabala as the Adam Kadmon; the Son is the eternal
reason or comprehension (Ἒννοια), and the Spirit is the female principle
of spiritual generation.

<span id="img_13900"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![THE CHRISTIAN
TRINITY, GOD FATHER, SON, AND HOLY GHOST. (Old German School. Reproduced
from Muther.)](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/13900.jpg)  
THE CHRISTIAN TRINITY, GOD FATHER, SON, AND HOLY GHOST. (Old German
School. Reproduced from Muther.)  
</span>

Similar ideas concerning the triune Godhead and the salvation from evil
are reported of other sects and especially of Simon Magus who is
mentioned in the Acts as having been baptised by St. Peter and condemned
for his opinion that the Holy Ghost could be bought with money.

We know of sects in Judæa the Nazarenes, the Sabians <span
id="fr_58"></span>[1](#fn_58) or Baptisers, the Essenes, and the
Ebionites, which were born of the same seeking spirit of the age. But we
must bear in mind that the members of these societies

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

belonged exclusively to the poorer class of society and formed a third
party which was quite distinct from the orthodox Pharisees and the
liberal Sadducees. <span id="fr_59"></span>[1](#fn_59) They are to us of
importance, however, because from their midst proceeded the man who was
destined to become the standard bearer of a new faith and the
representative incarnation of the new religion--Jesus of Nazareth.

*The Apocrypha of the Old Testament*.

The literature of this period was no longer received into the canon of
the Old Testament and is therefore in spite of many good qualities even
to the present day regarded as apocryphal.

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

The new world-conception which emphasised the contrast between body and
soul developed a new moral ideal; and the conception of evil underwent
the same subtle changes as the conception of goodness. Since the lower
classes began to make their influence felt, it is natural that in the
Apocryphal Books of the Old Testament

<span id="img_14100"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![ASMODI, AN EVIL
SPIRIT, CAST OUT BY PRAYER.&lt;br&gt; (After Schnorr von
Carolsfeld.)](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/14100.jpg)  
ASMODI, AN EVIL SPIRIT, CAST OUT BY PRAYER.  
(After Schnorr von Carolsfeld.)  
</span>

the conception of Satan grew more mythological and at the same time more
dualistic. He developed into an independent demon of evil, and now,
perhaps under the influence of Persian views, the adversary of man
became the adversary of God himself.

In the story of Tobit (150 B. C.) an evil spirit called Asmodi plays an
important part. His name which in its

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

original form is *Aeshma Daeva*, indicates a Persian origin. He tries to
prevent Sarah's marriage, because he is in love with her himself. In the
Talmud, Asmodi develops into the demon of lust.

Very valuable books among the Apocrypha are the book of Daniel and the
two books of Esdras; but the noblest thoughts are mixed with Judaistic
chauvinism and bitter hatred of the Gentile nations.

Esdras anticipates the general eschatology as well as many smaller
details of the Christian doctrines in a more definite shape than any
other author of the period. He even proclaims (2 Esdras, vii. 28) the
name of the Saviour whom the Lord calls "my son Jesus." <span
id="fr_60"></span>[1](#fn_60)

Esdras mentions two abysmal beings, Enoch and Leviathan, but they do not
take any part in the production of evil. He might as well have omitted
to mention them. In the name of God, an angel explains to him the origin
of evil as follows in a simile which reminds us of both the Buddhist
parable of the city of Nirvana and Christ's Sermon on the Mount:

"A city is builded, and set upon a broad field, and is full of all good
things: The entrance thereof is narrow, and is set in a dangerous place
to fall, like as if there were a fire on the right hand, and on the left
a deep water: And one only path between them both, even between the fire
and the water, so small that there could but one man go there at once.
If this city now were given unto man for an inheritance, if he never
shall pass the danger set before it, how shall he receive this
inheritance?'

"And I said, 'It is so, Lord.'

"Then said he unto me, Even so also is Israel's portion.

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> <span
class="small">Because for their sakes I made the world: and when Adam
transgressed my statutes, then was decreed that now is done. Then were
the entrances of this world made narrow, full of sorrow and travail;
they are but few and evil, full of peril and very painful. For the
entrances of the elder world were wide and sure, and brought immortal
fruit. If then they that live labor not to enter these strait and
painful things, they can never receive those that are laid up for
them.'" (2 Esdras, vii, 6-14.)</span>

A peculiarly interesting apocryphal work is ascribed to the patriarch
Enoch.

The book of Enoch undertakes to explain in allegorical form God's plan
of the world's history. The book is not yet Christian but shows many
traces of doctrines professed by the sects which appeared at the
beginning of the Christian era as competitors of Christianity.

While Enoch's demonology smacks of the religious myths of the Gentiles,
his ideas of salvation from evil betray Gnostic tendencies.

We read, for example, in Chapter 42:

<span class="small">"Wisdom came to live among men and found no
dwelling-place. Then she returned home and took her seat among the
angels."</span>

We read of the Messiah, commonly designated "the son of a woman,"
sometimes "the son of man," and once "the son of God," that he existed
from the beginning:

<span class="small">"Ere the sun and the signs \[in the zodiac\] were
made, ere the stars of the heavens were created, his name was pronounced
before the Lord of the spirits. Before the creation of the world he was
chosen and hidden before Him \[God\], and before Him he will be from
eternity to eternity."</span>

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

<span id="img_14400"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![HEAVEN AND
HELL.&lt;br&gt; (After H. F., an Unknown Old-German master.)&lt;br&gt;
Preserving the gnostic Trinity-ideal of God father, God mother, and God
son.](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/14400.jpg)  
HEAVEN AND HELL.  
(After H. F., an Unknown Old-German master.)  
Preserving the gnostic Trinity-ideal of God father, God mother, and God
son.  
</span>

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

<span class="small">"All the secrets of wisdom will flow from the
thoughts of his mouth, for the Lord of the spirits has given wisdom unto
him and has glorified him. In him liveth the spirit of wisdom, and the
spirit of Him who giveth comprehension, and the spirit of the doctrine
and of the power, and the spirit of all those who are justified and are
now sleeping. And He will judge all hidden things, and no one will speak
trifling words before Him, for He is chosen before the Lord of the
spirits. He is powerful in all secrets of justification, and injustice
has no place before Him."</span>

And God says of the sons of the earth:

<span class="small">"I and my son shall unite ourselves with them for
ever and aye in the paths of righteousness for all their lives."</span>

The spiritualistic views in the Book of Enoch, especially the
supernatural personality of the Messiah, are not peculiarly Christian,
but Essenic or Gnostic, standing even in contradiction to the idea that
the Messiah would become flesh and live among men as a real man.

It is a pity that we do not possess the original, but only an Ethiopian
version of the Book of Enoch, which has been translated into German by
Dr. A. Dillmann, for it is of great interest to the historian. It
breathes the spirit of a Judaistic Gnosticism, and it is probable that
the original Book of Enoch was written in the year 110 B. C. by a Jew of
the Pharisee party. <span id="fr_61"></span>[1](#fn_61)

*The Book of Wisdom and the Gnostic Trinity Idea*.

The Book of Wisdom, a product of Alexandrian Judaism, showing traces of
both Greek and Eastern influences, speaks of the Devil as having through
envy introduced death into the world. We read:

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

<span id="img_14600"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![THE HOLY TRINITY
IN THE VATICAN.&lt;br&gt; (After Pietro Berrettini. Reproduced from
&lt;i&gt;Il Vaticano&lt;/i&gt;, plate xx.)](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/14600.jpg)  
THE HOLY TRINITY IN THE VATICAN.  
(After Pietro Berrettini. Reproduced from *Il Vaticano*, plate xx.)  
</span>

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

<span class="small">"God created man to be immortal, and made him to be
an image of his own eternity; nevertheless, through envy of the Devil
came death into the world, and they that do hold of his side do find
it."</span>

The Wisdom literature shows many traces of Indian influence. The very
word wisdom, or *sophia*, seems to

<span id="img_14700"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![THE BUDDHIST
TRINITY, THE BUDDHA, THE DHARMA, THE SANGHA.&lt;br&gt; (Japanese wood
carving; Musée Guimet.)](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/14700.jpg)  
THE BUDDHIST TRINITY, THE BUDDHA, THE DHARMA, THE SANGHA.  
(Japanese wood carving; Musée Guimet.)  
</span>

be a translation of the term *bodhi*. At the same time, the trinity idea
begins to take root in the Jewish mind, the oldest form of it being
moulded after the pattern of the family, which consists of father,
mother, and child. The Wisdom books represent the relation of Sophia to
God as his spouse and the Messiah as their son. Many Gnostics used the
terms Sophia, Pneuma, and Logos as names for

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

the second person of the Deity, who represented the divine motherhood of
the God-man. But during the first period of the development of the
Christian Church, the ideal of a God-mother was abandoned, the Logos was
identified with God the Son, who now became the second person of the
Trinity; and the name Pneuma or spirit was alone retained for the third
person. The Gnostic Trinity-conception, however, left its trace in the
Christian apocrypha, for in "the Gospel according to the Hebrews" Christ
spoke of the Holy Ghost as his mother. <span
id="fr_62"></span>[1](#fn_62)

<span id="img_14800"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![THE TRINITY AND
MARY.&lt;br&gt; (By Ambrogio Fossano, called Borgognone. Formerly in the
S. Simpliciano at Milan, now at the Brera. After
Lübke.)](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/14800.jpg)  
THE TRINITY AND MARY.  
(By Ambrogio Fossano, called Borgognone. Formerly in the S. Simpliciano
at Milan, now at the Brera. After Lübke.)  
</span>

The Trinity idea is of a very ancient origin. We encounter it in the
religion of Babylon (see [p. 40](hod06.htm#page_40)), in Brahmanism (see
[p. 75](hod09.htm#page_75)), and in Buddhism. The Buddhists take refuge
in the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Sangha, called the three jewels,
representing (1) Buddha the teacher, (2) the Buddhist religion or the
good law, and (3) the Buddhist brotherhood or Church. The Trinity
doctrine is not contained in the New Testament, all

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

the passages which seem to involve it being spurious; but it forms an
integral part of almost all Gnostic systems, where it either appears as
three abstract principles, or as the family relation of Father, Mother,
and Child, viewed as one.

<span id="img_14900"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![THE CHRISTIAN
TRINITY.&lt;br&gt; From the &lt;i&gt;Iconographie Chrétienne&lt;/i&gt;.
(Reproduced from Bastian's &lt;i&gt;Ethnol. Bilderbuch&lt;/i&gt;, plate
xvii.)](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/14900.jpg)  
THE CHRISTIAN TRINITY.  
From the *Iconographie Chrétienne*. (Reproduced from Bastian's *Ethnol.
Bilderbuch*, plate xvii.)  
</span>

The Trinity idea of God as a divine unity of Father, Mother, and
Christ-child was retained among the Oriental Christians to the days of
the rise of Mohammedanism. The Koran knows as yet nothing of the
spiritualised Trinity conception of the Western Church, but represents
the Christian Trinity as consisting of God, Christ, and Mary. And this
Gnostic Trinity-conception is a natural ideal which in the further
development of Christianity proved strong enough to influence the Roman
Catholic Church in her devotion to Mary, the mother of Christ, whose
personality was sometimes superadded to the Trinity, and sometimes even
suffered to replace the Holy Ghost.

The more abstract form of the Trinity, emphasising it as a triunity,
found its artistic expression in pictures

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

of God as possessed of three faces. The most striking among these
productions is an old oil painting which was discovered by a German
artist at Salerno and published for the first time in *Die Gartenlaube*
(1882, No. 47). The four eyes in their meditative attitude make a weird
impression on the spectator, the three elongated noses show a freedom
from sensuality, the brown hair and beard indicate strength, the broad
forehead wisdom.

<span id="img_15000"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![THE TRINITY OF
SALERNO.&lt;br&gt; Byzantine style of Lower Italy, probably of the XIII.
century. Sketched by the artist of the &lt;i&gt;Gartenlaube&lt;/i&gt; in
an inn at Salerno from the original painting which has been sold in the
mean time to an Englishman.](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/15000.jpg)  
THE TRINITY OF SALERNO.  
Byzantine style of Lower Italy, probably of the XIII. century. Sketched
by the artist of the *Gartenlaube* in an inn at Salerno from the
original painting which has been sold in the mean time to an
Englishman.  
</span>

*A Modern Gnostic*.

Jacob Böhme's philosophy is, in this connexion, of interest because it
represents a revival of the spirit of Gnosticism in its best and most
typical form. It may serve as a substitute to characterise by way of
example the modes of thought of the ancient Gnostic systems and their
comprehension of the problem of evil.

Jacob Böhme was a German mystic, born in 1575 at Alt-Seidenberg near
Görlitz in Silesia. Like David he was in his childhood a shepherd.
Having served from his fourteenth year as a shoemaker's apprentice and
being

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

<span id="img_15100"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![JACOB
BÖHME.](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/15100.jpg)  
JACOB BÖHME.  
</span>

affiliated with the shoemaker guild, he established himself as a master
shoemaker in Görlitz in 1599. Later on in his life he changed his trade
for that of a glover. His books circulated during his life-time in
manuscript-form only, but even this sufficed to make his name known
beyond the limits of his native town. He died on Sunday, November 17th,
1624, at his home in Görlitz, much admired by his friends and persecuted
by some narrow-minded enemies who showed their malice even after his
death by defacing the monument of the deceased philosopher. The best
evidence, however, of his genius and the recognition which his honest
aspirations found among his fellow citizens appears in the fact that the
son of the Rev. Gregorius Richter, the pastor primarius of Görlitz and
the bitterest antagonist of Jacob Böhme, edited a collection of extracts
from his writings, which were afterwards published complete at Amsterdam
in the year 1682.

The similarity of Jacob Böhme's speculations to Gnosticism is apparent,
but the coincidence is almost

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

spontaneous. His education was very limited, and he was only
superficially familiar with the theories of Paracelsus (Theophrastus
Bombast von Hohenheim, 1493-1541), Kaspar Schwenkfeld (1490-1561), and
Valentin Weigel (1533-1588). His own system is original with him. It is
mainly due to a reflection on the Bible, which he read with a deeply
religious spirit but preserving at the same time great independence of
thought.

<span id="img_15200"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![VIGNETTE OF JACOB
BÖHME'S BOOK ON THE THREEFOLD LIFE OF MAN,&lt;br&gt; Illustrating the
three principles which pervade life, consisting of the principles of
Good and Evil as unfolded in Time.](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/15200.jpg)  
VIGNETTE OF JACOB BÖHME'S BOOK ON THE THREEFOLD LIFE OF MAN,  
Illustrating the three principles which pervade life, consisting of the
principles of Good and Evil as unfolded in Time.  
</span>

Jacob Böhme conceives God as the unfathomable ground of existence, as
the *Ungrund*. His biographer in the Encyclopædia Britannica, says of
his philosophy:

"Nature rises out of Him, we sink into Him.... The same view when
offered in the colder logic of Spinoza, is sometimes set aside as
atheistical.

"Translating Böhme's thought out of the uncouth dialect of material
symbols (as to which one doubts sometimes whether he means them as
concrete instances, or as pictorial illustrations, or as a more *memoria
technica*) we find that Böhme conceives of the correlation of two triads
of forces. Each triad consists of a thesis, an antithesis, and a
synthesis, and the two are connected by an important link. In the hidden
life of the Godhead, which is at once *Nichts* and *Alles*, exists the
original triad, viz., Attraction, Diffusion, and their resultant, the
Agony of the unmanifested Godhead. The transition is made; by an act of
will the divine Spirit comes to Light; and immediately the manifested
life appears in the triad of Love, Expression,

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

<span class="small">and their resultant Visible Variety. As the action
of contraries and their resultant are explained the relations of soul,
body, and spirit, of good, evil, and free will; of the spheres of the
angels, of Lucifer, and of this world.</span>

"It is a more difficult problem to account on this philosophy for the
introduction of evil. . . . Evil is a direct outcome of the primary
principle of divine manifestation-it is the wrath side of God."

<span id="img_15300"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![THE THREE
PRINCIPLES&lt;br&gt; Frontispiece of Jacob Böhme's book on the subject
and illustrating his religious philosophy.](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/15300.jpg)  
THE THREE PRINCIPLES  
Frontispiece of Jacob Böhme's book on the subject and illustrating his
religious philosophy.  
</span>

 <span id="fr_63"></span>[1](#fn_63)

The problem of the idea of evil is very prominent in Jacob Böhme's
philosophy, and has found a monistic solution. Without identifying good
and evil, he arrives at the conclusion that the existence of evil is
intrinsically necessary and unavoidable; it is ultimately rooted in the
nature of God himself. The yearning for self-realisation constitutes a
suffering in God himself, and in the act of revealing himself his will
manifests both the bright and the dark aspect of life.

Jacob Böhme anticipates Schopenhauer. He says, in his book on "The
Threefold Life of Man," p. 56: <span id="fr_64"></span>[1](#fn_63)

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

"For all things stand in the will, and in the will they are conducted.
If I do not conceive a will to walk, my body remaineth at a stand-still.
Therefore my will beareth me, and if I have no desire for \[moving to\]
some place, there is no will in me. But if I desire something else, it
is of the essence the will.

"The eternal word is the eternal will."--*Ibid*., p. 17.

Materiality and sensuality are identified with sin, and sin begins not
with the actual fall but with lusting, sleep being a symptom of this
condition.

<span class="small">"Before his sleep Adam was in the form of an angel,
but after his sleep he had flesh and blood, and there was a clod of the
ground in his flesh."--*Die drey Principien*, p. 221.</span>

With all his gnostic tendencies Jacob Böhme is not a dualist but a
monist. The duality of life viewed under the aspect of a higher unity
constitutes a trinity whose three principles are represented in the
frontispiece of Jacob Böhme's book on the subject <span
id="fr_65"></span>[1](#fn_64) as two overlapping spheres which by
meeting produce a third domain. There is an eternal goodness, and there
is an eternal badness, and there is an eternal mixture of both. The
eternal goodness contains the divine spirit and all the angels. But the
sphere of badness is no less eternal. It is in its ultimate constitution
the materiality of the world. The original Adam (a kind of Platonic
prototype of man) was spiritual: his fall begins with his falling to
sleep (p. 124), the result of carnal desire which changes his nature and
leads to the creation of the woman to tempt him.

But Jacob Böhme is not a dualist, for he conceives of the three spheres
as being one. He says in his book on The Threefold Life of Man, p. 16:

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

<span class="small">"We remind the God-loving and seeking reader to
recognise this of God. He should not concentrate his mind and senses to
seek the pure Godhead in loneliness, high above the stars, as living
solely in the heavens.... No, the pure Godhead is everywhere, entirely
present in all places and ends. There is everywhere the birth of the
Holy Trinity in one Being, and the angelic world reaches unto all the
ends wherever thou mayest think; even into the middle of the earth,
stones, and rocks; consequently also into Hell; briefly, the empire of
the wrath of God is also everywhere."</span>

Jacob Böhme does not believe in the letter but in the spirit of the
Bible; and although he is counted a mystic, the illumination which he
seeks is as sober as you can expect of a man of his culture. He freely
utilises the Scriptures, but urges good Christians to seek the key to
the problems of existence deeper. He says: "No one can come to God
except through the Holy Ghost," and by the "Holy Ghost" he understands
this spiritual illumination of heart and mind. He says (*ibid*., 15-16):

<span class="small">"Search for the ground of nature. Thus you will
comprehend all things. And do not madly go for the mere letter of the
histories, nor make any blind laws according to your own imaginings
wherewith you persecute one another. In this you are blinder than the
heathen. Search for the heart and spirit of the Scriptures that the
spirit may be born in you, and that the center of the Divine Love may be
unlocked in you. Thus you may recognise God and speak of him rightly.
For out of the histories merely, no one shall call himself a master,
cogniser, and knower of the Divine essence, but out of the Holy Ghost
which appeareth in another principium in the center of man's life, and
only to him who searches rightly and seriously."</span>

Jacob Böhme condenses his philosophy in his explanation of the
frontispiece of his *Threefold Life*, where he says:

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

"Every work indicates by its form, essence, and character, the wisdom
and virtue of its maker. Now if we contemplate the grandly marvellous
edifice of the visible heaven and earth, consider their motions, inquire
into their efficiencies and forces, and judge of the differences of the
bodies of the creature, how they are hard and soft, gross and subtile,
dark and radiant, opaque and pellucid, heavy and light: we shall at once
discover the twofold mother of the revelation of God, viz., darkness and
light which have breathed themselves out of all their forces and sealed
miracles and form themselves together with the firmament, the stars, the
elements, and all the visible conceivable creatures, where life and
death, goodness and evil are at once in each thing. That is the third of
the two hidden lives and it is called time contending with vanity. . . .

"Thus this world standeth in the mixed life of time between light and
darkness as a genuine mirror of the two, in which the marvels of
eternity are revealed in the form of time through the Word, as John
announces. All things were made by it, and without it was not anything
made that was made."

The Gnostic movement and especially its Jewish phase, manifesting itself
in sectarian life and in the post-canonical literature, is of greater
importance than is generally admitted, for it prepared the way for
Christianity. Many Christian dogmas, such as the bodily resurrection of
the dead, the Messiah as the soul of man, the approach of the day of
judgment, are in the Old Testament Apocrypha, as it were, tentatively
pronounced. A comprehensive formulation of the new religious ideals
begins to be needed; and the people find at last in Jesus of Nazareth a
leader whose powerful personality affords a centre around which the
fermenting innovations can crystallise into an organised institution,
the Christian Church, destined to become a new and most influential
factor in the history of the world.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_57"></span>[138:1](hod11.htm#fr_57) Philo explains the name
"therapeutae" also as "worshippers." The genuineness of Philo's book *De
vita contemplativa* and with it the very existence of the therapeutae
has been doubted by p. E. Lucius, whose views, however, are thoroughly
refuted by Fred. C. Conybeare, *Philo About the Contemplative Life*
(Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1895)

<span id="fn_58"></span>[139:1](hod11.htm#fr_58) St. John the Baptist
was a Sabian. The name is derived from ‏צָבָע‎ (*tsabha*). to baptise.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[140:1](hod11.htm#fr_59) The word Essenes, or
Essees (in Greek Ἐσσηνοί and Ἐσσαῖοι, in Latin Esseni), is derived by
Ewald from ‏חַצָּו‎ preserver, guardian, a rabbinical term, because they
called themselves "watchers, guardians, servants of God." Others derive
the word from ‏אָסָא‎ (to heal). Both derivations would remind one of
the Therapeutae. The root ‏הָסָה‎ (to fly, to take refuge) seems to be
quite probable, philologically considered, especially as the word is
used in the sense in which the Buddhist takes refuge in the Dharma,
illustrated in such phrases as ‏חַסָה בַּ יהוה‎ (to take refuge in God),
Psalms ii. 12; v. 15; vii. 2; xxv. 20; xxxi. 2; xxxvii 40, etc. A fourth
derivation is from ‏חָסָר‎ (to be pious, to be enthusiastic, to be
zealous in love). Philo says they are called "Essenes" on account of
their holiness (παρὰ τὴν ὁσιότητα) and uses the term ὅσιοι, i. e., "the
saints," or "the holy ones," as a synonym for Essenes. This hint,
however, is of little avail, as it would suit almost any one of the
various derivations.

The word Ebionites ‏אֶבְינִים‎ means the poor.

The early Christians seem to have been most closely allied with the
Nazarenes, for as early as in the year 54 of our era (see Harnack's
Chronologie, p. 237) St. Paul was accused by the Jewish authorities of
being a ringleader of the sect of the Nazarenes. (Acts, xxiv. 5.)

The name Ναζωραϊοι (sometimes Ναζαρηνοί) has nothing to do with the name
of the town of Nazareth (Ναζαρέϑ), which was presumably written with a
‏צ‎ (Tsaddi) or sharp *ts* sound. The name Nazareth is nowhere mentioned
in its original Aramaic form, and occurs only in the New Testament
whence it made its way into the patristic literature of later
Christianity. Neither must the name Nazarene be confounded with Nazarite
‏נָזִיר‎ an abstainer, who as a visible sign of his vow let his hair
grow, but both words may have been derived from the same root ‏נָזַרי‎,
the former in the sense of "Separatist." The Niphel of the verb means
"to separate oneself from others; to abstain. to vow, to devote oneself
to."

<span id="fn_60"></span>[142:1](hod11.htm#fr_60) The passage is of
course subject to the suspicion of being a later interpolation.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[145:1](hod11.htm#fr_61) See Dillmann, Das Buch
Henoch, p. xliv.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[148:1](hod11.htm#fr_62) *Hieron. adv. Pelag.*
III., 2.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[153:1](hod11.htm#fr_64) *Hohe und teife Gründe
von dem Dreyfachen Leben des Menschen nach dem Geheimnüss der drey
Principien göttlicher Offenbahrung. Geschrieben nach göttlicher
Erleuchtung*, Amsterdam, 1682.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[154:1](hod11.htm#fr_65) *Beschreibung der drey
Principien göttlichen Wesens*. Amsterdam, 1682.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Early Christianity](hod12)
