[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Yoga](../yoga/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](gsoy03.md) 
[Next](gsoy05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1425482597/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Great Systems of Yoga*, by Ernest Wood, \[1954\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span> <span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span> <span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

### CHAPTER TWO

#### PATANJALI'S RAJA YOGA

FOREMOST among the Yoga teachings of India comes that of Patanjali
dating back, according to popular tradition, to at least 300 B.C. His
*Yoga Sūtras* give definitions and instructions which are accepted by
all teachers, even when they also make additions in minor matters. He
begins with a description of yoga as "*Chitta vritti nirodha*." <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md) *Chitta* is the mind, the instrument that
stands between the man and the world. As a gardener uses a spade for
digging, so a man uses the mind for dealing with the world. Acted upon
by the things of the outer world through the senses, it presents to the
man within a picture of those things, as on the plate of a camera. Acted
upon by the will of the man within, it transmits into action in the body
the thought-power that

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

is its positive characteristic. It thus has two functions—one receptive
or negative, the other active or positive. It transmits from the world
to the man within, and also from the man within to the outer world.

*Vritti* means literally a whirlpool, and *nirodha* signifies restraint
or control. Thus yoga practice is control of the whirlpools or changes
of the mind or, in simple terms, voluntary direction of what is commonly
called thought, or control of the ideas which are in the mind.

The mind of the average man is far from being an instrument within his
control. It is being impressed at all times, even during sleep to some
extent, with the pictures of a thousand objects clamoring for his
attention, through ears, skin, eyes, nose and mouth, and by telepathic
impressions from others. In addition to all that, it is in a state of
agitation on its own account, bubbling in a hundred places with
disturbing visions, excited by uncontrolled emotion or worrying
thoughts. Let him achieve control of all this, says Patanjali, and his
reward will be that he shall stand in his own state. <span
id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1.md)

That a man should be in his own true state has two meanings: first, that
in his repose he will be utterly himself, not troubled with the
whirlpools, which, however slight, are in the eyes of the yogi nothing

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

but worry, and secondly, that in his activity as a man, using the mind,
he will be a positive thinker, not merely a receptacle for impressions
from outside and ideas which he has collected in the course of time.

Ideas in the mind should be material for thought, not merely ideas, just
as the muscles are useful means of action, not mere lumps of flesh. To
be a positive thinker, lover and willer, master in one's own house, is
to be oneself, in one's own true state; all the rest is slavery or
bondage, willing or unwilling. To its master, the man, the *vrittis* of
*chitta* are always only objects of knowledge, because of his not being
involved in them, say Aphorisms iv 18-20. <span
id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2.md) These *vrittis* are ideas or items in the
mind.

The final aim of Patanjali's yoga is to cease this slavery and achieve
freedom. The technical name for this great achievement is *kaivalya*,
independence. <span id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3.md) That is really only
another name for divinity, for material things are in bondage, unable to
move of themselves, and always moved by forces from the outside; but the
divine is by definition free, able to move of itself. Every man feels in
himself some spark of that divine freedom, which he then calls the will,
and that is the power with which he can control his mind.

In Patanjali's yoga the aspirant uses his will in

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

self-control. Thought governs things, we know; so much so that every
voluntary movement of the body follows a mental picture; therefore all
work done by us, even with the hands, is done by thought-power. But will
controls thought, concentrates it, expands it, causes its flow—directs,
in fact, its three operations of concentration, meditation, and
contemplation. The perfection of these three is the aim of the Patanjali
yoga exercises.

Before proceeding with the systematic description of the practices of
yoga, which begins in his Book ii, Patanjali mentions two things which
are necessary for success in controlling the *vrittis* or thoughts,
namely *abhyāsa* and *vairāgya*. *Abhyāsa* means constant practice in
the effort to secure steadiness of mind. <span
id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4.md) *Vairāgya* is that condition of the feelings
in which they are not colored by outside things, but are directed only
by our own best judgment. <span id="fr_5"></span>[6](#fn_5.md) This
detachment of the emotions may be "lower" or "higher" according as it is
born from dislike of external conditions, or from a vision of the
glorious joy of the pure free life. <span id="fr_6"></span>[7](#fn_6.md)
The higher uncoloredness leads to the highest contemplation, and
therefore to freedom, the goal of this yoga.

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

Patanjali's systematic instruction for practical training is given in
two portions. The first part, called *Kriyā Yoga*, <span
id="fr_7"></span>[8](#fn_7.md) is often translated as preliminary yoga
because a person who has not first practiced it is not likely to succeed
in the main portion, the *ashtanga*, <span id="fr_8"></span>[9](#fn_8.md)
or "eight limbs" of yoga practice. But it is much more than preliminary.
It is the yoga of action, the yoga which must be practiced all the time
in daily life. Without it, meditation would be useless, for yoga
involves not retirement or retreat but a change in attitude towards the
world. It. is in the midst of life's activities that our freedom must be
realized, for to desire to slip away into some untroubled sphere would
be mere escape, a perpetuation of the dream of the best we have so far
learned to know, a denial of the possibility of our real freedom. A man
must become master of himself, whatever other people and beings, whose
activities constitute the major portion of his world, may do.

The object of the preliminary yoga or yoga of action is to weaken what
are called the five *kleshas*. A *klesha* is literally an affliction,
just as one would speak of a crooked spine or blindness as an
affliction. The five afflictions are *avidyā*, *asmitā*, *rāga*,
*dwesha* and *abhinivesha*, which may be translated ignorance,

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

egotism, liking and disliking, and possessiveness. One leading ancient
commentator on the Aphorisms, named Vyāsa, states that these, when
active, bring one under the authority of Nature, and produce
instability, a stream of causes and effects in the world, and dependence
upon others. They are faults of the man himself, not outside causes of
trouble; the world can never hurt us, except through our own faults, and
these five reduce us to pitiful slavery. Having submitted to these, a
man is constantly moved from outside, governed too much by
circumstances.

"Ignorance" describes all those activities of the mind which do not take
into account the fact that man is in himself eternal, pure and
painless. <span id="fr_9"></span>[10](#fn_9.md) The man who does not accept
his own true nature as eternal, pure and painless, will judge and value
all objects improperly. A house, a chair and a pen are something to a
man, by which he can satisfy his body and mind. They could not be the
same things to a cow. But the question now is: what are all these things
to the real man, who is eternal, pure and painless? To look at all
things as for the use of such a being is to begin to see them without
error. It is to have true motives.

"Egotism" is the tendency to think "I am this," <span
id="fr_10"></span>[11](#fn_10.md) and the desire that other people also
should think

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

one to be this or that. Thinking oneself to be a certain object or mind,
or the combination of these even in the form of an excellent and useful
personality, means attachment to things. We are not a personality, but
we possess one, and it is not to be despised if it is useful to the real
man.

The error of Self-personality or egotism leads to the next two
afflictions which are personal liking and disliking. These two are those
unreasoning impulses which lead men to judge and value things by their
influence on the comforts and pleasures and prides of the personality,
not according to their value for an immortal being. <span
id="fr_11"></span>[12](#fn_11.md)

The fifth affliction is "possessiveness," beginning with clinging to the
body, which indicates the lack of that insight which causes a man to
regard the body as a mere instrument which he is willing to use, and
wear out in the course of time. <span id="fr_12"></span>[13](#fn_12.md)

In this affliction we have not merely the fear of death, but that of old
age as well, for men forget that the bodily life has its
phases—childhood, youth, manhood and old age—and each of these has its
own perfections, though it has not the perfections of the other stages.
In this course there is constant apparent loss as well as gain, because
no man can pay full attention to all the lessons of life at once, or
exert at the same

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

time all his faculties, any more than a child in school can properly
think of geography, history and mathematics in the period which is
devoted to music.

In Hindu life, before it was disturbed from the West, men were wise
enough in old age to give the family business into the hands of their
mature sons, and devote themselves to the study and contemplation of
life; and just as in the West it is considered the bounden duty of
parents to support their children with every kindness and give them the
opportunities that their stage in life requires, so it was always
considered in the East the duty of the grown up children to support
their old people with every kindness, treat them with honor and dignity
as the source of their own opportunity and power, and give them every
opportunity that *their* stage of life requires. The material
requirements of these retired people were very small—a corner in the
home, some food and occasional clothes.

It is not presumed that in the preliminary stages the candidate will
completely destroy the five afflictions. His object will be attained if
he succeeds in definitely weakening them. Three kinds of practices are
prescribed for this purpose in the yoga of action. These are called
*tapas*, *swādhyāya* and *īshwara-pranidhāna*. <span
id="fr_13"></span>[14](#fn_13.md)

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

It is impossible to translate these terms by a single word each, without
causing serious misunderstanding. The first is often translated as
austerity, and sometimes even as mortification. The word means literally
"heat" and the nearest English equivalent to that when it is applied to
human conduct is "effort." The yogī must definitely do those things that
are good, even when a special effort is necessary because old habits of
the personality stand in the way. Briefly it means this: "Do for the
body what you know to be good for it. Do not let laziness, selfishness,
or thoughtlessness stand in the way of your doing what you can to make
the body and mind healthy and efficient."

Patanjali does not explain the practice of *tapas*, but Shri Krishna
says, in the seventeenth chapter of the *Bhagavad Gītā* "Reverential
action towards the gods, the educated, the teachers and the wise,
purity, straightforwardness, continence, and harmlessness are *tapas* of
the body; speech not causing excitement, truthful, affectionate and
beneficial, and used in self-study is the *tapas* of speech; clearness
of thinking, coolness, quietness, self-control, and purity of
subject-matter are the *tapas* of mind." <span
id="fr_14"></span>[15](#fn_14.md)

Shri Krishna here gives a wider range to the meaning of *tapas* than
does Patanjali, who makes it particularly a matter concerning the body.

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

How than can any one say that *tapas* is self-torture? It is true that
there has grown up a system of painful practices, such as that of
holding the arm still until it withers, or sitting in the sun in the
midst of a ring of fires, but these are superstitions which have grown
up round a valuable thing, as they are liable to do everywhere. Those
who follow these methods are few as compared with the true yogī. All
over the country there are Indian gentlemen—many of them Government
servants who have a routine task with short working hours—who every day
spend some time in meditation, deliberately guiding themselves by the
"Yoga Sūtras."

A great example of *tapas* is that of the modern women. Their will-power
in the government of their bodies and in overcoming bodily
self-indulgence excites the greatest admiration. And their results are
entirely in line with Patanjali's aphorism iii 45 in which he approves
of "excellence of body" and refers to it as consisting of correct form,
charm, strength and very firm well-knitness, all of which is the very
reverse of mortification or self-castigation, which some have
erroneously attributed to yoga, because of superstition.

These delightful beings are not even willing to leave Nature just as she
is, but consider in many ways how to bring lightness and freedom from
earthiness

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

or grossness or clumsiness into bodily living and bodily appearance.
Even the artificialities of high heels and very slender figures have the
same "spiritual" background, and where excess or unbalance occurs it can
at least be credited to good intentions, carried out with great
will-power or *tapas*. The proportion of *tapas* is on the increase all
the time as seen by the exercises and dietary courses which are
extensively advertised and the thoroughness and continuity with which
they are carried out.

Man himself, too, it must be said, shares a little in this sort of
effort, shaving or at least trimming his beard and whiskers, and padding
his shoulders to ridiculous excess, as he used to do his calves in the
old days when trousers were worn short and stockings were the vogue.

In all these matters there has been plenty of *effort*, in the main
tending away from uncouth and un-mastered living. I know some of both
sexes who assiduously perform what our yogīs call *uddiyāna*, the
exercises of the abdominal muscles, with the effect of correct posture
and adequate strength, thus attaining the "natural corset," as it has
been called, essential to health and good appearance. There is no doubt
that such exercises are necessary for those who do not do work involving
bending, and it is not a bad thing that this undertaking calls for
considerable will-power

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

which then becomes useful also for other purposes as well, and also
contributes to the enjoyment of consciousness.

The second practice, *swādhyāya*, means the study of books that really
concern yourself as an immortal being. Psychology, philosophy and ethics
come in here. Give up indiscriminate reading, and study what bears upon
your progress, is the advice.

The third practice, *īshwara-pranidhāna*, means devotion to God, but God
as understood by the Hindu, as the perfect Being pervading all things,
the life of the world, the inner impulse of which each one of us is a
*share*. The aspirant must habituate himself to see that Principle in
everything, to accept all as from that hand. "Everything that is
received is a gift," says a Hindu proverb; more than that, it is a gift
from God, presented with perfect wisdom, to be accepted, therefore, with
cheerfulness and joy. Behind the eyes of every person he meets, the
aspirant must also see the Divine. The common salutation of the Hindu,
with the palms together, looks curious to the Westerner, as resembling
prayer. It *is* prayer—the recognition of God within our fellow-man. It
is appreciation, the opposite of depreciation. *Ishwara-pranidhāna* is
in effect the full appreciation of everything. It makes for maximum
attentiveness and thus maximum living.

This practice develops right feeling towards everything;

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

the previous one right thought, and the first right use of the will, and
the three together, pursued diligently for even a short time, play havoc
with the five afflictions.

When the candidate has weakened the afflictions to some extent, he is
ready for Patanjali's regular course, the eight "limbs" of yoga. These
may be divided into three sets: two moral, three external, and three
internal, as shown in the following list:—

<div align="center">

|     |            |                   |                       |
|-----|------------|-------------------|-----------------------|
| 1\. | *Yama*,    | Five abstentions. | Ethical               |
| 2\. |            | *Niyama*.         | Five observances.     |
| 3\. | *Āsanā*.   | Balanced posture. | External              |
| 4\. |            | *Prānāyāma*.      | Regularity of breath. |
| 5\. |            | *Pratyāhāra*.     | Withdrawal of senses. |
| 6\. | *Dhāranā*. | Concentration.    | Internal              |
| 7\. |            | *Dhyāna*.         | Meditation.           |
| 8\. |            | *Samādhi*.        | Contemplation.        |

</div>

The two ethical or moral "limbs" of yoga contain five rules each, which
the man must practice in his daily life. Put together, they make what we
may call "the ten commandments." The first five are; "Thou shalt not (a)
injure, (b) lie, (c) steal, (d) be sensual and (e) be greedy." <span
id="fr_15"></span>[16](#fn_15.md)

Explaining this aphorism, Vyāsa says that *ahimsā* or non-injury is
placed first because it is the source of the following nine. Thus the
brotherhood principle

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

is considered as fundamental. Truth, for example, can hardly arise
unless there is a motive beyond selfish desires. Vyāsa explains that
this means word and thought being in accordance with facts to the best
of our knowledge. Only if speech is not deceptive, confused or empty of
knowledge, he says, is it truth, because speech is uttered for the
purpose of transferring one's knowledge to another.

Vāchaspati's glossary interprets truth as word and thought in accordance
with facts, and fact as what is really believed or understood by us on
account of our own direct experience, our best judgment or the accepted
testimony of reliable witnesses. So yoga is rooted in virtue, and that
in brotherhood, or a feeling for others. Without at least the desire for
these five, though perfection in them may not be attained, contemplation
cannot yield its richest fruits. We are to be at peace with the world,
even if the world is not at peace with us. In this case there is no
*desire* to injure, lie, steal etc. Such activities are not sources of
pleasure, in any circumstances.

The second five are: "Thou shalt be (a) clean, (b) content, (c)
self-controlled, (d) studious, and (e) devoted." <span
id="fr_16"></span>[17](#fn_16.md) Few comments are needed on these.
Contentment does not mean satisfaction, but willingness to accept things
as they are and to make the most of

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

them. Without dissatisfaction one would not take to yoga. It implies a
desire to improve one's life. The remaining three are *tapas*,
*swādhyāya* and *īshwara-pranidhāna*, the preliminary yoga or yoga of
daily life—apart from any private exercises—still carried on.

By the attainment of these five a man can be at peace with the world. It
is the end of antagonism *from his side*.

Incidentally, Patanjali mentions that when the ten virtues are firmly
established in a person's character definite effects will begin to
appear, such as absence of danger, effectiveness of speech, the arrival
of unsought wealth, vigor of body and mind, understanding of life's
events, clarity of thought, steadiness of attention, control of the
senses, great happiness, perfection of body and senses, intuition and
realization of one's true self. <span id="fr_17"></span>[18](#fn_17.md)
These can come only after the cessation of all antagonisms to anybody or
anything in the world.

Now we come to what some will regard as the more practical steps, though
to the understanding yogī nothing can be more practical than the ten
commandments. Of these the three external steps are *āsanā*, *prānāyāma*
and *pratyāhāra*. The first is right posture, the second right breathing
and the third control of

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

the senses. They mean the training of the outer instrument or body so
that it will offer no impediment to the serious practices of meditation
which are to be taken up.

First, one must learn to sit quite still in a chosen healthy position.
"The posture must be steady and pleasant," <span
id="fr_18"></span>[19](#fn_18.md) says Patanjali—that is all. There is no
recommendation of any particular posture, least of all any distorted,
painful, or unhealthy position. Posture is achieved when it becomes
effortless and the mind easily forgets the body. It is chiefly a matter
of balance. Some practice of balanced sitting, whether on the ground or
on a chair is necessary until balanced musculature is attained. Very
often there is fatigue because some of the muscles are weak, yet to sit
unbalanced for long is almost impossible.

Next, regulation of breath is necessary. <span
id="fr_19"></span>[20](#fn_19.md) During meditation, people often forget to
breathe normally; sometimes they breathe out and forget to breathe in
again, and so are suddenly recalled to earth by a choking at the throat.
Many people never breathe well and regularly at all; let them practice
simple natural exercises, such as those recommended by teachers of
singing, and take care that the body is breathing regularly and quietly
before they enter their meditation.

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

Sometimes numbers or proportionate times are prescribed, and one of the
most authoritative in India is that in which one breathes in with the
number 1, holds the breath with the number 4, breathes out with the
number 2, and immediately begins again; but it is impossible to
prescribe the perfect numbers, because they must differ with different
people. The question really is: how long must your breath be so as to
provide for enough oxidation? Science will some day say. But one must
not hold it in longer than that, for to do so is to deprive the whole
system of oxygen. Your body has to carry on all its ordinary
sub-conscious activities while meditation is going on.

The only general practical advice one can give is that the breathing
should be regular and a little slow, and there should be enough pause
between inbreathing and outbreathing. It should also be calm, as may be
judged by its not causing much disturbance in the outside air. The
student will soon find out what suits him. Stunts such as breathing up
one nostril and down the other, or holding the breath for a long time,
are not mentioned by Patanjali and should be generally avoided as
dangerous.

*Pratyāhāra* is the holding back of the senses from the objects of
sense. <span id="fr_20"></span>[21](#fn_20.md) One must practice paying no
attention to sounds or sights or skin sensations, quietening

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

the senses so that they will create no disturbance during meditation.

Think of what happens when you are reading an interesting book. Someone
may come into the room where you are, may walk past you to get
something, and go out again; but perhaps you heard and saw nothing at
all. You were in what is sometimes called a brown study. The ears were
open and the waves of sound in the air were no doubt agitating the
tympanum, from which the nerves were carrying their message to the
brain. The eyes were open, and the light waves were painting their
pictures on the retina—but you saw and heard nothing, because your
attention was turned away from those sensations.

The yogī must try to withdraw attention at will, so that in his
meditation no sight or sound will distract him. This is helped by an
absence of curiosity about anything external during the time set apart
for meditation. One way of practicing this is to sit and listen for a
while to the various sounds of nature; then listen to the delicate sound
in the ear and so forget the former (though you cannot watch yourself
forgetting it); then listen to a mere mental sound conjured up by the
imagination, and so forget even the music in the ear.

Then come the three internal steps, to which everything else has been
leading up, called *dhūranā*, *dhyāna*

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

and *samādhi*. They are concentration, meditation, and contemplation.

Concentration is really voluntary attentiveness, but this involves
narrowing the field of view, focusing the mental eye upon a chosen
object. <span id="fr_21"></span>[22](#fn_21.md)

When you practice concentration or meditation, always choose the object
before you begin. Sometimes people sit down and then try to decide what
to concentrate upon, and come to no settled decision before their time
is all gone. Then, do not try to *hold* the object in position by your
thought. It is not the object that is going to run away; it is the mind
that wanders. Let the object be thought of as in a natural position—if
it is a pen it may be lying on the table; if it is a picture it may be
hanging on the wall. Then narrow the field of attention down to it, and
look at it with perfect calmness, and without any tension or sensation
in the body or head.

Do not be surprised or annoyed if other thoughts intrude on your
concentration. Be satisfied if you do not lose sight of your chosen
object, if it remains the central thing before your attention. Take no
notice of the intruding thoughts. Say "I do not care whether they are
there or not." Keep the emotions calm in this manner, and the intruders
will disappear when you are not looking. Calmness—no physical strain—is

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

necessary for successful concentration, and, given this, it is not at
all the difficult thing that it is sometimes supposed to be. Detailed
methods for practicing concentration are given in my book
*Concentration*," <span id="fr_22"></span>[23](#fn_22.md) and regarding
that and the other seven steps as well in my *Practical Yoga: Ancient
and Modern*, which contains my translation and explanation of all the
Patanjali Yoga aphorisms. <span id="fr_23"></span>[24](#fn_23.md)

Meditation is a continuous flow or fountain of thought with regard to
the object of your concentration. <span id="fr_24"></span>[25](#fn_24.md)
It involves the realization of that object as fully as possible. You
must not let the string of thought go so far away on any line that the
central object is in any way dimmed. On the contrary, every new idea
that you bring forward must be fully thought of only with reference to
it and should make it clearer and stronger than before. Thus for
practice you might meditate on a cat. You would consider it in every
detail; think of all its parts and qualities, physical, emotional,
mental, moral and spiritual; think of its relation to other animals and
of particular cats that you have known. When this is done you should

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

know what a cat is much better than you did before. You will have
brought into agreement and union all your knowledge or information on
the subject. In this meditation there is no clutching, no anxiety, only
calm mental reviewing and thinking.

The same method applies to virtues such as truth, kindness and courage.
Many people have the most imperfect ideas as to what these are. Make
concrete pictures in the imagination of acts of kindness, courage,
truth. Then try to realize the states of emotion and mind, and the moral
condition involved, and in doing so keep up the vividness of
consciousness that has already been attained in the beginning of the
practice on account of concentration on the concrete scene.

In meditation you take something up, but it is the opposite of going to
sleep, because you *retain* the vivid qualities of reality which belong
to the concentrated waking state. Yet it should always be done with
perfect calm, and no tension or excitement. It widens, includes and
integrates without loss of the quality gained by concentration or
specific attentiveness.

Contemplation is another kind of concentration; this time a poise of the
mind at the top end of your line of thought. <span
id="fr_25"></span>[26](#fn_25.md) When in meditation you have reached the
highest and fullest thought you can about

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

the chosen object, and your mind begins to waver, do not try to go
forward, but do not fall back. Hold what you have attained, and poise
calmly on it for a little time.

You will find that by contemplation you have created a platform. You
have been making a new effort and so have developed or discovered some
hitherto latent possibilities. There may be something in the nature of
illumination. You must see what comes; never try to predetermine it.
Then contemplation opens the door of the mind to intuitive knowledge,
and many powers.

The student is told always to begin with concentration, then proceed to
meditation. The triple process is a mind-poise called *sanyama*. <span
id="fr_26"></span>[27](#fn_26.md)

If the candidate wants to have what are commonly called psychic
faculties and powers, Patanjali explains how he may obtain them—by
*sanyama* on various objects having corresponding qualities. He mentions
knowledge of past and future, memory of past lives, reading of others’
minds, perception of those who have reached perfection, and other powers
and knowledge connected with "higher hearing, touch, sight, taste and
smell" <span id="fr_27"></span>[28](#fn_27.md) but remarks that, though
these are accomplishments of the out-going

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

mind, they are obstacles to the full or higher *samādhi*. <span
id="fr_28"></span>[29](#fn_28.md) Vāchaspati comments on this that
sometimes the mind is captivated by these psychic powers, just as a
beggar may think of the possession of a little wealth as abundant
riches, but the real yogī will reject them all. How can the real man, he
asks, who has determined to remove all pain—including psychological or
emotional pains—take pleasure in such accomplishments, which are opposed
to his true state of being? Only by non-attachment to all such things,
however great, may the seeds of bondage be destroyed, and independence
or freedom be attained. <span id="fr_29"></span>[30](#fn_29.md)

True contemplation, poised on higher matters, Patanjali teaches, leads
to the complete dispersal of the afflictions, and on to great clarity
and insight, culminating in the cessation of the junction of the seer
and the sight, the absence of all pain and the uncovering of the inner
light.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[15:1](gsoy04.htm#fr_0.md) Patanjali, book i, Sūtra
or Aphorism i 2.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[16:2](gsoy04.htm#fr_1.md) Patanjali, Book i,
Aphorism 3.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[17:3](gsoy04.htm#fr_2.md) Aphorisms iv 18-20.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[17:4](gsoy04.htm#fr_3.md) Aphorisms iii 49, 54; iv
26, 34.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[18:5](gsoy04.htm#fr_4.md) Aphorism i 13.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[18:6](gsoy04.htm#fr_5.md) Aphorism i 15.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[18:7](gsoy04.htm#fr_6.md) Aphorism i 16.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[19:8](gsoy04.htm#fr_7.md) Aphorism ii *et seq*.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[19:9](gsoy04.htm#fr_8.md) Aphorism ii 29 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[20:10](gsoy04.htm#fr_9.md) Aphorism ii 5.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[20:11](gsoy04.htm#fr_10.md) Aphorism ii 6.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[21:12](gsoy04.htm#fr_11.md) Aphorisms ii 7, 8.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[21:13](gsoy04.htm#fr_12.md) Aphorism ii 9.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[22:14](gsoy04.htm#fr_13.md) Aphorism ii I.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[23:15](gsoy04.htm#fr_14.md) Verses xvii 14-16.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[27:16](gsoy04.htm#fr_15.md) Aphorism ii 30.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[28:17](gsoy04.htm#fr_16.md) Aphorism ii 32.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[29:18](gsoy04.htm#fr_17.md) Aphorisms ii 35-45.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[30:19](gsoy04.htm#fr_18.md) Aphorism ii 46.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[30:20](gsoy04.htm#fr_19.md) Aphorism ii 49.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[31:21](gsoy04.htm#fr_20.md) Aphorism ii 54.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[33:22](gsoy04.htm#fr_21.md) Aphorism iii I.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[34:23](gsoy04.htm#fr_22.md) Pub. by the
Theosophical Publishing House, Adyar, Madras, India.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[34:24](gsoy04.htm#fr_23.md) Pub. by E. P. Dutton
and Co., Inc., New York; Rider and Co., Ltd., London, England; Messrs
Payot, Paris, France (in French), and Edition Orion, Mexico City (in
Spanish).

<span id="fn_24"></span>[34:25](gsoy04.htm#fr_24.md) Aphorism iii 2.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[35:26](gsoy04.htm#fr_25.md) Aphorism iii 3.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[36:27](gsoy04.htm#fr_26.md) Aphorism iii 4.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[36:28](gsoy04.htm#fr_27.md) Aphorism iii 35.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[37:29](gsoy04.htm#fr_28.md) Aphorism iii 36.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[37:30](gsoy04.htm#fr_29.md) Aphorism iii 49.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter Three. Shri Krishna's Gita-Yoga](gsoy05.md)
