[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Utopia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](csus26)  [Next](csus28) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486215806/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Communistic Societies of the United States*, by Charles Nordhoff,
\[1875\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_350">p. 350</span> <span id="page_351">p. 351</span>

# THE CEDAR VALE COMMUNITY.

<span id="page_352">p. 352</span> <span id="page_353">p. 353</span>

### THE CEDAR VALE COMMUNITY.

AT Cedar Vale, in Howard County, Kansas, a communistic society has been
founded, which, though its small numbers might make it insignificant, is
remarkable by reason of the nationality of some of its members.

It was begun three years ago, and the purpose of its projectors was "to
achieve both communism and individual freedom, or to lead persons of all
kinds of opinions to labor together for their common welfare. If there
was to be any law, it should be only for the regulation of industry or
hours of work." I quote this from the letter of a gentleman who is
familiar with this society, and who has been kind enough to send me its
constitution, and to give me the following particulars: "It is now three
years since the founders of the society settled in this domain, coming
here entirely destitute, and building first as a residence a covered
burrow in a hillside. Two of them had left affluence and position in
Russia, and subjected themselves to this poverty for the sake of their
principles. Of course they suffered here from fever, from insufficient
food, and cold, and were not able to make much improvement on the place.
The practical condition now, though insignificant from the common point
of view, compared with what has been, is very satisfactory. There are at
least comfortable shelter and enough to eat, and this year sufficient
land will be fenced and planted to leave a surplus.

"The propaganda has been made among two essentially differing classes of
socialists—the Russian Materialists and the

<span id="page_354">p. 354</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> American
Spiritualists. Both these classes are represented in the community, and
thus far seem to live in harmony. There are here a 'hygienic doctor' and
a 'reformed clergyman,' both Spiritualists, and a Russian sculptor of
considerable fame, a Russian astronomer, and a very pretty and devoted
and wonderfully industrious Russian woman."

The printed statement made by the community I copy here, as a sufficient
account of its numbers and possessions in April, 1874:

"The PROGRESSIVE COMMUNITY is located near Cedar Vale, Howard County,
Kansas, has three hundred and twenty acres of choice prairie land, with
abundance of stock, water, and with all advantages for successful
farming, stock and fruit raising.

"The nearest railroad station is Independence, Montgomery County,
Kansas, fifty miles east from the place.

"The community was established in January, 1871. It is out of debt now,
and has a fair prospect for success in the future.

"The business of the community consists chiefly in farming.

"Number of members: four males; three females; one child. Persons on
probation: two males; one female; one child.

"Improvements: frame house; stable; forty acres under fence; four acres
of orchard and vines.

"Live stock and implements: four horses; four oxen; three cows and
calves.

"The co-operation of earnest communists is wanted for the better
realization of a true home based on Liberty, Equality, and Fraternity.

"No fee is required from those who visit the community, but their work
for the community is regarded as equivalent to their current expenses.

"The principles and organization of the community can be seen from the
following constitution.

"PREAMBLE.

"*Whereas*, we believe that man is not only an individual having rights
as such, but also owing social duties to others, and that strict justice
requires us to help each other, and that our highest happiness and
development can only be attained by a union and co-operation of
interests and efforts; *Therefore*, we pledge ourselves to live

<span id="page_355">p. 355</span>

  'For the cause that lacks assistance,  
  For the wrong that needs resistance,  
  For the future in the distance,  
  And the good that we can do.'

"And we, whose names are annexed, hereby organize ourselves under the
name of the PROGRESSIVE COMMUNITY, and agree to devote our labor and
means, to the full extent of our ability, to carry out the following:

"CONSTITUTION.

"ARTICLE I.

"SEC. 1.—The community shall be considered as a family. The members
shall unite in their labor and business, hold their property in common
for the use of all, and dwell together in a unitary home.

"SEC. 2.—Each member shall be free to hold whatever opinions his
conscience may dictate; and the community shall make no restriction or
regulation interfering with the freedom of any, except when his actions
conflict with the rights of others.

"SEC. 3.—All shall be alike responsible for the strict observance of
this constitution. Equal rights and privileges shall be accorded to all
members; but the community may temporarily withhold from a member the
right to vote by the unanimous consent of the rest.

"ARTICLE II.

"SEC. 1.—All matters concerning the welfare of the community shall be
decided by the members at their meetings, which shall be of the
following kinds: (1) Daily business meetings for the decision of daily
work; (2) Weekly meetings for the discussion of business questions, and
for remarks on the general interests and welfare of the community.

"SEC. 2.—All decisions, except as herein otherwise provided for, shall
be by a majority of three fourths of all the members.

"SEC. 3.—Debts may be contracted, or credit given, only by the unanimous
vote of the community.

"SEC. 4.—The officers of the community shall consist of a president,
secretary, treasurer, and managers. They shall be elected at the end of
each year, and enter on the duties of their offices on the first of
January following, being subject to removal at any time.

"SEC. 5.—The president shall preside at all meetings, shall see that the
decisions of the community are carried out, and make temporary
arrangements for the business of the day when necessary.

"SEC. 6.—The secretary shall record the proceedings of all the meetings

<span id="page_356">p. 356</span>

of the community, attend to all its correspondence, and preserve all the
valuable documents thereof.

"SEC. 7.—The treasurer shall hold the fund of the community, and keep an
accurate account of all money received or expended; but no money shall
be paid out except as appropriated by the community. He shall make a
report at each business meeting.

"SEC. 8.—The managers shall control the different departments to which
they are elected, decide all details of business, if not previously
acted upon by the community, and make reports at each business meeting.

"ARTICLE III.

"SEC. 1.—Any person, after having lived in the community, and having
become thoroughly acquainted with its members and the community life,
may become a member by subscribing to this constitution; provided he is
accepted by the unanimous vote of the community.

"SEC. 2.—All property which members may have, or may receive from any
source or at any time, shall be given to the community without
reservation or return.

"SEC. 3.—The members shall be furnished with food, clothing, and
lodging, care and attention in sickness, misfortune, infancy, or old
age, and the means and opportunity for a complete integral education,
and for such other necessary requirements as the community can afford;
and these benefits shall be guaranteed by the whole resources of the
community.

"SEC. 4.—A withdrawing member shall not bring any claim against the
community on account of any labor, services, or property given thereto;
but his current expenses and the advantages of the community life shall
be considered as an equivalent therefore. He shall be allowed to take
from the common property only what may be decided upon by the community
at the time of withdrawal.

"SEC. 5.—Children of the members, or those which may be adopted by the
community, shall be considered as members thereof; they shall have equal
rights as herein specified, except voting, to which privilege they shall
be admitted when the community by unanimous consent shall think best,
and after signing their names to this constitution.

"ARTICLE IV.

"Any amendments, additions to, or interpretations of this constitution
may be made at any time by unanimous vote of the community."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Social Freedom Community.](csus28)
