[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Utopia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](csus32)  [Next](csus34) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486215806/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Communistic Societies of the United States*, by Charles Nordhoff,
\[1875\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### IV.—CONDITIONS AND POSSIBILITIES OF COMMUNISTIC LIVING.

Reviewing what I have seen and written, these questions occur:

I. On what terms, if at all, could a carefully selected and homogeneous
company of men and women hope to establish themselves as a commune?

II\. Would they improve their lives and condition?

III\. Have the existing societies brought communal life to its highest
point; or is a higher and more intellectual life compatible with that
degree of pecuniary success and harmonious living which is absolutely
indispensable?

I. I doubt if men and women in good circumstances, or given to an
intellectual life, can hope to succeed in such an experiment. In the
beginning, the members of a commune must expect to work hard; and, to be
successful, they ought always to retain the frugal habits, the early
hours, and the patient industry and contentment with manual labor which
belong to what we call the working class. Men cannot play at communism.
It is not amateur work. It requires patience, submission;
self-sacrifice, often in little matters where self-sacrifice

<span id="page_410">p. 410</span>

is peculiarly irksome; faith in a leader; pleasure in plain living and
healthful hours and occupations.

"Do you have no grumblers?" I asked Elder Frederick Evans at Mount
Lebanon; and he replied, "Yes, of course—and they grumble at the elder.
That is what he is for. It is necessary to have some one man to grumble
at, for that avoids confusion."

"Do you have no scandal?" I asked at Aurora, and they said, "Oh
yes—women will talk; but we have learned not to mind it."

"Are you not troubled sometimes with disagreeable members?" I asked at
Oneida; and they answered, "Yes; but what we cannot criticize out of
them we bear with. That is part of our life."

"*Bear ye one another's burdens*" might well be written over the gates
of every commune.

Some things the communist must surrender; and the most precious of these
is solitude.

The man to whom at intervals the faces and voices of his kind become
hateful, whose bitterest need it is to be sometimes alone—this man need
not try communism. For in a well-ordered commune there is hardly the
possibility of privacy. You are part of a great family, all whose
interests and all whose life must necessarily be in common. At Oneida,
when a man leaves the house he sticks a peg in a board, to tell all his
little world where he is to be found. In a Shaker family, the elder is
expected to know where every man is at all hours of the day. Moses,
wandering over the desert with his great commune, occasionally went up
into a mountain; but he never returned to the dead level of his
Israelites without finding his heart fill with rage and despair. Nor is
this surprising; for in the commune there must be absolute equality;
there can be no special privileges; and when the great Leader, resting
his spirit on the mountain, and enjoying the luxury of solitude

<span id="page_411">p. 411</span>

and retirement from the hateful sight and sounds of human kind, "delayed
to come down," his fellow-communists began at once to murmur, "As for
this Moses, the man who brought us up out of the land of Egypt, we wot
not what is become of him."

Fortunately—else there would be no communes—to the greater part of
mankind the faces and voices of their kind are necessary.

A company of fifty, or even of twenty-five families, well known to each
other, belonging to the same Christian Church, or at least united upon
some one form of religious faith, composed of farmers or mechanics, or
both, and strongly desirous to better their circumstances, and to live a
life of greater independence and of greater social advantages than is
attainable to the majority of farmers and mechanics, could, I believe,
if they were so fortunate as to possess a leader of sufficient wisdom
and unselfishness, in whom all would implicitly trust, make an attempt
at communistic living with strong hopes of success; and they would
undoubtedly, if they maintained their experiment only ten years,
materially improve their condition; and, what to me seems more
important, the life would affect their characters and those of their
children in many ways beneficially.

I think it would be a mistake in such a company of people to live in a
"unitary home." They should be numerous enough to form a village; they
should begin with means sufficient to own a considerable tract of land,
sufficient to supply themselves with food, and to keep as much stock as
they required for their own use. They should so locate their village as
to make it central to their agricultural land. They should determine, as
the Rappists did, upon a uniform and simple dress and house, and upon
absolute equality of living. They should place *all* the power in the
hands of their leader, and solemnly promise him unhesitating trust and
obedience; specifying

<span id="page_412">p. 412</span>

only that he should contract no debts, should attempt no new enterprise
without unanimous consent, and should at all times open his purposes and
his acts to the whole society. Finally, they should expect in the
beginning to live economically—*very* economically, perhaps; and in
every case within their income.

They would, of course, adopt rules as to hours of labor and of meals;
but if they had the spirit which alone can give success, these matters
would be easily settled—for in a community men are more apt to over-work
than to be idle. The lazy men, who are the bugbears of speculative
communists, are not, so far as I have heard, to be found in the existing
communes, and I have often and in different places been told, especially
of the early days: "We worked late and early, each trying how much he
could accomplish, and singing at our work."

In a commune, which is only a large family, I think it a great point
gained for success to give the women equal rights in every respect with
the men. They should take part in the business discussions, and their
consent should be as essential as that of the men in all the affairs of
the society. This gives them, I have noticed, contentment of mind, as
well as enlarged views and pleasure in self-denial. Moreover, women have
a conservative spirit, which is of great value in a communistic society,
as in a family; and their influence is always toward a higher life.

Servants are inadmissible in a commune; but it may and ought to possess
conveniences which make servants, with plain living, needless. For
instance, a common laundry, a common butcher's shop, a general barn and
dairy, are contrivances which almost every commune possesses, but which
hardly any village in the country has. A clean, hard road within the
communal village limits, and dry side-walks, would be attainable with
ease. A church and a school-house ought to be

<span id="page_413">p. 413</span>

the first buildings erected; and both being centrally placed, either
could be used for such evening meetings as are essential to happy and
successful community living.

Finally, there should be some way to bring to the light the
dissatisfaction which must exist where a number of people attempt to
live together, either in a commune or in the usual life, but which in a
commune needs to be wisely managed. For this purpose I know of no better
means than that which the Perfectionists call "criticism"—telling a
member to his face, in regular and formal meeting, what is the opinion
of his fellows about him—which he or she, of course, ought to receive in
silence. Those who cannot bear this ordeal are unfit for community life,
and ought not to attempt it. But, in fact, this "criticism," kindly and
conscientiously used, would be an excellent means of discipline in most
families, and would in almost all cases abolish scolding and grumbling.

A commune is but a larger family, and its members ought to meet each
other as frequently as possible. The only advantage of a unitary home
lies in this, that the members may easily assemble in a common room
every evening for an hour, not with any set or foreordained purpose, but
for that interchange of thought and experience which makes up, or
should, a large and important part of family life. Hence every commune
ought to have a pleasantly arranged and conveniently accessible
meeting-room, to which books and newspapers, music, and cheap, harmless
amusements should draw the people-women and children as well as men—two
or three times a week. Nor is such meeting a hardship in a commune,
where plain living, early hours, and good order and system make the work
light, and leave both time and strength for amusement.

Tobacco, spirituous liquors, and cards ought to be prohibited in every
commune, as wasteful of money, strength, and time.

The training of children in strict obedience and in good habits would be
insisted on by a wise leader as absolutely

<span id="page_414">p. 414</span>

necessary to concord in the society; and the school-teacher ought to
have great authority. Moreover, the training of even little children,
during some hours of every day, in some manual occupation, like
knitting—as is done at Amana—is useful in several ways. Regular and
patient industry, not exhausting toil, is the way to wealth in a
commune; and children—who are indeed in general but too proud to be
usefully employed, and to have the sense of accomplishing
something—cannot be brought into this habit of industry too early.

What now might the members of such a community expect to gain by their
experiment? Would they, to answer the second question above, improve
their lives and condition?

Pecuniarily, they would begin at once a vast economy and saving of
waste, which could hardly help but make them prosperous, and in time
wealthy. A commune pays no wages; its members "work for their board and
clothes," as the phrase is; and these supplies are either cheaply
produced or bought at wholesale. A commune has no blue Mondays, or idle
periods whatever; every thing is systematized, and there is useful
employment for all in all kinds of weather and at all seasons of the
year. A commune wastes no time in "going to town," for it has its own
shops of all kinds. It totally abolishes the middleman of every kind,
and saves all the large percentage of gain on which the "store-keepers"
live and grow rich elsewhere. It spends neither time nor money in
dram-shops or other places of common resort. It secures, by plain living
and freedom from low cares, good health in all, and thus saves "doctors'
bills." It does not heed the changes in fashion, and thus saves time and
strength to its women. Finally, the communal life is so systematized
that every thing is done well, at the right time, and thus comes another
important saving of time and material. The communal wood-house is always
full of well-seasoned firewood: here is a saving of time and temper
which almost every Western farmer's wife will appreciate.

<span id="page_415">p. 415</span>

If you consider well these different economies, it will cease to be
surprising that communistic societies become wealthy; and this without
severe or exhausting toil. The Zoarites acknowledge that they could not
have paid for their land had they not formed themselves into a commune;
the Amana Inspirationists confess that they could not have maintained
themselves near Buffalo had they not adopted the communal system.

I have said nothing about the gain of the commune by the thorough
culture it is able and likely to give to land; its ability to command at
any moment a large laboring force for an emergency, and its advantage in
producing the best, and selling its surplus consequently at the highest
market price. But these are not slight advantages. I should say that the
reputation for honesty and for always selling a good article is worth to
the Shakers, the Amana and other communes, at least ten per cent. over
their competitors.

On the moral side the gain is evidently great. In a society so
intimately bound together, if there are slight tendencies to evil in any
member, they are checked and controlled by the prevailing public
sentiment. The possibility of providing with ease and without the
expenditure of money good training and education for children, is an
immense advantage for the commune over the individualist who is a farmer
or mechanic in a new country. The social advantages are very great and
evident. Finally, the effect of the communal life upon the character of
the individual is good. Diversity of employments, as I have noticed in
another chapter, broadens the men's faculties. Ingenuity and mechanical
dexterity are developed to a surprising degree in a commune, as well as
business skill. The constant necessity of living in intimate association
with others, and taking into consideration their prejudices and
weaknesses, makes the communist somewhat a man of the world; teaches him
self-restraint; gives him a liberal

<span id="page_416">p. 416</span>

and tolerant spirit; makes him an amiable being. Why are *all*
communists remarkably cleanly? I imagine largely because filth or
carelessness would be unendurable in so large a family, and because
system and method are absolutely necessary to existence.

But, to come to my third question, the communes I have visited do not
appear to me to make nearly as much of their lives as they might. Most
of them are ascetics, who avoid the beautiful as tending to sin; and
most of them, moreover, out of the force of old habits, and a
conservative spirit which dreads change, rigidly maintain the old ways.

In the beginning, a commune must live with great economy, and deny
itself many things desirable and proper. It is an advantage that it
should have to do this, just as it is undoubtedly an advantage to a
young couple just starting out in life to be compelled by narrow
circumstances to frugal living and self-denial. It gives unselfishness
and a wholesome development of character. But I cannot see why a
prosperous commune should not own the best books; why it should not have
music; why it should not hear the most eloquent lecturers; why it should
not have pleasant pleasure-grounds, and devote some means to the highest
form of material art—fine architecture. It seems to me that in these
respects the communes I have visited have failed of their proper and
just development; and I believe this inattention to the higher and
intellectual wants of men to be the main reason of their generally
failing numbers. They keep their lives on the plane of the common
farmer's life out of which most of the older members were gathered—and
their young people leave them, just as the farmers of our country
complain that their boys run off to the cities. The individual farmer or
country mechanic cannot control this; he cannot greatly beautify his
life, or make it intellectually richer. But to the commune, once well
established and prosperous, all needful things are possible, so far as

<span id="page_417">p. 417</span>

money cost is concerned; and it is my belief that neither books nor
music, nor eloquence nor flowers, nor finely kept pleasure-grounds nor
good architecture would be dangerous to the success of a commune.

In another respect, the communistic societies fall short of what they
ought to be and do. The permanence of their establishments gives them
extraordinary advantages for observing the phenomena of climate and
nature; and it would add greatly to the interest of their lives did they
busy and interest themselves with observations of temperature, and of
the various natural phenomena which depend upon or denote climate: the
arrival and departure of birds; the first and last frosts; the
blossoming of flowers and trees. A Shaker family ought to produce
records of this kind of great value and interest; and I wonder that such
a book as White's "Selborne" has not empted some communist to such
observations. But I nowhere, except at Oneida, found more than a very
superficial interest in natural phenomena.

It is easy to see that here is a field of innocent and healthful
amusement which, with the abundant leisure the members of a prosperous
commune enjoy, could be worked so as to give a new and ever-fresh
interest to the lives of young and old.

I find fault also with the isolation in which communal societies live.
They would be the better if they communicated fully and frequently among
each other, and interchanged thoughts and experiences. Not only do the
different societies hold aloof from each other, but among the Shakers
even families do not communicate or advise with others living at a
distance. But I believe this is to be remedied.

Finally, I repeat that one cannot play at communism. It is earnest work,
and requires perseverance, patience, and all other manly qualities. But
if I compare the life in a contented and prosperous, that is to say a
successful commune, with the life of an ordinary farmer or mechanic even
in our

<span id="page_418">p. 418</span>

prosperous country, and more especially with the lives of the
working-men and their families in our great cities, I must confess that
the communist life is so much freer from care and risk, so much easier,
so much better in many ways, and in all material aspects, that I
sincerely wish it might have a farther development in the United States.

With this wish I conclude a work which has interested me extremely—the
record of an investigation which was certainly the strangest and most
remarkable I ever made, and which forced me to take some views of the
nature and capacities of the average man which I had not before.

That communistic societies will rapidly increase in this or any other
country, I do not believe. The chances are always great against the
success of any newly formed society of this kind. But that men and women
can, if they *will*, live pleasantly and prosperously in a communal
society is, I think, proved beyond a doubt; and thus we have a right to
count this another way by which the dissatisfied laborer may, if he
chooses, better his condition. This seems to me a matter of some
importance, and justifies, to myself at least, the trouble I have taken
in this investigation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Bibliography.](csus34)
