[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Utopia](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](csus25)  [Next](csus27.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486215806/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Communistic Societies of the United States*, by Charles Nordhoff,
\[1875\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_340">p. 340</span> <span id="page_341">p. 341</span>

# THE BISHOP HILL COMMUNE.

<span id="page_342">p. 342</span> <span id="page_343">p. 343</span>

### THE BISHOP HILL COMMUNE.

I HAVE determined to give a brief account of the Swedish colony at
Bishop Hill, in Henry County, Illinois, because, though it has now
ceased to exist as a communistic society, its story yields some
instructive lessons in the creation and maintenance of such
associations. These Swedes began in abject poverty, and in the course of
a few years built up a prosperous town and settlement. They rashly went
into debt: debt brought lawsuits and disputes into the society, and all
three broke it up.

The people of Bishop Hill came from the region of Helsingland, in
Sweden. In their own country they were Pietists, and Separatists from
the State Church, mostly farmers, scattered over a considerable
district, but united by their peculiar doctrines, and by the efforts of
their preachers. I am told that they came into existence as a sect about
1830; in 1843 their chief preacher was a man of some energy, Eric Janson
by name; and he taught them the duty of living after the manner of the
Primitive Christian Church, inculcating humble and prayerful lives,
equality of conditions, and community of property.

Their refusal to attend church, and to submit themselves to its
ordinances, excited the attention of the government, which, probably
also alarmed at the phrase "community of goods," began to persecute them
with fines and imprisonment. Police officers were sent to break up their
congregations; they imagined themselves threatened with confiscation;
and in 1845 they sent one of their number, Olaf Olson, to the United
States,

<span id="page_344">p. 344</span>

to see if they could not here find land on which to live in peace and
freedom. Olson's inquiries led him to Illinois; he selected Henry County
as a favorable situation; and in 1846, on his report, the people
determined to emigrate in a body, the few wealthy agreeing to pay the
expenses of the poor. They say that when they were ready to embark, they
were refused permission to leave their country, and Jonas Olson, one of
their leaders, had to go to the king, who, on his prayer, finally
allowed them to depart.

The first ship-load left Galfa in the summer of 1846, and arrived at
Bishop Hill in October of that year. Others followed, until by the
summer of 1848 they had eight hundred people on this spot—which they
named from an eminence in their own country.

They appear to have spent most of their means in the emigration, for
they were able during the first year to buy only forty acres of land,
and for eighteen months they lived in extreme poverty—in holes in the
ground, and under sheds built against hillsides; and ground their corn
for bread in hand-mills, often laboring at this task by turns all night,
to provide meal for the next day. A tent made of linen cloth was their
church during this time; and they worked the land of neighboring farmers
on shares to gain a subsistence. Living on the prairie, fever and ague
attacked them and added to their wretchedness.

By 1848 they had acquired two hundred acres of land, but were $1800 in
debt, which they had borrowed to keep them from starving; but in this
year they built a brick church, and they now worked a good deal of land
on shares. In 1849 they began to build a very long brick house, still
standing, which served them as kitchen and dining-hall. In the same year
Jonas Olson, a preacher, took eight young men, and with the consent of
the society went to California to dig gold for the common interest. He
returned after a year, unsuccessful.

<span id="page_345">p. 345</span>

In 1850 Eric Janson, their leader, was shot in the Henry County
court-house, while attending a trial in which a young man, not a member
of the community, claimed his wife, a girl who was a member, and whom he
wished to take away. I do not know the merits of the case, nor is it
important here. During this year Olaf Janson returned from Sweden with
several thousand dollars which he had been sent to collect—being debts
due some of the members; and this money, which enabled them to buy land,
appears to have given them their first fair start.

At this time, though they were still poor, they had built a number of
brick dwellings, had set up shops for carpentry, blacksmithing,
wagon-making, etc.; were raising flax, selling the seed, and making the
fiber into linen, some of which they sold; and they had a few cattle,
and a worn-out saw-mill. They had set up a school, even while they lived
"in the caves," and now hired an American teacher.

In 1853 they got an act of incorporation from the Illinois Legislature,
which enabled them to hold land and transact business as an association,
and in the name of trustees; until that time all they owned was held in
the name of individual members. In the same year they made a contract to
raise, during two years, seven hundred acres of broom-corn, for which
they received in cash on delivery fifty dollars a ton. As yet they had
no railroad, and had to haul their corn fifty miles. At this time, too,
they began to improve their breeds of cattle; paid high prices for one
or two short-horn bulls, and were soon famous in their region for the
excellence of their stock. They also made wagons for the neighboring
farmers, and established a grist-mill.

In 1854-5 they took a contract to grade a part of the Chicago,
Burlington, and Quincy Railroad line, and to build some bridges; and as
they were able to put a considerable body of their young men upon this
work, it brought them in a good deal of money. They now began to erect
brick dwellings, a

<span id="page_346">p. 346</span>

town-hall, and a large hotel, where they for a while did a good
business. They made excellent brick, and all their houses are very
solidly built, plain, but of pleasing exteriors. The most remarkable one
is the long dining-hall and kitchen, with a bakery and brewery
adjoining. In the upper story of this building a considerable number of
families lived; in the lower story all the people—to the number of a
thousand at one time—ate three times a day.

They were now prospering. In 1859 they owned ten thousand acres of land,
and had it all neatly fenced and in excellent order. They had the finest
cattle in the state; and their shops and mills earned money from the
neighboring farmers.

The families lived separately, but all ate together. They received their
clothing supplies at a common storehouse as they needed them, and
labored under the direction of foremen. Their business organization was
always loose. They had no president or single head. A body of trustees
transacted business, and made reports to the society, not regularly, but
at irregular intervals. There seems, too, to have been a speculative
spirit among them, for while in 1859 they owned ten thousand acres of
land and a town, which must have been worth at least three hundred
thousand dollars, as the land was all fenced and improved, and the town
was uncommonly well built, <span id="fr_26"></span>[\*](#fn_26.md) they
owed at that time, or in 1860, between eighty and one hundred thousand
dollars.

Their religions life was very simple. They had no paid preacher, but
expected their leaders to labor during the week with the rest. On Sunday
they had two services in the church—at ten in the morning, and between
six and seven in the evening. At these, after singing and prayer, the
preacher read the Bible, and commented on what he read. On every
week-day

<span id="page_347">p. 347</span>

evening, unless the weather was bad, they held a similar meeting, which
lasted an hour and a half. They had no library, and encouraged no
reading except in the Bible, teaching that the most important matter for
every man was to get a thorough understanding of the commandments of
God. They had for a little while a newspaper, and they printed at the
neighboring town of Galva, which was their business centre, an edition
of their hymn-book. <span id="fr_27"></span>[\*](#fn_27.md) They
discouraged amusements, as tending to worldliness; and though they
appear to have lived happily and without disputes, about 1859 they
discovered that their young people, who had grown up in the society,
were discontented, found the community life dull, did not care for the
religious views of the society, and were ready to break up the
organization.

When this discontent arose, the looseness of the organization was fatal.
With a more compact and energetic administration, either the
dissatisfied elements would have been eliminated quietly, or the causes
of dissatisfaction, mainly, as far as I could understand, the dullness
of the life and the lack of amusements, would have been removed. But
with a loose organization there appears to have been, what is not
unnatural, rigidity of discipline. There was no power any where to make
changes. "The discontented ones wanted a change, but no change was
possible: it was often discussed." The young people persuaded some of
the older ones to be of their mind, and thus two parties were formed;
and after many meetings, in which I imagine there were sometimes bitter
words, it was determined in the spring of 1860 to divide the property,
the Olson party, as it was called, including two thirds of the
membership, determining with their share to continue the community,
while the Janson party determined on individual effort.

Hereupon two thirds of the real and personal property was

<span id="page_348">p. 348</span>

set apart for the Olson party, but for a whole year the two parties
lived together at Bishop Hill. In 1861 the Janson party divided their
share among the families composing it; and in the same year the
disorganization proceeded another step. The Olson party fell into three
divisions. In 1862, finally, all the property was divided, and the
commune ceased to exist.

In 1860 a receiver had been appointed. In 1861 Olaf Janson was appointed
attorney in fact. This became necessary, because, besides the property,
there were debts; and when the trustees were removed and a receiver was
appointed, the question necessarily came up how the debts should be met.
The division of the property was made by a committee of the society, who
took a complete inventory, including even the smallest household
articles; and at the time there seems to have been no complaint of
unfairness. The whole was divided into shares, of which each man
received one, and women and children fractional shares. A part of the
property was set off, sufficient, as it was then believed, to pay off
the indebtedness; but it proved insufficient, and finally each farm
given to a member in the partition was saddled with a share of
indebtedness; and as there was poor management after the disorganization
began, and as the debt constantly increased by the non-payment of
interest, there are now, thirteen years after the final partition, heavy
lawsuits still pending in the courts against the colony and its
trustees.

In 1861 the community raised a company of soldiers for the Union army,
furnishing both privates and officers. These fought through the war, and
one of the younger members after the war was, for meritorious conduct
and promising intellect, taken as a scholar at West Point, where he was
graduated with honor.

At present Bishop Hill is slowly falling into decay. The houses are
still mostly inhabited; there are several shops and stores; but the
larger buildings are out of repair; and business

<span id="page_349">p. 349</span>

has centred at Galva, five or six miles distant. Most of the former
communists live happily on their small farms. A Methodist church has
been built in the village, and has some attendants, but a good many of
the older members have adopted the Adventist or Millerite faith, which
appears to revive after every failure of prediction, especially in the
West, where people seem to look forward with a quite singular pleasure
to the fiery end of all things.

On the whole, it is a melancholy story. It shows both what can be
achieved by combined industry, and what trifles can destroy such an
organization as a communistic society. It shows the extreme importance
of a central authority, wisely administered but also implicitly obeyed;
able therefore to yield, as well as to act, promptly. The history of
these Bishop Hill Communists also shows the necessity of great caution
in all financial affairs in a commune, which ought to avoid debt like
the plague, and to live financially as though it might break up at any
moment.

Not only were debt and the speculative spirit out of which debt arose
the causes of the colony's failure, but they have brought great trouble
on the people since. Had there been no debt, the commune could have
divided its property among the members at any time, without loss or
trouble; and I suspect that the possibility of such an immediate
division might have induced the people to keep together.

At any rate, the story of Bishop Hill shows how important it would be to
a community agreeing to labor and produce in common for a limited time
to keep free from debt.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_26"></span>[346:\*](csus26.htm#fr_26.md) Between four and five
hundred thousand dollars was their own valuation; and in 1860 a report
given in one of the briefs of a lawsuit gives their assets at $864,000,
and their debts at less than $100,000.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[347:\*](csus26.htm#fr_27.md) "Några Sånger, samt
Böner. Förfatade af Erik Janson. Förenade Staterna, Galva, Ills. S.
Cronsioe, 1857."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Cedar Vale Community.](csus27.md)
