[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Utopia](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](csus23)  [Next](csus25.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486215806/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Communistic Societies of the United States*, by Charles Nordhoff,
\[1875\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_324">p. 324</span>

#### II.—BETHEL.

Bethel is, of course, the older community; I describe it here after
Aurora, because my visit to it was made after I had seen the Oregon
community, and also because here is shown to what Aurora tends. The two
societies are still one, having their efforts in common; and I was told
that if the people at Bethel could sell their property, they would all
remove to Oregon.

The Bethel Community now owns about four thousand acres of good land,
exclusive of a tract of thirteen hundred acres at Nineveh, in the
neighboring county of Adair, where six families of the community live,
who are engaged chiefly in farming, having, however, also an old
saw-mill and a tannery, and a shoemaker's and a blacksmith's shop. These
families were removed thither twenty-five years ago, because it was
thought the land there had a valuable water-power.

Bethel has now above two hundred members, and about twenty-five
families. There are fifty children in the school, I was told.

They have a saw-mill and grist-mill, a tannery, a few looms, a general
store, and a drug-store, and shops for carpenters, blacksmiths, coopers,
tinners, tailors, shoemakers, and hatters, all on a small scale, but
sufficient to supply not only themselves but the neighboring farmers.
They had formerly a distillery, but that and a woolen factory were
burned down a few years ago. They mean to rebuild the last.

All the people are Germans, and I found here many relatives of persons I
had met at Aurora.

The town has much the same characteristic features as Aurora, except
that it has not the exceptionally large and factory-like dwellings. It
has one main street, poorly kept, and in parts even without a sidewalk;
cattle and pigs were straying

<span id="img_32400"></span>

[![THE BETHEL COMMUNE, MISSOURI.](tn/32400.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/32400.jpg.md)  
THE BETHEL COMMUNE, MISSOURI.  

<span id="page_325">p. 325</span>

<span id="img_32500"></span>

[![CHURCH AT BETHEL, MISSOURI.](tn/32500.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/32500.jpg.md)  
CHURCH AT BETHEL, MISSOURI.  

about it, too, and altogether it did not look very prosperous. But the
brick dwellings which lined the street were substantially built, and the
saw and grist mill which lies at the lower end is a well-constructed
building of brick. Half-way up the main street was a drug-store, large
enough I should have said to accommodate with purges and cathartics a
town of twenty-five hundred inhabitants; and on a cross-street was
another. Besides the chief store, I was surprised to see two other
smaller shops; and still more surprised to be told that they belonged to
and were kept by persons who had left the community, but who remained
here in its midst. Of these I shall have something to say by and by.

At the head of the street stands the tavern or hotel, kept in the German
or Pennsylvania Dutch way—with a bed in the large common room, and meals
served in the kitchen. The German cooking was substantial and good. To
the right of the hotel, at some distance, stands the church, placed in
the middle of a young grove of trees planted much too thickly ever to
prosper. The church has a floor of large red tiles; a narrow pulpit at
one end; a place railed off at the other end, where the band plays on
high festivals, and two doors for the entrance of the sexes, who sit on
separate sides of the house. From the tower I had a view of the greater
part of the community's territory, which lies finely, and is evidently a
well-selected and valuable tract of land.

As in Aurora, they have preaching here every other Sunday, and no
week-day meetings or assemblages of any kind. They told me, however,
that they have a Sunday-school for the children, where they are
instructed in the Bible.

The preacher and head of this society is a Mr. Giese, appointed by Dr.
Keil; he keeps also the drug-store, where I was sorry to see liquor sold
to laboring men and others, but in a very quiet way.

The Bethel Society has six trustees, chosen by the members,

<span id="page_326">p. 326</span>

but holding office during good behavior. As in Aurora, no business
report is made to the society. Giese is cashier and book-keeper, and the
trustees examine his accounts once a year.

The real estate in Bethel is held upon a very extraordinary tenure. It
appears that—the settlement having begun in 1844—by 1847 there were in
the society some dissatisfied persons, who clamored for a partition of
the property. Dr. Keil thereupon determined to divide it, and to each
member or householder a certain part was made over as his own. Out of
the gains of the community in the three years was reserved sufficient to
support the aged and infirm, and I believe the mills were also kept as
part of the common stock. Thereupon some dissatisfied persons sold their
shares and went off. The remainder lived on in common, and without
changing their relations. To each person a deed was given of his share;
but those who remained in the society were told—so the matter was
explained to me by two of the trustees—not to put their deeds on record;
and later a deed of the whole property of the community, including the
individual holdings, was made out in the name of the president, Mr.
Giese. I did not see this document, but presume, of course, that it gave
him a title only in trust for all.

"Why did you partition the property?" I asked, curiously; and was
answered, "In order to let every one be absolutely free, and to see who
were inclined to a selfish life, and who for the community or unselfish
life." Moreover, I was assured that any one who wished might at any time
put his deed on record, and its validity would be acknowledged.

Now among the persons who left the society, six families were allowed to
retain their property, and of these several at this day live in the
midst of the village. One is a mechanic, who pursues his trade for
wages; and two others keep small shops. This appeared to me a really
extraordinary instance of

<span id="page_327">p. 327</span>

liberality or carelessness; but no one of the community seemed to think
it strange. There are also one or two farmers, not members; with one of
these, a young man, I rode into Shelbina. He told me that he had grown
up in the society; that he had gone into the army, where he served
during the war; and when he returned he had got tired of community life.
He had also got some business notions into his head, and thought the
community affairs were too loosely managed. The members, he thought, had
not sufficient knowledge of business; in which I agreed with him. But
his house stood at the end of the village, and the relations between him
and his former associates were at least so far amicable that one of the
trustees took me to him to engage my passage to the railroad station.

The society was strongest before Dr. Keil went to Oregon; he drew away,
between 1854 and 1863, about four hundred of the six hundred and fifty
persons who were gathered in Bethel in 1855; and among these were, it
seems, a large number of young men who did not want to serve in the war,
the society being non-resistants, and slipped off to Oregon to avoid the
draft. There are no accessions from outside, or at any rate so few as to
count for nothing. But, on the other hand, they assured me that they
keep most of their young people.

When one of the younger generation—for whom no property has been set
apart—wishes to leave, a sum of money is given. While I was there a
young girl was about to sever her connection with the society, and she
received, besides her clothing, twenty-five dollars in money. If she had
been older she would have received more, on the ground that she would
have earned more by her labor, beyond the cost to the society of her
care from childhood.

Some years ago they were subjected to a troublesome lawsuit, brought by
a seceding member to recover both wages and the property of his parents.
Thereupon, for the first time,

<span id="page_328">p. 328</span>

they drew up a Constitution, which all signed, and which binds them to
claim no wages.

Clothing is served to all the members alike from a common store. As to
food: as at Aurora, each family receives pigs enough for meat, and cows
enough for milk and butter; and adjoining each house is a garden of from
a quarter to half an acre, in which the women work to raise vegetables
for the home supply—the men helping at odd hours. But it is plainly
understood that each may, and indeed is expected to raise a surplus of
chickens, eggs, vegetables, fruits, etc., which is sold at the store for
such luxuries as coffee, sugar, and articles of food brought from a
distance. The calves are raised for the community. I found that one
member was a silversmith and photographer; and all that he sold to his
fellow-members of course they paid for with the surplus products of
their small holdings. Flour and meal they take from the mill as they
please, and no account is kept of it.

The trustees are also foremen, and lay out the work. The people rise
with the sun, and have three meals a day. Before every house, neatly
piled up in the street, I noticed large supplies of fire-wood, sawed and
split. They hire a few laborers to cut wood for them; it is then drawn
into town and to each man's door by the community teams; and thereupon
each family is expected to saw and split its own supplies. In fact, they
make a general effort, and with singing and much merriment the
wood-piles are properly prepared. This certainly is a convenience which
the backwood farmer's wife is often without; but the untidy look of a
great wood-pile before each house vexed my eyes.

The older men complained to me that the emigration to Oregon of so many
of their young people had crippled them; and, indeed, I saw many signs
of neglect—buildings in want of repair, and a lack of tidiness. But
still they appear to be making money; for they have recently rebuilt
their grist-mill,

<span id="page_329">p. 329</span>

and have also within a few years paid off a debt of between three and
four thousand dollars.

The religious belief of the Bethel Communists is, of course, the same
with their Aurora brethren. They venerate Dr. Keil as the wisest of
mankind, and abhor all ceremonies and sects. I was told that they
celebrate the Lord's Supper at irregular intervals, and then by a
regular supper, held either in the church or in a private house.

The people, like those of Aurora, are simple Germans of the lower class,
and they live comfortably after their fashion. They have no library, and
read few books except the Bible. They have never printed any thing. In
many of the houses I noticed two beds in one room, and that the
principal sitting-room of the family. Dr. Giese, the president, has
living with him most of the young men who are without family connections
in the society. There are usually no carpets in the houses. But every
thing is clean; the beds are neat; and it is only out of doors that
litter is to be found.

The people have but little ingenuity; there is a lack of labor-saving
devices; indeed, the only thing of the kind I saw was a wash-house,
through which the hot water from the boiler of the mill is led; but the
house itself was badly arranged and comfortless. The young people have a
band of music, but no other amusement that I could hear of. Tobacco they
use freely, and strong drink is allowed; but they have no drunkards.

As their future is secure, the people marry young, and this probably
does much to bind them to the place. No restriction is placed upon
marriage, except that if one marries out of the community, he must leave
it.

The extraordinary feature of the Bethel and Aurora communities is the
looseness of the bond which keeps the people together. They might break
up at any time; but they have remained in community for thirty years.
Their religious belief

<span id="page_330">p. 330</span>

is extremely simple, and yet it seems to suffice to hold them. They have
not had among them any good business-men, yet they have managed to make
a reasonably fair business success; for though, as I remarked concerning
Aurora, almost any farmer industrious and economical as they are would
have been pecuniarily better off after so many years, still these
people, but for their determination to have their goods in common, would
for the most part to-day have been day-laborers.

In weighing results, one should not forget the character of those who
have achieved them; and considering what these people are, it cannot be
denied that they have lived better in community than they would have
lived by individual effort.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Icarians](csus25.md)
