[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [UFOs](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](idtc00)  [Next](idtc02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*In Days To Come*, by Ashtar (Ethel P. Hill), \[1957\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

### FOREWORD

As spiritual pioneers of the New Age, there are many things to consider.
Certainly the coming of the so-called Flying Saucers is a momentous
"sign of the times," and the attitude taken towards them is an
unmistakable measuring rod of your intelligence and spiritual status.

People interested in Flying Saucers fall into three
[categories](errata.htm#0)—those who are indifferent to the whole
matter, those who are interested only in the physical aspects, who pride
themselves on their "scientific attitude," but close their mind to every
evidence not in keeping with their own theories, and those who "believe"
in Flying Saucers and the possibility of communication with Spacemen.

Among the latter we find some, it is true, who are mentally not capable
of weighing evidence and the nature of various reports and "believe"
everybody who claims to have made a contact with Spacemen and every wild
story. Naturally such people are ridiculed by the more "sober minded,"
who reserve [judgment](errata.htm#1) until they find some evidence for
acceptance. On the other hand, is he who senses the tremendous import of
Flying Saucers any less intelligent

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

than he who point blank refuses to even *consider* the possibility of
higher worlds and communications with Spacemen through extrasensory
perception?

Extrasensory perception is now scientifically proven, established by
Prof. Rhine of Duke University. And why shouldn't' beings from Outer
Space, more advanced in this sort of thing, communicate with receptive
individuals here on earth?

Now, a high degree of development of both intelligence and extrasensory
perception is of course, ideal, but the lack of the former is no more
regrettable than the lack of the latter. As to "men of science," they
must necessarily have highly trained minds, but they may be utterly
lacking in extrasensory perception or any sort of spiritual perception,
which requires the unfoldment of latent, little known faculties in man.

Fortunately for humanity, the number of those who intuitively feel the
possibility of intercommunication between dwellers on this planet and in
other worlds, is constantly growing and the biting ridicule of
materialists cannot shake their faith, for the earth is moving into a
new "dimension" and the requirements for the "survival of the fittest"
is changing. Once it was brawn, but now it is precisely the extrasensory
faculty. The life of many a soldier has been saved by a sudden "hunch."
Mental telepathy will be

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

far more common in the future and one day will be considered "standard
equipment." For the present, the man or woman who has it, is far more
likely to survive in these days of earthquakes, floods and bombings.

For he or she who gets the "hunch" to leave a certain place *before* a
bomb falls, before an earthquake rocks the house, or fire breaks out,
has a far greater chance to survive than those who do not have such
"hunches." A man may be smart enough to "get the best of the other
fellow," strong as an ox, and very "practical," and have a well trained
mind, but still may not be able to foresee disaster.

In these perilous times, it is not necessarily the one with the biggest
bank roll, or who is socially secure, and has a private bomb shelter,
who will survive, but rather the one who has learned to follow hunches,
who feels an inner "guidance," and remains calm.

In a recent lecture Franklin Thomas pointed out that in the New Age,
thoughts will be increasingly visible, and therefore deception and what
is now called "hypocrisy" will be of no avail. For the present, a man or
woman, who can sense the motive or feel the thoughts of another, is
certainly in a much "safer" position than one who is easily fooled by a
charming personality or by first class "acting." I

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

know a man who can lie with complete assurance, look you straight in the
eye, while recounting the most fantastic lies, and he fools many
so-called "intelligent" people. Whole fortunes and certainly lives have
been lost or ruined because someone "trusted" the wrong person.

So . . . the possession of extrasensory perception is no longer a
faculty that can be considered a rare luxury, but rather a *necessity
for survival*. In the Bible we are told that in the last days even the
elect would be deceived, *if* it were possible . . . Evil loves to hide
itself under many different kinds of cloaks, and the most dangerous
enemy is one who is skilled in perfect deception.

Now, as to extrasensory perception in connection with communication with
higher worlds and beings—this is, of course, the first requirement in
such a relationship. A person, no matter how much and how often he may
"affirm" his divine perfection, if he isn't *receptive* and sensitive to
higher influences, will not and cannot receive any instruction from
higher sources. It takes a humble and receptive mind, well disciplined
and properly "attuned." And before any attempt be made to commune with
higher beings, let it be said that one should first learn how to get in
touch with one's own higher self, sometimes called the "guardian angel."

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

Now here we come to an important point. Modern metaphysics, although it
has helped thousands, made them more self-reliant, positive in their
thinking, intellectually mature and responsible, nevertheless has
practically ignored the fact that there are beings in this universe
beside ourselves, beings which the ancients sometimes called angels, and
who are now being called "space men."

According to occult science and the Bible, there are orders of beings,
called by various names, who in times of great need, especially, come to
earth to offer their assistance to men. Why shouldn't they be able to
impress thoughts and ideas on receptive individuals?

All down the ages there have been mystics who claimed to have heard the
VOICE OF GOD or of angels. Today there are those who claim to hear the
voice of spacemen. And if Flying Saucers are real—and the [Air
Force](errata.htm#2) knows they are—why shouldn't they be "manned" by
intelligent beings who can send their thought-waves to those who are
receptive?

Of course, that doesn't mean that everyone who claims to have received a
message has a genuine one from a Spaceman. We are not discussing
spiritualism, as such, in the sense of getting messages from one's
departed relatives. We are here only considering

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

the possibility of communicating with beings from another world, who
come here on a "mission." Perchance they once were incarnate here on
earth and therefore have our interest at heart. Perhaps they never were
human in our sense of the word, but who nevertheless have intelligence,
insight into our problems and understanding of our needs.

Some say that Jesus came here from another planet. Why not? The interest
in Flying Saucers is raising many questions. Perhaps there are beings on
other planets that never made such a mess of things as we have done here
on earth.

According to Jacob Lorber, there are beings who did not "fall" and
forget their divine origin, but remained in their *pristine* purity.
Perhaps most of us here are "prodigal sons." There are said to be men
and women who have lived on other planets, and are here on earth to
learn certain lessons which can only be learned on earth—through a
temporary forgetfulness of their inner divinity and by working upward
through the darkness, step by step. Perhaps there are those who are only
here to help and instruct us.

At any rate, our earth is certainly not the only inhabited planet in
this vast universe. And one thing is sure, we have made a mess of our
affairs, and we are in sore need of help and guidance from higher powers
at this particular time.

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

Now, some say that any kind of spirit communication is evil. Some claim
that, according to the Bible, it is wicked to call back the dead but the
Bible itself is full of communications with spirits of departed ones.
Even Jesus spoke to Elijah and Moses on the Mount of Transfiguration.
But of course, just about anything can be proven or disproven by Bible
texts. The Bible is written in such a way that there can be many
interpretations depending on your understanding. Often, passages are
interpreted according to wishful thinking or the misunderstanding of
ancient symbolism. As to metaphysical teachers, who usually ignore the
possibility of spirit communication, most leaders themselves, even Mrs.
Eddy (who so violently opposed it), have been known to commune with
departed ones.

 

Now, the communion with higher beings can take place in various ways,
one of which is automatic writing, where the hand writes without being
directed by the conscious mind of the medium, or by mental telepathy, or
the hearing of an inner voice. Automatic writing depends, of course, on
the willingness of the individual to be a channel of communication and
to what extent the conscious mind is temporarily put in abeyance.

Regarding the communication from Ashtar, received through automatic
writing by E. P. H. (who

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

prefers to remain anonymous) there are certain interesting side lights.
Here is the story:

We had been receiving the Ashtar discourses from E. P. H. at various
intervals and considered them of a very high order. Some of them were
read on several occasions before our group, but we did not think of
spreading the news any further. One morning the thought struck us that
we should give the ASHTAR messages wider circulation than was possible
through the efforts of E. P. H., who is doing her best to send them to
as many people as possible.

That very same day, a friend came to our office and said that the latest
communication from this source indicated the expressed wish of ASHTAR
that his messages should receive wider circulation. After this
"coincidence" we wrote to E. P. H. and told her of our intentions. She
not only heartily approved, but received a message from ASHTAR addressed
to us at the NEW AGE PUBLISHING CO., expressing a "most hearty
approval."

The communication to us says in part: "A service of immeasurable worth
has been rendered us in the publishing and circulation of what you call
"the Saucer Books." Their influence and the interest they have aroused
spreads with ever increasing momentum far beyond your cognizance. We
must keep the fountain flowing, with as little contamination as

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

possible from spurious sources." There is also an intimation that
messages from Ashtar may come through various *other* "suitable
channels."

Since the appearance of the first ASHTAR messages much has transpired.
Groups in many cities have formed for the purpose of studying his
communications. New channels have also been called to our attention.
Although Harold W. Wilkins, author of FLYING SAUCERS UNCENSORED is most
critical and highly skeptical of "communications with space beings,"
nevertheless he gives one ASHTAR message in his book, leaving it to the
reader to decide what he or she thinks about it. The contents of the
message is of the same high order as the ones contained in this book,
which has changed many a life from fear and uncertainty to confidence in
the creator and the future.

It is impossible, of course, to check on the source of the material
given in the following pages. Error is always possible where
extrasensory perception is concerned. However, we offer these discourses
to the public for their perusal as we received them—unaltered—and leave
it to you to judge as to their value.

Whether Flying Saucers are "air sylphs," as sometimes claimed by some
theosophists and other clairvoyants; physical objects, as claimed by
Major

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Donald Keyhoe;
Etherships, as suggested by Meade Layne and others, or whether space
beings are entities who have once lived on this earth and since resided
on other planets, or remained cruising in space, as Daniel Fry points
out in THE WHITE SANDS INCIDENT, one thing is certain, Flying Saucers
are here and communications with space beings and extra-terrestrials is
an interesting phenomena of our times.

The messages received from extra terrestrial source seem to have one
thing in common, regardless of where they are received or through what
[instrumentality](errata.htm#3). They all, without exception, warn of
impending disaster if mankind does not adopt a more tolerant and
understanding attitude among nations and peoples, and cease the hydrogen
bomb and armament race. Typical of this is the Martian's message to Mr.
Von Cihlar in the Austrian mountains, which is quoted in full in "We
Come in Peace" by Franklin Thomas.

One more thing, however, should not be neglected at this point: There
are many who come to us or write to us, asking us how they may perhaps
make a mental contact with beings from Outer Space. Many have on their
own started to experiment with the Ouija board. We do not advise this.
People who are not properly trained and have no knowledge of spirit
communication or the vagaries of the sub-

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

conscious mind, can get into serious trouble playing around with things
they do not understand. If any space being or other high intelligence
sees that you are ready to become a channel of communication, they will
of their own initiative open the way. On your part for the present, it
is sufficient that you have high aspirations, a desire to be of service
in this great cause and leave the rest to them.

According to the latest communication from ASHTAR, this is his expressed
wish. He says, in part, "we, ourselves, will choose the time, place and
person we desire to contact. However, it will be of immense assistance
if you will maintain a feeling of friendly interest and confidence in us
and, in your mind, hold a thought of welcome. Our forces find such an
atmosphere well adapted to their work, "as they need these 'lighted
landing fields,' where they may pause for a moment or two and adapt
themselves to conditions and vibrations they encounter in fulfilling
their various assignments."

The path of spiritual unfoldment is a serious one and is beset with many
difficulties. First and foremost, discipline is necessary to control the
body and mind, without which nothing can be accomplished. The control of
thought and feeling before going to sleep is especially important. We
cannot go into detail in this short space, but the desire to be of
service,

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

and the longing to become a "lighted landing field" is a safe guide in
itself. All else will follow. For "when the pupil is ready the Master
will appear."

There are many who feel that ASHTAR and his legions are the forerunners
of the Second Coming of Christ—no matter how this is understood. Some
expect to see him in the flesh, others believe that the Spirit of Christ
will eventually rule the earth, and the spiritually "unfit" will be
eliminated. At any rate, many people feel that our so-called culture is
nearing its end and that something is about to happen. A change must
come both in world affairs and in religion whose doctrines were
fashioned not by Jesus but by medieval priests in order to keep the
ignorant in spiritual bondage to the Church.

The Ancient Wisdom ever remains the same, although Truth may be
presented in many forms, and in the course of ages may become covered
with the barnacles of superstition.

Great Spiritual Intelligences seek suitable channels to convey spiritual
truths, and at times of crisis there is always an influx of "messages"
from other worlds.

The Publishers

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Introduction](idtc02)
