[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [UFOs](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](idtc06)  [Next](idtc08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*In Days To Come*, by Ashtar (Ethel P. Hill), \[1957\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

### CHAPTER V.

All honor to all those who, through divinely inspired intuition, have
grasped the true meaning of our mission . . . who have not attributed
our various manifestations to any base or selfish motives on our part.

Any attempt to acquire anything we find of value on the planet SHAN
would be but the grossest act of robbery and utterly inexcusable, since
your inhabitants as a whole possess at this time a supply pitifully
inadequate to provide your population with the barest necessities for
physical existence. We plan to *add* to your resources . . . not
subtract!

It is not my purpose to call your attention to the *causes* for this
ghastly reversal of all Universal Creative Laws designed to prevent any
such dilemma. What very few of even your most advanced thinkers and
philosophers appear to fully realize is the fact that innumerable purely
material blessings *naturally* follow in the wake of a strict observance
of these Universal Laws.

Even your own beloved Master, the Christ, did not *formulate* these Laws
during his earthly tenure in a

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

physical body. They had existed from the beginning of creation. They
were a part of the creative process! They still are of the very essence
of ALL creative process! Refuse to follow them and you *invite*
destruction, as is self-evident in all we see of misery, want and
degradation on your planet today.

The contrast between conditions prevailing on our own well-ordered
planets and the chaotic disorder everywhere apparent as we observe life
as now lived on the planet Shan, is painful in the extreme to
contemplate.

On this account we do the more earnestly commend the heroic attempts by
many enlightened mortals to rectify the blunders, as well as the
purposely subversive activities of vast multitudes operating in direct
opposition to the most obvious dictates of their own good judgment, did
they but apply their mental machinery (however "rusty" it has become) to
the discovery of the basic *causes* of your present difficulties.

Your planet was given a rare opportunity to learn the true and
dependable Laws leading to progress along *all* lines of achievement . .
. physical, mental and spiritual . . . when the One known to you as
Jesus Christ was sent in human embodiment, not only to teach but to
demonstrate in full sight of earth dwellers, the Beauty, the Efficacy
and the Supreme

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Wisdom of
compliance with those powerful Creative Laws enunciated by the
Omnipotent Creator of All Things!

This advent of The Christ occurred at what seems to us a very short time
ago and many of us watched with fascinated eyes and the most intense
desire and hope, to see this Saviour of mankind accepted and acclaimed
Ruler of the Planet Shan by unanimous consent!

Alas! The failure of all but a mere handful of people to catch even a
fleeting glimpse of the sublime spiritual message He brought, which
would have freed them from all *bondage* to material things . . . their
complete BLINDNESS . . . filled our hearts with sorrowful despair of any
possible chance for Shan to be saved from total destruction.

I say, we who watched from our posts of observation in space, lost all
hope of ever seeing your planet rescued from the fate it had brought
upon itself. And so our interest waned. Except for an occasional visit
of compassionate scrutiny, we consigned your planet to oblivion as far
as we, personally, were concerned.

Not so your Redeemer! He had made a sacred promise to those who believed
and trusted Him implicitly. To them He said He would return in power and
great glory, and this dark orb would be illumined in spite of all
efforts of the Dark Ones to prevent it from happening.

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

We come now in full confidence that this promise is to be kept. We have
been summoned to assist in the fulfilling of this promise. Knowing from
long experience the manifold joys and satisfactions which will be yours
when you are released from all those who hold you captive to their evil
wills, we come with an excess of enthusiasm to lend our support to this
crusade. Yet we hold ourselves subject at all times to the All-wise
supervision of our Supreme Commander.

May we all band together in a divinely blessed fellowship and lend our
utmost effort to serve well and faithfully until the GLORIOUS VICTORY IS
WON and the planet Shan is at last a Shining Orb in the firmament of the
heavens.

*My Love!* A S H T A R

NOTE . . . At the present time there need be no special effort made to
communicate with us except at our special request. We ourselves will
choose the time, place and person we desire to contact. However, it will
be of immense assistance if you will maintain a feeling of friendly
interest and confidence in us and, in your mind, hold a thought of
welcome. Our forces find such an atmosphere well adapted to their work,
as they need these "Lighted Landing Fields" where they may pause for a
moment or two and adapt themselves to the conditions and vibrations

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

they must encounter in fulfilling their various assignments.

We know each one who is in sympathy with our mission and we would like
*you* to know what a help it is to have these luminous avenues through
which to reach the darker areas where much of our work must be carried
on.

We are deeply grateful for your understanding and your welcome!

*A s h t a r*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI](idtc08.md)
