[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [UFOs](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](idtc02)  [Next](idtc04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*In Days To Come*, by Ashtar (Ethel P. Hill), \[1957\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

### CHAPTER I.

[Beginning](errata.htm#4) a series of revelations concerning what is
going forward in the activities of those not at this time encased in
mortal flesh and those who are, or will be, their associates on the
earthplane. Thy friends in the Unseen be possessed of bodies more
amenable to transposition from one phase of manifestation to another (as
water may manifest as steam, as snow, as ice and so on, depending on
atmospheric conditions, natural or artificial.) This doth greatly
enhance their ability to aid mortals at this time.

Pardon the diversion! Be ye interested in concrete facts deduced from
acute sensitivity to present conditions and their inevitable
consequences. As hath been said, the precise moment of Divine
Intervention doth depend absolutely upon Man's reaction to tests
imposed, not by thy Heavenly Father or His obedient emissaries, but by
the dupes of the Enemy.

As ye do at times forget, the warfare doth rage upon the astral planes
simultaneously with its progress on the earthplane. The mere fact that
so many thousands have been "killed" doth not conclude the matter in any
wise. THEY STILL LIVE! Thus

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

our problem is to segregate them, not as to earthly
[categories](errata.htm#5) but in accord with our innate purposes and
desires. Naturally, this doth greatly complicate the task of those whose
responsibility it be to resolve the whole matter into its basic
constituents.

With regard to thine own country, which be destined to act as a
"spring-board" from which to extend *real* aid to other lands, the
present distressing exhibition of preposterous antagonism to
well-planned, inherently just and legally sanctioned procedures to rid
the administrative branches of the government of utterly subversive and
traitorous incumbents cannot be tolerated. As dastardly plots of the
enemy are exposed to view, it be for the American people to choose
whether to cast their lot with the Christ forces or the renegades. There
be no middle ground . . . to remain neutral be the most despicable crime
of all.

Ye do deplore the lapse of time, yet of what consequence be the amount
of time consumed, compared with the self-exposure of criminals posing as
benefactors of the human race? Presently many millions of souls will be
following a pathway of ever progressive evolution, or doomed to tread
the downward path of misery and degradation. Is it not worth the price
of a few lagging months of desperate conflict twixt Darkness and Light,
twixt vicious Hatred and superhuman Courage to make certain every mortal

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

now living is in his or her rightful place? Not in accord with some
arbitrary law or human decision but according to the unerring knowledge
and wisdom of Him who doth see and judge the inmost secrets and hidden
motives of man's hearts?

I say, it will be settled, not by any natural advantage of superior
numbers or the use of weapons devised by scientists who have (or think
they have) contacted and harnessed the secret powers of Universal
Energy. I SAY, NOT SO! It will be brought to an abrupt and
incontrovertible conclusion by "AN ACT OF GOD" comparable to none
heretofore known to mortals. This planet be not caught in a net of
inextricable difficulties but be emerging from its super-imposed
domination by semi-demonic demagogues leading to its destruction. It be
placing its trust in the only Power able to deliver it from its
impending fate.

I say to thee in all sacred solemnity of pronouncement, THIS THY COUNTRY
SHALL BE SAVED AS BY A MIRACLE! I say not it will be a peaceful
deliverance but through the unfaltering loyalty of millions who place
their faith in thy Master, the Christ of God, this land will be cleansed
from the abominations now infesting it. It shall be the center from
which shall issue those injunctions and powerful energies which shall
lead the world into an intense,

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

burning desire to know and to do the Will of the Lord God of All
Creation, as revealed by their coming King, who shall reign over this
regenerated world without hindrance from those who now harass and seek
to destroy His faithful servants.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II](idtc04)
