[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [UFOs](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](idtc13)  [Next](idtc15.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*In Days To Come*, by Ashtar (Ethel P. Hill), \[1957\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

### CHAPTER XII

*A LETTER TO YOU  
FROM SCHARE!*

We will continue our description of life on Venus, as a fitting prelude
to our well earned privilege of serving in our present capacity . . .
not technically designated as "teachers" but more in the role of "elder
brothers," guiding, encouraging and commending any forward step, as our
comrades of earth fall into line with our steady march toward our goal .
. . the acceptance of our Beloved Commander-in-Chief, Jesus Christ, as
Ruler of Shan (planet earth)! Until he mounts his rightful throne of
Power and Glory, and is accepted by mankind in a true spirit of loyalty
and devotion, we are bound by our sacred word of honor to serve in any
way which will speed that denouement.

Let us, then, proceed to our task of enlightening our friends on Shan as
to some aspects of our accustomed mode of "home life," which has
afforded us a maximum of physical delight (my scribe questions that
term) but we *do* enjoy the sensory pleasures which you fear lost as you
make the transition

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

into what you have named the "Fourth Dimension." True, it takes a little
preparation to enter into this higher vibrational environment and
participate to the fullest extent in the rare privileges which are ours.
However, I assure you without equivocation our joy in the satisfying of
every desire (since we have learned the secret of desiring only what is
for our highest good) goes so far beyond anything you have experienced
in your present earth-life that we are at a loss to know how to employ
phrases strong enough to make it real to you!

When you "hear" the full, complete harmony of a celestial orchestra or
the crystal-clear tones of a heart-stirring melody sung by one you
regard as angelic . . . when a fragrance of unforgettable sweetness is
wafted to you from you know not where . . . when a mental vision is
reflected from some entrancing beauty spot, perhaps on Venus itself .. .
when there surges through your entire being ecstasy which sets your
heart aglow with love for every creature, for every growing thing from
tiniest blossom to towering monarch of the forest, for every mortal who
worships the great Creator . . . when you enjoy the full flavor of a
delectable contribution to your daily repast direct from Nature's
matchless storehouse of edibles (unspoiled by man's tampering processes)
. . . have you not had a tantalizing foretaste of the "sensory
pleasures" which many earth

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

people imagine they must forego upon leaving their earth home which has
yielded them all too scanty a portion of genuine pleasure?

Yet it is an undeniable fact that we retain, in amplified, intensified
form suited to our more sensitized capacity for enjoyment, all you have
found truly pleasurable in your "material existence" as you call it. We
*hear* and are especially susceptible to *aromas* . . . though we have
none offensive to our sensitive nostrils. We have *clarity* of vision,
extending to realms hidden from your eyes, no matter how expert your
oculist may be! Our sense of touch is delicately adjusted to objects
cast in a more etheric mold than those you encounter, and more easily
shattered. In fact, they may be altered or even obliterated by the power
of thought alone (which might be considered a desirable achievement in
the case of decrepit bits of furnishings I have observed, especially in
what you name your "attics"?)

Please! I have the greatest possible respect and admiration for anyone
who makes the best of their possessions however crude . . . but I was
thinking of what you often refer to as "trash" kept about for no good
reason. I heartily concur in "C. N.'s" advice to "streamline your
possessions."

I have not touched upon the more spiritual aspects of our lives, which
to us are precious beyond all else.

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Our lives abound
in an ever-expanding appreciation of blessings accruing from a free
expression of our highest aspirations. We shall try to take you further
into our confidence and our plans for your happiness when next we chat
with you. Until then, my love and my warmest gratitude for your
assurances of your confidence and affection, received by mail and via
"wireless!" Thank you and God bless you!

*ASHTAR       *

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII](idtc15.md)
