[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [UFOs](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](idtc08)  [Next](idtc10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*In Days To Come*, by Ashtar (Ethel P. Hill), \[1957\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

### CHAPTER VII

*Greetings to Our Friends on the Planet Shan from  
Space Men Stationed at Headquarters on  
Our Base Schare!*

There are a few suggestions I would like to make, in part to answer many
inquiries by those serious in their wish to be of service in
establishing the incoming "Kingdom of Heaven on Earth" and, therefore,
desirous of giving us assistance in our initial efforts to awaken your
people to the present peril.

While the cleansing process is unavoidable, as you well know, before a
more perfect system can be evolved, there are many ways by which the
discomforts and inconveniences of such a clearance of offensive debris
can be lessened.

Whereas, in certain sections of the globe, nothing but a complete
sweeping away of every vestige of ancient abominations and their residue
will serve the purpose . . . there are countless instances where a
determined effort by individuals, groups and organizations to raise
their standards in conformity with well known principles of New Age
living would obviate the necessity for such drastic measures.

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

Consider for a moment if you will, the *reasons* for this type of
disastrous occurrences. Your own history furnishes any number of
examples of corruption which led to the downfall of nations or their
burial in the ocean depths. Has virtuous and humane conduct ever been
known to wreck a civilization?

We are nearing the season when the people of this nation observe a day
of Thanksgiving. It would appear to be an appropriate time to consider
the blessings for which there is reason to be thankful. They consist of
a vast array of material possessions which add to your comfort and
pleasures in varying degrees. No country in the world has more abundant
cause for gratitude to the Giver of all Good Gifts! And yet, observing
the thought-streams ascending from the mass mind of humanity, we find a
great preponderance of dissatisfaction discoloring even the prayers of
the people! True gratitude, where may it be found?

You rise up in protest saying, "How can we give thanks for all the
terrible things which are being brought to light . . . the treachery,
dishonesty, deceit and disloyalty to all which is right and just? Tell
us that!" Why ask so inane a question? No one is asking you to say you
are thankful for things of that sort! But have you thought to thank your
Heavenly Father that they *are* being brought

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

to light? To thank Him you are being shown so clearly the evils which
*must be abolished?*

Do you recall learning the multiplication table? What has that to do
with world conditions? I will tell you! It has never been denied that
five and five make ten. Or that five times ten equals fifty! These are
facts accepted in every country under the sun. On other planets also.
You start with one, then you build up by addition or multiplication to a
hundred, a thousand, a million! And on up. My suggestion is that you
start with "one" . . . yourself! Four of our Space Men will join you in
thanking God for your freedom to think and act honorably, truthfully,
justly, loyally. Other mortals will join you . . . and with each one
there comes the added force from our side . . . fourfold! No doubt, you
and many others have done this, not realizing quite how much it meant in
the conflict now going on.

We have traversed the length and breadth of this and other lands. We
have found multitudes of fine, upright, generous-minded people. We have
taken account of every one of them. We have watched them at home, in
business, at work, at play, in fortune, in misfortune, in peaceful
times, when disaster strikes! At all times they are calm, resourceful,
lending courage and strength to the weak and fearful! We know thousands
upon thousands of such men, women and children. We thank God for them!

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Were your whole
world peopled with persons like them, what a Thanksgiving Day there
would be!

Some think of us as "Destroyers!" Just sit down quietly for a few
moments and think of all the things that make you anxious, afraid,
unhappy, sorrowful! THESE ARE THE THINGS WE HAVE COME TO DESTROY! They
have thrown everything out of balance, off their proper orbit! Yes, I
mean physical things! The weather, the ocean tides, the air you breathe,
the food you eat, the very earth on which you walk! They have affected
all human relationships, business, government, commerce, society in
general. They are the "intangibles" which permeate all existence and
either destroy or create according to their character. (You know their
names quite well! )

This coming Thanksgiving Day we from out of space join you in praising a
beneficent Heavenly Father and His Beloved Son for every true, every
beautiful creation of His which has not been distorted and rendered
vicious by Man's misuse.

We join you in thanking Him that where you are caught in a trap and are
not able to put into practice those good impulses and purposes you feel
so strongly, He is sending mighty Forces to your rescue!

We join you in thanking Him that when this sad and distressful season of
cleansing is over, we may

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

confidently anticipate a joyous time of re-building,
[re-modeling](errata.htm#9), re-creating all things on this earth in
perfect harmony and accord with the design and infinitely wise
specifications of the Master Architect of the Universe!

To this glorious and sublime end we pledge our hearts, our minds and
every power and skill we possess, till our sacred mission is completed!

We thank God our mutual success is assured and we shall see our Beloved
Master, the Christ of God crowned King of Kings!

Unto Him be honor, praise and glory now and forevermore!

<div align="right">

<table data-border="0" width="33%">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="655"><p>ASHTAR AND HIS ASSOCIATES<br />
from Venus and neighboring planets in loving cooperation with all friends on the planet Shan.</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

*A Simple Word of Warmest Greeting to All My Friends whom I Reach
through this Contact Point:* I join with you in honoring One who almost
two millenniums ago, as you reckon time, humbled Himself and entered an
earthly existence as an ordinary mortal. Needless to comment that I had
known Him previous to this incarnation and had held Him in deepest
reverence and adoration. How it was possible for any man, woman or child
to become acquainted with Him and fail to give Him the warmest

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

devotion of their hearts is a mystery too deep for me to fathom.

And so today, it is with joy in my own heart that I behold the ever
widening array of those who truly worship Him, whatever their own
particular form of religious observance may be.

Our Forces on Schare will join you with one accord as you endeavor to
give expression to the honor due Him.

May you be granted a new and glorified vision of His majestic grandeur
and absolute simplicity of speech and bearing and . . . Oh, that you
might know the depth of His compassion for the erring children of the
planet Shan!

To you who love Him, I can only say, "Did you but know Him as I do, you
would love Him more . . . *MUCH MORE!*

To all my friends           
"A Merry and a Holy Christmas!"        
My Love!     
(Signed) A S H T A R.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII](idtc10)
