[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [UFOs](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](idtc04)  [Next](idtc06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*In Days To Come*, by Ashtar (Ethel P. Hill), \[1957\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

### CHAPTER III.

*I salute You from Schare!* A few further words of explanation regarding
our presence and purpose. At the request of your Heavenly Father, we
come to assist your Unseen Guardians who are greatly perturbed over the
state of your planet Shan. We come ten million strong with a full
complement of appliances and all necessary forces of an etheric nature
to use in any manner deemed expedient to block the designs of
destructive forces or render their weapons innocuous. We realize certain
portions of earthly terrain are marked *for* destruction. In pursuance
of this program, we withhold interference when so instructed by the
Hierarchy in uninterrupted touch with the Father of us all. When certain
prearranged signals are received, we send thousands of ventlas to places
where dangerous conditions exist.

Perhaps, you will more readily comprehend our mission of merciful
protection when I tell you countless instances of planned sabotage have
gone awry owing to the vigilance and prompt action of our men.
Destruction for destruction's sake is not our practice. A condition may
be most distressing and

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

call forth our earnest desire to render assistance, yet we are bound by
the most sacred of vows to intervene only at the times and places
indicated by our Master or His accredited lieutenants. Once given
implicit instructions regarding a particular situation, we are then free
to work out the minutiae of operations according to our best wisdom and
skill. But there is never a moment when we may not confer with our
Commander-in-Chief should we feel any doubt over some proposed step to
be taken.

Our means of thought communication and visual observation of any person
or place on the entire globe is beyond your present comprehension. It
makes possible the fulfilling of a promise many times repeated, that all
who put their trust in God will be Divinely protected under all
circumstances. Your Heavenly Father uses His dedicated servants to carry
out His will, choosing the ones best fitted to act in the various roles
demanded in any crisis.

Our appearance in physical form or the materializing of the ships we use
occur only on instructions from our Headquarters far above your bases in
your stratosphere. They follow a predetermined schedule, not as your
clocks and calendars but in conformity with carefully computed sequences
of events depending largely on mortal reactions to each step in the
program. Many factors enter into the decisions made, such as planetary
influences of a magnetic

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

type, astral conditions, the activity of forces concealed within the
earth body, constantly changing vibratory rates in different sections of
the globe owing to the people's awakening to their perils and desperate
attempts to extricate themselves. This latter consideration is perhaps
the most potent point in releasing our forces in their behalf. They must
themselves instigate the attempt to gain their freedom before we can go
to their rescue.

Of course, we fully sympathize with your interest in the mechanical
construction and motive power used to achieve the feats of apparent
wizardry which mark our arrival in your material world. Even though we
may, for some specific purpose, invite you for a ride, it will be
impossible for you to ferret out our secret of propulsion, since you
have rejected opportunities afforded you to become acquainted with laws
governing these *higher forms* of energy. Such knowledge has been
prostituted for illicit purposes of destruction, in the past.

Not until your world has dispensed with all need for destructive weapons
and all desire to misuse the finer forces of this God-governed Universe,
will you be permitted to experiment with ever-existent etheric energies
holding magic possibilities for those qualified to employ them as
intended by the Creator to whom they owe their existence.

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

We come now as Liberators but look forward to a more joyous mission,
when we will mingle freely with you and gladly initiate you into many
delights and privileges we possess. May we count on your cooperation in
bringing that happy time very near? We hope so! My love and my
blessings!

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0" width="33%">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="655"><p>I AM ASHTAR</p>
<p>Commandant quadra sector, station Schare.</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV](idtc06.md)
