[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080013)  [Next](1080015) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.X"></span>

<span id="ii.X-p1"></span> <span id="ii.X-p1.1"></span><span
class="c20"><span id="ii.X-p1.2"></span>Psalm X. <span
id="fr_381"></span>[382](#fn_381) </span>

<span id="ii.X-p3"></span>“Why, O Lord,” saith he, “hast Thou withdrawn
afar off?” ([Psa. 10.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#001)<span
id="ii.X-p3.1"></span>). Then he who thus inquired, as if all on a
sudden he understood, or as if he asked, though he knew, that he might
teach, adds, “Thou despisest in due seasons, in tribulations:” that is,
Thou despisest seasonably, and causest tribulations to inflame men’s
minds with longing for Thy coming. For that fountain of life is sweeter
to them that have much thirst. Therefore he hints the reason of the
delay, saying, “Whilst the ungodly vaunteth himself, the poor man is
inflamed” ([Psa. 10.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#002)<span
id="ii.X-p3.2"></span>). Wondrous it is and true with what earnestness
of good hope the little ones are inflamed unto an upright living by
comparison with sinners. In which mystery it comes to pass, that even
heresies are permitted to exist; not that heretics themselves wish this,
but because Divine Providence worketh this result from their sins, which
both maketh and ordaineth the light; but ordereth only the darkness,
that by comparison therewith the light may be more pleasant, as by
comparison with heretics the discovery of truth is more sweet. For so,
by this comparison, the approved, who are known to God, are made
manifest among men.

<span id="ii.X-p4"></span>1. “They are taken in their thoughts, which
they think:” that is, their evil thoughts become chains to them. But how
become they chains? <span id="page_38">p. 38</span> <span
id="ii.X-Page_38"></span>“For the sinner is praised,” saith he, “in the
desires of his soul” ([Psa. 10.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#003)<span
id="ii.X-p4.1"></span>). The tongues of flatterers bind souls in sin.
For there is pleasure in doing those things, in which not only is no
reprover feared, but even an approver heard. “And he that does
unrighteous deeds is blessed.” Hence “are they taken in their thoughts,
which they think.”

<span id="ii.X-p5"></span>2. “The sinner hath angered the Lord” ([Psa.
10.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#004)<span id="ii.X-p5.1"></span>). Let
no one congratulate the man that prospers in his way, to whose sins no
avenger is nigh, and an approver is by. This is the greater anger of the
Lord. For the sinner hath angered the Lord, that he should suffer these
things, that is, should not suffer the scourging of correction. “The
sinner hath angered the Lord: according to the multitude of His anger He
will not search it out.” Great is His anger, when He searcheth not out,
when He as it were forgetteth and marketh not sin, and by fraud and
wickedness man attains to riches and honours: which will especially be
the case in that Antichrist, who will seem to man blessed to that
degree, that he will even be thought God. <span
id="fr_382"></span>[383](#fn_382) But how great this anger of God is, we
are taught by what follows.

<span id="ii.X-p7"></span>3. “God is not in his sight, his ways are
polluted in all time” ([Psa. 10.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#005)<span
id="ii.X-p7.1"></span>). He that knows what in the soul gives joy and
gladness, knows how great an ill it is to be abandoned by the light of
truth: since a great ill do men reckon the blindness of their bodily
eyes, whereby this light is withdrawn. How great then the punishment he
endures, who through the prosperous issue of his sins is brought to that
pass, that God is not in his sight, and that his ways are polluted in
all time, that is, his thoughts and counsels are unclean! “Thy judgments
are taken away from his face.” For the mind conscious of evil, whilst it
seems to itself to suffer no punishment, believes that God doth not
judge, and so are God’s judgments taken away from its face; while this
very thing is great condemnation. “And he shall have dominion over all
his enemies.” For so is it delivered, that he will overcome all kings,
and alone obtain the kingdom; since too according to the Apostle, who
preaches concerning him, “He shall sit in the temple of God, exalting
himself above all that is worshipped and that is called God.” <span
id="fr_383"></span>[384](#fn_383)

<span id="ii.X-p9"></span>4. And seeing that being delivered over to the
lust of his own heart, and predestinated to extreme <span
id="fr_384"></span>[385](#fn_384) condemnation, he is to come, by wicked
arts, to that vain and empty height and rule; therefore it follows, “For
he hath said in his heart, I shall not move from generation to
generation without evil” ([Psa.
10.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#006)<span id="ii.X-p10.1"></span>):
that is, my fame and my name will not pass from this generation to the
generation of posterity, unless by evil arts I acquire so lofty a
principality, that posterity cannot be silent concerning it. For a mind
abandoned and void of good arts, and estranged from the light of
righteousness, by bad arts devises a passage for itself to a fame so
lasting, as is celebrated even in posterity. And they that cannot be
known for good, desire that men should speak of them even for ill,
provided that their name spread far and wide. And this I think is here
meant, “I shall not move from generation to generation without evil.”
There is too another interpretation, if a mind vain and full of error
supposes that it cannot come from the mortal generation to the
generation of eternity, but by bad arts: which indeed was also reported
of Simon, when he thought that he would gain heaven by wicked arts, and
pass from the human generation to the generation divine by magic. <span
id="fr_385"></span>[386](#fn_385) Where then is the wonder, if that man
of sin too, who is to fill up all the wickedness and ungodliness, which
all false prophets have begun, and to do such “great signs; that, if it
were possible, he should deceive the very elect,” <span
id="fr_386"></span>[387](#fn_386) shall say in his heart, “I shall not
move from generation to generation without evil”?

<span id="ii.X-p13"></span>5. “Whose mouth is full of cursing and
bitterness and deceit” ([Psa.
10.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#007)<span id="ii.X-p13.1"></span>).
For it is a great curse to seek heaven by such abominable arts, and to
get together such earnings for acquiring the eternal seat. But of this
cursing his mouth is full. For this desire shall not take effect, but
within his mouth only will avail to destroy him, who dared promise
himself such things with bitterness and deceit, that is, with anger and
insidiousness, whereby he is to bring over the multitude to his side.
“Under his tongue is toil and grief.” Nothing is more toilsome than
unrighteousness and ungodliness: upon which toil follows grief; for that
the toil is not only without fruit, but even unto destruction. Which
toil and grief refer to that which he hath said in his heart, “I shall
not be moved from generation to generation without evil.” And therefore,
“under his tongue,” not on his tongue, because he will devise these
things in silence, and to men will speak other things, that he may
appear good and just, and a son of God.

<span id="ii.X-p14"></span>6. “He lieth in ambush with the rich” ([Psa.
10.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#008)<span id="ii.X-p14.1"></span>).
What rich, but those whom he will load with this world’s gifts? And he
is therefore said to lie in ambush with them, because he will display
their false happiness to deceive men; who, when with a perverted will
they desire to be such as they, and seek not the good things eternal,
will fall into his snares. “That in the dark he may kill the innocent.”
“In the dark,”  <span id="fr_387"></span>[388](#fn_387) I suppose, is
said, where it is not easily understood what should be sought, or what
avoided. <span id="page_39">p. 39</span> <span
id="ii.X-Page_39"></span>Now to kill the innocent, is of an innocent to
make one guilty.

<span id="ii.X-p16"></span>7. “His eyes look against the poor,” for he
is chiefly to persecute the righteous, of whom it is said, “Blessed are
the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven” <span
id="fr_388"></span>[389](#fn_388) ([Psa.
10.9](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#009)<span id="ii.X-p17.2"></span>).
“He lieth in wait in a secret place, as a lion in his den.” By a lion in
a den, he means one in whom both violence and deceit will work. For the
first persecution of the Church was violent, when by proscriptions, by
torments, by murders, the Christians were compelled to sacrifice:
another persecution is crafty, which is now conducted by heretics of any
kind and false brethren: there remains a third, which is to come by
Antichrist, than which there is nothing more perilous; for it will be at
once violent and crafty. Violence he will exert in empire, craft in
miracles. To the violence, the word “lion” refers; to craft, the words
“in his den.” And these are again repeated with a change of order. “He
lieth in wait,” he says, “that he may catch the poor;” this hath
reference to craft: but what follows, “To catch the poor whilst he
draweth him,” is put to the score of violence. For “draweth” means, he
bringeth him to himself by violence, by whatever tortures he can.

<span id="ii.X-p18"></span>8. Again, the two which follow are the same.
“In his snare he will humble him,” is craft ([Psa.
10.10](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#010)<span id="ii.X-p18.1"></span>).
“He shall decline and fall, whilst he shall have domination over the
poor,” is violence. For a “snare” naturally points to “lying in wait:”
but domination most openly conveys the idea of terror. And well does he
say, “He will humble him in his snare.” For when he shall begin to do
those signs, the more wonderful they shall appear to men, the more those
Saints that shall be then will be despised, and, as it were, set at
nought: he, whom they shall resist by righteousness and innocence, shall
seem to overcome by the marvels that he does. But “he shall decline and
fall, whilst he shall have domination over the poor;” that is, whilst he
shall inflict whatsoever punishments he will upon the servants of God
that resist him.

<span id="ii.X-p19"></span>9. But how shall he decline, and fall? “For
he hath said in his heart, God hath forgotten; He turneth away His face,
that He see not unto the end” ([Psa.
10.11](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#011)<span id="ii.X-p19.1"></span>).
This is declining, and the most wretched fall, while the mind of a man
prospers as it were in its iniquities, and thinks that it is spared;
when it is being blinded, and kept for an extreme and timely vengeance:
of which the Psalmist now speaks: “Arise, O Lord God, let Thine hand be
exalted” ([Psa. 10.12](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#012)<span
id="ii.X-p19.2"></span>): that is, let Thy power be made manifest. Now
he had said above, “Arise, O Lord, let not man prevail, let the heathen
be judged in Thy sight:” <span id="fr_389"></span>[390](#fn_389) that
is, in secret, where God alone seeth. This comes to pass when the
ungodly have arrived at what seems great happiness to men: over whom is
placed a lawgiver, such as they had deserved to have, of whom it is
said, “Place a lawgiver over them, O Lord, let the heathen know that
they are men.” <span id="fr_390"></span>[391](#fn_390) But now after
that hidden punishment and vengeance it is said, “Arise, O Lord God, let
Thine hand be exalted;” not of course in secret, but now in glory most
manifest. “That Thou forget not the poor unto the end;” that is, as the
ungodly think, who say, “God hath forgotten, He turneth away His face,
that He should not see unto the end.” Now they deny that God seeth unto
the end, who say that He careth not for things human and earthly, for
the earth is as it were the end of things; in that it is the last
element, in which men labour in most orderly sort, but they cannot see
the order of their labours, which specially belongs to the hidden things
of the Son. The Church then labouring in such times, like a ship in
great waves and tempests, awaketh the Lord as if He were sleeping, that
He should command the winds, and calm should be restored. <span
id="fr_391"></span>[392](#fn_391) He says therefore, “Arise, O Lord God,
let Thine hand be exalted, that Thou forget not the poor unto the end.”

<span id="ii.X-p23"></span>10. Accordingly understanding now the
manifest judgment, and in exultation at it, they say, “Wherefore hath
the ungodly angered God?” ([Psa.
10.13](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#013)<span id="ii.X-p23.1"></span>);
that is, what hath it profited him to do so great evil? “For he said in
his heart, He will not require it.” Then follows, “For Thou seest toil
and considerest anger, to deliver them into Thine hands” ([Psa.
10.14](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#014)<span id="ii.X-p23.2"></span>).
This sentence looks for distinct explanation, wherein if there shall be
error it becomes obscure. For thus has the ungodly said in his heart,
God will not require it, as though God regarded toil and anger, to
deliver them into His hands; that is, as though He feared toil and
anger, and for this reason would spare them, lest their punishment be
too burdensome to Him, or lest He should be disturbed by the storm of
anger: as men generally act, excusing themselves of vengeance, to avoid
toil or anger.

<span id="ii.X-p24"></span>11. “The poor hath been left unto Thee.” For
therefore is he poor, that is, hath despised all the temporal goods of
this world, that Thou only mayest be his hope. “Thou wilt be a helper to
the orphan,” that is, to him to whom his father this world, by whom he
was born after the flesh, dies, and who can already say, “The world hath
been crucified unto me, and I unto the world.” <span
id="fr_392"></span>[393](#fn_392) For of such orphans God becomes the
Father. The Lord teaches us in truth that His disciples do become
orphans, to whom He saith, “Call <span id="page_40">p. 40</span> <span
id="ii.X-Page_40"></span>no man father on earth.” <span
id="fr_393"></span>[394](#fn_393) Of which He first Himself gave an
example in saying, “Who is my mother, and who my brethren?” <span
id="fr_394"></span>[395](#fn_394) Whence some most mischievous
heretics <span id="fr_395"></span>[396](#fn_395) would assert that He
had no mother; and they do not see that it follows from this, if they
pay attention to these words, that neither had His disciples fathers.
For as He said, “Who is my mother?” so He taught them, when He said,
“Call no man your father on earth.”

<span id="ii.X-p29"></span>12. “Break the arm of the sinner and of the
malicious” ([Psa. 10.15](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#015)<span
id="ii.X-p29.1"></span>); of him, namely, of whom it was said above, “He
shall have dominion over all his enemies.” He called his power then, his
arm; to which Christ’s power is opposed, of which it is said, “Arise, O
Lord God, let Thine hand be exalted. His fault shall be required, and he
shall not be found because of it;” <span
id="fr_396"></span>[397](#fn_396) that is he shall be judged for his
sins, and himself shall perish because of his sin. After this, what
wonder if there follow, “The Lord shall reign for ever and world without
end; ye heathen shall perish out of His earth”? ([Psa.
10.16](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#016)<span id="ii.X-p30.3"></span>).
He uses heathen for sinners and ungodly.

<span id="ii.X-p31"></span>13. “The Lord hath heard the longing of the
poor” ([Psa. 10.17](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#017)<span
id="ii.X-p31.1"></span>): that longing wherewith they were burning, when
in the straits and tribulations of this world they desired the day of
the Lord. “Thine ear hath heard the preparation of their heart.” This is
the preparation of the heart, of which it is sung in another Psalm, “My
heart is prepared, O God, my heart is prepared:” <span
id="fr_397"></span>[398](#fn_397) of which the Apostle says, “But if we
hope for what we see not, we do with patience wait for it.” <span
id="fr_398"></span>[399](#fn_398) Now, by the ear of God, we ought,
according to a general rule of interpretation, to understand not a
bodily member, but the power whereby He heareth; and so (not to repeat
this often) by whatever members of His are mentioned, which in us are
visible and bodily, must be understood powers of operation. For we must
not suppose it anything bodily, in that <span
id="fr_399"></span>[400](#fn_399) the Lord God hears not the sound of
the voice, but the preparation of the heart.

<span id="ii.X-p35"></span>14. “To judge for the orphan and the humble”
([Psa. 10.18](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#018)<span
id="ii.X-p35.1"></span>): that is, not for him who is conformed to this
world, nor for the proud. For it is one thing to judge the orphan,
another to judge for the orphan. He judges the orphan even, who condemns
him; but he judges for the orphan, who delivers sentence for him. “That
man add not further to magnify himself upon earth.” For they are men, of
whom it was said, “Place a lawgiver over them, O Lord: let the heathen
know that they are men.” <span id="fr_400"></span>[401](#fn_400) But he
too, who in this same passage is understood to be placed over them, will
be man, of whom it is now said, “That man add not further to magnify
himself upon earth:” namely, when the Son of Man shall come to judge for
the orphan, who hath put off from himself the old man, and thus, as it
were, buried his father.

<span id="ii.X-p37"></span>15. After the hidden things then of the Son,
of which, in this Psalm, many things have been said, will come the
manifest things of the Son, of which a little has been now said at the
end of the same Psalm. But the title is given from the former, which
here occupy the larger portion. Indeed, the very day of the Lord’s
advent may be rightly numbered among the hidden things of the Son,
although the very presence of the Lord itself will be manifest. For of
that day it is said, that no man knoweth it, neither angels, nor powers,
nor the Son of man. <span id="fr_401"></span>[402](#fn_401) What then so
hidden, as that which is said to be hidden even to the Judge Himself,
not as regards knowledge, but disclosure? But concerning the hidden
things of the Son, even if any one would not wish to understand the Son
of God, but of David himself, to whose name the whole Psalter is
attributed, for the Psalms we know are called the Psalms of David, let
him give ear to those words in which it is said to the Lord, “Have mercy
on us, O Son of David:”  <span id="fr_402"></span>[403](#fn_402) and so
even in this manner let him understand the same Lord Christ, concerning
whose hidden things is the inscription of this Psalm. For so likewise is
it said by the Angel: “God shall give unto Him the throne of His father
David.” <span id="fr_403"></span>[404](#fn_403) Nor to this
understanding of it is the sentence opposed in which the same Lord asks
of the Jews, “If Christ be the Son of David, how then doth he in spirit
call Him Lord, saying, The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit Thou on my right
hand, until I put Thine enemies under Thy feet.” <span
id="fr_404"></span>[405](#fn_404) For it was said to the unskilled, who
although they looked for Christ’s coming, yet expected Him as man, not
as the Power and Wisdom of God. He teacheth then, in that place, the
most true and pure faith, that He is both the Lord of king David, in
that He is the Word in the beginning, God with God, <span
id="fr_405"></span>[406](#fn_405) by which all things were made; and
Son, in that He was made to him of the seed of David according to the
flesh. For He doth not say, Christ is not David’s Son, but if ye already
hold that He is his Son, learn how He is his Lord: and do not hold in
respect of Christ that He is the Son of Man, for so is He David’s
Son; <span id="fr_406"></span>[407](#fn_406) and leave out that He is
the Son of God, for so is He David’s Lord. <span
id="fr_407"></span>[408](#fn_407)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_381"></span>[37:382](1080014.htm#fr_381) <span
id="ii.X-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.X-p2"></span> The two Psalms are combined in the Vulgate.
But here the verses begin again, treating this as “Ps. x. *secundum
Hebræos*.” \[And so our English version.—C.\]

<span id="fn_382"></span>[38:383](1080014.htm#fr_382) <span
id="ii.X-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.X-p6"></span> \[Compare Hippolytus, A.N.F. vol. v. pp.
205–219.—C.\]

<span id="fn_383"></span>[38:384](1080014.htm#fr_383) <span
id="ii.X-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.X-p8"></span> [2 Thess. ii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#004)<span id="ii.X-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_384"></span>[38:385](1080014.htm#fr_384) <span
id="ii.X-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.X-p10"></span> *Ultimæ*.

<span id="fn_385"></span>[38:386](1080014.htm#fr_385) <span
id="ii.X-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.X-p11"></span> [Acts viii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#009)<span id="ii.X-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_386"></span>[38:387](1080014.htm#fr_386) <span
id="ii.X-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ii.X-p12"></span> [Matt. xxiv.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#024)<span id="ii.X-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_387"></span>[38:388](1080014.htm#fr_387) <span
id="ii.X-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ii.X-p15"></span> *In occultis*.

<span id="fn_388"></span>[39:389](1080014.htm#fr_388) <span
id="ii.X-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ii.X-p17"></span> [Matt. v.
3](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#003)<span id="ii.X-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_389"></span>[39:390](1080014.htm#fr_389) <span
id="ii.X-p19.3"></span>

<span id="ii.X-p20"></span> [Ps. ix.
19](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#019)<span id="ii.X-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_390"></span>[39:391](1080014.htm#fr_390) <span
id="ii.X-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ii.X-p21"></span> [Ps. ix.
20](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#020)<span id="ii.X-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_391"></span>[39:392](1080014.htm#fr_391) <span
id="ii.X-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ii.X-p22"></span> [Matt. viii.
24-26](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#024)<span id="ii.X-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_392"></span>[39:393](1080014.htm#fr_392) <span
id="ii.X-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ii.X-p25"></span> [Gal. vi.
14](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#014)<span id="ii.X-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_393"></span>[40:394](1080014.htm#fr_393) <span
id="ii.X-p25.2"></span>

<span id="ii.X-p26"></span> [Matt. xxiii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#009)<span id="ii.X-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_394"></span>[40:395](1080014.htm#fr_394) <span
id="ii.X-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ii.X-p27"></span> [Matt. xii.
48](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#048)<span id="ii.X-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_395"></span>[40:396](1080014.htm#fr_395) <span
id="ii.X-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ii.X-p28"></span> \[Manichees. See A.N.F. vol. vi. p.
252.—C.\]

<span id="fn_396"></span>[40:397](1080014.htm#fr_396) <span
id="ii.X-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ii.X-p30"></span> LXX. var. lect. <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.X-p30.1"></span>δι’ αὐτὴν</span>, “because of it.” These words
should be marked as part of the text, as some <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.X-p30.2"></span>mss</span>. are pointed.

<span id="fn_397"></span>[40:398](1080014.htm#fr_397) <span
id="ii.X-p31.2"></span>

<span id="ii.X-p32"></span> [Ps. lvii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#007)<span id="ii.X-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_398"></span>[40:399](1080014.htm#fr_398) <span
id="ii.X-p32.2"></span>

<span id="ii.X-p33"></span> [Rom. viii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#025)<span id="ii.X-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_399"></span>[40:400](1080014.htm#fr_399) <span
id="ii.X-p33.2"></span>

<span id="ii.X-p34"></span> *Al*. wherewith.

<span id="fn_400"></span>[40:401](1080014.htm#fr_400) <span
id="ii.X-p35.2"></span>

<span id="ii.X-p36"></span> [Ps. ix.
20](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#020)<span id="ii.X-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_401"></span>[40:402](1080014.htm#fr_401) <span
id="ii.X-p37.1"></span>

<span id="ii.X-p38"></span> [Mark xiii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#032)<span id="ii.X-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_402"></span>[40:403](1080014.htm#fr_402) <span
id="ii.X-p38.2"></span>

<span id="ii.X-p39"></span> [Matt. xx.
30](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#030)<span id="ii.X-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_403"></span>[40:404](1080014.htm#fr_403) <span
id="ii.X-p39.2"></span>

<span id="ii.X-p40"></span> [Luke i.
32](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#032)<span id="ii.X-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_404"></span>[40:405](1080014.htm#fr_404) <span
id="ii.X-p40.2"></span>

<span id="ii.X-p41"></span> [Matt.
22:43](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#043),
[44](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#044)<span id="ii.X-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_405"></span>[40:406](1080014.htm#fr_405) <span
id="ii.X-p41.2"></span>

<span id="ii.X-p42"></span> [John i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span id="ii.X-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_406"></span>[40:407](1080014.htm#fr_406) <span
id="ii.X-p42.2"></span>

<span id="ii.X-p43"></span> [Rom. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#003)<span id="ii.X-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_407"></span>[40:408](1080014.htm#fr_407) <span
id="ii.X-p43.2"></span>

<span id="ii.X-p44"></span> \[On the “hidden things” compare [Isa.
45:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#015), [1 Pet.
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#010)<span
id="ii.X-p44.1"></span>.—C.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm XI](1080015)
