[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080039)  [Next](1080041) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.XXXVI"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVI-p1"></span> <span id="ii.XXXVI-p1.1"></span><span
class="c20"><span id="ii.XXXVI-p1.2"></span>Psalm XXXVI. <span
id="fr_809"></span>[810](#fn_809) </span>

<span id="ii.XXXVI-p3"></span>1. …“The ungodly hath said in himself that
he will sin: there is no fear of God before his eyes” ([Psa.
36.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#001)<span id="ii.XXXVI-p3.1"></span>).
Not of one man, but of a race of ungodly men he speaketh, who fight
against their own selves, by not understanding, that so they may live
well; not because they cannot, but because they will not. For it is one
thing, when one endeavours to understand some thing, and through
infirmity of flesh cannot; as saith the Scripture <span
id="fr_810"></span>[811](#fn_810) in a certain place, “For the
corruptible body presseth down the soul, and the earthly tabernacle
weigheth down the mind that museth upon many things;” but another when
the human heart acts mischievously against itself, so that what it could
understand, if it had but good will thereto, it understandeth not, not
because it is difficult, but because the will is contrary. But so it is
when men love their own sins, and hate God’s Commandments. For the Word
of God is thy adversary, if thou be a friend to thy ungodliness; but if
thou art an adversary to thy ungodliness, the Word of God is thy friend,
as well as the adversary of thy ungodliness.…

<span id="ii.XXXVI-p5"></span>2. “For he hath wrought deceitfully in His
sight” ([Psa. 36.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#002)<span
id="ii.XXXVI-p5.1"></span>). In whose sight? In His, whose fear was not
before the eyes of him that did work deceitfully. “To find out his
iniquity, and hate it.” He wrought so as not to find it. For there are
men who as it were endeavour to seek out their iniquity, and fear to
find it; because if they should find it, it is said to them, Depart from
it: this thou didst before thou knewest; thou didst iniquity being in
ignorance; God giveth pardon: now thou hast discovered it, forsake it,
that to thy ignorance pardon may easily be given; and that with a clear
face thou mayest say to God, “Remember not the sins of my youth, and of
my ignorance.” <span id="fr_811"></span>[812](#fn_811) Thus he seeketh
it, thus he feareth lest he find it; for he seeketh it deceitfully. When
saith a man, I knew not that it was sin? When he hath seen that it is
sin, and ceaseth to do the sin, which he did only because he was
ignorant: such an one in truth would know his sin, to find it out, and
hate it. But now many “work deceitfully to find out their iniquity:”
they work not from their heart to find it out and hate it. But because
in the very search after iniquity, there is <span id="page_87">p.
87</span> <span id="ii.XXXVI-Page_87"></span>deceit, in the finding it
there will be defence of it. For when one hath found his iniquity, lo
now it is manifest to him that it is iniquity. Do it not, thou sayest.
And he who wrought deceitfully to find it out, now he hath found, hateth
it not; for what saith he? How many do this! Who is there that doth it
not? And will God destroy them all? Or at least he saith this: if God
would not these things to be done, would men live who commit the same?
Seest thou that thou didst work deceitfully to find out thy iniquity?
For if not deceitfully but sincerely thou hadst wrought, thou wouldest
now have found it out, and hated it; now thou hast found it out, and
thou defendest it; therefore thou didst work deceitfully, when thou
soughtest it.

<span id="ii.XXXVI-p7"></span>3. “The words of his mouth are iniquity
and deceit: he would not understand, that he might do good” ([Psa.
36.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#003)<span id="ii.XXXVI-p7.1"></span>).
Ye see that he attributeth that to the will: for there are men who would
understand and cannot, and there are men who would not understand, and
therefore understand not. “He would not understand, that he might do
good.”

<span id="ii.XXXVI-p8"></span>4. “He hath meditated iniquity on his
bed.” What said He, “On his bed?” ([Psa.
36.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#004)<span id="ii.XXXVI-p8.1"></span>).
“The ungodly hath said in himself, that he will sin:” what above he
said, in himself, that here he said, “On his bed.” Our bed is our heart:
there we suffer the tossing of an evil conscience; and there we rest
when our conscience is good. Whoso loveth the bed of his heart, let him
do some good therein. There is our bed, where the Lord Jesus Christ
commands us to pray. “Enter into thy chamber, and shut thy door.” <span
id="fr_812"></span>[813](#fn_812) What is, “Shut thy door?” Expect not
from God such things as are without, but such as are within; “and thy
Father which seeth in secret, shall reward thee openly.” Who is he that
shutteth not the door? He who asketh much from God such things, and in
such wise directeth all his prayers, that he may receive the goods that
are of this world. Thy door is open, the multitude seeth when thou
prayest. What is it to shut thy door? To ask that of God, which God
alone knoweth how He giveth. What is that for which thou prayest, when
thou hast shut the door? What “eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, or hath
entered into the heart of man.” <span id="fr_813"></span>[814](#fn_813)
And haply it hath not entered into thy very bed, that is, into thy
heart. But God knoweth what He will give: but when shall it be? When the
Lord shall be revealed, when the Judge shall appear.…

<span id="ii.XXXVI-p11"></span>5. “He hath set himself in every way that
is not good.” What is, “he hath set himself”? He hath sinned
perseveringly. Whence also of a certain pious and good man it is said,
“He hath not stood in the way of sinners.” <span
id="fr_814"></span>[815](#fn_814) As this “hath not stood,” so that
“hath set himself.” “But wickedness hath he not hated.” There is the
end, there the fruit: if a man cannot but have wickedness, let him at
least hate it. For when thou hatest it, it scarcely occurs to thee to do
any wickedness. For sin is in our mortal body, but what saith the
Apostle? “Let not sin reign in your mortal body, that ye should obey it
in the lusts thereof.” <span id="fr_815"></span>[816](#fn_815) When
beginneth it not to be therein? When that shall be fulfilled in us which
he saith, “When this corruptible shall have put on incorruption, and
this mortal shall have put on immortality.” <span
id="fr_816"></span>[817](#fn_816) Before this come to pass, there is a
delighting in sin in the body, but greater is the delighting and the
pleasure in the Word of Wisdom, in the Commandment of God. Overcome sin
and the lust thereof. Sin and iniquity do thou hate, that thou mayest
join thyself to God, who hateth it as well as thou. Now being joined in
mind unto the Law of God, in mind thou servest the Law of God. And if in
the flesh thou therefore servest <span id="fr_817"></span>[818](#fn_817)
the law of sin, <span id="fr_818"></span>[819](#fn_818) because there
are in thee certain carnal delightings, then will there be none when
thou shalt no longer fight. It is one thing not to fight, and to be in
true and lasting peace; another to fight and overcome; another to fight
and to be overcome; another not to fight at all, but to be carried
away.…

<span id="ii.XXXVI-p17"></span>6. “Thy mercy, O Lord, is in the heavens,
and Thy truth reacheth even unto the clouds” ([Psa.
36.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#005)<span
id="ii.XXXVI-p17.1"></span>). I know not what Mercy of Him he meaneth,
which is in the heavens. For the Mercy of the Lord is also in the earth.
Thou hast it written, “The earth is full of the Mercy of the
Lord.” <span id="fr_819"></span>[820](#fn_819) Of what Mercy then
speaketh He, when He saith, “Thy Mercy, O Lord, is in the heavens”? The
gifts of God are partly temporal and earthly, partly eternal and
heavenly. Whoso for this worshippeth God, that he may receive those
temporal and earthly goods, which are open to all, is still as it were
like the brutes: he enjoyeth indeed the Mercy of God, but not that which
is excepted, which shall not be given, save only to the righteous, to
the holy, to the good. What are the gifts which abound to all? “He
maketh His sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sendeth rain on
the just and on the unjust.” <span id="fr_820"></span>[821](#fn_820) Who
hath not this Mercy of God, first that he hath being, that he is
distinguished from the brutes, that he is a rational animal, so as to
understand God; secondly, that he enjoys this light, this air, rain,
fruits, diversity of seasons, and all the earthly comforts, health of
body, the affection of friends, the safety of his <span id="page_88">p.
88</span> <span id="ii.XXXVI-Page_88"></span>family? All these are good,
and they are God’s gifts.…

<span id="ii.XXXVI-p20"></span>7. But this man rightly understood what
mercy he should pray for from God. “Thy Mercy, O Lord, is in the
Heavens; and Thy Truth reacheth even to the clouds.” That is, the Mercy
which Thou givest to Thy Saints, is Heavenly, not earthly; is Eternal,
not temporal. And how couldest Thou declare it unto men? Because “Thy
Truth reacheth even unto the clouds.” For who could know the Heavenly
Mercy of God, unless God should declare it unto men? How did He declare
it? By sending His truth even unto the clouds. What are the clouds? The
Preachers of the Word of God.…Truth reached even to the clouds:
therefore unto us could be declared the Mercy of God, which is in Heaven
and not in earth. And truly, Brethren, the clouds are the Preachers of
the Word of Truth. When God threateneth through His Preachers, He
thunders through the clouds. When God worketh miracles through His
Preachers, He lightneth through the clouds, He terrifieth through the
clouds, and watereth by the rain. Those Preachers, then, by whom is
preached the Gospel of God, are the clouds of God. Let us then hope for
Mercy, but for that which is in the Heavens.

<span id="ii.XXXVI-p21"></span>8. “Thy Righteousness is like the
mountains of God: Thy Judgments are a great deep” ([Psa.
36.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#006)<span
id="ii.XXXVI-p21.1"></span>). Who are the mountains of God? Those who
are called clouds, the same are also the mountains of God. The great
Preachers are the mountains of God. And as when the sun riseth, he first
clothes the mountains with light, and thence the light descends to the
lowest parts of the earth: so our Lord Jesus Christ, when He came, first
irradiated the height of the Apostles, first enlightened the mountains,
and so His Light descended to the valley of the world. And therefore
saith He in a certain Psalm, “I lifted up mine eyes unto the mountains,
from whence cometh my help.” <span id="fr_821"></span>[822](#fn_821) But
think not that the mountains themselves will give thee help: for they
receive what they may give, give not of their own. And if thou remain in
the mountains, thy hope will not be strong: but in Him who enlighteneth
the mountains, ought to be thy hope and presumption. Thy help indeed
will come to thee through the mountains, because the Scriptures are
administered to thee through the mountains, through the great Preachers
of the Truth: but fix not thy hope in them. Hear what He saith next
following: “I lifted up mine eyes unto the mountains, from whence cometh
my help.” What then? Do the mountains give thee help? No; hear what
follows, “My help cometh from the Lord, which made Heaven and
earth.” <span id="fr_822"></span>[823](#fn_822) Through the mountains
cometh help, but not from the mountains. From whom then? “From the Lord,
which made Heaven and earth.”…

<span id="ii.XXXVI-p24"></span>9. “Thy Judgments are like the great
abyss.” The abyss he calleth the depth of sin, whither every one cometh
by despising God; as in a certain place it is said, “God gave them over
to their own hearts’ lusts, to do the things which are not
convenient.” <span id="fr_823"></span>[824](#fn_823) …Because then they
were proud and ungrateful, they were held worthy to be delivered up to
the lusts of their own hearts, and became a great abyss, so that they
not only sinned, but also worked craftily, lest they should understand
their iniquity, and hate it. That is the depth of wickedness, to be
unwilling to find it out and to hate it. But how one cometh to that
depth, see; “Thy Judgments are the great abyss.” As the mountains are by
the Righteousness of God,  <span id="fr_824"></span>[825](#fn_824) who
through His Grace become great: so also through His Judgments come they
unto the depth, who sink lowest. By this then let the mountains delight
thee, by this turn away from the abyss, and turn thyself unto that, of
which it is said, “My help cometh from the Lord.” But whereby? “I have
lifted up mine eyes unto the mountains.” What meaneth this? I will speak
plainly. <span id="fr_825"></span>[826](#fn_825) In the Church of God
thou findest an abyss, thou findest also mountains; thou findest there
but few good, because the mountains are few, the abyss broad; that is,
thou findest many living ill after the wrath of God, because they have
so worked that they are delivered up to the lusts of their own heart; so
now they defend their sins and confess them not; but say, Why? What have
I done? Such an one did this, and such an one did that. Now will they
even defend what the Divine Word reproves. This is the abyss. Therefore
in a certain place <span id="fr_826"></span>[827](#fn_826) saith the
Scripture (hear this abyss), “The sinner when he cometh unto the depth
of sin despiseth.” See, “Thy Judgments are like the great abyss.” But
yet not art thou a mountain; not yet art thou in the abyss; fly from the
abyss, tend towards the mountains; but yet remain not on the mountains.
“For thy help cometh from the Lord, which made Heaven and earth.”

<span id="ii.XXXVI-p29"></span>10. Because he said, Thy Mercy is in the
Heavens, that it may be known to be also on earth, he said, “O Lord,
Thou savest man and beast, <span id="fr_827"></span>[828](#fn_827) as
Thy Mercy is multiplied, O God” ([Psa.
36.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#007)<span
id="ii.XXXVI-p30.1"></span>). Great is Thy Mercy, and manifold is Thy
Mercy, O God; and that showest Thou both to man and beast. For from whom
is the saving of men? From God. Is not the saving of beasts also from
God? For He who made <span id="page_89">p. 89</span> <span
id="ii.XXXVI-Page_89"></span>man, made also beasts; He who made both,
saveth both; but the saving of beasts is temporal. But there are who as
a great thing ask this of God, which He hath given to beasts. “Thy
Mercy, O God, is multiplied,” so that not only unto men, but unto beasts
also is given the same saving which is given to men, a carnal and
temporal saving.

<span id="ii.XXXVI-p31"></span>11. Have not men then somewhat reserved
with God, which beasts deserve not, and whereunto beasts arrive not?
They have evidently. And where is that which they have. “The children of
men put their trust under the shadow of Thy wings.” Attend, my Beloved,
to this most pleasant sentence; “Thou savest man and beast.” First, he
spake of “man and beast,” then of “the children of men;” as though “men”
were one, “the children of men” other. Sometimes in Scripture children
of men is said generally of all men, sometimes in some proper manner,
with some proper signification, so that not all men are understood;
chiefly when there is a distinction. For not without reason is it here
put; “O Lord, Thou savest man and beast: but the children of men;” as
though setting aside the first, he keepeth separate the children of men.
Separate from whom? Not only from beasts, but also from men, who seek
from God the saving of beasts, and desire this as a great thing. Who
then are the children of men? Those who put their trust under the shadow
of His wings. For those men together with beasts rejoice in possession,
but the children of men rejoice in hope: those follow after present
goods with beasts, these hope for future goods with Angels.…

<span id="ii.XXXVI-p32"></span>12. “They shall be satiated <span
id="fr_828"></span>[829](#fn_828) with the fulness of Thy House” ([Psa.
36.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#008)<span
id="ii.XXXVI-p33.1"></span>). He promiseth us some great thing. He would
speak it, and He speaketh it not. Can He not, or do not we receive it? I
dare, my Brethren, to say, even of holy tongues and hearts, by which
Truth is declared to us, that it can neither be spoken, which they
declared, nor even thought of. For it is a great thing, and ineffable;
and even they saw through a glass darkly, as saith the Apostle, “For now
we see through a glass darkly; but then face to face.” <span
id="fr_829"></span>[830](#fn_829) Lo, they who saw through a glass
darkly, thus burst forth. What then shall we be, when we shall see face
to face? That with which they travailed in heart, and could not with
their tongue bring forth, that men might receive it. For what necessity
was there that he should say, “They shall be satiated with the fulness
of Thy House”? He sought a word whereby to express from human things
what he would say; and because he saw that men drowning themselves in
drunkenness receive indeed wine without measure, but lose their senses,
he saw what to say; for when shall have been received that ineffable
joy, then shall be lost in a manner the human soul, it shall become
Divine, and be satiated with the fulness of God’s House. Wherefore also
in another Psalm it is said, “Thy cup inebriating, how excellent is
it!” <span id="fr_830"></span>[831](#fn_830) With this cup were the
Martyrs satiated when going to their passion, they knew not their own.
What so inebriated as not to know a wife weeping, not children, not
parents? They knew them not, they thought not that they were before
their eyes. Wonder not: they were inebriated. Wherewith were they so?
Lo, they had received a cup wherewith they were satiated. Wherefore he
also gives thanks to God, saying, “What shall I render unto the Lord for
all His benefits towards me? I will take the cup of Salvation, and call
upon the Name of the Lord.” <span id="fr_831"></span>[832](#fn_831)
Therefore, Brethren of men, let us be children and let us trust under
the shadow of His wings and be satiated with the fulness of His House.
As I could, I have spoken; and as far as I can I see; and how far I see,
I cannot speak. <span id="fr_832"></span>[833](#fn_832) “And of the
torrent of Thy Pleasure shalt Thou give them to drink.” A torrent we
call water coming with a flood. There will be a flood of God’s Mercy to
overflow and inebriate those who now put their trust under the shadow of
His wings. What is that Pleasure? As it were a torrent inebriating the
thirsty. Let him then who thirsts now, lay up hope: whoso thirsts now,
let him have hope; when inebriated, he shall have possession: before he
have possession, let him thirst in hope. “Blessed are they which do
hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be filled.” <span
id="fr_833"></span>[834](#fn_833)

<span id="ii.XXXVI-p39"></span>13. With what fountain then wilt thou be
overflowed, and whence runneth such a torrent of His Pleasure? “For with
Thee,” saith he, “is the fountain of Life.” What is the fountain of
Life, but Christ? He came to thee in the flesh, that He might bedew thy
thirsty lips: He will satisfy thee trusting, who bedewed thee thirsting.
“For with Thee is the fountain of Life; in Thy Light shall we see light”
([Psa. 36.9](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#009)<span
id="ii.XXXVI-p39.1"></span>). Here a fountain is one thing, light
another: there not so. For that which is the Fountain, the same is also
Light: and whatever thou wilt thou callest It, for It is not what thou
callest It: for thou canst not find a fit name: for It remaineth not in
one name. If thou shouldest say, that It is Light only, it would be said
to thee, Then without cause am I told to hunger <span id="page_90">p.
90</span> <span id="ii.XXXVI-Page_90"></span>and thirst, for who is
there that eateth light? It is said to me plainly, directly, “Blessed
are the pure in heart: for they shall see God.” <span
id="fr_834"></span>[835](#fn_834) If It is Light, my eyes must I
prepare. Prepare also lips; for That which is Light is also a Fountain:
a Fountain, because It satisfieth the thirsty: Light, because It
enlighteneth the blind. Here sometimes, light is in one place, a
fountain in another. For sometimes fountains run even in darkness; and
sometimes in the desert thou sufferest the sun, findest no fountain:
here then can these two be separated: there thou shalt not be wearied,
for there is a Fountain; there thou shalt not be darkened, for there is
Light.

<span id="ii.XXXVI-p41"></span>14. “Show forth Thy Mercy unto them that
know Thee; Thy Righteousness to them that are of a right heart” ([Psa.
36.10](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#010)<span
id="ii.XXXVI-p41.1"></span>). As I have said, Those are of a right heart
who follow in this life the Will of God. The will of God is sometimes
that thou shouldest be whole, sometimes that thou shouldest be sick. If
when thou art whole God’s Will be sweet, and when thou art sick God’s
Will be bitter; thou art not of a right heart. Wherefore? Because thou
wilt not make right thy will according to God’s Will, but wilt bend
God’s Will to thine. That is right, but thou art crooked: thy will must
be made right to That, not That made crooked to thee; and thou wilt have
a right heart. It is well with thee in this world; be God blessed, who
comforteth thee: it goeth hardly with thee in this world; be God
blessed, because He <span id="fr_835"></span>[836](#fn_835) chasteneth
and proveth thee; and so wilt thou be of a right heart, saying, “I will
bless the Lord at all times: His Praise shall be ever in my
mouth.” <span id="fr_836"></span>[837](#fn_836)

<span id="ii.XXXVI-p44"></span>15. “Let not the foot of pride come
against me” ([Psa. 36.11](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#011)<span
id="ii.XXXVI-p44.1"></span>). But now he said, The children of men shall
put their trust under the shadow of Thy wings: they shall be satiated
with the fulness of Thy House. When one hath begun to be plentifully
overflowed with that Fountain, let him take heed lest he grow proud. For
the same was not wanting to Adam, the first man: but the foot of pride
came against him, and the hand of the sinner removed him, that is, the
proud hand of the devil. As he who seduced him, said of himself, “I will
sit in the sides of the north;” <span id="fr_837"></span>[838](#fn_837)
so he persuaded him, by saying, “Taste, and ye shall be as gods.” <span
id="fr_838"></span>[839](#fn_838) By pride then have we so fallen as to
arrive at this mortality. And because pride had wounded us, humility
maketh us whole. God came humbly, that from such great wound of pride He
might heal man. He came, for “The Word was made Flesh, and dwelt among
us.” <span id="fr_839"></span>[840](#fn_839) He was taken by the Jews;
He was reviled of them. Ye heard when the Gospel was read, what they
said, and to Whom they said, “Thou hast a devil:” <span
id="fr_840"></span>[841](#fn_840) and He said not, Ye have a devil, for
ye are still in your sins, and the devil possesseth your hearts. He said
not this, which if He had said, He had said truly: but it was not meet
that He should say it, lest He should seem not to preach Truth, but to
retort evil speaking. He let go what He heard as though He heard it not.
For a Physician was He, and to cure the madman had He come. As a
Physician careth not what he may hear from the madman; but how the
madman may recover and become sane; nor even if he receive a blow from
the madman, careth he; but while he to him giveth new wounds, he cureth
his old fever: so also the Lord came to the sick man, to the madman came
He, that whatever He might hear, whatever He might suffer, He should
despise; by this very thing teaching us humility, that being taught by
humility, we might be healed from pride: from which he here prayeth to
be delivered, saying, “Let not the foot of pride come against me;
neither let the hand of the sinner remove me.” For if the foot of pride
come, the hand of the sinner removeth. What is the hand of the sinner?
The working of him that adviseth ill. Hast thou become proud? Quickly he
corrupteth thee who adviseth ill. Humbly fix thyself in God, and care
not much what is said to thee. Hence is that which is elsewhere spoken,
“From my secret sins cleanse Thou me; and from others’ sins also keep
Thy servant.” <span id="fr_841"></span>[842](#fn_841) What is, “From my
secret sins”? “Let not the foot of pride come against me.” What is,
“From other men’s sins also keep Thy servant”? “Let not the hand of the
wicked remove me.” Keep that which is within, and thou shalt not fear
from without.

<span id="ii.XXXVI-p50"></span>16. But wherefore so greatly fearest thou
this? Because it is said, “Thereby have fallen all that work iniquity”
([Psa. 36.12](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#012)<span
id="ii.XXXVI-p50.1"></span>); so that they have come into that abyss of
which it is said, “Thy judgments are like the great abyss:” so that they
have come even to that deep wherein sinners who despise have fallen.
“Have fallen.” Whereby did they first fall? By the foot of pride. Hear
the foot of pride. “When they knew God, they glorified Him not as God.”
Therefore came against them the foot of pride, whereby they came into
the depth. “God gave them over to their own hearts’ lusts, to do those
things which are not convenient.” <span
id="fr_842"></span>[843](#fn_842) The root of sin, and the head of sin
feared he who said, “Let not the foot of pride come against me.”
Wherefore said he, “the foot”? Because by walking proudly man deserted
God, and departed from Him. His foot, called he his <span
id="page_91">p. 91</span> <span id="ii.XXXVI-Page_91"></span>affection.
“Let not the foot of pride come against me: let not the hand of the
wicked remove me:” that is, let not the works of the wicked remove me
from Thee, that I should wish to imitate them. But wherefore said he
this against pride, “Thereby have fallen all that work iniquity”?
Because those who now are ungodly, have fallen by pride. Therefore when
the Lord would caution His Church, He said, “It shall watch thy head,
and thou shalt watch <span id="fr_843"></span>[844](#fn_843) his
heel.” <span id="fr_844"></span>[845](#fn_844) The serpent watcheth when
the foot of pride may come against thee, when thou mayest fall, that he
may cast thee down. But watch thou his head: the beginning of all sin is
pride. <span id="fr_845"></span>[846](#fn_845) “Thereby have fallen all
that work iniquity: they are driven out, and are not able to stand.” He
first, who in the Truth stood not, then, through him, they whom God sent
out of Paradise. Whence he, the humble, who said that he was not worthy
to unloose His shoe’s latchet, is not driven out, but standeth and
heareth Him, and rejoiceth greatly because of the Bridegroom’s
voice; <span id="fr_846"></span>[847](#fn_846) not because of his own,
lest the foot of pride come against him, and he be driven out, and be
not able to stand.…

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_809"></span>[86:810](1080040.htm#fr_809) <span
id="ii.XXXVI-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVI-p2"></span> Lat. XXXV.

<span id="fn_810"></span>[86:811](1080040.htm#fr_810) <span
id="ii.XXXVI-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVI-p4"></span> [Wisd. ix.
15](../../../bib/apo/wis009.htm#015)<span id="ii.XXXVI-p4.1"></span>.
\[Here cited as Scripture, but only *deuterocanonical* (as St. Jerome
testifies), illustrating the Law and the Prophets, but not of authority
in itself.—C.\]

<span id="fn_811"></span>[86:812](1080040.htm#fr_811) <span
id="ii.XXXVI-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVI-p6"></span> [Ps. xxv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#007)<span id="ii.XXXVI-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_812"></span>[87:813](1080040.htm#fr_812) <span
id="ii.XXXVI-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVI-p9"></span> [Matt. vi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#006)<span id="ii.XXXVI-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_813"></span>[87:814](1080040.htm#fr_813) <span
id="ii.XXXVI-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVI-p10"></span> [Isa.
64:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#004), [1 Cor.
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#009)<span id="ii.XXXVI-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_814"></span>[87:815](1080040.htm#fr_814) <span
id="ii.XXXVI-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVI-p12"></span> [Ps. i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)<span id="ii.XXXVI-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_815"></span>[87:816](1080040.htm#fr_815) <span
id="ii.XXXVI-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVI-p13"></span> [Rom. vi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#012)<span id="ii.XXXVI-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_816"></span>[87:817](1080040.htm#fr_816) <span
id="ii.XXXVI-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVI-p14"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
54](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#054)<span id="ii.XXXVI-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_817"></span>[87:818](1080040.htm#fr_817) <span
id="ii.XXXVI-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVI-p15"></span> *i.e*., “art subject to it,” not
“obeyest it.” He is not here speaking of actual wilful sin, but of
motions toward sin to which the man does not consent. \[Concupiscence,
art. ix. Angl. XXXIX. Articles.—C.\]

<span id="fn_818"></span>[87:819](1080040.htm#fr_818) <span
id="ii.XXXVI-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVI-p16"></span> [Rom. vii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#025)<span id="ii.XXXVI-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_819"></span>[87:820](1080040.htm#fr_819) <span
id="ii.XXXVI-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVI-p18"></span> [Ps. xxxiii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#005)<span id="ii.XXXVI-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_820"></span>[87:821](1080040.htm#fr_820) <span
id="ii.XXXVI-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVI-p19"></span> [Matt. v.
45](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#045)<span id="ii.XXXVI-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_821"></span>[88:822](1080040.htm#fr_821) <span
id="ii.XXXVI-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVI-p22"></span> [Ps. cxxi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#001)<span id="ii.XXXVI-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_822"></span>[88:823](1080040.htm#fr_822) <span
id="ii.XXXVI-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVI-p23"></span> [Ps. cxxi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#002)<span id="ii.XXXVI-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_823"></span>[88:824](1080040.htm#fr_823) <span
id="ii.XXXVI-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVI-p25"></span> [Rom. i.
28](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#028)<span id="ii.XXXVI-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_824"></span>[88:825](1080040.htm#fr_824) <span
id="ii.XXXVI-p25.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVI-p26"></span> *Al*. “The Righteousness of God is like
the mountains.”

<span id="fn_825"></span>[88:826](1080040.htm#fr_825) <span
id="ii.XXXVI-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVI-p27"></span> *Latinè*.

<span id="fn_826"></span>[88:827](1080040.htm#fr_826) <span
id="ii.XXXVI-p27.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVI-p28"></span> [Prov. xviii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#003)<span id="ii.XXXVI-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_827"></span>[88:828](1080040.htm#fr_827) <span
id="ii.XXXVI-p29.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVI-p30"></span> \[In Vulgate and Septuagint this is
included in verse 6. The English Version agrees with the text as here
connected.—C.\]

<span id="fn_828"></span>[89:829](1080040.htm#fr_828) <span
id="ii.XXXVI-p32.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVI-p33"></span> \[I cannot but change the word “drunken”
here for one more decent and equally faithful. But note “*sober*
inebriety,” p. 75, *supra*.—C.\]

<span id="fn_829"></span>[89:830](1080040.htm#fr_829) <span
id="ii.XXXVI-p33.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVI-p34"></span> [1 Cor. xiii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#012)<span id="ii.XXXVI-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_830"></span>[89:831](1080040.htm#fr_830) <span
id="ii.XXXVI-p34.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVI-p35"></span> [Ps. xxiii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#005)<span id="ii.XXXVI-p35.1"></span>,
LXX.

<span id="fn_831"></span>[89:832](1080040.htm#fr_831) <span
id="ii.XXXVI-p35.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVI-p36"></span> [Ps.
16:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#013)<span id="ii.XXXVI-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_832"></span>[89:833](1080040.htm#fr_832) <span
id="ii.XXXVI-p36.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVI-p37"></span> \[To spiritualize inebriation seems a
difficult task; but as in heraldry we introduce the boar and the serpent
for other qualities than their filth and their venom, so here the
suggestion is explained by a reference to [Acts
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#013), [Eph.
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#018),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#019)<span
id="ii.XXXVI-p37.1"></span>.—C.\]

<span id="fn_833"></span>[89:834](1080040.htm#fr_833) <span
id="ii.XXXVI-p37.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVI-p38"></span> [Matt. v.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#006)<span id="ii.XXXVI-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_834"></span>[90:835](1080040.htm#fr_834) <span
id="ii.XXXVI-p39.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVI-p40"></span> [Matt.
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#006),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#008)<span id="ii.XXXVI-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_835"></span>[90:836](1080040.htm#fr_835) <span
id="ii.XXXVI-p41.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVI-p42"></span> *Al*. “Who.”

<span id="fn_836"></span>[90:837](1080040.htm#fr_836) <span
id="ii.XXXVI-p42.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVI-p43"></span> [Ps. xxxiv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#001)<span id="ii.XXXVI-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_837"></span>[90:838](1080040.htm#fr_837) <span
id="ii.XXXVI-p44.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVI-p45"></span> [Isa. xiv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#013)<span id="ii.XXXVI-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_838"></span>[90:839](1080040.htm#fr_838) <span
id="ii.XXXVI-p45.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVI-p46"></span> [Gen. iii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#005)<span id="ii.XXXVI-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_839"></span>[90:840](1080040.htm#fr_839) <span
id="ii.XXXVI-p46.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVI-p47"></span> [John i.
34](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#034)<span id="ii.XXXVI-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_840"></span>[90:841](1080040.htm#fr_840) <span
id="ii.XXXVI-p47.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVI-p48"></span> [John viii.
48](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#048)<span id="ii.XXXVI-p48.1"></span>.
\[This was then the Gospel for the day, or one of the Lessons.—C.\]

<span id="fn_841"></span>[90:842](1080040.htm#fr_841) <span
id="ii.XXXVI-p48.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVI-p49"></span> [Ps.
19:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#013)<span id="ii.XXXVI-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_842"></span>[90:843](1080040.htm#fr_842) <span
id="ii.XXXVI-p50.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVI-p51"></span> [Rom. i.
21-24](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#021)<span
id="ii.XXXVI-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_843"></span>[91:844](1080040.htm#fr_843) <span
id="ii.XXXVI-p51.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVI-p52"></span> Lat. *observabit*.

<span id="fn_844"></span>[91:845](1080040.htm#fr_844) <span
id="ii.XXXVI-p52.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVI-p53"></span> [Gen. iii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#015)<span id="ii.XXXVI-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_845"></span>[91:846](1080040.htm#fr_845) <span
id="ii.XXXVI-p53.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVI-p54"></span> [Ecclesiasticus
10.13](../../../bib/apo/sir010.htm#013)<span
id="ii.XXXVI-p54.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_846"></span>[91:847](1080040.htm#fr_846) <span
id="ii.XXXVI-p54.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVI-p55"></span> [John
1:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#027), [John
3:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#029)<span id="ii.XXXVI-p55.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm XXXVII](1080041)
