[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080083)  [Next](1080085) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.LXXIII"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p1"></span> <span id="ii.LXXIII-p1.1"></span><span
class="c20"><span id="ii.LXXIII-p1.2"></span>Psalm LXXIII. <span
id="fr_3249"></span>[3250](#fn_3249) </span>

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p3"></span>1. This Psalm hath an inscription, that
is, a title, “There have failed the hymns of David, the son of
Jesse. <span id="fr_3250"></span>[3251](#fn_3250) A Psalm <span
id="fr_3251"></span>[3252](#fn_3251) of Asaph himself.” So many Psalms
we have on the titles whereof is written the name David, nowhere there
is added, “son of Jesse,” except in this alone. Which we must believe
hath not been done to no purpose, nor capriciously. For everywhere <span
id="page_334">p. 334</span> <span id="ii.LXXIII-Page_334"></span>God
doth make intimations to us, and to the understanding thereof doth
invite the godly study of love. What is, “there have failed the hymns of
David, the son of Jesse”? Hymns are praises of God accompanied with
singing: hymns are songs containing the praise of God. If there be
praise, and it be not of God, it is no hymn: if there be praise, and
God’s praise, and it be not sung, it is no hymn. It must needs then, if
it be a hymn, have these three things, both praise, and that of God, and
singing. What is then, “there have failed the hymns”? There have failed
the praises which are sung unto God. He seemeth to tell of a thing
painful, and so to speak deplorable. For he that singeth praise, not
only praiseth, but only praiseth with gladness: he that singeth praise,
not only singeth, but also loveth him of whom he singeth. In praise,
there is the speaking forth of one confessing; in singing, the affection
of one loving. “There have failed” then “the hymns of David,” he saith:
and he hath added, “the son of Jesse.” For David was king of Israel, son
of Jesse, <span id="fr_3252"></span>[3253](#fn_3252) at a certain time
of the Old Testament, at which time the New Testament was therein
hidden, like fruit in a root. For if thou seek fruit in a root, thou
wilt not find, and yet dost thou not find any fruit in the branches,
except that which hath gone forth from the root.…And in like manner as
Christ Himself to be born after the flesh was hidden in the root, that
is in the seed of the Patriarchs, and at a certain time must be
revealed, as at the fruit appearing, according as it is written, “there
hath flourished a shoot from the root of Jesse:” <span
id="fr_3253"></span>[3254](#fn_3253) so also the New Testament itself
which is in Christ, in those former times was hidden, being known to the
Prophets alone, and to the very few godly men, not by the manifestation
of things present, but by the revelation of things future. For what
meaneth it, brethren (to mention but one thing), that Abraham sending
his faithful servant to espouse a wife for his only son, maketh him
swear to him, and in the oath saith to him, “Put thy hand under my
thigh, and swear”?  <span id="fr_3254"></span>[3255](#fn_3254) What was
there in the thigh of Abraham, where he put his hand in swearing? What
was there there, except that which even then was promised to him, “In
thy seed shall be blessed all nations”? <span
id="fr_3255"></span>[3256](#fn_3255) Under the name of thigh, flesh is
signified. From the flesh of Abraham, through Isaac and Jacob, and not
to mention many names, through Mary was our Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p10"></span>2. But that the root was in the
Patriarchs, how shall we show? Let us question Paul. The Gentiles now
believing in Christ, and desiring as it were to boast over the Jews who
crucified Christ; although also from that same people there came another
wall, meeting in the corner, that is, in Christ Himself, the wall of
uncircumcision, that is, of the Gentiles, coming from a different
quarter: when, I say, the nations were lifting up themselves, he doth
thus depress them. “For if thou,” he saith, “being cut out of the
natural wild olive, hast been graffed in among them, do not boast
against the branches: for if thou boastest, thou dost not bear the root,
but the root thee.” <span id="fr_3256"></span>[3257](#fn_3256) Therefore
he speaketh of certain branches broken off from the root of the
Patriarchs because of unbelief, and the wild olive therein graffed in,
that it might be partaker of the fatness of the olive, that is, the
Church coming out of the Gentiles. And who doth graff the wild olive on
the olive? The olive is wont to be graffed on the wild olive; the wild
olive on the olive we never saw. For whosoever may have done so will
find no berries but those of the wild olive. For that which is graffed
in, the same groweth, and of that kind the fruit is found. There is not
found the fruit of the root but of the graft. The Apostle showing that
God did this thing by His Omnipotence, namely, that the wild olive
should be graffed into the root of the olive, and should not bear wild
berries, but olive—ascribing it to the Omnipotence of God, the Apostle
saith this, “If thou hast been cut out of the natural wild olive and
against nature hast been graffed into a good  <span
id="fr_3257"></span>[3258](#fn_3257) olive, do not boast,” he saith,
“against the branches.” <span id="fr_3258"></span>[3259](#fn_3258) …

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p14"></span>3. In the time then of the Old
Testament, brethren, the promises from our God to that carnal people
were earthly and temporal. There was promised an earthly kingdom, there
was promised that land into which they were also led, after being
delivered from Egypt: by Jesus <span
id="fr_3259"></span>[3260](#fn_3259) son of Nave they were led into the
land of promise, where also earthly Jerusalem was builded, where David
reigned: they received the land, after being delivered from Egypt, by
passing through the Red Sea.…Such were also those promises, which were
not to endure, through which however were figured future promises which
were to endure, so that all that course of temporal promises was a
figure and a sort of prophecy of things future. Accordingly when that
kingdom was failing, where reigned David, the son of Jesse, that is, one
that was a man, though a Prophet, though holy, because he saw and
foresaw Christ to come, of whose seed also after the flesh He was to be
born: nevertheless a man, nevertheless not yet Christ, nevertheless not
yet our King Son of God, but king David son of Jesse: because then that
kingdom <span id="page_335">p. 335</span> <span
id="ii.LXXIII-Page_335"></span>was to fail, through the receiving of
which kingdom at that time God was praised by carnal men; for this thing
alone they esteemed a great matter, namely, that they were delivered
temporally from those by whom they were being oppressed, and that they
had escaped from persecuting enemies through the Red Sea, and had been
led through the desert, and had found country and kingdom: for this
alone they praised God, not yet perceiving the thing which God was
designing beforehand and promising in these figures. In the failing
therefore of those things for which the carnal people, over whom reigned
that David, was praising God, “there failed the hymns of David,” not the
Son of God, but the “son of Jesse.”…

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p16"></span>4. Whose voice is the Psalm? “Of
Asaph.” <span id="fr_3260"></span>[3261](#fn_3260) What is Asaph? As we
find in interpretations from the Hebrew language into the Greek, and
those again translated to us from the Greek into the Latin, Asaph is
interpreted Synagogue. It is the voice therefore of the Synagogue. But
when thou hast heard Synagogue, do not forthwith abhor it, as if it were
the murderer of the Lord. That Synagogue was indeed the murderer of the
Lord, no man doubteth it: but remember, that from the Synagogue were the
rams whereof we are the sons. Whence it is said in a Psalm, “Bring ye to
the Lord the sons of rams.” <span id="fr_3261"></span>[3262](#fn_3261)
What rams are thence? Peter, John, James, Andrew, Bartholomew, and the
rest of the Apostles. Hence also he too at first Saul, afterwards Paul:
that is, at first proud, afterwards humble.…Therefore even Paul came to
us from the Synagogue, and Peter and the other Apostles from the
Synagogue. Therefore when thou hast heard the voice of the Synagogue, do
not look to the deserving thereof, but observe the offspring. There is
speaking therefore in this Psalm, the Synagogue, after the failing of
the hymns of David, the son of Jesse that is, after the failing of
things temporal, through which God was wont to be praised by the carnal
people. But why did these fail, except in order that others might be
sought for? That there might be sought for what? Was it things which
were not there? No, but things which were there being hidden in figures:
not which were not yet there, <span id="fr_3262"></span>[3263](#fn_3262)
but which there as it were in a sort were concealed in certain secret
things of mysteries. What things? “These,” saith the Apostle himself,
“were our figures.” <span id="fr_3263"></span>[3264](#fn_3263) …

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p21"></span>5. It was the Synagogue therefore, that
is, they that there worshipped God after a godly sort, but yet for the
sake of earthly things, for the sake of these present things (for there
are ungodly men who seek the blessings of present things from demons:
but this people was on this account better than the Gentiles, because
although it were blessings present and temporal, yet they sought them
from the One God, who is the Creator of all things both spiritual and
corporal). When therefore those godly men after the flesh were
observing—that is that Synagogue which was made up of good men, men for
the time good, not spiritual men, such as were the Prophets therein,
such as were the few that understood the kingdom heavenly, eternal—that
Synagogue, I say, observed what things it received from God, and what
things God promised to that people, abundance of things earthly, land,
peace, earthly felicity: but in all these things were figures, and they
not perceiving what was there concealed in things figured, thought that
God gave this for a great matter, and had nothing better to give to men
loving Him and serving Him: they remarked and saw certain sinners,
ungodly, blasphemers, servants of demons, sons of the Devil, living in
great naughtiness and pride, yet abounding in such things earthly,
temporal, for which sort of things they were serving God themselves: and
there sprang up a most evil thought in the heart, which made the feet to
totter, and almost slip out of God’s way. And behold this thought was in
the people of the Old Testament: I would it be not in our carnal
brethren, when now openly there is being proclaimed the felicity of the
New Testament.…

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p22"></span>6. “How good is the God of Israel!” But
to whom? “To men right in heart” ([Psa.
73.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#001)<span
id="ii.LXXIII-p22.1"></span>). To men perverse what? Perverse He
seemeth. So also in another Psalm He saith: “With a holy man holy Thou
shalt be, and with the innocent man innocent Thou shalt be, and with the
perverse man perverse Thou shalt be.” <span
id="fr_3264"></span>[3265](#fn_3264) What is, perverse Thou shalt be
with the perverse man? Perverse the perverse man shall think Thee. Not
that by any means God is made perverse. Far be it: what He is, He is.
But in like manner as the sun appeareth mild to one having clear, sound,
healthy, strong eyes, but against weak eyes doth dart hard spears, so to
say; the former looking at it it doth invigorate, the latter it doth
torture, though not being itself changed, but the man being changed: so
when thou shalt have begun to be perverse, and to thee God shall seem to
be perverse, thou art changed, not He. That therefore to thee will be
punishment which to good men is joy. He calling to mind this thing,
saith, “How good is the God of Israel to men right in heart!”

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p24"></span>7. But what to thee? “But my feet were
almost moved” ([Psa. 73.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#002)<span
id="ii.LXXIII-p24.1"></span>). When were the feet moved, except when the
heart was not right? <span id="page_336">p. 336</span> <span
id="ii.LXXIII-Page_336"></span>Whence was the heart not right? Hear: “My
steps were well nigh overthrown.” What he hath meant by “almost,” the
same he hath meant by “well nigh:” and what he hath meant by “my feet
were almost moved,” the same he hath meant by “my steps were
overthrown.” Almost my feet were moved, almost my steps were overthrown.
Moved were the feet: but whence were the feet moved and the steps
overthrown? Moved were the feet to going astray, overthrown were the
steps to falling: not entirely, but “almost.” But what is this? Already
I was going to stray, I had not gone: already I was falling, I had not
fallen.

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p25"></span>8. But why even this? “For I was
jealous,” he saith, “in the case of sinners, looking on the peace of
sinners” ([Psa. 73.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#003)<span
id="ii.LXXIII-p25.1"></span>). I observed sinners, I saw them to have
peace. What peace? Temporal, transient, falling, and earthly: but yet
such as I also was desiring of God. I saw them that served not God to
have that which I desired in order that I might serve God: and my feet
were moved and my steps were almost overthrown. But why sinners have
this, he saith briefly: “Because there is no avoidance of their death,
and there is a firmament in their scourge” ([Psa.
73.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#004)<span
id="ii.LXXIII-p25.2"></span>). Now I have perceived, he saith, why they
have peace, and flourish on the earth; because of their death there is
no avoidance, because death sure and eternal doth await them, which
neither doth avoid them, nor can they avoid it, “because there is no
avoidance of their death, and there is a firmament in their scourge.”
And there is a firmament in their scourge. For their scourge is not
temporal, but firm for everlasting. Because of these evil things then
which are to be to them eternal, now what? “In the labours of men they
are not, and with men they shall not be scourged” ([Psa.
73.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#005)<span
id="ii.LXXIII-p25.3"></span>). Doth not even the devil himself escape
scourging with men, for whom nevertheless an eternal punishment is being
prepared?

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p26"></span>9. Wherefore on this account what do
these men, while they are not scourged, while they labour not with men?
“Therefore,” he saith “there hath holden them pride” ([Psa.
73.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#006)<span
id="ii.LXXIII-p26.1"></span>). Observe these men, proud, undisciplined;
observe the bull, devoted for a victim, suffered to stray at liberty;
and to damage whatever he may, even up to the day of his slaughter. Now
it is a good thing, brethren, that we should hear in the very words of a
prophet of this bull as it were, whereof I have spoken. For thus of him
the Scripture doth make mention in another place: he saith that they
are, as it were, made ready as for a victim, and that they are spared
for an evil liberty. <span id="fr_3265"></span>[3266](#fn_3265)
“Therefore,” he saith, “there hath holden them pride.” What is, “there
hath holden them pride”? “They have been clothed about with their
iniquity and ungodliness.” He hath not said, covered; but, “clothed
about,” on all sides covered up with their ungodliness. Deservedly
miserable, they neither see nor are seen, because they are clothed
about; and the inward parts of them are not seen. For whosoever could
behold the inward parts of evil men, that are as it were happy for a
time, whosoever could see their torturing consciences, whosoever could
examine their souls racked with such mighty perturbations of desires and
fears, would see them to be miserable even when they are called happy.
But because “they are clothed about with their iniquity and
ungodliness,” they see not; but neither are they seen. The Spirit knew
them, that saith these words concerning them: and we ought to examine
such men with the same eye as that wherewith we know that we see, if
there is taken from our eyes the covering of ungodliness.…

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p28"></span>10. At first these men are being
described. “There shall go forth as if out of fat their iniquity” ([Psa.
73.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#007)<span
id="ii.LXXIII-p28.1"></span>).…A poor beggar committeth a theft; out of
leanness hath gone forth the iniquity: but when a rich man aboundeth in
so many things, why doth he plunder the things of others? Of the former
the iniquity out of leanness, of the other out of fatness, hath gone
forth. Therefore to the lean man when thou sayest, Why hast thou done
this? Humbly afflicted and abject he replieth, Need hath compelled me.
Why hast thou not feared God? Want was urgent. Say to a rich man, Why
doest thou these things, and fearest not God?—supposing thee to be great
enough to be able to say it—see if he even deigneth to hear; see if even
against thyself <span id="fr_3266"></span>[3267](#fn_3266) there will
not go forth iniquity out of his fatness. For now they declare war with
their teachers and reprovers, and become enemies of them that speak the
truth, having been long accustomed to be coaxed with the words of
flatterers, being of tender ear, of unsound heart. Who would say to a
rich man, Thou hast ill done in robbing other men’s goods? Or perchance
if any man shall have dared to speak, and he is such a man as he could
not withstand, what doth he reply? All that he saith is in contempt of
God. Why? Because he is proud. Why? Because he is fat. Why? Because he
is devoted for a victim. “They have passed over unto purpose of heart.”
Here within they have passed over. What is, “they have passed over”?
They have crossed over the way. What is, “they have passed over”? They
have exceeded the bounds of mankind, men like the rest they think not
themselves. They have passed over, I say, the bounds of mankind. When
thou sayest to <span id="page_337">p. 337</span> <span
id="ii.LXXIII-Page_337"></span>such a man, Thy brother this beggar is;
when thou sayest to such a man, Thy brother <span
id="fr_3267"></span>[3268](#fn_3267) this poor man is; the same parents
ye have had, Adam and Eve: do not heed thy haughtiness, do not heed the
vapour unto which thou hast been elevated; although an establishment
waiteth about thee, although countless gold and silver, although a
marbled house doth contain thee, although fretted ceilings cover thee,
thou and the poor man together have for covering that roof of the
universe, the sky; but thou art different from the poor man in things
not thine own, added to thee from without: thyself see in them, not them
in thee. Observe thyself, how thou art in relation to the poor man;
thyself, not that which thou hast. For why dost thou despise thy
brother? In the bowels of your mothers ye were both naked. Forsooth,
even when ye shall have departed this life, and these bodies shall have
rotted, when the soul hath been breathed forth, let the bones of the
rich and poor man be distinguished! I am speaking of the equality of
condition, of that very lot of mankind, wherein all men are born: <span
id="fr_3268"></span>[3269](#fn_3268) for both here doth a man become
rich, and a poor man will not alway be here: and as a rich man doth not
come rich, so neither doth he depart rich; the very same is the entrance
of both, and like is the departure. I add, that perchance ye will change
conditions. Now everywhere the Gospel is being preached: observe a
certain poor man full of sores, who was lying before the gate of a rich
man, <span id="fr_3269"></span>[3270](#fn_3269) and was desiring to be
filled with crumbs, which used to fall from the table of the rich man;
observe also that likeness <span id="fr_3270"></span>[3271](#fn_3270) of
thine who was clothed with purple and fine linen, and fared sumptuously
every day. It chanced, I say, for that poor man to die, and to be borne
by the Angels into the bosom of Abraham: but the other died and was
buried; for the other’s burial perchance no one cared.…Brethren, how
great was the toil of the poor man! Of how long duration were the
luxuries of the rich man! But the condition which they have received in
exchange is everlasting.…Deservedly too late he will say, “Send
Lazarus,” <span id="fr_3271"></span>[3272](#fn_3271) “let him tell even
my brethren;” since to himself there is not granted the fruit of
repentance. For it is not that repentance <span
id="fr_3272"></span>[3273](#fn_3272) is not given, but everlasting will
be the repentance, and no salvation after repentance. Therefore these
men “have passed over unto purpose of heart.”

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p36"></span>11. “They have thought and have spoken
spitefulness” ([Psa. 73.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#008)<span
id="ii.LXXIII-p36.1"></span>). But men do speak spitefulness even with
fear: but these men how? “Iniquity on high they have spoken.” Not only
they have spoken iniquity; but even openly, in the hearing of all,
proudly; “I will do it;” “I will show you;” “thou shalt know with whom
thou hast to do;” “I will not let thee live.” Thou <span
id="fr_3273"></span>[3274](#fn_3273) mightest have but thought such
things, not have given utterance to them! Within the chambers of thought
at least the evil desire might have been confined, he might have at
least restrained it within his thought. Why? Is he perchance lean?
“There shall go forth as if out of fatness the iniquity of them.”
“Iniquity on high they have spoken.”

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p38"></span>12. “They have set against Heaven their
mouth, and their tongue hath passed over above the earth” ([Psa.
73.9](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#009)<span
id="ii.LXXIII-p38.1"></span>). For this, “hath passed over above the
earth” is, they pass over all earthly things? What is it to pass over
all earthly things? He doth not think of himself as a man that can die
suddenly, when he is speaking; he doth menace as if he were alway to
live: his thought doth transcend earthly frailty, he knoweth not with
what sort of vessel he is enwrapped; he knoweth not what hath been
written in another place concerning such men: “His spirit shall go
forth, and he shall return unto his earth, in that day shall perish all
his thoughts.” <span id="fr_3274"></span>[3275](#fn_3274) But these men
not thinking of their last day, speak pride, <span
id="fr_3275"></span>[3276](#fn_3275) and unto Heaven they set their
mouth, they transcend the earth. If a robber were not to think of his
last day, that is, the last day of his trial, when sent to prison,
nothing would be more monstrous than he: and yet he might escape.
Whither dost thou flee to escape death? Certain will that day be. What
is the long time which thou hast to live? How much is the long time
which hath an end, even if it were a long time? To this there is added
that it is nought: and the very thing which is called long time is not a
long time, and is uncertain. Why doth he not think of this? Because he
hath set against Heaven his mouth, and his tongue hath passed over above
the earth. “And full days shall be found in them.”

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p41"></span>13. “Therefore there shall return hither
My people” ([Psa. 73.10](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#010)<span
id="ii.LXXIII-p41.1"></span>). Now Asaph himself is returning hither.
For he saw these things abound to unrighteous men, he saw them abound to
proud men: he is returning to God, and is beginning to inquire and
discuss. But when? “When full days shall be found in them.” What is
“full days”? “But when there came the fulness of time, God sent His
Son.” <span id="fr_3276"></span>[3277](#fn_3276) This is the very
fulness of time, when He came to teach men that things temporal should
be despised, that they should not esteem as a great matter whatever
object evil men covet, that they should suffer whatever evil men fear.
He became the <span id="page_338">p. 338</span> <span
id="ii.LXXIII-Page_338"></span>way, He recalled us to inward thought,
admonished us of what should be sought of God. And see from what thought
reacting upon itself, and in a manner recalling the waves of its
impulse, he doth pass over unto choosing true things.

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p43"></span>14. “And they said, How hath God known,
and is there knowledge in the Most High?” ([Psa.
73.11](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#011)<span
id="ii.LXXIII-p43.1"></span>). See through what thought they pass.
Behold unjust men are happy, God doth not care for things human. Doth He
indeed know what we do? See what things are being said. We are
inquiring, brethren, “How hath God known,” etc. (no longer let
Christians say it). For how doth it appear to thee that God knoweth not,
and that there is no knowledge in the Most High? He replieth, “Lo!
themselves they are sinners, and in the world they have gotten abundant
riches” ([Psa. 73.12](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#012)<span
id="ii.LXXIII-p43.2"></span>). Both sinners they are, and in the world
they have gotten abundant riches. He confessed that he willed not to be
a sinner in order that he might have riches. A carnal soul for things
visible and earthly would have sold its justice. What sort of justice is
that which is retained for the sake of gold, as if gold were a more
precious thing than justice herself, or as if when a man denieth the
deposit of another man’s goods, he to whom he denied them should suffer
a greater loss, than he that denieth them to him. The former doth lose a
garment, the latter fidelity. “Lo! they are themselves sinners, and in
the world they have gotten abundant riches.” On this account therefore
God knoweth not, and on this account there is no knowledge in the Most
High.

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p44"></span>15. “And I said, therefore <span
id="fr_3277"></span>[3278](#fn_3277) without cause I have justified my
heart” ([Psa. 73.13](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#013)<span
id="ii.LXXIII-p45.2"></span>). In that I serve God, and have not these
things; they serve him not, and they abound in these things: “therefore
without cause I have justified my heart, and have washed among the
innocent my hands.” This without cause I have done. Where is the reward
of my good life? Where is the wage of my service? I live well and am in
need; and the unjust man doth abound. “And I have washed among the
innocent my hands. And I have been scourged all the day long” ([Psa.
73.14](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#014)<span
id="ii.LXXIII-p45.3"></span>). From me the scourges of God do not
impart. I serve well, and I am scourged; he serveth not, and is
honoured. He hath proposed to himself a great question. The soul is
disturbed, the soul doth pass over things which are to pass away unto
despising things earthly and to desiring things eternal. There is a
passage of the soul herself in this thought; where she doth toss in a
sort of tempest she will reach the harbour. And it is with her as it is
with sick persons, who are less violently sick, when recovery is far
off: when recovery is at hand they are in higher fever; physicians call
it the “critical <span id="fr_3278"></span>[3279](#fn_3278) accession”
through which they pass to health: greater fever is there, but leading
to health: greater heat, but recovery is at hand. So also is this man
enfevered. For these are dangerous words, brethren, offensive, and
almost blasphemous, “How hath God known?” This is why I say, “and
almost;” He hath not said, God hath not known: he hath not said, there
is no knowledge in the Most High: but as if inquiring, hesitating,
doubting. This is the same as he said a little before, “My steps were
almost overthrown.” <span id="fr_3279"></span>[3280](#fn_3279) He doth
not affirm it, but the very doubt is dangerous. Through danger he is
passing to health. Hear now the health: “Therefore in vain I have
justified my heart, and have washed among the innocent my hands: and I
have been scourged all the day long, and my chastening was in the
morning.” Chastening is correction. He that is being chastened is being
corrected. What is, “in the morning”? It is not deferred. That of the
ungodly is being deferred, mine is not deferred: the former is too late
or is not at all; mine is in the morning.

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p48"></span>16. “If I said, I shall declare thus;
behold, the generation of Thy sons I have reprobated” ([Psa.
73.15](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#015)<span
id="ii.LXXIII-p48.1"></span>): that is, I will teach thus. How wilt thou
teach? that there is no knowledge in the Most High, that God doth not
know? Wilt thou propound this opinion, that without cause men live
justly who do live justly; that a just man hath lost his service,
because God doth more show favour to evil men, or else He doth care for
no one? Wilt thou tell this, declare this? He doth restrain himself by
an authority repressing him. What authority? A man wisheth some time to
break out in this sentiment: but he is recalled by the Scriptures
directing us alway to live well, saying, that God doth care for things
human, that He maketh a distinction between a godly man and an ungodly
man. Therefore this man also wishing to put forth this sentiment, doth
recollect himself. And what saith he? “I have reprobated the generation
of Thy sons.” If I shall declare thus, the generation of just men I
shall reprobate. As also some copies have it, “Behold, the generation of
thy sons with which I have been in concert:” that is, with which
consisting of Thy sons I have been in concert; that is, with which I
have agreed, to which I have been conformed: I have been out of time
with all, if so I teach. For he doth sing in concert who giveth the tune
together; but he that giveth not the tune together doth not sing in
concert. Am I to say something different from that which Abraham said,
from that which Isaac said, from that which Jacob said, from that which
the Prophets said? <span id="page_339">p. 339</span> <span
id="ii.LXXIII-Page_339"></span>For all they said that God doth care for
things human, am I to say that He careth not? Is there greater wisdom in
me than in them? Greater understanding in me than in them? A most
wholesome authority hath called back his thought from ungodliness. And
what followeth? That he might not reprobate, he did what? “And I
undertook to know” ([Psa. 73.16](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#016)<span
id="ii.LXXIII-p48.2"></span>). May God be with him in order that he may
know. Meanwhile, brethren, from a great fall he is being withheld, when
he doth not presume that he already knoweth, but hath undertaken to know
that which he knew not. For but now he was willing to appear as if
knowing, and to declare that God hath no care of things human. For this
hath come to be a most naughty and ungodly doctrine of unrighteous men.
Know, brethren, that many men dispute and say that God careth not for
things human, that by chances all things are ruled, or that our wills
have been made subject to the stars, that each one is not dealt with
according to his deserts, but by the necessity of his stars,—an evil
doctrine, an impious doctrine. Unto these thoughts was going that man
whose feet were almost moved, and whose steps were all but overthrown,
into this error he was going; but because he was not in tune with the
generation of the sons of God, he undertook to know, and condemned the
knowledge wherein with God’s just men he agreed not. And what he saith
let us hear; how that he undertook to know, and was helped, and learned
something, and declared it to us. “And I undertook,” he saith, “to
know.” “In this labour is before me.” Truly a great labour; to know in
what manner both God doth care for things human, and it is well with
evil men, and good men labour. Great is the importance of the question;
therefore, “and this labour is before me.” As it were there is standing
in my face a sort of wall, but thou hast the voice of a Psalm, “In my
God I shall pass over the wall.” <span
id="fr_3280"></span>[3281](#fn_3280)

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p50"></span>17. …And he hath done this; for he saith
how long labour is before him; “until I enter into the sanctuary of God,
and understand upon the last things” ([Psa.
73.17](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#017)<span
id="ii.LXXIII-p50.1"></span>). A great thing it is, brethren: now for a
long time I labour, he saith, and before my face I see a sort of
insuperable labour, to know in what manner both God is just, and doth
care for things human, and is not unjust because men sinning and doing
wicked actions have happiness on this earth; but the godly and men
serving God are wasted ofttimes in trials and in labours; a great
difficulty it is to know this, but only “until I enter into the
Sanctuary of God.” For in the Sanctuary what is presented to thee, in
order that thou mayest solve this question? “And I understand,” he
saith, “upon the last things:” not present things. I, he saith, from the
Sanctuary of God stretch out mine eye unto the end, I pass over present
things. All that which is called the human race, all that mass of
mortality is to come to the balance, is to come to the scale, thereon
will be weighed the works of men. All things now a cloud doth enfold:
but to God are known the merits of each severally. “And I understand,”
he saith, “upon the last things:” but not of myself; for before me there
is labour. Whence “may I understand upon the last things”? Let me enter
into the Sanctuary of God. In that place then he understood also the
reason why these men now are happy.

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p51"></span>18. To wit, “because of deceitfulness
Thou hast set upon them” ([Psa.
73.18](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#018)<span
id="ii.LXXIII-p51.1"></span>). Because deceitful they are, that is
fraudulent; because deceitful they are, they suffer deceits. What is
this, because fraudulent they are they suffer a fraud? They desire to
play a fraud upon mankind in all their naughtinesses, they themselves
also suffer a fraud, in choosing earthly good things, and in forsaking
the eternal. Therefore, brethren, in their very playing off a fraud they
suffer a fraud. In that which but now I said, brethren, “What manner of
wit <span id="fr_3281"></span>[3282](#fn_3281) hath he who to gain a
garment doth lose his fidelity?” hath he whose garment he hath taken
suffered a fraud, or he that is smitten with so great a loss? If a
garment is more precious than fidelity, the former doth suffer the
greater loss: but if incomparably good faith doth surpass the whole
world, the latter shall seem to have sustained the loss of a garment;
but to the former is said, “What doth it profit a man if he gain the
whole world, but suffer the loss of his own soul?” <span
id="fr_3282"></span>[3283](#fn_3282) Therefore what hath befallen them?
“Because of deceitfulness Thou hast set for them: Thou didst throw them
down while they were being exalted.” He hath not said, Thou didst throw
them down because they were lifted up: not as it were after that they
were lifted up Thou didst throw them down; but in their very lifting up
they were thrown down. For thus to be lifted up is already to fall.

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p54"></span>19. “How have they become a desolation
suddenly?” ([Psa. 73.19](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#019)<span
id="ii.LXXIII-p54.1"></span>). He is wondering at them, understanding
unto the last things. “They have vanished.” Truly like smoke, which
while it mounteth upward, doth vanish, so they have vanished. How doth
he say, “They have vanished”? In the manner of one who understandeth the
last things: “they have perished because of their iniquity.” “Like as
the dream of one rising up” ([Psa.
73.20](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#020)<span
id="ii.LXXIII-p54.2"></span>). How have they vanished? As vanisheth the
dream of one rising up. <span id="page_340">p. 340</span> <span
id="ii.LXXIII-Page_340"></span>Fancy a man in sleep to have seen himself
find treasures; he is a rich man, but only until he awaketh. “Like as
the dream of one rising up:” so they have vanished, like the dream of
one awaking. It is sought then and it is not: there is nothing in the
hands, nothing in the bed. A poor man he went to sleep, a rich man in
sleep he became: had he not awoke, he were a rich man: he woke up, he
found the care which he had lost while sleeping. And these men shall
find the misery which they had prepared for themselves. When they shall
have awoke from this life, that thing doth pass away which was grasped
as if in sleep. “Like as the dream of one rising up.” And that there
might not be said, “What then? a small thing doth their glory seem to
thee, a small thing doth their state seem to thee, small things seem to
thee inscriptions, images, statues, distinctions, troops of clients?” “O
Lord,” he saith, “in Thy city their image <span
id="fr_3283"></span>[3284](#fn_3283) Thou shalt bring to nothing.”…He
hath taken away the pride of rich men, he giveth counsel. <span
id="fr_3284"></span>[3285](#fn_3284) As if they <span
id="fr_3285"></span>[3286](#fn_3285) were saying, We are rich men, thou
dost forbid us to be proud, dost prohibit us from boasting of the parade
of our riches: what then are we to do with these riches? Is it come to
this, that there is nothing which they may do therewith? “Be they rich,”
he saith, “in good works; let them readily distribute,
communicate.” <span id="fr_3286"></span>[3287](#fn_3286) And what doth
this profit? “Let them treasure unto themselves a good foundation for
the future, that they may lay hold of true life.” <span
id="fr_3287"></span>[3288](#fn_3287) Where ought they to lay up treasure
for themselves? In that place whereunto he set his eye, when entering
into the Sanctuary of God. Let there shudder all our rich brethren,
abounding in money, gold, silver, household, honours, let them shudder
at that which but now hath been said, “Thou shalt bring to nothing their
image.” Are they not worthy to suffer these things, to wit that God
bring to nothing their image in His city, because also they have
themselves brought to nothing the image of God in their earthly city?

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p60"></span>20. “Because my heart was delighted”
([Psa. 73.21](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#021)<span
id="ii.LXXIII-p60.1"></span>). He is saying with what things he is
tempted: “because my heart was delighted,” he saith, “my reins also were
changed.” When those temporal things delighted me, my reins were
changed. It may also be understood thus: “because my heart was
delighted” in God, “my reins also were changed, that is, my lusts were
changed, and I became wholly chaste. “My reins were changed.” And hear
how. “And I was brought unto nothing, and I knew not” ([Psa.
73.22](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#022)<span
id="ii.LXXIII-p60.2"></span>). I, the very man, who now say these things
of rich men, once longed for such things: therefore “even I was brought
to nothing” when my steps were almost overthrown. “And I was brought
unto nothing, and I knew not.” We must not therefore despair even of
them, against whom I was saying such things.

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p61"></span>21. What is, “I knew not”? “As it were a
beast I became to Thee, and I am alway with Thee” ([Psa.
73.23](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#023)<span
id="ii.LXXIII-p61.1"></span>). There is a great difference between this
man and others. He became as it were a beast in longing for earthly
things, when being brought to nothing he knew not things eternal: but he
departed not from his God, because he did not desire these things of
demons, of the devil. For this I have already brought to your notice.
The voice is from the Synagogue, that is, from that people which served
not idols. A beast indeed I became, when desiring from my God things
earthly: but I never departed from That my God.

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p62"></span>22. Because then, though having become a
beast, I departed not from my God, there followeth, “Thou hast held the
hand of my right hand.” He hath not said my right hand, but “the hand of
my right hand.” If the hand of the right hand it is, a hand hath a hand.
“The hand Thou hast held of my right hand,” in order that Thou mightest
conduct me. For what hath he put hand? For power. For we say that a man
hath that in his hand which he hath in his power: just as the devil said
to God concerning Job, “Lay to Thine hand, and take away the things
which he hath.” <span id="fr_3288"></span>[3289](#fn_3288) What is, lay
to Thine hand? Put <span id="fr_3289"></span>[3290](#fn_3289) forth
power. The hand of God he hath called the power of God: as hath been
written in another place, “death and life are in the hands of the
tongue.” <span id="fr_3290"></span>[3291](#fn_3290) Hath the tongue
hands? But what is, in the hands of the tongue? In the power of the
tongue. What is, in the power of the tongue? “Out of thy mouth thou
shalt be justified, and out of thy mouth thou shalt be condemned.” <span
id="fr_3291"></span>[3292](#fn_3291) “Thou hast held,” therefore, “the
hand of my right hand,” the power of my right hand. What was my right
hand? That I was alway with Thee. Unto the left I was holding, because I
became a beast, that is, because there was an earthly concupiscence in
me: but the right was mine, because I was alway with thee. Of this my
right hand Thou hast held the hand, that is, hast directed the power.
What power? “He gave them power to become sons of God.”  <span
id="fr_3292"></span>[3293](#fn_3292) He is beginning now to be among the
sons of God, belonging to the New Testament. See in what manner the hand
of his right hand was held. “In Thy will Thou hast conducted me.” What
is, “in thy will”? Not in my merits. What is, “in Thy <span
id="page_341">p. 341</span> <span id="ii.LXXIII-Page_341"></span>will”?
Hear the apostle, who was at first a beast longing for things earthly,
and living after the Old Testament. He saith what? “I that at first was
a blasphemer, and persecutor, and injurious: but mercy I
obtained.” <span id="fr_3293"></span>[3294](#fn_3293) What is, “in Thy
will”? “By the grace of God I am what I am.” <span
id="fr_3294"></span>[3295](#fn_3294) “And in <span
id="fr_3295"></span>[3296](#fn_3295) glory Thou hast taken me up.” Now
to what glory he was taken up, and in what glory, who can explain, who
can say? Let us await it, because in the Resurrection it will be, in the
last things it will be.

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p71"></span>23. And he is beginning to think of that
same Heavenly felicity, and to reprove himself, because he hath been a
beast, and hath longed for things earthly. “For what have I in Heaven,
and from Thee what have I willed upon earth?” ([Psa.
73.25](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#025)<span
id="ii.LXXIII-p71.1"></span>). By your voice I see that ye have
understood. <span id="fr_3296"></span>[3297](#fn_3296) He compared with
his earthly will the heavenly reward which he is to receive; he saw what
was there being reserved for him; and while thinking and burning at the
thought of some ineffable thing, which neither eye hath seen, nor ear
heard, nor into the heart of man hath ascended, <span
id="fr_3297"></span>[3298](#fn_3297) he hath not said, this or that I
have in Heaven, but, “what have I in Heaven?” What is that thing which I
have in Heaven? What is it? How great is it? Of what sort is it? “And,”
since that which I have in heaven doth not pass away, “from Thee what
have I willed upon earth?” <span id="fr_3298"></span>[3299](#fn_3298)
…Thou reservest, he saith, for me in Heaven riches immortal, even
Thyself, and I have willed from Thee on earth that which even ungodly
men have, which even evil men have, which even abandoned men have,
money, gold, silver, jewels, households, which even many wicked men
have: which even many profligate women have, many profligate men: these
things as a great matter I have desired of my God upon earth: though my
God reserveth Himself for me in Heaven!

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p75"></span>24. “My heart and my flesh hath failed,
O God of my heart” ([Psa. 73.26](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#026)<span
id="ii.LXXIII-p75.1"></span>). This then for me in Heaven hath been
reserved, “God of my heart, and my portion is my God.” What is it,
brethren? Let us find out our riches, let mankind choose their parts.
Let us see men torn with diversity of desires: let some choose
war-service, some advocacy, some divers and sundry offices of teaching,
some merchandise, some farming, let them take their portions in human
affairs: let the people of God cry, “my portion is my God.” Not for a
time “my portion;” but “my portion is my God for everlasting.” Even if I
alway have gold, what have I? Even if I did not alway have God, how
great a good should I have? To this is added, that He promiseth Himself
to me, and He promiseth that I shall have this for everlasting. So great
a thing I have, and never have it not. Great felicity: “my portion is
God!” How long? “For everlasting.” For behold and see after what sort He
hath loved him; He hath made his heart chaste: “God of my heart, and my
portion is God for everlasting.” His heart hath become chaste, for
nought now God is loved, from Him is not sought any other reward. He
that doth seek any other reward from God, and therefore is willing to
serve God, more precious doth make that which he willeth to receive,
than Him from whom he willeth to receive. What then, is there no reward
belonging to God? None except Himself. The reward belonging to God, is
God Himself. This he loveth, this he esteemeth; if any other thing he
shall have loved, the love will not be chaste. Thou art receding from
the Fire immortal, thou wilt grow cold, wilt be corrupted. Do not
recede. Recede not, it will be thy corruption, it will be thy
fornication. Now he is returning, now he is repenting, now he is
choosing repentance, now he is saying, “my portion is God.” And after
what sort is he delighted with that Same, whom he hath chosen for his
portion.

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p76"></span>25. “Behold, they that put themselves
afar from Thee shall perish” ([Psa.
73.27](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#027)<span
id="ii.LXXIII-p76.1"></span>). He therefore departed from God, but not
far: for “I have become as it were a beast,” he saith, and “I am alway
with Thee.” <span id="fr_3299"></span>[3300](#fn_3299) But they have
departed afar, because not only things earthly they have desired, but
have sought them from demons and the Devil. “They that put themselves
afar from Thee shall perish.” And what is it, to become afar from God?
“Thou hast destroyed every man that committeth fornication away from
Thee.” To this fornication is opposed chaste love. What is chaste love?
Now the soul doth love her Bridegroom: what doth she require of Him,
from Her Bridegroom whom she loveth? Perchance in like manner as women
choose for themselves men either as sons-in-law or as bridegrooms: she
perchance chooseth riches, and loveth his gold, and estates, and silver
and cattle and horses, and household, and the like. Far be it. He doth
love Him alone, for nought he doth love Him: because in Him he hath all
things, for “by Him were made all things.” <span
id="fr_3300"></span>[3301](#fn_3300)

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p79"></span>26. But thou doest what? “But for me to
cleave to God is a good thing” ([Psa.
73.28](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#028)<span
id="ii.LXXIII-p79.1"></span>). This is whole good. Will ye have more? I
grieve at your willing. Brethren, what will ye have more? Than to cleave
to God nothing is better, when we shall see Him face to face. <span
id="fr_3301"></span>[3302](#fn_3301) But now <span id="page_342">p.
342</span> <span id="ii.LXXIII-Page_342"></span>what? For yet as a
stranger I am speaking: “to cleave,” he saith, “to God is a good thing:”
but now in my sojourning (for not yet hath come the substance), I have
“to put in God my hope.” So long therefore as thou hast not yet cloven,
therein put thy hope. Thou art wavering, cast forward an anchor to the
land. <span id="fr_3302"></span>[3303](#fn_3302) Not yet dost thou
cleave by presence, cleave fast by hope. “To put in God my hope.” And by
doing what here wilt thou put in God thy hope? What will be thy
business, but to praise Him whom thou lovest, and to make others to be
fellow-lovers of Him with thee? Lo, if thou shouldest love a charioteer,
wouldest thou not carry along other men to love him with thee? A lover
of a charioteer whithersoever he goeth doth speak of him, in order that
as well as he others also may love him. For nought are loved abandoned
men, and from God is reward required in order that He may be loved? Love
thou God for nought, grudge God to no one.…For what followeth? “In order
that I may tell forth all Thy praises in the courts of the daughter of
Sion.” “In the courts:” for the preaching of God beside the Church is
vain. A small thing it is to praise God and to tell forth all His
praise. In the courts of the daughter of Sion tell thou forth. Make for
unity, do not divide the people; but draw them unto one, and make them
one. I have forgotten how long I have been speaking. Now the Psalm being
ended, even judging by this closeness, <span
id="fr_3303"></span>[3304](#fn_3303) I suppose I have held a long
discourse: but it doth not suffice for your zeal; ye are too
impetuous. <span id="fr_3304"></span>[3305](#fn_3304) O that with this
impetuosity ye would seize upon the kingdom of Heaven.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3249"></span>[333:3250](1080084.htm#fr_3249) <span
id="ii.LXXIII-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p2"></span> Lat. LXXII.

<span id="fn_3250"></span>[333:3251](1080084.htm#fr_3250) <span
id="ii.LXXIII-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p4"></span> This sentence in our version and in the
Vulgate stands at the end of the previous Psalm. \[Where it is more
significant. David can prophesy no further concerning the glory that
shall be revealed. See A.N.F. vol. i. p. 211, note 3.—C.\]

<span id="fn_3251"></span>[333:3252](1080084.htm#fr_3251) <span
id="ii.LXXIII-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p5"></span> Title of [Psalm
lxxiii.](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#000)<span
id="ii.LXXIII-p5.1"></span>

<span id="fn_3252"></span>[334:3253](1080084.htm#fr_3252) <span
id="ii.LXXIII-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p6"></span> [1 Sam. xvi.
19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#019)<span id="ii.LXXIII-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3253"></span>[334:3254](1080084.htm#fr_3253) <span
id="ii.LXXIII-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p7"></span> [Isa. xi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001)<span id="ii.LXXIII-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3254"></span>[334:3255](1080084.htm#fr_3254) <span
id="ii.LXXIII-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p8"></span> [Gen. xxiv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#002)<span id="ii.LXXIII-p8.1"></span>.
\[See p. 148, note 11, *supra*.—C.\]

<span id="fn_3255"></span>[334:3256](1080084.htm#fr_3255) <span
id="ii.LXXIII-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p9"></span> [Gen. xxii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#018)<span id="ii.LXXIII-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3256"></span>[334:3257](1080084.htm#fr_3256) <span
id="ii.LXXIII-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p11"></span> [Rom.
11:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#017),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#018)<span id="ii.LXXIII-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3257"></span>[334:3258](1080084.htm#fr_3257) <span
id="ii.LXXIII-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p12"></span> Ben. notes that the word “good” is not
in the <span class="c21"><span id="ii.LXXIII-p12.1"></span>mss</span>.;
it is found at Oxford, and probably in <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.LXXIII-p12.2"></span>mss</span>. used for earlier editions.

<span id="fn_3258"></span>[334:3259](1080084.htm#fr_3258) <span
id="ii.LXXIII-p12.3"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p13"></span> [Rom.
11:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#024),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#018)<span id="ii.LXXIII-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3259"></span>[334:3260](1080084.htm#fr_3259) <span
id="ii.LXXIII-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p15"></span> \[*i.e*., Joshua the son of Nun.—C.\]

<span id="fn_3260"></span>[335:3261](1080084.htm#fr_3260) <span
id="ii.LXXIII-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p17"></span> See Title of Psalm.

<span id="fn_3261"></span>[335:3262](1080084.htm#fr_3261) <span
id="ii.LXXIII-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p18"></span> [Ps. xxix.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#001)<span id="ii.LXXIII-p18.1"></span>,
Gr. and Lat.

<span id="fn_3262"></span>[335:3263](1080084.htm#fr_3262) <span
id="ii.LXXIII-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p19"></span> Oxf. <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.LXXIII-p19.1"></span>mss</span>. add, “not which,” etc.

<span id="fn_3263"></span>[335:3264](1080084.htm#fr_3263) <span
id="ii.LXXIII-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p20"></span> [1 Cor. x.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#006)<span id="ii.LXXIII-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3264"></span>[335:3265](1080084.htm#fr_3264) <span
id="ii.LXXIII-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p23"></span> [Ps. xviii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#025)<span id="ii.LXXIII-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3265"></span>[336:3266](1080084.htm#fr_3265) <span
id="ii.LXXIII-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p27"></span> [Prov. vii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#022)<span id="ii.LXXIII-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3266"></span>[336:3267](1080084.htm#fr_3266) <span
id="ii.LXXIII-p28.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p29"></span> Ed. *in teipso*; Ben. conj. and Oxf.
<span class="c21"><span id="ii.LXXIII-p29.1"></span>mss</span>. *in
teipsum*.

<span id="fn_3267"></span>[337:3268](1080084.htm#fr_3267) <span
id="ii.LXXIII-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p30"></span> The words from “this beggar,” added
from Oxf. <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.LXXIII-p30.1"></span>mss</span>.

<span id="fn_3268"></span>[337:3269](1080084.htm#fr_3268) <span
id="ii.LXXIII-p30.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p31"></span> \[See A.N.F. vol. vii. p. 151.—C.\]

<span id="fn_3269"></span>[337:3270](1080084.htm#fr_3269) <span
id="ii.LXXIII-p31.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p32"></span> [Luke xvi.
19](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#019)<span id="ii.LXXIII-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3270"></span>[337:3271](1080084.htm#fr_3270) <span
id="ii.LXXIII-p32.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p33"></span> *Al*. “father.”

<span id="fn_3271"></span>[337:3272](1080084.htm#fr_3271) <span
id="ii.LXXIII-p33.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p34"></span> [Luke xvi.
27](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#027)<span id="ii.LXXIII-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3272"></span>[337:3273](1080084.htm#fr_3272) <span
id="ii.LXXIII-p34.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p35"></span> Used, of course, in the lower sense.
\[The sense, *i.e*., of mere *attrition*. See Roman doctrine, Liguori,
vol. iv. p. 245, ed. Paris, 1852.—C.\]

<span id="fn_3273"></span>[337:3274](1080084.htm#fr_3273) <span
id="ii.LXXIII-p36.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p37"></span> Oxf. <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.LXXIII-p37.1"></span>mss</span>. and some of Ben. “Thou proud
man, thou,” etc.

<span id="fn_3274"></span>[337:3275](1080084.htm#fr_3274) <span
id="ii.LXXIII-p38.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p39"></span> [Ps. cxlvi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#004)<span id="ii.LXXIII-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3275"></span>[337:3276](1080084.htm#fr_3275) <span
id="ii.LXXIII-p39.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p40"></span> Oxf. and other <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.LXXIII-p40.1"></span>mss</span>. “proud things.”

<span id="fn_3276"></span>[337:3277](1080084.htm#fr_3276) <span
id="ii.LXXIII-p41.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p42"></span> [Gal. iv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#004)<span id="ii.LXXIII-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3277"></span>[338:3278](1080084.htm#fr_3277) <span
id="ii.LXXIII-p44.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p45"></span> <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.LXXIII-p45.1"></span>mss</span>. want “therefore.”

<span id="fn_3278"></span>[338:3279](1080084.htm#fr_3278) <span
id="ii.LXXIII-p45.4"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p46"></span> <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.LXXIII-p46.1"></span>mss</span>. *creticam*.

<span id="fn_3279"></span>[338:3280](1080084.htm#fr_3279) <span
id="ii.LXXIII-p46.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p47"></span> [Ps. lxxiii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#002)<span id="ii.LXXIII-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3280"></span>[339:3281](1080084.htm#fr_3280) <span
id="ii.LXXIII-p48.3"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p49"></span> [Ps. xviii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#029)<span id="ii.LXXIII-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3281"></span>[339:3282](1080084.htm#fr_3281) <span
id="ii.LXXIII-p51.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p52"></span> *Cor*.

<span id="fn_3282"></span>[339:3283](1080084.htm#fr_3282) <span
id="ii.LXXIII-p52.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p53"></span> [Matt. xvi.
26](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#026)<span id="ii.LXXIII-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3283"></span>[340:3284](1080084.htm#fr_3283) <span
id="ii.LXXIII-p54.3"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p55"></span> Oxf. <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.LXXIII-p55.1"></span>mss</span>. “images.”

<span id="fn_3284"></span>[340:3285](1080084.htm#fr_3284) <span
id="ii.LXXIII-p55.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p56"></span> \[He uses the word *ferimus* in the
omitted paragraph.—C.\] He seems to mean, that such teaching, addressed
to any one in common intercourse, would be “smiting.”

<span id="fn_3285"></span>[340:3286](1080084.htm#fr_3285) <span
id="ii.LXXIII-p56.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p57"></span> Oxf. <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.LXXIII-p57.1"></span>mss</span>. “the rich.”

<span id="fn_3286"></span>[340:3287](1080084.htm#fr_3286) <span
id="ii.LXXIII-p57.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p58"></span> [1 Tim. vi.
18](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#018)<span id="ii.LXXIII-p58.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3287"></span>[340:3288](1080084.htm#fr_3287) <span
id="ii.LXXIII-p58.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p59"></span> [1 Tim. vi.
19](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#019)<span id="ii.LXXIII-p59.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3288"></span>[340:3289](1080084.htm#fr_3288) <span
id="ii.LXXIII-p62.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p63"></span> [Job i.
11](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#011)<span id="ii.LXXIII-p63.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3289"></span>[340:3290](1080084.htm#fr_3289) <span
id="ii.LXXIII-p63.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p64"></span> Lit. “give.”

<span id="fn_3290"></span>[340:3291](1080084.htm#fr_3290) <span
id="ii.LXXIII-p64.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p65"></span> [Prov. xviii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#021)<span id="ii.LXXIII-p65.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3291"></span>[340:3292](1080084.htm#fr_3291) <span
id="ii.LXXIII-p65.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p66"></span> [Matt. xii.
37](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#037)<span id="ii.LXXIII-p66.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3292"></span>[340:3293](1080084.htm#fr_3292) <span
id="ii.LXXIII-p66.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p67"></span> [John i.
12](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#012)<span id="ii.LXXIII-p67.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3293"></span>[341:3294](1080084.htm#fr_3293) <span
id="ii.LXXIII-p67.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p68"></span> [1 Tim. i.
13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#013)<span id="ii.LXXIII-p68.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3294"></span>[341:3295](1080084.htm#fr_3294) <span
id="ii.LXXIII-p68.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p69"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#010)<span id="ii.LXXIII-p69.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3295"></span>[341:3296](1080084.htm#fr_3295) <span
id="ii.LXXIII-p69.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p70"></span> So <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.LXXIII-p70.1"></span>mss</span>.; Ben. “with.”

<span id="fn_3296"></span>[341:3297](1080084.htm#fr_3296) <span
id="ii.LXXIII-p71.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p72"></span> \[Here there were voluntary “amens,” or
the like, from the people. See p. 207, *supra*.—C.\]

<span id="fn_3297"></span>[341:3298](1080084.htm#fr_3297) <span
id="ii.LXXIII-p72.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p73"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#009)<span id="ii.LXXIII-p73.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3298"></span>[341:3299](1080084.htm#fr_3298) <span
id="ii.LXXIII-p73.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p74"></span> \[Here he interpolates: “I will speak
as I am able, but forgive me; accept my endeavour, mine earnestness to
attempt; for to explain it I have not power.”—C.\]

<span id="fn_3299"></span>[341:3300](1080084.htm#fr_3299) <span
id="ii.LXXIII-p76.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p77"></span> [Ps. lxxiii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#021)<span id="ii.LXXIII-p77.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3300"></span>[341:3301](1080084.htm#fr_3300) <span
id="ii.LXXIII-p77.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p78"></span> [John i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003)<span id="ii.LXXIII-p78.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3301"></span>[341:3302](1080084.htm#fr_3301) <span
id="ii.LXXIII-p79.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p80"></span> [1 Cor. xiii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#012)<span id="ii.LXXIII-p80.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3302"></span>[342:3303](1080084.htm#fr_3302) <span
id="ii.LXXIII-p80.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p81"></span> Oxf. <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.LXXIII-p81.1"></span>mss</span>. “Wavering, from the earth cast
an anchor before thee upward.”

<span id="fn_3303"></span>[342:3304](1080084.htm#fr_3303) <span
id="ii.LXXIII-p81.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p82"></span> *Odore*, lit. “smell;” one <span
class="c21"><span id="ii.LXXIII-p82.1"></span>ms</span>. *ardore*,
“heat;” Ben. conj. *sudore*.

<span id="fn_3304"></span>[342:3305](1080084.htm#fr_3304) <span
id="ii.LXXIII-p82.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXIII-p83"></span> \[P. 341, note 4, *supra*.—C.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm LXXIV](1080085)
