[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080108)  [Next](1080110) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.XCVIII"></span>

<span id="ii.XCVIII-p1"></span> <span id="ii.XCVIII-p1.1"></span><span
class="c20"><span id="ii.XCVIII-p1.2"></span>Psalm XCVIII. <span
id="fr_4493"></span>[4494](#fn_4493) </span>

<span id="ii.XCVIII-p3"></span>1. “O sing unto the Lord a new song”
([Psa. 98.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#001)<span
id="ii.XCVIII-p3.1"></span>). The new man knoweth this, the old man
knoweth it not. The old man is the old life, and the new man the new
life: the old life is derived from Adam, the new life is formed in
Christ. But in this Psalm, the whole world is enjoined to sing a new
song. More openly elsewhere the words are these: “O sing unto the Lord a
new song; sing unto the Lord, all the whole earth;”  <span
id="fr_4494"></span>[4495](#fn_4494) that they who cut themselves off
from the communion of the whole earth, <span
id="fr_4495"></span>[4496](#fn_4495) may understand that they cannot
sing the new song, because it is sung in the whole, and not in a part of
it. Attend here also, and see that this is said. And when the whole
earth is enjoined to sing a new song, it is meant, that peace singeth a
new song. “For He hath done marvelous things.” What marvelous things?
Behold, the Gospel was just now being read, and we heard the marvellous
things of the Lord. The only son of his mother, who was a widow, was
being carried out dead: the Lord, in compassion, made them stand still;
they laid him down, and the Lord said, “Young man, I say unto thee,
Arise.” <span id="fr_4496"></span>[4497](#fn_4496) …“The Lord hath done
marvellous things.” What marvellous things? Hear: “His own right hand,
and His holy arm, hath healed for Him.” What is the Lord’s holy Arm? Our
Lord Jesus Christ. Hear Isaiah: “Who hath believed our report, and to
whom is the arm of the Lord revealed?” <span
id="fr_4497"></span>[4498](#fn_4497) His holy arm then, and His own
right hand, is <span id="page_481">p. 481</span> <span
id="ii.XCVIII-Page_481"></span>Himself. Our Lord Jesus Christ is
therefore the arm of God, and the right hand of God; for this reason is
it said, “hath He healed for Him.” It is not said only, “His right hand
hath healed the world,” but “hath healed for Him.” For many are healed
for themselves, not for Him. Behold how many long for that bodily
health, and receive it from Him: they are healed by Him, but not for
Him. How are they healed by Him, and not for Him? When they have
received health, they become wanton: they who when sick were chaste,
when cured become adulterers: they who when in illness injured no man,
on the recovery of their strength attack and crush the innocent: they
are healed, but not unto Him. Who is he who is healed unto Him? He who
is healed inwardly. Who is he that is healed inwardly? He who trusteth
in Him, that when he shall have been healed inwardly, reformed into a
new man, afterwards this mortal flesh too, which doth languish for a
time, may in the end itself even recover its most perfect health. Let us
therefore be healed for Him. But that we may be healed for Him, let us
believe in His right hand.

<span id="ii.XCVIII-p8"></span>2. “The Lord hath made known His
salvation” ([Psa. 98.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#002)<span
id="ii.XCVIII-p8.1"></span>). This very right hand, this very arm, this
very salvation, is our Lord Jesus Christ of whom it is said, “And all
flesh shall see the salvation of God;” <span
id="fr_4498"></span>[4499](#fn_4498) of whom also that Simeon who
embraced the Infant in his arms, spoke, “Lord, now lettest Thou Thy
servant depart in peace; for mine eyes have seen Thy salvation.” <span
id="fr_4499"></span>[4500](#fn_4499) “The Lord hath made known His
salvation.” To whom did He make it known? To a part, or to the whole?
Not to any part specially. Let no man betray, no man deceive, no man
say, “Lo, here is Christ, or there:” <span
id="fr_4500"></span>[4501](#fn_4500) the man who saith, Lo, He is here,
or there, pointeth to some particular spots. To whom “hath the Lord
declared His salvation”? Hear what followeth: “His righteousness hath He
openly showed in the sight of the heathen.” Our Lord and Saviour Jesus
Christ is the right hand of God, the arm of God, the salvation of God,
and the righteousness of God.

<span id="ii.XCVIII-p12"></span>3. “He hath remembered His mercy to
Jacob, and His truth unto the house of Israel” ([Psa.
98.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#003)<span
id="ii.XCVIII-p12.1"></span>). What meaneth this, “He hath remembered
His mercy and truth”? He hath pitied, so that He promised; because He
promised and showed His mercy, truth hath followed: mercy hath gone
before promise, promise hath been fulfilled in truth.…

<span id="ii.XCVIII-p13"></span>“And His truth unto the house of
Israel.” Who is this Israel? That ye may not perchance think of one
nation of the Jews, hear what followeth: “All the ends of the world have
seen the salvation of our God.” It is not said, all the earth: but, “all
the ends of the world:” as it is said, from one end to the other. Let no
man cut this down, let no man scatter it abroad; strong is the unity of
Christ. He who gave so great a price, hath bought the whole: “All the
ends of the world.”

<span id="ii.XCVIII-p14"></span>4. Because they have seen, then, “Make a
joyful noise unto the Lord, all ye lands” ([Psa.
98.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#004)<span
id="ii.XCVIII-p14.1"></span>). Ye already know what it is to make a
joyful noise. Rejoice, and speak. If ye cannot express your joy, shout
ye; let the shout manifest your joy, if your speech cannot: yet let not
joy be mute; let not your heart be silent respecting its God, let it not
be mute concerning His gifts. If thou speakest to thyself, unto thyself
art thou healed; if His right hand hath healed thee for Him, speak thou
unto Him for whom thou hast been healed. “Sing, rejoice, and make
melody.”

<span id="ii.XCVIII-p15"></span>5. “Make melody unto the Lord upon the
harp: on the harp and with the voice of a Psalm” ([Psa.
98.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#005)<span
id="ii.XCVIII-p15.1"></span>). Praise Him not with the voice only; take
up works, that ye may not only sing, but work also. He who singeth and
worketh, maketh melody with psaltery and upon the harp. Now see what
sort of instruments are next spoken of, in figure: “With ductile
trumpets also, and the sound of the pipe of horn” ([Psa.
98.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#006)<span
id="ii.XCVIII-p15.2"></span>). What are ductile trumpets, and pipes of
horn? Ductile trumpets are of brass: they are drawn out by hammering; if
by hammering, by being beaten, ye shall be ductile trumpets, drawn out
unto the praise of God, if ye improve when in tribulation: tribulation
is hammering, improvement is the being drawn out. Job was a ductile
trumpet, when suddenly assailed by the heaviest losses, and the death of
his sons, become like a ductile trumpet by the beating of so heavy
tribulation, he sounded thus: “The Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken
away; blessed be the name of the Lord.” <span
id="fr_4501"></span>[4502](#fn_4501) How did he sound? How pleasantly
doth his voice sound? This ductile trumpet is still under the hammer.…We
have heard how he was hammered; let us hear how he soundeth: let us, if
it please you, hear the sweet sound of this ductile trumpet: “What!
shall we receive good at the hand of God, and shall we not receive
evil?” O courageous, O sweet sound! whom will not that sound awake from
sleep? whom will not confidence in God awake, to march to battle
fearlessly against the devil; not to struggle with his own strength, but
His who proveth him. For He it is who hammereth: for the hammer could
not do so of itself.…See how (I dare so speak, my brethren) even the
Apostle was beaten with this very hammer: he saith, “there was given to
me a thorn in the <span id="page_482">p. 482</span> <span
id="ii.XCVIII-Page_482"></span>flesh, the messenger of Satan, to buffet
me.” <span id="fr_4502"></span>[4503](#fn_4502) Behold he is under the
hammer: let us hear how he speaketh of it: “For this thing,” he saith,
“I besought the Lord thrice, that it might depart from me. And He said
unto me, My grace is sufficient for thee: for My strength is made
perfect in weakness.” I, saith His Maker, wish to make this trumpet
perfect; I cannot do so unless I hammer it; in weakness is strength made
perfect. Hear now the ductile trumpet itself sounding as it should:
“When I am weak, then am I strong.”…

<span id="ii.XCVIII-p18"></span>6. The voice of the pipe of horn, what
is it? The horn riseth above the flesh: in rising above the flesh it
needs must be solid so as to last, and able to speak. And whence this?
Because it hath surpassed the flesh. He who wisheth to be a horn
trumpet, let him overcome the flesh. What meaneth this, let him overcome
the flesh? Let him surpass the desires, let him conquer the lusts of the
flesh. Hear the horn trumpets.…What meaneth this, “Set your affection on
things above”? It meaneth, Rise above the flesh, think not of carnal
things. They were not yet horn trumpets, to whom he now spoke thus: “I
could not speak unto you, brethren, as unto spiritual, but as unto
carnal, even as unto babes in Christ. I have fed you with milk, and not
with meat; for hitherto ye were not able to bear it: neither yet now are
ye able. For ye are yet carnal.” <span
id="fr_4503"></span>[4504](#fn_4503) They were not therefore horn
trumpets, because they had not risen above the flesh. Horn both adhereth
to the flesh, and riseth above the flesh; and although it springeth from
the flesh, yet it surpasseth it. If therefore thou art spiritual, when
before thou wast carnal; as yet thou art treading the earth in the
flesh, but in spirit thou art rising into heaven; for though we walk in
the flesh, we do not war after the flesh.…Brethren, do not reproach
brethren whom the mercy of God hath not yet converted; know that as long
as ye do this, ye savour of the flesh. That is not a trumpet which
pleaseth the ears of God: the trumpet of boastfulness maketh the war
fruitless. Let the horn trumpet raise thy courage against the devil; let
not the fleshly trumpet raise thy pride against thy brother. “Make a
joyful noise in the sight of the Lord the King.”

<span id="ii.XCVIII-p20"></span>7. While ye are rejoicing, and delighted
with the ductile trumpets, and the voice of the horn, what followeth?
“Let the sea be stirred up, and the fulness thereof” ([Psa.
98.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#007)<span
id="ii.XCVIII-p20.1"></span>). Brethren, when the Apostles, like ductile
trumpets and horns, were preaching the truth, the sea was stirred up,
its waves arose, tempests increased, persecutions of the Church took
place. Whence hath the sea been stirred up? When a joyful noise was
made, when Psalms of thanksgiving were being sung before God: the ears
of God were pleased, the waves of the sea were raised. “Let the sea be
stirred up, and the fulness thereof: the round world, and all that dwell
therein.” Let the sea be stirred up in its persecutions. “Let the floods
clap their hands together” ([Psa.
98.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#008)<span
id="ii.XCVIII-p20.2"></span>). Let the sea be aroused, and the floods
clap their hands together; persecutions arise, and the saints rejoice in
God. Whence shall the floods clap their hands? What is to clap their
hands? To rejoice in works. To clap hands, is to rejoice; hands, mean
works. What floods? Those whom God hath made floods, by giving them that
Water, the Holy Spirit. “If any man thirst,” saith He, “let him come
unto Me, and drink. He that believeth on Me, out of his bosom shall flow
rivers of living water.” <span id="fr_4504"></span>[4505](#fn_4504)
These rivers clapped their hands, these rivers rejoiced in works, and
blessed God. “The hills shall be joyful together.”

<span id="ii.XCVIII-p22"></span>8. “Before the Lord, for He is come; for
He is come to judge the earth” ([Psa.
98.9](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#009)<span
id="ii.XCVIII-p22.1"></span>). “The hills” signify the great. The Lord
cometh to judge the earth, and they rejoice. But there are hills, who,
when the Lord is coming to judge the earth, shall tremble. There are
therefore good and evil hills; the good hills, are spiritual greatness;
the bad hills, are the swelling of pride. “Let the hills be joyful
together before the Lord, for He is come; for He is come to judge the
earth.” Wherefore shall He come, and how shall He come? “With
righteousness shall He judge the world, and the people with equity”
([Psa. 98.10](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#010)<span
id="ii.XCVIII-p22.2"></span>). Let the hills therefore rejoice; for He
shall not judge unrighteously. When some man is coming as a judge, to
whom the conscience cannot lie open, even innocent men may tremble, if
from him they expect a reward for virtue, or fear the penalty of
condemnation; when He shall come who cannot be deceived, let the hills
rejoice, let them rejoice fearlessly; they shall be enlightened by Him,
not condemned; let them rejoice, because the Lord will come to judge the
world with equity; and if the righteous hills rejoice, let the
unrighteous tremble. But behold, He hath not yet come: what need is
there they should tremble? Let them mend their ways, and rejoice. It is
in thy power in what way thou willest to await the coming of Christ. For
this reason He delayeth to come, that when He cometh He may not condemn
thee. Lo, He hath not yet come: He is in heaven, thou on earth: He
delayeth His coming, do not thou delay wisdom. His coming is hard to the
hard of heart, soft to the pious. See therefore even now what thou art:
if hard <span id="page_483">p. 483</span> <span
id="ii.XCVIII-Page_483"></span>of heart, thou canst soften; if thou art
soft, even now rejoice that He will come. For thou art a Christian. Yea,
thou sayest. I believe that thou prayest, and sayest, “Thy kingdom
come.” <span id="fr_4505"></span>[4506](#fn_4505) Thou desirest Him to
come, whose coming thou fearest. Reform thyself, that thou mayest not
pray against thyself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4493"></span>[480:4494](1080109.htm#fr_4493) <span
id="ii.XCVIII-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.XCVIII-p2"></span> Lat. XCVII. A discourse to the people.

<span id="fn_4494"></span>[480:4495](1080109.htm#fr_4494) <span
id="ii.XCVIII-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCVIII-p4"></span> [Ps. xcvi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#001)<span id="ii.XCVIII-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4495"></span>[480:4496](1080109.htm#fr_4495) <span
id="ii.XCVIII-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCVIII-p5"></span> Donatists.

<span id="fn_4496"></span>[480:4497](1080109.htm#fr_4496) <span
id="ii.XCVIII-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XCVIII-p6"></span> [Luke vii.
12-14](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#012)<span
id="ii.XCVIII-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4497"></span>[480:4498](1080109.htm#fr_4497) <span
id="ii.XCVIII-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCVIII-p7"></span> [Isa. liii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#001)<span id="ii.XCVIII-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4498"></span>[481:4499](1080109.htm#fr_4498) <span
id="ii.XCVIII-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCVIII-p9"></span> [Luke iii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#006)<span id="ii.XCVIII-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4499"></span>[481:4500](1080109.htm#fr_4499) <span
id="ii.XCVIII-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCVIII-p10"></span> [Luke ii.
28-30](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#028)<span
id="ii.XCVIII-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4500"></span>[481:4501](1080109.htm#fr_4500) <span
id="ii.XCVIII-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCVIII-p11"></span> [Matt. xxiv.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#023)<span id="ii.XCVIII-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4501"></span>[481:4502](1080109.htm#fr_4501) <span
id="ii.XCVIII-p15.3"></span>

<span id="ii.XCVIII-p16"></span> [Job i.
21](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#021)<span id="ii.XCVIII-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4502"></span>[482:4503](1080109.htm#fr_4502) <span
id="ii.XCVIII-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCVIII-p17"></span> [2 Cor. xii.
7-10](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#007)<span
id="ii.XCVIII-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4503"></span>[482:4504](1080109.htm#fr_4503) <span
id="ii.XCVIII-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XCVIII-p19"></span> [1 Cor.
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#012), [1 Cor.
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#001)<span id="ii.XCVIII-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4504"></span>[482:4505](1080109.htm#fr_4504) <span
id="ii.XCVIII-p20.3"></span>

<span id="ii.XCVIII-p21"></span> [John vii.
37-39](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#037)<span
id="ii.XCVIII-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4505"></span>[483:4506](1080109.htm#fr_4505) <span
id="ii.XCVIII-p22.3"></span>

<span id="ii.XCVIII-p23"></span> [Matt. vi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#010)<span id="ii.XCVIII-p23.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm XCIX](1080110)
