[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080088)  [Next](1080090) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.LXXVIII"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p1"></span> <span id="ii.LXXVIII-p1.1"></span><span
class="c20"><span id="ii.LXXVIII-p1.2"></span>Psalm LXXVIII. <span
id="fr_3519"></span>[3520](#fn_3519) </span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p3"></span>1. This Psalm <span
id="fr_3520"></span>[3521](#fn_3520) doth contain the things which are
said to have been done among the old people: but the new and latter
people is being admonished, to beware that it be not ungrateful
regarding the blessings of God, and provoke His anger against it,
whereas it ought to receive His grace.…The Title thereof doth first move
and engage our attention. For it is not without reason inscribed,
“Understanding <span id="fr_3521"></span>[3522](#fn_3521) of Asaph:” but
it is perchance because these words require a reader who doth perceive
not the voice which the surface uttereth, but some inward sense.
Secondly, when about to narrate and mention all these things, which seem
to need a hearer more than an expounder: “I will open,” he saith, “in
parables my mouth, I will declare propositions from the
beginning.” <span id="fr_3522"></span>[3523](#fn_3522) Who would not
herein be awakened out of sleep? Who would dare to hurry over the
parables and propositions, reading them as if self-evident, while by
their very names they signify that they ought to be sought out with
deeper view? For a parable hath on the surface thereof the similitude of
something: and though it be a Greek word, it is now used as a Latin
word. And it is observable, that in parables, those which are called the
similitudes of things are compared with things with which we have to do.
But propositions, which in Greek are called <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p6.2"></span>προβήλματα</span>, are questions having
something therein which is to be solved by disputation. What man then
would read parables and propositions cursorily? What man would not
attend while hearing these words with watchful mind, in order that by
understanding he may come by the fruit thereof?

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p7"></span>2. “Hearken ye,” He saith, “My people,
to My law” ([Psa. 78.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#001)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p7.1"></span>). Whom may we suppose to be here speaking,
but God? For it was Himself that gave a law to His people, whom when
delivered out of Egypt He gathered together, the which gathering
together is properly named a Synagogue, which the word Asaph is
interpreted to signify. Hath it then been said, “Understanding of
Asaph,” in the sense that Asaph himself hath understood; or must it be
figuratively understood, in the sense that the same Synagogue, that is,
the same people, hath understood, unto whom is said, “Hearken, My
people, unto My law”? Why is it then that He is rebuking the same people
by the mouth of the Prophet, saying, “But Israel hath not known Me, and
My people hath not understood”? <span
id="fr_3523"></span>[3524](#fn_3523) But, in fact, there were even in
that people they that understood, having the faith which was afterwards
revealed, not pertaining to the letter of the law, but the grace of the
Spirit. For they cannot have been without the same faith, who were able
to foresee and foretell the revelation thereof that should be in Christ,
inasmuch as even those old Sacraments were significants of those that
should be. Had the prophets alone this faith, and not the people too?
Nay indeed, but even they that faithfully heard the Prophets, were aided
by the same grace in order that they might understand what they heard.
But without doubt the mystery <span id="fr_3524"></span>[3525](#fn_3524)
of the Kingdom of Heaven was veiled in the Old Testament, which in the
fulness of time should be unveiled in the New. <span
id="fr_3525"></span>[3526](#fn_3525) “For,” saith the Apostle, “they did
drink of the Spiritual Rock following them, but the Rock was <span
id="page_367">p. 367</span> <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-Page_367"></span>Christ.” <span
id="fr_3526"></span>[3527](#fn_3526) In a mystery therefore theirs was
the same meat and drink as ours, but in signification the same, not in
form; <span id="fr_3527"></span>[3528](#fn_3527) because the same Christ
was Himself figured to them in a Rock, manifested to us in the Flesh.
“But,” he saith, “not in all of them God was well pleased.” <span
id="fr_3528"></span>[3529](#fn_3528) All indeed ate the same spiritual
meat and drank the same spiritual drink, that is to say, signifying
something spiritual: but not in all of them was God well pleased. When,
he saith, “not in all:” there were evidently there some in whom was God
well pleased; and although all the Sacraments were common, grace, which
is the virtue of the Sacraments, was not common to all. Just as in our
times, now that the faith hath been revealed, which then was veiled, to
all men that have been baptized in the name of the Father and of the Son
and of the Holy Ghost, <span id="fr_3529"></span>[3530](#fn_3529) the
Laver of regeneration is common; but the very grace whereof these same
are the Sacraments, whereby the members of the Body of Christ are to
reign <span id="fr_3530"></span>[3531](#fn_3530) together with their
Head, is not common to all. For even heretics have the same Baptism, and
false brethren too, in the communion of the Catholic name.

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p16"></span>3. Nevertheless, neither then nor now
without profit is the voice of him, saying, “Hearken ye, My people, to
My law.” Which expression is remarkable in all the Scriptures, how he
saith not, “hearken thou,” but, “hearken ye.” For of many men a people
doth consist: to which many that which followeth is spoken in the plural
number. “Incline ye your ear unto the words of My mouth.” “Hearken ye,”
is the same as, “Incline your ear:” and what He saith there, “My law,”
this He saith here in, “the words of My mouth.” For that man doth godly
hearken to the law of God, and the words of His mouth, whose ear
humility doth incline: not he whose neck pride doth lift up. For
whatever is poured in is received on the concave surface of humility, is
shaken off from the convexity of swelling. Whence in another place,
“Incline,” he saith, “thine ear, and receive the words of
understanding.”  <span id="fr_3531"></span>[3532](#fn_3531) We have been
therefore sufficiently admonished to receive even this Psalm of this
understanding of Asaph, <span id="fr_3532"></span>[3533](#fn_3532) to
receive, I say, with inclined ear, that is, with humble piety. And it
hath not been spoken of as being of Asaph himself, but to Asaph himself.
Which thing is evident by the Greek article, and is found in certain
Latin copies. These words therefore are of understanding, that is, of
intelligence, which hath been given to Asaph himself: which we had
better understand not as to one man, but as to the congregation of the
people of God; whence we ought by no means to alienate ourselves. For
although properly we say “Synagogue” of Jews, but “Church” of
Christians, because a “Congregation” <span
id="fr_3533"></span>[3534](#fn_3533) is wont to be understood as rather
of beasts, but a “convocation” as rather of men: yet that too we find
called a Church, and it perhaps is more suitable for us <span
id="fr_3534"></span>[3535](#fn_3534) to say, “Save us, O Lord, our God,
and congregate us from the nations, in order that we may confess to Thy
Holy Name.” <span id="fr_3535"></span>[3536](#fn_3535) Neither ought we
to disdain to be, nay we ought to render ineffable thanks, for that we
are, the sheep of His hands, which He foresaw when He was saying, “I
have other sheep which are not of this fold, them too I must lead in,
that there may be one flock and one Shepherd:” <span
id="fr_3536"></span>[3537](#fn_3536) that is to say, by joining the
faithful people of the Gentiles with the faithful people of the
Israelites, concerning whom He had before said, “I have not been sent
but to the sheep which have strayed of the house of Israel.” <span
id="fr_3537"></span>[3538](#fn_3537) For also there shall be congregated
before Him all nations, and He shall sever them as a shepherd the sheep
from the goats. <span id="fr_3538"></span>[3539](#fn_3538) Thus then let
us hear that which hath been spoken. “Hearken ye, My people, to My law,
incline ye your ear unto the words of My mouth:” not as if addressed to
Jews, but rather as if addressed to ourselves, or at least as if these
words were said as well to ourselves (as to them <span
id="fr_3539"></span>[3540](#fn_3539) ). For when the Apostle had said,
“But not in all them was God well pleased,” thereby showing that there
were those too in whom God was well pleased: he hath forthwith added,
“For they were overthrown in the desert:” <span
id="fr_3540"></span>[3541](#fn_3540) secondly he hath continued, “but
these things have been made our figures.”…To us therefore more
particularly these words have been sung. Whence in this Psalm among
other things there hath been said, “That another generation may know,
sons who shall be born and shall arise.” <span
id="fr_3541"></span>[3542](#fn_3541) Moreover, if that death by
serpents, and that destruction by the destroyer, and the slaying by the
sword, were figures, as the Apostle evidently doth declare, inasmuch as
it is manifest that all those things did happen: for he saith not, in a
figure they were spoken, or, in a figure they were written, but, in a
figure, he saith, they happened to them: with how much greater diligence
of godliness must those punishments be shunned whereof those were the
figures? For beyond a doubt as in good things there is much more of good
in that which is signified by the figure, than in the figure itself: so
also in evil things very far worse are the things which are <span
id="page_368">p. 368</span> <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-Page_368"></span>signified by the figures, while so great
are the evil things which as figures do signify. For as the land of
promise, whereunto that people was being led, is nothing in comparison
with the Kingdom of Heaven, whereunto the Christian people is being led:
so also those punishments which were figures, though they were so
severe, are nothing in comparison with the punishments which they
signify. But those which the Apostle hath called figures, the same this
Psalm, as far as we are able to judge, calleth parables and
propositions: not having their end in the fact of their having happened,
but in those things whereunto they are referred by a reasonable
comparison. Let us therefore hearken unto the law of God—us His
people—and let us incline our ear unto the words of His mouth.

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p28"></span>4. “I will open,” he saith, “in
parables My mouth, I will declare propositions from the beginning”
([Psa. 78.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#002)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p28.1"></span>). From what beginning he meaneth, is very
evident in the words following. For it is not from the beginning, what
time the Heaven and earth were made, nor what time mankind was created
in the first man: but what time the congregation that was led out of
Egypt; in order that the sense may belong to Asaph, which is interpreted
a congregation. But O that He that hath said, “I will open in parables
My mouth,” would also vouchsafe to open our understanding unto them! For
if, as He hath opened His mouth in parables, He would in like sort open
the parables themselves: and as He declareth “propositions,” He would
declare in like sort the expositions thereof, we should not be here
toiling: but now so hidden and closed are all things, that even if we
are able by His aid to arrive at anything, whereon we may feed to our
health, still we must eat the bread in the sweat of our face; and pay
the penalty of the ancient sentence <span
id="fr_3542"></span>[3543](#fn_3542) not with the labour of the body
only, but also with that of the heart. Let him speak then, and let us
hear the parables and propositions.

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p30"></span>5. “How great things we have heard, and
have known them, and our fathers have told them to us” ([Psa.
78.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#003)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p30.1"></span>). The Lord was speaking higher up. For of
what other person could these words be thought to be, “Hearken ye, O My
people, to My law”? <span id="fr_3543"></span>[3544](#fn_3543) Why is it
then that now on a sudden a man is speaking, for here we have the words
of a man, “our fathers have told them to us.” Without doubt God, now
about to speak by a man’s ministry, as the Apostle saith, “Will ye to
receive proof of Him that is speaking in me, Christ?” <span
id="fr_3544"></span>[3545](#fn_3544) in His own person at first willed
the words to be uttered, lest a man speaking His words should be
despised as a man. For it is thus with the sayings of God which make
their way to us through our bodily sense. The Creator moveth the subject
creature by an invisible working; not so that the substance is changed
into anything corporal and temporal, when by means of corporal and
temporal signs, whether belonging to the eyes or to the ears, as far as
men are able to receive it, He would make His will to be known. For if
an angel is able to use air, mist, cloud, fire, and any other natural
substance or corporal species; <span
id="fr_3545"></span>[3546](#fn_3545) and man to use face, tongue, hand,
pen, letters, or any other significants, for the purpose of intimating
the secret things of his own mind: in a word, if, though he is a man, he
sendeth human messengers, and he saith to one, “Go, and he goeth; and to
another, Come, and he cometh; and to his servant, Do this, and he doeth
it;” <span id="fr_3546"></span>[3547](#fn_3546) with how much greater
and more effectual power doth God, to whom as Lord all things together
are subject, use both the same angel and man, in order that He may
declare whatsoever pleaseth Him?…For those things were heard in the Old
Testament which are known in the New: heard when they were being
prophesied, known when they were being fulfilled. Where a promise is
performed, hearing is not deceived. “And our fathers,” Moses and the
Prophets, “have told unto us.”

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p35"></span>6. “They have not been hidden from
their sons in another generation” ([Psa.
78.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#004)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p35.1"></span>). This is our generation wherein there
hath been given to us regeneration. “Telling forth the praises of the
Lord and His powers, and His wonderful works which He hath done.” The
order of the words is, “and our fathers have told unto us, telling forth
the praises of the Lord.” The Lord is praised, in order that He may be
loved. For what object can be loved more to our health? “And He hath
raised up a testimony in Jacob, and hath set a law in Jacob” ([Psa.
78.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#005)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p35.2"></span>). This is the beginning whereof hath been
spoken above, “I will declare propositions from the beginning.” <span
id="fr_3547"></span>[3548](#fn_3547) So then the beginning is the Old
Testament, the end is the New. For fear doth prevail in the law. <span
id="fr_3548"></span>[3549](#fn_3548) “But the end of the law is Christ
for righteousness to every one believing;” <span
id="fr_3549"></span>[3550](#fn_3549) at whose bestowing “love is shed
abroad in our hearts through the Holy Spirit, which hath been given to
us:” <span id="fr_3550"></span>[3551](#fn_3550) and love made perfect
doth cast out fear, <span id="fr_3551"></span>[3552](#fn_3551) inasmuch
as now without the Law the righteousness of God hath been made manifest.
But inasmuch as He hath a testimony by the Law and the Prophets, <span
id="fr_3552"></span>[3553](#fn_3552) therefore, “He hath raised up a
testimony in Jacob.” For even that Tabernacle which was <span
id="page_369">p. 369</span> <span id="ii.LXXVIII-Page_369"></span>set up
with a work so remarkable and full of such wondrous meanings, is named
the Tabernacle of Testimony, wherein was the veil over the Ark of the
Law, like the veil over the face of the Minister of the Law; <span
id="fr_3553"></span>[3554](#fn_3553) because in that dispensation there
were “parables and propositions.” For those things which were being
preached and were coining to pass were hidden in veiled meanings, and
were not seen in unveiled manifestations. But “when thou shalt have
passed over unto Christ,” saith the Apostle, “the veil shall be taken
away.” <span id="fr_3554"></span>[3555](#fn_3554) For “all the promises
of God in Him are yea, Amen.” <span id="fr_3555"></span>[3556](#fn_3555)
Whosoever therefore doth cleave to Christ, hath the whole of the good
which even in the letters of the Law he perceiveth not: but whosoever is
an alien from Christ, doth neither perceive, nor hath. “He hath set a
law in Israel.” After his usual custom he is making a repetition. For
“He hath raised up a testimony,” is the same as, “He hath set a law,”
and “in Jacob,” is the same as “in Israel.” For as these are two names
of one man, so law and testimony are two names of one thing. Is there
any difference, saith some one, between “hath raised up” and “hath set”?
Yea indeed, the same difference as there is between “Jacob” and
“Israel:” not because they were two persons, but these same two names
were bestowed upon one man for different reasons; Jacob because of
supplanting, for that he grasped the foot of his brother at his
birth: <span id="fr_3556"></span>[3557](#fn_3556) but Israel because of
the vision of God. <span id="fr_3557"></span>[3558](#fn_3557) So “raised
up” is one thing, “set” is another. For, “He hath raised up a
testimony,” as far as I can judge, hath been said because by it
something has been raised up; “For without the Law,” saith the Apostle,
“sin was dead: but I lived sometime without the Law: but at the coming
in of the commandment sin revived.” <span
id="fr_3558"></span>[3559](#fn_3558) Behold that which hath been raised
up by the testimony, which is the Law, so that what was lying hidden
might appear, as he saith a little afterwards: “But sin, that it might
appear sin, through a good thing hath wrought in me death.” <span
id="fr_3559"></span>[3560](#fn_3559) But “He hath set a law,” hath been
said, as though it were a yoke upon sinners, whence hath been said, “For
upon a just man law hath not been imposed.” <span
id="fr_3560"></span>[3561](#fn_3560) It is a testimony then, so far
forth as it doth prove anything; but a law so far forth as it doth
command; though it is one and the same thing. Wherefore just as Christ
is a stone, but to believers for the Head of the corner, while to
unbelievers a stone of offence and a rock of scandal; <span
id="fr_3561"></span>[3562](#fn_3561) so the testimony of the Law to them
that use not the Law lawfully, <span
id="fr_3562"></span>[3563](#fn_3562) is a testimony whereby sinners are
to be convicted as deserving of punishment; but to them that use the
same lawfully, is a testimony whereby sinners are shown unto whom they
ought to flee in order to be delivered.…

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p52"></span>7. “How great things,” he saith, “He
hath commanded our fathers, to make the same known to their sons?”
([Psa. 78.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#005)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p52.1"></span>). “That another generation may know, sons
who shall be born and shall rise up, and they may tell to their sons”
([Psa. 78.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#006)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p52.2"></span>). “That they may put their hope in God,
and may not forget the works of God, and may seek out His commandments”
([Psa. 78.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#007)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p52.3"></span>). “That they may not become, like their
fathers, a crooked and embittering generation: a generation that hath
not guided their heart, and the spirit thereof hath not been trusted
with God” ([Psa. 78.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#008)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p52.4"></span>). These words do point out two peoples as
it were, the one belonging to the Old Testament, the other to the New:
for in that he saith, he hath implied that they received the
commandments, “to make them known to their sons,” but that they did not
know or do them: but they received them themselves, to the end “that
another generation might know,” what the former knew not. “Sons who
shall be born and shall arise.” For they that have been born have not
arisen: because they had not their heart above, but rather on the earth.
For the arising is with Christ: whence hath been said, “If ye have
arisen with Christ, savour ye the things which are above.” <span
id="fr_3563"></span>[3564](#fn_3563) “And they may tell them,” he saith,
“to their sons, in order that they may put their hope in God.”…“And may
not forget the works of God:” that is to say, in magnifying and vaunting
their own works, as though they did them themselves; while “God it is
that worketh,” in them that work good things, “both to will and to work
according to good will.” <span id="fr_3564"></span>[3565](#fn_3564) “And
may search out His commandments.”…The commandments which He hath
commanded. How then should they still search out, whereas they have
already learned them, save that by putting their hope in God, they do
then search out His commandments, in order that by them, with His aid,
they may be fulfilled? And he saith why, by immediately subjoining, “and
its spirit hath not been trusted with God,” that is, because it had no
faith, which doth obtain what the Law doth enjoin. For when the spirit
of man doth work together with the Spirit of God working, then there is
fulfilled that which God hath commanded: and this doth not come to pass,
except by believing in Him that doth justify an ungodly man. <span
id="fr_3565"></span>[3566](#fn_3565) Which faith the generation crooked
and embittering had not: and therefore concerning the same hath been
said, “The spirit thereof hath not been trusted with God.” For this hath
been said much more exactly to point out the grace of <span
id="page_370">p. 370</span> <span id="ii.LXXVIII-Page_370"></span>God,
which doth work not only remission of sins, but also doth make the
spirit of man to work together therewith in the work of good deeds, as
though he were saying, his spirit hath not believed in God. For to have
the spirit trusted with God, is, not to believe that his spirit is able
to do righteousness without God, but with God. For this is to believe in
God: which is surely more than to believe God. For ofttimes we must
believe even a man, though in him we must not believe. To believe in God
therefore is this, in believing to cleave unto God who worketh good
works, in order to work with Him well.…

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p56"></span>8. Lastly, “The sons of Ephrem bending
and shooting bows, have been turned back in the day of war” ([Psa.
78.9](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#009)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p56.1"></span>). Following after the law of
righteousness, unto the law of righteousness they have not
attained. <span id="fr_3566"></span>[3567](#fn_3566) Why? Because they
were not of faith. For they were that generation whereof the spirit hath
not been trusted with God: but they were, so to speak, of works: because
they did not, as they bended and shot their bows (which are outward
actions, as of the works of the law), so guide their heart also, wherein
the just man doth live by faith, which worketh by love; whereby men
cleave to God, who worketh in man both to will and work according to
good will.  <span id="fr_3567"></span>[3568](#fn_3567) For what else is
bending the bow and shooting, and turning back in the day of war, but
heeding and purposing in the day of hearing, and deserting in the day of
temptation; flourishing arms, so to speak, beforehand, and at the hour
of the action refusing to fight? But whereas he saith, “bending and
shooting bows,” when it would seem that he ought to have said, bending
bows and shooting arrows.…Some Greek copies to be sure are said to have
“bending and shooting with bows,” so that without doubt we ought to
understand arrows. But whereas by the sons of Ephrem he hath willed that
there be understood the whole of that embittering generation, it is an
expression signifying the whole by a part. And perhaps this part was
chosen whereby to signify the whole, because from these men especially
some good thing was to have been expected.…Although set at the left hand
by his father as being the younger, Jacob nevertheless blessed with his
right hand, and preferred him before his elder brother with a
benediction of hidden meaning. <span
id="fr_3568"></span>[3569](#fn_3568) …For there was being figured how
they were to be last that were first, and first were to be they that
were last, <span id="fr_3569"></span>[3570](#fn_3569) through the
Saviour’s coming, concerning whom hath been said, “He that is coming
after me was made before me.” <span id="fr_3570"></span>[3571](#fn_3570)
In like manner righteous Abel was preferred before the elder brother; so
to Ismael Isaac; so to Esau, though born before him, his twin brother
Jacob; so also Phares himself preceded even in birth his twin brother,
who had first thrust a hand out of the womb, and had begun to be
born: <span id="fr_3571"></span>[3572](#fn_3571) so David was preferred
before his elder brother: <span id="fr_3572"></span>[3573](#fn_3572) and
as the reason why all these parables and others like them preceded, not
only of words but also of deeds, in like manner to the people of the
Jews was preferred the Christian people, for redeeming the which as Abel
by Cain, <span id="fr_3573"></span>[3574](#fn_3573) so by the Jews was
slain Christ. This thing was prefigured even when Jacob stretching out
his hands cross-wise, with his right hand touched Ephrem standing on the
left; and set him before Manasse standing on the right, whom he himself
touched with the left hand. <span id="fr_3574"></span>[3575](#fn_3574)

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p66"></span>9. But what that is which he saith,
“they have been turned back in the day of war,” the following words do
teach, wherein he hath most clearly explained this: “they have not
kept,” he saith, “the testament of God, and in His law they would not
walk” ([Psa. 78.10](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#010)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p66.1"></span>). Behold what is, “they have been turned
back in the day of war:” they have not kept the testament of God. When
they were bending and shooting bows, they did also utter the words of
most forward promise, saying, “Whatsoever things the Lord our God hath
spoken we will do, and we will hear.” <span
id="fr_3575"></span>[3576](#fn_3575) “They have been turned back in the
day of war:” because the promise of obedience not hearing but temptation
doth prove. But he whose spirit hath been trusted with God, keepeth hold
on God, who is faithful, and “doth not suffer him to be tempted above
that which he is able; but will make with the temptation a way of escape
also,” <span id="fr_3576"></span>[3577](#fn_3576) that he may be able to
endure, and may not be turned back in the day of war.…Therefore these
men have been thus branded: “a generation,” he saith, “which hath not
directed their heart.” <span id="fr_3577"></span>[3578](#fn_3577) It
hath not been said, works, but heart. For when the heart is directed,
the works are right; but when the heart is not directed, the works are
not right, even though they seem to be right. And how the crooked
generation hath not directed the heart, hath sufficiently been shown,
when he saith, “and the spirit thereof hath not been trusted with
God.” <span id="fr_3578"></span>[3579](#fn_3578) For God is right: and
therefore by cleaving to the right, as to an immutable rule, the heart
of a man can be made right, which in itself was crooked.…

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p71"></span>10. “And they forgat His benefits, and
the wonderful works of Him which He showed to them; before their fathers
the wonderful things which He did” ([Psa.
78.11](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#011)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p71.1"></span>). What this is, is not a question to be
negligently passed over. Concerning those very fathers he was speaking a
little before, that they had been a generation crooked and
embittering.…What fathers, inasmuch <span id="page_371">p. 371</span>
<span id="ii.LXXVIII-Page_371"></span>as these are the very fathers,
whom he would not have posterity to be like? If we shall take them to be
those out of whom the others had derived their being, for example,
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, by this time they had long since fallen asleep,
when God showed wonderful things in Egypt. For there followeth, “in the
land of Egypt, in the plain of Thanis” ([Psa.
78.12](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#012)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p71.2"></span>): where it is said that God showed to them
wonderful things before their fathers. Were they perchance present in
spirit? For of the same the Lord saith in the Gospel, “for all do live
to Him.” <span id="fr_3579"></span>[3580](#fn_3579) Or do we more
suitably understand thereby the fathers Moses and Aaron, and the other
elders who are related in the same Scripture also to have received the
Spirit, of which also Moses received, in order that they might aid him
in ruling and bearing the same people? <span
id="fr_3580"></span>[3581](#fn_3580) For why should they not have been
called fathers? It is not in the same manner as God is the One Father,
who doth regenerate with His Spirit those whom He doth make sons for an
everlasting inheritance; but it is for the sake of honour, because of
their age and kindly carefulness: just as Paul the elder saith, “Not to
confound you I am writing these things, but as my dearly beloved sons I
am admonishing you:” <span id="fr_3581"></span>[3582](#fn_3581) though
he knew of a truth that it had been said by the Lord, “Call ye no man
your father on earth, for One is your Father, even God.” <span
id="fr_3582"></span>[3583](#fn_3582) And this was not said in order that
this term of human honour should be erased from our usual way of
speaking: but lest the grace of God whereby we are regenerated unto
eternal life, should be ascribed either to the power or even sanctity of
any man. Therefore when he said, “I have begotten you;” he first said,
“in Christ,” and “through the Gospel;” lest that might be thought to be
of him, which is of God.…Accordingly, the land of Egypt must be
understood for a figure of this world. “The plain of Thanis” is the
smooth surface of lowly commandment. For lowly commandment is the
interpretation of Thanis. In this world therefore let us receive the
commandment of humility, in order that in another world we may merit to
receive the exaltation which He hath promised, who for our sake here
became lowly.

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p76"></span>11. For He that “did burst asunder the
sea and made them go through, did confine the waters as it were in
bottles” ([Psa. 78.13](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#013)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p76.1"></span>), in order that the water might stand up
first as if it were shut in, is able by His grace to restrain the
flowing and ebbing tides of carnal desires, when we renounce this world,
so that all sins having been thoroughly washed away, as if they were
enemies, the people of the faithful may be made to pass through by means
of the Sacrament of Baptism. He that “led them home in the cloud of the
day, and in the whole of the night in the illumination of fire” ([Psa.
78.14](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#014)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p76.2"></span>), is able also spiritually to direct
goings if faith crieth to Him, “Direct Thou my goings after Thy
word.” <span id="fr_3583"></span>[3584](#fn_3583) Of Whom in another
place <span id="fr_3584"></span>[3585](#fn_3584) is said, “For Himself
shall make thy courses right, and shall prolong thy goings in
peace” <span id="fr_3585"></span>[3586](#fn_3585) through Jesus Christ
our Lord, whose Sacrament in this world, as it were in the day, is
manifest in the flesh, as if in a cloud; but in the Judgment it will be
manifest like as in a terror by night; for then there will be a great
tribulation of the world like as it were fire, and it shall shine for
the just and shall burn for the unjust. “He that burst asunder the rock
in the desert, and gave them water as in a great deep” ([Psa.
78.15](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#015)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p79.1"></span>); “and brought out water from the rock,
and brought down waters like rivers” ([Psa.
78.16](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#016)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p79.2"></span>), is surely able upon thirsty faith to
pour the gift of the Holy Spirit (the which gift the performance of that
thing did spiritually signify), to pour, I say, from the Spiritual Rock
that followed, which is Christ: who did stand and cry, “If any is
athirst, let him come to Me:” <span id="fr_3586"></span>[3587](#fn_3586)
and, “he that shall have drunk of the water which I shall give, rivers
of living water shall flow out of his bosom.” <span
id="fr_3587"></span>[3588](#fn_3587) For this He spake, as is read in
the Gospel, <span id="fr_3588"></span>[3589](#fn_3588) to the Spirit,
which they were to receive that believed in Him, unto whom like the rod
drew near the wood of the Passion, in order that there might flow forth
grace for believers.

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p83"></span>12. And yet, “they,” like a generation
crooked and embittering, “added yet to sin against Him” ([Psa.
78.17](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#017)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p83.1"></span>): that is, not to believe. For this is the
sin, whereof the Spirit doth convict the world, as the Lord saith, “Of
sin indeed because they have not believed on Me.” <span
id="fr_3589"></span>[3590](#fn_3589) “And they exasperated the Most High
in drought,” which other copies have, “in a place without water,” which
is a more exact translation from the Greek, and doth signify no other
thing than drought. Was it in that drought of the desert, or rather in
their own? For although they had drank of the rock, they had not their
bellies but their minds dry, freshening with no fruitfulness of
righteousness. In that drought they ought the more faithfully to have
been suppliant unto God, in order that He who had given fulness unto
their jaws, might give also equity to their manners. For unto him the
faithful soul doth cry, “Let mine eyes see equity.” <span
id="fr_3590"></span>[3591](#fn_3590)

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p86"></span>13. “And they tempted God in their
hearts, in order that they might seek morsels for their souls” ([Psa.
78.18](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#018)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p86.1"></span>). It is one thing to ask in believing,
another thing in tempting. Lastly there <span id="page_372">p.
372</span> <span id="ii.LXXVIII-Page_372"></span>followeth, “And they
slandered God, and said, Shall God be able to prepare a table in the
desert?” ([Psa. 78.19](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#019)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p86.2"></span>). “For He smote the rock, and the waters
flowed, and torrents gushed forth: will He be able to give bread also,
or to prepare a table for His people?” ([Psa.
78.20](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#020)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p86.3"></span>). Not believing therefore, they sought
morsels for their souls. Not so the Apostle James doth enjoin a morsel
to be asked for the mind, but doth admonish that it be sought by
believers, not by such as tempt and slander God. “But if any one of
you,” he saith, “doth lack wisdom, let him ask of God, who doth give to
all men abundantly, and doth not upbraid, and it shall be given to him:
but let him ask in faith, nothing wavering.”  <span
id="fr_3591"></span>[3592](#fn_3591) This faith had not that generation
which “had not directed their heart, and the spirit thereof had not been
trusted with God.”

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p88"></span>14. “Wherefore the Lord heard, and He
delayed, and fire was lighted in Jacob, and wrath went up into Israel”
([Psa. 78.21](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#021)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p88.1"></span>). He hath explained what he hath called
fire. He hath called anger fire: although in strict propriety fire did
also burn up many men. What is therefore this that he saith, “The Lord
heard, and He delayed”? Did He delay to conduct them into the land of
promise, whither they were being led: which might have been done in the
space of a few days, but on account of sins they must needs be wasted in
the desert, where also they were wasted during forty years? And if this
be so, He did then delay the people, not those very persons who tempted
and slandered God: for they all perished in the desert, and their
children journeyed into the land of promise. Or did He delay punishment,
in order that He might first satisfy unbelieving concupiscence, lest He
might be supposed to be angry, because they were asking of Him what He
was not able to do? “He heard,” then, “and He delayed to avenge:” and
after He had done what they supposed He was not able to do, then “anger
went up upon Israel.”

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p89"></span>15. Lastly, when both these things have
been briefly touched, afterwards he is evidently following out the order
of the narrative. “Because they believed not in God, nor hoped in His
saving health” ([Psa. 78.22](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#022)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p89.1"></span>). For when he had told why fire was
lighted in Jacob, and anger went up upon Israel, that is to say,
“because they believed not in God, nor hoped in His saving health:”
immediately subjoining the evident blessings for which they were
ungrateful, he saith, “and He commanded the clouds above, and opened the
doors of Heaven” ([Psa. 78.23](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#023)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p89.2"></span>). “And He rained upon them manna to eat,
and gave them bread of Heaven” ([Psa.
78.24](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#024)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p89.3"></span>). “Bread of angels man did eat: dainties
He sent them in abundance” ([Psa.
78.25](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#025)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p89.4"></span>). He brought over the South Wind from
Heaven, and in His virtue He led in the South West Wind” ([Psa.
78.26](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#026)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p89.5"></span>). “And He rained upon them fleshes like
dust, and winged fowls like the sand of the sea” ([Psa.
78.27](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#027)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p89.6"></span>). “And they fell in the midst of their
camp, around their tabernacles” ([Psa.
78.28](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#028)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p89.7"></span>). “And they ate and were filled
exceedingly; and their desire He brought to them: they were not deprived
of their desire” ([Psa. 78.29](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#029)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p89.8"></span>). Behold why He had delayed. But what He
had delayed let us hear. “Yet the morsel was in their mouths, and the
anger of God came down upon them” ([Psa.
78.30](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#030)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p89.9"></span>). Behold what He had delayed. For before
“He delayed:” and afterwards, “fire was lighted in Jacob and anger went
up upon Israel.” He had delayed therefore in order that He might first
do what they had believed that He could not do, and then might bring
upon them what they deserved to suffer. For if they placed their hope in
God, not only would their desires of the flesh but also those of the
spirit have been fulfilled. For he that…“opened the doors of Heaven, and
rained upon them manna to eat,” that He might fill the unbelieving, is
not without power to give to believers Himself the true Bread from
Heaven, which the manna did signify: which is indeed the food of Angels,
whom being incorruptible the Word of God doth incorruptibly feed: the
which in order that man might eat, He became flesh, and dwelled in us.
 <span id="fr_3592"></span>[3593](#fn_3592) For Himself the Bread by
means of the Evangelical clouds is being rained over the whole world,
and, the hearts of preachers like heavenly doors, being opened, is being
preached not to a murmuring and tempting synagogue, but to a Church
believing and putting hope in Him. He is able also to feed the feeble
faith of such as tempt not, but believe, with the signs of words uttered
by the flesh and speeding through the air, as though it were fowls: not
however with such as come from the north, where cold and mist do
prevail, that is to say, eloquence which is pleasing to this world, but
by bringing over the South Wind from Heaven; whither, except to the
earth? In order that they who are feeble in faith, by hearing things
earthly may be nourished up to receive things heavenly.…

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p91"></span>16. But as to unbelievers, being a
crooked and embittering generation, as it were, while the morsel was yet
in their mouths, “the anger of God went up upon them, and it slew among
the most of them” ([Psa. 78.31](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#031)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p91.1"></span>): that is, the most of them, or as some
copies have it, “the fat ones of them,” which however in the Greek
copies which we had, we did not find. But if this be <span
id="page_373">p. 373</span> <span id="ii.LXXVIII-Page_373"></span>the
truer reading, what else must be understood by “the fat ones of them,”
than men mighty in pride, concerning whom is said, “their iniquity shall
come forth as if out of fat”? <span id="fr_3593"></span>[3594](#fn_3593)
“And the elect of Israel He fettered.” Even there there were elect, with
whose faith the generation crooked and embittering was not mixed. But
they were fettered, so that they might in no sort profit them for whom
they desired that they might provide from a fatherly affection. For what
is conferred by human mercy, on those with whom God is angry? Or rather
hath He willed it to be understood, how that even the elect were
fettered at the same time with them, in order that they who were diverse
both in mind and in life, might endure sufferings with them for an
example not only of righteousness, but also of patience? For we have
learned that holy men were even led captive with sinners for no other
reason; since in the Greek copies we read not <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p92.2"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p92.3"></span>νεπόδισεν</span>, which is “fettered;” but
<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p92.4"></span>συνεπόδισεν</span>, which is rather
“fettered together with.”

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p93"></span>17. But the generation crooked and
embittering, “in all these things sinned yet more, and they believed not
in His wonderful works” ([Psa.
78.32](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#032)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p93.1"></span>). “And in their days failed in vanity”
([Psa. 78.33](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#033)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p93.2"></span>). Though they might, if they had believed,
have had days in truth without failing, with Him to whom hath been said,
“Thy years shall not fail.” <span id="fr_3594"></span>[3595](#fn_3594)
Therefore, “their days failed in vanity, and their years with haste.”
For the whole life of mortal men is hastening, and that which seemeth to
be longer is but a vapour of somewhat longer duration.

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p95"></span>18. Nevertheless, “when he slew them
they sought Him:” not for the sake of eternal life, but fearing to end
the vapour too soon. There sought Him then, not indeed those whom He had
slain, but they that were afraid of being slain according to the example
of them. But the Scripture hath so spoken of them as if they sought God
who were slain; because they were one people, and it is spoken as if of
one body: “and they returned, and at dawn they came to God” ([Psa.
78.34](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#034)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p95.1"></span>). “And they remembered that God is their
Helper, and the High God is their Redeemer” ([Psa.
78.35](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#035)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p95.2"></span>). But all this is for the sake of
acquiring temporal good things, and for avoiding temporal evil things.
For they that did seek God for the sake of temporal blessings, sought
not God indeed, but things. Thus with those God is worshipped with
slavish fear, not free love. Thus then God is not worshipped, for that
thing is worshipped which is loved. Whence because God is found to be
greater and better than all things, He must be loved more than all
things, in order that He may be worshipped.

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p96"></span>19. Lastly, here let us see the words
following: “And they loved Him,” he saith, “in their mouth, and in their
tongue they lied unto Him” ([Psa.
78.36](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#036)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p96.1"></span>). “But their heart was not right with Him,
and they were not counted faithful in His Testament” ([Psa.
78.37](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#037)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p96.2"></span>). One thing on their tongue, another thing
in their heart He found, unto whom the secret things of men are naked,
and without any impediment He saw what they loved rather. Therefore the
heart is right with God, when it doth seek God for the sake of God. For
one thing he desired of the Lord, the same he will require, that he may
dwell always in the House of the Lord, and may meditate on the
pleasantness of Him. <span id="fr_3595"></span>[3596](#fn_3595) Unto
Whom saith the heart of the faithful, I will be filled, not with the
flesh-pots of the Egyptians, nor with melons and gourds, and garlick and
onions, which a generation crooked and embittering did prefer even to
bread celestial, <span id="fr_3596"></span>[3597](#fn_3596) nor with
visible manna, and those same winged fowls; but, “I will be filled, when
Thy glory shall be made manifest.” <span
id="fr_3597"></span>[3598](#fn_3597) For this is the inheritance of the
New Testament, wherein they were not counted faithful; whereof however
the faith even at that time, when it was veiled, was in the elect, and
now, when it hath already been revealed, it is not in many that are
called. “For many have been called, but few are elect.” <span
id="fr_3598"></span>[3599](#fn_3598) Of such sort therefore was the
generation crooked and embittering, even when they were seeming to seek
God, loving in mouth, and in tongue lying; but in heart not right with
God, while they loved rather those things, for the sake of which they
required the help of God.

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p101"></span>20. “But He is Himself merciful, and
will become propitious to their sins, and He will not destroy them. And
He will abound to turn away His anger, and He will not kindle all his
anger” ([Psa. 78.38](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#038)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p101.1"></span>). By these words many men promise to
themselves impunity for their iniquity from the Divine Mercy, even if
they shall have persevered in being such, as that generation is
described, “crooked and embittering; which hath not directed their
heart, and the spirit thereof hath not been trusted with God:” with whom
it is not profitable to agree. For if, to speak in their words, God will
perchance not destroy no not even bad men, without doubt He will not
destroy good men. Why then do we not rather choose that wherein there is
no doubt? For they that lie to Him in their tongue, though their heart
doth hold some other thing, do think indeed, and will, even God to be a
liar, when He doth menace upon such men eternal punishment. But whilst
they do not deceive Him with their lying, He doth not deceive them with
<span id="page_374">p. 374</span> <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-Page_374"></span>speaking the truth. These words
therefore of divine sayings, concerning which the crooked generation
doth cajole itself, let it not make crooked like its own heart: for even
when it is made crooked, they continue right. For at first they may be
understood according to that which is written in the Gospel, “that ye
may be like your Father who is in the Heavens, who maketh His sun to
rise upon good men and evil men, and raineth upon just men and unjust
men.” <span id="fr_3599"></span>[3600](#fn_3599) For who could not see,
how great is the long-suffering of mercy with which He is sparing evil
men? But before the Judgment, He spared then that nation in such sort,
that He kindled not  <span id="fr_3600"></span>[3601](#fn_3600) all His
anger, utterly to root it up and bring it to an end: which thing in His
words and in the intercession for their sins of His servant Moses doth
evidently appear, where God saith, “Let Me blot them out, and make thee
into a great nation:” <span id="fr_3601"></span>[3602](#fn_3601) he
intercedeth, being more ready to be blotted out for them than that they
should be; knowing that he is doing this before One Merciful, who
inasmuch as by no means He would blot out him, would even spare them for
his sake. For let us see how greatly He spared, and doth still spare.…

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p105"></span>21. In the second place, that we may
not seem to do violence to divine words, and lest in the place where
there was said, “He will not destroy them,” <span
id="fr_3602"></span>[3603](#fn_3602) we should say, “But hereafter He
will destroy them:” concerning this very present Psalm let us turn to a
very common phrase of the Scripture, whereby this question may be more
diligently and more truly solved. Speaking of these same persons a
little lower down, when He had made mention of the things which the
Egyptians because of them had endured, He saith,…“And He led them unto
the mount of His sanctification, the mount which His right hand won. And
He cast out from their face the nations, and by lot distributed to them
the land in the cord of distribution.” <span
id="fr_3603"></span>[3604](#fn_3603) If any one at these words should
press a question upon us, and should say, How doth he make mention of
all these things as having been bestowed upon them, when the same
persons were not led into the land of promise, as were delivered from
Egypt, inasmuch as they were dead? What shall we reply but that they
were spoken of, because they were the self-same people by means of a
succession of sons?…

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p108"></span>22. “And He remembered that they are
flesh, a spirit <span id="fr_3604"></span>[3605](#fn_3604) going and not
returning” ([Psa. 78.39](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#039)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p109.1"></span>). Therefore calling them and pitying them
through His grace, He called them back Himself, because of themselves
they could not return. For how doth flesh return, “a spirit walking and
not turning back,” <span id="fr_3605"></span>[3606](#fn_3605) while a
weight of evil deserts doth weigh it down unto the lowest and far places
of evil, save through the election of grace?…For thus also is solved
this no unimportant question, how it is written in the Proverbs, when
the Scripture was speaking of the way of iniquity, “all they that walk
in her shall not return.” <span id="fr_3606"></span>[3607](#fn_3606) For
it hath been so spoken as if all ungodly men were to be despaired of:
but the Scripture did only commend grace; for of himself man is able to
walk in that way, but is not able of himself to return, except when
called back by grace.

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p112"></span>23. I say then of these crooked and
embittering persons, “How often they exasperated Him in the desert, and
provoked Him to wrath in the waterless place!” ([Psa.
78.40](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#040)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p112.1"></span>). “And they turned themselves and tempted
God, and exasperated the Holy One of Israel” ([Psa.
78.41](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#041)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p112.2"></span>). He is repeating that same unbelief of
theirs, of which He had made mention above. But the reason of the
repetition is, in order that there may be mentioned also the plagues
which He inflicted on the Egyptians for their sakes: all which things
they certainly ought to have remembered, and not to be ungrateful.
Lastly, there followeth what? “They remembered not His hands, in the day
when He redeemed them from the hand of the troubler” ([Psa.
78.42](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#042)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p112.3"></span>). And he beginneth to speak of what
things He did to the Egyptians: “He set in Egypt His signs, and His
prodigies in the plain of Thanis” ([Psa.
78.43](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#043)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p112.4"></span>): “and He turned their rivers into blood,
and their showers lest they should drink” ([Psa.
78.44](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#044)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p112.5"></span>), or rather, “the flowings of waters,” as
some do better understand by what is written in Greek, <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.LXXVIII-p112.6"></span>τὰ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.LXXVIII-p112.7"></span>ὀμβρήματα</span>,
which in Latin we call *scaturigines,* waters bubbling from beneath. “He
sent upon them the dog-fly, and it ate them up; and the frog, and it
destroyed them” ([Psa. 78.45](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#045)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p112.8"></span>). “And He gave their fruit to the mildew,
and their labours to the locust” ([Psa.
78.46](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#046)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p112.9"></span>). “And He slew with hail their vineyards,
and their mulberry trees with frost” ([Psa.
78.47](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#047)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p112.10"></span>). “And He gave over to the hail their
beasts of burden, and their possessions to the fire” ([Psa.
78.48](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#048)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p112.11"></span>). “He sent upon them the anger of His
indignation, indignation and anger and tribulation, a visitation through
evil angels” ([Psa. 78.49](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#049)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p112.12"></span>). He made a way to the course of His
anger, and their beasts of burden He shut up in death ([Psa.
78.50](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#050)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p112.13"></span>). “And He smote every first-born thing
in the land of Egypt, the first-fruits of their labours in the
tabernacles of Cham” ([Psa. 78.51](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#051)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p112.14"></span>).

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p113"></span>24. All these punishments of the
Egyptians may be explained by an allegorical interpretation, according
as one shall have chosen to understand them, and to compare them to the
things whereunto they must be referred. Which we too will <span
id="page_375">p. 375</span> <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-Page_375"></span>endeavour to do; and shall do it the
more properly, the more we shall have been divinely aided. For to do
this, those words of this Psalm do constrain us, wherein it was said, “I
will open in parables my mouth, I will declare propositions from the
beginning.” <span id="fr_3607"></span>[3608](#fn_3607) For for this
cause even some things have been here spoken of, which that they befell
the Egyptians at all we read not, although all their plagues are most
carefully related in Exodus according to their order, so that while that
which is not there mentioned we are sure hath not been mentioned in the
Psalm to no purpose, and we can interpret the same only figuratively, we
may at the same time understand that even the rest of the things which
it is evident did happen, were done or described for the sake of some
figurative meaning. For the Scripture doth so do in many passages of the
prophetic sayings.…In the plagues therefore of the Egyptians, which are
in the book which is called Exodus, where the Scripture hath been
especially careful, that those things whereby they were afflicted should
be all related in order, there is not found what this Psalm hath, “and
He gave to the mildew their fruits.” This also wherein, when he had
said, “and He gave over to the hail their beasts,” he hath added, “and
their possession to the fire:” of the beasts slain with hail is read in
Exodus; <span id="fr_3608"></span>[3609](#fn_3608) but how their
possession was burned with fire, is not read at all. Although voices and
fires do come together with hail, just as thunderings do commonly
accompany lightnings; nevertheless, it is not written that anything was
given over to the fire that it should be burned. Lastly, the soft things
which the hail could not hurt, are said not to have been smitten, that
is, hurt with hard blows; which things the locust devoured afterwards.
Also that which is here spoken of, “and their mulberry trees with
hoar-frost,” is not in Exodus. For hoar-frost doth differ much from
hail; for in the clear winter nights the earth is made white with
hoar-frost.

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p116"></span>25. What then those things do signify,
let the interpreter say as he can, let reader and hearer judge as is
just. The water turned into blood seemeth to me to signify a carnal view
of the causes of things. Dog-fly, are the manners of dogs, <span
id="fr_3609"></span>[3610](#fn_3609) who see not even their parents when
first they are born. The frog is very talkative vanity. Mildew doth hurt
secretly, which also some have interpreted by rust, others black mould:
which evil thing to what vice is it more appropriately compared, than to
what doth show itself least readily, like the trusting much in one’s
self? For it is a blighting air which doth work this secretly among
fruits: just like in morals, secret pride, when a man thinketh himself
to be something, though he is nothing. <span
id="fr_3610"></span>[3611](#fn_3610) The locust is malice hurting with
the mouth, that is, with unfaithful testimony. The hail is iniquity
taking away the goods of others; whence theft, robberies, and
depredations do spring: but more by his wickedness the plunderer himself
is plundered. The hoar-frost doth signify the fault wherein the love of
one’s neighbour by the darkness of foolishness, like as it were by the
cold of night, is frozen up. But the fire, if here it is not that which
is mentioned which was in the hail out of the lightning clouds,
forasmuch as he hath said here, “He gave over their possession to the
fire,” where he implieth that a thing was burned, which by that fire we
read not to have been done,—it seemeth to me, I say, to signify the
savageness of wrath, whereby even man-slaying may be committed. But by
the death of beasts was figured, as far as I judge, the loss of
chastity. For concupiscence, whereby offspring do arise, we have in
common with beasts. To have this therefore tamed and ordered, is the
virtue of chastity. The death of the first-born things, is the putting
off of the very justice whereby a man doth associate with mankind. But
whether the figurative significations of these things be so, or whether
they are better understood in another way, whom would it not move, that
with ten plagues the Egyptians are smitten, and with ten commandments
the tables are inscribed, <span id="fr_3611"></span>[3612](#fn_3611)
that thereby the people of God should be ruled? Concerning the comparing
of which one with the other, inasmuch as we have spoken elsewhere, there
is no need to load the exposition of this Psalm therewith: thus much we
remind you, that here too, though not in the same order, yet ten plagues
of the Egyptians are commemorated, forasmuch as in the place of three
which are in Exodus and are not here, to wit, lice, boils, darkness;
other three are commemorated, which are not there, that is to say,
mildew, hoarfrost, and fire; not of lightning, but that where-unto their
possession was given over, which is not read of in that place.

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p120"></span>26. But it hath been clearly enough
intimated, that by the judgment of God these things befell them through
the instrumentality of evil angels, in this wicked world, as though it
were in Egypt and in the plain of Thanis, where we ought to be humble,
until there come that world, wherein we may earn to be exalted out of
this humiliation. For even Egypt in the Hebrew tongue doth signify
darkness or tribulations, in which tongue, Thanis,  <span
id="fr_3612"></span>[3613](#fn_3612) as I have observed, is understood
to be humble commandment. Concerning the evil angels therefore in this
Psalm, while he was speaking of those very plagues, there hath been
<span id="page_376">p. 376</span> <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-Page_376"></span>something inserted, which must not be
passed over cursorily: “He sent upon them,” he saith, “an infliction
through evil angels.” Now that the devil and his angels are so very
evil, that for them everlasting fire is prepared, no believer is
ignorant: but that there should be sent by means of them an infliction
from the Lord God upon certain whom He judgeth to be deserving of this
punishment, seemeth to be a hard thing to those who are little prone to
consider, how the perfect justice of God doth use well even evil things.
For these indeed, as far as regardeth their substance, what other person
but Himself hath made? But evil He hath not made them: yet He doth use
them, inasmuch as He is good, well, that is, conveniently and justly:
just as on the other hand unrighteous men do use His good creatures in
evil manner. God therefore doth use evil angels not only to punish evil
men, as in the case of all those concerning whom the Psalm doth speak,
as in the case of king Achab, whom a spirit of lying by the will of God
did beguile, in order that he might fall in war: <span
id="fr_3613"></span>[3614](#fn_3613) but also to prove and make manifest
good men, as He did in the case of Job. But as far as regardeth that
corporal matter of visible elements, I suppose that thereof angels both
good and evil are able to make use, according to the power given to
each: just as also men good and evil do use such things, as far as they
are able, according to the measure of human infirmity. For we use both
earth and water, and air, and fire, not only in things necessary for our
support, but also in many operations superfluous and playful, and
marvellously artificial. For countless things, which are called <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.LXXVIII-p122.2"></span>μηχανήματα</span>, are
moulded out of these elements scientifically employed. But over these
things angels have a far more extended power, both the good and the
evil, though greater is that which the good have; <span
id="fr_3614"></span>[3615](#fn_3614) but only so far as is commanded or
permitted by the will and providence of God; on which terms also we have
it. For not even in these cases are we able to do all that we will. But
in a book the most unerring we read that the devil was able even to send
fire from Heaven, to burn up with wonderful and awful fierceness so
great a number of the cattle of a holy man: <span
id="fr_3615"></span>[3616](#fn_3615) which thing no one of the faithful
would dare perchance to ascribe to the devil, except it were read on the
authority of Holy Scripture. But that man, being by the gift of God just
and firm, and of godly knowledge, saith not, The Lord hath given, the
devil hath taken away: but, “The Lord hath given, the Lord hath taken
away:” <span id="fr_3616"></span>[3617](#fn_3616) very well knowing that
even what the devil was able to do with these elements, he would still
not have done to a servant of God, except at his Lord’s will and
permission; he did confound the malice of the devil, forasmuch as he
knew who it was that was making use thereof to prove him. In the sons
then of unbelief like as it were in his own slaves, he doth work, <span
id="fr_3617"></span>[3618](#fn_3617) like men with their beasts, and
even therewith only so far as is permitted by the just judgment of God.
But it is one thing when his power is restrained from treating even his
own as he pleases, by a greater power; another thing when to him power
is given even over those who are alien from him. Just as a man with his
beast, as men understand it, doeth what he will, and yet doth not
indeed, if he be restrained by a greater power: but with another man’s
beast to do something, he doth wait until power be given from him unto
whom it belongeth. In the former case the power which there was is
restrained, in the latter that which there was not is conceded.

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p127"></span>27. And if such be the case, if
through evil angels God did inflict those plagues upon the Egyptians,
shall we dare to say that the water also was turned into blood by means
of those same angels, and that frogs were created by means of the same,
the like whereunto even the magicians of Pharaoh were able to make by
their enchantments; <span id="fr_3618"></span>[3619](#fn_3618) so as
that evil angels stood on both sides, on the one side afflicting them,
on the other side deceiving them, according to the judgment and
dispensation <span id="fr_3619"></span>[3620](#fn_3619) of the most just
and most omnipotent God, who doth justly make use of even the
naughtiness of unrighteous men? I dare not to say so. For whence was it
that the magicians of Pharaoh could by no means make lice? <span
id="fr_3620"></span>[3621](#fn_3620) Was it not because even these same
evil angels were not suffered to do this? Or, to speak more truly, is
not the cause hidden, and it doth exceed our powers of inquiry? For if
we shall have supposed that God wrought those things by means of evil
angels, because punishments were being inflicted, and not blessings
being bestowed, as though God doth inflict punishments upon no one by
means of good angels, but by means of those executioners as it were of
the heavenly wrath; the consequence will be that we must believe that
even Sodom was overthrown by means of evil angels, and that Abraham and
Lot would seem to have entertained under their roof evil angels; <span
id="fr_3621"></span>[3622](#fn_3621) the which, as being contrary to the
most evident Scriptures, far be it that we should think. It is clear
then that these things might have been done to men by means of good and
evil angels. What should be done or when it should be done doth escape
me: but Him that doeth it, it escapeth not, and him unto whom He shall
have willed to reveal it. Nevertheless, as far as divine Scripture doth
yield to our application thereto, on evil men that punishments are
inflicted both by means of good angels, as upon <span id="page_377">p.
377</span> <span id="ii.LXXVIII-Page_377"></span>the Sodomites, and by
means of evil angels, as upon the Egyptians, we read: but that just men
with corporal penances by means of good angels are tried and proved,
doth not occur to me.

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p132"></span>28. But as far as regardeth the
present passage of this Psalm, if we dare not ascribe those things which
were marvellously formed out of creatures, to evil angels; we have a
thing which without doubt we can ascribe to them; the dyings of the
beasts, the dyings of the first-born, and this especially whence all
these things proceeded, namely, the hardening of heart, so that they
would not let go the people of God. <span
id="fr_3622"></span>[3623](#fn_3622) For when God is said to make this
most iniquitous and malignant obstinacy, He maketh it not by suggesting
and inspiring, but by forsaking, so that they work in the sons of
unbelief that which God doth duly and justly permit. <span
id="fr_3623"></span>[3624](#fn_3623) …Moreover, those evil manners which
we said were signified by these corporal plagues, on account of that
which was said before, “I will open in parables my mouth,” <span
id="fr_3624"></span>[3625](#fn_3624) are most appropriately believed by
means of evil angels to have been wrought in those that are made subject
to them by Divine justice. For neither when that cometh to pass of which
the apostle speaketh, “God gave them over into the lusts of their heart,
that they should do things which are not convenient,” <span
id="fr_3625"></span>[3626](#fn_3625) can it be but that those evil
angels dwell and rejoice therein, as in the matter of their own work:
unto whom most justly is human haughtiness made subject, in all save
those whom grace doth deliver. “And for these things who is
sufficient?” <span id="fr_3626"></span>[3627](#fn_3626) Whence when he
had said, “He sent unto them the anger of His indignation, indignation
and anger and tribulation, an infliction through evil angels;” for this
which he hath added, “a way He hath made for the path of His anger”
([Psa. 78.50](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#050)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p137.2"></span>), whose eye, I pray, is sufficient to
penetrate, so that it may understand and take in the sense lying hidden
in so great a profundity? For the path of the anger of God was that
whereby He punished the ungodliness of the Egyptians with hidden
justice: but for that same path He made a way, so that drawing them
forth as it were from secret places by means of evil angels unto
manifest offences, He most evidently inflicted punishment upon those
that were most evidently ungodly. From this power of evil angels nothing
doth deliver man but the grace of God, whereof the Apostle speaketh,
“Who hath delivered us from the power of darkness, and hath translated
us into the kingdom of the Son of His love:” <span
id="fr_3627"></span>[3628](#fn_3627) of which things that people did
bear the figure, when they were delivered from the power of the
Egyptians, and translated into the kingdom of the land of promise
flowing with milk and honey, which doth signify the sweetness of grace.

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p139"></span>29. The Psalm proceedeth then after
the commemoration of the plagues of the Egyptians ([Psa.
78.51](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#051)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p139.1"></span>) and saith, “And He took away like sheep
His people, and He led them through like a flock in the desert” ([Psa.
78.52](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#052)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p139.2"></span>). “And He led them down in hope, and they
feared not, and their enemies the sea covered” ([Psa.
78.53](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#053)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p139.3"></span>). This cometh to pass to so much the
greater good, as it is a more inward thing, wherein being delivered from
the power of darkness, we are in mind translated into the Kingdom of
God, and with respect to spiritual pastures we are made to become sheep
of God, walking in this world as it were in a desert, inasmuch as to no
one is our faith observable: whence saith the Apostle, “Your life is
hidden with Christ in God.” <span id="fr_3628"></span>[3629](#fn_3628)
But we are being led home in hope, “For by hope we are saved.” <span
id="fr_3629"></span>[3630](#fn_3629) Nor ought we to fear. For, “If God
be for us, who can be against us?” <span
id="fr_3630"></span>[3631](#fn_3630) And our enemies the sea hath
covered, He hath effaced them in baptism by the remission of sins.

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p143"></span>30. In the next place there followeth,
“And He led them into the mountain of His sanctification” ([Psa.
78.54](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#054)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p143.1"></span>). How much better into Holy Church! “The
mountain which His right hand hath gotten.” How much higher is the
Church which Christ hath gotten, concerning whom has been said, “And to
whom has the arm of the Lord been revealed?” <span
id="fr_3631"></span>[3632](#fn_3631) ([Psa.
78.55](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#055)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p144.2"></span>). “And He cast forth from the face of
them the nations.” And <span id="fr_3632"></span>[3633](#fn_3632) from
the face of His faithful. For nations in a manner are the evil spirits
of Gentile errors. “And by lot He divided unto them the land in the cord
of distribution.” And in us “all things one and the same Spirit doth
work, dividing severally to every one as He willeth.” <span
id="fr_3633"></span>[3634](#fn_3633)

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p147"></span>31. “And He made to dwell in their
tabernacles the tribes of Israel.” In the tabernacles, he saith, of the
Gentiles He made the tribes of Israel to dwell, which I think can better
be explained spiritually, inasmuch as unto celestial glory, whence
sinning angels have been cast forth and cast down, by Christ’s grace we
are being uplifted. For that generation crooked and embittering,
inasmuch as for these corporal blessings they put not off the coat of
oldness, “Did tempt” yet, “and provoked the high God, and His
testimonies they kept not ([Psa.
78.56](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#056)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p147.1"></span>): and they turned them away, and they
kept not the covenant, like their fathers” ([Psa.
78.57](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#057)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p147.2"></span>). For under a sort of covenant and decree
they said, “All things which our Lord God hath spoken we will do, and we
will hear.” <span id="fr_3634"></span>[3635](#fn_3634) It is a
remark<span id="page_378">p. 378</span> <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-Page_378"></span>able thing indeed which he saith, “like
their fathers:” while throughout the whole text of the Psalm he was
seeming to speak of the same men as it were, yet now it appeareth that
the words did concern those who were already in the land of promise, and
that the fathers spoken of were of those who did provoke in the desert.
“They were turned,” he saith, “into a crooked,” or, as some copies have
it, “into a perverse bow” ([Psa.
78.58](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#058)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p148.2"></span>). But what this is doth better appear in
that which followeth, where he saith, “And unto wrath they provoked Him
with their hills” ([Psa. 78.59](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#059)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p148.3"></span>). It doth signify that they leaped into
idolatry. The bow then was perverted, not for the name of the Lord, but
against the name of the Lord: who said to the same people, “Thou shalt
have none other Gods but Me.” <span id="fr_3635"></span>[3636](#fn_3635)
But by the bow He doth signify the mind’s intention. This same idea,
lastly, more clearly working out, “And in their graven idols,” he saith,
“they provoked Him to indignation.”

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p150"></span>32. “God heard, and He despised:” that
is, He gave heed and took vengeance. “And unto nothing He brought Israel
exceedingly” ([Psa. 78.60](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#060)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p150.1"></span>). For when God despised, what were they
who by God’s help were what they were? But doubtless he is commemorating
the doing of that thing, when they were conquered by the Philistines in
the time of Heli the priest, and the Ark of the Lord was taken, and with
great slaughter they were laid low. <span
id="fr_3636"></span>[3637](#fn_3636) This it is that he speaketh of.
“And He rejected the tabernacle of Selom, His tabernacle, where He
dwelled among men” ([Psa. 78.61](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#061)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p151.2"></span>). He hath elegantly explained why He
rejected His tabernacle, when he saith, “where He dwelled among men.”
When therefore they were not worthy for Him to dwell among, why should
He not reject the tabernacle, which indeed not for Himself He had
established, but for their sakes, whom now He judged unworthy for Him to
dwell among. “And He gave over unto captivity their strength, and their
beauty unto the hands of the enemy.” The very Ark whereby they thought
themselves invincible, and whereon they plumed themselves, he calleth
their “virtue” and “beauty.” Lastly, also afterward, when they were
living ill, and boasting of the temple of the Lord, He doth terrify them
by a Prophet, saying, “See ye what I have done to Selom, where was My
tabernacle.”  <span id="fr_3637"></span>[3638](#fn_3637) “And He ended
with the sword His people, and His inheritance He despised” ([Psa.
78.62](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#062)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p152.2"></span>). “Their young men the fire devoured:”
that is, wrath. “And their virgins mourned not” ([Psa.
78.63](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#063)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p152.3"></span>). For not even for this was there
leisure, in fear of the foe. “Their priests fell by the sword, and their
widows were not lamented” ([Psa.
78.64](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#064)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p152.4"></span>). For there fell by the sword the sons of
Heli, of one of whom the wife being widowed, and presently dying in
child-birth, <span id="fr_3638"></span>[3639](#fn_3638) because of the
same confusion could not be mourned with the distinction of a funeral.
“And the Lord was awakened as one sleeping” ([Psa.
78.65](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#065)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p153.2"></span>). For He seemeth to sleep, when He giveth
His people into the hands of those whom He hateth, when there is said to
them, “Where is thy God?” <span id="fr_3639"></span>[3640](#fn_3639) “He
was awakened, then, like one sleeping, like a mighty man drunken with
wine.” No one would dare to say this of God, save His Spirit. For he
hath spoken, as it seemeth to ungodly men reviling; as if like a drunken
man He sleepeth long, when He succoureth not so speedily as men
think. <span id="fr_3640"></span>[3641](#fn_3640)

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p156"></span>33. “And He smote His enemies in the
hinder parts” ([Psa. 78.66](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#066)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p156.1"></span>): those, to wit, who were rejoicing that
they were able to take His Ark: for they were smitten in their
back-parts. <span id="fr_3641"></span>[3642](#fn_3641) Which seemeth to
me to be a sign of that punishment, wherewith a man will be tortured, if
he shall have looked back upon things behind; which, as saith the
Apostle, he ought to value as dung. <span
id="fr_3642"></span>[3643](#fn_3642) For they that do so receive the
Testament of God, as that they put not off from them the old vanity, are
like the hostile nations, who did place the captured Ark of the
Testament beside their own idols. And yet those old things even though
these be unwilling do fall: for “all flesh is hay, and the glory of man
as the flower of hay. The hay hath dried up, and the flower hath fallen
off:” <span id="fr_3643"></span>[3644](#fn_3643) but the Ark of the Lord
“abideth for everlasting,” to wit, the secret testament of the kingdom
of Heaven, where is the eternal Word of God. But they that have loved
things behind, because of these very things most justly shall be
tormented. For “everlasting reproach He hath given to them.” ([Psa.
78.67](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#067)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p159.2"></span>).

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p160"></span>34. “And He rejected,” he saith, “the
tabernacle of Joseph, and the tribe of Ephraim <span
id="fr_3644"></span>[3645](#fn_3644) He chose not” ([Psa.
78.68](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#068)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p161.4"></span>). “And He chose the tribe of Judah”
([Psa. 78.69](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#069)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p161.5"></span>). He hath not said, He rejected the
tabernacle of Reuben, who was the first-born son of Jacob; <span
id="fr_3645"></span>[3646](#fn_3645) nor them that follow, and precede
Judah in order of birth; so that they being rejected and not chosen, the
tribe of Judah was chosen. For it might have been said that they were
deservedly rejected; because even in the blessing of Jacob wherewith he
blessed his sons, he mentioneth their sins, <span
id="fr_3646"></span>[3647](#fn_3646) and deeply abhorreth them; though
among them the tribe of Levi merited to be the priestly tribe, whence
<span id="page_379">p. 379</span> <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-Page_379"></span>also Moses was. <span
id="fr_3647"></span>[3648](#fn_3647) Nor hath he said, He rejected the
tabernacle of Benjamin, or the tribe of Benjamin He chose not, out of
which a king already had begun to be; for thence there had been chosen
Saul; <span id="fr_3648"></span>[3649](#fn_3648) whence because of the
very proximity of the time, when he had been rejected and refused, and
David chosen, <span id="fr_3649"></span>[3650](#fn_3649) this might
conveniently have been said; but yet was not said: but he hath named
those especially who seemed to excel for more surpassing merits. For
Joseph fed in Egypt his father and his brethren, and having been
impiously sold, because of his piety, chastity, wisdom, he was most
justly exalted; <span id="fr_3650"></span>[3651](#fn_3650) and Ephraim
by the blessing of his grandfather Jacob was preferred before his elder
brother: <span id="fr_3651"></span>[3652](#fn_3651) and yet God
“rejected the tabernacle of Joseph, and the tribe of Ephraim He chose
not.” In which place by these names of renowned merit, what else do we
understand but that whole people with old cupidity requiring of the Lord
earthly rewards, rejected and refused, but the tribe of Judah chosen not
for the sake of the merits of that same Judah? For far greater are the
merits of Joseph, but by the tribe of Judah, inasmuch as thence arose
Christ according to the flesh, the Scripture doth testify of the new
people of Christ preferred before that old people, the Lord opening in
parables His mouth. Moreover, thence also in that which followeth, “the
Mount Sion which He chose,” we do better understand the Church of
Christ, not worshipping God for the sake of the carnal blessings of the
present time, but from afar looking for future and eternal rewards with
the eyes of faith: for Sion too is interpreted a “looking out.”

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p169"></span>35. Lastly there followeth, “and He
builded like as of unicorns His sanctification” ([Psa.
78.70](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#070)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p169.1"></span>): or, as some interpreters have made
thereof a new word, “His sanctifying.” <span
id="fr_3652"></span>[3653](#fn_3652) The unicorns are rightly understood
to be those, whose firm hope is uplifted unto that one thing, concerning
which another Psalm saith, “One thing I have sought of the Lord, this I
will require.” <span id="fr_3653"></span>[3654](#fn_3653) But the
sanctifying of God, according to the Apostle Peter, is understood to be
a holy people and a royal priesthood. <span
id="fr_3654"></span>[3655](#fn_3654) But that which followeth, “in the
land which He founded for everlasting:” which the Greek copies have
<span class="Greek"><span id="ii.LXXVIII-p172.2"></span>εἰς</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.LXXVIII-p172.3"></span>τὸν</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.LXXVIII-p172.4"></span> αἰῶνα</span>, whether
it be called by us “for everlasting,” or “for an age,” is at the
pleasure of the Latin translators; forasmuch as it doth signify either:
and therefore the latter is found in some Latin copies, the former in
others. Some also have it in the plural, that is, “for ages:” which in
the Greek copies which we have had we have not found. But which of the
faithful would doubt, that the Church, even though, some going, others
coming, she doth pass out of this life in mortal manner, is yet founded
for everlasting?

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p173"></span>36. “And He chose David His servant”
([Psa. 78.71](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#071)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p173.1"></span>). The tribe, I say, of Judah, for the
sake of David: but David for the sake of Christ: the tribe then of Judah
for the sake of Christ. At whose passing by blind men cried out, “Have
pity on us, Son of David:” <span id="fr_3655"></span>[3656](#fn_3655)
and forthwith by His pity they received light, because true was the
thing which they cried out. This then the Apostle doth not cursorily
speak of, but doth heedfully notice, writing to Timothy, “Be thou
mindful, that Christ Jesus hath risen from the dead, of the seed of
David,” etc. <span id="fr_3656"></span>[3657](#fn_3656) Therefore the
Saviour Himself, made according to the flesh of the seed of David, is
figured in this passage under the name of David, the Lord opening in
parables His mouth. And let it not move us, that when he had said, “and
He chose David,” under which name he signified Christ, he hath added,
“His servant,” not His Son. Yea even hence we may perceive, that not the
substance of the Only-Begotten coeternal with the Father, but the “form
of a servant” was taken of the seed of David.

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p176"></span>37. “And He took him from the flocks
of sheep, from behind the teeming sheep He received him: to feed Jacob
His servant, and Israel His inheritance” ([Psa.
78.72](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#072)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p176.1"></span>). This David indeed, of whose seed the
flesh of Christ is, from the pastoral care of cattle was translated to
the kingdom of men: but our David, Jesus Himself, from men to men, from
Jews to Gentiles, was yet according to the parable from sheep to sheep
taken away and translated. For there are not now in that land “Churches
of Judæa in Christ,” which belonged to them of the circumcision after
the recent Passion and Resurrection of our Lord, of whom saith the
Apostle, “But I was unknown by face to the Churches of Judæa, which are
in Christ,” etc. <span id="fr_3657"></span>[3658](#fn_3657) Already from
hence those Churches of the circumcised people have passed away: and
thus in Judæa, which now doth exist on the earth, there is not now
Christ. <span id="fr_3658"></span>[3659](#fn_3658) He hath been removed
thence, now He doth feed flocks of Gentiles. Truly from behind teeming
sheep He hath been taken thence. For those former Churches were of such
sort, as that of them it is said in the Song of Songs, “Thy teeth—are
like a flock of shorn ewes going up from the washing, <span
id="fr_3659"></span>[3660](#fn_3659) all of which do bear twins, and a
barren one is not among them.” <span
id="fr_3660"></span>[3661](#fn_3660) For they then laid aside like as it
were fleeces the burdens of the world, <span
id="fr_3661"></span>[3662](#fn_3661) when before the feet of the
Apostles they laid the prices of their sold goods, <span
id="fr_3662"></span>[3663](#fn_3662) going up from that Laver,
concerning which the <span id="page_380">p. 380</span> <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-Page_380"></span>apostle Peter doth admonish them, when
they were troubled because they had shed the blood of Christ, and he
saith, “Repent ye, and let each one of you be baptized in the name of
the Lord Jesus Christ, and your sins shall be forgiven you.” <span
id="fr_3663"></span>[3664](#fn_3663) But twins they begat, the works, to
wit, of the two commandments of twin love, love of God, and love of
one’s neighbour: whence a barren one there was not among them. From
behind these teeming sheep our David having been taken, doth now feed
other flocks among the Gentiles, and those too “Jacob” and “Israel.” For
thus hath been said, “to feed Jacob His servant, and Israel His
inheritance.”…Unless perchance any one be willing to make such a
distinction as this; viz. that in this time Jacob serveth; but he will
be the eternal inheritance of God, at that time when he shall see God
face to face, whence he hath received the name Israel. <span
id="fr_3664"></span>[3665](#fn_3664)

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p185"></span>38. “And He fed them,” he saith, “in
the innocence of His heart” ([Psa.
78.73](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#073)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p185.1"></span>). What can be more innocent than He, who
not only had not any sin whereby to be conquered, but even not any to
conquer? “And in the understanding of His hands He led them home:” or,
as some copies have it, “in the understandings of His hands.” Any other
man might suppose that it would have been better had it been said thus,
“in innocence of hands and understanding of heart;” but He who knew
better than others what He spake, preferred to join with the heart
innocence, and with the hands understanding. It is for this reason, as
far as I judge; because many men think themselves innocent, who do not
evil things because they fear lest they should suffer if they shall have
done them; but they have the will to do them, if they could with
impunity. Such men may seem to have innocence of hands, but yet not that
of heart. And what, I pray, or of what sort is that innocence, if of
heart it is not, where man was made after the image of God? <span
id="fr_3665"></span>[3666](#fn_3665) But in this which he saith, “in
understanding (or intelligence) of His hands He led them home,” he
seemeth to me to have spoken of that intelligence which He doth Himself
make in believers: and so “of His hands:” for making doth belong to the
hands, but in the sense wherein the hands of God may be understood; for
even Christ was a Man in such sort, that He was also God.…

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3519"></span>[366:3520](1080089.htm#fr_3519) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p2"></span> Lat. LXXVII.

<span id="fn_3520"></span>[366:3521](1080089.htm#fr_3520) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p4"></span> Dictated A.D. 415. See Ep. 169<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p4.1"></span>, to Evodius.—*Ben*.

<span id="fn_3521"></span>[366:3522](1080089.htm#fr_3521) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p5"></span> \[*Intellectus*, Vulg.; *Eruditionis*,
Jerome; <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p5.1"></span>Σ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p5.2"></span>υν™σεως τῷ’Ασ€φ</span>, Sept.—C.\]

<span id="fn_3522"></span>[366:3523](1080089.htm#fr_3522) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p5.3"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p6"></span> [Ps. lxxvii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#002)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3523"></span>[366:3524](1080089.htm#fr_3523) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p8"></span> [Isa. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#003)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3524"></span>[366:3525](1080089.htm#fr_3524) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p9"></span> *Sacramentum*.

<span id="fn_3525"></span>[366:3526](1080089.htm#fr_3525) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p10"></span> \[*Velabatur in Veteri, quod
revelaretur in Novo*.—C.\]

<span id="fn_3526"></span>[367:3527](1080089.htm#fr_3526) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p11"></span> [1 Cor. x.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#004)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3527"></span>[367:3528](1080089.htm#fr_3527) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p12"></span> *Specie*.

<span id="fn_3528"></span>[367:3529](1080089.htm#fr_3528) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p13"></span> [1 Cor. x.
5](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#005)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3529"></span>[367:3530](1080089.htm#fr_3529) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p14"></span> [Matt. xxviii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#019)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3530"></span>[367:3531](1080089.htm#fr_3530) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p15"></span> So Oxf. <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p15.1"></span>mss</span>.; Ben. “are regenerated,” which
makes scarcely an intelligible sense.

<span id="fn_3531"></span>[367:3532](1080089.htm#fr_3531) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p17"></span> [Prov. v.
1](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#001)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3532"></span>[367:3533](1080089.htm#fr_3532) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p18"></span> \[He subjoins as follows: “For the
word on the Title is put in the genitive case: *hujus* *intellectûs*,
not *hic intellectus*.”—C.\]

<span id="fn_3533"></span>[367:3534](1080089.htm#fr_3533) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p19"></span> He takes *con-gregatio* as the Latin
for synagogue, and expressing merely bringing together, and *convocatio*
as Latin for ecclesia, which expresses calling.

<span id="fn_3534"></span>[367:3535](1080089.htm#fr_3534) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p20"></span> *i.e*., than for *them*.

<span id="fn_3535"></span>[367:3536](1080089.htm#fr_3535) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p21"></span> [Ps. cvi.
47](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#047)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3536"></span>[367:3537](1080089.htm#fr_3536) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p22"></span> [John x.
16](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#016)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3537"></span>[367:3538](1080089.htm#fr_3537) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p23"></span> [Matt. xv.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#024)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3538"></span>[367:3539](1080089.htm#fr_3538) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p24"></span> [Matt. xxv.
32](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#032)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3539"></span>[367:3540](1080089.htm#fr_3539) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p24.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p25"></span> Oxf. <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p25.1"></span>mss</span>. add *quam Judæis*.

<span id="fn_3540"></span>[367:3541](1080089.htm#fr_3540) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p25.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p26"></span> [1 Cor. x.
5](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#005)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p26.1"></span>.
\[He cites to verse 12, entire.—C.\]

<span id="fn_3541"></span>[367:3542](1080089.htm#fr_3541) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p27"></span> [Ps. lxxviii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#006)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3542"></span>[368:3543](1080089.htm#fr_3542) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p28.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p29"></span> [Gen. iii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#019)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3543"></span>[368:3544](1080089.htm#fr_3543) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p30.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p31"></span> [Ps. lxxviii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#001)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3544"></span>[368:3545](1080089.htm#fr_3544) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p31.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p32"></span> [2 Cor. xiii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#003)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3545"></span>[368:3546](1080089.htm#fr_3545) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p32.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p33"></span> \[[Judg. xiii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#020)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p33.1"></span>.
This mysterious subject may be illustrated from Holy Scripture so as to
justify our author’s very broad statement. It throws light on [Gen.
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#001), [2 Pet.
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#016)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p33.2"></span>. Compare on [Ps.
78.49](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#049)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p33.3"></span>, *infra*.—C.\]

<span id="fn_3546"></span>[368:3547](1080089.htm#fr_3546) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p33.4"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p34"></span> [Luke vii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#008)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3547"></span>[368:3548](1080089.htm#fr_3547) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p35.3"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p36"></span> [Ps. lxxviii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#002)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3548"></span>[368:3549](1080089.htm#fr_3548) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p36.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p37"></span> [Ps. cxi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#010)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3549"></span>[368:3550](1080089.htm#fr_3549) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p37.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p38"></span> [Rom. x.
4](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#004)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3550"></span>[368:3551](1080089.htm#fr_3550) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p38.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p39"></span> [Rom. v.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#005)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3551"></span>[368:3552](1080089.htm#fr_3551) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p39.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p40"></span> [1 John iv.
18](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#018)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3552"></span>[368:3553](1080089.htm#fr_3552) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p40.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p41"></span> [Rom. iii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#021)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3553"></span>[369:3554](1080089.htm#fr_3553) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p41.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p42"></span> [Exod.
40:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#003), [2 Cor.
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#013)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3554"></span>[369:3555](1080089.htm#fr_3554) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p42.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p43"></span> [2 Cor. iii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#016)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3555"></span>[369:3556](1080089.htm#fr_3555) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p43.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p44"></span> [2 Cor. i.
20](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#020)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3556"></span>[369:3557](1080089.htm#fr_3556) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p44.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p45"></span> [Gen. xxv.
26](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#026)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3557"></span>[369:3558](1080089.htm#fr_3557) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p45.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p46"></span> [Gen. xxxii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#028)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3558"></span>[369:3559](1080089.htm#fr_3558) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p46.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p47"></span> [Rom.
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#009)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3559"></span>[369:3560](1080089.htm#fr_3559) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p47.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p48"></span> [Rom. vii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#013)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3560"></span>[369:3561](1080089.htm#fr_3560) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p48.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p49"></span> [1 Tim. i.
9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#009)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3561"></span>[369:3562](1080089.htm#fr_3561) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p49.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p50"></span> [Ps.
18:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#022), [1 Pet.
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#008)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3562"></span>[369:3563](1080089.htm#fr_3562) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p50.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p51"></span> [1 Tim. i.
8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#008)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3563"></span>[369:3564](1080089.htm#fr_3563) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p52.5"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p53"></span> [Col. iii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#001)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3564"></span>[369:3565](1080089.htm#fr_3564) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p53.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p54"></span> [Philip. ii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#013)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p54.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3565"></span>[369:3566](1080089.htm#fr_3565) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p54.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p55"></span> [Rom. iv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#005)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3566"></span>[370:3567](1080089.htm#fr_3566) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p56.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p57"></span> [Rom. ix.
31](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#031)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3567"></span>[370:3568](1080089.htm#fr_3567) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p57.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p58"></span> [Rom.
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#017), [Gal.
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#006), [Phil.
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#013)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p58.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3568"></span>[370:3569](1080089.htm#fr_3568) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p58.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p59"></span> [Gen. xlviii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#014)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p59.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3569"></span>[370:3570](1080089.htm#fr_3569) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p59.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p60"></span> [Matt. xx.
16](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#016)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p60.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3570"></span>[370:3571](1080089.htm#fr_3570) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p60.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p61"></span> [John i.
27](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#027)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p61.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3571"></span>[370:3572](1080089.htm#fr_3571) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p61.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p62"></span> [Gen.
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#004), [Gen.
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#012), [Gen.
38:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#029)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p62.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3572"></span>[370:3573](1080089.htm#fr_3572) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p62.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p63"></span> [1 Sam. xvi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#012)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p63.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3573"></span>[370:3574](1080089.htm#fr_3573) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p63.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p64"></span> [Gen. iv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#008)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p64.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3574"></span>[370:3575](1080089.htm#fr_3574) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p64.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p65"></span> [Gen. xlviii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#014)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p65.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3575"></span>[370:3576](1080089.htm#fr_3575) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p66.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p67"></span> [Exod. xix.
8](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#008)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p67.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3576"></span>[370:3577](1080089.htm#fr_3576) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p67.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p68"></span> [1 Cor. x.
13](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#013)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p68.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3577"></span>[370:3578](1080089.htm#fr_3577) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p68.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p69"></span> [Ps. lxxviii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#008)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p69.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3578"></span>[370:3579](1080089.htm#fr_3578) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p69.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p70"></span> [Ps. lxxviii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#008)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p70.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3579"></span>[371:3580](1080089.htm#fr_3579) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p71.3"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p72"></span> [Luke xx.
38](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#038)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p72.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3580"></span>[371:3581](1080089.htm#fr_3580) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p72.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p73"></span> [Numb. xi.
17](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#017)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p73.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3581"></span>[371:3582](1080089.htm#fr_3581) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p73.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p74"></span> [1 Cor. iv.
14](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#014)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p74.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3582"></span>[371:3583](1080089.htm#fr_3582) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p74.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p75"></span> [Matt. xxiii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#009)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p75.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3583"></span>[371:3584](1080089.htm#fr_3583) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p76.3"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p77"></span> [Ps. cxix.
133](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#133)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p77.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3584"></span>[371:3585](1080089.htm#fr_3584) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p77.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p78"></span> [Prov. iv.
27](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#027)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p78.1"></span>,
LXX.

<span id="fn_3585"></span>[371:3586](1080089.htm#fr_3585) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p78.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p79"></span> These words are part of an addition in
the Septuagint text.

<span id="fn_3586"></span>[371:3587](1080089.htm#fr_3586) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p79.3"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p80"></span> [John vii.
37](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#037)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p80.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3587"></span>[371:3588](1080089.htm#fr_3587) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p80.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p81"></span> [John iv.
14](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#014)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p81.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3588"></span>[371:3589](1080089.htm#fr_3588) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p81.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p82"></span> [John vii.
39](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#039)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p82.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3589"></span>[371:3590](1080089.htm#fr_3589) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p83.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p84"></span> [John xvi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#009)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p84.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3590"></span>[371:3591](1080089.htm#fr_3590) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p84.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p85"></span> [Ps. xvii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#002)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p85.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3591"></span>[372:3592](1080089.htm#fr_3591) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p86.4"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p87"></span> [Jas.
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#006)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p87.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3592"></span>[372:3593](1080089.htm#fr_3592) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p89.10"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p90"></span> [John i.
44](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#044)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p90.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3593"></span>[373:3594](1080089.htm#fr_3593) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p91.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p92"></span> [Ps. lxxiii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#007)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p92.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3594"></span>[373:3595](1080089.htm#fr_3594) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p93.3"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p94"></span> [Ps. cii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#027)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p94.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3595"></span>[373:3596](1080089.htm#fr_3595) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p96.3"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p97"></span> [Ps. xxvii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#004)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p97.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3596"></span>[373:3597](1080089.htm#fr_3596) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p97.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p98"></span> [Exod. xvi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#003)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p98.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3597"></span>[373:3598](1080089.htm#fr_3597) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p98.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p99"></span> [Ps. xvii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#015)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p99.1"></span>,
Lat.

<span id="fn_3598"></span>[373:3599](1080089.htm#fr_3598) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p99.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p100"></span> [Matt. xx.
16](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#016)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p100.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3599"></span>[374:3600](1080089.htm#fr_3599) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p101.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p102"></span> [Matt. v.
45](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#045)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p102.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3600"></span>[374:3601](1080089.htm#fr_3600) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p102.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p103"></span> Many <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p103.1"></span>mss</span>. omit “not.”

<span id="fn_3601"></span>[374:3602](1080089.htm#fr_3601) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p103.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p104"></span> [Exod. xxxii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#010)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p104.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3602"></span>[374:3603](1080089.htm#fr_3602) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p105.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p106"></span> [Ps. lxxviii.
38](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#038)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p106.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3603"></span>[374:3604](1080089.htm#fr_3603) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p106.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p107"></span> [Ps.
78:54](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#054),
[55](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#055)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p107.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3604"></span>[374:3605](1080089.htm#fr_3604) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p108.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p109"></span> Or, “breath.”

<span id="fn_3605"></span>[374:3606](1080089.htm#fr_3605) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p109.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p110"></span> \[Transient, and not returning.—C.\]

<span id="fn_3606"></span>[374:3607](1080089.htm#fr_3606) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p110.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p111"></span> [Prov. ii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#019)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p111.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3607"></span>[375:3608](1080089.htm#fr_3607) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p113.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p114"></span> [Ps. lxxviii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#002)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p114.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3608"></span>[375:3609](1080089.htm#fr_3608) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p114.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p115"></span> [Exod. ix.
25](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#025)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p115.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3609"></span>[375:3610](1080089.htm#fr_3609) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p116.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p117"></span> \[*Obscenique canes*. Virg. *Georg*.
i. 470.—C.\]

<span id="fn_3610"></span>[375:3611](1080089.htm#fr_3610) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p117.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p118"></span> [Gal. vi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#003)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p118.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3611"></span>[375:3612](1080089.htm#fr_3611) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p118.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p119"></span> *Vid*. Sermon on the Ten Plagues and
Ten Commandments.

<span id="fn_3612"></span>[375:3613](1080089.htm#fr_3612) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p120.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p121"></span> Oxf. <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p121.1"></span>mss</span>. *Taphnis*.

<span id="fn_3613"></span>[376:3614](1080089.htm#fr_3613) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p121.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p122"></span> [1 Kings xxii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#020)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p122.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3614"></span>[376:3615](1080089.htm#fr_3614) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p122.3"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p123"></span> \[See p. 219, n. 8, *supra*.—C.\]

<span id="fn_3615"></span>[376:3616](1080089.htm#fr_3615) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p123.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p124"></span> [Job i.
16](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#016)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p124.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3616"></span>[376:3617](1080089.htm#fr_3616) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p124.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p125"></span> [Job i.
21](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#021)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p125.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3617"></span>[376:3618](1080089.htm#fr_3617) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p125.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p126"></span> [Eph. ii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#002)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p126.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3618"></span>[376:3619](1080089.htm#fr_3618) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p127.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p128"></span> [Exod. viii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#007)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p128.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3619"></span>[376:3620](1080089.htm#fr_3619) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p128.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p129"></span> *Al*. “ordinance.”

<span id="fn_3620"></span>[376:3621](1080089.htm#fr_3620) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p129.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p130"></span> [Exod.
8:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#018),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#019)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p130.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3621"></span>[376:3622](1080089.htm#fr_3621) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p130.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p131"></span> [Gen.
18:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#002), [Gen.
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#001)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p131.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3622"></span>[377:3623](1080089.htm#fr_3622) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p132.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p133"></span> [Exod. iv.
21](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#021)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p133.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3623"></span>[377:3624](1080089.htm#fr_3623) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p133.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p134"></span> [Eph. ii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#002)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p134.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3624"></span>[377:3625](1080089.htm#fr_3624) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p134.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p135"></span> [Ps. lxxviii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#002)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p135.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3625"></span>[377:3626](1080089.htm#fr_3625) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p135.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p136"></span> [Rom.
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#024),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#028)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p136.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3626"></span>[377:3627](1080089.htm#fr_3626) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p136.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p137"></span> [2 Cor. ii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#016)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p137.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3627"></span>[377:3628](1080089.htm#fr_3627) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p137.3"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p138"></span> [Col. i.
13](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#013)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p138.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3628"></span>[377:3629](1080089.htm#fr_3628) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p139.4"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p140"></span> [Col. iii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#003)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p140.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3629"></span>[377:3630](1080089.htm#fr_3629) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p140.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p141"></span> [Rom. viii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#024)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p141.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3630"></span>[377:3631](1080089.htm#fr_3630) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p141.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p142"></span> [Rom. viii.
31](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#031)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p142.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3631"></span>[377:3632](1080089.htm#fr_3631) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p143.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p144"></span> [Isa. liii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#001)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p144.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3632"></span>[377:3633](1080089.htm#fr_3632) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p144.3"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p145"></span> Oxf. <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p145.1"></span>mss</span>. add, “He did cast out
nations.”

<span id="fn_3633"></span>[377:3634](1080089.htm#fr_3633) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p145.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p146"></span> [1 Cor. xii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#011)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p146.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3634"></span>[377:3635](1080089.htm#fr_3634) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p147.3"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p148"></span> [Exod. xix.
8](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#008)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p148.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3635"></span>[378:3636](1080089.htm#fr_3635) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p148.4"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p149"></span> [Exod. xx.
3](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#003)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p149.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3636"></span>[378:3637](1080089.htm#fr_3636) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p150.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p151"></span> [1 Sam. iv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#010)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p151.1"></span>, etc.

<span id="fn_3637"></span>[378:3638](1080089.htm#fr_3637) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p151.3"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p152"></span> [Jer. vii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#012)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p152.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3638"></span>[378:3639](1080089.htm#fr_3638) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p152.5"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p153"></span> [1 Sam. iv.
19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#019)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p153.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3639"></span>[378:3640](1080089.htm#fr_3639) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p153.3"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p154"></span> [Ps. xlii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#003)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p154.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3640"></span>[378:3641](1080089.htm#fr_3640) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p154.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p155"></span> *Al*. “require.”

<span id="fn_3641"></span>[378:3642](1080089.htm#fr_3641) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p156.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p157"></span> [1 Sam. v.
6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1005.htm#006)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p157.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3642"></span>[378:3643](1080089.htm#fr_3642) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p157.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p158"></span> [Phil. iii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#008)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p158.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3643"></span>[378:3644](1080089.htm#fr_3643) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p158.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p159"></span> [Isa.
40:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#007)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p159.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3644"></span>[378:3645](1080089.htm#fr_3644) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p160.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p161"></span> \[Jeroboam represented the house of
Joseph ([1 Kings xi. 28](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#028)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p161.1"></span>), and was offended at the removal of the
Tabernacle ([1 Kings viii. 4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#004)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p161.2"></span>) to Jerusalem. But God overruled his
rebellion in such wise, that Ephraim (as the ten tribes were called from
the pre-eminent one) carried away, and, not returning, did not, as
tribes, share in the rejection of the Messiah, “the Shepherd and Stone
of Israel;” thus indicated in the prophetic benediction of Jacob, [Gen.
xlix. 24](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#024)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p161.3"></span>.—C.\]

<span id="fn_3645"></span>[378:3646](1080089.htm#fr_3645) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p161.6"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p162"></span> [Gen. xlix.
3](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#003)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p162.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3646"></span>[378:3647](1080089.htm#fr_3646) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p162.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p163"></span> [Gen. xlix.
5](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#005)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p163.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3647"></span>[379:3648](1080089.htm#fr_3647) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p163.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p164"></span> [Exod. ii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#001)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p164.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3648"></span>[379:3649](1080089.htm#fr_3648) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p164.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p165"></span> [1 Sam. ix.
1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#001)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p165.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3649"></span>[379:3650](1080089.htm#fr_3649) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p165.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p166"></span> [1 Sam. xvi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#001)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p166.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3650"></span>[379:3651](1080089.htm#fr_3650) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p166.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p167"></span> [Gen. xli.
40](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#040)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p167.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3651"></span>[379:3652](1080089.htm#fr_3651) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p167.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p168"></span> [Gen.
48:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#017),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#019)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p168.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3652"></span>[379:3653](1080089.htm#fr_3652) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p169.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p170"></span> *Sanctificium*.

<span id="fn_3653"></span>[379:3654](1080089.htm#fr_3653) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p170.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p171"></span> [Ps. xxvii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#004)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p171.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3654"></span>[379:3655](1080089.htm#fr_3654) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p171.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p172"></span> [1 Pet. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#009)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p172.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3655"></span>[379:3656](1080089.htm#fr_3655) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p173.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p174"></span> [Matt. xx.
30](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#030)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p174.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3656"></span>[379:3657](1080089.htm#fr_3656) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p174.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p175"></span> [2 Tim. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#008)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p175.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3657"></span>[379:3658](1080089.htm#fr_3657) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p176.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p177"></span> [Gal.
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#022),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#023)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p177.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3658"></span>[379:3659](1080089.htm#fr_3658) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p177.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p178"></span> \[A noteworthy testimony.—C.\]

<span id="fn_3659"></span>[379:3660](1080089.htm#fr_3659) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p178.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p179"></span> *Lavacro*.

<span id="fn_3660"></span>[379:3661](1080089.htm#fr_3660) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p179.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p180"></span> [Song of Sol. iv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#002)<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p180.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3661"></span>[379:3662](1080089.htm#fr_3661) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p180.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p181"></span> [Acts ii.
45](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#045)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p181.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3662"></span>[379:3663](1080089.htm#fr_3662) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p181.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p182"></span> [Acts
4:34](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#034),
[35](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#035)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p182.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3663"></span>[380:3664](1080089.htm#fr_3663) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p182.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p183"></span> [Acts ii.
38](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#038)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p183.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3664"></span>[380:3665](1080089.htm#fr_3664) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p183.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p184"></span> [Gen. xxxii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#028)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p184.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3665"></span>[380:3666](1080089.htm#fr_3665) <span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p185.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVIII-p186"></span> [Gen. i.
27](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#027)<span
id="ii.LXXVIII-p186.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm LXXIX](1080090)
