[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080168)  [Next](1080170) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.CXXXVI"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXXVI-p1"></span> <span id="ii.CXXXVI-p1.1"></span><span
class="c20"><span id="ii.CXXXVI-p1.2"></span>Psalm CXXXVI. <span
id="fr_5669"></span>[5670](#fn_5669) </span>

<span id="ii.CXXXVI-p3"></span>1. “Give thanks unto the Lord, for He is
good, for His mercy endureth for ever” ([Psa.
136.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#001)<span
id="ii.CXXXVI-p3.1"></span>). This Psalm contains the praise of God, and
all its verses finish in the same way. Wherefore although many things
are related here in praise of God, yet His mercy is most
commended; <span id="fr_5670"></span>[5671](#fn_5670) for without this
plain commendation, he, whom the Holy Spirit used to utter this Psalm,
would have no verse be ended. Although after the judgment, by which at
the end of the world the quick and the dead must be judged, the just
being sent into life eternal, the unjust into everlasting fire, <span
id="fr_5671"></span>[5672](#fn_5671) there will not afterwards be those,
whom God will have mercy on, yet rightly may His future mercy be
understood to be for ever, which He bestows on His saints and faithful
ones, not because they will be miserable for ever, and therefore will
need His mercy for ever, but because that very blessedness, which He
mercifully bestows on the miserable, that they cease to be miserable,
and begin to be happy, will have no end, and therefore “His mercy is for
ever.” For that we shall be just from being unjust, whole from being
unsound, alive from being dead, immortal from being mortal, happy from
being wretched, is of His mercy. But this that we <span id="page_628">p.
628</span> <span id="ii.CXXXVI-Page_628"></span>shall be, will be for
ever, and therefore “His mercy is for ever.” Wherefore, “give thanks to
the Lord;” that is, praise the Lord by giving thanks, “for He is good:”
nor is it any temporal good you will gain from this confession, for,
“His mercy endureth for ever;” that is, the benefit which He bestows
mercifully upon you, is for ever. <span
id="fr_5672"></span>[5673](#fn_5672)

<span id="ii.CXXXVI-p7"></span>2. Then follows, “Give thanks to the God
of gods, for His mercy endureth for ever” ([Psa.
136.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#002)<span
id="ii.CXXXVI-p7.1"></span>). “Give thanks to the Lord of lords, for His
mercy endureth for ever” ([Psa.
136.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#003)<span
id="ii.CXXXVI-p7.2"></span>). We may well enquire, Who are these gods
and lords, of whom He who is the true God is God and Lord? And we find
written in another Psalm, that even men are called gods. <span
id="fr_5673"></span>[5674](#fn_5673) The Lord even takes note of this
testimony in the Gospel, saying, “Is it not written in your Law, I have
said, Ye are gods?” <span id="fr_5674"></span>[5675](#fn_5674) …It is
not therefore because they are all good, but because “the word of God
came to them,” that they were called gods. For were it because they are
all good, He would not thus distinguish between them. He saith, “He
judgeth between the gods.” Then follows, “How long do ye judge
iniquity!” <span id="fr_5675"></span>[5676](#fn_5675) and the rest,
which He says certainly not to all, but to some, because He saith it in
distinguishing, and yet He distinguisheth between the gods.

<span id="ii.CXXXVI-p11"></span>3. But it is asked, If men are called
gods to whom the word of the Lord came, are the Angels to be called
gods, when the greatest reward which is promised to just and holy men is
the being equal to Angels? In the Scriptures I know not whether it can,
at least easily, be found, that the Angels are openly called gods; but
when it had been said of the Lord God, “He is terrible, above all gods,”
he adds, as by way of exposition why he says this, “for the gods of the
heathen are devils,” <span id="fr_5676"></span>[5677](#fn_5676) that we
might understand what had been expressed in the Hebrew, “the gods of the
Gentiles are idols,” meaning rather the devils which dwell in the
idols. <span id="fr_5677"></span>[5678](#fn_5677) For as regards images,
which in Greek are called idols, a name we now use in Latin, they have
eyes and see not, and all the other things which are said of them,
because they are utterly without sense; wherefore they cannot be
frightened, for nothing which has no sense can be frightened. How then
can it be said of the Lord, “He is terrible above all gods, because the
gods of the Gentiles are idols,” if the devils which may be terrified
are not understood to be in these images. Whence also the Apostle says,
“We know that an idol is nothing.” <span
id="fr_5678"></span>[5679](#fn_5678) This refers to its earthy senseless
material. But that no one may think, that there is no living and
sentient nature, which delights in the Gentile sacrifices, he adds, “But
what the Gentiles sacrifice, they sacrifice to devils, and not to God: I
would not have you partaken with devils.” <span
id="fr_5679"></span>[5680](#fn_5679) If therefore we never find in the
divine words that the holy Angels are called gods, I think the best
reason is, that men may not be induced by the name to pay that ministry
and service of religion (which in Greek is called <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.CXXXVI-p15.2"></span>λειτουργία</span> or
<span class="Greek"><span id="ii.CXXXVI-p15.3"></span>λατρία</span>) to
the holy Angels, which neither would they have paid by man at all, save
to that God, who is the God of themselves and men.  <span
id="fr_5680"></span>[5681](#fn_5680) Hence they are much more correctly
called Angels, which in Latin is *Nuntii,* that by the name of their
function, not their substance, we may plainly understand that they would
have us worship the God, whom they announce. The whole then of that
question the Apostle has briefly expounded, when he says, “For though
there be who are called gods, whether in heaven or in earth, as there
are gods many and lords many; yet we have one God the Father, from whom
are all, and we in Him; and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all
things, and we by Him.” <span id="fr_5681"></span>[5682](#fn_5681)

<span id="ii.CXXXVI-p18"></span>4. Let us therefore “give thanks to the
God of gods, and the Lord of lords, for His mercy,” etc. “Who alone did
wonderful things” ([Psa. 136.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#004)<span
id="ii.CXXXVI-p18.1"></span>). As at the last part of every verse, it is
written, “For His mercy endureth for ever,” so we must understand at the
beginning of each, though it be not written, “Give thanks.” Which indeed
in the Greek is very plain. It would be so in Latin, if our translators
had been able to make use of that expression. Which indeed they could
have done in this verse, if they had said, “To Him who doeth <span
id="fr_5682"></span>[5683](#fn_5682) wonderful things.” For where we
have, “who did wonderful things,” the Greek has <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.CXXXVI-p19.1"></span>τῷ ποιήσαντι</span>,
where we must necessarily understand, “give thanks.” And I would they
had added the pronoun, and said to Him, “who did,” or to Him “who
doeth,” or to Him “who made sure;” because then one might easily
understand, “let us give thanks.” For now it is so obscurely rendered,
that he who either knows not or cares not to examine a Greek manuscript
may think, “who made the heavens, who made sure the earth, who made the
luminaries, for His mercy endureth for ever,” <span
id="fr_5683"></span>[5684](#fn_5683) has been so said, because He did
these things for this reason, “because His mercy endureth for ever:”
whereas they, whom He has freed from misery, belong to His Mercy: but
not that we should believe that <span id="page_629">p. 629</span> <span
id="ii.CXXXVI-Page_629"></span>He makes sky, earth, and luminaries, of
His Mercy; since they are marks of His Goodness, who created all things
very good. <span id="fr_5684"></span>[5685](#fn_5684) For He created all
things, that they might have their being; <span
id="fr_5685"></span>[5686](#fn_5685) but it is the work of His Mercy, to
cleanse us from our sins, and deliver us from everlasting misery. And so
the Psalm thus addresses us, “Give thanks unto the God of gods, give
thanks unto the Lord of lords.” Give thanks to Him, “who alone doeth
great wonders;” give thanks to Him, “who by His wisdom made the
heavens;” give thanks to Him, “who stretched out the earth above the
waters;” give thanks to Him, “who alone made great lights.” But why we
are to praise, he setteth down at the end of all the verses, “for His
mercy endureth for ever.”

<span id="ii.CXXXVI-p23"></span>5. But what meaneth, “who alone doeth
great wonders”? Is it because many wonderful things He hath done by
means of angels and men? Some wonderful things there are which God doeth
alone, and these he enumerates, saying, “who by His wisdom made the
heavens” ([Psa. 136.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#005)<span
id="ii.CXXXVI-p23.1"></span>), “who stretched out the earth above the
waters” ([Psa. 136.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#006)<span
id="ii.CXXXVI-p23.2"></span>), “who alone made great lights” ([Psa.
136.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#007)<span
id="ii.CXXXVI-p23.3"></span>). For this reason did he add “alone” in
this verse also, because the other wonders which he is about to tell of,
God did by means of man. For having said, “who alone made great lights,”
he goes on to explain what these are, “the sun to rule the day” ([Psa.
136.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#008)<span
id="ii.CXXXVI-p23.4"></span>), “the moon and stars to govern the night”
([Psa. 136.9](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#009)<span
id="ii.CXXXVI-p23.5"></span>); then he begins to tell the wonders which
He did by means of angels and men: “who smote Egypt with their
first-born” ([Psa. 136.10](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#010)<span
id="ii.CXXXVI-p23.6"></span>), and the rest. The whole creation then God
manifestly made, not by means of any creature, but “alone;” and of this
creation he hath mentioned certain more eminent parts, that they might
make us think on the whole; the heavens we can understand, <span
id="fr_5686"></span>[5687](#fn_5686) and the earth we see. And as there
are visible heavens too, by mentioning the lights in them, he has bid us
look on the whole body of the heavens as made by Him.

<span id="ii.CXXXVI-p25"></span>6. However, whether by what he saith,
“who made the heavens in understanding,” or, as others have rendered it,
“in intelligence,” he meant to signify, the heavens we can understand,
or that He in His understanding or intelligence, that is, in His wisdom
made the heavens (as it is elsewhere written, “in wisdom hast Thou made
them all” <span id="fr_5687"></span>[5688](#fn_5687) ), implying thereby
the only-begotten Word, may be a question. But if it be so, that we are
to understand that “God by His wisdom made the heavens,” why saith He
this only of the heavens, whereas God made all things by the same
wisdom? It is that it needed only to be expressed there, so that in the
rest it might be understood without being written. How then could it be
“alone,” if “in understanding” or “in intelligence” means “by His
wisdom,” that is, by the only-begotten Word? Is it that, inasmuch as the
Trinity is not three Gods, but one God, he states that God made these
things alone, because He made not creation by means of any creature?

<span id="ii.CXXXVI-p27"></span>7. But what is, “who laid out the earth
above the waters”? For it is a difficult question, because the earth
seemeth to be the heavier, so that it should be believed not so much to
be borne on the waters, as to bear the waters. And that we may not seem
contentiously to maintain our Scriptures against those who think that
they have discovered these matters on sure principles, we have a second
interpretation to give, that the earth which is inhabited by men, and
contains the living creatures of the earth, is “laid out above the
waters” because it stands out above the waters which surround it. For
when we speak of a city on the sea being built “above the waters,” it is
not meant that the sea is under it in the same way as the waters are
under the chambers of caverns, or under ships sailing over them; but it
is said to be “above” the sea, because it stands up above the sea below
it.

<span id="ii.CXXXVI-p28"></span>8. But if these words further signify
something else which more closely concerns us, God “by His wisdom made
the heavens,” that is, His saints, spiritual men, to whom He has given
not only to believe, but also to understand things divine; those who
cannot yet attain to this, and only hold their faith firmly, as being
beneath the heavens, are figured by the name of earth. And because they
abide with unshaken belief upon the baptism they have received,
therefore it is said, “He laid out the earth above the waters.” Further,
since it is written of our Lord Jesus Christ, that “in Him are hid all
the treasures of wisdom and knowledge,” <span
id="fr_5688"></span>[5689](#fn_5688) and that these two, wisdom and
knowledge, differ somewhat from one another is testified by other
utterances of Scripture, especially in the words of holy Job, <span
id="fr_5689"></span>[5690](#fn_5689) where both are in a manner defined;
not unsuitably then do we understand wisdom to consist in the knowledge
and love of That which ever is and abideth unchangeable, which is God.
For where he saith, “piety <span id="fr_5690"></span>[5691](#fn_5690) is
wisdom,” in Greek is <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.CXXXVI-p31.1"></span> θεοσ™βεια</span>, and to express the whole
of this in Latin, we may call it worship of God. <span
id="fr_5691"></span>[5692](#fn_5691) But to depart from evil, which he
calls knowledge, what else is it but to walk cautiously and heedfully
“in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation,” <span
id="fr_5692"></span>[5693](#fn_5692) in the night, as it were, of this
world, that each one by keeping himself from iniquity may avoid being
confounded with the darkness, distinguished by the light of his proper
gift.…

<span id="ii.CXXXVI-p34"></span>9. “Who brought out Israel from the
midst <span id="page_630">p. 630</span> <span
id="ii.CXXXVI-Page_630"></span>of them” ([Psa.
136.11](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#011)<span
id="ii.CXXXVI-p34.1"></span>). He brought out also His saints and
faithful ones from the midst of the wicked. “With a mighty Hand and
stretched-out Arm” ([Psa. 136.12](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#012)<span
id="ii.CXXXVI-p34.2"></span>). What more powerful, what more
out-stretched, than that of which is said “To whom is the Arm of the
Lord revealed?” <span id="fr_5693"></span>[5694](#fn_5693) “Who divided
the Red Sea in two parts” ([Psa.
136.13](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#013)<span
id="ii.CXXXVI-p35.2"></span>). He divided also in such wise, that the
same baptism should be to some unto life, to others unto death. “And
brought out Israel through the midst of it” ([Psa.
136.14](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#014)<span
id="ii.CXXXVI-p35.3"></span>). So too He brings out His renewed people
through the laver of regeneration. “And overthrew Pharaoh and his power
in the Red Sea” ([Psa. 136.15](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#015)<span
id="ii.CXXXVI-p35.4"></span>). He quickly destroyeth both the sin of His
people and the guilt thereof by baptism. “Who led His people through the
wilderness” ([Psa. 136.16](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#016)<span
id="ii.CXXXVI-p35.5"></span>). Us too He leadeth through the drought and
barrenness of this world, that we perish not therein. “Who smote great
kings” ([Psa. 136.17](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#017)<span
id="ii.CXXXVI-p35.6"></span>), “and slew famous kings” ([Psa.
136.18](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#018)<span
id="ii.CXXXVI-p35.7"></span>). From us too He smites and slays the
deadly powers of the devil. “Sehon king of the Amorites” ([Psa.
136.19](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#019)<span
id="ii.CXXXVI-p35.8"></span>), an “useless shoot,” or “fiery
temptation,” for so is Sehon interpreted: the king of “them who cause
bitterness,” for such is the meaning of Amorites. “And Og, the king of
Basan” ([Psa. 136.20](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#020)<span
id="ii.CXXXVI-p35.9"></span>). The “heaper-together,” such is the
meaning of Og, and, king of “confusion,” which Basan signifies. For what
else doth the devil heap together but confusion? “And gave away their
land for an heritage” ([Psa.
136.21](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#021)<span
id="ii.CXXXVI-p35.10"></span>), “even an heritage unto Israel His
servant” ([Psa. 136.22](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#022)<span
id="ii.CXXXVI-p35.11"></span>). For He giveth them, whom once the devil
owned, for an heritage to the seed of Abraham, that is, Christ. “Who
remembered us in our low estate” ([Psa.
136.23](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#023)<span
id="ii.CXXXVI-p35.12"></span>), “and redeemed us from our enemies”
([Psa. 136.24](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#024)<span
id="ii.CXXXVI-p35.13"></span>) by the Blood of His only-begotten Son.
“Who giveth food to all flesh” ([Psa.
136.25](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#025)<span
id="ii.CXXXVI-p35.14"></span>), that is, to the whole race of mankind,
not Israelites only, but Gentiles too; and of this Food is said, “My
Flesh is meat indeed.” “Give thanks unto the God of Heaven” ([Psa.
136.26](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#026)<span
id="ii.CXXXVI-p35.15"></span>). “Give thanks unto the Lord of lords”
([Psa. 136.27](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#027)<span
id="ii.CXXXVI-p35.16"></span>). For what he here says, “the God of
Heaven,” I suppose that he meant to express in other words what He had
before said, “the God of gods.” For what there he subjoined, he has here
also repeated. “Give thanks unto the Lord of lords.” “But to us there is
but one God,” etc., “and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things,
and we by Him;” <span id="fr_5694"></span>[5695](#fn_5694) to whom we
confess that “His mercy endureth for ever.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5669"></span>[627:5670](1080169.htm#fr_5669) <span
id="ii.CXXXVI-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXXVI-p2"></span> Lat. CXXXV.

<span id="fn_5670"></span>[627:5671](1080169.htm#fr_5670) <span
id="ii.CXXXVI-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXXVI-p4"></span> \[He says: “I remember, in the hundred
and sixth Psalm, which begins in the same way, because the manuscript
which I read had not ‘for ever,’ but, ‘for ages’ (*in sæculum*), ‘His
mercy,’ that I enquired what we had better understand. For, in the Greek
language, it is written, <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.CXXXVI-p4.1"></span>εἰς τὸν αἰῶνα</span>, which may be
interpreted, ‘for ages’ and (*in æternum*) ‘for ever.’ But it would be
tedious to renew the enquiries I made as best I could in that place. But
in this Psalm the same manuscript has not ‘for ages,’ which most have,
but, ‘for ever His mercy.’”—C.\]

<span id="fn_5671"></span>[627:5672](1080169.htm#fr_5671) <span
id="ii.CXXXVI-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXXVI-p5"></span> [Matt. xxv.
46](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#046)<span id="ii.CXXXVI-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5672"></span>[628:5673](1080169.htm#fr_5672) <span
id="ii.CXXXVI-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXXVI-p6"></span> \[He adds: “The expression, ‘for He is
good,’ in the Greek is ‡<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.CXXXVI-p6.1"></span>γαθος</span>; not as in the hundred and sixth
Psalm, for there “He is good,’ in Greek is <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.CXXXVI-p6.2"></span>χρηστός</span>. And so some have expounded
the former, ‘Since He is sweet.’ For ‡<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.CXXXVI-p6.3"></span>γαθος</span> is not good anyhow, but good
most excellently.”—C.\]

<span id="fn_5673"></span>[628:5674](1080169.htm#fr_5673) <span
id="ii.CXXXVI-p7.3"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXXVI-p8"></span> [Ps.
82:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#001), [Ps.
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#007)<span id="ii.CXXXVI-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5674"></span>[628:5675](1080169.htm#fr_5674) <span
id="ii.CXXXVI-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXXVI-p9"></span> [John x.
34](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#034)<span id="ii.CXXXVI-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5675"></span>[628:5676](1080169.htm#fr_5675) <span
id="ii.CXXXVI-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXXVI-p10"></span> [Ps. lxxxii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#002)<span id="ii.CXXXVI-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5676"></span>[628:5677](1080169.htm#fr_5676) <span
id="ii.CXXXVI-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXXVI-p12"></span> [Ps. xcvi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#004)<span id="ii.CXXXVI-p12.1"></span>
*seq*.

<span id="fn_5677"></span>[628:5678](1080169.htm#fr_5677) <span
id="ii.CXXXVI-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXXVI-p13"></span> *Simulacrum*; <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.CXXXVI-p13.1"></span>εἵδωλον</span>.

<span id="fn_5678"></span>[628:5679](1080169.htm#fr_5678) <span
id="ii.CXXXVI-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXXVI-p14"></span> [1 Cor. viii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#004)<span id="ii.CXXXVI-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5679"></span>[628:5680](1080169.htm#fr_5679) <span
id="ii.CXXXVI-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXXVI-p15"></span> [1 Cor. x.
20](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#020)<span id="ii.CXXXVI-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5680"></span>[628:5681](1080169.htm#fr_5680) <span
id="ii.CXXXVI-p15.4"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXXVI-p16"></span> \[The Roman dogma makes a *verbal*
distinction as to worship of angels and saints, to meet the case as our
author puts it here. But the vulgar cannot so distinguish; and
everywhere, *practically*, this *latria* is offered. See Pius IX., the
bull *Ineffabilis*.—C.\]

<span id="fn_5681"></span>[628:5682](1080169.htm#fr_5681) <span
id="ii.CXXXVI-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXXVI-p17"></span> [1 Cor.
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#006)<span id="ii.CXXXVI-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5682"></span>[628:5683](1080169.htm#fr_5682) <span
id="ii.CXXXVI-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXXVI-p19"></span> *Facienti mirabilia*.

<span id="fn_5683"></span>[628:5684](1080169.htm#fr_5683) <span
id="ii.CXXXVI-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXXVI-p20"></span> [Ps. cxxxvi.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#005)<span id="ii.CXXXVI-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5684"></span>[629:5685](1080169.htm#fr_5684) <span
id="ii.CXXXVI-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXXVI-p21"></span> [Gen. i.
31](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#031)<span id="ii.CXXXVI-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5685"></span>[629:5686](1080169.htm#fr_5685) <span
id="ii.CXXXVI-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXXVI-p22"></span> [Wisd. i.
14](../../../bib/apo/wis001.htm#014)<span id="ii.CXXXVI-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5686"></span>[629:5687](1080169.htm#fr_5686) <span
id="ii.CXXXVI-p23.7"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXXVI-p24"></span> *Intelligibiles cœlos*.

<span id="fn_5687"></span>[629:5688](1080169.htm#fr_5687) <span
id="ii.CXXXVI-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXXVI-p26"></span> [Ps. civ.
24](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#024)<span id="ii.CXXXVI-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5688"></span>[629:5689](1080169.htm#fr_5688) <span
id="ii.CXXXVI-p28.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXXVI-p29"></span> [Col. ii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#003)<span id="ii.CXXXVI-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5689"></span>[629:5690](1080169.htm#fr_5689) <span
id="ii.CXXXVI-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXXVI-p30"></span> \[[Job xxviii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#028)<span
id="ii.CXXXVI-p30.1"></span>.—C.\]

<span id="fn_5690"></span>[629:5691](1080169.htm#fr_5690) <span
id="ii.CXXXVI-p30.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXXVI-p31"></span> *Pietas*, Vulg.

<span id="fn_5691"></span>[629:5692](1080169.htm#fr_5691) <span
id="ii.CXXXVI-p31.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXXVI-p32"></span> *Dei cultus*.

<span id="fn_5692"></span>[629:5693](1080169.htm#fr_5692) <span
id="ii.CXXXVI-p32.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXXVI-p33"></span> [Philip. ii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#015)<span id="ii.CXXXVI-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5693"></span>[630:5694](1080169.htm#fr_5693) <span
id="ii.CXXXVI-p34.3"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXXVI-p35"></span> [Isa. liii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#001)<span id="ii.CXXXVI-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5694"></span>[630:5695](1080169.htm#fr_5694) <span
id="ii.CXXXVI-p35.17"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXXVI-p36"></span> [1 Cor.
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#006)<span id="ii.CXXXVI-p36.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm CXXXVII](1080170)
