[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080156)  [Next](1080158) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.CXXIV"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXIV-p1"></span> <span id="ii.CXXIV-p1.1"></span><span
class="c20"><span id="ii.CXXIV-p1.2"></span>Psalm CXXIV. <span
id="fr_5459"></span>[5460](#fn_5459) </span>

<span id="ii.CXXIV-p3"></span>1. Ye already well know, dearest brethren,
that a “Song of Degrees,” is a song of our ascent: and that this ascent
is not effected by <span id="page_599">p. 599</span> <span
id="ii.CXXIV-Page_599"></span>the feet of the body, but by the
affections of the heart. This we have repeatedly reminded you of: and we
need not repeat it too often, that there may be room for saying what
hath not yet been said. This Psalm, therefore, which ye have now heard
sung for you, <span id="fr_5460"></span>[5461](#fn_5460) is inscribed,
“A Song of Degrees.” This is its title. They sing therefore while
ascending: and sometimes as it were one man singeth, sometimes as it
were many; because many are one, since Christ is One, and in Christ the
members of Christ constitute one with Christ, and the Head of all these
members is in heaven. But although the body toileth on earth, it is not
cut off from its Head; for the Head looketh down from above, and
regardeth the body.  <span id="fr_5461"></span>[5462](#fn_5461) …Whether
therefore one or many sing; many men are one man, because it is unity;
and Christ, as we have said, is One, and all Christians are members of
Christ.

<span id="ii.CXXIV-p6"></span>2. …Certain members indeed of that body of
which we also are, which can sing in truth, have gone before us. And
this the holy Martyrs have sung: for they have already escaped, and are
with Christ in joy about to receive at last incorruptible bodies, the
very same which were at first corruptible, wherein they have suffered
pains; of the same there will be made for them ornaments of
righteousness. Therefore whether they in reality, or we in hope, joining
our affections with their crowns, and longing for such a life as we have
not here, and shall never gain unless we have longed for it here, let us
all sing together, and say, “If the Lord Himself had not been in us.”…

<span id="ii.CXXIV-p7"></span>3. “If the Lord Himself had not been in
us, now may Israel say” ([Psa.
124.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa124.htm#001)<span
id="ii.CXXIV-p7.1"></span>)…When? “When men rose up against us” ([Psa.
124.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa124.htm#002)<span
id="ii.CXXIV-p7.2"></span>). Marvel not: they have been subdued: for
they were men; but the Lord was in us, man was not in us: for men rose
up against us. Nevertheless men would crush other men, unless in those
men who could not be crushed, there were not man, but the Lord. For what
could men do to you, while ye rejoiced, and sang, and securely held
everlasting bliss? what could men do to you when they rose against you,
if the Lord had not been on your side? what could they do? “Perchance
they had swallowed us up quick” ([Psa.
124.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa124.htm#003)<span
id="ii.CXXIV-p7.3"></span>). “Swallowed us up:” <span
id="fr_5462"></span>[5463](#fn_5462) they would not first have slain us,
and so have swallowed us up. O inhuman, O cruel men! The Church
swalloweth not thus. <span id="fr_5463"></span>[5464](#fn_5463) To Peter
it was said, “*Kill* and eat:” <span
id="fr_5464"></span>[5465](#fn_5464) not, Swallow quick. Because no man
entereth into the body of the Church, save he be slain first. <span
id="fr_5465"></span>[5466](#fn_5465) What he was dieth, that he may be
what he was not. Otherwise, he who is not slain, and is not eaten by the
Church, may be in the visible number of the people: but he cannot be in
the number of the people which is known to God, whereof the Apostle
saith, “The Lord knoweth who are His,” <span
id="fr_5466"></span>[5467](#fn_5466) save he be eaten; and eaten he
cannot be, save he first be slain. The Pagan cometh, still in him
idolatry liveth; he must be grafted among the members of Christ: that he
may be engrafted, he must needs be eaten; but he cannot be eaten by the
Church, save first he be slain. Let him renounce the world, then is he
slain; let him believe in God, then is he eaten…But they in whom the
Lord is, are slain and die not. But they who consent <span
id="fr_5467"></span>[5468](#fn_5467) and live, are swallowed quick, when
swallowed up they die. But they who have suffered, and have not yielded
to tribulations, rejoice and say, “If the Lord had not been in us,” etc.

<span id="ii.CXXIV-p14"></span>4. …“When their fury was enraged upon
us.” They are now in anger, they now openly rage: “perchance the water
had drowned us” ([Psa. 124.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa124.htm#004)<span
id="ii.CXXIV-p14.1"></span>). By water he meaneth ungodly nations: and
we shall see what sort of water in the following verses. Whoever had
consented unto them, water would have overwhelmed him. For he would die
by the death of the Egyptians, he would not pass through after the
example of the Israelites. For ye know, brethren, that the people of
Israel passed through the water, by which the Egyptians were
overwhelmed. <span id="fr_5468"></span>[5469](#fn_5468) But what sort of
water is this? It is a torrent, it flows with violence, but it will pass
by…Hence He, our Head, first drinketh, of whom it is said in the Psalms,
“He shall drink of the torrent in the way: therefore shall He lift up
His head.” For our Head is already exalted, because He drank of the
torrent by the way; for our Lord hath suffered. If therefore our Head
hath been already raised up, why doth the body fear the torrent? Without
doubt, because the Head hath been raised, the body also will say
hereafter, “Our soul hath passed over the torrent. Perhaps our soul hath
passed over the water without substance” ([Psa.
124.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa124.htm#005)<span
id="ii.CXXIV-p15.2"></span>). Behold, what sort of water he was speaking
of, “The water perchance had overwhelmed us.” But what meaneth, “without
substance”?

<span id="ii.CXXIV-p16"></span>5. In the first place, what
meaneth, <span id="fr_5469"></span>[5470](#fn_5469) “Per<span
id="page_600">p. 600</span> <span id="ii.CXXIV-Page_600"></span>chance
our soul hath passed over”? ([Psa.
124.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa124.htm#005)<span
id="ii.CXXIV-p17.3"></span>). Understand however the meaning to be this:
“Thinkest thou our soul hath passed over?” and why do they say,
“Thinkest thou”? Because the greatness of the danger maketh it hardly
credible that he hath escaped. They have endured a great death: they
have been in great dangers; they have been so much oppressed, that they
almost gave consent while alive, and were all but swallowed up alive:
now therefore that they have escaped, now that they are secure, but
still remember the danger, the great danger, say, “Thinkest thou our
soul hath passed over the water without substance?”

<span id="ii.CXXIV-p18"></span>6. What is the water without substance,
save the water of sins without substance? For sins have not substance:
they have destitution, not substance; they have want, not substance. In
that water without substance, the younger son lost the whole of his
substance…Dost thou wish to see how the water is without substance? Take
away with thee to the world below what thou hast acquired: what wilt
thou do? Thou hast acquired gold: thou hast lost thy faith: after a few
days thou leavest this life; thou canst not take away with thee the gold
thou hast acquired by the loss of thy good faith; thy heart, destitute
of faith, goeth forth into punishment—thy heart, which if full of faith,
would go forth unto a crown. Behold, what thou hast done is nothing: and
thou hast offended God for nothing.

<span id="ii.CXXIV-p19"></span>7. Men hear that common proverb; and the
proverbs of God slumber in them. What proverb? “Better in hand than in
hope.” <span id="fr_5470"></span>[5471](#fn_5470) Unhappy man, what hast
thou in hand? Thou sayest, “Better in hand.” Hold it so as not to lose
it, and then say, “Better in hand.” But if thou holdest it not, why dost
thou not hold fast that which thou canst not lose? What then hast thou
in hand? Gold. Keep it in hand, therefore: if thou hast it in hand, let
it not be taken away without thy consent. But if through gold also thou
art carried where thou wishest not, and if a more powerful robber
seeketh thee, because he findeth thee a less powerful robber; if a
stronger eagle pursue thee, because thou hast carried off a hare before
him: the lesser was thy prey, thou wilt be a prey unto the greater. Men
see not these things in human affairs: by so much avarice are they
blinded…

<span id="ii.CXXIV-p21"></span>8. Let them escape the water without
substance, and say, “Blessed be the Lord, who hath not given us over for
a prey unto their teeth” ([Psa.
124.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa124.htm#006)<span
id="ii.CXXIV-p21.1"></span>). For the hunters were following, and had
placed a bait in their trap. What bait? The sweetness of this life, so
that each man for the sake of the sweetness of this life may thrust his
head into iniquity, and be caught in the trap. Not they, in whom the
Lord was, they who say, “If the Lord Himself had not been in us;” they
have not been taken in the trap. Let the Lord be in thee, and thou wilt
not be taken in the trap.

<span id="ii.CXXIV-p22"></span>9. “Our soul is escaped, even as a bird
out of the snare of the fowlers” ([Psa.
124.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa124.htm#007)<span
id="ii.CXXIV-p22.1"></span>). Because the Lord was in the soul itself,
therefore hath that soul escaped, even as a bird out of the snare of the
fowler. Why like a bird? Because it had fallen heedlessly, like a bird;
and it could say afterwards, God will forgive me. Unstable bird, rather
set thy feet firm upon the rock: go not into the trap. Thou wilt be
taken, consumed, crushed. Let the Lord be in thee, and He will deliver
thee from greater threats, from the snare of the fowlers. As if thou
wert to see a bird about to fall into a snare, thou makest a greater
noise that it may fly away from the net; so also, when perhaps some even
of the Martyrs were stretching out their neck after the enjoyment of
this life, the Lord, who was in them, made the noise of hell, and the
bird was delivered from the snare of the fowlers. The snare was the
sweetness of this life: they were not entangled in the snare, and were
slain; by their slaughter the net was broken; no longer did the
sweetness of this life remain, that they might again be entangled by it,
but it was crushed. Was the bird also crushed? Far be it! for it was not
in the snare: “The snare is broken, and we are delivered.”

<span id="ii.CXXIV-p23"></span>10. …“Our help standeth in the Name of
the Lord, who hath made heaven and earth” ([Psa.
124.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa124.htm#008)<span
id="ii.CXXIV-p23.1"></span>). For if this were not our help, the snare
would not indeed remain for ever; but when the bird was once taken, it
would be crushed. For this life will pass away; and they who shall have
been taken in by its pleasures, and through these pleasures have
offended God, will pass away with this life. For the snare will be
broken; be ye assured of this: all the sweetness of this present life
will no longer exist, when the lot assigned to it hath been fulfilled;
but we must not be enthralled by it, so that when the net is broken,
thou mayest then rejoice and say, “The snare is broken, and we are
delivered.” But lest thou think that thou canst do this of thy own
strength, consider whose work thy deliverance is (for if thou art proud,
thou fallest into the snare), and say, “Our help standeth in the Name of
the Lord, who hath made heaven and earth.”…

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5459"></span>[598:5460](1080157.htm#fr_5459) <span
id="ii.CXXIV-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXIV-p2"></span> Lat. CXXIII. A sermon to the people.

<span id="fn_5460"></span>[599:5461](1080157.htm#fr_5460) <span
id="ii.CXXIV-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXIV-p4"></span> \[“*Unto* you,” in Oxford ed., which is
not necessarily the sense of the original: *quem nunc vobis cantatum
audistis*.—C.\]

<span id="fn_5461"></span>[599:5462](1080157.htm#fr_5461) <span
id="ii.CXXIV-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXIV-p5"></span> [Acts ix.
4](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#004)<span id="ii.CXXIV-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5462"></span>[599:5463](1080157.htm#fr_5462) <span
id="ii.CXXIV-p7.4"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXIV-p8"></span> \[*i.e*., alive: *vivos
absorbuissent*.—C.\]

<span id="fn_5463"></span>[599:5464](1080157.htm#fr_5463) <span
id="ii.CXXIV-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXIV-p9"></span> \[Compare [Ps. xxxv.
25](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#025)<span id="ii.CXXIV-p9.1"></span>, p.
86, *supra*.—C.\]

<span id="fn_5464"></span>[599:5465](1080157.htm#fr_5464) <span
id="ii.CXXIV-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXIV-p10"></span> [Acts x.
13](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#013)<span id="ii.CXXIV-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5465"></span>[599:5466](1080157.htm#fr_5465) <span
id="ii.CXXIV-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXIV-p11"></span> \[“Ye are dead,” [Col. iii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#003)<span
id="ii.CXXIV-p11.1"></span>.—C.\]

<span id="fn_5466"></span>[599:5467](1080157.htm#fr_5466) <span
id="ii.CXXIV-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXIV-p12"></span> [2 Tim. ii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#019)<span id="ii.CXXIV-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5467"></span>[599:5468](1080157.htm#fr_5467) <span
id="ii.CXXIV-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXIV-p13"></span> \[*i.e*., to sacrifice to idols.—C.\]

<span id="fn_5468"></span>[599:5469](1080157.htm#fr_5468) <span
id="ii.CXXIV-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXIV-p15"></span> [Exod. xiv.
22-29](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#022)<span
id="ii.CXXIV-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5469"></span>[599:5470](1080157.htm#fr_5469) <span
id="ii.CXXIV-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXIV-p17"></span> Gesenius, *Monum. Phœn*. p. 390, thinks
both may be from the first root, signifying “difficulty;” or the latter
possibly=ארְיַ, ארֶי” “let one see.” \[Our author says: “The Latin
interpreters have thus rendered as far as they were able the Greek word
ˆ<span class="Greek"><span id="ii.CXXIV-p17.1"></span>ρα</span>. For
thus the Greek copies have it; ˆρα: and as it is an expression of doubt,
it is rendered by an expression of doubt, the word ‘perchance’
(*fortasse*): but this is not the exact sense. We may express this Greek
word by one not so Latin in its use, but adapted to your comprehension.
The Punic word, *iar*, I mean not that which signifieth a wood, but the
expression of doubt, is the Greek ˆ<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.CXXIV-p17.2"></span>ρα</span>. This the Latins may or usually do
express by *Putas*: as in this instance, Dost thou think (*putas*) I
have escaped this? If we say, Perchance I have escaped, ye see that it
hath not this meaning: but the word, Thinkest thou, is commonly used:
but not in Latin in this sense. Although I may use it, when expounding
to you; for I often use words that are not Latin, that ye may
understand. But in Scripture this could not be used, because it was not
Latin; and as Latin failed, that was used for it which had not this
meaning.”—C.\]

<span id="fn_5470"></span>[600:5471](1080157.htm#fr_5470) <span
id="ii.CXXIV-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXIV-p20"></span> *Malo quod teneo, quam quod spero*.
\[Eng. “A bird in the hand,” etc.—C.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm CXXV](1080158)
