[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080071)  [Next](1080073) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.LXI"></span>

<span id="ii.LXI-p1"></span> <span id="ii.LXI-p1.1"></span><span
class="c20"><span id="ii.LXI-p1.2"></span>Psalm LXI. <span
id="fr_2335"></span>[2336](#fn_2335) </span>

<span id="ii.LXI-p3"></span>1. The title of it doth not detain us. For
it is “Unto the end, in hymns, to David himself. “In hymns,” to wit in
praises. “Unto the end,” to wit unto Christ.…But the voice in this Psalm
(if we are among the members of Him, and in the Body, even as upon His
exhortation we have the boldness to trust) we ought to acknowledge to be
our own, not that of any foreigner. But I have not so called it our own,
as if it were of those only that are now in presence; but our own, as
being of us that are throughout the whole world, that are from the East
even unto the West. And in order that ye may know it thus to be our
voice, He speaketh here as if one Man: but He is not One Man; but even
as One, the Unity is speaking. But in Christ we all are one man: because
of this One <span id="page_249">p. 249</span> <span
id="ii.LXI-Page_249"></span>Man the Head is in Heaven, and the members
are yet toiling on earth: and because they are toiling see what He
saith. <span id="fr_2336"></span>[2337](#fn_2336)

<span id="ii.LXI-p5"></span>2. “Hearken, O God, to my supplication, give
heed to my prayer” ([Psa. 61.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa061.htm#001)<span
id="ii.LXI-p5.1"></span>). Who saith? He, as if One. See whether one:
“From the ends of the earth to Thee I have cried, while my heart was
being vexed” ([Psa. 61.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa061.htm#002)<span
id="ii.LXI-p5.2"></span>). Now therefore not one: but for this reason
one, because Christ is One, of whom all we are the members. For what one
man crieth from the ends of the earth? There crieth not from the ends of
the earth any but that inheritance, of which hath been said to the Son
Himself, “Demand of Me, and I will give to Thee the nations for Thine
inheritance, and for Thy possession the boundaries of the earth.” <span
id="fr_2337"></span>[2338](#fn_2337) This therefore Christ’s possession,
this Christ’s inheritance, this Christ’s Body, this Christ’s one Church,
this the Unity which we are, is crying from the ends of the earth.…But
wherefore have I cried this thing? “While my heart was being vexed.” He
showeth himself to be throughout all nations in the whole round world,
in great glory, but in great tribulation. For our life in this
sojourning cannot be without temptation: because our advance is made
through our temptation, nor does a man become known to himself unless
tempted, nor can he be crowned except he shall have conquered, nor can
he conquer except he shall have striven, nor can he strive except he
shall have experienced an enemy, and temptations. This Man therefore is
being vexed, that from the ends of the earth is crying, but nevertheless
He is not forsaken. For ourselves who are His Body He hath willed to
prefigure also in that His Body wherein already He hath both died and
hath risen again, and into Heaven hath ascended, in order that whither
the Head hath gone before, thither the members may be assured that they
shall follow. Therefore us He did transfer by a figure into Himself,
when He willed to be tempted of Satan.

<span id="ii.LXI-p7"></span>3. But now there was read in the Gospel, how
the Lord Jesus Christ in the wilderness was being tempted of the
devil. <span id="fr_2338"></span>[2339](#fn_2338) Christ entirely was
tempted of the devil. For in Christ thou wast being tempted, because
Christ of thee had for Himself flesh, of Himself for thee salvation; of
thee for Himself death, of Himself for thee life; of thee for Himself
revilings, of Himself for thee honours; therefore of thee for Himself
temptation, of Himself for thee victory. If in Him tempted we have been,
in Him we overcome the devil.…“On the Rock Thou hast exalted me.” Now
therefore here we perceive who is crying from the ends of the earth. Let
us call to mind the Gospel: “Upon this Rock I will build My
Church.” <span id="fr_2339"></span>[2340](#fn_2339) Therefore She crieth
from the ends of the earth, whom He hath willed to be builded upon a
Rock. But in order that the Church might be builded upon the Rock, who
was made the Rock? Hear Paul saying: “But the Rock was Christ.” <span
id="fr_2340"></span>[2341](#fn_2340) On Him therefore builded we have
been. For this reason that Rock whereon we have been builded, <span
id="fr_2341"></span>[2342](#fn_2341) first hath been smitten with winds,
flood, rain, when Christ of the devil was being tempted. Behold on what
firmness He hath willed to stablish thee. With reason our voice is not
in vain, but is hearkened unto: for on great hope we have been set: “On
the Rock Thou hast exalted me.”…

<span id="ii.LXI-p12"></span>4. “Thou hast led me down, because Thou
hast been made my hope: a tower of strength from the face of the enemy”
([Psa. 61.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa061.htm#003)<span
id="ii.LXI-p12.1"></span>). My heart is vexed, saith that Unity from the
ends of the earth, and I toil amid temptations and offences: the heathen
envy, because they have been conquered; the heretics lie in wait, hidden
in the cloak of the Christian name: within in the Church itself the
wheat suffereth violence from the chaff: amid all these things when my
heart is vexed, I will cry from the ends of the earth. But there
forsaketh me not the Same that hath exalted me upon the Rock, in order
to lead me down even unto Himself, because even if I labour, while the
devil through so many places and times and occasions lieth in wait
against me, He is to me a tower of strength, to whom when I shall have
fled for refuge, not only I shall escape the weapons of the enemy, but
even against him securely I shall myself hurl whatever darts I shall
please. For Christ Himself is the tower, Himself for us hath been made a
tower from the face of the enemy, who is also the Rock whereon hath been
builded the Church. Art thou taking heed that thou be not smitten of the
devil? Flee to the Tower; never to that tower will the devil’s darts
follow thee: there thou wilt stand protected and fixed. But in what
manner shalt thou flee to the Tower? Let not a man, set perchance in
temptation, in body seek that Tower, and when he shall not have found
it, be wearied, or faint in temptation. Before thee is the Tower: call
to mind Christ, and go into the Tower.  <span
id="fr_2342"></span>[2343](#fn_2342) …

<span id="ii.LXI-p14"></span>5. “A sojourner I will be in Thy tabernacle
even unto ages” ([Psa. 61.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa061.htm#004)<span
id="ii.LXI-p14.1"></span>). Ye see how he, of whom we have spoken, is he
that crieth. Which of us is a sojourner even unto ages? For a few days
here we live, and we pass away: for sojourners here we are, inhabitants
in Heaven we shall be. Thou art a sojourner in that place where thou art
to hear the voice of the Lord <span id="page_250">p. 250</span> <span
id="ii.LXI-Page_250"></span>thy God, “Remove.” For from that Home
everlasting in the Heavens no one will bid thee to remove. Here
therefore a sojourner thou art. Whence also is said in another Psalm, “A
sojourner I am with Thee and a stranger, as all my fathers were.” <span
id="fr_2343"></span>[2344](#fn_2343) Here therefore sojourners we are;
there the Lord shall give to us mansions everlasting: “Many are,” He
saith, “the mansions in My Father’s house.”  <span
id="fr_2344"></span>[2345](#fn_2344) Those mansions not as though to
sojourners He will give, but as though to citizens to abide for
everlasting. Here however, brethren, because for no small time the
Church was to be on this earth, but because here shall be the Church
even unto the end of the world: <span
id="fr_2345"></span>[2346](#fn_2345) therefore here He hath said, “A
dweller I will be in Thy tabernacle even unto ages.” <span
id="fr_2346"></span>[2347](#fn_2346) …Well, of a few days thou wouldest
choose that the temptations should be: but how would She gather together
all Her sons, unless for a long time She were to be here, unless even
unto the end She were to be prolonged? Do not envy the rest of mankind
that hereafter shall be: do not, because thou hast already passed over,
wish to cut down the bridge of mercy: <span
id="fr_2347"></span>[2348](#fn_2347) be it here even for ever. And what
of temptations, which needs must abound, by how much the more offences
come? For Himself saith, “Because iniquity hath abounded, the love of
many shall wax cold.” <span id="fr_2348"></span>[2349](#fn_2348) But
that Church, which crieth from the ends of the earth, is in these
circumstances whereof he speaketh in continuation. “But he that shall
have persevered even unto the end, the same shall be saved.” But whence
shalt thou persevere?…“I shall be covered up in the veiling of Thy
wings.” Behold the reason why we are in safety amid so great
temptations, until there come the end of the world, and ages everlasting
receive us; namely, because we are covered up in the veiling of His
Wings. There is heat in the world, but there is a great shade under the
wings of God.

<span id="ii.LXI-p21"></span>6. “For Thou, O God, hast hearkened to my
prayer” ([Psa. 61.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa061.htm#005)<span
id="ii.LXI-p21.1"></span>). What prayer? That wherewith he beginneth:
“Hearken, O God, to my supplication.”…“Thou hast given inheritance to
men fearing Thy name.” Let us continue therefore in the fear of God’s
name: the eternal Father deceiveth us not. Sons labour, that they may
receive the inheritance of their parents, to whom when dead they are to
succeed: are we not labouring to receive an inheritance from that
Father, to whom not dying we succeed; but together with Him in the very
inheritance for everlasting are to live?

<span id="ii.LXI-p22"></span>7. “Days upon days of the King Thou shalt
add to the years of Him” ([Psa.
61.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa061.htm#006)<span id="ii.LXI-p22.1"></span>).
This is therefore the King of whom we are the members. A King Christ is,
our Head, our King. Thou hast given to Him days upon days; not only
those days in that time that hath end, but days upon those days without
end. “I will dwell,” he saith, “in the house of the Lord, for length of
days.” <span id="fr_2349"></span>[2350](#fn_2349) Wherefore for length
of days, but because now is the shortness of days? For everything which
hath an end, is short: but of this King are days upon days, so that not
only while these days pass away, Christ reigneth in His Church, but the
Saints shall reign together with Him in those days which have no
end.…For years of God have been also spoken of: “But Thou art the very
Same, and Thy years shall not fail.” <span
id="fr_2350"></span>[2351](#fn_2350) In the same manner as years, so
days, so one day. Whatsoever thou wilt thou sayest of eternity. Whatever
thou wilt thou sayest for this reason, because whatever thou shalt have
said, it is too little that thou hast said. For thou must needs say
somewhat, to the end that there may be something whereby thou mayest
meditate on that which cannot be told. “Even unto the day of generation
and of generation.” Of this generation and of the generation that shall
be: of this generation which is compared to the moon, because as the
moon is new, waxeth, is full, waneth, and vanisheth, so are these mortal
generations; and of the generation wherein we are born anew by rising
again, and shall abide for everlasting with God, when now no longer we
are like the moon, but like that of which saith the Lord, “Then the
righteous shall shine like the sun in the kingdom of their
Father.” <span id="fr_2351"></span>[2352](#fn_2351) For the moon by a
figure in the Scriptures is put for the mutability of this mortal
state.…

<span id="ii.LXI-p26"></span>8. “He shall abide for everlasting in the
sight of God” ([Psa. 61.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa061.htm#007)<span
id="ii.LXI-p26.1"></span>); according to what, or because of what? “His
mercy and truth who shall seek for Him?” He saith also in another place,
“All the ways of the Lord are mercy and truth, to men seeking His
testament and His testimonies.” <span
id="fr_2352"></span>[2353](#fn_2352) Large is the discourse of truth and
mercy, but shortness we have promised. Briefly hear ye what is truth and
mercy: because no small thing is that which hath been said, “All the
ways of the Lord are mercy and truth.” Mercy is spoken of, because our
merits God regarded not, but His own goodness, in order that He might
forgive us all our sins, and might promise life everlasting: but truth
is spoken of, because He faileth not to render those things which He
hath promised. Let us acknowledge it here, and let us do it; so that,
just as to us God hath shown forth His mercy and His truth, mercy in
forgiving our sins, truth in showing forth His promises; so also, I say,
let us execute mercy and truth, mercy concerning the weak, <span
id="page_251">p. 251</span> <span id="ii.LXI-Page_251"></span>concerning
the needy, concerning even our enemies; truth in not sinning, and in not
adding sin upon sin.…Who is therefore he that doeth this, save one out
of those few, of whom is said, “He that shall have continued unto the
end, the same shall be saved”? With reason here also “His mercy and
truth who shall seek for Him?” Why is there “for Him”? “Who shall seek,”
would be sufficient. Why hath he added, “for Him,” but because many men
seek to learn His mercy and truth in His books? And when they have
learned, for themselves they live, not for Him; <span
id="fr_2353"></span>[2354](#fn_2353) their own things they seek, not the
things which are of Jesus Christ: <span
id="fr_2354"></span>[2355](#fn_2354) they preach mercy and truth, and do
not mercy and truth. But by preaching it, they know it: for they would
not preach it, unless they knew it. But he that loveth God and Christ,
in preaching the mercy and truth of the Same, doth himself seek her for
Him, not for himself: that is, not in order that himself may have by
this preaching temporal advantages, but in order that he may do good to
His members, that is, His faithful ones, by ministering with truth of
that which he knoweth: in order that he that liveth, no longer for
himself may live, but for Him that for all men hath died. <span
id="fr_2355"></span>[2356](#fn_2355)

<span id="ii.LXI-p31"></span>9. “So I will play music to Thy name, that
I may render my vows from day unto day” ([Psa.
61.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa061.htm#008)<span id="ii.LXI-p31.1"></span>).
If thou playest music to the name of God, play not for a time. Wilt thou
for ever play? wilt thou for everlasting play? Render to Him thy vows
from day unto day. What is, render to Him thy vows from day unto day?
From this day unto that day. Continue to render vows in this day, until
thou come to that day: that is, “He that shall have continued even unto
the end, the same shall be saved.” <span
id="fr_2356"></span>[2357](#fn_2356)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2335"></span>[248:2336](1080072.htm#fr_2335) <span
id="ii.LXI-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.LXI-p2"></span> Lat. LX. Sermon to the Commonalty.

<span id="fn_2336"></span>[249:2337](1080072.htm#fr_2336) <span
id="ii.LXI-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXI-p4"></span> Or, “they say,” <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.LXI-p4.1"></span> mss</span>.

<span id="fn_2337"></span>[249:2338](1080072.htm#fr_2337) <span
id="ii.LXI-p5.3"></span>

<span id="ii.LXI-p6"></span> [Ps. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#008)<span id="ii.LXI-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2338"></span>[249:2339](1080072.htm#fr_2338) <span
id="ii.LXI-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXI-p8"></span> [Matt. iv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#001)<span id="ii.LXI-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2339"></span>[249:2340](1080072.htm#fr_2339) <span
id="ii.LXI-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXI-p9"></span> [Matt. xvi.
18](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#018)<span id="ii.LXI-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2340"></span>[249:2341](1080072.htm#fr_2340) <span
id="ii.LXI-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXI-p10"></span> [1 Cor. x.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#004)<span id="ii.LXI-p10.1"></span>.
\[Rhetorically he may say this of Cephas; but as of Peter’s confession
elsewhere, so here, *dogmatically* he understands only Christ. Compare
p. 223, *supra*.—C.\]

<span id="fn_2341"></span>[249:2342](1080072.htm#fr_2341) <span
id="ii.LXI-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXI-p11"></span> [Matt. vii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#024)<span id="ii.LXI-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2342"></span>[249:2343](1080072.htm#fr_2342) <span
id="ii.LXI-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXI-p13"></span> \[[Zech. ix.
12](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#012)<span
id="ii.LXI-p13.1"></span>.—C.\]

<span id="fn_2343"></span>[250:2344](1080072.htm#fr_2343) <span
id="ii.LXI-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXI-p15"></span> [Ps. xxxix.
12](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#012)<span id="ii.LXI-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2344"></span>[250:2345](1080072.htm#fr_2344) <span
id="ii.LXI-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXI-p16"></span> [John xiv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#002)<span id="ii.LXI-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2345"></span>[250:2346](1080072.htm#fr_2345) <span
id="ii.LXI-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXI-p17"></span> *Sæculi*.

<span id="fn_2346"></span>[250:2347](1080072.htm#fr_2346) <span
id="ii.LXI-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXI-p18"></span> *Sæcula*.

<span id="fn_2347"></span>[250:2348](1080072.htm#fr_2347) <span
id="ii.LXI-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXI-p19"></span> Many omit “of mercy.”

<span id="fn_2348"></span>[250:2349](1080072.htm#fr_2348) <span
id="ii.LXI-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXI-p20"></span> [Matt. xxiv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#012)<span id="ii.LXI-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2349"></span>[250:2350](1080072.htm#fr_2349) <span
id="ii.LXI-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXI-p23"></span> [Ps. xxvii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#004)<span id="ii.LXI-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2350"></span>[250:2351](1080072.htm#fr_2350) <span
id="ii.LXI-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXI-p24"></span> [Ps. cii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#027)<span id="ii.LXI-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2351"></span>[250:2352](1080072.htm#fr_2351) <span
id="ii.LXI-p24.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXI-p25"></span> [Matt. xiii.
43](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#043)<span id="ii.LXI-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2352"></span>[250:2353](1080072.htm#fr_2352) <span
id="ii.LXI-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXI-p27"></span> [Ps. xxv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#010)<span id="ii.LXI-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2353"></span>[251:2354](1080072.htm#fr_2353) <span
id="ii.LXI-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXI-p28"></span> [2 Cor. v.
15](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#015)<span id="ii.LXI-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2354"></span>[251:2355](1080072.htm#fr_2354) <span
id="ii.LXI-p28.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXI-p29"></span> [Philip. ii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#021)<span id="ii.LXI-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2355"></span>[251:2356](1080072.htm#fr_2355) <span
id="ii.LXI-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXI-p30"></span> [2 Cor. v.
15](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#015)<span id="ii.LXI-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2356"></span>[251:2357](1080072.htm#fr_2356) <span
id="ii.LXI-p31.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXI-p32"></span> [Matt. xxiv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#013)<span id="ii.LXI-p32.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm LXII](1080073)
