[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080041)  [Next](1080043.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.XXXVII.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVII.1-p1"></span> <span
id="ii.XXXVII.1-p1.1"></span><span class="c20"><span
id="ii.XXXVII.1-p1.2"></span>Psalm XXXVII. <span
id="fr_847"></span>[848](#fn_847.md) </span>

<span id="ii.XXXVII.1-p3"></span>On the first part of the psalm.

<span id="ii.XXXVII.1-p4"></span>1. With terror do they hear of the
coming of the last day, who will not be secure by living well: and who
fain would live ill, long. But it was for useful purposes that God
willed that day to remain unknown; that the heart may be ever ready to
expect that of which it knows it is to come, but knows not when it is to
come. Seeing, however, that our Lord Jesus Christ was sent to us to be
our “Master,” <span id="fr_848"></span>[849](#fn_848.md) He said, that “of
the day not even the Son of Man knew,” <span
id="fr_849"></span>[850](#fn_849.md) because it was not part of His office
as our Master that through Him it should become known to us. For indeed
the Father knoweth nothing that the Son knoweth not; since that is the
Very Knowledge of the Father Itself, which is His Wisdom; now His Son,
His Word, is “His Wisdom.” But because it was not for our good to know
that, which however was known to Him who came indeed to teach us, though
not to teach us that which it was not good for us to know, He not only,
as a Master, taught us something, but also, as a Master, left something
untaught. For, as a Master, He knew how both to teach us what was good
for us, and not to teach us what was injurious. Now thus, according to a
certain form of speech, the Son <span id="fr_850"></span>[851](#fn_850.md)
is said not to know what He does not teach: that is, in the same way
that we are daily in the habit of speaking, He is said not to know what
He causes us not to know. <span id="fr_851"></span>[852](#fn_851.md) …

<span id="ii.XXXVII.1-p9"></span>2. This it is that disturbs you who are
a Christian; that you see men of bad lives prospering, and surrounded
with abundance of things like these; you see them sound in health,
distinguished with proud honours; you see their family unvisited by
misfortune; the happiness of their relatives, the obsequious attendance
of their dependants, their most commanding influence, their life
uninterrupted by any sad event; you see their characters most
profligate, their external resources most affluent; and your heart says
that there is no Divine judgment; that all things are carried to and fro
by accidents, and blown about in disorderly and irregular motions. For
if God, thou sayest, regarded human affairs, would his iniquity
flourish, and my innocence suffer? Every sickness of the soul hath in
Scripture its proper remedy. Let him then whose sickness is of that kind
that he says in his heart things like these, let him drink this Psalm by
way of potion.…

<span id="ii.XXXVII.1-p10"></span>3. “Be not envious because of
evil-doers, neither be envious against the workers of iniquity” ([Psa.
37.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#001.md)<span
id="ii.XXXVII.1-p10.1"></span>). “For they shall soon wither like the
grass, and shall fade like the herbs of the meadow” ([Psa.
37.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#002.md)<span
id="ii.XXXVII.1-p10.2"></span>). That which to thee seemeth long, is
“soon” in the sight of God. Conform <span
id="fr_852"></span>[853](#fn_852.md) thou thyself to God; and it will be
“soon” to thee. That which he here calls “grass,” that we understand by
the “herbs of the meadow.” They are some worthless things, occupying the
surface only of the ground, they have no depth of root. In the winter
then they are green; but when the summer sun shall begin to scorch, they
will wither away. For now it is the season of winter. Thy glory doth not
as yet appear. But if thy love hath but a deep root, like that of many
trees during winter, the frost passes away, the summer (that is, the Day
of Judgment) will come; then will the greenness of the grass wither
away. Then will the glory of the trees appear. “For ye” (saith the
Apostle) “are dead,” <span id="fr_853"></span>[854](#fn_853.md) even as
trees seem to be in winter, as it were dead, as it were withered. What
is our hope then, if we are dead? The root is within; where our root is,
there is our life also, for there our love is fixed. “And your life is
hid with Christ in God.” <span id="fr_854"></span>[855](#fn_854.md) When
shall he <span id="page_92">p. 92</span> <span
id="ii.XXXVII.1-Page_92"></span>wither who is thus rooted? But when will
our spring be? When our summer? When will the honour of foliage clothe
us around, and the fulness of fruit make us rich? When shall this come
to pass? Hear what follows: “When Christ, who is our life, shall appear,
then shall ye also appear with Him in glory.” And what then shall we do
now? “Be not envious because of the evil-doers, neither be envious
against the workers of iniquity. For they shall soon wither like the
grass, and fade like the herb of the meadow.”

<span id="ii.XXXVII.1-p14"></span>4. What shouldest thou do then? “Trust
in the Lord” ([Psa. 37.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#003.md)<span
id="ii.XXXVII.1-p14.1"></span>). For they too trust, but not “in the
Lord.” Their hope is perishable. Their hope is short-lived, frail,
fleeting, transitory, baseless. “Trust thou in the Lord.” “Behold,” thou
sayest, “I do trust; what am I to do?”

<span id="ii.XXXVII.1-p15"></span>“And do good.” Do not do that evil
which thou beholdest in those men, who are prosperous in wickedness. “Do
good, and dwell in the land.” Lest haply thou shouldest be doing good
without “dwelling in the land.” For it is the Church that is the Lord’s
land. It is her whom He, the Father, the tiller of it, waters and
cultivates. For there are many that, as it were, do good works, but yet,
in that they do not “dwell in the land,” they do not belong to the
husbandman. Therefore do thou thy good, not outside of the land, but do
thou “dwell in the land.” And what shall I have?

<span id="ii.XXXVII.1-p16"></span>“And thou shalt be fed in its riches.”
What are the riches of that land? Her riches are her Lord! Her riches
are her God! He it is to whom it is said, “The Lord is the portion of
mine inheritance, and of my cup.” <span
id="fr_855"></span>[856](#fn_855.md) In a late discourse we suggested to
you, dearly beloved, that God is our possession, <span
id="fr_856"></span>[857](#fn_856.md) and that we are at the same time God’s
possession. Hear how that He is Himself the riches of that land.

<span id="ii.XXXVII.1-p19"></span>“Delight thyself in the Lord” ([Psa.
37.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#004.md)<span
id="ii.XXXVII.1-p19.1"></span>). As if thou hadst put the question, and
hadst said “Show me the riches of that land, in which thou biddest me
dwell,” he says, “Delight thyself in the Lord.”

<span id="ii.XXXVII.1-p20"></span>5. “And He shall give thee the desires
of thine heart.” Understand in their proper signification, <span
id="fr_857"></span>[858](#fn_857.md) “the desires of thine heart.”
Distinguish the “desires of thine heart” from the desires of thy flesh;
distinguish as much as thou canst. It is not without a meaning that it
is said in a certain Psalm, “God is” (the strength) “of mine heart.” For
there it says in what follows: “And God is my portion for ever.” For
instance: One labours under bodily blindness. He asks that he may
receive his sight. Let him ask it; for God does that too, and gives
those blessings also. But these things are asked for even by the wicked.
This is a desire of the flesh. One is sick, and prays to be made sound.
From the point of death he is restored to health. That too is a desire
of the flesh, as are all of such a kind. What is “the desire of the
heart”? As the desire of the flesh is to wish to have one’s eyesight
restored, to enable him, that is, to see that light, which can be seen
by such eyes; so “the desire of the heart” relates to a different sort
of light. For, “Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God.
Delight thou thyself in the Lord; and He shall give thee the desires of
thine heart.”

<span id="ii.XXXVII.1-p22"></span>6. “Behold” (you say), “I do long
after it, I do ask for it, I do desire it. Shall I then accomplish it?”
No. Who shall then? “Reveal thy way unto the Lord: trust also in Him,
and He shall bring it to pass” ([Psa.
37.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#005.md)<span
id="ii.XXXVII.1-p22.1"></span>). Mention to Him what thou sufferest,
mention to Him what thou dost desire. For what is it that thou
sufferest? “The flesh lusteth against the spirit, and the spirit against
the flesh.”  <span id="fr_858"></span>[859](#fn_858.md) What is it then
that thou dost desire? “Wretched man that I am! Who shall deliver me
from the body of this death?” <span id="fr_859"></span>[860](#fn_859.md)
And because it is He “Himself” that “will bring it to pass,” when thou
shalt have “revealed thy ways unto Him;” hear what follows: “The grace
of God through Jesus Christ our Lord.” What is it then that He is to
bring to pass, since it is said, “Reveal thy way unto Him, and He will
bring it to pass”? What will He bring to pass?

<span id="ii.XXXVII.1-p25"></span>“And He shall bring forth thy
righteousness as the light” ([Psa.
37.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#006.md)<span
id="ii.XXXVII.1-p25.1"></span>). For now, “thy righteousness” is hid.
Now it is a thing of faith; not yet of sight. You believe something that
you may do it. You do not yet see that in which you believe. But when
thou shalt begin to see that, which thou didst believe before, “thy
righteousness will be brought forth to the light,” because it is thy
faith that was <span id="fr_860"></span>[861](#fn_860.md) thy
righteousness. For “the just lives by faith.”

<span id="ii.XXXVII.1-p27"></span>7. “And He shall bring forth thy
judgment as the noon-day.” That is to say, “as the clear light.” It was
too little to say, “as the light.” For we call it “light” already, even
when it but dawns: we call it light even while the sun is rising. But
never is the light brighter than at mid-day. Therefore He will not only
“bring forth thy righteousness as the light,” but “thy judgment shall be
as the noon-day.” For now dost thou make thy “judgment” to follow
Christ. This is thy purpose: this is thy choice: this is thy
“judgment.”…

<span id="ii.XXXVII.1-p28"></span>8. “What should I do then?” Hear what
<span id="page_93">p. 93</span> <span
id="ii.XXXVII.1-Page_93"></span>thou shouldest do. “Submit thee to the
Lord, and entreat Him” ([Psa.
37.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#007.md)<span
id="ii.XXXVII.1-p28.1"></span>). Be this thy life, to obey His
commandments. For this is to submit thee to Him; and to entreat Him
until He give thee what He hath promised. Let good works
“continue;” <span id="fr_861"></span>[862](#fn_861.md) let prayer
“continue.” For “men ought always to pray, and not to faint.” <span
id="fr_862"></span>[863](#fn_862.md) Wherein dost thou show that thou art
“submitted to Him”? In doing what He hath commanded. But haply thou dost
not receive thy wages as yet, because as yet thou art not able. For He
is already able to give them; but thou art not already able to receive
them. Exercise thou thyself in works. Labour in the vineyard; at the
close of the day crave thy wages. “Faithful is He” who brought thee into
the vineyard. “Submit thee to the Lord, and entreat Him.”

<span id="ii.XXXVII.1-p31"></span>9. “See! I do so; I do ‘submit to the
Lord, and I do entreat.’ But what do you think? That neighbour of mine
is a wicked man, living a bad life, and prosperous! His thefts,
adulteries, robberies, are known to me. Lifted up above every one,
proud, and raised on high by wickedness, he deigns not to notice me. In
these circumstances, how shall I hold out with patience?” This is a
sickness; drink, by way of remedy. “Fret not thyself because of him who
prospereth in his way.” He prospereth, but it is “in his way:” thou
sufferest, but it is in God’s way! His portion is prosperity on his way,
misery on arriving at its end: yours, toil on the road, happiness in its
termination. “The Lord knoweth the way of the righteous; and the way of
the ungodly shall perish.” <span id="fr_863"></span>[864](#fn_863.md) Thou
walkest those ways which “the Lord knoweth,” and if thou dost suffer
toil in them, they do not deceive thee. The “way of the ungodly” is but
a transitory happiness; at the end of the way the happiness is at an end
also. Why? Because that way is “the broad road;” its termination leads
to the pit of hell. Now, thy way is narrow; and “few there be” that
enter in through it: <span id="fr_864"></span>[865](#fn_864.md) but into
how ample a field it comes at the last, thou oughtest to consider. “Fret
not thyself at him who prospereth in his way; because of the man who
bringeth wicked devices to pass.”

<span id="ii.XXXVII.1-p34"></span>“Cease from anger, and forsake wrath”
([Psa. 37.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#008.md)<span
id="ii.XXXVII.1-p34.1"></span>). Wherefore art thou wroth? Wherefore is
it that, through that passion and indignation, thou dost blaspheme, or
almost blaspheme? Against “the man who bringeth wicked devices to pass,
cease from anger, and forsake wrath.” Knowest thou not whither that
wrath tempts thee on? Thou art on the point of saying unto God, that He
is unjust. It tends to that. “Look! why is that man prosperous, and this
man in adversity?” Consider what thought it begets: stifle the wicked
notion. “Cease from anger, and forsake wrath:” so that now returning to
thy senses, thou mayest say, “Mine eye is disturbed because of
wrath.” <span id="fr_865"></span>[866](#fn_865.md) What eye is that, but
the eye of faith? To the eye of thy faith I appeal. <span
id="fr_866"></span>[867](#fn_866.md) Thou didst believe in Christ: why
didst thou believe? What did He promise thee? If it was the happiness of
this world that Christ promised thee, then murmur against Christ; yes!
murmur against Him, when thou seest the wicked flourishing. What of
happiness did He promise? What, save in the Resurrection of the Dead?
But what in this life? That which was His portion. His portion, I say!
Dost thou, servant and disciple, disdain what thy Lord, what thy Master
bore?…

<span id="ii.XXXVII.1-p37"></span>“For evil-doers shall be cut off”
([Psa. 37.9](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#009.md)<span
id="ii.XXXVII.1-p37.1"></span>). “But I see their prosperity.” Believe
Him who saith, “they shall be cut off;” Him who seeth better than thou,
since His eye anger cannot cloud. “For evil-doers shall be cut off. But
those that wait upon the Lord,”—not upon any one that can deceive them;
but verily on Him who is the Truth itself,—“But those that wait upon the
Lord, they shall inherit the land.” What “land,” but that Jerusalem,
with the love of which whosoever is inflamed, shall come to peace at the
last.

<span id="ii.XXXVII.1-p38"></span>10. “But how long is the sinner to
flourish? How long shall I have to endure?” Thou art impatient; <span
id="fr_867"></span>[868](#fn_867.md) that which seems long to thee, will
soon come to pass. It is infirmity makes that seem long, which is really
short, as is found in the case of the longings of sick men. Nothing
seems so long as the mixing of the potion for him when athirst. For all
that his attendants are making all speed, lest haply the patient be
angry; “When will it be done? (he cries). When will it be drest? When
will it be served?” Those who are waiting upon you are making haste, but
your infirmity fancies that long which is being done with expedition.
Behold ye, therefore, our Physician complying with the infirmity of the
patient, saying, “How long shall I have to endure? How long will it be?”

<span id="ii.XXXVII.1-p40"></span>“Yet a little while, and the sinner
shall not be” ([Psa. 37.10](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#010.md)<span
id="ii.XXXVII.1-p40.1"></span>). Is it certainly among sinners, and
because of the sinner, that thou murmurest? “A little while, and he
shall not be.” Lest haply because I said, “They that wait upon the Lord,
they shall inherit the land,” thou shouldest think that waiting to be of
very long duration. Wait “a little while,” thou shalt receive without
end what thou waitest for. A little while, a moderate space. Review the
years from Adam’s time up to this day; run through the Scriptures. It is
almost yesterday that he fell from Paradise! <span id="page_94">p.
94</span> <span id="ii.XXXVII.1-Page_94"></span>So many ages have been
measured out, and unrolled. <span id="fr_868"></span>[869](#fn_868.md)
Where now are the past ages? Even so, however, shall the few which
remain, pass away also. Hadst thou been living throughout all that time,
since Adam was banished from Paradise up to this present day, thou
wouldest certainly see that the life, which had thus flown away, had not
been of long duration. But how long is the duration of each individual’s
life? Add any number of years you please: prolong old age to its longest
duration: what is it? Is it not but a morning breeze? Be it so, however,
that the Day of Judgment is far off, when the reward of the righteous
and of the unrighteous is to come: your last day at all events cannot be
far off. Make thyself ready against this! For such as thou shall have
departed from this life, shalt thou be restored to the other. At the
close of that short life, you will not yet be, where the Saints shall
be, to whom it shall be said, “Come, ye blessed of My Father: inherit
the kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the world.” <span
id="fr_869"></span>[870](#fn_869.md) You will not yet be there? Who does
not know that? But you may already be there, where that beggar, once
“covered with sores,” was seen at a distance, at rest, by that proud and
unfruitful “rich man” in the midst of his torments. <span
id="fr_870"></span>[871](#fn_870.md) Surely hid in that rest thou waitest
in security for the Day of Judgment, when thou art to receive again a
body, to be changed so as to be made equal to an Angel. How long then is
that for which we are impatient, and are saying, “When will it come?
Will it tarry long?” This our sons will say hereafter, and our sons’
sons will say too; and, though each one of these in succession will say
this same thing, that “little while” that is yet to be, passes away, as
all that is already past hath passed away already! O thou sick one! “Yet
a little while, and the sinner shall not be. Yea, thou shalt diligently
consider his place, and thou shalt not find him.”…

<span id="ii.XXXVII.1-p44"></span>11. “But the meek shall inherit the
land” <span id="fr_871"></span>[872](#fn_871.md) ([Psa.
37.11](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#011.md)<span
id="ii.XXXVII.1-p45.2"></span>). That land is the one of which we have
often spoken, the holy Jerusalem, which is to be released from these her
pilgrimages, and to live for ever with God, and on God. Therefore, “They
shall inherit the land.” What shall be their delight? “And they shall
delight themselves in the abundance of peace.” Let the ungodly man
delight himself here in the multitude of his gold, in the multitude of
his silver, in the multitude of his slaves, in the multitude, lastly, of
his baths, his roses, his intoxicating wines, his most sumptuous and
luxurious banquets. Is this the power thou enviest? Is this the glory
that delights thee? Would not his fate be worthy to be deplored, even if
he were to be so for ever? What shall be thy delights? “And they shall
delight themselves in the abundance of peace.” Peace shall be thy gold.
Peace shall be thy silver. Peace shall be thy lands. Peace shall be thy
life, thy God Peace. Peace shall be to thee whatsoever thou dost
desire.…

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_847"></span>[91:848](1080042.htm#fr_847.md) <span
id="ii.XXXVII.1-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVII.1-p2"></span> Lat. XXXVI. This is a sermon which was
delivered at Carthage, as well as the two following. It should be
noticed that in the life of St. Fulgentius, c. 3, we are told that,
“having some time before resolved with himself to renounce the world, he
was so roused and moved by St. Augustin’s exposition of this Psalm that
he determined to make his vow public, and earnestly desired to adopt the
religious habit.”—*Ben*.

<span id="fn_848"></span>[91:849](1080042.htm#fr_848.md) <span
id="ii.XXXVII.1-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVII.1-p5"></span> *Magister Magisterio*. Master, in
sense of teacher or guide; <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.XXXVII.1-p5.1"></span>Καθηγητὴς</span>, in [Matt. xxiii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#008.md)<span id="ii.XXXVII.1-p5.2"></span>,
being in the Latin translated “*Magister*,” as in English, “Master.”

<span id="fn_849"></span>[91:850](1080042.htm#fr_849.md) <span
id="ii.XXXVII.1-p5.3"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVII.1-p6"></span> [Mark xiii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#032.md)<span id="ii.XXXVII.1-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_850"></span>[91:851](1080042.htm#fr_850.md) <span
id="ii.XXXVII.1-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVII.1-p7"></span> *Al*. “Son of Man,” as below.

<span id="fn_851"></span>[91:852](1080042.htm#fr_851.md) <span
id="ii.XXXVII.1-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVII.1-p8"></span> \[Here he enlarges; but our common use
of the word “ignore” sufficiently explains the use here. We *ignore*
what it is needless to say.—C.\]

<span id="fn_852"></span>[91:853](1080042.htm#fr_852.md) <span
id="ii.XXXVII.1-p10.3"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVII.1-p11"></span> *Subjunge*.

<span id="fn_853"></span>[91:854](1080042.htm#fr_853.md) <span
id="ii.XXXVII.1-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVII.1-p12"></span> [Col. iii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#003.md)<span id="ii.XXXVII.1-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_854"></span>[91:855](1080042.htm#fr_854.md) <span
id="ii.XXXVII.1-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVII.1-p13"></span> [Col. iii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#003.md)<span id="ii.XXXVII.1-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_855"></span>[92:856](1080042.htm#fr_855.md) <span
id="ii.XXXVII.1-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVII.1-p17"></span> [Ps. xvi.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#005.md)<span id="ii.XXXVII.1-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_856"></span>[92:857](1080042.htm#fr_856.md) <span
id="ii.XXXVII.1-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVII.1-p18"></span> See Disc. 2 (omitted) on [Ps.
33](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#000.md)<span
id="ii.XXXVII.1-p18.1"></span>, delivered at Carthage in the Church of
St. Cyprian.

<span id="fn_857"></span>[92:858](1080042.htm#fr_857.md) <span
id="ii.XXXVII.1-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVII.1-p21"></span> *Signanter accipe*.

<span id="fn_858"></span>[92:859](1080042.htm#fr_858.md) <span
id="ii.XXXVII.1-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVII.1-p23"></span> [Gal. v.
17](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#017.md)<span
id="ii.XXXVII.1-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_859"></span>[92:860](1080042.htm#fr_859.md) <span
id="ii.XXXVII.1-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVII.1-p24"></span> [Rom. vii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#024.md)<span
id="ii.XXXVII.1-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_860"></span>[92:861](1080042.htm#fr_860.md) <span
id="ii.XXXVII.1-p25.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVII.1-p26"></span> *Al*. “shall be.”

<span id="fn_861"></span>[93:862](1080042.htm#fr_861.md) <span
id="ii.XXXVII.1-p28.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVII.1-p29"></span> *Perseveret*, alluding to a word in
the portion omitted. [Matt. xxiv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#013.md)<span
id="ii.XXXVII.1-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_862"></span>[93:863](1080042.htm#fr_862.md) <span
id="ii.XXXVII.1-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVII.1-p30"></span> [Luke xviii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#001.md)<span id="ii.XXXVII.1-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_863"></span>[93:864](1080042.htm#fr_863.md) <span
id="ii.XXXVII.1-p31.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVII.1-p32"></span> [Ps. i.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#006.md)<span id="ii.XXXVII.1-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_864"></span>[93:865](1080042.htm#fr_864.md) <span
id="ii.XXXVII.1-p32.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVII.1-p33"></span> [Matt.
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#013.md),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#014.md)<span
id="ii.XXXVII.1-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_865"></span>[93:866](1080042.htm#fr_865.md) <span
id="ii.XXXVII.1-p34.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVII.1-p35"></span> [Ps. vi.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#007.md)<span id="ii.XXXVII.1-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_866"></span>[93:867](1080042.htm#fr_866.md) <span
id="ii.XXXVII.1-p35.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVII.1-p36"></span> *Interrogo*.

<span id="fn_867"></span>[93:868](1080042.htm#fr_867.md) <span
id="ii.XXXVII.1-p38.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVII.1-p39"></span> *Festinas*.

<span id="fn_868"></span>[94:869](1080042.htm#fr_868.md) <span
id="ii.XXXVII.1-p40.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVII.1-p41"></span> \[Few consider how very short is the
span of all human history. Daily we read of men and women who live a
*hundred* years. Eighteen such lives go back to the age of Christ and
His Apostles. Official lives of *fifty* years are not uncommon, and
six-and-thirty such cover the entire Christian era.—C.\]

<span id="fn_869"></span>[94:870](1080042.htm#fr_869.md) <span
id="ii.XXXVII.1-p41.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVII.1-p42"></span> [Matt. xxv.
34](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#034.md)<span
id="ii.XXXVII.1-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_870"></span>[94:871](1080042.htm#fr_870.md) <span
id="ii.XXXVII.1-p42.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVII.1-p43"></span> [Luke
16:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#020.md),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#023.md)<span
id="ii.XXXVII.1-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_871"></span>[94:872](1080042.htm#fr_871.md) <span
id="ii.XXXVII.1-p44.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVII.1-p45"></span> \[Comp. [St. Matt. v.
5](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#005.md)<span id="ii.XXXVII.1-p45.1"></span>.
The earlier Fathers believed in the “regeneration” of this earth. See
A.N.F. vol. i. 240, 435, and (Apocryphal Revelation) viii. 584, vii.
218, 254, iv. 211, 212, 218, and conversely, 274, 275. Our author, after
sharing this early opinion, gave it up, and founded a new school.—C.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part 2](1080043.md)
