[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080082)  [Next](1080084) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.LXXII"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p1"></span> <span id="ii.LXXII-p1.1"></span><span
class="c20"><span id="ii.LXXII-p1.2"></span>Psalm LXXII. <span
id="fr_3167"></span>[3168](#fn_3167) </span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p3"></span>1. “For Salomon” indeed this Psalm’s title
is fore-noted: but things are spoken of therein which could not apply to
that Salomon king of Israel after the flesh, according to those things
which holy Scripture speaketh concerning him: but they can most
pertinently apply to the Lord Christ. Whence it is perceived, that the
very word Salomon is used in a figurative sense, so that in him Christ
is to be taken. For Salomon is interpreted peace-maker: and on this
account such a word to Him most truly and excellently doth apply,
through Whom, the Mediator, having received remission of sins, we that
were enemies are reconciled to God. For “when we were enemies we were
reconciled to God through the death of His Son.” <span
id="fr_3168"></span>[3169](#fn_3168) The Same is Himself that
Peace-maker.…Since then we have found out the true Salomon, that is, the
true Peace-maker: next let us observe what the Psalm doth teach
concerning Him.

<span id="ii.LXXII-p5"></span>2. “O God, Thy judgment to the King give
Thou, and Thy justice to the King’s Son” ([Psa.
72.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#001)<span id="ii.LXXII-p5.1"></span>).
The Lord Himself in the Gospel saith, “The Father judgeth not any one,
but all judgment He hath given to the Son:” <span
id="fr_3169"></span>[3170](#fn_3169) this is then, <span
id="page_327">p. 327</span> <span id="ii.LXXII-Page_327"></span>“O God,
Thy judgment to the King give Thou.” He that is King is also the Son of
the King: because God the Father also is certainly King. Thus it hath
been written, that the King made a marriage for His Son. <span
id="fr_3170"></span>[3171](#fn_3170) But after the manner of Scripture
the same thing is repeated. For that which he hath said in, “Thy
judgment;” the same he hath otherwise expressed in, “Thy justice:” and
that which he hath said in, “the King,” the same he hath otherwise
expressed in, “to the King’s Son.”…But these repetitions do much commend
the divine sayings, whether the same words, or whether in other words
the same sense be repeated: and they are mostly found in the Psalms, and
in the kind of discourse whereby the mind’s affection is to be awakened.

<span id="ii.LXXII-p8"></span>3. Next there followeth, “To judge Thy
people in justice, and Thy poor in judgment” ([Psa.
72.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#002)<span id="ii.LXXII-p8.1"></span>).
For what purpose the royal Father gave to the royal Son His judgment and
His justice is sufficiently shown when he saith, “To judge Thy people in
justice;” that is, for the purpose of judging Thy people. Such an idiom
is found in Salomon: “The Proverbs of Salomon, son of David, to know
wisdom and discipline:”  <span id="fr_3171"></span>[3172](#fn_3171) that
is, the Proverbs of Salomon, for the purpose of knowing wisdom and
discipline. So, “Thy judgment give Thou, to judge Thy people:” that is,
“Thy judgment” give Thou for the purpose of judging Thy people. But that
which he saith before in, “Thy people,” the same he saith afterwards in,
“Thy poor:” and that which he saith before in, “in justice;” the same
afterward in, “in judgment:” according to that manner of repetition.
Whereby indeed he showeth, that the people of God ought to be poor, that
is, not proud, but humble. For, “blessed are the poor in spirit, for
theirs is the kingdom of Heaven.” <span
id="fr_3172"></span>[3173](#fn_3172) In which poverty even blessed Job
was poor even before he had lost those great earthly riches. Which thing
for this reason I thought should be mentioned, because there are certain
persons who are more ready to distribute all their goods to the
poor, <span id="fr_3173"></span>[3174](#fn_3173) than themselves to
become the poor of God. For they are puffed up with boasting wherein
they think their living well should be ascribed to themselves, not to
the grace of God: and therefore now they do not even live well, however
great the good works which they seem to do.…

<span id="ii.LXXII-p12"></span>4. But seeing that he hath changed the
order of the words (though he had first said, “O God, Thy judgment to
the King give Thou, and Thy justice to the King’s Son,” putting judgment
first, then justice), and hath put justice first, then judgment, saying,
“To judge Thy people in justice, and Thy poor in judgment:” he doth more
clearly show that he hath called judgment justice, proving that there is
no difference made by the order in which the word is placed, because it
signifieth the same thing. For it is usual to say “wrong judgment” of
that which is unjust: but justice iniquitous or unjust we are not wont
to speak of. For if wrong and unjust it be; no longer must it be called
justice. Again, by putting down judgment and repeating it under the name
of justice, or by putting down justice and repeating it under the name
of judgment, he clearly showeth that he specially nameth that judgment
which is wont to be put instead of justice, that is, that which cannot
be understood of giving an evil judgment. For in the place where He
saith, “Judge not according to persons, but right judgment judge
ye;” <span id="fr_3174"></span>[3175](#fn_3174) He showeth that there
may be a wrong judgment, when He saith, “right judgment judge ye:”
lastly, the one He doth forbid, the other He doth enjoin. But when
without any addition He speaketh of judgment, He would at once have just
judgment to be understood: as is that which He saith, “Ye forsake the
weightier matters of the Law, mercy and judgment.” <span
id="fr_3175"></span>[3176](#fn_3175) That also which Jeremiah saith is,
“making his riches not with judgment.” <span
id="fr_3176"></span>[3177](#fn_3176) He saith not, making his riches by
wrong or unjust judgment, or not with judgment right or just, but not
with judgment: calling not anything judgment but what is right and just.

<span id="ii.LXXII-p16"></span>5. “Let the mountains bear peace to the
people, and the hills justice” ([Psa.
72.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#003)<span
id="ii.LXXII-p16.1"></span>). The mountains are the greater, the hills
the less. These are without doubt those which another Psalm hath,
“little with great.” <span id="fr_3177"></span>[3178](#fn_3177) For
those mountains did exult like rams, and those hills like lambs of the
sheep, at the departure of Israel out of Egypt, that is, at the
deliverance of the people of God from this world’s servitude. Those then
that are eminent in the Church for passing sanctity, are the mountains,
who are meet to teach other men also, <span
id="fr_3178"></span>[3179](#fn_3178) by so speaking as that they may be
faithfully taught, by so living as that they may imitate them to their
profit: but the hills are they that follow the excellence of the former
by their own obedience. Why then “the mountains peace: and the hills
justice”? <span id="fr_3179"></span>[3180](#fn_3179) Would there
perchance have been no difference, even if it had been said thus, Let
the mountains bear justice to the people and the hills peace? For to
both justice, and to both peace is necessary: and it may be that under
another name justice herself may have been called peace. For this is
true peace, not such as unjust men make among them. Or rather <span
id="page_328">p. 328</span> <span id="ii.LXXII-Page_328"></span>with a
distinction not to be overlooked must that be understood which he saith,
“the mountains peace, and the hills justice”? For men excelling in the
Church ought to counsel for peace with watchful care; lest for the sake
of their own distinctions by acting proudly they make schisms and
dissever the bond of union. But let the hills so follow them by
imitation and obedience, that they prefer Christ to them: lest being led
astray by the empty authority of evil mountains (for they seem to
excel), they tear themselves away from the Unity of Christ.…

<span id="ii.LXXII-p20"></span>6. Thus also most pertinently may be
understood, “let the mountains bear peace to the people,” namely, that
we understand the peace to consist in the reconciliation whereby we are
reconciled to God: for the mountains receive this for His people.…“Let
the mountains, therefore, receive peace for the people, and the hills
justice:” so that in this manner, both being at one, there may come to
pass that which hath been written, “justice and peace have kissed one
another.” <span id="fr_3180"></span>[3181](#fn_3180) But that which
other copies have, “let the mountains receive peace for the people, and
let the hills:” I think must be understood of all sorts of preaching of
Gospel peace, whether those that go before, or those that follow after.
But in these copies this followeth, “in justice He shall judge the poor
of the people.” But those copies are more approved of which have that
which we have expounded above, “let the mountains bear peace to the
people, and the hills justice.” But some have, “to Thy people;” some
have not to “Thy,” but only “to the people.”

<span id="ii.LXXII-p22"></span>7. “He shall judge the poor of the
people, and shall save the sons of the poor” ([Psa.
72.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#004)<span
id="ii.LXXII-p22.1"></span>). The poor and the sons of the poor seem to
me to be the very same, as the same city is Sion and the daughter of
Sion. But if it is to be understood with a distinction, the poor we take
to be the mountains, but the sons of the poor the hills: for instance,
Prophets and Apostles, the poor, but the sons of them, that is, those
that profit under their authority, the sons of the poor. But that which
hath been said above, “shall judge;” and afterwards, “shall save;” is as
it were a sort of exposition in what manner He shall judge. For to this
end He shall judge, that He may save, that is, may sever from those that
are to be destroyed and condemned, those to whom He giveth “salvation
ready to be revealed at the” last time. <span
id="fr_3181"></span>[3182](#fn_3181) For by such men to Him is said,
“Destroy not with ungodly men my soul:” <span
id="fr_3182"></span>[3183](#fn_3182) and, “Judge Thou me, O God, and
sever my cause from the nation unholy.” <span
id="fr_3183"></span>[3184](#fn_3183) We must observe also that he saith
not, He shall judge the poor people, but, “the poor of the people.” For
above when he had said, “to judge Thy people in justice and Thy poor in
judgment,” <span id="fr_3184"></span>[3185](#fn_3184) the same he called
the people of God as His poor, that is, only the good and those that
belong to the right hand side. But because in this world those for the
right and those for the left feed together, who, like lambs and goats at
the last are to be put asunder; <span
id="fr_3185"></span>[3186](#fn_3185) the whole, as it is mingled
together, he hath called by the name of the People. And because even
here he putteth judgment in a good sense, that is, for the purpose of
saving: therefore he saith, “He shall judge the poor of the people,”
that is, shall sever for salvation those that are poor among the people.
“And He shall humble the false-accuser.” No false-accuser can be more
suitably recognised here than the devil. False accusation is his
business. “Doth Job worship God gratis?” <span
id="fr_3186"></span>[3187](#fn_3186) But the Lord Jesus doth humble him,
by His grace aiding His own, in order that they may worship God gratis,
that is, may take delight in the Lord. <span
id="fr_3187"></span>[3188](#fn_3187) He humbled him also thus; because
when in Him the devil, that is, the prince of this world, had found
nothing, <span id="fr_3188"></span>[3189](#fn_3188) he slew Him by the
false accusations of the Jews, whom the false-accuser made use of as his
vessels, working in the sons of unbelief. <span
id="fr_3189"></span>[3190](#fn_3189) …

<span id="ii.LXXII-p32"></span>8. “And He shall endure to the sun,” or,
“shall endure with the sun” ([Psa.
72.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#005)<span
id="ii.LXXII-p32.1"></span>). For thus some of our writers have thought
would be more exactly translated that which in the Greek is <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.LXXII-p32.2"></span> συμπαραμενεῖ</span>. But
if in Latin it could have been expressed in one word, it must have been
expressed by *compermanebit:* however, because in Latin the word cannot
be expressed, in order that the sense at least might be translated, it
hath been expressed by, “He shall endure with the sun.” For He shall
co-endure to the sun is nothing else but, “He shall endure with the
sun.” But what great matter is it for Him to endure with the sun,
through whom all things were made, and without whom nothing was
made, <span id="fr_3190"></span>[3191](#fn_3190) save that this prophecy
hath been sent before for the sake of those who think that the religion
of the Christian name up to a particular time in this world will live,
and afterwards will be no more? <span
id="fr_3191"></span>[3192](#fn_3191) “He shall endure” therefore “with
the sun,” so long as the sun riseth and setteth, that is, so long as
these times revolve, there shall not be wanting the Church of God, that
is, Christ’s body on earth. But that which he addeth, “and before the
moon, generations of generations:” he might have expressed by, and
before the sun, that is, both with the sun and before the sun: which
would have been understood by both with times and before times. That
then which goeth before time is eternal: <span id="page_329">p.
329</span> <span id="ii.LXXII-Page_329"></span>and that is truly to be
held eternal which by no time is changed, as, “in the beginning was the
Word.” <span id="fr_3192"></span>[3193](#fn_3192) But by the moon he
hath chosen rather to intimate the waxings and wanings of things mortal.
Lastly, when he had said, “before the moon,” wishing in a manner to
explain for what purpose he inserted the moon, “generations,” he saith,
“of generations.” As though he were saying, before the moon, that is,
before the generations of generations which pass away in the departure
and succession of things mortal, like the lunar wanings and waxings. And
thus what is better to be understood by His enduring before the moon,
than that He taketh precedence of all mortal things by immortality?
Which also as followeth may not impertinently be taken, that whereas
now, having humbled the false-accuser, He sitteth at the right hand of
the Father, this is to endure with the sun. For the brightness of the
eternal glory is understood to be the Son: <span
id="fr_3193"></span>[3194](#fn_3193) as though the Sun were the Father,
and the Brightness of Him His Son. But as these things may be spoken of
the invisible Substance of the Creator, not as of that visible creation
wherein are bodies celestial, of which bright bodies the sun hath the
pre-eminence, from which this similitude hath been drawn: just as they
are drawn even from things earthly, to wit, stone, lion, lamb, man
having two sons, and the like: therefore having humbled the
false-accuser, He endureth with the sun: because having vanquished the
devil by the Resurrection, He sitteth at the right hand of the
Father, <span id="fr_3194"></span>[3195](#fn_3194) where He dieth no
more, and death no longer over Him shall have dominion. <span
id="fr_3195"></span>[3196](#fn_3195) This too is before the moon, as
though the First-born from the dead were going before the Church, which
is passing on in the departure and succession of mortals. These are “the
generations of generations.” Or perchance it is because generations are
those whereby we are begotten mortally; but generations of generations
those whereby we are begotten again immortally. And such is the Church
which He went before, in order that He might endure before the moon,
being the First-born of the dead. To be sure, that which is in the Greek
<span class="Greek"><span id="ii.LXXII-p38.2"></span>γενεας
γενεῶν</span>, some have interpreted, not “generations,” but, “of a
generation of generations:” because <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.LXXII-p38.3"></span> γενεας</span> is of ambiguous case in Greek,
and whether it be the genitive singular <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.LXXII-p38.4"></span>της γενε‚ς</span>, that is, of the
generation, or the accusative plural <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.LXXII-p38.5"></span>τὰς γενεὰς</span>, that is, the generations,
doth not clearly appear, except that deservedly that sense hath been
preferred wherein, as though explaining <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.LXXII-p38.6"></span>what</span> he had called “the moon,” he
added in continuation, “generations of generations.”

<span id="ii.LXXII-p39"></span>9. “And He shall come down like rain into
a fleece, and like drops distilling upon the earth” ([Psa.
72.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#006)<span
id="ii.LXXII-p39.1"></span>). He hath called to our minds and admonished
us, that what was done by Gedeon the Judge, in Christ hath its end. For
he asked a sign of the Lord, that a fleece laid on the floor should
alone be rained upon, and the floor should be dry; and again, the fleece
alone should be dry, and the floor should be rained upon; and so it came
to pass. <span id="fr_3196"></span>[3197](#fn_3196) Which thing
signified, that, being as it were on a floor in the midst of the whole
round world, the dry fleece was the former people Israel. The same
Christ therefore Himself came down like rain upon a fleece, when yet the
floor was dry: whence also He said, “I am not sent but to the sheep
which were lost of the house of Israel.” <span
id="fr_3197"></span>[3198](#fn_3197) There He chose out a Mother by whom
to receive the form of a servant, wherein He was to appear to men: there
the disciples, to whom He gave this same injunction, saying, “Into the
way of the nations go ye not away, and into the cities of the Samaritans
enter ye not: go ye first to the sheep which are lost of the house of
Israel.” <span id="fr_3198"></span>[3199](#fn_3198) When He saith, go ye
first to them, He showeth also that hereafter, when at length the floor
was to be rained upon, they would go to other sheep also, which were not
of the old people Israel, concerning whom He saith, “I have other sheep
which are not of this fold, it behoveth Me to bring in them also, that
there may be one flock and one Shepherd.” <span
id="fr_3199"></span>[3200](#fn_3199) Hence also the Apostle: “for I
say,” he saith, “that Christ was a minister of the Circumcision for the
truth of God, to confirm the promises of the fathers.” <span
id="fr_3200"></span>[3201](#fn_3200) Thus rain came down upon the
fleece, the floor being yet dry. But inasmuch as he continueth, “but
that the nations should glorify God for His mercy:” <span
id="fr_3201"></span>[3202](#fn_3201) that when the time came on, that
should be fulfilled which by the Prophet He saith, “a people whom I have
not known hath served Me, in the hearkening of the ear it hath obeyed
Me:” <span id="fr_3202"></span>[3203](#fn_3202) we now see, that of the
grace of Christ the nation of the Jews hath remained dry, and the whole
round world through all nations is being rained upon by clouds full of
Christian grace. For by another word he hath indicated the same rain,
saying, “drops distilling:” no longer upon the fleece, but “upon the
earth.” For what else is rain but drops distilling? But that the above
nation under the name of a fleece is signified, I think is either
because they were to be stripped of the authority of teaching, just as a
sheep is stripped of its skin; or because in a secret place He was
hiding that same rain, which He willed not should be preached to
uncircumcision, that is, be revealed to uncircumcised nations.

<span id="ii.LXXII-p47"></span>10. “There shall arise in His days
justice <span id="page_330">p. 330</span> <span
id="ii.LXXII-Page_330"></span>and abundance of peace, until the moon be
taken away” ([Psa. 72.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#007)<span
id="ii.LXXII-p47.1"></span>). The expression *tollatur* some have
interpreted by “be taken away,” but others by “be exalted,” translating
one Greek word, which is there used, <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.LXXII-p47.2"></span>‡</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.LXXII-p47.3"></span>νταναιρεθῇ</span>, just as each of them
thought good. But they who have said, “be removed,” and they who have
said, “be taken away,” do not so very much differ. For by the
expression, “be removed,” custom doth teach us that there should be
rather implied, that a thing is taken away and is no more, than that it
is raised to a higher place: but “be taken away” can be understood in no
other way at all, than that a thing is destroyed: that is, it is no
more: but by “be exalted,” only that it is raised to a higher place.
Which indeed when it is put in a bad sense is wont to signify pride: as
is the passage, “In thy wisdom be not exalted.” <span
id="fr_3203"></span>[3204](#fn_3203) But in a good sense it belongeth to
a more exceeding honour, as, for instance, when anything is being
raised; as is, “In the nights exalt ye your hands unto holy places, and
bless ye the Lord.” <span id="fr_3204"></span>[3205](#fn_3204) Here then
if we have understood the expression, “be removed,” what will be, “until
the moon be removed,” but that it be so dealt with that it be no more?
For perchance he willed this also to be perceived, that mortality is to
be no longer, “when the last enemy shall be destroyed, death:” <span
id="fr_3205"></span>[3206](#fn_3205) so that abundance of peace may be
brought down so far as that nothing may withstand the felicity of the
blessed from the infirmity of mortality: which will come to pass in that
age, of which we have the faithful promise of God through Jesus Christ
our Lord, concerning which it is said, “There shall arise in His days
justice and abundance of peace:” until, death being utterly overcome and
destroyed, all mortality be consumed. But if under the term moon, not
the mortality of the flesh through which the Church is now passing, but
the Church Herself in general hath been signified, which is to endure
for everlasting, being delivered from this mortality, thus must be taken
the expression, “There shall arise in His days justice and abundance of
peace, until the moon be exalted;” as though it were said, There shall
arise in His days justice, to conquer the contradiction and rebellion of
the flesh, and whereby there may be made a peace so increasing and
abundant, until the moon be exalted, that is, until the Church be lifted
up, through the glory of the Resurrection to reign with Him, who went
before Her in this glory, the first-born of the dead, that He might sit
at the right hand of the Father; <span
id="fr_3206"></span>[3207](#fn_3206) thus with the sun <span
id="fr_3207"></span>[3208](#fn_3207) enduring before the moon, in the
place whereunto hereafter was to be exalted the moon also.

<span id="ii.LXXII-p53"></span>11. “And He shall be Lord from sea even
unto sea, and from the river even unto the ends of the round world”
([Psa. 72.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#008)<span
id="ii.LXXII-p53.1"></span>): He to wit concerning whom he had said,
“There shall arise in His days justice and abundance of peace, until the
moon be exalted.” <span id="fr_3208"></span>[3209](#fn_3208) If the
Church here is properly signified under the term moon, in continuation
he showed how widely that same Church He was going to spread abroad,
when He added, “and He shall be Lord from sea even unto sea.” For the
land is encircled by a great sea which is called the Ocean: from which
there floweth in some small part in the midst of the lands, and maketh
those seas known to us, which are frequented by ships. Again, in “from
sea even unto sea” He hath said, that from any one end of the earth even
unto any other end, He would be Lord, whose name and power in the whole
world were to be preached and to prevail exceedingly. To which, that
there might not be understood in any other manner, “from sea even unto
sea:” He immediately added, “and from the river even unto the ends of
the round world.” Therefore that which He saith in “even unto the ends
of the round world,” the same He had said before in “from sea even unto
sea.” But in that which now He saith, “from the river,” He hath
evidently expressed that He willed Christ to publish at length His power
from that place from whence also He began to choose His disciples, to
wit from the river Jordan, where upon the Lord, on His baptism, when the
Holy Ghost descended, there sounded a voice from Heaven, “This is My
beloved Son.” <span id="fr_3209"></span>[3210](#fn_3209) From this place
then His doctrine and the authority of the heavenly ministry setting
out, is enlarged even unto the ends of the round world, when there is
preached the Gospel of the kingdom in the whole world, for a testimony
unto all nations: and then shall come the end. <span
id="fr_3210"></span>[3211](#fn_3210)

<span id="ii.LXXII-p57"></span>12. “In His presence shall fall down the
Ethiopians, and His enemies shall lick the earth” ([Psa.
72.9](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#009)<span
id="ii.LXXII-p57.1"></span>). By the Ethiopians, as by a part the whole,
He hath signified all nations, selecting that nation to mention
especially by name, which is at the ends of the earth. By “in His
presence shall fall down” hath been signified, shall adore Him. And
because there were to be schisms in divers quarters of the world, which
would be jealous of the Church Catholic spread abroad in the whole round
world, and again those same schisms dividing themselves into the names
of men, and by loving the men under whose authority they had been rent,
opposing themselves to the glory of Christ which is throughout all
lands; so when He had said, “in His presence shall fall down the
Ethi<span id="page_331">p. 331</span> <span
id="ii.LXXII-Page_331"></span>opians,” He added, “and His enemies shall
lick the earth:” that is, shall love men, so that they shall be jealous
of the glory of Christ, to whom hath been said, “Be Thou exalted above
the Heavens, O God, and above all the earth Thy glory.” <span
id="fr_3211"></span>[3212](#fn_3211) For man earned to hear, “Earth thou
art, and unto earth thou shalt go.” <span
id="fr_3212"></span>[3213](#fn_3212) By licking this earth, that is,
being delighted with the vainly talking authority of such men, by loving
them, and by counting them for the most pleasing of men, they gainsay
the divine sayings, whereby the Catholic Church hath been foretold, not
as to be in any particular quarter of the world, as certain schisms are,
but in the whole universe by bearing fruit and growing so as to attain
even unto the very Ethiopians, to wit, the remotest and foulest of
mankind.  <span id="fr_3213"></span>[3214](#fn_3213)

<span id="ii.LXXII-p61"></span>13.  <span
id="fr_3214"></span>[3215](#fn_3214) “The kings of Tharsis and the isles
shall offer gifts, the kings of the Arabians and of Saba shall
lead <span id="fr_3215"></span>[3216](#fn_3215) presents” ([Psa.
72.10](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#010)<span
id="ii.LXXII-p63.1"></span>). This no longer requireth an expounder but
a thinker; yea it doth thrust itself upon the sight not only of
rejoicing believers, but also of groaning unbelievers—except perchance
we must inquire why there hath been said, “shall lead presents.” For
there are wont to be led those things which can walk. For could it by
any means have been spoken with reference to the sacrifice of victims?
Far be it that such “righteousness” should arise in His days. But those
gifts which have been foretold as to be led, seem to me to signify men,
whom into the fellowship of the Church of Christ the authority of kings
doth lead: although even persecuting kings have led gifts, knowing not
what they did, in sacrificing the holy Martyrs. “And there shall adore
Him all kings of the earth, all nations shall serve Him” ([Psa.
72.11](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#011)<span
id="ii.LXXII-p63.2"></span>).

<span id="ii.LXXII-p64"></span>14. But while he is explaining the
reasons why so great honour is paid Him by kings, and He is served of
all nations: “because He hath delivered,” he saith, “the needy man from
the mighty, and the poor man, to whom was no helper”([Psa.
72.12](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#012)<span
id="ii.LXXII-p64.1"></span>). This needy and poor man is the people of
men believing in Him. In this people are also kings adoring Him. For
they do not disdain to be needy and poor, that is, humbly confessing
sins, and needing the glory of God <span
id="fr_3216"></span>[3217](#fn_3216) and the grace of God, in order that
this King, Son of the King, may deliver them from the mighty one. For
this same mighty one is he who above was called the Slanderer: whom
mighty to subdue men to himself, and to hold them bound in captivity,
not his virtue did make, but men’s sins. The same is himself also called
strong; therefore here mighty also. But He that hath humbled the
slanderer and hath entered into the house of the strong man to bind him
and to spoil his vessels, <span id="fr_3217"></span>[3218](#fn_3217) He
“hath delivered the needy and the poor man.” For this neither the virtue
of any one could accomplish, nor any just man, nor any Angel. When then
there was no helper, by His coming He saved them Himself.

<span id="ii.LXXII-p67"></span>15. But it might occur to one; if because
of sins man was held by the devil, have sins pleased Christ, who saved
the needy man from the mighty? Far be it. But “He it is that shall spare
the helpless and poor man” ([Psa.
72.13](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#013)<span
id="ii.LXXII-p67.1"></span>): that is, shall remit sins to the man,
humble and not trusting in his own merits, or hoping for salvation
because of his own virtue, but needing the grace of his Saviour. But
when he hath added, “and the souls of the poor He shall save:” he hath
recommended to our notice both the aids of grace; both that which is for
the remission of sins, when he saith, “He shall spare the poor and needy
man;” and that which doth consist in the imparting of righteousness,
when he hath added, “and the souls of the poor He shall save.” For no
one is meet of himself for salvation (which salvation is perfect
righteousness), unless God’s grace aid: because the fulness of the law
is nought but love, which doth not exist in us of ourselves, but is shed
abroad in our hearts through the Holy Spirit which hath been given unto
us. <span id="fr_3218"></span>[3219](#fn_3218)

<span id="ii.LXXII-p69"></span>16. “From usuries and iniquity He shall
redeem the souls of them” ([Psa.
72.14](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#014)<span
id="ii.LXXII-p69.1"></span>). What are these usuries but sins, which are
also called debts? <span id="fr_3219"></span>[3220](#fn_3219) But I
think they have been called usuries, because more of ill is found in the
punishments than hath been committed in the sins. For, for example’s
sake, while a man-slayer killeth only the body of a man, but can no wise
hurt the soul; of himself both soul and body is destroyed in hell.
Because of such despisers of present commandment and deriders of future
punishment hath been said, “I coming would have exacted with
usuries,” <span id="fr_3220"></span>[3221](#fn_3220) from these usuries
are redeemed the souls of the poor by that blood which hath been shed
for the remission of sins. He shall redeem, I say, from usuries, by
remitting sins which owed larger punishments: but He shall redeem from
iniquity, by helping them by grace even to do righteousness. Therefore
the same two things have been repeated which were said above. For in
that which is above, “He shall spare the helpless and poor man,” <span
id="fr_3221"></span>[3222](#fn_3221) there is understood “from usuries:”
but in that which there he saith, “and the souls of the poor He shall
save;” there seemeth to have been implied, “from iniquity:” so that the
words “He shall <span id="page_332">p. 332</span> <span
id="ii.LXXII-Page_332"></span>redeem,” are understood with both. So when
He shall spare the poor and helpless man, and shall save the souls of
the poor: thus “from usuries and iniquity He shall redeem the souls of
them. And honourable shall be the name of Him in the presence of them.”
For they give honour to His name for so great benefits, and they respond
that “meet and right it is” <span id="fr_3222"></span>[3223](#fn_3222)
to render thanks to the Lord their God. Or, as some copies have it, “and
honourable is the name of them in the presence of Him:” for even if
Christians seem despicable to this world, the name of them in the
presence of Him is honourable, who to them hath given it, no longer
remembering those names in His lips, whereby before they used to be
called, when they were bound fast by the superstitions of the Gentiles,
or signed with names derived from their own evil deserts, before they
were Christians, which name is honourable in the presence of Him, even
if it seemeth despicable to enemies.

<span id="ii.LXXII-p74"></span>17. “And He shall live, and there shall
be given to Him of the gold of Arabia” ([Psa.
72.15](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#015)<span
id="ii.LXXII-p74.1"></span>). There would not have been said, “and He
shall live” (for of whom could not this be said, though living for ever
so brief a space of time on this earth?) unless that life were being
recommended to our notice, wherein He “dieth no more, and death over Him
shall have no more dominion.” <span id="fr_3223"></span>[3224](#fn_3223)
And thus, “and He shall live,” that was despised in death: for, as
another Prophet saith, “there shall be taken away from the earth the
life of Him.” <span id="fr_3224"></span>[3225](#fn_3224) But what is,
“and there shall be given to Him of the gold of Arabia”? For the fact
that from thence even the former Salomon received gold, in this Psalm
hath been in a figure transferred unto another true Salomon, that is,
the true Peace-maker. For the former did not have dominion “from the
river even unto the ends of the round world.” <span
id="fr_3225"></span>[3226](#fn_3225) Thus then hath been prophesied,
that even the wise men of this world in Christ would believe. But by
Arabia we understand the Gentiles; by gold wisdom which doth as much
excel among all doctrines as gold among metals. Whence hath been
written, “Receive ye prudence as silver, <span
id="fr_3226"></span>[3227](#fn_3226) and wisdom as proved gold.” <span
id="fr_3227"></span>[3228](#fn_3227) “And they shall pray concerning
Himself alway.” That which the Greek hath, <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.LXXII-p79.2"></span>περὶ αὐτοῦ</span>, some have interpreted by
“concerning Himself,” some “for Himself,” or “for Him.” But what is,
“concerning Himself,” except perchance that for which we pray, saying,
“Thy kingdom come”? <span id="fr_3228"></span>[3229](#fn_3228) For
Christ’s coming shall make present to believers the kingdom of God. But
how to understand “for Him” is difficult; except that when prayer is
made for the Church, for Himself prayer is made, because she is His
Body. For concerning Christ and the Church hath been sent before a great
Sacrament, <span id="fr_3229"></span>[3230](#fn_3229) “there shall be
two in one flesh.” But now that which followeth, “all the day long,”
that is, in all time, “they shall bless Him,” is sufficiently evident.

<span id="ii.LXXII-p82"></span>18. “And there shall be a firmament on
the earth, on the tops of the mountains” ([Psa.
72.16](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#016)<span
id="ii.LXXII-p82.1"></span>). For, “all the promises of God in Him are
Yea,” <span id="fr_3230"></span>[3231](#fn_3230) that is, in Him are
confirmed: because in Him hath been fulfilled whatever hath been
prophesied for our salvation. For the tops of the mountains it is meet
to understand as the authors of the divine Scriptures, that is, those
persons through whom they were supplied: wherein He is indeed Himself
the Firmament: for unto Him all things that have been divinely written
are ascribed. But this He willed should be on earth; because for the
sake of those that are upon earth, they were written. Whence He came
also Himself upon earth, in order that He might confirm all these
things, that is, in Himself might show them to have been fulfilled. “For
it was necessary,” He saith, “for all things to be fulfilled which were
written in the Law, and the Prophets, and Psalms, concerning Me:” <span
id="fr_3231"></span>[3232](#fn_3231) that is, “in the tops of the
mountain.” <span id="fr_3232"></span>[3233](#fn_3232) For so there
cometh in the last time the evident Mount of the Lord, prepared on the
summit of the mountains: of which here he speaketh, “in the tops of the
mountains.” “Highly superexalted above Libanus shall be His fruit.”
Libanus we are wont to take as this world’s dignity: for Libanus is a
mountain bearing tall trees, and the name itself is interpreted
whiteness. <span id="fr_3233"></span>[3234](#fn_3233) For what marvel,
if above every brilliant state of this world there is superexalted the
fruit of Christ, of which fruit the lovers have contemned all secular
dignities? But if in a good sense we take Libanus, because of the
“cedars of Libanus which He hath planted:” <span
id="fr_3234"></span>[3235](#fn_3234) what other fruit must be
understood, that is being exalted above this Libanus, except that
whereof the Apostle speaketh when he is going to speak concerning that
love of his, “yet a pre-eminent way to you I show”? <span
id="fr_3235"></span>[3236](#fn_3235) For this is put forward even in the
first rank of divine gifts, in the place where he saith, “but the fruit
of the Spirit is love:” <span id="fr_3236"></span>[3237](#fn_3236) and
with this are conjoined the remaining words as consequent. “And they
shall flourish from the city like hay of the earth.” Because city is
used ambiguously, and there is not annexed of Him, or of God, for there
hath not been said, “from the city” of Him, or “from the city” of God,
but only “from the city:” in a good sense it is understood, in order
that from the city of God, <span id="page_333">p. 333</span> <span
id="ii.LXXII-Page_333"></span>that is, from the Church, they may
flourish like grass; but grass bearing fruit, as is that of wheat: for
even this is called grass <span id="fr_3237"></span>[3238](#fn_3237) in
Holy Scripture; as in Genesis <span id="fr_3238"></span>[3239](#fn_3238)
there is a command for the earth to bring forth every tree and every
grass, and there is not added every wheat: which without doubt would not
have been passed over unless under the name of grass this also were
understood; and in many other passages of the Scriptures this is found.
But if we must take, “and they shall flourish like the grass of the
earth,” in the same manner as is said, “all flesh is grass, and the
glory of a man like the flower of grass:”  <span
id="fr_3239"></span>[3240](#fn_3239) certainly then that city must be
understood which doth intimate this world’s society: for it was not to
no purpose that Cain was the first to build a city. <span
id="fr_3240"></span>[3241](#fn_3240) Thus the fruit of Christ being
exalted above Libanus, that is, above enduring trees and undecaying
timbers, because He is the everlasting fruit, all the glory of a man
according to the temporal exaltation of the world is compared to grass;
for by believers and by men already hoping for life eternal temporal
felicity is despised, in order that there may be fulfilled that which
hath been written, “all flesh is grass, and all the glory of flesh as
the flower of grass: the grass hath dried, the flower hath fallen off,
but the word of the Lord doth endure for ever.” There is the fruit of
Him exalted above Libanus. For always flesh hath been grass, and the
glory of flesh as the flower of grass: but because it was not clearly
proved what felicity ought to have been chosen and preferred, the flower
of grass was esteemed for a great matter: not only it was by no means
despised, but it was even chiefly sought after. As if therefore at that
time He shall have begun to be thus, when there is reproved and despised
whatever used to flourish in the world, thus hath been said,
“superexalted above Libanus shall be the fruit of Him, and they shall
flourish from the city like grass of the earth:” that is, glorified
above all things shall be that which is promised for everlasting, and
compared to the grass of the earth shall be whatever is counted a great
matter in the world.

<span id="ii.LXXII-p94"></span>19. “Be,” therefore, “the name of Him
blessed for ever: before the sun endureth the name of Him” ([Psa.
72.17](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#017)<span
id="ii.LXXII-p94.1"></span>). By the sun times are signified. Therefore
for everlasting endureth the name of Him. For eternity doth precede
times, and is not bounded by time. “And there shall be blessed in Him
all the tribes of the earth.” For in Him is fulfilled that which hath
been promised to Abraham. “For He saith not, In seeds, as though in
many; but as though in one, And to thy Seed, which is Christ.” <span
id="fr_3241"></span>[3242](#fn_3241) But to Abraham is said, “In thy
Seed shall be blessed all the tribes of the earth.” <span
id="fr_3242"></span>[3243](#fn_3242) And not the sons of the flesh but
the sons of promise are counted in the Seed. <span
id="fr_3243"></span>[3244](#fn_3243) “All nations shall magnify Him.” As
if in explanation there is repeated that which above hath been said. For
because they shall be blessed in Him, they shall magnify Him; not of
themselves making Him to be great, that of Himself is great, but by
praising and confessing Him to be great. For thus we magnify God: thus
also we say, “Hallowed be Thy name,” <span
id="fr_3244"></span>[3245](#fn_3244) which is indeed always holy.

<span id="ii.LXXII-p99"></span>20. “Blessed be the Lord God of Israel,
who hath done wonderful things alone” ([Psa.
72.18](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#018)<span
id="ii.LXXII-p99.1"></span>). Contemplating all things above spoken of,
a hymn bursteth <span id="fr_3245"></span>[3246](#fn_3245) forth; and
the Lord God of Israel is blessed. For that is being fulfilled which
hath been spoken to that barren woman, “and He that hath delivered Thee,
the God of Israel, shall Himself be called of the whole earth.” <span
id="fr_3246"></span>[3247](#fn_3246) “He doeth” Himself “marvellous
things alone:” for whosoever do them, He doth Himself work in them, “who
doeth wonderful things alone.” “And blessed be the name of His
glory <span id="fr_3247"></span>[3248](#fn_3247) for everlasting, and
for age of age” ([Psa. 72.19](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#019)<span
id="ii.LXXII-p102.2"></span>). For what else should the Latin
interpreters have said, who could not have said for everlasting, and for
everlasting of everlasting? For it soundeth as if one thing were meant
in the expression “for everlasting,” and another thing in the expression
“for age:” but the Greek hath <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.LXXII-p102.3"></span>εἰς τὸν αἰωνα, καὶ εἰς τὸν αἰῶνα τοῦ
αἰῶνος</span>, which perchance more meetly might have been rendered by,
“for age, and for age of age:” so that by “for age,” might have been
understood as long as this age <span
id="fr_3248"></span>[3249](#fn_3248) endureth; but “for age of age,”
that which after the end of this is promised to be. “And there shall be
fulfilled with the glory of Him every land: so be it, so be it.” Thou
hast commanded, O Lord, so it is coming to pass: so it is coming to
pass, until that which began with the river, may attain fully even unto
the ends of the round world.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3167"></span>[326:3168](1080083.htm#fr_3167) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p2"></span> Lat. LXXI.

<span id="fn_3168"></span>[326:3169](1080083.htm#fr_3168) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p4"></span> [Rom. v.
10](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#010)<span id="ii.LXXII-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3169"></span>[326:3170](1080083.htm#fr_3169) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p6"></span> [John v.
22](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#022)<span id="ii.LXXII-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3170"></span>[327:3171](1080083.htm#fr_3170) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p7"></span> [Matt. xxii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#002)<span id="ii.LXXII-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3171"></span>[327:3172](1080083.htm#fr_3171) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p9"></span> [Prov. i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#001)<span id="ii.LXXII-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3172"></span>[327:3173](1080083.htm#fr_3172) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p10"></span> [Matt. v.
3](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#003)<span id="ii.LXXII-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3173"></span>[327:3174](1080083.htm#fr_3173) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p11"></span> God’s poor.

<span id="fn_3174"></span>[327:3175](1080083.htm#fr_3174) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p13"></span> [John vii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#024)<span id="ii.LXXII-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3175"></span>[327:3176](1080083.htm#fr_3175) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p14"></span> [Matt. xxiii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#023)<span id="ii.LXXII-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3176"></span>[327:3177](1080083.htm#fr_3176) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p15"></span> [Jer. xvii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#011)<span id="ii.LXXII-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3177"></span>[327:3178](1080083.htm#fr_3177) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p17"></span> [Ps.
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#004),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#006)<span id="ii.LXXII-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3178"></span>[327:3179](1080083.htm#fr_3178) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p18"></span> [2 Tim. ii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#002)<span id="ii.LXXII-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3179"></span>[327:3180](1080083.htm#fr_3179) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p19"></span> \[Coleridge has justly remarked on the
feebleness of this Latin word *justice*, as compared with our English
“righteousness.”—C.\]

<span id="fn_3180"></span>[328:3181](1080083.htm#fr_3180) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p21"></span> [Ps. lxxxv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/psa085.htm#010)<span id="ii.LXXII-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3181"></span>[328:3182](1080083.htm#fr_3181) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p23"></span> [1 Pet. i.
5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#005)<span id="ii.LXXII-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3182"></span>[328:3183](1080083.htm#fr_3182) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p24"></span> [Ps. xxvi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#009)<span id="ii.LXXII-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3183"></span>[328:3184](1080083.htm#fr_3183) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p24.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p25"></span> [Ps. xliii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa043.htm#001)<span id="ii.LXXII-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3184"></span>[328:3185](1080083.htm#fr_3184) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p25.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p26"></span> [Ps. lxxii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#002)<span id="ii.LXXII-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3185"></span>[328:3186](1080083.htm#fr_3185) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p27"></span> [Matt. xxv.
32](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#032)<span id="ii.LXXII-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3186"></span>[328:3187](1080083.htm#fr_3186) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p28"></span> [Job i.
9](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#009)<span id="ii.LXXII-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3187"></span>[328:3188](1080083.htm#fr_3187) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p28.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p29"></span> [Ps. xxxvii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#004)<span id="ii.LXXII-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3188"></span>[328:3189](1080083.htm#fr_3188) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p30"></span> [John xiv.
30](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#030)<span id="ii.LXXII-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3189"></span>[328:3190](1080083.htm#fr_3189) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p30.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p31"></span> [Eph. ii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#002)<span id="ii.LXXII-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3190"></span>[328:3191](1080083.htm#fr_3190) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p32.3"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p33"></span> [John i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003)<span id="ii.LXXII-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3191"></span>[328:3192](1080083.htm#fr_3191) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p33.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p34"></span> See on [Ps.
xli.](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#000)<span id="ii.LXXII-p34.1"></span>
p. 128, note 9.

<span id="fn_3192"></span>[329:3193](1080083.htm#fr_3192) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p34.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p35"></span> [John i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span id="ii.LXXII-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3193"></span>[329:3194](1080083.htm#fr_3193) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p35.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p36"></span> [Heb. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003)<span id="ii.LXXII-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3194"></span>[329:3195](1080083.htm#fr_3194) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p36.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p37"></span> [Mark xvi.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#019)<span id="ii.LXXII-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3195"></span>[329:3196](1080083.htm#fr_3195) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p37.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p38"></span> [Rom. vi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#009)<span id="ii.LXXII-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3196"></span>[329:3197](1080083.htm#fr_3196) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p39.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p40"></span> [Judg. vi.
36-38](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#036)<span
id="ii.LXXII-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3197"></span>[329:3198](1080083.htm#fr_3197) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p40.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p41"></span> [Matt. xv.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#024)<span id="ii.LXXII-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3198"></span>[329:3199](1080083.htm#fr_3198) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p41.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p42"></span> [Matt.
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#006)<span id="ii.LXXII-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3199"></span>[329:3200](1080083.htm#fr_3199) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p42.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p43"></span> [John x.
16](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#016)<span id="ii.LXXII-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3200"></span>[329:3201](1080083.htm#fr_3200) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p43.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p44"></span> [Rom. xv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#008)<span id="ii.LXXII-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3201"></span>[329:3202](1080083.htm#fr_3201) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p44.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p45"></span> [Rom. xv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#009)<span id="ii.LXXII-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3202"></span>[329:3203](1080083.htm#fr_3202) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p45.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p46"></span> [Ps. xviii.
43](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#043)<span id="ii.LXXII-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3203"></span>[330:3204](1080083.htm#fr_3203) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p47.4"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p48"></span> [Sir.
32:4](../../../bib/apo/sir032.htm#004),
[6](../../../bib/apo/sir032.htm#006)<span id="ii.LXXII-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3204"></span>[330:3205](1080083.htm#fr_3204) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p48.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p49"></span> [Ps. cxxxiv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#002)<span id="ii.LXXII-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3205"></span>[330:3206](1080083.htm#fr_3205) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p49.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p50"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
26](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#026)<span id="ii.LXXII-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3206"></span>[330:3207](1080083.htm#fr_3206) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p50.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p51"></span> [Mark xvi.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#019)<span id="ii.LXXII-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3207"></span>[330:3208](1080083.htm#fr_3207) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p51.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p52"></span> Or, “abiding.”

<span id="fn_3208"></span>[330:3209](1080083.htm#fr_3208) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p53.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p54"></span> [Ps. lxxii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#007)<span id="ii.LXXII-p54.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3209"></span>[330:3210](1080083.htm#fr_3209) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p54.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p55"></span> [Matt. iii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#017)<span id="ii.LXXII-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3210"></span>[330:3211](1080083.htm#fr_3210) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p55.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p56"></span> [Matt. xxiv.
14](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#014)<span id="ii.LXXII-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3211"></span>[331:3212](1080083.htm#fr_3211) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p57.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p58"></span> [Ps. cviii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#005)<span id="ii.LXXII-p58.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3212"></span>[331:3213](1080083.htm#fr_3212) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p58.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p59"></span> [Gen. iii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#019)<span id="ii.LXXII-p59.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3213"></span>[331:3214](1080083.htm#fr_3213) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p59.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p60"></span> \[It must be borne in mind that the
Hindoos as well as the sons of Phut were so called.—C.\]

<span id="fn_3214"></span>[331:3215](1080083.htm#fr_3214) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p61.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p62"></span> Oxf. <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.LXXII-p62.1"></span>mss</span>. add here: “Observe, brethren,
that it is said in this Psalm.”

<span id="fn_3215"></span>[331:3216](1080083.htm#fr_3215) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p62.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p63"></span> *Vid. infra*.

<span id="fn_3216"></span>[331:3217](1080083.htm#fr_3216) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p64.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p65"></span> [Rom. iii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#023)<span id="ii.LXXII-p65.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3217"></span>[331:3218](1080083.htm#fr_3217) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p65.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p66"></span> [Matt. xii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#029)<span id="ii.LXXII-p66.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3218"></span>[331:3219](1080083.htm#fr_3218) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p67.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p68"></span> [Rom. v.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#005)<span id="ii.LXXII-p68.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3219"></span>[331:3220](1080083.htm#fr_3219) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p69.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p70"></span> [Matt. vi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#012)<span id="ii.LXXII-p70.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3220"></span>[331:3221](1080083.htm#fr_3220) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p70.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p71"></span> [Matt. xxv.
27](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#027)<span id="ii.LXXII-p71.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3221"></span>[331:3222](1080083.htm#fr_3221) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p71.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p72"></span> [Ps. lxxii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#013)<span id="ii.LXXII-p72.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3222"></span>[332:3223](1080083.htm#fr_3222) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p72.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p73"></span> *Dignum et justum*, used then, as still,
in the service for Holy Communion. \[In all the liturgies, according to
Sir William Palmer. See A.N.F. vol. vii. p. 532, note 9.—C.\]

<span id="fn_3223"></span>[332:3224](1080083.htm#fr_3223) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p74.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p75"></span> [Rom. vi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#009)<span id="ii.LXXII-p75.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3224"></span>[332:3225](1080083.htm#fr_3224) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p75.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p76"></span> [Isa. liii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#008)<span id="ii.LXXII-p76.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3225"></span>[332:3226](1080083.htm#fr_3225) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p76.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p77"></span> [Ps. lxxii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#008)<span id="ii.LXXII-p77.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3226"></span>[332:3227](1080083.htm#fr_3226) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p77.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p78"></span> “And not silver,” E.V.

<span id="fn_3227"></span>[332:3228](1080083.htm#fr_3227) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p78.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p79"></span> [Prov. viii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#010)<span id="ii.LXXII-p79.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3228"></span>[332:3229](1080083.htm#fr_3228) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p79.3"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p80"></span> [Matt. vi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#010)<span id="ii.LXXII-p80.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3229"></span>[332:3230](1080083.htm#fr_3229) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p80.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p81"></span> [Eph. v.
32](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#032)<span id="ii.LXXII-p81.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3230"></span>[332:3231](1080083.htm#fr_3230) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p82.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p83"></span> [2 Cor. i.
20](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#020)<span id="ii.LXXII-p83.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3231"></span>[332:3232](1080083.htm#fr_3231) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p83.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p84"></span> [Luke xxiv.
44](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#044)<span id="ii.LXXII-p84.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3232"></span>[332:3233](1080083.htm#fr_3232) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p84.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p85"></span> [Isa. ii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#002)<span id="ii.LXXII-p85.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3233"></span>[332:3234](1080083.htm#fr_3233) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p85.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p86"></span> *Candidatio*.

<span id="fn_3234"></span>[332:3235](1080083.htm#fr_3234) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p86.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p87"></span> [Ps. civ.
16](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#016)<span id="ii.LXXII-p87.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3235"></span>[332:3236](1080083.htm#fr_3235) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p87.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p88"></span> [1 Cor. xii.
31](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#031)<span id="ii.LXXII-p88.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3236"></span>[332:3237](1080083.htm#fr_3236) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p88.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p89"></span> [Gal. v.
22](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#022)<span id="ii.LXXII-p89.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3237"></span>[333:3238](1080083.htm#fr_3237) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p89.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p90"></span> *Fœnum*.

<span id="fn_3238"></span>[333:3239](1080083.htm#fr_3238) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p90.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p91"></span> [Gen. i.
11](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#011)<span id="ii.LXXII-p91.1"></span>.
\[See p. 206, *supra*.—C.\]

<span id="fn_3239"></span>[333:3240](1080083.htm#fr_3239) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p91.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p92"></span> [Isa. xl.
6](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#006)<span id="ii.LXXII-p92.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3240"></span>[333:3241](1080083.htm#fr_3240) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p92.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p93"></span> [Gen. iv.
17](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#017)<span id="ii.LXXII-p93.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3241"></span>[333:3242](1080083.htm#fr_3241) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p94.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p95"></span> [Gal. iii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#016)<span id="ii.LXXII-p95.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3242"></span>[333:3243](1080083.htm#fr_3242) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p95.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p96"></span> [Gen. xxii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#018)<span id="ii.LXXII-p96.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3243"></span>[333:3244](1080083.htm#fr_3243) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p96.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p97"></span> [Rom. ix.
8](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#008)<span id="ii.LXXII-p97.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3244"></span>[333:3245](1080083.htm#fr_3244) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p97.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p98"></span> [Matt. vi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#009)<span id="ii.LXXII-p98.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3245"></span>[333:3246](1080083.htm#fr_3245) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p99.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p100"></span> Lit. “is belched.”

<span id="fn_3246"></span>[333:3247](1080083.htm#fr_3246) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p100.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p101"></span> [Isa. liv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#005)<span id="ii.LXXII-p101.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3247"></span>[333:3248](1080083.htm#fr_3247) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p101.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p102"></span> “Majesty,” most <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.LXXII-p102.1"></span> mss</span>., Ben.

<span id="fn_3248"></span>[333:3249](1080083.htm#fr_3248) <span
id="ii.LXXII-p102.4"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXII-p103"></span> Or, “world.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm LXXIII](1080084)
