[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080177)  [Next](1080179.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.CXLV"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLV-p1"></span> <span id="ii.CXLV-p1.1"></span><span
class="c20"><span id="ii.CXLV-p1.2"></span>Psalm CXLV. <span
id="fr_5860"></span>[5861](#fn_5860.md) </span>

<span id="ii.CXLV-p3"></span>1. …The title is, “Praise, to David
himself.” Praise to Christ Himself. And since He is called David, who
came to us of the seed of David, yet He was our King, ruling us, and
bringing us into His kingdom, therefore “Praise to David himself” is
understood to mean, Praise to Christ Himself. Christ according to the
flesh is David, because He is the Son of David: but according to His
Divine Nature He is the Creator of David, and Lord of David. “I will
exalt Thee, my God, my King; and I will bless Thy Name for the age, and
age upon age” ([Psa. 145.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#001.md)<span
id="ii.CXLV-p3.1"></span>). Ye see that the praise of God is here begun,
and this praise is carried on even to the end of the Psalm.…Now then
begin to praise, if thou intendest to praise for ever. He who will not
praise in this transitory “age,” will be silent when “age upon age” has
come. But lest any one should in any otherwise also understand what he
saith, “I will praise Thy Name for the age,” and should seek another
age, wherein to praise, he saith, “Every day will I bless Thee” ([Psa.
145.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#002)<span id="ii.CXLV-p3.2"></span>.md).
Praise then and bless the Lord thy God every day, that when single days
have passed, and there has come one day without end, thou mayest go from
praise to praise, as “from strength to strength.” <span
id="fr_5861"></span>[5862](#fn_5861.md) No day shall pass by, wherein I
bless Thee not. And it is no wonder, if in thy day of joy thou bless the
Lord. What if perchance some day of sorrow hath dawned on thee, as is
natural in the circumstances of our mortal nature, as there is abundance
of offences, as temptations are multiplied; what, if something sad
befall thee, a man; wilt thou cease to praise God? wilt thou cease to
bless thy Creator? If thou cease, thou hast lied in saying, “every day,”
etc. But if thou cease not, although it seem to thee to be ill with thee
in the day of thy sorrow, yet in thy God it shall be well with thee.…

<span id="ii.CXLV-p5"></span>2. “Great is the Lord, and very much to be
praised” ([Psa. 145.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#003.md)<span
id="ii.CXLV-p5.1"></span>). How much was he about to say? what terms was
he about to seek? How vast a conception hath he included in the one
word, “very much”? Imagine what thou wilt, for how can that be imagined,
which cannot be contained? “He is very much to be praised. And of His
Greatness there is no end;” therefore said he “very much:” lest
perchance thou begin to wish to praise, and think that thou canst reach
the end of His praises, whose Greatness can have no end. Think not then
that He, whose Greatness has no end, can ever be enough praised by thee.
Is it not then better that as He has no end, so neither should thy
praise have end? His Greatness is without end; let thy praise also be
without end.…

<span id="ii.CXLV-p6"></span>3. For how great things besides has His
boundless Goodness and illimitable Greatness made, which we do not know!
When we lift the gaze of our eyes even to the heaven, and then recall it
from sun, moon, and stars to the earth, and there is all this space
where our sight can wander; beyond the heavens who can extend the
eyesight of his mind, not to say of his flesh? So far then as His works
are known to us, let us praise Him through His works.  <span
id="fr_5862"></span>[5863](#fn_5862.md) “Generation and generation shall
praise Thy works” ([Psa. 145.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#004.md)<span
id="ii.CXLV-p7.2"></span>). Every generation shall praise Thy works. For
perhaps every generation is meant by “generation and generation.”…Did he
perchance mean to imply two generations by that repetition? For we are
in this generation sons of God, we shall be in another generation sons
of the Resurrection. Scripture hath called us “sons of the
Resurrection;” the Resurrection itself it hath called Regeneration. “In
the regeneration,” it saith, “when the Son of Man shall be seated in His
Majesty.” <span id="fr_5863"></span>[5864](#fn_5863.md) So also in another
place; “For they shall not marry, nor be given in marriage, for they are
the sons of the Resurrection.” <span
id="fr_5864"></span>[5865](#fn_5864.md) Therefore “generation and
generation shall praise Thy works.…And they shall tell out Thine
excellence.” For neither shall they praise Thy works, save in order to
“tell out Thine excellence.” Boys at school are set to praise, and all
such things are set before them to be praised, as God hath wrought: a
mortal is set to praise the sun, the sky, the earth; to come to even
lesser things, to praise a rose, or a laurel; all these are works of
God: they are set, they are undertaken, they are praised: the works are
lauded, of the Worker they are silent. I desire in the works to praise
the Creator: I love not a thankless praiser. Dost thou praise what He
hath made, and art silent of Him who made? In that which thou seest,
what is it that thou praisest? The form, the usefulness, some virtue,
some power in the things. If beauty delight thee, what is more beautiful
than the Maker? If usefulness be praised, what more useful than He who
made all things? If excellence be praised, what more excellent than He
by whom all things were made?…

<span id="ii.CXLV-p10"></span>4. “They shall speak of the magnificence
of the glory of Thy Holiness, and shall record Thy <span
id="page_658">p. 658</span> <span id="ii.CXLV-Page_658"></span>wondrous
deeds” ([Psa. 145.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#005.md)<span
id="ii.CXLV-p10.1"></span>). “And the excellence of Thy fearful works
shall they speak of: and Thy greatness, they shall relate it” ([Psa.
145.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#006.md)<span
id="ii.CXLV-p10.2"></span>). “The remembrance of the abundance of Thy
sweetness they shall pour forth” ([Psa.
145.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#007.md)<span
id="ii.CXLV-p10.3"></span>): none but Thine. See whether this man,
meditating on Thy works, hath turned aside from the Worker to the work:
see whether he hath sunk from Him who made, to the things which He made.
Of the things which He hath made, he hath made a step up to Him, not a
descent from Him to them. For if thou love these more than Him, thou
wilt not have Him. And what profit is it to thee to overflow with the
works, if the Worker leave thee? Truly thou shouldest love them; but
love Him more, and love them for His sake. For He doth not hold out
promises, without holding out threats also: if He held out no promises,
there would be no encouragement; if He held out no threats, there would
be no correction. They that praise Thee therefore shall “speak” also “of
the excellence of Thy terrible deeds;” the excellence of that work of
Thy hands which punisheth and administereth discipline, they shall speak
of, they shall not be silent: for they shall not proclaim Thine
everlasting kingdom, and be silent about Thine everlasting fire. For the
praise of God, setting thee in the way, ought to show thee both what
thou shouldest love, and what thou shouldest fear; what thou shouldest
seek, and what thou shouldest shun; what thou shouldest choose, and what
thou shouldest avoid. The time of choice is now, the time of receiving
will be hereafter. Let then the excellence of Thy terrible things be
told. Unlimited as it is, though “of Thy greatness there is no end,”
they shall not be silent about it. How shall they recount it, if there
is no end of it? They shall recount it when they praise it; and because
there is no end of it, so of His praise also there shall be no
end. <span id="fr_5865"></span>[5866](#fn_5865.md)

<span id="ii.CXLV-p12"></span>5. “The remembrance of the abundance of
Thy sweetness they shall pour forth.” O happy feasts! What shall they
eat, who thus shall “pour forth”!…So eat, that thou mayest pour forth
again; so receive, that thou mayest give. Thou eatest, when thou
learnest; thou pourest forth again, when thou teachest: thou eatest,
when thou hearest; thou pourest forth again, when thou preachest; but
that thou pourest forth, which thou hast first eaten. Finally, that most
eager feaster John, to whom the very table of the Lord sufficed not,
unless he leaned on the Lord’s breast, and of his inmost heart drank in
divine secrets; what did he pour forth? “In the beginning was the Word,
and the Word was with God.” <span id="fr_5866"></span>[5867](#fn_5866.md)
How is it that it sufficeth not to say, “Thy remembrance;” or, “the
remembrance of Thine abundance”? Because, what availeth it if it be
abundant, yet not sweet? So also it is annoying if it be sweet but too
little.

<span id="ii.CXLV-p14"></span>6. …By “pouring forth” this, His preachers
“shall exult in His righteousness” not in their own. What then hast Thou
done unto us, O Lord, whom we praise, that we should be, that we should
praise, that we should “exult in Thy righteousness,” that we should
“utter forth the remembrance of the abundance of Thy sweetness”? Let us
tell it, and, as we tell, let us praise.

<span id="ii.CXLV-p15"></span>7. “Merciful and pitiful is the Lord;
long-suffering, and very merciful” ([Psa.
145.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#008.md)<span
id="ii.CXLV-p15.1"></span>). “Sweet is the Lord to all, and His
compassions reach into all His works” ([Psa.
145.9](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#009.md)<span
id="ii.CXLV-p15.2"></span>). Were He not such as this, there would be no
seeking to recover us. Consider thyself: what didst thou deserve, O
sinner? Despiser of God, what didst thou deserve? See if aught occur to
thee but penalty, if aught occur to thee but punishment. Thou seest then
what was due to thee, and what He hath given, who gave gratis. There was
given pardon to the sinner; there was given the spirit of justification;
there was given charity and love, wherein thou mayest do all good works;
and beyond this, He will give thee also life everlasting, and fellowship
with the angels: all of His mercy.…Hear the Scripture: “I will not the
death of a sinner, but rather that he should turn, and live.”  <span
id="fr_5867"></span>[5868](#fn_5867.md) By these words of God, he is
brought back to hope; but there is another snare to be feared, lest
through this very hope he sin the more. What then didst thou also say,
thou who through hope sinnest yet more? “Whensoever I turn, God will
forgive me all; I will do whatsoever I will.” Say not then, “To-morrow I
will turn, to-morrow I will please God; and all to-day’s and yesterday’s
deeds shall be forgiven me.” Thou sayest true: God hath promised pardon
to thy conversion; He hath not promised a to-morrow to thy delay. <span
id="fr_5868"></span>[5869](#fn_5868.md)

<span id="ii.CXLV-p18"></span>8. “Sweet is the Lord to all, and His
compassions are over all His works.” Why then doth He condemn? why doth
He scourge? Are not they whom He condemneth, whom He scourgeth, His
works? Plainly they are. And wilt thou know how “His compassions are
over all His works”? Thence is that long-suffering, whereby “He maketh
His sun to rise on the evil and on the good.” <span
id="fr_5869"></span>[5870](#fn_5869.md) Are not “His compassions over all
His works, who sendeth rain upon the just and upon the unjust”? In His
long-suffering He waiteth for the sinner, saying, “Turn ye to Me, and I
will turn to you.” <span id="fr_5870"></span>[5871](#fn_5870.md) Are <span
id="page_659">p. 659</span> <span id="ii.CXLV-Page_659"></span>not “His
compassions over all His works”? And when He saith, “Go ye into
everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels,” <span
id="fr_5871"></span>[5872](#fn_5871.md) this is not His compassion, but His
severity. His compassion is given to His works: His severity is not over
His works, but over thy works. Lastly, if thou remove thine own evil
works, and there remain in thee nought but His work, His compassion will
not leave thee: but if thou leavest not thy works, there will be
severity over thy works, not over His works.

<span id="ii.CXLV-p22"></span>9. “Let all Thy works, O Lord, confess to
Thee, and let Thy saints bless Thee” ([Psa.
145.10](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#010.md)<span
id="ii.CXLV-p22.1"></span>). How so? Is not the earth His work? Are not
the trees His work? Cattle, beasts, fish, fowl, are not they His works?
Plainly they too are. And how shall these too confess to Him? I see
indeed in the angels that His works confess to Him, for the angels are
His works: and men are His works; and when men confess to Him, His works
confess to Him; but have trees and stones the voice of confession? Yes,
verily; “let all” His “works confess to” Him. What sayest thou? even the
earth and the trees?…But there ariseth the same question in regard of
praise, as in regard of confession. For if earth and all things devoid
of sensation therefore cannot confess, because they have no voice to
confess with; neither will they be able to praise, because they have no
voice to proclaim with. But do not those Three Children enumerate all
things, as they walked amid the harmless flames, who had leisure not
only not to fear, but even to praise God? They say to all things,
heavenly and earthly, “Bless ye the Lord, praise Him and magnify Him for
ever.” <span id="fr_5872"></span>[5873](#fn_5872.md) Behold how they
praise. Let none think that the dumb stone or dumb animal hath reason
wherewith to comprehend God. They who have thought this, have erred far
from the truth. God hath ordered everything, and made everything: to
some He hath given sense and understanding and immortality, as to the
angels; to some He hath given sense and understanding with mortality, as
to man; to some He hath given bodily sense, yet gave them not
understanding, or immortality, as to cattle: to some He hath given
neither sense, nor understanding, nor immortality, as to herbs, trees,
stones: yet even these cannot be wanting in their kind, and by certain
degrees He hath ordered His creation, from earth up to heaven, from
visible to invisible, from mortal to immortal. This framework of
creation, this most perfectly ordered beauty, ascending from lowest to
highest, descending from highest to lowest, never broken, but tempered
together of things unlike, all praiseth God. Wherefore then doth all
praise God? Because when thou considerest it, and seest its beauty, thou
in it praisest God. The beauty of the earth is a kind of voice of the
dumb earth.…And this which thou hast found in it, is the very voice of
its confession, that thou praise the Creator. When thou hast thought on
the universal beauty of this world, doth not its very beauty as it were
with one voice answer thee, “I made not myself, God made me”?

<span id="ii.CXLV-p24"></span>10. For when Thy saints bless Thee, what
say they? “They shall tell the glory of Thy kingdom, and talk of Thy
Power” ([Psa. 145.11](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#011.md)<span
id="ii.CXLV-p24.1"></span>). How powerful is God, who hath made the
earth! how powerful is God, who hath filled the earth with good things!
how powerful is God, who hath given to the animals each its own life!
how powerful is God, who hath given different seeds to the womb of the
earth, that they might make to spring up such various shoots, such
beautiful trees! how powerful, how great is God! Do thou ask, creation
answereth, and by its answer, as by the confession of the creature,
thou, O saint of God, blessest God, and “talkest of His power.”

<span id="ii.CXLV-p25"></span>11. “That they may make known to the sons
of men Thy power, and the glory of the greatness of the beauty of Thy
kingdom” ([Psa. 145.12](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#012.md)<span
id="ii.CXLV-p25.1"></span>). Thy saints then commend “the glory of the
greatness of the beauty of Thy kingdom,” the glory of the greatness of
its beauty. There is a certain “greatness of the beauty of Thy kingdom:”
that is, Thy kingdom hath beauty, and great beauty. Since whatever hath
beauty, hath beauty from Thee, how great beauty hath Thy whole kingdom!
Let not the kingdom frighten us: it hath beauty also, wherewith to
delight us. For what is that beauty, which the saints shall hereafter
enjoy, to whom it shall be said, “Come, ye blessed of My Father, enjoy
the kingdom”? <span id="fr_5873"></span>[5874](#fn_5873.md) Whence shall
they come? whither shall they come? Behold, brethren, and, if ye can, as
far as ye can, think of the beauty of that kingdom which is to come;
whence our prayer saith, “Thy kingdom come.” For that kingdom we desire
may come, that kingdom the saints proclaim to be coming. Observe this
world: it is beautiful. How beautiful are earth, sea, air, heavens,
stars. Do not all these frighten him who considereth them? Is not the
beauty of them so conspicuous, that it seemeth as though nothing more
beautiful could be found? And here, in this beauty, in this fairness
almost unspeakable, here worm and mice and all creeping things of the
earth live with thee, they live with thee in all this beauty. How great
is the beauty of that kingdom where none but angels live with Thee!
There is a greatness of a certain beauty; let it be loved before it is
seen, that when it is seen, it may be retained.

<span id="ii.CXLV-p27"></span><span id="page_660">p. 660</span> <span
id="ii.CXLV-Page_660"></span>12. “Thy kingdom.” What kingdom mean I? “a
kingdom of all ages.” For the kingdom of this age too hath its own
beauty, but there is not in it that greatness of beauty, such as in the
“kingdom of all ages.” “And Thy dominion is in every generation and
generation” ([Psa. 145.13](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#013.md)<span
id="ii.CXLV-p27.1"></span>). This is the repetition we noticed,
signifying either every generation, or the generation which will be
after this generation. “Faithful is the Lord in His words, and holy in
all His works.” <span id="fr_5874"></span>[5875](#fn_5874.md) “Faithful is
the Lord in His words:” for what hath He promised that He hath not
given? “Faithful is the Lord in His words.” Hereto there are certain
things which He hath promised, and hath not given; but let Him be
believed from the things which He hath given. We might well believe Him,
if He only spake: He willed not that we should believe Him speaking, but
that we should have His Scriptures in our hands:…as though a kind of
bond of God’s, which all who pass by might read, and might keep to the
path of its promise. And how great things hath He already paid in
accordance with that bond! Do men hesitate to believe Him concerning the
Resurrection of the dead and the Life to come, which alone now remaineth
to be paid, when, if He come to reckon with the unbelievers, the
unbelievers must blush? If God say to thee, “Thou hast My bond: I have
promised judgment, the separation of good and bad, everlasting life for
the faithful, and wilt thou not believe? There in My bond read all that
I have promised, reckon with me: verily even by counting up what I have
paid, thou canst believe that I shall pay what still I owe. In that bond
thou hast My only-begotten Son promised, “Whom I spared not, but gave
Him up for you all:” <span id="fr_5875"></span>[5876](#fn_5875.md) reckon
this then among what is paid. Read the bond: I promised therein that I
would give by My Son the earnest of the Holy Spirit: reckon that as
paid. I promised therein the blood and the crowns of the glorious
Martyrs; let the White Mass <span id="fr_5876"></span>[5877](#fn_5876.md)
remind you that My debt has been paid.…He setteth before the eyes of all
His payment of His debts: some He hath paid in the time of our
ancestors, which we saw not: some He hath paid in our times, which they
saw not; throughout all generations He hath paid what was written. And
what remaineth? Do men not believe Him, when He hath paid all this? What
remaineth? Behold thou hast reckoned: all this He hath paid: is He
become unfaithful for the few things which remain? God forbid!
Wherefore? Because “the Lord is faithful in His words, and holy in all
His works.”

<span id="ii.CXLV-p31"></span>13. “The Lord strengtheneth all that are
falling” ([Psa. 145.14](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#014.md)<span
id="ii.CXLV-p31.1"></span>). But who are “all that are falling”? All
indeed fall in a general sense, but he meaneth those who fall in a
particular way. For many fall from Him, many also fall from their own
imaginations. If they had evil imaginations, they fall from them, and
“God strengthened all that are falling.” They who lose anything in this
world, yet are holy, are as it were dishonoured in this world, from rich
become poor, from honoured of low estate, yet are they God’s saints;
they are, as it were, falling. But “God strengtheneth.” For “the just
falleth seven times, and riseth again; but the wicked shall be weakened
in evils.” <span id="fr_5877"></span>[5878](#fn_5877.md) When evils befall
the wicked, they are weakened thereby; when evils befall the righteous,
“the Lord strengtheneth all that are falling.”…“And lifteth up all those
that have been cast down:” all, that is, who belong to him; for “God
resisteth the proud.” <span id="fr_5878"></span>[5879](#fn_5878.md)

<span id="ii.CXLV-p34"></span>14. “The eyes of all hope upon Thee, and
Thou givest them food in due season” ([Psa.
145.15](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#015.md)<span
id="ii.CXLV-p34.1"></span>). Just as when thou refreshest a sick man in
due season, when he ought to receive, then Thou givest, and what he
ought to receive, that Thou givest. Sometimes then men long, and he
giveth not: he who tendeth, knoweth the time to give. Wherefore say I
this, brethren? Lest any one be faint, if perchance he hath not been
heard, when making some righteous request of God. For when he maketh any
unrighteous request, he is heard to his punishment: but when making some
righteous request of God, if perchance he have not been heard, let him
not be down-hearted, let him not faint, let his eyes wait for the food,
which He giveth in due season. When He giveth not, He therefore giveth
not, lest that which He giveth do harm. <span
id="fr_5879"></span>[5880](#fn_5879.md) …“Thou givest them meat in due
season.”

<span id="ii.CXLV-p36"></span>15. “Thou openest Thine Hand, and fillest
every living thing with blessing” ([Psa.
145.16](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#016.md)<span
id="ii.CXLV-p36.1"></span>). Though sometimes Thou givest not, yet “in
due season” Thou givest: Thou delayest, not deniest, and that in due
season.” “Righteous is the Lord in all His ways, and holy in all His
works” ([Psa. 145.17](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#017.md)<span
id="ii.CXLV-p36.2"></span>). Both when He smiteth and when He healeth,
He is righteous, and in Him unrighteousness is not. Finally, all His
saints, when set in the midst of tribulation, have first praised His
righteousness, and so sought His blessings. They first have said, “What
Thou doest is righteous.” So did Daniel ask, and other holy men:
“Righteous are Thy judgments: rightly have we <span id="page_661">p.
661</span> <span id="ii.CXLV-Page_661"></span>suffered: deservedly have
we suffered.” They laid not unrighteousness to God, they laid not to Him
injustice and folly. First they praised Him scourging, and so they felt
Him feeding.

<span id="ii.CXLV-p37"></span>16. “The Lord is nigh unto all that call
upon Him” ([Psa. 145.18](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#018.md)<span
id="ii.CXLV-p37.1"></span>). Where then is that, “Then shall they call
upon Me, and I will not hear them”? <span
id="fr_5880"></span>[5881](#fn_5880.md) See then what follows: “all who
call upon Him in truth.” For many call upon Him, but not in truth. They
seek something else from Him, but seek not Himself. Why lovest thou God?
“Because He hath made me whole.” That is clear: it was He that made thee
so. For from none else cometh health, save Him. “Because He gave me,”
saith another, “a rich wife, whereas I before had nothing, and one that
obeyeth me.” This too He gave: thou sayest true. “He gave me,” saith
another, “sons many and good, He gave me a household, He gave me all
good things.” Dost thou love Him for this?…Therefore if God is good, who
hath given thee what thou hast, how much more blessed wilt thou be when
He hath given thee Himself! Thou hast desired all these things of Him: I
beseech thee desire of Him Himself also. For these things are not truly
sweeter than He is, nor in any way are they to be compared to Him. He
then who preferreth God Himself to all the things which he has received,
whereat he rejoiceth, to the things he has received, he “calleth upon
God in truth.”…

<span id="ii.CXLV-p39"></span>17. “He will perform the will of them that
fear Him” ([Psa. 145.19](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#019.md)<span
id="ii.CXLV-p39.1"></span>). He will perform it, He will perform it:
though He perform it not at once, yet He will perform it. Certainly if
therefore thou fearest God, that thou mayest do His will, behold even He
in a manner ministereth to thee; He doeth thy will. “And He shall hear
their prayer, and save them.” Thou seest that for this purpose the
Physician hears, that He may save. When? Hear the Apostle telling thee.
“For we are saved in hope: but hope which is seen is not hope: but if
what we see not we hope for, then do we with patience wait for it: <span
id="fr_5881"></span>[5882](#fn_5881.md) “the salvation,” that is, which
Peter calleth “ready to be revealed in the last time.” <span
id="fr_5882"></span>[5883](#fn_5882.md)

<span id="ii.CXLV-p42"></span>18. “The Lord guardeth all that love Him,
and all sinners He will destroy” ([Psa.
145.20](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#020.md)<span
id="ii.CXLV-p42.1"></span>). Thou seest that there is severity with Him,
with whom is so great sweetness. He will save all that hope in Him, all
the faithful, all that fear Him, all that call upon Him in truth: “and
all sinners He will destroy.” What “all sinners,” save those who
persevere in sin; who dare to blame God, not themselves; who daily argue
against God; who despair of pardon for their sins, and from this very
despair heap up their sins; or who perversely promise themselves pardon,
and through this very promise depart not from their sins and impiety?
The time will come for all these to be separated, and for the two
divisions to be made of them, one on the right hand, the other on the
left; and for the righteous to receive the everlasting Kingdom, the
wicked to go into everlasting fire. Since this is so, and we have heard
the blessing of the Lord, the works of the Lord, the wondrous things of
the Lord, the mercies of the Lord, the severity of the Lord, His
Providence over all His works, the confession of all His works; observe
how He concludeth in His praise, “My mouth shall speak the praise of the
Lord, and let all flesh bless His holy Name for ever and ever” ([Psa.
145.21](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#021.md)<span
id="ii.CXLV-p42.2"></span>).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5860"></span>[657:5861](1080178.htm#fr_5860.md) <span
id="ii.CXLV-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLV-p2"></span> Lat. CXLIV. Sermon to the people.

<span id="fn_5861"></span>[657:5862](1080178.htm#fr_5861.md) <span
id="ii.CXLV-p3.3"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLV-p4"></span> [Ps. lxxxiv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#007.md)<span id="ii.CXLV-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5862"></span>[657:5863](1080178.htm#fr_5862.md) <span
id="ii.CXLV-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLV-p7"></span> [Rom. i.
20](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#020.md)<span id="ii.CXLV-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5863"></span>[657:5864](1080178.htm#fr_5863.md) <span
id="ii.CXLV-p7.3"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLV-p8"></span> [Matt. xix.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#028.md)<span id="ii.CXLV-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5864"></span>[657:5865](1080178.htm#fr_5864.md) <span
id="ii.CXLV-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLV-p9"></span> [Luke
20:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#035.md),
[36](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#036.md)<span id="ii.CXLV-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5865"></span>[658:5866](1080178.htm#fr_5865.md) <span
id="ii.CXLV-p10.4"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLV-p11"></span> [Ps. lxxxiv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#004.md)<span id="ii.CXLV-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5866"></span>[658:5867](1080178.htm#fr_5866.md) <span
id="ii.CXLV-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLV-p13"></span> [John i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001.md)<span id="ii.CXLV-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5867"></span>[658:5868](1080178.htm#fr_5867.md) <span
id="ii.CXLV-p15.3"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLV-p16"></span> [Ezek. xxxiii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#011.md)<span id="ii.CXLV-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5868"></span>[658:5869](1080178.htm#fr_5868.md) <span
id="ii.CXLV-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLV-p17"></span> [Ecclesiasticus
5.7](../../../bib/apo/sir005.htm#007.md)<span id="ii.CXLV-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5869"></span>[658:5870](1080178.htm#fr_5869.md) <span
id="ii.CXLV-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLV-p19"></span> [Matt. v.
45](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#045.md)<span id="ii.CXLV-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5870"></span>[658:5871](1080178.htm#fr_5870.md) <span
id="ii.CXLV-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLV-p20"></span> [Zech. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#003.md)<span id="ii.CXLV-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5871"></span>[659:5872](1080178.htm#fr_5871.md) <span
id="ii.CXLV-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLV-p21"></span> [Matt. xxv.
41](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#041.md)<span id="ii.CXLV-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5872"></span>[659:5873](1080178.htm#fr_5872.md) <span
id="ii.CXLV-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLV-p23"></span> <span id="ii.CXLV-p23.1"></span>Song of
Three Children, 29, etc.

<span id="fn_5873"></span>[659:5874](1080178.htm#fr_5873.md) <span
id="ii.CXLV-p25.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLV-p26"></span> [Matt. xxv.
34](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#034.md)<span id="ii.CXLV-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5874"></span>[660:5875](1080178.htm#fr_5874.md) <span
id="ii.CXLV-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLV-p28"></span> This verse is not contained in the
English version.

<span id="fn_5875"></span>[660:5876](1080178.htm#fr_5875.md) <span
id="ii.CXLV-p28.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLV-p29"></span> [Rom. viii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#032.md)<span id="ii.CXLV-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5876"></span>[660:5877](1080178.htm#fr_5876.md) <span
id="ii.CXLV-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLV-p30"></span> This sermon appears from this to have
been preached in the Basilica of the “White Mass.” The Roman
Martyrology, Aug. 24, has, “at Carthage, of the 300 holy martyrs, who,
in the reign of Valerius and Gallienus, first suffered manifold
torments, and at last were thrown into a burning lime-pit, and won a
glorious crown of martyrdom. Hence they had the name of ‘The White
Mass.’” There was a Basilica in memory of them at Utica. Serm. 306 of
St. Aug. is on their festival. See also Prud. *Peristeph*. 13; Ruinart,
pp. 199, 518.

<span id="fn_5877"></span>[660:5878](1080178.htm#fr_5877.md) <span
id="ii.CXLV-p31.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLV-p32"></span> [Prov. xxiv.
16](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#016.md)<span id="ii.CXLV-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5878"></span>[660:5879](1080178.htm#fr_5878.md) <span
id="ii.CXLV-p32.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLV-p33"></span> [Jas. iv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#006.md)<span id="ii.CXLV-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5879"></span>[660:5880](1080178.htm#fr_5879.md) <span
id="ii.CXLV-p34.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLV-p35"></span> [2 Cor. xii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#007.md)<span id="ii.CXLV-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5880"></span>[661:5881](1080178.htm#fr_5880.md) <span
id="ii.CXLV-p37.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLV-p38"></span> [Prov. i.
28](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#028.md)<span id="ii.CXLV-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5881"></span>[661:5882](1080178.htm#fr_5881.md) <span
id="ii.CXLV-p39.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLV-p40"></span> [Rom. viii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#024.md)<span id="ii.CXLV-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5882"></span>[661:5883](1080178.htm#fr_5882.md) <span
id="ii.CXLV-p40.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLV-p41"></span> [1 Pet. i.
5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#005.md)<span id="ii.CXLV-p41.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm CXLVI](1080179.md)
