[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080100)  [Next](1080102) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.XC"></span>

<span id="ii.XC-p1"></span> <span id="ii.XC-p1.1"></span><span
class="c20"><span id="ii.XC-p1.2"></span>Psalm XC. <span
id="fr_4231"></span>[4232](#fn_4231) </span>

<span id="ii.XC-p3"></span>1. This Psalm is entitled, “The prayer of
Moses the man of God,” through whom, His man, God gave the law to His
people, through whom He freed them from the house of slavery, and led
them forty years through the wilderness. Moses was therefore the
Minister of the Old, and the Prophet of the New Testament. For “all
these things,” saith the Apostle, “happened unto them for ensamples: and
they are written for our admonition, unto whom the ends of the world
come.”  <span id="fr_4232"></span>[4233](#fn_4232) In accordance
therefore with this dispensation which was vouchsafed to Moses, this
Psalm is to be examined, as it has received its title from his prayer.

<span id="ii.XC-p5"></span>2. “Lord,” he saith, “Thou hast been our
refuge from one generation to another” ([Psa.
90.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#001)<span id="ii.XC-p5.1"></span>):
either in every generation, or in two generations, the old and new:
because, as I said, he was the Minister of the Testament that related to
the old generation, and the Prophet of the Testament which appertained
to the new. Jesus Himself, the Surety of that covenant, and the
Bridegroom in the marriage which He entered into in that generation,
saith, “Had ye believed Moses, ye would have believed Me: for he wrote
of Me.” <span id="fr_4233"></span>[4234](#fn_4233) Now it is not to be
believed that this Psalm was entirely the composition of that Moses, as
it is not distinguished by any of those of his expressions <span
id="fr_4234"></span>[4235](#fn_4234) which are used in his songs: but
the name of the great servant of God is used for the sake of some
intimation, which should direct the attention of the reader or listener.
“Lord,” he saith, “Thou hast been our refuge from one generation to the
other.”

<span id="ii.XC-p8"></span>3. He adds, how He became our refuge, since
He began to be that, viz. a refuge, to us which He had not been before,
not that He had not existed before He became our refuge: “Before the
mountains were brought forth, or ever the earth and the world were made:
and from age even unto age Thou art” ([Psa.
90.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#002)<span id="ii.XC-p8.1"></span>).
Thou therefore who art for ever, and before we were, and before the
world was, hast become our refuge ever since we turned to Thee. But the
expression, “before the mountains,” etc., seems to me to contain a
particular meaning; for mountains are the higher parts of the earth, and
if God was before even the earth were formed (or, as some books have it,
from the same Greek word, “framed” <span
id="fr_4235"></span>[4236](#fn_4235) ), since it was by Him that it was
formed, what is the need of saying that He was before the mountains, or
any certain parts of it, since God was not only before the earth, but
before heaven and earth, and even the whole bodily and spiritual
creation? But it may certainly be that the whole rational creation is
marked by this distinction; that while the loftiness of Angels is
signified by the mountains, the lowliness of man is meant by the earth.
And for this reason, although all the works of creation are not
improperly said to be either made or formed; nevertheless, if there is
any propriety in these words, the Angels are “made;” for as they are
enumerated among His heavenly works, the enumeration itself is thus
concluded: “He spake the word, and they were made; He commanded, and
they were created;” <span id="fr_4236"></span>[4237](#fn_4236) but the
earth was “formed,” that man might thence be created in the body. For
the Scripture uses this word, where we read, God made, or “God formed
man out of the dust of the ground.” <span
id="fr_4237"></span>[4238](#fn_4237) Before then the noblest parts of
the creation (for what is higher than the rational part of the Heavenly
creation) were made: before the earth was made, that Thou mightest have
worshippers upon the earth; and even this is little, as all these had a
beginning either in or with time; but “from age to age Thou art.” It
would have been better, from everlasting to everlasting: for God, who is
before the ages, exists not from a certain age, nor to a certain age,
which has an end, since He is without end. But it often happens in the
Scripture, that the equivocal Greek word causes the Latin translator to
put age for eternity and eternity for age. But he very rightly does not
say, Thou wast from ages, and unto ages Thou shalt be: but puts the verb
in the present, intimating that the substance of God is altogether
immutable. It is not, He <span id="page_442">p. 442</span> <span
id="ii.XC-Page_442"></span>was, and Shall be, but only Is. Whence the
expression, <span class="c21"><span id="ii.XC-p11.2"></span>I Am that I
Am</span>; and, <span class="c21"><span id="ii.XC-p11.3"></span>I
Am</span> “hath sent me unto you;” <span
id="fr_4238"></span>[4239](#fn_4238) and, “Thou shalt change them, and
they shall be changed: but Thou art the same, and Thy years shall not
fail.” <span id="fr_4239"></span>[4240](#fn_4239) Behold then the
eternity that is our refuge, that we may fly thither from the mutability
of time, there to remain for evermore.

<span id="ii.XC-p14"></span>4. But as our life here is exposed to
numerous and great temptations, and it is to be feared lest we may be
turned aside by them from that refuge, let us see what in consequence of
this the prayer of the man of God seeks for. “Turn not Thou man to
lowness” ([Psa. 90.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#003)<span
id="ii.XC-p14.1"></span>): that is, let not man, turned aside from Thy
eternal and sublime things, lust for things of time, savour of earthly
things. This prayer is what God has Himself enjoined us, in the Prayer,
“Lead us not into temptation,” <span
id="fr_4240"></span>[4241](#fn_4240) He adds, “Again Thou sayest, Come
again, ye children of men.” As if he said, I ask of Thee what Thou hast
commanded me to ask: giving glory to His grace, that “he that glorieth,
in the Lord he may glory:” <span id="fr_4241"></span>[4242](#fn_4241)
without whose help we cannot by an exertion of our own will overcome the
temptations of this life. “Turn not Thou man to lowness: again thou
sayest, Turn again, ye children of men.” But grant what Thou has
enjoined, by hearing the prayer <span
id="fr_4242"></span>[4243](#fn_4242) of him who can at least pray, and
aiding the faith of the willing soul.

<span id="ii.XC-p18"></span>5. “For a thousand years in Thy sight are
but as yesterday, which is past by” ([Psa.
90.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#004)<span id="ii.XC-p18.1"></span>):
hence we ought to turn to Thy refuge, where Thou art without any change,
from the fleeting scenes around us; since however long a time may be
wished for for this life, “a thousand years in Thy sight are but as
yesterday:” not as to-morrow, which is to come: for all limited periods
of time are reckoned as having already passed. Hence the Apostle’s
choice is rather to aim at what is before, <span
id="fr_4243"></span>[4244](#fn_4243) that is, to desire things eternal,
and to forget things behind, by which temporal matters should be
understood. But that no one may imagine a thousand years are reckoned by
God as one day, as if with God days were so long, when this is only said
in contempt of the extent of time: he adds, “and as a watch in the
night:” which only lasts three hours. Nevertheless men have ventured to
assert their knowledge of times, to the pretenders to which our Lord
said, “It is not for you to know the times or seasons, which the Father
hath put in His own power:” <span id="fr_4244"></span>[4245](#fn_4244)
and they allege that this period may be defined six thousand years, as
of six days. Nor have they heeded the words, “are but as one day which
is past by:” for, when this was uttered, not a thousand years only had
passed, and the expression, “as a watch in the night,” ought to have
warned them that they might not be deceived by the uncertainty of the
seasons: for even if the six first days in which God finished His works
seemed to give some plausibility to their opinion, six watches, which
amount to eighteen hours, will not consist with that opinion.

<span id="ii.XC-p21"></span>6. Next, the man of God, or rather the
Prophetic spirit, seems to be reciting some law written in the secret
wisdom of God, in which He has fixed a limit to the sinful life of
mortals, and determined the troubles of mortality, in the following
words: “Their years are as things which are nothing worth: in the
morning let it fade away like the grass” ([Psa.
90.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#005)<span id="ii.XC-p21.1"></span>).
The happiness therefore of the heirs of the old covenant, which they
asked of the Lord their God as a great boon, attained to receive this
Law in His mysterious Providence. Moses seems to be reciting it: “Their
years shall be things which are esteemed as nothing.” Such are those
things which are not before they are come: and when come, shall soon not
be: for they do not come to be here, but to be gone. “In the morning,”
that is, before they come, “as a heat <span
id="fr_4245"></span>[4246](#fn_4245) let it pass by;” but “in the
evening,” it means after they come, “let it fall, and be dried up, and
withered” ([Psa. 90.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#006)<span
id="ii.XC-p22.1"></span>). It is “to fall” in death, be “dried up” in
the corpse, “withered” in the dust. What is this but flesh, wherein is
the accursed lust of fleshly things? “For all flesh is grass, and all
the goodliness of man as the flower of the field; the grass withereth,
the flower fadeth: but the word of the Lord abideth for ever.” <span
id="fr_4246"></span>[4247](#fn_4246)

<span id="ii.XC-p24"></span>7. Making no secret that this fate is a
penalty inflicted for sin, he adds at once, “For we consume away in Thy
displeasure, and are troubled at Thy wrathful indignation” ([Psa.
90.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#007)<span id="ii.XC-p24.1"></span>):
we consume away in our weakness, and are troubled from the fear of
death; for we are become weak, and yet fearful to end that weakness.
“Another,” saith He, “shall gird thee, and carry thee whither thou
wouldest not:”  <span id="fr_4247"></span>[4248](#fn_4247) although not
to be punished, but to be crowned, by martyrdom; and the soul of our
Lord, transforming us into Himself, was sorrowful even unto death: for
“the Lord’s going out” is no other than in “death.”

<span id="ii.XC-p26"></span>8. “Thou hast set our misdeeds before Thee”
([Psa. 90.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#008)<span
id="ii.XC-p26.1"></span>): that is, Thou hast not dissembled Thine
anger: “and our age in the light of Thy countenance.” “The light of Thy
countenance” answers to “before Thee,” and to “our misdeeds,” as above.

<span id="ii.XC-p27"></span>9. “For all our days are failed, and in
Thine anger we have failed” ([Psa.
90.9](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#009)<span id="ii.XC-p27.1"></span>).
These words <span id="page_443">p. 443</span> <span
id="ii.XC-Page_443"></span>sufficiently prove that our subjection to
death is a punishment. He speaks of our days failing, either because men
fail in them from loving things that pass away, or because they are
reduced to so small a number; which he asserts in the following lines:
“our years are spent in thought like a spider.”  <span
id="fr_4248"></span>[4249](#fn_4248) “The days of our age are threescore
years and ten; and though men be so strong that they come to fourscore
years, yet is more of them but labour and sorrow” ([Psa.
90.10](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#010)<span id="ii.XC-p28.1"></span>).
These words appear to express the shortness and misery of this life:
since those who have reached their seventieth year are styled old men.
Up to eighty, however, they appear to have some strength; but if they
live beyond this, their existence is laborious through multiplied
sorrows. Yet many even below the age of seventy experience an old age
the most infirm and wretched: and old men have often been found to be
wonderfully vigorous even beyond eighty years. It is therefore better to
search for some spiritual meaning in these numbers. For the anger of God
is not greater on the sins of Adam (through whom alone “sin entered into
the world, and death by sin, and so death passed upon all men”), <span
id="fr_4249"></span>[4250](#fn_4249) because they live a much shorter
time than the men of old; since even the length of their days is
ridiculed in the comparison of a thousand years to yesterday that is
past, and to three hours: especially since at the very time when they
provoked the anger of God to send the deluge in which they perished,
their life was at its longest span.

<span id="ii.XC-p30"></span>10. Moreover, seventy and eighty years equal
a hundred and fifty; a number which the Psalms clearly insinuate to be a
sacred one. One hundred and fifty have the same relative signification
as fifteen, the latter number being composed of seven and eight
together: the first of which points to the Old Testament through the
observation of the Sabbath; the latter to the New, referring to the
resurrection of our Lord. Hence the fifteen steps in the Temple. Hence
in the Psalms, fifteen “songs of degrees.” Hence the waters of the
deluge overtopped the highest mountains by fifteen cubits: <span
id="fr_4250"></span>[4251](#fn_4250) and many other instances of the
same nature. “Our years are passed in thought like a spider.” We were
labouring in things corruptible, corruptible works were we weaving
together: which, as the Prophet Isaiah saith, by no means covered
us. <span id="fr_4251"></span>[4252](#fn_4251) “The days of our years
are in themselves,” etc. A distinction is here made between themselves
and their strength: <span id="fr_4252"></span>[4253](#fn_4252) “in
themselves,” that is, in the years or days themselves, may mean in
temporal things, which are promised in the Old Testament, signified by
the number seventy; “but if” not in themselves, but “in their strength,”
refers not to temporal things, but to things eternal, “fourscore years,”
as the New Testament contains the hope of a new life and resurrection
for evermore: and what is added, that if they pass this latter
period, <span id="fr_4253"></span>[4254](#fn_4253) “their strength is
labour and sorrow,” intimates that such shall be the fate of him who
goes beyond this faith, and seeks for more. It may also be understood
thus: because although we are established in the New Testament, which
the number eighty signifies, yet still our life is one of labour and
sorrow, while “we groan within ourselves, awaiting the adoption, to wit,
the redemption of our body; for we are saved by hope; and if we hope for
that we see not, then do we with patience wait for it.” <span
id="fr_4254"></span>[4255](#fn_4254) This relates to the mercy of God,
of which he proceeds to say, “Since thy mercy cometh over us, <span
id="fr_4255"></span>[4256](#fn_4255) and we shall be chastened:” for
“the Lord chasteneth whom He loveth, and scourgeth every son whom He
receiveth,” <span id="fr_4256"></span>[4257](#fn_4256) and to some
mighty ones He giveth a thorn in the flesh, to buffet them, that they
may not be exalted above measure through the abundance of the
revelations, so that strength be made perfect in weakness. <span
id="fr_4257"></span>[4258](#fn_4257) Some copies read, we shall be
“taught,” instead of “chastened,” which is equally expressive of the
Divine Mercy; for no man can be taught without labour and sorrow; since
strength is made perfect in weakness.

<span id="ii.XC-p39"></span>11. “For who knoweth the power of Thy wrath:
and for the fear of Thee to number Thine anger?” ([Psa.
90.11](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#011)<span id="ii.XC-p39.1"></span>).
It belongs to very few men, he saith, to know the power of Thy wrath;
for when Thou dost spare, Thy anger is so far heavier against most men;
that we may know that labour and sorrow belong not to wrath, but rather
to Thy mercy, when Thou chastenest and teachest those whom Thou lovest,
to save them from the torments of eternal punishment: as it is said in
another Psalm, <span id="fr_4258"></span>[4259](#fn_4258) “The sinner
hath provoked the Lord: He will not require it of him according to the
greatness of His wrath.” With this also is understood, “Who knoweth?”
Such is the difficulty of finding any one who knoweth how to number
Thine anger by Thy fear, that he adds this, meaning that it is to the
purpose that Thou appearest to spare some, with whom Thou art more
angry, that the sinner may be prospered in his path, and receive a
heavier doom at the last. For when the power of human wrath hath killed
the body, it hath nothing more to do: but God hath <span
id="page_444">p. 444</span> <span id="ii.XC-Page_444"></span>power both
to punish here, and after the death of the body to send into Hell, and
by the few who are thus taught, the vain and seductive prosperity of the
wicked is judged to be greater wrath of God. <span
id="fr_4259"></span>[4260](#fn_4259) …

<span id="ii.XC-p42"></span>12. “Make Thy right hand so well known”
([Psa. 90.12](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#012)<span
id="ii.XC-p42.1"></span>). This is the reading of most of the Greek
copies: not of some in Latin, which is thus, “Make Thy right hand well
known to me.” What is, “Thy right hand,” but Thy Christ, of whom it is
said, And to whom is the Arm of the Lord revealed? <span
id="fr_4260"></span>[4261](#fn_4260) Make Him so well known, that Thy
faithful may learn in Him to ask and to hope for those things rather of
Thee as rewards of their faith, which do not appear in the Old
Testament, but are revealed in the New: that they may not imagine that
the happiness derived from earthly and temporal blessings is to be
highly esteemed, desired, or loved, and thus their feet slip, <span
id="fr_4261"></span>[4262](#fn_4261) when they see it in men who honour
Thee not: that their steps may not give way, while they know not how to
number Thine anger. Finally, in accordance with this prayer of the Man
that is His, <span id="fr_4262"></span>[4263](#fn_4262) He has made His
Christ so well known as to show by His sufferings that not these rewards
which seem so highly prized in the Old Testament, where they are shadows
of things to come, but things eternal, are to be desired. The right hand
of God may also be understood in this sense, as that by which He will
separate His saints from the wicked: because that hand becomes well
known, when it scourgeth every son whom He receiveth, and suffers him
not, in greater anger, to prosper in his sins, but in His mercy
scourgeth him with the left, <span id="fr_4263"></span>[4264](#fn_4263)
that He may place him purified on His right hand. <span
id="fr_4264"></span>[4265](#fn_4264) The reading of most copies, “make
Thy right hand well known to me,” may be referred either to Christ, or
to eternal happiness: for God has not a right hand in bodily shape, as
He has not that anger which is aroused into violent passion.

<span id="ii.XC-p48"></span>13. But what he addeth, <span
id="fr_4265"></span>[4266](#fn_4265) “and those fettered in heart in
wisdom;” other copies read, “instructed,” not “lettered:” the Greek
verb, expressing both senses, only differing by a single syllable. <span
id="fr_4266"></span>[4267](#fn_4266) But since these also, as it is
said, put their “feet in the fetters” of wisdom, are taught wisdom (he
means the feet of the heart, not of the body), and bound by its golden
chains <span id="fr_4267"></span>[4268](#fn_4267) depart not from the
path of God, and become not runaways from him; whichever reading we
adopt, the truth in the meaning is safe. Them thus lettered, or
instructed in heart in wisdom, God makes so well known in the New
Testament, that they despised all things for the Faith which the impiety
of Jews and Gentiles abhorred; and allowed themselves to be deprived of
those things which in the Old Testament are thought high promises by
those who judge after the flesh.

<span id="ii.XC-p52"></span>14. And as when they became so well known,
as to despise these things, and by setting their affections on things
eternal, gave a testimony through their sufferings (whence they are
called witnesses or martyrs in the Greek), they endured for a long while
many bitter temporal afflictions. This man of God giveth heed to this,
and the prophetic spirit under the name of Moses continues thus,
“Return, O Lord, how long? and be softened concerning Thy servants”
([Psa. 90.13](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#013)<span
id="ii.XC-p52.1"></span>). These are the words of those, who, enduring
many evils in that persecuting age, become known because their hearts
are bound in the chain of wisdom so firmly, that not even such hardships
can induce them to fly from their Lord to the good things of this world.
“How long wilt Thou hide Thy face from me, O Lord?” <span
id="fr_4268"></span>[4269](#fn_4268) occurs in another Psalm, in unison
with this sentence, “Return, O Lord, how long?” And that they who, in a
most carnal spirit, ascribe to God the form of a human body, may know
that the “turning away” and “turning again” of His countenance is not
like those motions of our own frame, let them recollect these words from
above in the same Psalm, “Thou hast set our misdeeds before Thee, and
our secret sins in the light of Thy countenance.” How then does he say
in this passage, “Return,” that God may be favourable, as if He had
turned away His face in anger; when as in the former he speaks of God’s
anger in such a manner, as to insinuate that He had not turned away His
countenance from the misdeeds and the course of life of those He was
angry with, but rather had set them before Him, and in the light of His
countenance? The word, “How long,” belongs to righteousness beseeching,
not indignant impatience. “Be softened,” some have rendered by a verb,
“soften.” But “be softened” avoids an ambiguity; since to soften is a
common verb: for he may be said to soften who pours out prayers, and he
to whom they are poured out: for we say, I soften thee, and I soften
toward thee. <span id="fr_4269"></span>[4270](#fn_4269)

<span id="ii.XC-p55"></span>15. Next, in anticipation of future
blessings, of which he speaks as already vouchsafed, he says, “We are
satisfied with Thy mercy in the morning” ([Psa.
90.14](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#014)<span id="ii.XC-p55.1"></span>).
Prophecy has thus been kindled for us, in the midst of these toils and
sorrows of the night, like a lamp in the darkness, until day dawn, and
the Day-star arise in our hearts. <span
id="fr_4270"></span>[4271](#fn_4270) For blessed are the pure in heart,
for they shall see God: then shall the righteous be filled with that
blessing for which they hunger <span id="page_445">p. 445</span> <span
id="ii.XC-Page_445"></span>and thirst now, <span
id="fr_4271"></span>[4272](#fn_4271) while, walking in faith, they are
absent from the Lord. <span id="fr_4272"></span>[4273](#fn_4272) Hence
are the words, “In Thy presence is fulness of joy:” <span
id="fr_4273"></span>[4274](#fn_4273) and, “Early in the morning they
shall stand by, and shall look up:” <span
id="fr_4274"></span>[4275](#fn_4274) and as other translators have said
it, “We shall be satisfied with Thy mercy in the morning;” then they
shall be satisfied. As he says elsewhere, “I shall be satisfied, when
Thy glory shall be revealed.” <span id="fr_4275"></span>[4276](#fn_4275)
So it is said, “Lord, show us the Father, and it sufficeth us:” and our
Lord Himself answereth, “I will manifest Myself to Zion;” <span
id="fr_4276"></span>[4277](#fn_4276) and until this promise is
fulfilled, no blessing satisfies us, or ought to do so, lest our
longings should be arrested in their course, when they ought to be
increased until they gain their objects. “And we rejoiced and were glad
all the days of our life.” Those days are days without end: they all
exist together: it is thus they satisfy us: for they give not way to
days succeeding: since there is nothing there which exists not yet
because it has not reached us, or ceases to exist because it has passed;
all are together: because there is one day only, which remains and
passes not away: this is eternity itself. These are the days respecting
which it is written, “What man is he that lusteth to live, and would
fain see good days?” <span id="fr_4277"></span>[4278](#fn_4277) These
days in another passage are styled years: where unto God it is said,
“But Thou art the same, and Thy years shall not fail:” <span
id="fr_4278"></span>[4279](#fn_4278) for these are not years that are
accounted for nothing, or days that perish like a shadow: but they are
days which have a real existence, the number of which he who thus spoke,
“Lord, let me know mine end” (that is, after reaching what term I shall
remain unchanged, and have no further blessing to crave), “and the
number of my days, what it is” (what is, not what is not): prayed to
know. He distinguishes them from the days of this life, of which he
speaks as follows, “Behold, Thou hast made my days as it were a span
long,” <span id="fr_4279"></span>[4280](#fn_4279) which are not, because
they stand not, remain not, but change in quick succession: nor is there
a single hour in them in which our being is not such, but that one part
of it has already passed, another is about to come, and none remains as
it is. But those years and days, in which we too shall never fail, but
evermore be refreshed, will never fail. Let our souls long earnestly for
those days, let them thirst ardently for them, that there we may be
filled, be satisfied, and say what we now say in anticipation, “We have
been satisfied,” etc. “We have been comforted again now, after the time
that Thou hast brought us low, and for the years wherein we have seen
evil” ([Psa. 90.15](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#015)<span
id="ii.XC-p65.2"></span>).

<span id="ii.XC-p66"></span>16. But now in days that are as yet evil,
let us speak as follows. “Look upon Thy servants, and upon Thy works”
([Psa. 90.16](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#016)<span
id="ii.XC-p66.1"></span>). For Thy servants themselves are Thy works,
not only inasmuch as they are men, but as Thy servants, that is,
obedient to Thy commands. For we are His workmanship, created not merely
in Adam, but in Christ Jesus, unto good works, which God hath before
ordained that we should walk in them: <span
id="fr_4280"></span>[4281](#fn_4280) “for it is God which worketh in us
both to will and to do of His good pleasure.” <span
id="fr_4281"></span>[4282](#fn_4281) “And direct their sons:” that they
may be right in heart, for to such God is bountiful; for “God is
bountiful to Israel, to those that are right in heart.”…

<span id="ii.XC-p69"></span>17. “And let the brightness of the Lord our
God be upon us” ([Psa. 90.17](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#017)<span
id="ii.XC-p69.1"></span>); whence the words, “O Lord, the light of Thy
countenance is marked upon us.” <span
id="fr_4282"></span>[4283](#fn_4282) And, “Make Thou straight the works
of our hands upon us:” that we may do them not for hope of earthly
reward: for then they are not straight, but crooked. In many copies the
Psalm goes thus far, but in some there is found an additional verse at
the end, as follows, “And make straight the work of our hands.” To these
words the learned have prefixed a star, called an asterisk, to show that
they are found in the Hebrew, or in some other Greek translations, but
not in the Septuagint. The meaning of this verse, if we are to expound
it, appears to me this, that all our good works are one work of love:
for love is the fulfilling of the Law. <span
id="fr_4283"></span>[4284](#fn_4283) For as in the former verse he had
said, “And the works of our hands make Thou straight upon us,” here he
says “work,” not works, as if anxious to show, in the last verse, that
all our works are one, that is, are directed with a view to one work.
For then are works righteous, when they are directed to this one end:
“for the end of the commandment is charity out of a pure heart, and of a
good conscience, and of faith unfeigned.” <span
id="fr_4284"></span>[4285](#fn_4284) There is therefore one work, in
which are all, “faith which worketh by love:” <span
id="fr_4285"></span>[4286](#fn_4285) whence our Lord’s words in the
Gospel, “This is the work of God, that ye believe in Him whom He hath
sent.” <span id="fr_4286"></span>[4287](#fn_4286) Since, therefore, in
this Psalm, both old and new life, life both mortal and everlasting,
years that are counted for nought, and years that have the fulness of
loving-kindness and of true joy, that is, the penalty of the first and
the reign of the Second Man, are marked so very clearly; I imagine, that
the name of Moses, the man of God, became the title of the Psalm, that
pious and right-minded readers of the Scriptures might gain an
intimation that the Mosaic laws, in which God appears to promise only,
or nearly only, earthly rewards for good works, without doubt contains
under a veil some such hopes as this Psalm displays. But when any one
has passed over to Christ, the <span id="page_446">p. 446</span> <span
id="ii.XC-Page_446"></span>veil will be taken away: <span
id="fr_4287"></span>[4288](#fn_4287) and his eyes will be unveiled, that
he may consider the wonderful things in the law of God, by the gift of
Him, to whom we pray, “Open Thou mine eyes, and I shall see the wondrous
things of Thy law. <span id="fr_4288"></span>[4289](#fn_4288)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4231"></span>[441:4232](1080101.htm#fr_4231) <span
id="ii.XC-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.XC-p2"></span> Lat. LXXXIX.

<span id="fn_4232"></span>[441:4233](1080101.htm#fr_4232) <span
id="ii.XC-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XC-p4"></span> [1 Cor. x.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#011)<span id="ii.XC-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4233"></span>[441:4234](1080101.htm#fr_4233) <span
id="ii.XC-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XC-p6"></span> [John v.
46](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#046)<span id="ii.XC-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4234"></span>[441:4235](1080101.htm#fr_4234) <span
id="ii.XC-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XC-p7"></span> *Literis*. \[But see Delitzsch (ed. Clark),
vol. iii. p. 48.—C.\]

<span id="fn_4235"></span>[441:4236](1080101.htm#fr_4235) <span
id="ii.XC-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XC-p9"></span> *Fingeretur*.

<span id="fn_4236"></span>[441:4237](1080101.htm#fr_4236) <span
id="ii.XC-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XC-p10"></span> [Ps. cxlviii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#005)<span id="ii.XC-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4237"></span>[441:4238](1080101.htm#fr_4237) <span
id="ii.XC-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XC-p11"></span> [Gen. ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#007)<span id="ii.XC-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4238"></span>[442:4239](1080101.htm#fr_4238) <span
id="ii.XC-p11.4"></span>

<span id="ii.XC-p12"></span> [Exod. iii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#014)<span id="ii.XC-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4239"></span>[442:4240](1080101.htm#fr_4239) <span
id="ii.XC-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XC-p13"></span> [Ps.
2:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#026),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#027)<span id="ii.XC-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4240"></span>[442:4241](1080101.htm#fr_4240) <span
id="ii.XC-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XC-p15"></span> [Matt. vi.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#013)<span id="ii.XC-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4241"></span>[442:4242](1080101.htm#fr_4241) <span
id="ii.XC-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XC-p16"></span> [1 Cor. i.
31](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#031)<span id="ii.XC-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4242"></span>[442:4243](1080101.htm#fr_4242) <span
id="ii.XC-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XC-p17"></span> *Precem petentis exaudiendo*.

<span id="fn_4243"></span>[442:4244](1080101.htm#fr_4243) <span
id="ii.XC-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XC-p19"></span> [Phil. iii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#013)<span id="ii.XC-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4244"></span>[442:4245](1080101.htm#fr_4244) <span
id="ii.XC-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XC-p20"></span> [Acts i.
7](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#007)<span id="ii.XC-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4245"></span>[442:4246](1080101.htm#fr_4245) <span
id="ii.XC-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XC-p22"></span> \[*Al*. “as an herb.”—C.\]

<span id="fn_4246"></span>[442:4247](1080101.htm#fr_4246) <span
id="ii.XC-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XC-p23"></span> [Isa.
40:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#006),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#008)<span id="ii.XC-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4247"></span>[442:4248](1080101.htm#fr_4247) <span
id="ii.XC-p24.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XC-p25"></span> [John xxi.
18](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#018)<span id="ii.XC-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4248"></span>[443:4249](1080101.htm#fr_4248) <span
id="ii.XC-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XC-p28"></span> *Sicut aranea meditabantur*.

<span id="fn_4249"></span>[443:4250](1080101.htm#fr_4249) <span
id="ii.XC-p28.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XC-p29"></span> [Rom. v.
12](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#012)<span id="ii.XC-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4250"></span>[443:4251](1080101.htm#fr_4250) <span
id="ii.XC-p30.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XC-p31"></span> [Gen. vii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#020)<span id="ii.XC-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4251"></span>[443:4252](1080101.htm#fr_4251) <span
id="ii.XC-p31.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XC-p32"></span> [Isa. lix.
6](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#006)<span id="ii.XC-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4252"></span>[443:4253](1080101.htm#fr_4252) <span
id="ii.XC-p32.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XC-p33"></span> *Aliud est in ipsis, aliud in
potentatibus*.

<span id="fn_4253"></span>[443:4254](1080101.htm#fr_4253) <span
id="ii.XC-p33.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XC-p34"></span> St. Augustin seems to refer the word
*amplius* to a period beyond the eighty years. In the English version it
clearly applies to the attainment of that age.

<span id="fn_4254"></span>[443:4255](1080101.htm#fr_4254) <span
id="ii.XC-p34.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XC-p35"></span> [Rom. viii.
23-25](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#023)<span id="ii.XC-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4255"></span>[443:4256](1080101.htm#fr_4255) <span
id="ii.XC-p35.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XC-p36"></span> *Quoniam supervenit super nos mansuetudo,
et corripiemur*: the equivalent in the Prayer Book is, “so soon passeth
it away, and we are gone.”

<span id="fn_4256"></span>[443:4257](1080101.htm#fr_4256) <span
id="ii.XC-p36.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XC-p37"></span> [Heb. xii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#006)<span id="ii.XC-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4257"></span>[443:4258](1080101.htm#fr_4257) <span
id="ii.XC-p37.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XC-p38"></span> [2 Cor.
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#007),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#009)<span id="ii.XC-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4258"></span>[443:4259](1080101.htm#fr_4258) <span
id="ii.XC-p39.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XC-p40"></span> [Ps. x.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#003)<span id="ii.XC-p40.1"></span>, Lat.

<span id="fn_4259"></span>[444:4260](1080101.htm#fr_4259) <span
id="ii.XC-p40.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XC-p41"></span> [Matt.
10:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#028), [Ps.
73:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#003),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#017)<span id="ii.XC-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4260"></span>[444:4261](1080101.htm#fr_4260) <span
id="ii.XC-p42.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XC-p43"></span> [Isa. liii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#001)<span id="ii.XC-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4261"></span>[444:4262](1080101.htm#fr_4261) <span
id="ii.XC-p43.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XC-p44"></span> [Ps. lxxiii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#002)<span id="ii.XC-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4262"></span>[444:4263](1080101.htm#fr_4262) <span
id="ii.XC-p44.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XC-p45"></span> *Hominis sui*.

<span id="fn_4263"></span>[444:4264](1080101.htm#fr_4263) <span
id="ii.XC-p45.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XC-p46"></span> *Al*. “on the left.”

<span id="fn_4264"></span>[444:4265](1080101.htm#fr_4264) <span
id="ii.XC-p46.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XC-p47"></span> [Matt. xxv.
33](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#033)<span id="ii.XC-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4265"></span>[444:4266](1080101.htm#fr_4265) <span
id="ii.XC-p48.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XC-p49"></span> *Et compeditos corde in sapientiâ*.

<span id="fn_4266"></span>[444:4267](1080101.htm#fr_4266) <span
id="ii.XC-p49.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XC-p50"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.XC-p50.1"></span>πεπαιδευμ™νους</span>, <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.XC-p50.2"></span>πεπεδημ™νους</span>.

<span id="fn_4267"></span>[444:4268](1080101.htm#fr_4267) <span
id="ii.XC-p50.3"></span>

<span id="ii.XC-p51"></span> [Ecclesiasticus
6.24](../../../bib/apo/sir006.htm#024)<span id="ii.XC-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4268"></span>[444:4269](1080101.htm#fr_4268) <span
id="ii.XC-p52.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XC-p53"></span> [Ps. xiii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#001)<span id="ii.XC-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4269"></span>[444:4270](1080101.htm#fr_4269) <span
id="ii.XC-p53.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XC-p54"></span> *Deprecor te, et deprecor a te*.

<span id="fn_4270"></span>[444:4271](1080101.htm#fr_4270) <span
id="ii.XC-p55.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XC-p56"></span> [2 Pet. i.
19](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#019)<span id="ii.XC-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4271"></span>[445:4272](1080101.htm#fr_4271) <span
id="ii.XC-p56.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XC-p57"></span> [Matt.
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#008),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#006)<span id="ii.XC-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4272"></span>[445:4273](1080101.htm#fr_4272) <span
id="ii.XC-p57.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XC-p58"></span> [2 Cor. v.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#006)<span id="ii.XC-p58.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4273"></span>[445:4274](1080101.htm#fr_4273) <span
id="ii.XC-p58.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XC-p59"></span> [Ps. xvi.
11](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#011)<span id="ii.XC-p59.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4274"></span>[445:4275](1080101.htm#fr_4274) <span
id="ii.XC-p59.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XC-p60"></span> [Ps. v.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#003)<span id="ii.XC-p60.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4275"></span>[445:4276](1080101.htm#fr_4275) <span
id="ii.XC-p60.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XC-p61"></span> [Ps. xvii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#015)<span id="ii.XC-p61.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4276"></span>[445:4277](1080101.htm#fr_4276) <span
id="ii.XC-p61.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XC-p62"></span> [John
14:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#008),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#021)<span id="ii.XC-p62.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4277"></span>[445:4278](1080101.htm#fr_4277) <span
id="ii.XC-p62.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XC-p63"></span> [Ps. xxxiv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#012)<span id="ii.XC-p63.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4278"></span>[445:4279](1080101.htm#fr_4278) <span
id="ii.XC-p63.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XC-p64"></span> [Ps. cii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#027)<span id="ii.XC-p64.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4279"></span>[445:4280](1080101.htm#fr_4279) <span
id="ii.XC-p64.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XC-p65"></span> [Ps.
39:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#005)<span id="ii.XC-p65.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4280"></span>[445:4281](1080101.htm#fr_4280) <span
id="ii.XC-p66.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XC-p67"></span> [Eph. ii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#010)<span id="ii.XC-p67.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4281"></span>[445:4282](1080101.htm#fr_4281) <span
id="ii.XC-p67.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XC-p68"></span> [Philip. ii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#013)<span id="ii.XC-p68.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4282"></span>[445:4283](1080101.htm#fr_4282) <span
id="ii.XC-p69.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XC-p70"></span> [Ps. iv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#006)<span id="ii.XC-p70.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4283"></span>[445:4284](1080101.htm#fr_4283) <span
id="ii.XC-p70.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XC-p71"></span> [Rom. xiii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#010)<span id="ii.XC-p71.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4284"></span>[445:4285](1080101.htm#fr_4284) <span
id="ii.XC-p71.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XC-p72"></span> [1 Tim. i.
5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#005)<span id="ii.XC-p72.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4285"></span>[445:4286](1080101.htm#fr_4285) <span
id="ii.XC-p72.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XC-p73"></span> [Gal. v.
6](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#006)<span id="ii.XC-p73.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4286"></span>[445:4287](1080101.htm#fr_4286) <span
id="ii.XC-p73.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XC-p74"></span> [John vi.
29](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#029)<span id="ii.XC-p74.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4287"></span>[446:4288](1080101.htm#fr_4287) <span
id="ii.XC-p74.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XC-p75"></span> [2 Cor. iii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#015)<span id="ii.XC-p75.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4288"></span>[446:4289](1080101.htm#fr_4288) <span
id="ii.XC-p75.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XC-p76"></span> [Ps. cxix.
18](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#018)<span id="ii.XC-p76.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm XCI](1080102)
