[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080103)  [Next](1080105) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.XCIII"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIII-p1"></span> <span id="ii.XCIII-p1.1"></span><span
class="c20"><span id="ii.XCIII-p1.2"></span>Psalm XCIII. <span
id="fr_4339"></span>[4340](#fn_4339) </span>

<span id="ii.XCIII-p3"></span>1. …It is entitled, “The Song of praise of
David himself, on the day before the Sabbath, when the earth was
founded.” Remembering then what God did through all those days, when He
made and ordained all things, from the first up to the sixth day (for
the seventh He sanctified, because He rested on that day after all the
works, which He made very good), we find that He created on the sixth
day (which day is here mentioned, in that he saith, “before the
Sabbath”) all animals on the earth; lastly, He on that very day created
man in His own likeness and image. For these days were not without
reason ordained in such order, but for that ages also were to run in a
like course, before we rest in God. <span
id="fr_4340"></span>[4341](#fn_4340) But then we rest if we do good
works. As a type of this, it is written of God, “God rested on the
seventh day,” when He had made all His works very good. <span
id="fr_4341"></span>[4342](#fn_4341) For He was not wearied, so as to
need rest, nor hath He now left off to work, for our Lord Christ saith
openly, “My Father worketh hitherto.” <span
id="fr_4342"></span>[4343](#fn_4342) For He saith this unto the Jews,
who thought carnally of God, and understood not that God worketh in
quiet, and always worketh, and is always in quiet. We also, then, whom
God willed then to figure in Himself, shall have rest after all good
works.…And because these good works are doomed <span id="page_457">p.
457</span> <span id="ii.XCIII-Page_457"></span>to pass away, that sixth
day also, when those very good works are perfected, hath an evening; but
in the Sabbath we find no evening, because our rest shall have no end:
for evening is put for end. As therefore God made man in His own image
on the sixth day: thus we find that our Lord Jesus Christ came into the
sixth age, that man might be formed anew after the image of God. For the
first period, as the first day, was from Adam until Noah: the second, as
the second day, from Noah unto Abraham: the third, as the third day,
from Abraham unto David: the fourth, as the fourth day, from David unto
the removal to Babylon: the fifth period, as the fifth day, from the
removal to Babylon unto the preaching of John. The sixth day beginneth
from the preaching of John, and lasteth unto the end: and after the end
of the sixth day, we reach our rest. The sixth day, therefore, is even
now passing. <span id="fr_4343"></span>[4344](#fn_4343) And it is now
the sixth day, see what the title hath; “On the day before the Sabbath,
when the earth was founded.” Let us now listen to the Psalm itself: let
us enquire of it, how the earth was made, whether perhaps the earth was
then made: and we do not read so in Genesis. When, therefore, was the
earth founded? when, unless when that which hath been but now read in
the Apostle taketh place: “If,” he saith, “ye are stedfast, immovable.”
 <span id="fr_4344"></span>[4345](#fn_4344) When all who believe
throughout all the earth are stedfast in faith, the earth is founded:
then man is made in the image of God. That sixth day in Genesis
signifieth this.…

<span id="ii.XCIII-p9"></span>2. “The Lord reigneth, He is clothed with
beauty; the Lord is clothed with strength, and is girded” ([Psa.
93.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa093.htm#001)<span id="ii.XCIII-p9.1"></span>).
We see that He hath clothed Himself with two things: beauty and
strength. But why? That He might found the earth. So it followeth, “He
hath made the round world so sure, that it cannot be moved.” Whence hath
He made it so sure? Because He hath clothed Himself in beauty. He would
not make it so sure, if He put on beauty only, and not strength also.
Why therefore beauty, why strength? For He hath said both. Ye know,
brethren, that when our Lord had come in the flesh, of those to whom He
preached the Gospel, He pleased some, and displeased others. For the
tongues of the Jews were divided against one another: “Some said, He is
a good Man; others said, Nay, but He deceiveth the people.” <span
id="fr_4345"></span>[4346](#fn_4345) Some then spoke well, others
detracted from Him, tore Him, bit and insulted Him. Towards those
therefore whom He pleased, “He put on beauty;” towards those whom He
displeased, “He put on strength.” Imitate then thy Lord, that thou
mayest become His garment: be with beauty towards those whom thy good
works please: show thy strength against detractors.…

<span id="ii.XCIII-p11"></span>3. Perhaps we should enquire respecting
this word also, why he said, “He is girded.” Girding signifieth work:
for every man then girdeth himself, when he is about to work. But
wherefore did he use the word *præcinctus,* instead of *cinctus?* For he
saith in another Psalm, <span id="fr_4346"></span>[4347](#fn_4346) “Gird
Thee with Thy sword upon Thy thigh, O Thou most mighty: the people shall
fall under Thee:” using the word *accingere,* not *cingere,* nor
*præcingere:* this word being applied to the act of attaching anything
to the side by girding it. The sword of the Lord, wherewith He conquered
the round world by killing iniquity, is the Spirit of God in the truth
of the word of God. Wherefore is He said to bind His sword around His
thigh? In another place, on another Psalm we have spoken in another
manner of girding: but nevertheless, since it hath been mentioned, it
ought not to be passed over. What is the girding on of the sword around
the thigh? He meaneth the flesh by the thigh. For the Lord would not
otherwise conquer the round world, unless the sword of truth came into
the flesh. Why therefore is He here said to be girded in front
(*præcinctus*)? He who girdeth himself before, placeth something before
himself, wherewith he is girded; whence it is said, He girded Himself
before with a towel, and began to wash the disciples’ feet. Because He
was humble when He girded Himself with a towel. He washed the feet of
His own disciples. But all strength is in humility: because all pride is
fragile: therefore when He was speaking of strength, he added, “He is
girded:” that thou mayest remember how thy God was girded in humility,
when He washed His disciples’ feet.  <span
id="fr_4347"></span>[4348](#fn_4347) …After He had washed their feet,
again He sat down; He said unto them, “Ye call me Lord and Master: and
ye say well; for so I am. If I then, your Lord and Master, have washed
your feet; how ought ye also to do to one another’s feet?” If therefore
strength is in humility, fear not the proud. The humble are like a rock:
the rock seems to lie downwards: but nevertheless it is firm. What are
the proud? Like smoke: although they are lofty, they vanish. We ought
therefore to ascribe our Lord’s being girded to His humility, according
to the mention of the Gospel, that He was girded, that He might wash His
disciples’ feet.

<span id="ii.XCIII-p14"></span>4. …“ For He hath made the round world
sure, which cannot be moved.”…What then is the round world, “which
cannot be moved”? This He would not mention specially, if there were not
also a round world that can be moved. There is a round world that shall
not be moved. <span id="page_458">p. 458</span> <span
id="ii.XCIII-Page_458"></span>There is a round world that shall be
moved. For the good who are stedfast in the faith are the round world:
that no man may say, <span id="fr_4348"></span>[4349](#fn_4348) they are
only in part of it; while the wicked who abide not in faith, when they
have felt any tribulation, are throughout the whole world. There is
therefore a round world movable: there is a world immovable: of which
the Apostle speaketh. Behold, the round world movable. I ask thee, of
whom speaketh the Apostle in these words, “Of whom is Hymenæus and
Philetus; who concerning the truth have erred, saying that the
resurrection is past already: and overthrow the faith of some?” <span
id="fr_4349"></span>[4350](#fn_4349) Did these belong to the round
world, that shall not be moved? But they were chaff: and as he saith,
“they overthrow the faith of some.”…“Nevertheless, the foundation of God
standeth sure; having his seal,”—what seal hath it as its sure
foundation?—“ The Lord knoweth them that are His.” This is the round
world that shall not be moved; “The Lord knoweth them that are His.” And
what seal hath it? “And let every one that nameth the name of Christ
depart from unrighteousness.” Let him depart from unrighteousness: for
he cannot depart from the unrighteous, for the chaff is mixed with the
wheat until it is fanned.…

<span id="ii.XCIII-p17"></span>5. “Thy throne is established from
thence, O Lord” ([Psa. 93.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa093.htm#002)<span
id="ii.XCIII-p17.1"></span>). What is, “from thence”? From that time. As
if he said, What is the throne of God? Where doth God sit? In His
Saints. Dost thou wish to be the throne of God? Prepare a place in thy
heart where He may sit. What is the throne of God, except where God
dwelleth? Where doth God dwell, except in His temple? What is His
temple? Is it surrounded with walls? Far from it. Perhaps this world is
His temple, because it is very great, and a thing worthy to contain God.
It contains not Him by whom it was made. And wherein is He contained? In
the quiet soul, in the righteous soul: that is it that containeth
Him.…He who said, “Before Abraham was, I am:” <span
id="fr_4350"></span>[4351](#fn_4350) not before Abraham only, but before
Adam: not only before Adam, but before all the angels, before heaven and
earth; since all things were made through Him: he added, lest thou,
attending to the day of our Lord’s nativity, mightest think He commenced
from that time, “Thy throne is established, O God.” But what God? “Thou
art from everlasting:” for which he uses <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.XCIII-p18.2"></span>‡</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.XCIII-p18.3"></span>π’ αἰῶνος</span>, in the Greek version; that
word being sometimes used for an age, sometimes for everlasting.
Therefore, O Thou who seemest to be born “from thence,” Thou art from
everlasting! But let not human birth be thought of, but Divine eternity.
He began then from the time of His birth; He grew: <span
id="fr_4351"></span>[4352](#fn_4351) ye have heard the Gospel. He chose
disciples, He replenished them, His disciples began to preach. Perhaps
this is what he speaketh of in the following verse.

<span id="ii.XCIII-p20"></span>6. “The floods lift up their voices”
([Psa. 93.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa093.htm#003)<span
id="ii.XCIII-p20.1"></span>). What are these floods, which have lift up
their voices? We heard them not: neither when our Lord was born, did we
hear rivers speak, nor when He was baptized, nor when He suffered; we
heard not that rivers did speak. Read the Gospel, ye find not that
rivers spoke. It is not enough that they spoke: “They have lift up their
voice:” they have not only spoken, but bravely, mightily, in a lofty
voice. What are those rivers which have spoken?…The Spirit itself was a
mighty river, whence many rivers were filled. Of that river the Psalmist
saith in another passage, “The rivers of the flood thereof shall make
glad the city of God.” <span id="fr_4352"></span>[4353](#fn_4352) Rivers
then were made to flow from the belly of the disciples, when they
received the Holy Spirit: themselves were rivers, when they had received
that Holy Spirit. Whence did those rivers lift their voices? wherefore
did they lift them up? Because at first they feared. Peter was not yet a
river, when at the question of the maid-servant he thrice denied Christ:
“I do not know the man.” <span id="fr_4353"></span>[4354](#fn_4353) Here
he lieth through fear: he lifteth not his voice as yet: he is not yet
the river. But when they were filled with the Holy Spirit, the Jews sent
for them, and enjoined them not to preach at all, nor to teach in the
name of Jesus.…For when the Apostles had been dismissed from the council
of the Jews, they came to their own friends, and told them what the
priests and elders said unto them: but they on hearing lifted up their
voices with one accord unto the Lord, and said, “Lord, it is Thou who
hast made heaven and earth, and the sea, and all that in them is;” <span
id="fr_4354"></span>[4355](#fn_4354) and the rest which floods lifting
up their voices might say, “Wonderful are the hangings of the sea”
([Psa. 93.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa093.htm#004)<span
id="ii.XCIII-p23.2"></span>). For when the disciples had lifted up their
voices unto Him, many believed, and many received the Holy Spirit, and
many rivers instead of few began to lift up their voice. Hence there
followeth, “from the voices of many waters, wonderful are the hangings
of the sea;” that is, the waves of the world. When Christ had begun to
be preached by so powerful voices, the sea became enraged, persecutions
began to thicken. When therefore the rivers had lift up their voice,
“from the voices of many waters, wonderful” were “the hangings of the
sea.” To be hung aloft is to be lifted up; when the sea rages, the waves
are hung as from above. Let the waves hang over as they choose; let the
sea roar as it chooseth; the hangings of the sea indeed are mighty,
mighty are the threatenings, <span id="page_459">p. 459</span> <span
id="ii.XCIII-Page_459"></span>mighty the persecutions; but see what
followeth: “but yet the Lord, who dwelleth on high, is mightier.” Let
therefore the sea restrain itself, and sometime become calmed; let peace
be granted by Christians. The sea was disturbed, the vessel was tossed;
the vessel is the Church: the sea, the world. The Lord came, He walked
over the sea, and calmed the waves. How did the Lord walk over the sea?
Above the heads of those mighty foaming waves. Principalities and kings
believed; they were subdued unto Christ. Let us not therefore be
frightened; because “the Lord, who dwelleth on high, is mightier.”

<span id="ii.XCIII-p24"></span>7. “Thy testimonies, O Lord, are very
surely believed” ([Psa. 93.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa093.htm#005)<span
id="ii.XCIII-p24.1"></span>). The Lord, who dwelleth on high, is
mightier than the mighty overhangings of the sea. “Thy testimonies are
very surely believed.” “Thy testimonies,” because He had said
beforehand, “These things I have spoken unto you, that in Me ye might
have peace. In the world ye shall have tribulation.”…He added, “but be
of good cheer, I have overcome the world.” <span
id="fr_4355"></span>[4356](#fn_4355) If then He saith, “I have overcome
the world,” cling unto Him who overcame the world, who overcame the sea.
Rejoice in Him, because the Lord, who dwelleth on high, is mightier,
and, “Thy testimonies are very surely believed.” And what is the end of
all these? “Holiness becometh Thine house, O Lord!” Thine house, the
whole of Thine house, not here and there: but the whole of Thine house,
throughout the whole world. Why throughout the whole of the round world?
“Because He hath set aright the round world, which cannot be
moved.” <span id="fr_4356"></span>[4357](#fn_4356) The Lord’s house will
be strong: it will prevail throughout the whole world: many shall fall:
but that house standeth; many shall be disturbed, but that house shall
not be moved. Holiness becometh Thine house, O Lord!” For a short time
only? No. “Unto length of days.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4339"></span>[456:4340](1080104.htm#fr_4339) <span
id="ii.XCIII-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIII-p2"></span> Lat. XCII. A sermon to the people.

<span id="fn_4340"></span>[456:4341](1080104.htm#fr_4340) <span
id="ii.XCIII-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIII-p4"></span> \[Compare p. 103, *supra*.—C.\]

<span id="fn_4341"></span>[456:4342](1080104.htm#fr_4341) <span
id="ii.XCIII-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIII-p5"></span> [Gen.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#000), [Gen.
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#001)<span id="ii.XCIII-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4342"></span>[456:4343](1080104.htm#fr_4342) <span
id="ii.XCIII-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIII-p6"></span> [John v.
17](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#017)<span id="ii.XCIII-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4343"></span>[457:4344](1080104.htm#fr_4343) <span
id="ii.XCIII-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIII-p7"></span> \[See Barnabas, A.N.F. vol. i. p.
146.—C.\]

<span id="fn_4344"></span>[457:4345](1080104.htm#fr_4344) <span
id="ii.XCIII-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIII-p8"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
58](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#058)<span id="ii.XCIII-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4345"></span>[457:4346](1080104.htm#fr_4345) <span
id="ii.XCIII-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIII-p10"></span> [John vii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#012)<span id="ii.XCIII-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4346"></span>[457:4347](1080104.htm#fr_4346) <span
id="ii.XCIII-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIII-p12"></span> [Ps. xlv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#003)<span id="ii.XCIII-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4347"></span>[457:4348](1080104.htm#fr_4347) <span
id="ii.XCIII-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIII-p13"></span> [John xiii.
4-15](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#004)<span id="ii.XCIII-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4348"></span>[458:4349](1080104.htm#fr_4348) <span
id="ii.XCIII-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIII-p15"></span> As the Donatists.

<span id="fn_4349"></span>[458:4350](1080104.htm#fr_4349) <span
id="ii.XCIII-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIII-p16"></span> [2 Tim. ii.
17-19](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#017)<span
id="ii.XCIII-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4350"></span>[458:4351](1080104.htm#fr_4350) <span
id="ii.XCIII-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIII-p18"></span> [John viii.
58](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#058)<span id="ii.XCIII-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4351"></span>[458:4352](1080104.htm#fr_4351) <span
id="ii.XCIII-p18.4"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIII-p19"></span> [Luke
2:40](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#040),
[52](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#052)<span id="ii.XCIII-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4352"></span>[458:4353](1080104.htm#fr_4352) <span
id="ii.XCIII-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIII-p21"></span> [Ps. xlvi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#004)<span id="ii.XCIII-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4353"></span>[458:4354](1080104.htm#fr_4353) <span
id="ii.XCIII-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIII-p22"></span> [Matt. xxvi.
69-74](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#069)<span
id="ii.XCIII-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4354"></span>[458:4355](1080104.htm#fr_4354) <span
id="ii.XCIII-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIII-p23"></span> [Acts iv.
24](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#024)<span id="ii.XCIII-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4355"></span>[459:4356](1080104.htm#fr_4355) <span
id="ii.XCIII-p24.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIII-p25"></span> [John xvi.
33](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#033)<span id="ii.XCIII-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4356"></span>[459:4357](1080104.htm#fr_4356) <span
id="ii.XCIII-p25.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIII-p26"></span> [Ps. xcvi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#010)<span id="ii.XCIII-p26.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm XCIV](1080105)
