[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080008)  [Next](1080010) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.V"></span>

<span id="ii.V-p1"></span> <span id="ii.V-p1.1"></span><span
class="c20"><span id="ii.V-p1.2"></span>Psalm V.</span>

<span id="ii.V-p2"></span>1. The title of the Psalm is, “For her who
receiveth the inheritance.” The Church then is signified, who receiveth
for her inheritance eternal life through our Lord Jesus Christ; that she
may possess God Himself, in cleaving to whom she may be blessed,
according to that, “Blessed are the meek, for they shall possess the
earth.” <span id="fr_114"></span>[115](#fn_114) What earth, but that of
which it is said, “Thou art my hope, my portion in the land of the
living”? <span id="fr_115"></span>[116](#fn_115) And again more clearly,
“The Lord is the portion of mine inheritance and of my cup.” <span
id="fr_116"></span>[117](#fn_116) And conversely the word Church is said
to be God’s inheritance according to that, “Ask of Me, and I shall give
thee the heathen for thine inheritance.” <span
id="fr_117"></span>[118](#fn_117) Therefore is God said to be our
inheritance, because He feedeth and sustaineth <span
id="fr_118"></span>[119](#fn_118) us: and we are said to be God’s
inheritance, because He ordereth and ruleth us. Wherefore it is the
voice of the Church in this Psalm called to her inheritance, that she
too may herself become the inheritance of the Lord.

<span id="ii.V-p8"></span>2. “Hear my words, O Lord” ([Psa.
5.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#001)<span id="ii.V-p8.1"></span>).
Being called she calleth upon the Lord; that the same Lord being her
helper, she may pass through the wickedness of this world, and attain
unto Him. “Understand my cry.” The Psalmist well shows what this cry is;
how from within, from the chamber of the heart, without the body’s
utterance, <span id="fr_119"></span>[120](#fn_119) it reaches unto God:
for the bodily voice is heard, but the spiritual is understood. Although
this too may be God’s hearing, not with carnal ear, but in the
omnipresence of His Majesty.

<span id="ii.V-p10"></span>3. “Attend Thou to the voice of my
supplication;” that is, to that voice, which he maketh request that God
would understand: of which what the nature is, he hath already
intimated, when he said, “Understand my cry. Attend Thou to the voice of
my supplication, my King, and my God” ([Psa.
5.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#002)<span id="ii.V-p10.1"></span>).
Although both the Son is God, and the Father God, and the Father and the
Son together One God; and if asked of the Holy Ghost, we must give no
other answer than that He is God; and when the Father, and the Son, and
the Holy Ghost are mentioned together, we must understand nothing else,
than One God; nevertheless Scripture is wont to give the appellation of
King to the Son. According then to that which is said, “By Me man cometh
to the Father,” <span id="fr_120"></span>[121](#fn_120) rightly is it
first, “my King;” and then, “my God.” And yet has not the Psalmist said,
Attend Ye; but, “Attend Thou.” For the Catholic faith preaches not two
or three Gods, but the Very Trinity, One God. Not that the same Trinity
can be together, now the Father, now the Son, now the Holy Ghost, as
Sabellius believed: but that the Father must be none but the Father, and
the Son none but the Son, and the Holy Ghost none but the Holy Ghost,
and this Trinity but One God. Hence when the Apostle had said, “Of whom
are all things, by whom are all things, in whom are all things,” <span
id="fr_121"></span>[122](#fn_121) he is believed to have conveyed an
intimation of the Very Trinity; and yet he did not add, to Them be
glory; but, “to Him be glory.”

<span id="ii.V-p13"></span>4. “Because I will pray unto Thee ([Psa.
5.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#003)<span id="ii.V-p13.1"></span>). O
Lord, in the morning Thou wilt hear my voice.” What does that, which he
said above, “Hear Thou,” mean, as if he desired to be heard immediately?
But now he saith, “in the morning Thou wilt hear;” not, hear Thou: and,
“I will pray unto Thee;” not, I do pray unto Thee: and, as follows, “in
the morning I will stand by Thee, and will see;” not, I do stand by
Thee, and do see. Unless perhaps his former prayer marks the invocation
itself: but being in <span id="page_12">p. 12</span> <span
id="ii.V-Page_12"></span>darkness amidst the storms of this world, he
perceives that he does not see what he desires, and yet does not cease
to hope, “For hope that is seen, is not hope.” <span
id="fr_122"></span>[123](#fn_122) Nevertheless, he understands why he
does not see, because the night is not yet past, that is, the darkness
which our sins have merited. He says therefore, “Because I will pray
unto Thee, O Lord;” that is, because Thou art so mighty to whom I shall
make my prayer, “in the morning Thou wilt hear my voice.” Thou art not
He, he says, that can be seen by those, from whose eyes the night of
sins is not yet withdrawn: when the night then of my error is past, and
the darkness gone, which by my sins I have brought upon myself, then
“Thou wilt hear my voice.” Why then did he say above not, “Thou wilt
hear,” but “hear Thou”? Is it that after the Church cried out, “hear
Thou,” and was not heard, she perceived what must needs pass away to
enable her to be heard? Or is it that she was heard above, but doth not
yet understand that she was heard, because she doth not yet see by whom
she hath been heard; and what she now says, “In the morning Thou wilt
hear,” she would have thus taken, In the morning I shall understand that
I have been heard? Such is that expression, “Arise, O Lord,” <span
id="fr_123"></span>[124](#fn_123) that is, make me arise. But this
latter is taken of Christ’s resurrection: but at all events that
Scripture, “The Lord your God proveth you, that He may know whether ye
love Him,” <span id="fr_124"></span>[125](#fn_124) cannot be taken in
any other sense, than, that ye by Him may know, and that it may be made
evident to yourselves, what progress ye have made in His love.

<span id="ii.V-p17"></span>5. “In the morning I will stand by Thee, and
will see” ([Psa. 5.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#003)<span
id="ii.V-p17.1"></span>). What is, “I will stand,” but “I will not lie
down”? Now what else is, to lie down, but to take rest on the earth,
which is a seeking happiness in earthly pleasures? “I will stand by,” he
says, “and will see.” We must not then cleave to things earthly, if we
would see God, who is beheld by a clean heart. “For Thou art not a God
who hast pleasure in iniquity. The malignant man shall not dwell near
Thee, nor shall the unrighteous abide before Thine eyes. Thou hast hated
all that work iniquity, Thou wilt destroy all that speak a lie. The man
of blood, and the crafty man, the Lord will abominate” ([Psa.
5.4-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#004)<span id="ii.V-p17.2"></span>).
Iniquity, malignity, lying, homicide, craft, and all the like, are the
night of which we speak: on the passing away of which, the morning
dawns, that God may be seen. He has unfolded the reason, then, why he
will stand by in the morning, and see: “For,” he says, “Thou art not a
God who hast pleasure in iniquity.” For if He were a God who had
pleasure in iniquity, He could be seen even by the iniquitous, so that
He would not be seen in the morning, that is, when the night of iniquity
is over.

<span id="ii.V-p18"></span>6. “The malignant man shall not dwell near
Thee:” that is, he shall not so see, as to cleave to Thee. Hence
follows, “Nor shall the unrighteous abide before Thine eyes.” For their
eyes, that is, their mind is beaten back by the light of truth, because
of the darkness of their sins; by the habitual practice of which they
are not able to sustain the brightness of right understanding. Therefore
even they who see sometimes, that is, who understand the truth, are yet
still unrighteous, they abide not therein through love of those things,
which turn away from the truth. For they carry about with them their
night, that is, not only the habit, but even the love, of sinning. But
if this night shall pass away, that is, if they shall cease to sin, and
this love and habit thereof be put to flight, the morning dawns, so that
they not only understand, but also cleave to the truth.

<span id="ii.V-p19"></span>7. “Thou hast hated all that work iniquity.”
God’s hatred may be understood from that form of expression, by which
every sinner hates the truth. For it seems that she too hates those,
whom she suffers not to abide in her. Now they do not abide, who cannot
bear the truth. “Thou wilt destroy all that speak a lie.” For this is
the opposite to truth. But lest any one should suppose that any
substance or nature is opposite to truth, let him understand that “a
lie” has relation to that which is not, not to that which is. For if
that which is be spoken, truth is spoken: but if that which is not be
spoken, it is a lie. <span id="fr_125"></span>[126](#fn_125) Therefore
saith he, “Thou wilt destroy all that speak a lie;” because drawing back
from that which is, they turn aside to that which is not. Many lies
indeed seem to be for some one’s safety or advantage, spoken not in
malice, but in kindness: such was that of those midwives in
Exodus, <span id="fr_126"></span>[127](#fn_126) who gave a false report
to Pharaoh, to the end that the infants of the children of Israel might
not be slain. <span id="fr_127"></span>[128](#fn_127) But even these are
praised not for the fact, but for the disposition shown; since those who
only lie in this way, will attain in time to a freedom from all lying.
For in those that are perfect, not even these lies are found. For to
these it is said, “Let there be in your mouth, yea, yea; nay, nay;
whatsoever is more, is of evil.” <span id="fr_128"></span>[129](#fn_128)
Nor is it without reason written in another place, “The mouth that lieth
slayeth the soul:” <span id="fr_129"></span>[130](#fn_129) lest any
should imagine that the perfect and spiritual man ought to lie for this
<span id="page_13">p. 13</span> <span id="ii.V-Page_13"></span>temporal
life, in the death of which no soul is slain, neither his own, nor
another’s. But since it is one thing to lie, another to conceal the
truth (if indeed it be one thing to say what is false, another not to
say what is true), if haply one does not wish to give a man up even to
this visible death, he should be prepared to conceal what is true, not
to say what is false; so that he may neither give him up, nor yet lie,
lest he slay his own soul for another’s body. But if he cannot yet do
this, let him at all events admit only lies of such necessity, that he
may attain to be freed even from these, if they alone remain, and
receive the strength of the Holy Ghost, whereby he may despise all that
must be suffered for the truth’s sake. In fine, there are two kinds of
lies, in which there is no great fault, <span
id="fr_130"></span>[131](#fn_130) and yet they are not without fault,
either when we are in jest, or when we lie that we may do good. That
first kind, in jest, is for this reason not very hurtful, because there
is no deception. For he to whom it is said knows that it is said for the
sake of the jest. But the second kind is for this reason the more
inoffensive, because it carries with it some kindly intention. And to
say truth, that which has no duplicity, cannot even be called a lie. As
if, for example, a sword be intrusted to any one, and he promises to
return it, when he who intrusted it to him shall demand it: if he chance
to require his sword when in a fit of madness, it is clear it must not
be returned then, lest he kill either himself or others, until soundness
of mind be restored to him. Here then is no duplicity, because he, to
whom the sword was intrusted, when he promised that he would return it
at the other’s demand, did not imagine that he could require it when in
a fit of madness. But even the Lord concealed the truth, when He said to
the disciples, not yet strong enough, “I have many things to say unto
you, but ye cannot bear them now:” <span
id="fr_131"></span>[132](#fn_131) and the Apostle Paul when he said, “I
could not speak unto you as unto spiritual, but as unto carnal.” <span
id="fr_132"></span>[133](#fn_132) Whence it is clear that it is not
blamable, sometimes not to speak what is true. But to say what is false
is not found to have been allowed to the perfect.

<span id="ii.V-p28"></span>8. “The man of blood, and the crafty man, the
Lord will abominate.” What he said above, “Thou hast hated all that work
iniquity, Thou wilt destroy all that speak a lie,” may well seem to be
repeated here: so that one may refer “the man of blood” to “the worker
of iniquity,” and “the crafty man” to the “lie.” For it is craft, when
one thing is done, another pretended. He used an apt word too, when he
said, “will abominate.” For the disinherited are usually called
abominated. Now this Psalm is, “for her who receiveth the inheritance;”
and she adds the exulting joy of her hope, in saying, “But I, in the
multitude of Thy mercy, will enter into Thine house” ([Psa.
5.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#007)<span id="ii.V-p28.1"></span>). “In
the multitude of mercy:” perhaps he means in the multitude of perfected
and blessed men, of whom that city shall consist, of which the Church is
now in travail, and is bearing few by few. Now that many men regenerated
and perfected, are rightly called the multitude of God’s mercy, who can
deny; when it is most truly said, “What is man that Thou art mindful of
him, or the son of man that Thou visitest him? <span
id="fr_133"></span>[134](#fn_133) I will enter into Thine house:” as a
stone into a building, I suppose, is the meaning. For what else is the
house of God than the Temple of God, of which it is said, “for the
temple of God is holy, <span id="fr_134"></span>[135](#fn_134) which
temple ye are”? Of which building He is the cornerstone, <span
id="fr_135"></span>[136](#fn_135) whom the Power and Wisdom of God
coeternal with the Father assumed.

<span id="ii.V-p32"></span>9. “I will worship at Thy holy temple, in Thy
fear.” “At the temple,” we understand as, “near” the temple. For he does
not say, I will worship “in” Thy holy temple; but, “I will worship at
Thy holy temple.” It must be understood too to be spoken not of
perfection, but of progress toward perfection: so that the words, “I
will enter into Thine house,” should signify perfection. But that this
may come to a happy issue, “I will” first, he says, “worship at Thy holy
temple.” And perhaps on this account he added, “in Thy fear;” which is a
great defence to those that are advancing toward salvation. But when any
one shall have arrived there, in him comes to pass that which is
written, “perfect love casteth out fear.” <span
id="fr_136"></span>[137](#fn_136) For they do not fear Him who is now
their friend, to whom it is said, “henceforth I will not call you
servants, but friends,” <span id="fr_137"></span>[138](#fn_137) when
they have been brought through to that which was promised.

<span id="ii.V-p35"></span>10. “O Lord, lead me forth in Thy justice
because of mine enemies” ([Psa.
5.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#008)<span id="ii.V-p35.1"></span>). He
has here sufficiently plainly declared that he is on his onward road,
that is, in progress toward perfection, not yet in perfection itself,
when he desires eagerly that he may be led forth. But, “in Thy justice,”
not in that which seems so to men. For to return evil for evil seems
justice: but it is not His justice of whom it is said, “He maketh His
sun to rise on the good and on the evil:” for even when God punishes
sinners, He does not inflict His evil on them, but leaves them to their
own evil. “Behold,” the Psalmist says, “he travailed with injustice, he
hath conceived toil, and brought forth iniquity: he hath opened a ditch,
and digged it, and hath fallen into the pit which he wrought: his pains
shall be turned <span id="page_14">p. 14</span> <span
id="ii.V-Page_14"></span>on his own head, and his iniquity shall descend
on his own pate.”  <span id="fr_138"></span>[139](#fn_138) When then God
punishes, He punishes as a judge those that transgress the law, not by
bringing evil upon them from Himself, but driving them on to that which
they have chosen, to fill up the sum of their misery. But man, when he
returns evil for evil, does it with an evil will: and on this account is
himself first evil, when he would punish evil.

<span id="ii.V-p37"></span>11. “Direct in Thy sight my way.” Nothing is
clearer, than that he here sets forth that time, in which he is
journeying onward. For this is a way which is traversed not in any
regions of the earth, but in the affections of the heart. “In Thy
sight,” he says, “direct my way:” that is, where no man sees; who are
not to be trusted in their praise or blame. For they can in no wise
judge of another man’s conscience, wherein the way toward God is
traversed. Hence it is added, “for truth is not in their mouth” ([Psa.
5.9](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#009)<span id="ii.V-p37.1"></span>). To
whose judgment of course then there is no trusting, and therefore must
we fly within to conscience, and the sight of God. “Their heart is
vain.” How then can truth be in their mouth, whose heart is deceived by
sin, and the punishment of sin? Whence men are called back by that
voice, “Wherefore do ye love vanity, and seek a lie?”

<span id="ii.V-p38"></span>12. “Their throat is an open sepulchre.” It
may be referred to signify gluttony, for the sake of which men very
often lie by flattery. And admirably has he said, “an open sepulchre:”
for this gluttony is ever gaping with open mouth, not as sepulchres,
which, on the reception of corpses, are closed up. This also may be
understood hereby, that with lying and blind flattery men draw to
themselves those whom they entice to sin; and as it were devour them,
when they turn them to their own way of living. And when this happens to
them, since by sin they die, those by whom they are led along, are
rightly called open sepulchres: for themselves too are in a manner
lifeless, being destitute of the life of truth; and they take in to
themselves dead men, whom having slain by lying words and a vain heart,
they turn unto themselves. “With their own tongues they dealt craftily:”
that is, with evil tongues. For this seems to be signified, when he says
“their own.” For the evil have evil tongues, that is, they speak evil,
when they speak craftily. To whom the Lord saith, “How can ye, being
evil, speak good things?” <span id="fr_139"></span>[140](#fn_139)

<span id="ii.V-p40"></span>13. “Judge them, O God: let them fall from
their own thoughts” ([Psa. 5.10](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#010)<span
id="ii.V-p40.1"></span>). It is a prophecy, not a curse. For he does not
wish that it should come to pass; but he perceives what will come to
pass. For this happens to them, not because he appears to have wished
for it, but because they are such as to deserve that it should happen.
For so also what he says afterwards, “Let all that hope in Thee
rejoice,” he says by way of prophecy; since he perceives that they will
rejoice. Likewise is it said prophetically, “Stir up Thy strength, and
come:” <span id="fr_140"></span>[141](#fn_140) for he saw that He would
come. Although the words, “Let them fall from their own thoughts,” may
be taken thus also, that it may rather be believed to be a wish for
their good by the Psalmist, whilst they fall from their evil thoughts,
that is, that they may no more think evil. But what follows, “drive them
out,” forbids this interpretation. For it can in no wise be taken in a
favourable sense, that one is driven out by God. Wherefore it is
understood to be said prophetically, and not of ill will; when this is
said, which must necessarily happen to such as chose to persevere in
those sins, which have been mentioned. “Let them,” therefore, “fall from
their own thoughts,” is, let them fall by their self-accusing thoughts,
“their own conscience also bearing witness,” as the Apostle says, “and
their thoughts accusing or excusing, in the revelation of the just
judgment of God.” <span id="fr_141"></span>[142](#fn_141)

<span id="ii.V-p43"></span>14. “According to the multitude of their
ungodlinesses drive them out:” that is, drive them out far away. For
this is “according to the multitude of their ungodlinesses,” <span
id="fr_142"></span>[143](#fn_142) that they should be driven out far
away. The ungodly then are driven out from that inheritance, which is
possessed by knowing and seeing God: as diseased eyes are driven out
from the shining of the light, when what is gladness to others is pain
to them. Therefore these shall not stand in the morning, <span
id="fr_143"></span>[144](#fn_143) and see. And that expression is as
great a punishment, as that which is said, “But for me it is good to
cleave to the Lord,” <span id="fr_144"></span>[145](#fn_144) is a great
reward. To this punishment is opposed, “Enter thou into the joy of Thy
Lord;” <span id="fr_145"></span>[146](#fn_145) for similar to this
expulsion is, “Cast him into outer darkness.” <span
id="fr_146"></span>[147](#fn_146)

<span id="ii.V-p49"></span>15. “Since they have embittered Thee, O Lord:
I am,” saith He, “the Bread which came down from heaven;” <span
id="fr_147"></span>[148](#fn_147) again, “Labour for the meat which
wasteth not;” <span id="fr_148"></span>[149](#fn_148) again, “Taste and
see that the Lord is sweet.” <span id="fr_149"></span>[150](#fn_149) But
to sinners the bread of truth is bitter. Whence they hate the mouth of
him that speaketh the truth. These then have embittered God, who by sin
have fallen into such a state of sickliness, that the food of truth, in
which healthy souls delight, as if it were bitter as gall, they cannot
bear.

<span id="ii.V-p53"></span>16. “And let all rejoice that hope in Thee;”
those of course to whose taste the Lord is sweet. <span id="page_15">p.
15</span> <span id="ii.V-Page_15"></span>“They will exult for evermore,
and Thou wilt dwell in them” ([Psa.
5.11](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#011)<span id="ii.V-p53.1"></span>).
This will be the exultation for evermore, when the just become the
Temple of God, and He, their Indweller, will be their joy. “And all that
love Thy name shall glory in Thee:” as when what they love is present
for them to enjoy. And well is it said, “in Thee,” as if in possession
of the inheritance, of which the title of the Psalm speaks: when they
too are His inheritance, which is intimated by, “Thou wilt dwell in
them.” From which good they are kept back, whom God, according to the
multitude of their ungodlinesses, driveth out.

<span id="ii.V-p54"></span>17. “For Thou wilt bless the just man” ([Psa.
5.12](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#012)<span id="ii.V-p54.1"></span>).
This is blessing, to glory in God, and to be inhabited by God. Such
sanctification is given to the just. But that they may be justified, a
calling goes before: which is not of merit, but of the grace of God.
“For all have sinned, and want the glory of God.” <span
id="fr_150"></span>[151](#fn_150) “For whom He called, them He also
justified; and whom He justified, them He also glorified.” <span
id="fr_151"></span>[152](#fn_151) Since then calling is not of our
merit, but of the goodness and mercy of God, he went on to say, “O Lord,
as with the shield of Thy good will Thou hast crowned us.” For God’s
good will goes before our good will, to call sinners to repentance. And
these are the arms whereby the enemy is overcome, against whom it is
said, “Who will bring accusation against God’s elect?” Again, “if God be
for us, who can be against us? Who spared not His Only Son, but
delivered Him up for us all.” <span id="fr_152"></span>[153](#fn_152)
“For if, when we were enemies, Christ died for us; much more being
reconciled shall we be saved from wrath through Him.” <span
id="fr_153"></span>[154](#fn_153) This is that unconquerable shield,
whereby the enemy is driven back, when he suggests despair of our
salvation through the multitude of tribulations and temptations.

<span id="ii.V-p59"></span>18. The whole contents of the Psalm, then,
are a prayer that she may be heard, from the words, “hear my words, O
Lord,” unto, “my King, and my God.” Then follows a view of those things
which hinder the sight of God, that is, a knowledge that she <span
id="fr_154"></span>[155](#fn_154) is heard, from the words, “because I
shall pray unto Thee, O Lord, in the morning Thou wilt hear my voice,”
unto, “the man of blood and the crafty man the Lord will abominate.”
Thirdly, she hopes that she, who is to be the house of God, even now
begins to draw near to Him in fear, before that perfection which casteth
out fear, from the words, “but I in the multitude of Thy mercy,” unto,
“I will worship at Thy holy temple in Thy fear.” Fourthly, as she is
progressing and advancing amongst those very things which she feels to
hinder her, she prays that she may be assisted within, where no man
seeth, lest she be turned aside by evil tongues, for the words, “O Lord,
lead me forth in Thy justice because of my enemies,” unto, “with their
tongues they dealt craftily.” Fifthly, is a prophecy of what punishment
awaits the ungodly, when the just man shall scarcely be saved; and of
what reward the just shall obtain, who, when they were called, came, and
bore all things manfully, till they were brought to the end, from the
words, “judge them, O God,” unto the end of the Psalm.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_114"></span>[11:115](1080009.htm#fr_114) <span
id="ii.V-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.V-p3"></span> [Matt. v.
5](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#005)<span id="ii.V-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_115"></span>[11:116](1080009.htm#fr_115) <span
id="ii.V-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ii.V-p4"></span> [Ps. cxlii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#005)<span id="ii.V-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_116"></span>[11:117](1080009.htm#fr_116) <span
id="ii.V-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ii.V-p5"></span> [Ps. xvi.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#005)<span id="ii.V-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_117"></span>[11:118](1080009.htm#fr_117) <span
id="ii.V-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.V-p6"></span> [Ps. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#008)<span id="ii.V-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_118"></span>[11:119](1080009.htm#fr_118) <span
id="ii.V-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.V-p7"></span> *Continet*.

<span id="fn_119"></span>[11:120](1080009.htm#fr_119) <span
id="ii.V-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.V-p9"></span> *Strepitu*.

<span id="fn_120"></span>[11:121](1080009.htm#fr_120) <span
id="ii.V-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.V-p11"></span> [John xiv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#006)<span id="ii.V-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_121"></span>[11:122](1080009.htm#fr_121) <span
id="ii.V-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ii.V-p12"></span> [Rom. xi.
36](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#036)<span id="ii.V-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_122"></span>[12:123](1080009.htm#fr_122) <span
id="ii.V-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ii.V-p14"></span> [Rom. viii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#024)<span id="ii.V-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_123"></span>[12:124](1080009.htm#fr_123) <span
id="ii.V-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ii.V-p15"></span> [Ps. iii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#007)<span id="ii.V-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_124"></span>[12:125](1080009.htm#fr_124) <span
id="ii.V-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ii.V-p16"></span> [Deut. xiii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#003)<span id="ii.V-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_125"></span>[12:126](1080009.htm#fr_125) <span
id="ii.V-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ii.V-p20"></span> \[Yet on this apparently harmless principle
has been built up the art of lying, in the Liguorian casuistry: He who
lays his hand on a box or table, and swears “The man is not *here*,”
speaks a material truth, and hence is judged innocent. See *Theologia
Moralis S. Alphons. de Ligorio*, tom. ii. p. 35 *et seqq*., Paris, ed.
1852.—C.\]

<span id="fn_126"></span>[12:127](1080009.htm#fr_126) <span
id="ii.V-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ii.V-p21"></span> [Exod. i.
19](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#019)<span id="ii.V-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_127"></span>[12:128](1080009.htm#fr_127) <span
id="ii.V-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ii.V-p22"></span> See his treatises on lying and against
lying.

<span id="fn_128"></span>[12:129](1080009.htm#fr_128) <span
id="ii.V-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ii.V-p23"></span> [Matt. v.
37](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#037)<span id="ii.V-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_129"></span>[12:130](1080009.htm#fr_129) <span
id="ii.V-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ii.V-p24"></span> [Wisd. i.
11](../../../bib/apo/wis001.htm#011)<span id="ii.V-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_130"></span>[13:131](1080009.htm#fr_130) <span
id="ii.V-p24.2"></span>

<span id="ii.V-p25"></span> \[Lax language, which has greatly hindered
strict conscientiousness in moral teachers. See Meyrick’s *Moral and
Devotional Theology of Rome*, pp. 68–71, London, 1857. Compare our
author, *De Mendacio*, and *Retractations*, ed. Migne, i. pp. 630,
659.—C.\]

<span id="fn_131"></span>[13:132](1080009.htm#fr_131) <span
id="ii.V-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ii.V-p26"></span> [John xvi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#012)<span id="ii.V-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_132"></span>[13:133](1080009.htm#fr_132) <span
id="ii.V-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ii.V-p27"></span> [1 Cor. iii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#001)<span id="ii.V-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_133"></span>[13:134](1080009.htm#fr_133) <span
id="ii.V-p28.2"></span>

<span id="ii.V-p29"></span> [Ps. viii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#004)<span id="ii.V-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[13:135](1080009.htm#fr_134) <span
id="ii.V-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ii.V-p30"></span> [1 Cor. iii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#017)<span id="ii.V-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[13:136](1080009.htm#fr_135) <span
id="ii.V-p30.2"></span>

<span id="ii.V-p31"></span> [Eph. ii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#020)<span id="ii.V-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_136"></span>[13:137](1080009.htm#fr_136) <span
id="ii.V-p32.1"></span>

<span id="ii.V-p33"></span> [1 John iv.
18](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#018)<span id="ii.V-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_137"></span>[13:138](1080009.htm#fr_137) <span
id="ii.V-p33.2"></span>

<span id="ii.V-p34"></span> [John xv.
15](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#015)<span id="ii.V-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[14:139](1080009.htm#fr_138) <span
id="ii.V-p35.2"></span>

<span id="ii.V-p36"></span> [Ps. 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#015),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#016)<span id="ii.V-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_139"></span>[14:140](1080009.htm#fr_139) <span
id="ii.V-p38.1"></span>

<span id="ii.V-p39"></span> [Matt. xii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#034)<span id="ii.V-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_140"></span>[14:141](1080009.htm#fr_140) <span
id="ii.V-p40.2"></span>

<span id="ii.V-p41"></span> [Ps. lxxx.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#002)<span id="ii.V-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_141"></span>[14:142](1080009.htm#fr_141) <span
id="ii.V-p41.2"></span>

<span id="ii.V-p42"></span> [Rom.
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#015),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#016)<span id="ii.V-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_142"></span>[14:143](1080009.htm#fr_142) <span
id="ii.V-p43.1"></span>

<span id="ii.V-p44"></span> It is not possible to preserve in the
translation the cognate words, *multitudinem* and *multum*: “hoc est
enim secundum *multitudinem* impietatum eorum, ut *multum* expellantur.”

<span id="fn_143"></span>[14:144](1080009.htm#fr_143) <span
id="ii.V-p44.1"></span>

<span id="ii.V-p45"></span> [Ps. v.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#003)<span id="ii.V-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_144"></span>[14:145](1080009.htm#fr_144) <span
id="ii.V-p45.2"></span>

<span id="ii.V-p46"></span> [Ps. lxxiii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#028)<span id="ii.V-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_145"></span>[14:146](1080009.htm#fr_145) <span
id="ii.V-p46.2"></span>

<span id="ii.V-p47"></span> [Matt. xxv.
21](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#021)<span id="ii.V-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_146"></span>[14:147](1080009.htm#fr_146) <span
id="ii.V-p47.2"></span>

<span id="ii.V-p48"></span> [Matt. xxv.
30](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#030)<span id="ii.V-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_147"></span>[14:148](1080009.htm#fr_147) <span
id="ii.V-p49.1"></span>

<span id="ii.V-p50"></span> [John vi.
51](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#051)<span id="ii.V-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_148"></span>[14:149](1080009.htm#fr_148) <span
id="ii.V-p50.2"></span>

<span id="ii.V-p51"></span> [John vi.
27](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#027)<span id="ii.V-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_149"></span>[14:150](1080009.htm#fr_149) <span
id="ii.V-p51.2"></span>

<span id="ii.V-p52"></span> [Ps. xxxiv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#008)<span id="ii.V-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_150"></span>[15:151](1080009.htm#fr_150) <span
id="ii.V-p54.2"></span>

<span id="ii.V-p55"></span> [Rom. iii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#023)<span id="ii.V-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_151"></span>[15:152](1080009.htm#fr_151) <span
id="ii.V-p55.2"></span>

<span id="ii.V-p56"></span> [Rom. viii.
30](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#030)<span id="ii.V-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_152"></span>[15:153](1080009.htm#fr_152) <span
id="ii.V-p56.2"></span>

<span id="ii.V-p57"></span> [Rom.
8:33](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#033),
[31](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#031),
[32](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#032)<span id="ii.V-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_153"></span>[15:154](1080009.htm#fr_153) <span
id="ii.V-p57.2"></span>

<span id="ii.V-p58"></span> [Rom. v.
10](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#010)<span id="ii.V-p58.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_154"></span>[15:155](1080009.htm#fr_154) <span
id="ii.V-p59.1"></span>

<span id="ii.V-p60"></span> *i.e.*, the Church.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm VI](1080010)
