[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080066)  [Next](1080068) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.LVIII"></span>

<span id="ii.LVIII-p1"></span> <span id="ii.LVIII-p1.1"></span><span
class="c20"><span id="ii.LVIII-p1.2"></span>Psalm LVIII. <span
id="fr_2161"></span>[2162](#fn_2161) </span>

<span id="ii.LVIII-p3"></span>1. The words which we have sung must be
rather hearkened to by us, than proclaimed. For to all men as it were in
an assemblage of mankind, the Truth crieth, “If truly indeed justice ye
speak, judge right things, ye sons of men” ([Psa.
58.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#001)<span id="ii.LVIII-p3.1"></span>).
For to what unjust man is it not an easy thing to speak justice? or what
man if questioned about justice, when he hath not a cause, would not
easily answer what is just? Inasmuch as the hand of our Maker in our
very hearts hath written this truth, “That which to thyself thou
wouldest not have done, do not thou to another.” <span
id="fr_2162"></span>[2163](#fn_2162) Of this truth, even before that the
Law was given, no one was suffered to be ignorant, in order that there
might be some rule whereby might be judged even those to whom Law had
not been given. <span id="fr_2163"></span>[2164](#fn_2163) But lest men
should complain that something had been wanting for them, there hath
been written also in tables that <span id="page_230">p. 230</span> <span
id="ii.LVIII-Page_230"></span>which in their hearts they read not. For
it was not that they had it not written, but read it they would not.
There hath been set before their eyes that which in their conscience to
see they would be compelled; and as if from without the voice of God
were brought to them, to his own inward parts hath man been thus driven,
the Scripture saying, “For in the thoughts of the ungodly man there will
be questioning.” <span id="fr_2164"></span>[2165](#fn_2164) Where
questioning is, there is law. But because men, desiring those things
which are without, even from themselves have become exiles, there hath
been given also a written law: not because in hearts it had not been
written, but because thou wast a deserter from thy heart, thou art
seized by Him that is everywhere, and to thyself within art called back.
Therefore the written law, what crieth it, to those that have deserted
the law written in their hearts?  <span
id="fr_2165"></span>[2166](#fn_2165) “Return ye transgressors to the
heart.” <span id="fr_2166"></span>[2167](#fn_2166) For who hath taught
thee, that thou wouldest have no other man draw near thy wife? Who hath
taught thee, that thou wouldest not have a theft committed upon thee?
Who hath taught thee, that thou wouldest not suffer wrong, and whatever
other thing either universally or particularly might be spoken of? For
many things there are, of which severally if questioned men with loud
voice would answer, that they would not suffer. Come, if thou art not
willing to suffer these things, art thou by any means the only man? dost
thou not live in the fellowship of mankind? He that together with thee
hath been made, is thy fellow; and all men have been made after the
image of God, <span id="fr_2167"></span>[2168](#fn_2167) unless with
earthly coverings they efface that which He hath formed. That which
therefore to thyself thou wilt not have to be done, do not thou to
another. For thou judgest that there is evil in that, which to suffer
thou art not willing: and this thing thou art constrained to know by an
inward law; that in thy very heart is written. Thou wast doing somewhat,
and there was a cry raised in thy hands: how art thou constrained to
return to thy heart when this thing thou sufferest in the hands of
others? Is theft a good thing? No! I ask, is adultery a good thing? All
cry, No! Is man-slaying a good thing? All cry, that they abhor it. Is
coveting the property of a neighbour a good thing? No! is the voice of
all men. Or if yet thou confessest not, there draweth near one that
coveteth thy property: be pleased to answer what thou wilt have. All men
therefore, when of these things questioned, cry that these things are
not good. Again, of doing kindnesses, not only of not hurting, but also
of conferring and distributing, any hungry soul is questioned thus:
“thou sufferest hunger, another man hath bread, and there is abundance
with him beyond sufficiency, he knoweth thee to want, he giveth not: it
displeaseth thee when hungering, let it displease thee when full also,
when of another’s hungering thou shalt have known. A stranger wanting
shelter cometh into thy country, he is not taken in: he then crieth that
inhuman is that city, at once among barbarians he might have found a
home. He feeleth the injustice because he suffereth; thou perchance
feelest not, but it is meet that thou imagine thyself also a stranger;
and that thou see in what manner he will have displeased thee, who shall
not have given that, which thou in thy country wilt not give to a
stranger.” I ask all men. True are these things? True. Just are these
things? Just. But hear ye the Psalm. “If truly therefore justice ye
speak, judge right things, ye sons of men.” Be it not a justice of lips,
but also of deeds. For if thou actest otherwise than thou speakest, good
things thou speakest, and ill thou judgest.…

<span id="ii.LVIII-p10"></span>2. But now to the present case let us
come, if ye please. For the voice is that sweet voice, so well known to
the ears of the Church, the voice of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the
voice of His Body, the voice of the Church toiling, sojourning upon
earth, living amid the perils of men speaking evil and of men
flattering. Thou wilt not fear a threatener, if thou lovest not a
flatterer. He therefore, of whom this is the voice, hath observed and
hath seen, that all men speak justice. For what man doth dare not to
speak it, lest he be called unjust? When, therefore, as though he were
hearing the voices of all men, and were observing the lips of all men,
he cried out to them, “If truly indeed justice ye speak,”—if not falsely
justice ye speak, if not one thing on lips doth sound, whilst another
thing is concealed in hearts,—“judge right things, ye sons of men.” Hear
out of the Gospel His own voice, the very same as is in this Psalm:
“Hypocrites,” saith the Lord to the Pharisees, “how are ye able good
things to speak, when ye are evil men?.…Either make the tree good, and
the fruit thereof good: or make the tree evil, and the fruit thereof
evil.” <span id="fr_2168"></span>[2169](#fn_2168) Why wilt thou whiten
thee, wall of mud? I know thy inward parts, I am not deceived by thy
covering: I know what thou holdest forth, I know what thou coverest.
“For there was no need for Him, that any one to Him should bear
testimony of man: for He knew Himself what was in man.” <span
id="fr_2169"></span>[2170](#fn_2169) For He knew what was in man, who
had made man, and who had been made Man, in order that He might seek
man.…

<span id="ii.LVIII-p13"></span>3. But now ye do what? Why these things
to you do I speak? “Because in heart iniquities ye work on earth” ([Psa.
58.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#002)<span
id="ii.LVIII-p13.1"></span>). Iniquities per<span id="page_231">p.
231</span> <span id="ii.LVIII-Page_231"></span>chance in heart alone?
Hear what followeth: both their heart hands do follow, and their heart
hands do serve, the thing is thought of, and it is done; or else it is
not done, not because we would not, but because we could not, <span
class="c21"><span id="ii.LVIII-p13.2"></span>Whatever thou willest and
canst not, for done God doth count it</span>. “For in heart Iniquities
ye work on earth.” What next? “Iniquities your hands knit together.”
What is, “knit together”? From sin, sin, and to sin, sin, because of
sin. What is this? A theft a man hath committed, a sin it is: he hath
been seen, he seeketh to slay him by whom he hath been seen: there hath
been knit together sin with sin: God hath permitted him in His hidden
judgment to slay that man whom he hath willed to slay: he perceiveth
that the thing is known, he seeketh to slay a second also; he hath knit
together a third sin: while these things he is planning, perchance that
he may not be found out, or that he may not be convicted of having done
it, he consulteth an astrologer; there is added a fourth sin: the
astrologer answereth perchance with some hard and evil responses, he
runneth to a soothsayer, that expiation may be made; the soothsayer
maketh answer that he is not able to expiate: a magician is sought. And
who could enumerate those sins which are knit together with sins?
“Iniquities your hands do knit together.” So long as thou knittest
together, thou bindest sin upon sin. Loose thyself from sins. But I am
not able, thou sayest. Cry to Him. “Unhappy man I, who shall deliver me
from the body of this death?” <span id="fr_2170"></span>[2171](#fn_2170)
For there shall come the Grace of God, so that righteousness shall be
thy delight, as much as thou didst delight in iniquity; and thou, a man
that out of bonds hast been loosed, shall cry out to God, “Thou hast
broken asunder my bonds.” <span id="fr_2171"></span>[2172](#fn_2171)
“Thou hast broken asunder my bonds,” is what else but, “Thou hast
remitted my sins”? Hear why chains they are: the Scripture maketh
answer, “with the chains of his sins each one is bound fast.” <span
id="fr_2172"></span>[2173](#fn_2172) Not only bonds, but chains <span
id="fr_2173"></span>[2174](#fn_2173) also they are. Chains are those
which are made by twisting in: that is, because with sins sins thou wast
knitting together.…

<span id="ii.LVIII-p18"></span>4. “Alienated are sinners from the womb,
they have gone astray from the belly, they have spoken false things”
([Psa. 58.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#003)<span
id="ii.LVIII-p18.1"></span>). And when iniquity they speak, false things
they speak; because deceitful is iniquity: and when justice they speak,
false things they speak; because one thing with mouth they profess,
another thing in heart they conceal. “Alienated are sinners from the
womb.” What is this? Let us search more diligently: for perhaps he is
saying this, because God hath foreknown men that are to be sinners even
in the wombs of their mothers. <span
id="fr_2174"></span>[2175](#fn_2174) For whence when Rebecca was yet
pregnant, and in womb was bearing twins, was it said, “Jacob I have
loved, but Esau I have hated”? <span
id="fr_2175"></span>[2176](#fn_2175) For it was said, “The elder shall
serve the younger.” Hidden at that time was the judgment of God: but yet
from the womb, that is, from the very origin, alienated are sinners.
Whence alienated? From truth. Whence alienated? From the blessed
country, from the blessed life. Perchance alienated they are from the
very womb. And what sinners have been alienated from the womb? For what
men would have been born, if therein they had not been held? Or what men
to-day would be alive to hear these words to no purpose, unless they
were born? Perchance therefore sinners have been alienated from a
certain womb, wherein that charity was suffering pains, which speaketh
through the Apostle, “Of whom again I am in labour, until Christ be
formed in you.” <span id="fr_2176"></span>[2177](#fn_2176) Expect thou
therefore; be formed: do not to thyself ascribe a judgment which
perchance thou knowest not. Carnal thou art as yet, conceived thou hast
been: from that very time when thou hast received the name of Christ, by
a sort of sacrament thou hast been born in the bowels of a mother. For
not only out of bowels a man is born, but also in bowels. First he is
born in bowels, in order that he may be able to be born of bowels.
Wherefore it hath been said even to Mary, “For that which is born in
thee, is of the Holy Spirit.” <span id="fr_2177"></span>[2178](#fn_2177)
Not yet of Her It had been born, but already in Her It had been born.
Therefore there are born within the bowels of the Church certain little
ones, and a good thing it is that being formed they should go forth, so
that they drop not by miscarriage. Let the mother bear thee, not
miscarry. If patient thou shalt have been, even until thou be formed,
even until in thee there be the sure doctrine of truth, the maternal
bowels ought to keep thee. But if by thy impatience thou shalt have
shaken the sides of thy mother, with pain indeed she expelleth thee out,
but more to thy loss than to hers.

<span id="ii.LVIII-p23"></span>5. For this reason therefore have they
gone astray from the belly, because “they have spoken false things”? Or
rather have they not for this reason spoken false things, because they
have gone astray from the belly? For in the belly of the Church truth
abideth. Whosoever from this belly of the Church separated shall have
been, must needs speak false things: must needs, I say, speak false
things; whoso either conceived would not be, or whom when conceived the
<span id="page_232">p. 232</span> <span
id="ii.LVIII-Page_232"></span>mother hath expelled. Thence heretics
exclaim against the Gospel (to speak in preference of those whom
expelled we lament). We repeat to them: behold Christ hath said, “It
behoved Christ to suffer, and from the dead to rise again the third
day.” <span id="fr_2178"></span>[2179](#fn_2178) I acknowledge there our
Head, I acknowledge there our bridegroom: acknowledge thou also with me
the Bride.…

<span id="ii.LVIII-p25"></span>6. “Indignation to them after the
similitude of a serpent” ([Psa.
58.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#004)<span
id="ii.LVIII-p25.1"></span>). A great thing ye are to hear. “Indignation
to them after the similitude of a serpent.” As if we had said, What is
that which thou hast said? there followeth, “As if of a deaf asp.”
Whence deaf? “And closing its ears.” Therefore deaf, because it closeth
its ears. “And closing its ears.” “Which will not hearken to the voice
of men charming, and of the medicine medicated by the wise man” ([Psa.
58.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#005)<span
id="ii.LVIII-p25.2"></span>). As we have heard, because even men speak
who have learned it with such research as they were able, but
nevertheless it is a thing which the Spirit of God knoweth much better
than any men. For it is not to no purpose that of this he hath spoken,
but because it may chance that true is even that which we have heard of
the asp. When the asp beginneth to be affected by the Marsian charmer,
who calleth it forth with certain peculiar incantations, hear what it
doeth.…Give heed what is spoken to thee for a simile’s sake, what is
noted thee for avoidance. <span id="fr_2179"></span>[2180](#fn_2179) So
therefore here also there hath been given a certain simile derived from
the Marsian, who maketh incantation to bring forth the asp from the dark
cavern; surely into light he would bring it: but it loving its darkness,
wherein coiled up it hideth itself, when it will not choose to come
forth, nevertheless refusing to hear those words whereby it feeleth
itself to be constrained, is said to press one ear against the ground,
and with its tail to stop up the other, and therefore as much as
possible escaping those words, it cometh not forth to the charmer. To
this as being like, the Spirit of God hath spoken of certain persons
hearing not the Word of God, and not only not doing, but altogether,
that they may not do it, refusing to hear.

<span id="ii.LVIII-p27"></span>7. This thing hath been done even in the
first times of the faith. Stephen the Martyr was preaching the Truth,
and to minds as though dark, in order to bring them forth into light,
was making incantation: when he came to make mention of Christ, whom
they would not hear at all, of them the Scripture saith what? of them
relateth what? “They shut,” he saith, “their ears.” <span
id="fr_2180"></span>[2181](#fn_2180) But what they did afterwards, the
narrative of the passion of Stephen doth publish. They were not deaf,
but they made themselves deaf.…For this thing they did at the point
where Christ was named. The indignation of these men was as the
indignation of a serpent. Why your ears do ye shut? Wait, hear, and if
ye shall be able, rage. Because they chose not to do aught but rage,
they would not hear. But if they had heard, perchance they would have
ceased to rage. The indignation of them was as the indignation of a
serpent.…

<span id="ii.LVIII-p29"></span>8. “God hath broken utterly the teeth of
them in their own mouth” ([Psa.
58.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#006)<span
id="ii.LVIII-p29.1"></span>). Of whom? Of them to whom indignation is as
the similitude of a serpent, and of an asp closing up its ears, so that
it heareth not the voice of men charming, and of medicine medicated by
the wise man. The Lord hath done to them what? “Hath broken utterly the
teeth of them in their own mouth.” It hath been done, this at first hath
been done, and now is being done. But it would have sufficed, my
brethren, that it should have been said, “God hath broken utterly the
teeth of them.” The Pharisees would not hear the Law, would not hear the
precepts of truth from Christ, being like to that serpent and asp. For
in their past sins they took delight, and present life they would not
lose, that is, joys earthly for joys heavenly.…What is, “in their own
mouth”? In such sort, that with their own mouth against themselves they
should make declaration: He hath compelled them with their mouth against
themselves to give sentence. They would have slandered Him, because of
the tribute: <span id="fr_2181"></span>[2182](#fn_2181) He said not, “It
is lawful to pay tribute,” or, “It is not lawful to pay tribute.” And He
willed to break utterly their teeth, wherewith they were gaping in order
to bite; but in their own mouth He would do it. If He said, Let there be
paid to Cæsar tribute, they would have slandered Him, because He had
spoken evil to the nation of the Jews, by making it a tributary. For
because of sin they were paying tribute, having been humbled, as to them
in the Law had been foretold. We have Him, say they, a maligner of our
nation, if He shall have bidden us to pay tribute: but if He say, Do not
pay, we have Him for saying that we should not be under allegiance to
Cæsar. Such a double noose as it were to catch the Lord they laid. But
to whom had they come? To Him that knew how to break utterly the teeth
of them in their own mouth. “Show to Me the coin,” <span
id="fr_2182"></span>[2183](#fn_2182) He saith. Why tempt ye Me, ye
hypocrites?” Of paying tribute do ye think? To do justice are ye
willing? the counsel of justice do ye seek? “If truly justice ye speak,
judge right things, ye sons of men.” But now because in one way ye
speak, in another way judge, hypocrites ye are: “Why tempt ye Me, ye
hypocrites?” Now I will break utterly your teeth in your mouth: “show to
Me the coin.” And they showed it to Him. And He saith not, it is
Cæsar’s: but asketh <span id="page_233">p. 233</span> <span
id="ii.LVIII-Page_233"></span>Whose it is? in order that their teeth in
their own mouth might be utterly broken. For on His inquiring, of whom
it had the image and inscription, they said, of Cæsar. Even now the Lord
shall break utterly the teeth of them in their own mouth. Now ye have
made answer, now have been broken utterly your teeth in your mouth.
“Render unto Cæsar the things which are of Cæsar, and unto God the
things which are of God.”  <span id="fr_2183"></span>[2184](#fn_2183)
Cæsar seeketh his image; render it: God seeketh His image; render it.
Let not Cæsar lose from you his coin: let not God lose in you His coin.
And they found not what they might answer. For they had been sent to
slander Him: and they went back, saying, that no one to Him could make
answer. Wherefore? Because broken utterly had been the teeth of them in
their own mouth. Of that sort is also the following: “In what power
doest Thou these things? I also will ask of you one question, answer
me.” <span id="fr_2184"></span>[2185](#fn_2184) And He asked them of
John, whence was the Baptism of John, from heaven, or of men? so that
whatever they might answer might tell against themselves.…

<span id="ii.LVIII-p34"></span>9. The Lord displeased that Pharisee, who
to dinner had bidden Him, because a woman that was a sinner drew near to
His feet, and he murmured against Him, saying, “If this man were a
prophet, He would know what woman drew near to His feet.” <span
id="fr_2185"></span>[2186](#fn_2185) O thou that art no prophet, whence
knowest thou that He knew not what woman drew near to His feet? Because
indeed He kept not the purifying of the Jews, which outwardly was as it
were kept in the flesh, and was afar from the heart, this thing he
suspected of the Lord. And in order that I may not speak at length on
this point, even in his mouth He willed to break utterly the teeth of
him. For He set forth to him: “A certain usurer had two debtors, one was
owing five hundred pence, the other fifty: both had not wherewithal to
pay, he forgave both. Which loved him the more?” <span
id="fr_2186"></span>[2187](#fn_2186) To this end the one asketh, that
the other may answer: to this end he answereth that the teeth of him in
his mouth may be broken utterly.…

<span id="ii.LVIII-p37"></span>10. “The jaw-bones of lions the Lord hath
broken utterly.” <span id="fr_2187"></span>[2188](#fn_2187) Not only of
asps. What of asps? Asps treacherously desire to throw in their venom,
and scatter it, and hiss. Most openly raged the nations, and roared like
lions. “Wherefore have raged the nations, and the peoples meditated
empty things?” <span id="fr_2188"></span>[2189](#fn_2188) When they were
lying in wait for the Lord. Is it lawful to give tribute to Cæsar, or is
it not lawful? <span id="fr_2189"></span>[2190](#fn_2189) Asps they
were, serpents they were, broken utterly were the teeth of them in their
own mouth. Afterwards they cried out, “Crucify, Crucify.” <span
id="fr_2190"></span>[2191](#fn_2190) Now is there no tongue of asp, but
roar of lion. But also “the jaw-bones of lions the Lord hath broken
utterly.” Perchance here there is no need of that which he hath not
added, namely, “in the mouth of them.” For men lying in wait with
captious questions, were forced to be conquered with their own answer:
but those men that openly were raging, were they by any means to be
confuted with questions? Nevertheless, even their jaw-bones were broken
utterly: having been crucified, He rose again, ascended into heaven, was
glorified as the Christ, is adored by all nations, adored by all kings.
Let the Jews now rage, if they are able. We have also in the case of
heretics this as a warning and precedent, because themselves also we
find to be serpents with indignation made deaf, not choosing to hear the
“medicine medicated by the wise man:” and in their own mouth the Lord
hath broken utterly the teeth of them.…

<span id="ii.LVIII-p42"></span>11. “They shall be despised like water
running down” ([Psa. 58.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#007)<span
id="ii.LVIII-p42.1"></span>). Be not terrified, brethren, by certain
streams, which are called torrents: with winter waters they are filled
up; do not fear: after a little it passeth by, that water runneth down;
for a time it roareth, soon it will subside: they cannot hold long. Many
heresies now are utterly dead: they have run in their channels as much
as they were able, have run down, dried are the channels, scarce of them
the memory is found, or that they have been. “They shall be despised
like water running down.” But not they alone; the whole of this age for
a time is roaring, and is seeking whom it may drag along. Let all
ungodly men, all proud men resounding against the rocks of their pride
as it were with waters rushing along and flowing together, not terrify
you, winter waters they are, they cannot alway flow: it must needs be
that they run down unto their place, unto their end. And nevertheless of
this torrent of the world the Lord hath drunk. For He hath suffered
here, the very torrent He hath drunk, but in the way He hath drunk, but
in the passage over: because in way of sinners He hath not stood. <span
id="fr_2191"></span>[2192](#fn_2191) But of Him saith the Scripture
what? “Of the torrent in the way He shall drink, therefore He shall lift
up His Head;” <span id="fr_2192"></span>[2193](#fn_2192) that is, for
this reason glorified He hath been, because He hath died; for this
reason hath risen again, because He hath suffered.…

<span id="ii.LVIII-p45"></span>12. “Like wax melted they shall be taken
away” ([Psa. 58.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#008)<span
id="ii.LVIII-p45.1"></span>). For thou wast about to say, all men are
not so made weak, like myself, in order that they may believe: many men
do persevere in their evil, and in their malice. And of the same fear
thou nothing: “Like wax melted <span id="page_234">p. 234</span> <span
id="ii.LVIII-Page_234"></span>they shall be taken away.” Against thee
they shall not stand, they shall not continue: with a sort of fire of
their own lusts they shall perish. For there is here a kind of hidden
punishment, <span id="fr_2193"></span>[2194](#fn_2193) of it the Psalm
is about to speak now, to the end of it. There are but a few verses; be
attentive. There is a certain punishment future, fire of hell, fire
everlasting. For future punishment hath two kinds: either of the lower
places it is, where was burning that rich man, who was wishing for
himself a drop of water to be dropped on his tongue off the finger of
the poor man, whom before his gate he had spurned, when he saith, “For I
am tormented in this flame.”  <span id="fr_2194"></span>[2195](#fn_2194)
And the second is that at the end, whereof they are to hear, that on the
left hand are to be set: “Go ye into fire everlasting, that hath been
prepared for the devil and his angels.” <span
id="fr_2195"></span>[2196](#fn_2195) Those punishments shall be manifest
at that time, when we shall have departed out of this life, or when at
the end of the world men shall have come to the resurrection of the
dead. Now therefore is there no punishment, and doth God suffer sins
utterly unpunished even unto that day? There is even here a sort of
hidden punishment, of the same he is treating now.…We see nevertheless
sometimes with these punishments just men to be afflicted, and to these
punishments unjust men to be strangers: for which reason did totter the
feet of him that afterwards rejoicing saith, “How good is the God of
Israel to men right in heart! But my own feet have been almost shaken,
because I have been jealous in the case of sinners, beholding the peace
of sinners.” <span id="fr_2196"></span>[2197](#fn_2196) For he had seen
the felicity of evil men, and well-pleased he had been to be an evil
man, seeing evil men to reign, seeing that it was well with them, that
they abounded in plenty of all things temporal, such as he too, being as
yet but a babe, was desiring from the Lord: and his feet did totter,
even until he saw what at the end is either to be hoped for or to be
feared. For he saith in the same Psalm, “This thing is a labour before
me, until I enter into the sanctuary of God, and understand unto the
last things.” <span id="fr_2197"></span>[2198](#fn_2197) It is not
therefore the punishments of the lower places, not the punishments of
that fire everlasting after the resurrection, not those punishments
which as yet in this world are common to just men and unjust men, and
ofttimes more heavy are those of just men than those of unjust men; but
some punishment or other of the present life the Spirit of God would
recommend to our notice. Give heed, hear ye me about to speak of that
which ye know: but a more sweet thing it is when it is declared in a
Psalm, which, before it was declared, was deemed obscure. For behold I
bring forth that which already ye knew: but because these things are
brought forth from a place where ye have never yet seen them, it cometh
to pass that even known things, as if they were new things, do delight
you. Hear ye the punishment of ungodly men: “Like wax,” he saith,
“melted they shall be taken away.” I have said that through their lusts
this thing to them is done. Evil lust is like a burning and a fire. Doth
fire consume a garment, and doth not the lust of adultery consume the
soul? Of meditated adultery when the Scripture was speaking it saith,
“Shall one bind fire in his bosom, and his garments shall he not burn
up?” <span id="fr_2198"></span>[2199](#fn_2198) Thou bearest in thy
bosom live coals; burned through is thy vest; thou bearest in thought
adultery, and whole then is thy soul? But these punishments few men do
see: therefore them the Spirit of God doth exceedingly recommend to our
notice. Hear the Apostle saying, “God hath given them up unto the lusts
of their heart.” <span id="fr_2199"></span>[2200](#fn_2199) Behold, the
fire from the face of which like wax they are melting. For they loose
themselves from a certain continence of chastity; therefore even these
same men, going unto their lusts, as loose and melting are spoken of.
Whence melting? whence loose? From the fire of lusts. “God hath given
them up unto the lusts of their heart, so that they do those things
which beseem not, being filled full of all iniquity.”…

<span id="ii.LVIII-p53"></span>13. “There hath fallen upon them fire,
and they have not seen the sun.” Ye see in what manner he speaketh of a
certain punishment of darkening. “Fire hath fallen upon them,” fire of
pride, a smoky fire, fire of lust, fire of wrath. How great a fire is
it? He upon whom it shall have fallen, shall not see the sun. Therefore
hath it been said, “Let not the sun go down upon your wrath.” <span
id="fr_2200"></span>[2201](#fn_2200) Therefore, brethren, fire of evil
lust fear ye, if ye will not melt like wax, and to perish from the face
of God. For there falleth upon you that fire, and the sun ye shall not
see. What sun? Not that which together with thee see both beasts and
insects, and good men and evil men: because “He maketh His sun to rise
upon good men and evil men.” <span id="fr_2201"></span>[2202](#fn_2201)
But there is another sun, whereof those men are to speak, “And the sun
hath not risen to us, passed away are all those things as it were a
shadow. Therefore we have strayed from the way of truth, and the light
of righteousness hath not shone to us, and the sun hath not risen to
us.” <span id="fr_2202"></span>[2203](#fn_2202) …

<span id="ii.LVIII-p57"></span>14. “Before that the bramble <span
id="fr_2203"></span>[2204](#fn_2203) bringeth forth your thorns: as
though living, as though in anger, it shall drink them up” ([Psa.
58.9](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#009)<span
id="ii.LVIII-p58.1"></span>). What is the bramble? Of prickly plants it
is a kind, upon which there are said to be certain of the closest
thorns. At first it is a herb; and while it is a herb, soft and fair it
is: but thereon there <span id="page_235">p. 235</span> <span
id="ii.LVIII-Page_235"></span>are nevertheless thorns to come forth. Now
therefore sins are pleasant, and as it were they do not prick. A herb is
the bramble; even now nevertheless there is a thorn. “Before that the
bramble bringeth forth thorns:” is before that of miserable delights and
pleasures the evident tortures come forth. Let them question themselves
that love any object, and to it cannot attain; let them see if they are
not racked with longing: and when they have attained to that which
unlawfully they long for, let them mark if they are not racked with
fear. Let them see therefore here their punishments; before that there
cometh that resurrection, when in flesh rising again they shall not be
changed. “For all we shall rise again, but not <span
id="fr_2204"></span>[2205](#fn_2204) all we shall be changed.” <span
id="fr_2205"></span>[2206](#fn_2205) For they shall have the corruption
of the flesh wherein to be pained, not that wherein to die: otherwise
even those pains would be ended. Then the thorns of that bramble, that
is, all pains and piercings of tortures shall be brought forth. Such
thorns as they shall suffer that are to say, “These are they whom
sometimes we had in derision:” <span
id="fr_2206"></span>[2207](#fn_2206) thorns of the piercing of
repentance, but of one too late and without fruit like the barrenness of
thorns. The repentance of this time is pain healing: repentance of that
time is pain penal. Wouldest thou not suffer those thorns? here be thou
pierced with the thorns of repentance; in such sort that thou do that
which hath been spoken of, “Turned I have been in sorrow, when the thorn
was piercing: <span id="fr_2207"></span>[2208](#fn_2207) my sin I have
known, and mine iniquity I have not covered: I have said, I will declare
against me my shortcoming to the Lord, and Thou hast remitted the
ungodliness of my heart.” <span id="fr_2208"></span>[2209](#fn_2208) Now
do so, now be pierced through, be there not in thee done that which hath
been said of certain execrable men, “They have been cloven asunder, and
have not been pierced through.” <span
id="fr_2209"></span>[2210](#fn_2209) Observe them that have been cloven
asunder and have not been pierced through. <span
id="fr_2210"></span>[2211](#fn_2210) Ye see men cloven asunder, and ye
see them not pierced through. Behold beside the Church they are, and it
doth not repent them, so as they should return whence they have been
cloven asunder. The bramble hereafter shall bring forth their thorns.
They will not now have a healing piercing through, they shall have
hereafter one penal. But even now before that the bramble produceth
thorns, there hath fallen upon them fire, that suffereth them not to see
the sun, that is, the wrath of God is drinking up them while still
living: fire of evil lusts, of empty honours, of pride, of their
covetousness: and whatsoever is weighing them down, that they should not
know the truth, so that they seem not to be conquered, so that they be
not brought into subjection even by truth herself. For what is a more
glorious thing, brethren, than to be brought in subjection and to be
overcome by truth? Let truth overcome thee willing: for even unwilling
she shall of herself overcome thee.…

<span id="ii.LVIII-p66"></span>15. As yet the punishments of the lower
places have not come, as yet fire everlasting hath not come: let him
that is growing in God compare himself now with an ungodly man, a blind
heart with an enlightened heart: compare ye two men, one seeing and one
not seeing in the flesh. And what so great thing is vision of the flesh?
Did Tobias by any means have fleshly eyes? <span
id="fr_2211"></span>[2212](#fn_2211) His own son had, and he had not;
and the way of life a blind man to one seeing did show. Therefore when
ye see that punishment, rejoice, because in it ye are not.

<span id="ii.LVIII-p68"></span>Therefore saith the Scripture, “The just
man shall rejoice when he shall have seen vengeance” ([Psa.
58.10](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#010)<span
id="ii.LVIII-p68.1"></span>). Not that future punishment; for see what
followeth: “his hands he shall wash in the blood of the sinner.” What is
this? Let your love attend. When man-slayers are smitten, ought anywise
innocent men to go thither and wash their hands? But what is, “in the
blood of the sinner he shall wash his hands”? When a just man seeth the
punishment of a sinner, he groweth himself; and the death of one is the
life of another. For if spiritually blood runneth from those that within
are dead, do thou, seeing such vengeance, wash therein thy hands; for
the future more cleanly live. And how shall he wash his hands, if a just
man he is? For what hath he on his hands to be washed, if just he is?
“But the just man of faith shall live.” <span
id="fr_2212"></span>[2213](#fn_2212) Just men therefore he hath called
believers: and from the time that thou hast believed, at once thou
beginnest to be called just. For there hath been made a remission of
sins. Even if out of that remaining part of thy life some sins are
thine, which cannot but flow in, like water from the sea into the hold;
nevertheless, because thou hast believed, when thou shalt have seen him
that altogether is turned away from God to be slain in that blindness,
there falling upon him that fire so that he see not the sun—then do thou
that now through faith seest Christ, in order that thou mayest see in
substance (because the just man liveth of faith), observe the ungodly
man dying, and purge thyself from sins. So thou shalt wash in a manner
thy hands in the blood of the sinner.

<span id="ii.LVIII-p70"></span>16. “And a man shall say, If therefore
there is fruit to a just man” ([Psa.
58.10](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#010)<span
id="ii.LVIII-p70.1"></span>). Behold, before that there cometh that
which is promised, before <span id="page_236">p. 236</span> <span
id="ii.LVIII-Page_236"></span>that there is given life everlasting,
before that ungodly men are cast forth into fire everlasting, here in
this life there is fruit to the just man. What fruit? “In hope
rejoicing, in tribulation enduring.” <span
id="fr_2213"></span>[2214](#fn_2213) What fruit to the just man? “We
glory in tribulations, knowing that tribulation worketh patience, but
patience probation, but probation hope: but hope confoundeth not:
because the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts through the Holy
Spirit, that hath been given to us.” <span
id="fr_2214"></span>[2215](#fn_2214) Doth he rejoice that is a drunkard;
and doth he not rejoice that is just? In love there is fruit to a just
man. Miserable the one, even when he maketh himself drunken: blessed the
other, even when he hungereth and thirsteth. The one wine-bibbing doth
gorge, the other hope doth feed. Let him see therefore the punishment of
the other, his own rejoicing, and let him think of God. He that hath
given even now such joy of faith, of hope, of charity, of the truth of
His Scriptures, what manner of joy is He making ready against the end?
In the way thus He feedeth, in his home how shall He fill him? “And a
man shall say, If therefore there is fruit to the just man.” Let them
that see believe, and see, and perceive. Rejoice shall the just man when
he shall have seen vengeance. But if he hath not eyes whence he may see
vengeance, he will be made sad, and will not be amended by it. But if he
seeth it, he seeth what difference there is between the darkened eye of
the heart, and the eye enlightened of the heart: between the coolness of
chastity and the flame of lust, between the security of hope and the
fear there is in crime. When he shall have seen this, let him separate
himself, and wash his hands in the blood of the same. Let him profit by
the comparison, and say, “Therefore there is fruit to the just man:
therefore there is a God judging them in the earth.” Not yet in that
life, not yet in fire eternal, not yet in the lower places, but here in
earth.…

<span id="ii.LVIII-p73"></span>17. If somewhat too prolix we have been,
pardon us. We exhort you in the name of Christ, to meditate profitably
on those things which ye have heard. Because even to preach the truth is
nought, if heart from tongue dissenteth; and to hear the truth nothing
profiteth, if a man upon the rock build not. He that buildeth upon a
Rock, is the same that heareth and doeth: <span
id="fr_2215"></span>[2216](#fn_2215) but he that heareth and doeth not,
buildeth upon sand: he that neither heareth nor doeth, buildeth
nothing.…

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2161"></span>[229:2162](1080067.htm#fr_2161) <span
id="ii.LVIII-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.LVIII-p2"></span> Lat. LVII. Sermon to the Commonalty,
wherein everywhere he confuteth the Donatists.

<span id="fn_2162"></span>[229:2163](1080067.htm#fr_2162) <span
id="ii.LVIII-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVIII-p4"></span> [Tob. iv.
15](../../../bib/apo/tob004.htm#015)<span id="ii.LVIII-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2163"></span>[229:2164](1080067.htm#fr_2163) <span
id="ii.LVIII-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVIII-p5"></span> \[[Matt. vii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#012)<span id="ii.LVIII-p5.1"></span>.
The quotation from the father of Tobias shows this maxim, negative in
its form, and reflecting the Mosaic law, which “made nothing perfect.”
It was probably Noahic, and was therefore known to Gentilism, as *e.g*.
to Confucius. The glory of “the Golden Rule” is not merely that it gives
a positive form to this law: Christ made it the energetic and
characteristic principle of His Church towards humanity, and of all
Christians towards all men.—C.\]

<span id="fn_2164"></span>[230:2165](1080067.htm#fr_2164) <span
id="ii.LVIII-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVIII-p6"></span> [Wisd. i.
9](../../../bib/apo/wis001.htm#009)<span id="ii.LVIII-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2165"></span>[230:2166](1080067.htm#fr_2165) <span
id="ii.LVIII-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVIII-p7"></span> [Rom. ii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#015)<span id="ii.LVIII-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2166"></span>[230:2167](1080067.htm#fr_2166) <span
id="ii.LVIII-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVIII-p8"></span> [Isa. xlvi.
8](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#008)<span id="ii.LVIII-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2167"></span>[230:2168](1080067.htm#fr_2167) <span
id="ii.LVIII-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVIII-p9"></span> [Gen. i.
26](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#026)<span id="ii.LVIII-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2168"></span>[230:2169](1080067.htm#fr_2168) <span
id="ii.LVIII-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LVIII-p11"></span> [Matt.
12:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#033),
[34](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#034)<span id="ii.LVIII-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2169"></span>[230:2170](1080067.htm#fr_2169) <span
id="ii.LVIII-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVIII-p12"></span> [John ii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#025)<span id="ii.LVIII-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2170"></span>[231:2171](1080067.htm#fr_2170) <span
id="ii.LVIII-p13.3"></span>

<span id="ii.LVIII-p14"></span> [Rom. vii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#024)<span id="ii.LVIII-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2171"></span>[231:2172](1080067.htm#fr_2171) <span
id="ii.LVIII-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVIII-p15"></span> [Ps. cxvi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#016)<span id="ii.LVIII-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2172"></span>[231:2173](1080067.htm#fr_2172) <span
id="ii.LVIII-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVIII-p16"></span> [Prov. v.
22](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#022)<span id="ii.LVIII-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2173"></span>[231:2174](1080067.htm#fr_2173) <span
id="ii.LVIII-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVIII-p17"></span> *Criniculi*.

<span id="fn_2174"></span>[231:2175](1080067.htm#fr_2174) <span
id="ii.LVIII-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVIII-p19"></span> [Gen. xxv.
23](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#023)<span id="ii.LVIII-p19.1"></span>.
\[Here foreknowledge precedes predestination. See Clement, vol. ii. p.
497, A.N.F.—C.\]

<span id="fn_2175"></span>[231:2176](1080067.htm#fr_2175) <span
id="ii.LVIII-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVIII-p20"></span> [Mal.
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#002), [Rom.
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#013)<span id="ii.LVIII-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2176"></span>[231:2177](1080067.htm#fr_2176) <span
id="ii.LVIII-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVIII-p21"></span> [Gal. iv.
19](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#019)<span id="ii.LVIII-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2177"></span>[231:2178](1080067.htm#fr_2177) <span
id="ii.LVIII-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVIII-p22"></span> [Matt.
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#020), [Luke
1:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#035)<span id="ii.LVIII-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2178"></span>[232:2179](1080067.htm#fr_2178) <span
id="ii.LVIII-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LVIII-p24"></span> [Luke xxiv.
46](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#046)<span id="ii.LVIII-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2179"></span>[232:2180](1080067.htm#fr_2179) <span
id="ii.LVIII-p25.3"></span>

<span id="ii.LVIII-p26"></span> So. p. 133.

<span id="fn_2180"></span>[232:2181](1080067.htm#fr_2180) <span
id="ii.LVIII-p27.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LVIII-p28"></span> [Acts vii.
57](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#057)<span id="ii.LVIII-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2181"></span>[232:2182](1080067.htm#fr_2181) <span
id="ii.LVIII-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVIII-p30"></span> [Matt.
22:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#017),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#018)<span id="ii.LVIII-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2182"></span>[232:2183](1080067.htm#fr_2182) <span
id="ii.LVIII-p30.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVIII-p31"></span> [Matt. xxii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#019)<span id="ii.LVIII-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2183"></span>[233:2184](1080067.htm#fr_2183) <span
id="ii.LVIII-p31.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVIII-p32"></span> [Matt. xxii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#021)<span id="ii.LVIII-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2184"></span>[233:2185](1080067.htm#fr_2184) <span
id="ii.LVIII-p32.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVIII-p33"></span> [Matt.
21:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#023),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#024), [Mark
11:28](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#028),
[29](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#029)<span id="ii.LVIII-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2185"></span>[233:2186](1080067.htm#fr_2185) <span
id="ii.LVIII-p34.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LVIII-p35"></span> [Luke vii.
39](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#039)<span id="ii.LVIII-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2186"></span>[233:2187](1080067.htm#fr_2186) <span
id="ii.LVIII-p35.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVIII-p36"></span> [Luke
7:41](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#041),
[42](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#042)<span id="ii.LVIII-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2187"></span>[233:2188](1080067.htm#fr_2187) <span
id="ii.LVIII-p37.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LVIII-p38"></span> [Ps. lviii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#006)<span id="ii.LVIII-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2188"></span>[233:2189](1080067.htm#fr_2188) <span
id="ii.LVIII-p38.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVIII-p39"></span> [Ps. ii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001)<span id="ii.LVIII-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2189"></span>[233:2190](1080067.htm#fr_2189) <span
id="ii.LVIII-p39.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVIII-p40"></span> [Matt. xxii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#017)<span id="ii.LVIII-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2190"></span>[233:2191](1080067.htm#fr_2190) <span
id="ii.LVIII-p40.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVIII-p41"></span> [Matt.
27:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#023), [John
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#006)<span id="ii.LVIII-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2191"></span>[233:2192](1080067.htm#fr_2191) <span
id="ii.LVIII-p42.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVIII-p43"></span> [Ps. i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)<span id="ii.LVIII-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2192"></span>[233:2193](1080067.htm#fr_2192) <span
id="ii.LVIII-p43.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVIII-p44"></span> [Ps. cx.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#007)<span id="ii.LVIII-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2193"></span>[234:2194](1080067.htm#fr_2193) <span
id="ii.LVIII-p45.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVIII-p46"></span> Hidden punishment of sinners.

<span id="fn_2194"></span>[234:2195](1080067.htm#fr_2194) <span
id="ii.LVIII-p46.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LVIII-p47"></span> [Luke xvi.
24](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#024)<span id="ii.LVIII-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2195"></span>[234:2196](1080067.htm#fr_2195) <span
id="ii.LVIII-p47.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVIII-p48"></span> [Matt. xxv.
41](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#041)<span id="ii.LVIII-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2196"></span>[234:2197](1080067.htm#fr_2196) <span
id="ii.LVIII-p48.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVIII-p49"></span> [Ps. lxxiii.
1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#001)<span id="ii.LVIII-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2197"></span>[234:2198](1080067.htm#fr_2197) <span
id="ii.LVIII-p49.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVIII-p50"></span> [Ps.
73:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#017)<span id="ii.LVIII-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2198"></span>[234:2199](1080067.htm#fr_2198) <span
id="ii.LVIII-p50.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVIII-p51"></span> [Prov. vi.
27](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#027)<span id="ii.LVIII-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2199"></span>[234:2200](1080067.htm#fr_2199) <span
id="ii.LVIII-p51.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVIII-p52"></span> [Rom. i.
24](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#024)<span id="ii.LVIII-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2200"></span>[234:2201](1080067.htm#fr_2200) <span
id="ii.LVIII-p53.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LVIII-p54"></span> [Eph. iv.
26](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#026)<span id="ii.LVIII-p54.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2201"></span>[234:2202](1080067.htm#fr_2201) <span
id="ii.LVIII-p54.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVIII-p55"></span> [Matt. v.
45](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#045)<span id="ii.LVIII-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2202"></span>[234:2203](1080067.htm#fr_2202) <span
id="ii.LVIII-p55.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVIII-p56"></span> [Wisd. v.
6](../../../bib/apo/wis005.htm#006)<span id="ii.LVIII-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2203"></span>[234:2204](1080067.htm#fr_2203) <span
id="ii.LVIII-p57.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LVIII-p58"></span> *Rhamnus*.

<span id="fn_2204"></span>[235:2205](1080067.htm#fr_2204) <span
id="ii.LVIII-p58.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVIII-p59"></span> So several early writers and <span
class="c21"><span id="ii.LVIII-p59.1"></span>mss</span>. But the balance
of authority as well as the sense is in favour of the received reading.

<span id="fn_2205"></span>[235:2206](1080067.htm#fr_2205) <span
id="ii.LVIII-p59.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVIII-p60"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
51](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#051)<span id="ii.LVIII-p60.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2206"></span>[235:2207](1080067.htm#fr_2206) <span
id="ii.LVIII-p60.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVIII-p61"></span> [Wisd. v.
3](../../../bib/apo/wis005.htm#003)<span id="ii.LVIII-p61.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2207"></span>[235:2208](1080067.htm#fr_2207) <span
id="ii.LVIII-p61.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVIII-p62"></span> Or, “being made to pierce.”

<span id="fn_2208"></span>[235:2209](1080067.htm#fr_2208) <span
id="ii.LVIII-p62.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LVIII-p63"></span> [Ps. xxxii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#005)<span id="ii.LVIII-p63.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2209"></span>[235:2210](1080067.htm#fr_2209) <span
id="ii.LVIII-p63.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVIII-p64"></span> [Ps. xxxv.
15](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#015)<span id="ii.LVIII-p64.1"></span>.
These words are in the Vulgate, for “they did tear me, and ceased not;”
but St. Augustin does not notice them in his comment on the Psalm.

<span id="fn_2210"></span>[235:2211](1080067.htm#fr_2210) <span
id="ii.LVIII-p64.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVIII-p65"></span> Against the Donatists.

<span id="fn_2211"></span>[235:2212](1080067.htm#fr_2211) <span
id="ii.LVIII-p66.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LVIII-p67"></span> [Tob. iv.
3-19](../../../bib/apo/tob004.htm#003)<span id="ii.LVIII-p67.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2212"></span>[235:2213](1080067.htm#fr_2212) <span
id="ii.LVIII-p68.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVIII-p69"></span> [Rom. i.
17](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#017)<span id="ii.LVIII-p69.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2213"></span>[236:2214](1080067.htm#fr_2213) <span
id="ii.LVIII-p70.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVIII-p71"></span> [Rom. xii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#012)<span id="ii.LVIII-p71.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2214"></span>[236:2215](1080067.htm#fr_2214) <span
id="ii.LVIII-p71.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVIII-p72"></span> [Rom. v.
3-5](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#003)<span id="ii.LVIII-p72.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2215"></span>[236:2216](1080067.htm#fr_2215) <span
id="ii.LVIII-p73.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LVIII-p74"></span> [Matt. vii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#024)<span id="ii.LVIII-p74.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm LIX](1080068)
