[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080062)  [Next](1080064) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.LIV"></span>

<span id="ii.LIV-p1"></span> <span id="ii.LIV-p1.1"></span><span
class="c20"><span id="ii.LIV-p1.2"></span>Psalm LIV. <span
id="fr_1946"></span>[1947](#fn_1946) </span>

<span id="ii.LIV-p3"></span>1. The title of this Psalm hath fruit in the
prolixity thereof, if it be understood: and because the Psalm is short,
let us make up our not having to tarry over the Psalm by tarrying over
the title. For upon this dependeth every verse which is sung. If any
one, therefore, observe that which on the front of the house is fixed,
secure he will enter; and, when he shall have entered, he will not err.
For this on the post itself is prominently marked, namely, in what
manner within he may not be in error. The title thereof standeth thus:
“At the end, in hymns, understanding to David himself, when there came
the Ziphites, and said to Saul, Behold, is not David hidden with us?”
That Saul was persecutor of the holy man David, very well we know: that
Saul was bearing the figure of a temporal kingdom, not to life but to
death belonging, this also to your Love we remember to have imparted.
And also that David himself was bearing the figure of Christ, or of the
Body of Christ, ye ought both to know and to call to mind, ye that have
already learned. <span id="fr_1947"></span>[1948](#fn_1947) What then of
the Ziphites? There was a certain village, Ziph, whereof the inhabitants
were Ziphites, in whose country David had hidden himself, when Saul
would find and slay him. These Ziphites then, when they had learned
this, betrayed him to the king his persecutor, saying, “Behold, is not
David hidden with us?” Of no good to them indeed was their betrayal, and
to David himself of no harm. For their evil disposition was shown: but
Saul not even after their betrayal could seize David; but rather in a
certain cave in that very country, when into his hands Saul had been
given to slay, David spared him, and that which he had in his power he
did not. <span id="fr_1948"></span>[1949](#fn_1948) But the other was
seeking to do that which he had not in his power. Let them that have
been Ziphites take heed: let us see those whom to us the Psalm
presenteth to be understood by the occasion of those same men.

<span id="ii.LIV-p6"></span>2. If we inquire then by what word is
translated Ziphites, we find, “Men flourishing.” Flourishing then were
certain enemies to holy David, flourishing before him hiding. We may
find them in mankind, if we are willing to under<span id="page_206">p.
206</span> <span id="ii.LIV-Page_206"></span>stand the Psalm. Let us
find here at first David hiding, and we shall find his adversaries
flourishing. Observe David hiding: “For ye are dead,” saith the Apostle
to the members of Christ, “and your life is hid with Christ in
God.” <span id="fr_1949"></span>[1950](#fn_1949) These men, therefore,
that are hiding, when shall they be flourishing? “When Christ,” he
saith, “your life, shall have appeared, then ye also with Him shall
appear in glory.” <span id="fr_1950"></span>[1951](#fn_1950) When these
men shall be flourishing, then shall be those Ziphites withering. For
observe to what flower their glory is compared: “All flesh is grass, and
the honour of flesh as the flower of grass.” <span
id="fr_1951"></span>[1952](#fn_1951) What is the end? “The grass hath
withered, and the flower hath fallen off.” Where then shall be David?
See what followeth: “But the Word of the Lord abideth for ever.”…

<span id="ii.LIV-p10"></span>3. These men sometimes are observed of the
weak sons of light, and their feet totter, when they have seen evil men
in felicity to flourish, and they say to themselves, “Of what profit to
me is innocence? What doth it advantage me that I serve God, that I keep
His commandments, that I oppress no one, from no one plunder anything,
hurt no one, that what I can I bestow? behold, all these things I do,
and they flourish, I toil.” But why? Wouldest thou also wish to be a
Ziphite? They flourish in the world, wither in judgment, and after
withering, into fire everlasting shall be cast: wouldest thou also
choose this? Art thou ignorant of what He hath promised thee, who to
thee hath come, what in Himself here He displayed? If the flower of the
Ziphites were to be desired, would not Himself thy Lord also in this
world have flourished? Or indeed was there wanting to Him the power to
flourish? Nay but here He chose rather amid the Ziphites to hide, and to
say to Pontius Pilate, as if to one being himself also a flower of the
Ziphites, and in suspicion about His kingdom, “My kingdom is not of this
world.” <span id="fr_1952"></span>[1953](#fn_1952) Therefore here He was
hidden: and all good men are hidden here, because their good is within,
it is concealed, in the heart it is, where is faith, where charity,
where hope, where their treasure is. Do these good things appear in the
world? Both these good things are hidden, and the reward of these good
things is hidden.…

<span id="ii.LIV-p12"></span>4. “O God, in Thy name make me safe, and in
Thy virtue judge me” ([Psa. 54.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa054.htm#001)<span
id="ii.LIV-p12.1"></span>). Let the Church say this, hiding amid the
Ziphites. Let the Christian body say this, keeping secret the good of
its morals, expecting in secret the reward of its merits, let it say
this: “In Thy virtue <span id="fr_1953"></span>[1954](#fn_1953) judge
me.” Thou hast come, O Christ, humble Thou hast appeared, despised Thou
hast been, scourged hast been, crucified hast been, slain hast been;
but, on the third day hast risen, on the fortieth day into Heaven hast
ascended: Thou sittest at the right hand of the Father, and no one
seeth: Thy Spirit thence Thou hast sent, which men that were worthy have
received; fulfilled with Thy love, the praise of that very humility of
Thine throughout the world and nations they have preached: Thy name I
see to excel among mankind, but nevertheless as weak to us hast Thou
been preached. For not even did that Teacher of the Gentiles say, that
among us he knew anything, “Save Christ Jesus, and Him crucified;” <span
id="fr_1954"></span>[1955](#fn_1954) in order that of Him we might
choose the reproach, rather than the glory of the flourishing Ziphites.
Nevertheless, of Him he saith what? “Although He died of weakness, yet
He liveth of the power <span id="fr_1955"></span>[1956](#fn_1955) of
God.” He came then that He might die of weakness, He is to come that He
may judge in the power of God: but through the weakness of the Cross His
name hath been illustrious. Whosoever shall not have believed upon the
name made illustrious through weakness, shall stand in awe at the Judge,
when He shall have come in power. But, lest He that once was weak, when
He shall have come strong, with that fan send us to the left hand; may
He “save us in His name, and judge us in His virtue.” For who so rash as
to have desired this, as to say to God, for instance “Judge me”? Is it
not wont to be said to men for a curse, “God judge thee”? So evidently
it is a curse, if He judge thee in His virtue; and shall not have saved
thee in His name: but when in name precedent He shall have saved thee,
to thy health in virtue consequent He shall judge. Be thou without care:
that judgment shall not to thee be punishment, but dividing. For in a
certain Psalm  <span id="fr_1956"></span>[1957](#fn_1956) thus is said:
“Judge me, O God, and divide my cause from the nation unholy.”…

<span id="ii.LIV-p17"></span>5. “O God, hearken to my prayer, in Thy
ears receive the words of my mouth” ([Psa.
54.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa054.htm#002)<span
id="ii.LIV-p17.1"></span>).…To Thee may my prayer attain, driven forth
and darted out from the desire of Thy eternal blessings: to Thy ears I
send it forth, aid it that it may reach, lest it fall short in the
middle of the way, and fainting as it were it fall down. But even if
there result not to me now the good things which I ask, I am secured
nevertheless that hereafter they will come. For even in the case of
transgressions a certain man is said to have asked of God, and not to
have been hearkened to for his good. For privations of this world had
inspired him to prayer, and being set in temporal tribulations he had
wished that temporal tribulations should pass away, and there should
return the flower of grass; and he saith, “My God, my God, why hast Thou
forsaken me?” <span id="fr_1957"></span>[1958](#fn_1957) The very voice
of Christ it is, but for <span id="page_207">p. 207</span> <span
id="ii.LIV-Page_207"></span>His members’ sake. “The words,” he saith,
“of my transgressions I have cried to Thee throughout the day, and Thou
hast not hearkened: and by night, and not for the sake of folly to me:”
that is, “and by night I have cried, and Thou hast not hearkened; and
nevertheless in this very thing that Thou hast not hearkened, it is not
for the sake of folly to me that Thou hast not hearkened, but rather for
the sake of wisdom that Thou hast not hearkened, that I might perceive
what of Thee I ought to ask. For those things I was asking which to my
cost perchance I should have received.” Thou askest riches, O man; how
many have been overset through their riches? Whence knowest thou whether
to thee riches may profit? Have not many poor men more safely been in
obscurity; having become rich men, so soon as they have begun to blaze
forth, they have been a prey to the stronger? How much better they would
have lain concealed, how much better they would have been unknown, that
have begun to be inquired after not for the sake of what they were, but
for the sake of what they had! In these temporal things therefore,
brethren, we admonish and exhort you in the Lord, that ye ask not
anything as if it were a thing settled, but that which God knoweth to be
expedient for you. For what is expedient for you, ye know not at all.
Sometimes that which ye think to be for you is against you, and that
which ye think to be against you is for you. For sick ye are; do not
dictate to the physician the medicines he may choose to set beside you.
If the teacher of the Gentiles, Paul the Apostle, saith, “For what we
should pray for as we ought, we know not,” <span
id="fr_1958"></span>[1959](#fn_1958) how much more we? Who nevertheless,
when he seemed to himself to pray wisely, namely, that from him should
be taken away the thorn of the flesh, the angel of Satan, that did
buffet him, in order that he might not in the greatness of the
revelations be lifted up, heard from the Lord what? Was that done which
he wished? Nay, <span id="fr_1959"></span>[1960](#fn_1959) in order to
that being done which was expedient, he heard from the Lord, I say,
what? “Thrice,” he saith, “I besought the Lord that He would take it
from me; and He said to me, My Grace sufficeth for thee: for virtue in
weakness is made perfect.” <span id="fr_1960"></span>[1961](#fn_1960)
Salve to the wound I have applied; when I applied it I know, when it
should be taken away I know. Let not a sick man draw back from the hands
of the physician, let him not give advice to the physician. So it is
with all these things temporal. There are tribulations; if well thou
worshippest God, thou wilt know that He knoweth what is expedient for
each man: there are prosperities; take the more heed, lest these same
corrupt thy soul, so that it withdraw from Him that hath given these
things.…

<span id="ii.LIV-p22"></span>6. “For aliens have risen up against me”
([Psa. 54.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa054.htm#003)<span
id="ii.LIV-p22.1"></span>). What “aliens”? Was not David himself a Jew
of the tribe of Judah? But the very place Ziph belonged to the tribe of
Judah; it was of the Jews. How then “aliens”? Not in city, not in tribe,
not in kindred, but in flower. <span
id="fr_1961"></span>[1962](#fn_1961) …But see the Ziphites, see them for
a time flourishing. With reason “alien” sons. Thou amid the Ziphites
hiding saidst what? “Blessed the people whereof the Lord is its God.”
Out of this affection this prayer <span
id="fr_1962"></span>[1963](#fn_1962) is being sent forth into the ears
of the Lord, when it is said, “for aliens have risen up against me.”

<span id="ii.LIV-p25"></span>7. “And mighty men have sought after my
soul.” For in a new manner, my brethren, they would destroy the race of
holy men, and the race of them that abstain from hoping in this world,
all they that have hope in this world. Certainly commingled they are,
certainly together they live. Very much to one another are opposed these
two sorts: the one of those that place no hope but in things secular,
and in temporal felicity, and the other of those that do firmly place
their hope in the Lord God. And though concordant are these Ziphites, do
not much trust to their concord: temptations are wanting; when there
shall have come any temptation, so as that a person may be reproved for
the flower of the world, I say not to thee he will quarrel with the
Bishop, but not even to the Church Herself will he draw near, lest there
fall any part of the grass. <span id="fr_1963"></span>[1964](#fn_1963)
Wherefore have I said these words, brethren? Because now gladly ye all
hear in the name of Christ, and according as ye understand, so ye shout
out at the word; ye would not indeed shout at it unless ye
understood. <span id="fr_1964"></span>[1965](#fn_1964) This your
understanding ought to be fruitful. But whether it is fruitful,
temptation doth try; lest suddenly when ye are said to be ours, through
temptation ye be found aliens, and it be said, “Aliens have risen up
against me, and mighty men have sought my soul.” Be not that said which
followeth, “They have not set forth God before their face.” For when
will he set God before his face, before whose eyes there is nought but
the world? namely, how he may have coin upon coin, how flocks may be
increased, how barns may be filled, how it may be said to his soul,
“Thou hast many good things, be merry, feast, take thy fill.” Doth he
set before his face Him, that unto one so boasting and so blooming with
the flower of the Ziphites saith, “Fool” (that is, “man not
understanding,” <span id="page_208">p. 208</span> <span
id="ii.LIV-Page_208"></span>“man unwise”), “this night shall be taken
from thee thy soul; all these things which thou hast prepared, whose
shall they be?”  <span id="fr_1965"></span>[1966](#fn_1965)

<span id="ii.LIV-p29"></span>8. “For behold, God helpeth me” ([Psa.
54.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa054.htm#004)<span id="ii.LIV-p29.1"></span>).
Even themselves know not themselves, amid whom I am hiding. But if they
too were to set God before their face, they would find in what manner
God helpeth me. For all holy men are helped by God, but within, where no
one seeth. For in like manner as the conscience of ungodly men is a
great punishment, so a great joy is the very conscience of godly men.
“For our glory this is,” saith the Apostle, “the testimony of our
conscience.” <span id="fr_1966"></span>[1967](#fn_1966) In this within,
not in the flower of the Ziphites without, doth glory that man that now
saith, “For behold God helpeth me.” Surely though afar off are to be
those things which He promiseth, this day have I a sweet and present
help; to-day in my heart’s joy I find that without cause certain say,
“Who doth show to us good things? For there is signed upon us the light
of Thy countenance, O Lord, Thou hast put pleasantness into my heart.”
 <span id="fr_1967"></span>[1968](#fn_1967) Not into my vineyard, not
into my flock, not into my cask, not into my table, but “into my heart.”
“For behold God helpeth me.” How doth He help thee? “And the Lord is the
lifter up of my soul.”

<span id="ii.LIV-p32"></span>9. “Turn away evil things unto mine
enemies” ([Psa. 54.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa054.htm#005)<span
id="ii.LIV-p32.1"></span>). So however green they are, so however they
flourish, for the fire they are being <span
id="fr_1968"></span>[1969](#fn_1968) reserved. “In Thy virtue destroy
Thou them.” Because to wit they flourish now, because to wit they spring
up like grass: <span id="fr_1969"></span>[1970](#fn_1969) do not thou be
a man unwise and foolish, so that by giving thought to these things thou
perish for ever and ever. For, “Turn Thou away evil things unto mine
enemies.” For if thou shalt have place in the body of David Himself, in
His virtue He will destroy them. These men flourish in the felicity of
the world, perish in the virtue of God. Not in the same manner as they
flourish, do they also perish: for they flourish for a time, perish for
everlasting: flourish in unreal good things, perish in real torments.
“In Thy strength destroy,” whom in Thy weakness Thou hast endured.

<span id="ii.LIV-p35"></span>10. “Voluntarily I will sacrifice to Thee”
([Psa. 54.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa054.htm#006)<span
id="ii.LIV-p35.1"></span>). Who can even understand this good thing of
the heart, at another’s speaking thereof, unless in himself he hath
tasted it? What is, “Voluntarily I will sacrifice to Thee”?… For what
sacrifice here shall I take, brethren? or what worthily shall I offer to
the Lord for His mercy? Victims shall I seek from flock of sheep, ram
shall I select, for any bull in the herds shall I look out, frankincense
indeed from the land of the Sabæans shall I bring? What shall I do? What
offer; except that whereof He speaketh, “Sacrifice of praise shall
honour Me”? <span id="fr_1970"></span>[1971](#fn_1970) Wherefore then
“voluntarily”? Because truly I love that which I praise. I praise God,
and in the self-same praise I rejoice: in the praise of Himself I
rejoice, at whom being praised, I blush not. For He is not praised in
the same manner as by those who love the theatrical follies is praised
either by a charioteer, or a hunter, or actor of any kind, and by their
praisers, other praisers are invited, are exhorted, to shout together:
and when all have shouted, ofttimes, if their favourite is overcome,
they are all put to the blush. Not so is our God: be He praised with the
will, loved with charity: let it be gratuitous (or voluntary) that He is
loved and that He is praised. What is “gratuitous”? Himself for the sake
of Himself, not for the sake of something else. For if thou praisest God
in order that He may give thee something else, no longer freely dost
thou love God. Thou wouldest blush, if thy wife for the sake of riches
were to love thee, and perchance if poverty should befall thee, should
begin to think of adultery. Seeing that therefore thou wouldest be loved
by thy partner freely, wilt thou for anything else love God? What reward
art thou to receive of God, O covetous man? Not earth for thee, but
Himself He keepeth, who made heaven and earth. “Voluntarily I will
sacrifice to Thee:” do it not of necessity. For if for the sake of
anything else thou praisest God, out of necessity thou praisest.…These
things also which He hath given, because of the Giver are good things.
For He giveth entirely, He giveth these temporal things: and to certain
men to their good, to certain men to their harm, after the height and
depth of His judgments.…“Voluntarily I will sacrifice to Thee.”
Wherefore “voluntarily”? Because *gratis*. What is *gratis?* “And I will
confess to Thy name, O Lord, for it is a good thing:” for nothing else,
but because a “good thing” it is. Doth he say, “I will confess to Thy
name, O Lord,” because Thou givest me fruitful manors, because Thou
givest me gold and silver, because Thou givest me extended riches,
abundant money, most exalted dignity? Nay. But what? “For it is a good
thing.” Nothing I find better than Thy name.

<span id="ii.LIV-p37"></span>11. “For out of all tribulation Thou hast
delivered me” ([Psa. 54.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa054.htm#007)<span
id="ii.LIV-p37.1"></span>). For this cause I have perceived how good a
thing is Thy name: for if this I were able before tribulations to
acknowledge, perchance for me there had been no need of them. But
tribulation hath been applied for admonition, admonition hath redounded
to Thy praise. For I should not have understood <span id="page_209">p.
209</span> <span id="ii.LIV-Page_209"></span>where I was, except of my
weakness I had been admonished. “Out of all tribulations,” therefore,
“Thou hast delivered me. And upon mine enemies mine eye hath looked
back:” upon those Ziphites “mine eye hath looked back.” Yea, their
flower I have passed over in loftiness of heart, unto Thee I have come,
and thence I have looked back upon them, and have seen that “All flesh
is grass, and all the glory of man as the flower of grass:” <span
id="fr_1971"></span>[1972](#fn_1971) as in a certain place is also said,
“I have seen the ungodly man to be exalted and raised up like <span
id="fr_1972"></span>[1973](#fn_1972) the cedars of Lebanon: I passed by,
and, lo! he was not.” <span id="fr_1973"></span>[1974](#fn_1973)
Wherefore “he was not”? Because thou hast passed by. What is, “because
thou hast passed by”? Because not to no purpose hast thou heard “Lift up
thy heart;” because not on earth, where thou wouldest have rotted, thou
hast remained; because thou hast lifted thy soul to God, and thou hast
mounted beyond the cedars of Lebanon, and from that elevation hast
observed: and “Lo! he was not;” and thou hast sought him, and there hath
not been found place for him. No longer is labour before thee; because
thou hast entered into the sanctuary of God, and hast understood for the
last things. <span id="fr_1974"></span>[1975](#fn_1974) So also here
thus he concludeth. “And upon mine enemies mine eye hath looked back.”
This do ye therefore, brethren, with your souls; lift up your hearts,
sharpen the edge of your mind, learn truly to love God, learn to despise
the present world, learn voluntarily to sacrifice the offerings of
praise; to the end that, mounting beyond the flower of the grass, ye may
look back upon your enemies.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1946"></span>[205:1947](1080063.htm#fr_1946) <span
id="ii.LIV-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.LIV-p2"></span> Lat. LIII. From a sermon to the people.

<span id="fn_1947"></span>[205:1948](1080063.htm#fr_1947) <span
id="ii.LIV-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LIV-p4"></span> See exposition upon [Ps.
lii.](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#000)<span id="ii.LIV-p4.1"></span> §§
1, 2.

<span id="fn_1948"></span>[205:1949](1080063.htm#fr_1948) <span
id="ii.LIV-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LIV-p5"></span> [1 Sam. xxiv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#004)<span id="ii.LIV-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1949"></span>[206:1950](1080063.htm#fr_1949) <span
id="ii.LIV-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LIV-p7"></span> [Col. iii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#003)<span id="ii.LIV-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1950"></span>[206:1951](1080063.htm#fr_1950) <span
id="ii.LIV-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LIV-p8"></span> [Col. iii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#004)<span id="ii.LIV-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1951"></span>[206:1952](1080063.htm#fr_1951) <span
id="ii.LIV-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LIV-p9"></span> [Isa. xl.
6](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#006)<span id="ii.LIV-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1952"></span>[206:1953](1080063.htm#fr_1952) <span
id="ii.LIV-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LIV-p11"></span> [John xviii.
36](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#036)<span id="ii.LIV-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1953"></span>[206:1954](1080063.htm#fr_1953) <span
id="ii.LIV-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LIV-p13"></span> \[*i.e*., power or strength.—C.\]

<span id="fn_1954"></span>[206:1955](1080063.htm#fr_1954) <span
id="ii.LIV-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LIV-p14"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#002)<span id="ii.LIV-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1955"></span>[206:1956](1080063.htm#fr_1955) <span
id="ii.LIV-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LIV-p15"></span> *Virtute*.

<span id="fn_1956"></span>[206:1957](1080063.htm#fr_1956) <span
id="ii.LIV-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LIV-p16"></span> [Ps.
43:0](../../../bib/kjv/psa043.htm#000), [Ps.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#000)<span id="ii.LIV-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1957"></span>[206:1958](1080063.htm#fr_1957) <span
id="ii.LIV-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LIV-p18"></span> [Ps. xxii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#001)<span id="ii.LIV-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1958"></span>[207:1959](1080063.htm#fr_1958) <span
id="ii.LIV-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LIV-p19"></span> [Rom. viii.
26](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#026)<span id="ii.LIV-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1959"></span>[207:1960](1080063.htm#fr_1959) <span
id="ii.LIV-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LIV-p20"></span> “Nay” not in <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.LIV-p20.1"></span> mss</span>.

<span id="fn_1960"></span>[207:1961](1080063.htm#fr_1960) <span
id="ii.LIV-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LIV-p21"></span> [2 Cor.
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#009)<span id="ii.LIV-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1961"></span>[207:1962](1080063.htm#fr_1961) <span
id="ii.LIV-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LIV-p23"></span> \[[Jas.
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#011)<span id="ii.LIV-p23.1"></span>. He
seems to bear this text in mind in these comments.—C.\]

<span id="fn_1962"></span>[207:1963](1080063.htm#fr_1962) <span
id="ii.LIV-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LIV-p24"></span> \[*i.e*., this Psalm.—C.\]

<span id="fn_1963"></span>[207:1964](1080063.htm#fr_1963) <span
id="ii.LIV-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LIV-p26"></span> \[[Isa. xl.
6](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#006)<span id="ii.LIV-p26.1"></span>. Note
5, p. 199, *supra*.—C.\]

<span id="fn_1964"></span>[207:1965](1080063.htm#fr_1964) <span
id="ii.LIV-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LIV-p27"></span> \[They seem to have applauded, or shouted
*Amen*. So, also, often when Chrysostom preached.—C.\]

<span id="fn_1965"></span>[208:1966](1080063.htm#fr_1965) <span
id="ii.LIV-p27.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LIV-p28"></span> [Luke xii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#020)<span id="ii.LIV-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1966"></span>[208:1967](1080063.htm#fr_1966) <span
id="ii.LIV-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LIV-p30"></span> [2 Cor. i.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#012)<span id="ii.LIV-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1967"></span>[208:1968](1080063.htm#fr_1967) <span
id="ii.LIV-p30.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LIV-p31"></span> [Ps.
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#007)<span id="ii.LIV-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1968"></span>[208:1969](1080063.htm#fr_1968) <span
id="ii.LIV-p32.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LIV-p33"></span> *Al*. “let them be.”

<span id="fn_1969"></span>[208:1970](1080063.htm#fr_1969) <span
id="ii.LIV-p33.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LIV-p34"></span> [Ps. xcii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#007)<span id="ii.LIV-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1970"></span>[208:1971](1080063.htm#fr_1970) <span
id="ii.LIV-p35.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LIV-p36"></span> [Ps. l.
23](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#023)<span id="ii.LIV-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1971"></span>[209:1972](1080063.htm#fr_1971) <span
id="ii.LIV-p37.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LIV-p38"></span> [Isa. xl.
6](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#006)<span id="ii.LIV-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1972"></span>[209:1973](1080063.htm#fr_1972) <span
id="ii.LIV-p38.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LIV-p39"></span> Oxf. <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.LIV-p39.1"></span>mss</span>. “above.”

<span id="fn_1973"></span>[209:1974](1080063.htm#fr_1973) <span
id="ii.LIV-p39.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LIV-p40"></span> [Ps.
37:35](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#035),
[36](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#036)<span id="ii.LIV-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1974"></span>[209:1975](1080063.htm#fr_1974) <span
id="ii.LIV-p40.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LIV-p41"></span> [Ps.
73:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#017)<span id="ii.LIV-p41.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm LV](1080064)
