[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080178)  [Next](1080180) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.CXLVI"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVI-p1"></span> <span id="ii.CXLVI-p1.1"></span><span
class="c20"><span id="ii.CXLVI-p1.2"></span>Psalm CXLVI. <span
id="fr_5883"></span>[5884](#fn_5883) </span>

<span id="ii.CXLVI-p3"></span>1. …Behold the Psalm soundeth; it is the
voice of some one (and that some one are ye, if ye will), of some one
encouraging his soul to praise God, and saying to himself, “Praise the
Lord, O my soul” ([Psa. 146.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa146.htm#001)<span
id="ii.CXLVI-p3.1"></span>). For sometimes in the tribulations and
temptations of this present life, whether we will or no, our soul is
troubled; of which troubling he speaketh in another Psalm. <span
id="fr_5884"></span>[5885](#fn_5884) But to remove this troubling, he
suggesteth joy; not as yet in reality, but in hope; and saith to it when
troubled and anxious, sad and sorrowing, “Hope in God, for I will yet
confess to Him.”…

<span id="ii.CXLVI-p5"></span>2. But who saith it, and to whom saith he
it? What shall we say, brethren? Is it the flesh that saith, “Praise
thou the Lord, O my soul”? And can the flesh suggest good counsel to the
soul? However much the flesh be conquered, and subjected as a servant to
us through strength which the Lord imparteth, that it serve us entirely
as a bond slave, enough for us that it hinder us not.…For the body,
inasmuch as it is the body, is even beneath the soul; and every soul,
however vile, is found more excellent than the most excellent body. And
let not this seem to you to be wonderful, that even any vile and sinful
soul is better than any great and most surpassing body. It is better,
not in deserts, but in nature. The soul indeed is sinful, is stained
with certain defilements of lusts; yet gold, though rusted, is better
than the most polished lead. Let your mind then run over every part of
creation, and ye will see that what we are saying is not incredible,
that a soul, however blameable, is yet more praiseworthy than a
praiseworthy body. There are two things, a soul and a body. The soul I
chide, the body I praise: the soul I chide, because it is sinful; the
body I praise, because it is sound. Yet it is in its own kind that I
praise the soul, and in its own kind <span id="page_662">p. 662</span>
<span id="ii.CXLVI-Page_662"></span>that I blame the soul: and so in its
own kind I praise the body, or blame it. If you ask me which is better,
what I have blamed or what I have praised, wondrous is the answer thou
wilt receive.…So you speak of the best horse and the worst man: yet thou
preferrest the man thou findest fault with to the horse thou
praisest.…The nature of the soul is more excellent than the nature of
the body: it surpasseth it by far, it is a thing spiritual, incorporeal,
akin to the substance of God. It is somewhat invisible, it ruleth the
body, moveth the limbs, guideth the senses, prepareth thoughts, putteth
forth actions, taketh in images of countless things; who is there, in
short, beloved brethren, who may suffice for the praises of the soul?
And yet such is the grace given to it, that this man saith, “Praise the
Lord, O my soul.”…It is not the flesh that saith it. Let the body be
angel-like, still it is inferior to the soul, it cannot give advice to
its superior. The flesh when duly obedient is the handmaid of the soul:
the soul rules, the body obeys; the soul commands, the body performs;
how then can the flesh give this advice to the soul? Is it then
perchance the soul herself, who saith to herself, and in a manner
commandeth herself, and exhorteth and asketh herself? For through
certain passions in one part of her nature she wavered; but in another
part, which they call the reasonable mind, the wisdom whereby she
thinks, clinging to God, and now sighing towards Him, she perceives that
certain inferior parts of her are troubled by worldly emotions, and by a
certain excitement of earthly desires, betake them to outward things,
leaving God who is within; so she recalleth herself from things outward
to inward, from lower to higher, and says, “Praise the Lord, O my
soul.”…The soul itself giveth itself counsel from the light of God by
the reasonable mind, whereby it conceiveth the wisdom fixed in the
everlasting nature of its Author. It readeth there of somewhat to be
feared, to be praised, to be loved, to be longed for, and sought after:
as yet it graspeth it not, it comprehendeth it not; it is, as it were,
dazzled with brightness; it has not strength to abide there. Therefore
it gathers itself, as it were, into a sound state, and saith, “Praise
the Lord, O my soul.”…And then the soul, weighed down, as it were, and
unable to stand up as is fitting, answereth the mind, “I will praise the
Lord in my life” ([Psa. 146.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa146.htm#002)<span
id="ii.CXLVI-p5.1"></span>). What is, “in my life”? Because now I am in
my death. Therefore first encourage thyself, and say, “Praise the Lord,
O my soul.” Thy soul answereth thee, I do praise so far as I can,
slightly, poorly, weakly. Wherefore? Because, “while we are in the body,
we are absent from the Lord.” <span id="fr_5885"></span>[5886](#fn_5885)
…

<span id="ii.CXLVI-p7"></span>3. “In my life.” Now what has it? It might
answer thee, “My death.” Whence, “My death”? because I am absent from
the Lord. For if to cling to Him is life, to depart from Him is death.
But what comforteth thee? Hope. Now thou livest in hope: in hope praise,
in hope sing. Thy death is from the sadness of this life, thou livest in
hope of a future life. And how wilt thou praise thy Lord? “I will sing
unto my God, as long as I have my being.” What sort of praise is this,
“I will sing unto my God as long as I have being”? Behold, my brethren,
what sort of being this will be; where there will be everlasting praise,
there will be also everlasting being. Behold, now thou hast being: dost
thou sing unto God as long as thou hast being? Behold, thou wast
singing, and hast turned thyself away to some business, thou singest no
longer, yet thou hast being: thou hast being, yet thou singest not. It
may be also thy desire turneth thee to somewhat; not only dost thou not
sing, but thou even offendest His ears, yet thou hast being. What praise
will that be, when thou praisest as long as thou hast being? But what
meaneth, “as long as I have being”? Will there be any time when he will
not be? Nay, rather, that “long” will be everlasting, and therefore it
will be truly “long.” For whatever hath end in time, however prolonged
it is, is yet not “long.”…

<span id="ii.CXLVI-p8"></span>4. “Put not your trust in princes” ([Psa.
146.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa146.htm#003)<span
id="ii.CXLVI-p8.1"></span>). Brethren, here we receive a mighty task; it
is a voice from heaven, from above it soundeth to us. For now through
some kind of weakness the soul of man, whensoever it is in tribulation
here, despaireth of God, and chooseth to rely on man. Let it be said to
one when set in some affliction, “There is a great man, by whom thou
mayest be set free;” he smileth, he rejoiceth, he is lifted up. But if
it is said to him, “God freeth thee,” he is chilled, so to speak, by
despair. The aid of a mortal is promised, and thou rejoicest; the aid of
the Immortal is promised, and art thou sad? It is promised thee that
thou shalt be freed by one who needeth to be freed with thee, and thou
exultest, as at some great aid: thou art promised that Liberator, who
needeth none to free Him, and thou despairest, as though it were but a
fable. Woe to such thoughts: they wander far; truly there is sad and
great death in them. Approach, begin to long, begin to seek and to know
Him by whom thou wast made. For He will not leave His work, if He be not
left by His work.

<span id="ii.CXLVI-p9"></span>5. …“His breath shall go forth, and he
shall return to his earth: in that day shall all his thoughts perish”
([Psa. 146.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa146.htm#004)<span
id="ii.CXLVI-p9.1"></span>). Where is swelling? where is pride? where is
boasting? But perhaps he will have passed to a good place, if indeed he
have passed. For I know not whither he who <span id="page_663">p.
663</span> <span id="ii.CXLVI-Page_663"></span>spake thus hath passed.
For he spake in pride; and I know not whither such men pass, save that I
look into another Psalm, and see that their passage is an evil one. “I
beheld the wicked lifted up above the cedars of Libanus, and I passed
by, and, lo, he was not; and I sought him, and his place was not
found.” <span id="fr_5886"></span>[5887](#fn_5886) The good man, who
passed by, and found not the wicked, reached a place where the wicked is
not. Wherefore, brethren, let us all listen: brethren, beloved of God,
let us all listen; in whatsoever tribulation, in whatsoever longing for
the heavenly gift, “let us not trust in princes, nor in sons of men, in
whom is no salvation.” All this is mortal, fleeting, perishable.

<span id="ii.CXLVI-p11"></span>What then must we do, if we are not to
hope in sons of men, nor in princes? What must we do? “Blessed is he
whose Helper is the God of Jacob” ([Psa.
146.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa146.htm#005)<span
id="ii.CXLVI-p11.1"></span>): not this man or that man; not this angel
or that angel; but, “blessed is he whose Helper is the God of Jacob:”
for to Jacob also so great an Helper was He, that of Jacob He made him
Israel. O mighty help! now he is Israel, “seeing God.” While then thou
art placed here, and a wanderer not yet seeing God, if thou hast the God
of Jacob for thy Helper, from Jacob thou wilt become Israel, and wilt be
“seeing God,” and all toil and all groans shall come to an end, gnawing
cares shall cease, happy praises shall succeed. “Blessed is he whose
Helper is the God of Jacob;” of this Jacob. Wherefore is he happy?
Meanwhile, while yet groaning in this life, “his hope is in the Lord his
God.”…Who is this, “Lord his God”?…“To us there is one God, the Father,
of whom are all things, and one Lord Jesus Christ, through whom are all
things.” <span id="fr_5887"></span>[5888](#fn_5887) Therefore let Him be
thy hope, even the Lord thy God; in Him let thy hope be. His hope too is
in the lord his god, who worshippeth Saturn; his hope is in the lord his
god, who worshippeth Neptune or Mercury; yea more, I add, who
worshippeth his belly, of whom is said, “whose god is their
belly.” <span id="fr_5888"></span>[5889](#fn_5888) The one is the god of
the one, the other of the other. Who is this “blessed” one? for “his
hope is in the Lord his God.” But who is He? “Who made heaven and earth,
the sea, and all that is in them” ([Psa.
146.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa146.htm#006)<span
id="ii.CXLVI-p13.2"></span>). My brethren, we have a great God; let us
bless His holy Name, that He hath deigned to make us His possession. As
yet thou seest not God; thou canst not fully love what as yet thou seest
not. All that thou seest, He hath made. Thou admirest the world; why not
the Maker of the world? Thou lookest up to the heavens, and art amazed:
thou considerest the whole earth, and tremblest; when canst thou contain
in thy thought the vastness of the sea? Look at the countless number of
the stars, look at all the many kind of seeds, all the different sorts
of animals, all that swimmeth in the water, creepeth on the earth,
flieth in the sky, hovereth in the air; how great are all these, how
beautiful, how fair, how amazing! Behold, He who made all these, is thy
God. Put thy hope in Him, that thou mayest be happy. “His hope is in the
Lord his God.” Observe, my brethren, the mighty God, the good God, who
maketh all these things.…If he mentioned these things only, perhaps thou
wouldest answer me, “God, who made heaven and earth and sea, is a great
God: but doth He think of me?” It would be said to thee, “He made thee.”
How so? am I heaven, or am I earth, or am I sea? Surely it is plain; I
am neither heaven, nor earth, nor sea: yet I am on earth. At least thou
grantest me this, that thou art on earth. Hear then, that God made not
only heaven and earth and sea: for He “made heaven and earth and sea,
and all that is in them.” If then He made all that is in them, He made
thee also. It is too little to say, thee; the sparrow, the locust, the
worm, none of these did He not make, and He careth for all. His care
refers not to His commandment, for this commandment He gave to man
alone.…As regards then the tenor of the commandment, “God doth not take
care for oxen:” <span id="fr_5889"></span>[5890](#fn_5889) as regards
His providential care of the universe, whereby He created all things,
and ruleth the world, “Thou, Lord, shalt save both man and beast.” Here
perhaps some one may say to me, “God careth not for oxen,” comes from
the New Testament: “Thou, Lord, shalt save both man and beast,” is from
the Old Testament. There are some who find fault and say, that these two
Testaments agree not with one another.…Let us hear the Lord Himself, the
Chief and Master of the Apostles: “Consider,” saith He, “the fowls of
the air; they sow not, neither do they reap, nor gather into barns, and
your heavenly Father feedeth them.” <span
id="fr_5890"></span>[5891](#fn_5890) Therefore even beside men, these
animals are objects of care to God, to be fed, not to receive a law. As
far then as regards giving a law, “God careth not for oxen:” as regards
creating, feeding, governing, ruling, all things have to do with God.
“Are not two sparrows sold for one farthing?” saith our Lord Jesus
Christ, “and one of them shall not fall to the ground without the will
of your Father: how much better are ye than they.”  <span
id="fr_5891"></span>[5892](#fn_5891) Perhaps thou sayest, God counteth
me not in this great multitude. There follows here a wondrous passage in
the Gospel: “the hairs of your head are all numbered.” <span
id="fr_5892"></span>[5893](#fn_5892)

<span id="ii.CXLVI-p18"></span>6. “Who keepeth truth for ever.” What
“truth for ever”? what “truth” doth He “keep,” <span id="page_664">p.
664</span> <span id="ii.CXLVI-Page_664"></span>and wherein doth “He keep
it for ever”? “Who executeth judgment for them that suffer wrong” ([Psa.
146.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa146.htm#007)<span
id="ii.CXLVI-p18.1"></span>). He avengeth them that suffer wrong. There
cometh at once to thee the voice of the Apostle: “now therefore there is
altogether a fault among you, that ye go to law one with another: why do
ye not rather suffer wrong?”  <span id="fr_5893"></span>[5894](#fn_5893)
He urged thee not to suffer annoyance, but to suffer wrong: for not
every annoyance is wrong. For whatever thou sufferest lawfully is not a
wrong; lest perchance thou shouldest say, I also am among those who have
suffered wrong, for I have suffered such a thing in such a place, and
such a thing for such a reason. Consider whether thou hast suffered a
wrong. Robbers suffer many things, but they suffer no wrong. Wicked men,
evil doers, house-breakers, adulterers, seducers, all these suffer many
evils, yet is there no wrong. It is one thing to suffer wrong; it is
another to suffer tribulation, or penalty, or annoyance, or punishment.
Consider where thou art; see what thou hast done; see why thou art
suffering; and then thou seest what thou art suffering. Right and wrong
are contraries. Right is what is just. For not all that is called right,
is right. What if a man lay down for you unjust right? nor indeed is it
to be called right, if it is unjust. That is true right, which is also
just. Consider what thou hast done, not what thou art suffering. If thou
hast done right, thou art suffering wrong; if thou hast done wrong, thou
art suffering right.…

<span id="ii.CXLVI-p20"></span>7. “Who giveth food to the hungry.”
Behold, from thee I look for nothing: “God giveth food to the hungry.”
Who are “the hungry”? All. What is, all? To all things that have life,
to all men He giveth food: doth He not reserve some food for His
beloved? If they have another kind of hunger, they have also another
kind of food. Let us first enquire what their hunger is, and then we
shall find their food. “Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after
righteousness, for they shall be filled.” <span
id="fr_5894"></span>[5895](#fn_5894) We ought to be God’s hungry
ones.…“The Lord looseth them that are fettered; the Lord lifteth up them
that are dashed down; the Lord maketh wise them that are blind” ([Psa.
146.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa146.htm#008)<span
id="ii.CXLVI-p21.2"></span>). Perfectly hath he by this last sentence
explained to us all the preceding ones: lest perchance, when he had
said, “the Lord looseth them that are fettered,” we should refer it to
those fettered ones, who for some crime are bound in irons by their
masters: and in that he said, “He lifteth up them that are dashed down,”
there should occur to our minds some one stumbling or falling, or thrown
from a horse. There is another kind of fall, there are other kinds of
fetters, just as there is other darkness and other light. Whereas he
said, “He maketh the blind wise;” he would not say, He enlightened the
blind, lest thou shouldest understand this also in reference to the
flesh, as the man was enlightened by the Lord, when He anointed his eyes
with clay made with spittle, and so healed him: that thou mightest not
look for anything of this sort, when He is speaking of spiritual things,
he pointeth to a sort of light of wisdom, wherewith the blind are
enlightened. Therefore in the same way as the blind are enlightened with
the light of wisdom, so are the fettered set free, and those who are
dashed down are lifted up. Whereby then have we been fettered? whereby
dashed down? Our body was once an ornament to us: now, we have sinned,
and thereby have had fetters put on us. What are our fetters? Our
mortality.…“The Lord loveth the righteous.” And who are the “righteous”?
How far are they righteous now? Just as thou hast; “the Lord, guardeth
proselytes” ([Psa. 146.9](../../../bib/kjv/psa146.htm#009)<span
id="ii.CXLVI-p21.3"></span>). “Proselytes” are strangers. Every Church
of the Gentiles is a stranger. For it cometh in to the Fathers, not
sprung of their flesh, but their daughter by imitating them. Yet the
Lord, not any man, guardeth them. “The orphan and widow He will take
up.” Let none think that He taketh up the orphan for his inheritance, or
the widow for any business of hers. True, God doth help them; and in all
the duties of the human race, he doeth a good work, who taketh care of
an orphan, who abandoneth not a widow: but in a certain way we are all
orphans, not because our Father is dead, but because He is absent. <span
id="fr_5895"></span>[5896](#fn_5895) …

<span id="ii.CXLVI-p23"></span>8. “And the way of sinners He shall root
out.” What is, “the way of sinners”? To mock at these things which we
say. “Who is an orphan, who a widow? What kingdom of heaven, what
punishment of hell is there? These are fables of the Christians. To what
I see, to that will I live: “let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we
die.” <span id="fr_5896"></span>[5897](#fn_5896) Beware lest such men
persuade you of aught: let them not enter through your ears into your
heart; let them find thorns in your ears: let him, who seeketh to enter
thus, go away pierced: for “evil communications corrupt good
manners.” <span id="fr_5897"></span>[5898](#fn_5897) But here perhaps
thou wilt say, “Wherefore then are they prosperous? Behold, they worship
not God, and commit every kind of evil daily: yet they abound in those
things, through want of which I toil.” Be not envious against sinners.
What they receive, thou seest; what is in store for them, seest thou
not?…Wilt thou not believe even the Lord thy God, who saith, “Broad and
spacious is the way that leadeth to destruction, and many there be that
walk by it”?  <span id="fr_5898"></span>[5899](#fn_5898) This “way the
Lord will root out.” <span id="page_665">p. 665</span> <span
id="ii.CXLVI-Page_665"></span>And, when “the way of sinners” has been
“rooted out,” what remaineth for us? “Come, ye blessed of My father,
enjoy the Kingdom;” <span id="fr_5899"></span>[5900](#fn_5899) “The Lord
shall reign for ever” ([Psa.
146.10](../../../bib/kjv/psa146.htm#010)<span
id="ii.CXLVI-p27.2"></span>). “O Sion, thy God” shall reign for ever;
surely thy God will not reign without thee. “For generation and
generation.” He hath said it twice, because he could not say it for
ever. And think not that eternity is bounded by finite words. The word
eternity consists of four syllables; in itself it is without end. It
could not be commended to thee, save thus, “for generation and
generation.” Too little hath he said: if he spoke it all day long, it
were too narrow: if he spoke it all his life, must he not at length hold
his peace? Love eternity: without end shalt thou reign, if Christ be
thine End, with whom thou shalt reign for ever and ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5883"></span>[661:5884](1080179.htm#fr_5883) <span
id="ii.CXLVI-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVI-p2"></span> Lat. CXLV. Sermon to the people.

<span id="fn_5884"></span>[661:5885](1080179.htm#fr_5884) <span
id="ii.CXLVI-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVI-p4"></span> [Ps.
42:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#015)<span id="ii.CXLVI-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5885"></span>[662:5886](1080179.htm#fr_5885) <span
id="ii.CXLVI-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVI-p6"></span> [2 Cor. v.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#006)<span id="ii.CXLVI-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5886"></span>[663:5887](1080179.htm#fr_5886) <span
id="ii.CXLVI-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVI-p10"></span> [Ps.
37:35](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#035),
[36](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#036)<span id="ii.CXLVI-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5887"></span>[663:5888](1080179.htm#fr_5887) <span
id="ii.CXLVI-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVI-p12"></span> [1 Cor. viii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#006)<span id="ii.CXLVI-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5888"></span>[663:5889](1080179.htm#fr_5888) <span
id="ii.CXLVI-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVI-p13"></span> [Philip. iii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#019)<span id="ii.CXLVI-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5889"></span>[663:5890](1080179.htm#fr_5889) <span
id="ii.CXLVI-p13.3"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVI-p14"></span> [1 Cor. ix.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#009)<span id="ii.CXLVI-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5890"></span>[663:5891](1080179.htm#fr_5890) <span
id="ii.CXLVI-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVI-p15"></span> [Matt. vi.
26](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#026)<span id="ii.CXLVI-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5891"></span>[663:5892](1080179.htm#fr_5891) <span
id="ii.CXLVI-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVI-p16"></span> [Matt. x.
29](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#029)<span id="ii.CXLVI-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5892"></span>[663:5893](1080179.htm#fr_5892) <span
id="ii.CXLVI-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVI-p17"></span> [Matt. x.
30](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#030)<span id="ii.CXLVI-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5893"></span>[664:5894](1080179.htm#fr_5893) <span
id="ii.CXLVI-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVI-p19"></span> [1 Cor. vi.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#007)<span id="ii.CXLVI-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5894"></span>[664:5895](1080179.htm#fr_5894) <span
id="ii.CXLVI-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVI-p21"></span> [Matt. v.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#006)<span id="ii.CXLVI-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5895"></span>[664:5896](1080179.htm#fr_5895) <span
id="ii.CXLVI-p21.4"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVI-p22"></span> \[But compare (Greek) [John xiv.
18](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#018)<span
id="ii.CXLVI-p22.1"></span>.—C.\]

<span id="fn_5896"></span>[664:5897](1080179.htm#fr_5896) <span
id="ii.CXLVI-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVI-p24"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
32](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#032)<span id="ii.CXLVI-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5897"></span>[664:5898](1080179.htm#fr_5897) <span
id="ii.CXLVI-p24.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVI-p25"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
33](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#033)<span id="ii.CXLVI-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5898"></span>[664:5899](1080179.htm#fr_5898) <span
id="ii.CXLVI-p25.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVI-p26"></span> [Matt. vii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#013)<span id="ii.CXLVI-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5899"></span>[665:5900](1080179.htm#fr_5899) <span
id="ii.CXLVI-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVI-p27"></span> [Matt. xxv.
34](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#034)<span id="ii.CXLVI-p27.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm CXLVII](1080180)
