[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080111)  [Next](1080113) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.CI"></span>

<span id="ii.CI-p1"></span> <span id="ii.CI-p1.1"></span><span
class="c20"><span id="ii.CI-p1.2"></span>Psalm CI. <span
id="fr_4558"></span>[4559](#fn_4558) </span>

<span id="ii.CI-p3"></span>1. In this Psalm, we ought to seek in the
whole body of it what we find in the first verse: “Mercy and judgment
will I sing unto Thee, O Lord” ([Psa.
101.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#001)<span id="ii.CI-p3.1"></span>).
Let no man flatter himself that he will never be punished through God’s
mercy; for there is judgment also; and let no man who hath been changed
for the better dread the Lord’s judgment, seeing that mercy goeth before
it. For when men judge, sometimes overcome by mercy, they act against
justice; and mercy, but not justice, seemeth to be in them: while
sometimes, when they wish to enforce a rigid judgment, they lose mercy.
But God neither loseth the severity of judgment in the bounty of mercy,
nor in judging with severity loseth the bounty of mercy. Suppose we
distinguish these two, mercy and judgment, by time; for possibly, they
are not placed in this order without a meaning, so that he said not
“judgment and mercy,” but “mercy and judgment:” so that if we
distinguish them by succession in time, perhaps we find that the present
is the season for mercy, the future for judgment. How is it that the
season of mercy cometh first? Consider first how it is with God, that
thou also mayest imitate the Father, in so far as He shall permit
thee.…“He maketh His sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and
sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust.” Behold mercy. When thou
seest the just and the unjust behold the same sun, enjoy the same light,
drink from the same founts, satisfied with the same rain, blessed with
the same fruits of the earth, inhale this air in the same way, possess
equally the world’s goods; think not that God is unjust, who giveth
these things equally to the just and the unjust. It is the season of
mercy, not as yet of judgment. For unless God spared at first through
mercy, He would not find those whom He could crown through judgment.
There is therefore a season for mercy, when the long-suffering of God
calleth sinners to repentance.

<span id="ii.CI-p4"></span>2. Hear the Apostle distinguishing each
season, and do thou also distinguish it.…“Thinkest thou,” he saith, “O
man, that judgest them that do such things, and doest the same, that
thou shalt escape the judgment of God?” And as if we were to reply, Why
do I commit such sins daily, and no evil occurreth unto me? he goeth on
to show to him the season of mercy: “Despisest thou the riches of His
goodness, and forbearance, and long-suffering?” And he did indeed
despise them; but the Apostle hath made him anxious. “Not knowing,” he
saith, “that the goodness of God leadeth thee to repentance?” <span
id="fr_4559"></span>[4560](#fn_4559) Behold the season of mercy. But
that he might not think this would last for ever, how did he in the next
verse raise his fears? Now hear the season of judgment; thou hast heard
the season of mercy, on which account, “mercy and judgment will I sing
unto Thee, O Lord:” “But thou,” saith the Apostle, “after thy hardness
and impenitent heart, treasurest up unto thyself wrath against the day
of wrath, and revelation of the righteous judgment of God, who will
render to every man <span id="page_492">p. 492</span> <span
id="ii.CI-Page_492"></span>according to his deeds.” <span
id="fr_4560"></span>[4561](#fn_4560) Lo, “mercy and judgment.” But he
hath threatened concerning judgment: is therefore the judgment of God to
be feared only, and not to be loved? To be feared by the wicked on
account of punishment, to be loved by the good on account of the crown.
Because then the Apostle hath alarmed the wicked in the testimony which
I have quoted, hear where he giveth hope concerning judgment to the
good. He puts forth himself, and shows in himself too the season of
mercy. For unless he found a period of mercy, in what condition would
judgment find him? A blasphemer, a persecutor, an injurer of others. For
he thus speaketh, and praiseth the season of mercy, in which season we
are now living: “I who was before,” he saith, “a blasphemer, and a
persecutor, and injurious: but I obtained mercy.” But perhaps he only
hath obtained mercy? Hear how he cheereth us: “That in me,” he saith,
“first, Christ Jesus might show forth all long-suffering, for a pattern
to them which should hereafter believe on Him to life
everlasting.” <span id="fr_4561"></span>[4562](#fn_4561) What meaneth,
“that He might show forth all long-suffering”? That every sinner and
wicked man might see that Paul received pardon, and might not despair of
himself? Lo, he hath instanced himself, and thereby cheered others
also.…But did Paul alone deserve this? For I had asserted, that as he
raised our fears by the former testimony, so did he encourage us by the
latter. When he said, “The Lord, the righteous Judge, shall render to me
at that day:” he addeth, “and not to me only, but unto all them also
that love His appearing” <span id="fr_4562"></span>[4563](#fn_4562) and
His kingdom. Since therefore, brethren, we have a season of mercy, let
us not on that account flatter, or indulge ourselves, saying, God
spareth ever.…

<span id="ii.CI-p9"></span>3. “I will sing to the harp, and will have
understanding, in the spotless way. When Thou shalt come unto me” ([Psa.
101.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#002)<span id="ii.CI-p9.1"></span>).
Except in the spotless way, thou canst neither sing to the harp, nor
understand. If thou dost wish to understand, sing in the spotless way,
that is, work with cheerfulness before thy God. What is the spotless
way? Hear what followeth: “I walked in innocence, in the midst of my
house.” This spotless way beginneth from innocence, and it endeth also
in innocence. Why seek many words? Be innocent: and thou hast perfected
righteousness.…But who is innocent? He who while he hurteth not another,
injureth not himself. For he who hurteth himself, is not innocent. Some
one saith: Lo, I have not robbed any one, I have not oppressed any one:
I will live happily on my own substance, the fruits of my virtuous toil;
I wish to have fine banquets, I wish to spend as much as pleaseth me, to
drink with those whom I like as much as I please; whom have I robbed,
whom have I oppressed, who hath complained of me? He seemeth innocent.
But if he corrupt himself, if he overthrow the temple of God within
himself, why hope that he will act with mercy toward others, and spare
the wretched? Can that man be merciful to others, who unto himself is
cruel? The whole of righteousness, therefore, is reduced to the one
word, innocence. But the lover of iniquity, hateth his own soul. When he
loved iniquity, he fancied he was injuring others. But consider whether
he was injuring others: “He who loveth iniquity,” he saith, “hateth his
own soul.”  <span id="fr_4563"></span>[4564](#fn_4563) He therefore who
wishes to injure another, first injureth himself; nor doth he walk,
since there is no room. For all wickedness suffereth from narrowness:
innocence alone is broad enough to walk in. “I walked in the innocence
of my heart, in the midst of my house.” By the middle of his house, he
either signifieth the Church herself; for Christ walketh in her: or his
own heart; for our inner house is our heart: as he hath explained in the
above words, “in the innocence of my heart.” What is the innocence of
the heart? The middle of his house? Whoever hath a bad house in this, is
driven out of doors. For whoever is oppressed within his heart by a bad
conscience, just as any man in consequence of the overflow of a
waterspout or of smoke goeth out of his house, suffereth not himself to
dwell therein; so he who hath not a quiet heart, cannot happily dwell in
his heart. Such men go out of themselves in the bent of their mind, and
delight themselves with things without, that affect the body; they seek
repose in trifles, in spectacles, in luxuries, in all evils. Wherefore
do they wish themselves well without? Because it is not well with them
within, so that they may rejoice in a good conscience.…

<span id="ii.CI-p11"></span>4. “I set no wicked thing before my eyes”
([Psa. 101.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#003)<span
id="ii.CI-p11.1"></span>).…I did love no wicked thing. And he explaineth
this same wicked thing: “I hated them that do unfaithfulness.” Attend,
my brethren. If ye walk with Christ in the midst of His house, that is,
if either in your heart ye have a good repose, or in the Church herself
proceed on a good journey in the way of godliness; ye ought not to hate
those unfaithful only who are without, but whomsoever also ye may have
found within. Who are the unfaithful? They who hate the law of God; who
hear, and do it not, are called unfaithful. Hate the doers of
unfaithfulness, repel them from thee. But thou shouldest hate the
unfaithful, not men: one man who is unfaithful, hath, ye see, two names,
man, and unfaithful: God made him <span id="page_493">p. 493</span>
<span id="ii.CI-Page_493"></span>man, he made himself unfaithful; love
in him what God made, persecute in him what he made himself. For when
thou shalt have persecuted his unfaithfulness, thou killest the work of
man, and freest the work of God. “I hated the doers of unfaithfulness.”

<span id="ii.CI-p12"></span>5. “The wicked heart hath not cleaved unto
me.”…The heart of a man, who wisheth not anything contrary to any that
God wisheth, is called straight.…If therefore the righteous heart
followeth God, the crooked heart resisteth God. Suppose something
untoward happeneth to him, he crieth out, “God, what have I done unto
Thee? What sin have I committed?” He wisheth himself to appear just, God
unjust. What is so crooked as this? It is not enough that thou art
crooked thyself: thou must think thy rule crooked also. Reform thyself,
and thou findest Him straight, in departing from whom thou hast made
thyself crooked. He doth justly, thou unjustly; and for this reason thou
art perverse, since thou callest man just, and God unjust. What man dost
thou call just? Thyself. For when thou sayest, “What have I done unto
Thee?” thou thinkest thyself just. But let God answer thee: “Thou
speakest truth: thou hast done nothing to Me: thou hast done all things
unto thyself; for if thou hadst done anything for Me, thou wouldest have
done good. For whatever is done well, is done unto Me; because it is
done according to My commandment; but whatever of evil is done, is done
unto thee, not unto Me; for the wicked man doth nothing except for his
own sake, since it is not what I command.” When ye see such men,
brethren, reprove them, convince and correct them: and if ye cannot
reprove or correct them, consent not to them.

<span id="ii.CI-p13"></span>6. “When the wicked man departed from me, I
knew him not” ([Psa. 101.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#004)<span
id="ii.CI-p13.1"></span>). I approved him not, I praised him not, he
pleased me not. For we find the word “to know” occasionally used in
Scripture, in the sense of “to be pleased.” For what is hidden from God,
brethren? Doth He know the just, and doth He not know the unjust? What
dost thou think of, that He doth not know? I say not, what thinkest
thou; but what wilt thou ever think, that He will not have seen
beforehand? God knoweth all things, then; and yet in the end, that is in
judgment after mercy, He saith of some persons: “I will profess unto
them, I never knew you; depart from Me, ye workers of iniquity.” <span
id="fr_4564"></span>[4565](#fn_4564) Was there any one He did not know?
But what meaneth, “I never knew you”? I acknowledge you not in My rule.
For I know the rule of My righteousness: ye agree not with it, ye have
turned aside from it, ye are crooked. Therefore He said here also: “When
the wicked man departed from Me, I knew him not.”…Therefore, “when the
wicked man departed from me,” that is, when the wicked man was unlike
me, and was unwilling to imitate my paths, was unwilling in his
wickedness to live as I had proposed myself for his imitation; “I knew
him not.” What meaneth, “I knew him not”? Not that I was ignorant of
him, but that I did not approve him.

<span id="ii.CI-p15"></span>7. “Whoso privily slandered his neighbour,
him I persecuted” ([Psa. 101.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#005)<span
id="ii.CI-p15.1"></span>). Behold the righteous persecutor, not of the
man, but of the sin. “With the proud eye, and the insatiable heart, I
did not feed.” What meaneth, “I did not feed with”? I did not eat in
common with such. Attend, beloved; since ye are about to hear something
wonderful. If he did not feed with this man, he did not eat with him;
for to feed is to eat; how is it then that we find our Lord Himself
eating with the proud? It was not only with those publicans and sinners,
for they were humble: for they acknowledged their weakness, and asked
for the physician. We find that He ate with the proud Pharisees
themselves. A certain proud man had invited Him: it was the same who was
displeased because a sinning woman, one of ill repute in the city,
approached the feet of our Lord.…That Pharisee was proud: the Lord ate
with him; what is it therefore that he saith? “With such an one I did
not eat.” How doth He enjoin unto us what He hath not done Himself? He
exhorteth us to imitate Himself: we see that He ate with the proud; how
doth He forbid us to eat with the proud? We indeed, brethren, for the
sake of reproof, abstain from communion with our brethren, and do not
eat with them, that they may be reformed? We rather eat with strangers,
with Pagans, than with those who hold with us, if we have seen that they
live wickedly, that they may be ashamed, and amend; as the Apostle
saith, “And if any man obey not our word by this Epistle, note that man,
and have no company with him, that he may be ashamed. Yet count him not
as an enemy, but admonish him as a brother.” <span
id="fr_4565"></span>[4566](#fn_4565) For the sake of healing others we
usually do this; but nevertheless we often eat with many strangers and
ungodly men.

<span id="ii.CI-p17"></span>8. The pious heart hath its banquets, the
proud heart hath its banquets: for it was on account of the food of the
proud heart, that he said, “with an insatiable heart.” How is the proud
heart fed? If a man is proud, he is envious: otherwise it cannot be.
Pride is the mother of enviousness: it cannot but generate it, and ever
coexist with it. Every proud man is, therefore, envious: if envious, he
feedeth on <span id="page_494">p. 494</span> <span
id="ii.CI-Page_494"></span>the misfortunes of others. Whence the Apostle
saith, “But if ye bite and devour one another, take heed that ye be not
consumed of one another.” <span id="fr_4566"></span>[4567](#fn_4566) Ye
see them, then, eating: eat not with these: fly such banquets: for they
cannot satisfy themselves with rejoicing in others’ evils, because their
hearts are insatiable. Beware thou art not caught in their feasts by the
devil’s noose.…Just as birds feed at the trap, or fishes at the hook,
they were taken, when they fed. The ungodly therefore have their own
feasts, the godly also have theirs. Hear the feasts of the godly:
“Blessed are they who hunger and thirst after righteousness: for they
shall be filled.” <span id="fr_4567"></span>[4568](#fn_4567) If
therefore the godly eateth the meat of righteousness, and the ungodly of
pride; it is no wonder if he is insatiable in heart. He eateth the meat
of iniquity: do not eat the meat of iniquity, and the proud in eye, and
the insatiable in heart, eateth not with thee.

<span id="ii.CI-p20"></span>9. And whence wast thou fed? And what
pleased thee, when he did not eat with thee? “Mine eyes,” he saith,
“were upon such as are faithful in the land, that they might sit with
me” ([Psa. 101.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#006)<span
id="ii.CI-p20.1"></span>). That is, that with Me they might be
seated. <span id="fr_4568"></span>[4569](#fn_4568) In what sense are
they “to sit”? “Ye shall sit on twelve thrones, judging the twelve
tribes of Israel.” <span id="fr_4569"></span>[4570](#fn_4569) The
faithful of the earth judge, for to them it is said, “Know ye not, that
we shall judge angels?” <span id="fr_4570"></span>[4571](#fn_4570)
“Whoso walketh in a spotless way, he ministered unto me.” To “Me,” he
saith, not to himself. For many minister the Gospel, but unto
themselves; because they seek their own things, not the things of Jesus
Christ. <span id="fr_4571"></span>[4572](#fn_4571) …

<span id="ii.CI-p25"></span>10. “The proud man hath not dwelt in the
midst of my house” ([Psa. 101.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#007)<span
id="ii.CI-p25.1"></span>). Understand this of the heart. The proud did
not dwell in my heart: no such dwelt in my heart: for he hurried away
from me. None but the meek and peaceful dwelt in my heart; the proud
dwelt not there, for the unrighteous one dwelleth not in the heart of
the righteous. Let the righteous be distant from thee, I know not how
many miles and stations: <span id="fr_4572"></span>[4573](#fn_4572) ye
dwell together, if ye have one heart. “The proud doer hath not dwelt in
the midst of my house: he that speaketh unjust things hath not directed
in the sight of my eyes.” This is the spotless way, where we understand
when the Lord cometh unto us.

<span id="ii.CI-p27"></span>11. “In the morning I destroyed all the
ungodly that were in the land. That I may root out all wicked doers from
the city of the Lord” ([Psa.
101.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#008)<span id="ii.CI-p27.1"></span>).
This is obscure. There are then wicked doers in the city of the Lord,
and they at present, seemingly, spared. Why so? Because it is the season
of mercy: but that of judgment will come; for the Psalm thus began, “Of
mercy and judgment will I sing unto Thee, O Lord.”…

<span id="ii.CI-p28"></span>12. He at present spareth, He will then
judge. But when will He judge? When night shall have passed away. For
this reason He hath said: “In the morning.” When the day shall at last
have arrived, night having passed by. Why doth He spare them until the
dawn? Because it was night. What meaneth, it was night? Because it was
the season for mercy: He was merciful, while the hearts of men were
hidden. Thou seest some one living ill; thou endurest him: for thou
knowest not of what sort he will prove to be; since it is night; whether
he who to-day liveth ill, to-morrow may live well; and whether he who
to-day liveth well, to-morrow may be wicked. For it is night, and God
endureth all men, since He is of long-suffering: He endureth them, that
sinners may be converted unto Him. But they who shall not have reformed
themselves in that season of mercy, shall be slain. And wherefore? That
they may be scattered abroad  <span id="fr_4573"></span>[4574](#fn_4573)
from the city of the Lord, from the fellowship of Jerusalem, from the
fellowship of the Saints, from the fellowship of the Church. But when
shall they be slain? “At dawn.” What meaneth, “at dawn”? When night
shall have passed away. Wherefore now doth he spare? Because it is the
season of mercy. Why doth He not always spare? Because, “Mercy and
judgment will I sing unto Thee, O Lord.” Brethren, let no man flatter
himself: all the doers of iniquity shall be slain; Christ shall slay
them at the dawn, and shall destroy them from His city. But now while it
is the time of mercy, let them hear Him. Everywhere He crieth out by the
Law, by the Prophets, by the Psalms, by the Epistles, by the Gospels:
see that He is not silent; that He spareth; that He granteth mercy; but
beware, for the judgment will come.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4558"></span>[491:4559](1080112.htm#fr_4558) <span
id="ii.CI-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.CI-p2"></span> Lat. C. A discourse to the people.

<span id="fn_4559"></span>[491:4560](1080112.htm#fr_4559) <span
id="ii.CI-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CI-p5"></span> [Rom. ii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#004)<span id="ii.CI-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4560"></span>[492:4561](1080112.htm#fr_4560) <span
id="ii.CI-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CI-p6"></span> [Rom. 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#006)<span id="ii.CI-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4561"></span>[492:4562](1080112.htm#fr_4561) <span
id="ii.CI-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CI-p7"></span> [1 Tim.
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#013),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#016)<span id="ii.CI-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4562"></span>[492:4563](1080112.htm#fr_4562) <span
id="ii.CI-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CI-p8"></span> [2 Tim. iv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#008)<span id="ii.CI-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4563"></span>[492:4564](1080112.htm#fr_4563) <span
id="ii.CI-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CI-p10"></span> [Ps. xi.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#005)<span id="ii.CI-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4564"></span>[493:4565](1080112.htm#fr_4564) <span
id="ii.CI-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CI-p14"></span> [Matt. vii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#023)<span id="ii.CI-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4565"></span>[493:4566](1080112.htm#fr_4565) <span
id="ii.CI-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CI-p16"></span> [2 Thess. iii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#014)<span id="ii.CI-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4566"></span>[494:4567](1080112.htm#fr_4566) <span
id="ii.CI-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CI-p18"></span> [Gal. v.
15](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#015)<span id="ii.CI-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4567"></span>[494:4568](1080112.htm#fr_4567) <span
id="ii.CI-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CI-p19"></span> [Matt. v.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#006)<span id="ii.CI-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4568"></span>[494:4569](1080112.htm#fr_4568) <span
id="ii.CI-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CI-p21"></span> *Mecum sederent*. There was an ambiguity in
*considerent*, as written.

<span id="fn_4569"></span>[494:4570](1080112.htm#fr_4569) <span
id="ii.CI-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CI-p22"></span> [Matt. xix.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#028)<span id="ii.CI-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4570"></span>[494:4571](1080112.htm#fr_4570) <span
id="ii.CI-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CI-p23"></span> [1 Cor. vi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#003)<span id="ii.CI-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4571"></span>[494:4572](1080112.htm#fr_4571) <span
id="ii.CI-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CI-p24"></span> [Philip. ii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#021)<span id="ii.CI-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4572"></span>[494:4573](1080112.htm#fr_4572) <span
id="ii.CI-p25.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CI-p26"></span> *Mansionibus*.

<span id="fn_4573"></span>[494:4574](1080112.htm#fr_4573) <span
id="ii.CI-p28.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CI-p29"></span> Oxf. <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.CI-p29.1"></span>mss</span>. *disperdantur*, “destroyed,” as
below.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm CII](1080113)
