[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080116)  [Next](1080118.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.CVI"></span>

<span id="ii.CVI-p1"></span> <span id="ii.CVI-p1.1"></span><span
class="c20"><span id="ii.CVI-p1.2"></span>Psalm CVI. <span
id="fr_4813"></span>[4814](#fn_4813.md) </span>

<span id="ii.CVI-p3"></span>1. This Psalm also hath the title Allelujah
prefixed to it: and this twice. But some say, that one Allelujah
belongeth to the end of the former Psalm, the other to the beginning of
this. And they assert, that all the Psalms bearing this title have
Allelujah at the end, but not all at the beginning; so that they will
not allow any Psalm which hath not Allelujah at the end, to have it at
the beginning; supposing that what seemeth to belong to the
commencement, really belongeth to the end of the former Psalm. But until
they persuade us by some sure proofs that this is true, we will follow
the general custom, which, whenever it findeth Allelujah, attributes it
to the same Psalm, at the head of which it is found. For there are very
few copies (and I have found this in none of the Greek copies, which I
have been able to inspect) which have Allelujah at the end of the <span
class="c21"><span id="ii.CVI-p3.1"></span>CL</span>th Psalm; after which
there is <span id="page_526">p. 526</span> <span
id="ii.CVI-Page_526"></span>no other which belongeth to the same canon.
But not even this could outweigh custom, although all the copies had it
so. For it might be that, with some reference to the praise of God, the
whole book of Psalms, which is said to consist of five books (for they
say that the books severally end where it is written Amen, Amen), might
be closed with this last Allelujah, after all that hath been sung; nor,
on account of the end of the <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.CVI-p3.2"></span>CL</span>th Psalm, do I see that it is necessary
that all the Psalms entitled Allelujah, should have Allelujah at the
end. But when there is a double Allelujah at the head of a Psalm, why as
our Lord sometimes once, sometimes twice over, saith Amen, in the same
way Allelujah may not sometimes be used once, sometimes twice, I know
not: especially, since as in this <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.CVI-p3.3"></span> CV</span>th, both the Allelujahs are placed
after the mark by which the number of the Psalm is described, whereas
the one, if it belonged to the end of the former Psalm, ought to have
been placed before the number; and the Allelujah which belonged to the
Psalm of this number, should have been written after the number. But
perhaps even in this an ignorant habit hath prevailed, and some reason
may be assigned of which we are as yet uninformed, so that the judgment
of truth ought rather to be our guide than the prejudice of custom. In
the mean time, before we are fully instructed in this matter, whenever
we find Allelujah written, whether once or twice, after the number of
the Psalm, according to the most usual custom of the Church, we will
ascribe it to that Psalm to which the same number is prefixed;
confessing that we both believe the mysteries of all the titles in the
Psalms, and of the order of the same Psalms, to be important, and that
we have not yet been able, as we wish, to penetrate them.

<span id="ii.CVI-p4"></span>2. But I find these two Psalms, the <span
class="c21"><span id="ii.CVI-p4.1"></span>CV</span>th and <span
class="c21"><span id="ii.CVI-p4.2"></span> CVI</span>th so connected,
that in one of them, the first, the people of God is praised in the
person of the elect, of whom there is no complaint, whom I imagine to
have been there in those with whom God was well pleased; <span
id="fr_4814"></span>[4815](#fn_4814.md) but in the following Psalm those
are mentioned among the same people who have provoked God; though the
mercy of God was not wanting even to these.…This Psalm therefore
beginneth like the former; “Confess ye unto the Lord.” But in that Psalm
these words follow: “And call upon His Name:” whereas here, it is as
follows, “For He is gracious, and His mercy endureth for ever” ([Psa.
106.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#001)<span id="ii.CVI-p5.2"></span>.md).
Wherefore in this passage a confession of sins may be understood; for
after a few verses we read, “We have sinned with our fathers, we have
done amiss, and dealt wickedly;” but in the words, “For He is
gracious, <span id="fr_4815"></span>[4816](#fn_4815.md) and His mercy
endureth for ever,” there is chiefly the praise of God, and in His
praise confession. Although when any one confesses his sins, he ought to
do so with praise of God; nor is a confession of sins a pious one,
unless it be without despair, and with calling upon the mercy of God. It
therefore doth contain His praise, whether in words, when it calleth Him
gracious and merciful, or in the feeling only, when he believeth
this.…If that mercy be here understood, in respect of which no man can
be happy without God; we may render it better, “for ever:” but if it be
that mercy which is shown to the wretched, that they may either be
consoled in misery, or even freed from it; it is better construed, “to
the end of the world,” in which there will never be wanting wretched
persons to whom that mercy may be shown. Unless indeed any man ventured
to say, that some mercy of God will not be wanting even to those who
shall be condemned with the devil and his angels; not a mercy by which
they may be freed from that condemnation, but that it may be in some
degree softened for them: and that thus the mercy of God may be styled
eternal, as exercised over their eternal misery. <span
id="fr_4816"></span>[4817](#fn_4816.md) …

<span id="ii.CVI-p8"></span>3. “Who can express the mighty acts of the
Lord?” ([Psa. 106.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#002.md)<span
id="ii.CVI-p8.1"></span>). Full of the consideration of the Divine
works, while he entreateth His mercy, “Who,” he saith, “can express the
mighty acts of the Lord, or make all His praises heard?” We must supply
what was said above, to make the sense complete here, thus, “Who shall
make all His praises heard?” that is, who is sufficient to make all His
praises heard? “Shall make” them “heard,” he saith; that is, cause that
they be heard; showing, that the mighty acts of the Lord and His praises
are so to be spoken of, that they may be preached to those who hear
them. But who can make “all,” heard? Is it that as the next words are,
“Blessed are they that alway keep judgment, and do righteousness in
every time” ([Psa. 106.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#003.md)<span
id="ii.CVI-p8.2"></span>); he perhaps meant those praises of His, which
are understood as His works in His commandments? “For it is God,” saith
the Apostle, “who worketh in you,”  <span
id="fr_4817"></span>[4818](#fn_4817.md) …since He worketh in these things
in a manner that cannot be spoken. “Who will do all His praises heard?”
that is, who, when he hath heard them, doth all His praises? which are
the works of His commandments. As far as they are done, although all
which are heard are not performed, He is to be praised, who “worketh in
us both to will and to do of His good pleasure.” <span
id="fr_4818"></span>[4819](#fn_4818.md) For this reason, <span
id="page_527">p. 527</span> <span id="ii.CVI-Page_527"></span>while he
might have said, all His commandments, or, all the works of His
commandments; he preferred saying, “His praises.”…

<span id="ii.CVI-p11"></span>4. But unless there were some difference
between judgment and righteousness, we should not read in another Psalm,
“Until righteousness turn again unto judgment.” <span
id="fr_4819"></span>[4820](#fn_4819.md) The Scripture, indeed, loveth to
place these two words together; as, “Righteousness and judgment are the
habitation of His seat;” <span id="fr_4820"></span>[4821](#fn_4820.md) and
this, “He shall make thy righteousness as clear as the light, and thy
judgment as the noon-day;” <span id="fr_4821"></span>[4822](#fn_4821.md)
where there is apparently a repetition of the same sentiment. And
perhaps on account of the resemblance of signification one may be put
for the other, either judgment for righteousness, or righteousness for
judgment: yet, if they be spoken of in their proper sense, I doubt not
that there is some difference; viz. that he is said to keep judgment who
judgeth rightly, but he to do righteousness who acts righteously. And I
think that the verse, “Until righteousness turn again unto judgment,”
may not absurdly be understood in this sense: that here also those are
called blessed, who keep judgment in faith, and do righteousness in
deed.…

<span id="ii.CVI-p15"></span>5. Next, since God justifieth, that is,
maketh men righteous, by healing them from their iniquities, a prayer
followeth: “Remember me, O Lord, according to the favour that Thou
bearest unto Thy people” ([Psa.
106.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#004)<span id="ii.CVI-p15.1"></span>.md):
that is, that we may be among those with whom Thou art well pleased;
since God is not well pleased with them all. “O visit me with Thy
salvation.” This is the Saviour Himself, in whom sins are forgiven, and
souls healed, that they may be able to keep judgment, and do
righteousness; and since they who here speak know such men to be
blessed, they pray for this themselves.…“Visit us,” then, “with Thy
salvation,” that is, with Thy Christ. “To see the felicity of Thy
chosen, and to rejoice in the gladness of Thy people” ([Psa.
106.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#005)<span id="ii.CVI-p15.2"></span>.md):
that is, visit us for this reason with Thy salvation, that we may see
the felicity of Thy chosen, and rejoice in the gladness of Thy people.
For “felicity” <span id="fr_4822"></span>[4823](#fn_4822.md) some copies
read “sweetness;” as in the former passage, “For He is gracious;” where
others read, “for He is sweet.” And it is the same word in the Greek, as
is elsewhere read, “The Lord shall show sweetness:” <span
id="fr_4823"></span>[4824](#fn_4823.md) which some have translated
“felicity,” others “bounty.” But what meaneth, “Visit us to see the
felicity of Thy chosen:” that is, that happiness which Thou givest to
Thine elect: except that we may not remain blind, as those unto whom it
is said, “But now ye say we see: therefore your sin remaineth.” <span
id="fr_4824"></span>[4825](#fn_4824.md) For the Lord giveth sight to the
blind, <span id="fr_4825"></span>[4826](#fn_4825.md) not by their own
merits, but in the felicity He giveth to His chosen, which is the
meaning of “the felicity of Thy chosen:” as, the help of my countenance,
is not of myself, but is my God. <span
id="fr_4826"></span>[4827](#fn_4826.md) And we speak of our daily bread, as
ours, but we add, Give unto us. <span
id="fr_4827"></span>[4828](#fn_4827.md) …“That Thou mayest be praised with
Thine inheritance.” I wonder this verse hath been so interpreted in many
copies, since the Greek phrase is one and the same in these three
verses.…But since this seemeth a doubtful expression, if that sense be
true according to which interpreters have preferred, “That Thou mayest
be praised,” the two preceding verses also must be so understood,
because, as I have said, there is one Greek expression in these three
verses; so that the whole should be thus understood, “Visit us with Thy
salvation, that Thou mayest see the felicity of Thy chosen;” that is,
visit us for this purpose, that Thou mayest cause us to be there, and
mayest see us there; that “Thou mayest rejoice in the gladness of Thy
people,” that is, that Thou mayest be said to rejoice, since they
rejoice in Thee; that “Thou mayest be praised with Thine inheritance,”
that is, mayest be praised with it, since it may not be praised save for
Thy sake.…

<span id="ii.CVI-p22"></span>6. But let us hear what they next confess:
“we have sinned with our fathers: we have done amiss, and dealt
wickedly” ([Psa. 106.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#006.md)<span
id="ii.CVI-p22.1"></span>). What meaneth “with our fathers”?…“Our
fathers,” he saith, “regarded not Thy wonders in Egypt” ([Psa.
106.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#007)<span id="ii.CVI-p22.2"></span>.md);
and many other things also, he doth relate of their sins. Or is, “we
have sinned with our fathers,” to be understood as meaning, we have
sinned like our fathers, that is, by imitating their sins? If it be so,
it should be supported by some example of this mode of expression: which
did not occur to me when I sought on this occasion an instance of any
one saying that he had sinned, or done anything, with another, whom he
had imitated by a similar act after a long interval of time. What
meaneth then, “Our fathers understood not Thy wonders;” save this, they
did not know what Thou didst wish to convince them of by these miracles?
What indeed, save life eternal, <span
id="fr_4828"></span>[4829](#fn_4828.md) and a good, not temporal, but
immutable, which is waited for only through endurance? For this reason
they impatiently murmured, and provoked, and they asked to be blessed
with present and fugitive blessings, “Neither were they mindful of the
greatness of Thy mercy.” He reproveth both their understanding and
memory. Understanding there was need of, that they might meditate unto
what eternal blessings God was calling them <span id="page_528">p.
528</span> <span id="ii.CVI-Page_528"></span>through these temporal
ones; and of memory, that at least they might not forget the temporal
wonders which had been wrought, and might faithfully believe, that by
the same power which they had already experienced, God would free them
from the persecutions of their enemies; whereas they forgot the aid
which He had given them in Egypt, by means of such wonders, to crush
their enemies. “And they provoked, as they went up to the sea, even to
the Red Sea.” <span id="fr_4829"></span>[4830](#fn_4829.md) We ought
especially to notice how the Scripture doth censure the not
understanding that which ought to have been understood, and the not
remembering that which ought to have been remembered; which men are
unwilling to have ascribed to their own fault, for no other reason than
that they may pray less, and be less humble unto God, in whose sight
they should confess what they are, and might by praying for His aid,
become what they are not. For it is better to accuse even the sins of
ignorance and negligence, that they may be done away with, than to
excuse them, so that they remain; and it is better to clear them off by
calling upon God, than to clench them by provoking Him.

<span id="ii.CVI-p25"></span>He addeth, that God acted not according to
their unbelief. “Nevertheless,” he saith, “He saved them for His Name’s
sake: that He might make His power to be known” ([Psa.
106.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#008)<span id="ii.CVI-p25.1"></span>.md):
not on account of any deservings of their own.

<span id="ii.CVI-p26"></span>7. “He rebuked the Red Sea also, and it was
dried up” ([Psa. 106.9](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#009.md)<span
id="ii.CVI-p26.1"></span>). We do not read that any voice was sent forth
from Heaven to rebuke the sea; but he hath called the Divine Power by
which this was effected, a rebuke: unless indeed any one may choose to
say, that the sea was secretly rebuked, so that the waters might hear,
and yet men could not. The power by which God acteth is very abstruse
and mysterious, a power which He causeth that even things devoid of
sense instantly obey at His will. “So He led them through the deeps, as
through a wilderness.” He calleth a multitude of waters the deeps. For
some wishing to give the sense of this whole verse, have translated, “So
He led them forth amid many waters.” What then doth “through the deeps,
as through a wilderness,” mean, except that that had become as a
wilderness from its dryness, where before had been the watery deeps?

<span id="ii.CVI-p27"></span>8. “And He saved them from the hating
ones” <span id="fr_4830"></span>[4831](#fn_4830.md) ([Psa.
106.10](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#010.md)<span
id="ii.CVI-p28.1"></span>). Some translators, in order to avoid an
expression unusual in Latin, have rendered the word, by a
circumlocution, “And He saved them from the hand of those that hated
them, and redeemed them from the hand of the enemy.” What price was
given in this redemption? Is it a prophecy, since this deed was a figure
of Baptism, wherein we are redeemed from the hand of the devil at a
great price, which price is the Blood of Christ? whence this is more
consistently figured forth, not by any sea indiscriminately, but by the
Red Sea; since blood hath a red colour.

<span id="ii.CVI-p29"></span>9. “As for those that troubled them, the
waters overwhelmed them: there was not one of them left” ([Psa.
106.11](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#011.md)<span
id="ii.CVI-p29.1"></span>); not of all the Egyptians, but of those who
pursued the departing Israelites, desirous either of taking or of
killing them.

<span id="ii.CVI-p30"></span>10. “Then believed they in His words”
([Psa. 106.12](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#012.md)<span
id="ii.CVI-p30.1"></span>). The expression seemeth barely Latin, for he
saith not “believed His word,” <span
id="fr_4831"></span>[4832](#fn_4831.md) or “on His words,” <span
id="fr_4832"></span>[4833](#fn_4832.md) but “in His words;” <span
id="fr_4833"></span>[4834](#fn_4833.md) yet it is very frequent in
Scripture. “And praised praise unto Him;” such an expression as when we
say, “This servitude he served,” “such a life he lived.” He is here
alluding to that well-known hymn, commencing, “I will sing unto the
Lord, for He hath triumphed gloriously: the horse and the rider hath He
thrown into the sea.” <span id="fr_4834"></span>[4835](#fn_4834.md)

<span id="ii.CVI-p35"></span>11. “They acted hastily: they forgot His
works” ([Psa. 106.13](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#013.md)<span
id="ii.CVI-p35.1"></span>): other copies read more intelligibly, “They
hastened, they forgot His works, and would not abide His counsel.” For
they ought to have thought, that so great works of God towards
themselves were not without a purpose, but that they invited them to
some endless happiness, which was to be waited for with patience; but
they hastened to make themselves happy with temporal things, which give
no man true happiness, because they do not quench insatiable longing:
for “whosoever,” saith our Lord, “shall drink of this water, shall
thirst again.” <span id="fr_4835"></span>[4836](#fn_4835.md)

<span id="ii.CVI-p37"></span>12. Lastly, “And they lusted a lust in the
wilderness, and they tempted God in the dry land” ([Psa.
106.14](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#014.md)<span
id="ii.CVI-p37.1"></span>). The “dry land,” or land without water, and
“desert,” are the same: so also are, “they lusted a lust,” and, “they
tempted God.” The form of speech is the same as above, “they praised a
praise.” <span id="fr_4836"></span>[4837](#fn_4836.md)

<span id="ii.CVI-p39"></span>13. “And He gave them their desire, and
sent fulness withal into their souls” ([Psa.
106.15](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#015.md)<span
id="ii.CVI-p39.1"></span>). But He did not thus render them happy: for
it was not that fulness of which it is said, “Blessed are they which do
hunger and thirst after righteousness: for they shall be filled.” <span
id="fr_4837"></span>[4838](#fn_4837.md) In this passage he doth not speak
of the rational soul, but <span id="page_529">p. 529</span> <span
id="ii.CVI-Page_529"></span>of the soul as giving animal life to the
body; to the substance of which belong meat and drink, according to what
is said in the Gospel, “Is not the soul more than meat, and the body
than raiment?” <span id="fr_4838"></span>[4839](#fn_4838.md) as if it
belonged to the soul to eat, to the body to be clothed.

<span id="ii.CVI-p42"></span>14. “And they angered Moses in the tents,
and Aaron the saint of the Lord” ([Psa.
106.16](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#016.md)<span
id="ii.CVI-p42.1"></span>). What angering, or, as some have more
literally rendered it, what provocation, <span
id="fr_4839"></span>[4840](#fn_4839.md) he speaketh of, the following words
sufficiently show.

<span id="ii.CVI-p44"></span>15. “The earth opened,” he saith, “and
swallowed up Dathan, and covered over the congregation of Abiram” ([Psa.
106.17](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#017.md)<span
id="ii.CVI-p44.1"></span>): “swallowed up” answereth to “covered over.”
Both Dathan and Abiram were equally concerned in a most sacrilegious
schism. <span id="fr_4840"></span>[4841](#fn_4840.md)

<span id="ii.CVI-p46"></span>16. “And the fire was kindled in their
company; the flame burnt up the sinners” ([Psa.
106.18](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#018.md)<span
id="ii.CVI-p46.1"></span>). This word is not in Scripture usually
applied to those, who, although they live righteously, and in a
praiseworthy manner, are not without sin. Rather, as there is a
difference between those who scorn and scorners, between men who murmur
and murmurers, between men who are writing and writers, and so forth; so
Scripture is wont to signify by sinners such as are very wicked, and
laden with heavy loads of sins.

<span id="ii.CVI-p47"></span>17. “And they made a calf in Horeb, and
worshipped the graven image” ([Psa.
106.19](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#019.md)<span
id="ii.CVI-p47.1"></span>). “Thus they changed their glory, in the
similitude of a calf that eateth hay” ([Psa.
106.20](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#020.md)<span
id="ii.CVI-p47.2"></span>). He saith not “into” the likeness, but “in”
the likeness. It is such a form of speech as where he said “and they
believed in His words.” <span id="fr_4841"></span>[4842](#fn_4841.md) With
great effect in truth he saith not, they changed the glory of God when
they did this; as the Apostle also saith, “They changed the glory of the
incorruptible God into an image made like to corruptible man:” <span
id="fr_4842"></span>[4843](#fn_4842.md) but “their glory.” For God was
their glory, if they would abide His counsel, and hasten not.…

<span id="ii.CVI-p50"></span>18. “They forgat God who saved them” ([Psa.
106.21](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#021.md)<span
id="ii.CVI-p50.1"></span>). How did He save them? “Who did so great
things in Egypt: Wondrous works in the land of Ham, and fearful things
in the Red Sea” ([Psa. 106.22](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#022.md)<span
id="ii.CVI-p50.2"></span>). The things that are wondrous, are also
fearful; for there is no wonder without a certain fear: although these
might be called fearful, because they beat down their adversaries, and
showed them what they ought to fear.

<span id="ii.CVI-p51"></span>19. “So He said, He would have destroyed
them” ([Psa. 106.23](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#023.md)<span
id="ii.CVI-p51.1"></span>). Since they forgot Him who saved them, the
Worker of wondrous works, and made and worshipped a graven image, by
this atrocious and incredible impiety they deserved death. “Had not
Moses His chosen stood before Him in the breaking.” He doth not say,
that he stood in the breaking, <span
id="fr_4843"></span>[4844](#fn_4843.md) as if to break the wrath of God,
but in the way of the breaking, meaning the stroke which was to strike
them: that is, had he not put himself in the way for them, saying, “Yet
now, if Thou wilt forgive their sin;—and if not, blot me, I pray Thee,
out of Thy book.” Where it is proved how greatly the intercession of the
saints in behalf of others prevaileth with God. For Moses, fearless in
the justice of God, which could not blot him out, implored mercy, that
He would not blot out those whom He justly might. Thus he “stood before
Him in the breaking, to turn away His wrathful indignation, lest He
should destroy them.”

<span id="ii.CVI-p53"></span>20. “Yea, they thought scorn of that
pleasant land” ([Psa. 106.24](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#024.md)<span
id="ii.CVI-p53.1"></span>). But had they seen it? How then could they
scorn that which they had not seen, except as the following words
explain, “and believed not in His words.” Indeed, unless that land which
was styled the land that flowed with milk and honey, <span
id="fr_4844"></span>[4845](#fn_4844.md) signified something great, through
which, as by a visible token, He was leading those who understood His
wondrous works to invisible grace and the kingdom of heaven, they could
not be blamed for scorning that land, whose temporal kingdom we also
ought to esteem as nothing, that we may love that Jerusalem which is
free, the mother of us all, <span id="fr_4845"></span>[4846](#fn_4845.md)
which is in heaven, and truly to be desired. But rather unbelief is here
reproved, since they gave no credence to the words of God, who was
leading them to great things through small things, and hastening to
bless themselves with temporal things, which they carnally savoured of,
they “abided not His counsel,” as is said above.

<span id="ii.CVI-p56"></span>21. “But murmured in their tents, and
hearkened not unto the voice of the Lord” ([Psa.
106.25](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#025.md)<span
id="ii.CVI-p56.1"></span>); who strongly forbade them to murmur.

<span id="ii.CVI-p57"></span>22. “Then lift He up His hand against them,
to overthrow them in the wilderness” ([Psa.
106.26](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#026.md)<span
id="ii.CVI-p57.1"></span>); “to cast out their seed among the nations:
and to scatter them in the lands” ([Psa.
106.27](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#027.md)<span
id="ii.CVI-p57.2"></span>).

<span id="ii.CVI-p58"></span>23. “They were initiated also unto
Baalpeor;” that is, were consecrated to the Gentile idol; “and ate the
offerings of the dead” ([Psa.
106.28](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#028.md)<span
id="ii.CVI-p58.1"></span>). “Thus they provoked Him to anger with their
own inventions; and destruction was multiplied among them” ([Psa.
106.29](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#029.md)<span
id="ii.CVI-p58.2"></span>). As if He had deferred the lifting up of His
hand which was to cast them down in the desert, and to cast out their
seed among the nations, and to scatter them in the lands; as the Apostle
saith: “And even as they did not like to retain God in their knowl<span
id="page_530">p. 530</span> <span id="ii.CVI-Page_530"></span>edge, God
gave them over to a reprobate mind, to do those things which are not
convenient.” <span id="fr_4846"></span>[4847](#fn_4846.md) “‘Destruction,’
therefore, ‘was multiplied among them,’ when they were heavily punished
for their heavy sins.”

<span id="ii.CVI-p60"></span>24. “Then stood up Phineas, and appeased
Him, and the shaking ceased” ([Psa.
106.30](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#030.md)<span
id="ii.CVI-p60.1"></span>). He hath related the whole briefly, because
he is not here teaching the ignorant, but reminding those who know the
history. The word “shaking” here is the same as “breaking” before. For
it is one word in the Greek. Lastly, so great was their wickedness, in
being consecrated to the idol, and eating the sacrifices of the dead
(that is, because the Gentiles <span
id="fr_4847"></span>[4848](#fn_4847) sacrificed to dead men as to God.md),
that God would not be otherwise appeased than as Phineas the Priest
appeased Him, when he slew a man and a woman together whom he found in
adultery. <span id="fr_4848"></span>[4849](#fn_4848.md) If he had done this
from hatred towards them, and not from love, while zeal for the house of
God devoured him, it would not have been counted unto him for
righteousness.…Christ our Lord indeed, when the New Testament was
revealed, chose a milder discipline; but the threat of hell is more
severe, and this we do not read of in those threatenings held out by God
in His temporal government.

<span id="ii.CVI-p63"></span>25. “And that was counted unto him for
righteousness among all posterities for evermore” ([Psa.
106.31](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#031.md)<span
id="ii.CVI-p63.1"></span>). God counted this unto His Priest for
righteousness, not only as long as posterity shall exist, but “for
evermore;” for He who knoweth the heart, knoweth how to weigh with how
much love for the people that deed was done.

<span id="ii.CVI-p64"></span>26. “And they angered Him at the waters of
strife: so that Moses was vexed for their sakes” ([Psa.
106.32](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#032.md)<span
id="ii.CVI-p64.1"></span>); “because they provoked his spirit, so that
he spake doubtfully <span id="fr_4849"></span>[4850](#fn_4849.md) with his
lips” ([Psa. 106.33](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#033.md)<span
id="ii.CVI-p65.1"></span>). What is spake doubtfully? As if God, who had
done so great wonders before, could not cause water to flow from a rock.
For he touched the rock with his rod with doubt, and thus distinguished
this miracle from the rest, in which he had not doubted. He thus
offended, thus deserved to hear that he should die, without entering
into the land of promise. <span id="fr_4850"></span>[4851](#fn_4850.md) For
being disturbed by the murmurs of an unbelieving people, he held not
fast that confidence which he ought to have held. Nevertheless, God
giveth unto him, as unto His chosen, a good testimony even after his
death, so that we may see that this wavering of faith was punished with
this penalty only, that he was not allowed to enter that land, whither
he was leading the people.…

<span id="ii.CVI-p67"></span>27. But they of whose iniquities this Psalm
speaketh, when they had entered into that temporal land of promise,
“destroyed not the heathen, which the Lord commanded them” ([Psa.
106.34](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#034.md)<span
id="ii.CVI-p67.1"></span>); “but were mingled among the heathen, and
learned their works” ([Psa.
106.35](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#035.md)<span
id="ii.CVI-p67.2"></span>). “Insomuch that they worshipped their idols,
which became to them an offence” ([Psa.
106.36](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#036.md)<span
id="ii.CVI-p67.3"></span>). Their not destroying them, but mingling with
them, became to them an offence.

<span id="ii.CVI-p68"></span>28. “Yea, they offered their sons and their
daughters unto devils” ([Psa.
106.37](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#037.md)<span
id="ii.CVI-p68.1"></span>); “and shed innocent blood, even the blood of
their sons and of their daughters, whom they offered unto the idols of
Canaan” ([Psa. 106.38](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#038.md)<span
id="ii.CVI-p68.2"></span>). That history doth not relate that they
offered their sons and daughters to devils and idols; but neither can
that Psalm lie, nor the Prophets, who assert this in many passages of
their rebukes. But the literature of the Gentiles is not silent
respecting this custom of theirs. But what is it that followeth? “And
the land was slain with bloods.” We might suppose that this was a
mistake of the writer, and that he had written *interfecta* for
*infecta,* were it not for the goodness of God, who hath willed His
Scriptures to be written in many languages; were it not that we see it
written as in the text in many Greek  <span
id="fr_4851"></span>[4852](#fn_4851.md) copies which we have inspected;
“the land was slain with bloods.” What meaneth then, “the land was
slain,” unless this be referred to the men who dwelt in the land, by a
metaphorical expression.…For they themselves were slaying their own
souls when they offered up their sons, and when they shed the blood of
infants who were far from consent to this crime: whence it is said,
“They shed innocent blood.” “The land” therefore “was slain with bloods,
and defiled by their works” ([Psa.
106.39](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#039.md)<span
id="ii.CVI-p69.2"></span>), since they themselves were slain in soul,
and defiled by their works; “and they went a whoring after their own
inventions.” By inventions are meant what the Greeks call <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.CVI-p69.3"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.CVI-p69.4"></span>πιτηδεύματα</span>: for
this word doth occur in the Greek copies both in this and a former
passage, where it is said, “They provoked Him to anger with their own
inventions;” “inventions” in both instances signifying what they had
initiated others in. Let no man therefore suppose inventions to mean
what they had of themselves instituted, without any example before them
to imitate. Whence other translators in the Latin tongue have preferred
pursuits, affections, imitations, pleasures, to inventions: and the very
same who here write inventions, have elsewhere written pursuits. I chose
to mention this, lest the word inventions, applied to what they had not
invented, but imitated from others, might raise a difficulty.

<span id="ii.CVI-p70"></span><span id="page_531">p. 531</span> <span
id="ii.CVI-Page_531"></span>29. “Therefore was the wrath of the Lord
kindled against His own people” ([Psa.
106.40](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#040.md)<span
id="ii.CVI-p70.1"></span>). Our translators have been unwilling to use
the word anger, for the Greek <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.CVI-p70.2"></span>θυμὸς</span>; though some have used it; while
others translate by “indignation” or “mind.” <span
id="fr_4852"></span>[4853](#fn_4852.md) Whichever of these terms be
adopted, passion doth not affect God; but the power of punishing hath
assumed this name metaphorically from custom.

<span id="ii.CVI-p72"></span>30. “Insomuch that He abhorred His own
inheritance; and He gave them over into the hand of the heathen: and
they that hated them were lords over them” ([Psa.
106.41](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#041.md)<span
id="ii.CVI-p72.1"></span>): “and their enemies oppressed them, and they
were brought low under their hands” ([Psa.
106.42](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#042.md)<span
id="ii.CVI-p72.2"></span>). Since he hath called them the inheritance of
God, it is clear that He abhorred them, and gave them over into their
enemies’ hands, not in order to their perdition, but for their
discipline. Lastly, he saith, “Many a time did He deliver them.” “But
they provoked Him with their own counsels” ([Psa.
106.43](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#043.md)<span
id="ii.CVI-p72.3"></span>). This is what he said above, “They did not
abide His counsel.” Now a man’s counsel is pernicious to himself, when
he seeketh those things which are his own only, not those which are
God’s. <span id="fr_4853"></span>[4854](#fn_4853.md) In whose inheritance,
which inheritance He Himself is to us, when He deigneth His presence for
our enjoyment, being with the Saints, we shall suffer no straitening
from the society, by our love of anything as our own possession. For
that most glorious city, when it hath gained the promised inheritance,
in which none shall die, none shall be born, will not contain citizens
who shall individually rejoice in their own, for “God shall be all in
all.”  <span id="fr_4854"></span>[4855](#fn_4854.md) And whoever in this
pilgrimage faithfully and earnestly doth long for this society, doth
accustom himself to prefer common to private interests, by seeking not
his own things, but Jesus Christ’s: lest, by being wise and vigilant in
his own affairs, he provoke God with his own counsel; but, hoping for
what he seeth not, let him not hasten to be blessed with things visible;
and, patiently waiting for that everlasting happiness which he seeth
not, follow His counsel in His promises, whose aid he prayeth for in his
prayers. Thus he will also become humble in his confessions; so as not
to be like those, of whom it is said, “They were brought down in their
wickedness.”

<span id="ii.CVI-p75"></span>31. Nevertheless, God, full of mercy,
forsook them not. “And He saw when they were in adversity, when He heard
their complaint” ([Psa. 106.44](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#044.md)<span
id="ii.CVI-p75.1"></span>). “And He thought upon His covenant, and
repented, according to the multitude of His mercies” ([Psa.
106.45](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#045.md)<span
id="ii.CVI-p75.2"></span>). He saith, “He repented,” because He changed
that wherewith He seemed about to destroy them. With God indeed all
things are arranged and fixed; and when He seemeth to act upon sudden
motive, He doth nothing but what He foreknew that He should do from
eternity; but in the temporal changes of creation, which He ruleth
wonderfully, He, without any temporal change in Himself, is said to do
by a sudden act of will what in the ordained causes of events He hath
arranged in the unchangeableness of His most secret counsel, according
to which He doth everything according to defined seasons, doing the
present, and having already done the future. And who is capable of
comprehending these things? <span id="fr_4855"></span>[4856](#fn_4855.md)
Let us therefore hear the Scripture, speaking high things humbly, giving
food for the nourishment of children, and proposing subjects for the
research of the older: that everlasting covenant “which He made with
Abraham,” not the old which is abolished, but the new which is hidden
even in the old. “And pitied them,” etc. He did that which He had
covenanted, but He had foreknown that He would yield this to them when
they prayed in their adversity; since even their very prayer, when it
was not uttered, but was still to be uttered, undoubtedly was known unto
God.

<span id="ii.CVI-p77"></span>32. So “He gave them unto compassions, in
the sight of all that had taken them captive” ([Psa.
106.46](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#046.md)<span
id="ii.CVI-p77.1"></span>). That they might not be vessels of wrath, but
vessels of mercy. <span id="fr_4856"></span>[4857](#fn_4856.md) The
compassions unto which He gave them are named in the plural for this
reason, I imagine, because each one hath a gift of his own from God, one
in one way, another in another. <span
id="fr_4857"></span>[4858](#fn_4857.md) Come then, whosoever readest this,
and dost recognise the grace of God, by which we are redeemed unto
eternal life through our Lord Jesus Christ, by reading in the
apostolical writings, and by searching in the Prophets, and seest the
Old Testament revealed in the New, the New veiled in the Old; remember
the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, where, when He driveth him out of
the hearts of the faithful, He saith, “Now is the prince of this world
cast out:”  <span id="fr_4858"></span>[4859](#fn_4858.md) and again of the
Apostle, when he saith, “Who hath delivered us from the power of
darkness, and hath translated us into the kingdom of His dear
Son.” <span id="fr_4859"></span>[4860](#fn_4859.md) Meditate on these and
such like things, examine also the Old Testament, and see what is sung
in that Psalm, the title of which is, When the temple was being built
after the captivity: <span id="fr_4860"></span>[4861](#fn_4860.md) for
there it is said, “Sing unto the Lord a new song.” And, that thou mayest
not think it doth refer to the Jewish people only, he saith, “Sing unto
the Lord, all the whole earth: sing unto the Lord, and praise His Name:
declare,” or rather, “give the good news of,” or, to transfer the very
word <span id="page_532">p. 532</span> <span
id="ii.CVI-Page_532"></span>used in the Greek, “evangelize day from day,
His salvation.” Here the Gospel (Evangelium) is mentioned, in which is
announced the Day that came from Day, our Lord Christ, the Light from
Light, the Son from the Father. This also is the meaning of His
salvation: for Christ is the Salvation of God, as we have shown
above. <span id="fr_4861"></span>[4862](#fn_4861.md) …

<span id="ii.CVI-p84"></span>33. “Deliver us, O Lord our God, and gather
us from among the nations (other copies read, “from the heathen”); that
we may give thanks unto Thy holy Name, and make our boast of Thy praise”
([Psa. 106.47](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#047.md)<span
id="ii.CVI-p84.1"></span>). Then he hath briefly added this very praise,
“Blessed be the Lord God of Israel from everlasting, and world without
end” <span id="fr_4862"></span>[4863](#fn_4862.md) ([Psa.
106.48](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#048.md)<span
id="ii.CVI-p85.2"></span>): by which we understand from everlasting to
everlasting; because He shall be praised without end by those of whom it
is said, “Blessed are they that dwell in Thy house: they will be alway
praising Thee.” <span id="fr_4863"></span>[4864](#fn_4863.md) This is the
perfection of the Body of Christ on the third day, when the devils had
been cast out, and cures perfected, even unto the immortality of the
body itself, the everlasting reign of those who perfectly praise Him,
because they perfectly love Him; and perfectly love Him, because they
behold Him face to face. For then shall be completed the prayer at the
commencement of this Psalm: <span id="fr_4864"></span>[4865](#fn_4864.md)
“Remember us, O Lord, according to the favour that Thou bearest unto Thy
people,” etc. For from the Gentiles He doth not gather only the lost
sheep of the house of Israel, <span id="fr_4865"></span>[4866](#fn_4865.md)
but also those which do not belong to that fold; so that there is one
flock, as is said, and one Shepherd. But when the Jews suppose that that
prophecy belongeth to their visible kingdom, because they know not how
to rejoice in the hope of good things unseen, they are about to rush
into the snares of him, of whom the Lord saith, “I am come in My
Father’s Name, and ye receive Me not: if another shall come in his own
name, him ye will receive.”  <span id="fr_4866"></span>[4867](#fn_4866.md)
Of whom the Apostle Paul saith: “that Man of Sin shall be revealed, the
son of perdition,” etc. And a little after he saith, “Then shall that
Wicked be revealed, whom the Lord shall consume with the Spirit of His
mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness of His coming,” etc. <span
id="fr_4867"></span>[4868](#fn_4867.md) …Through that Apostate, through him
who exalteth himself above all that is called God, or that is
worshipped, it seemeth to me, that the carnal people of Israel will
suppose that prophecy to be fulfilled, where it is said, “Deliver us, O
Lord, and gather us from among the heathen;” that under His guidance,
before the eyes of their visible enemies, who had visibly taken them
captive, they are to have visible glory. Thus they will believe a lie,
because they have not received the love of truth, that they might love
not carnal, but spiritual blessings.…For Christ had other sheep that
were not of this fold: <span id="fr_4868"></span>[4869](#fn_4868.md) but
the devil and his angels had taken captive all those sheep, both among
the Israelites and the Gentiles. The power, therefore, of the devil
having been cast out of them, in the sight of the evil spirits who had
taken them captive, their cry in this prophecy is, that they may be
saved and perfected for evermore: “Deliver us, O Lord our God, and
gather us from among the heathen.” Not, as the Jews imagine it,
fulfilled through Antichrist, but through our Lord Christ coming in the
name of His Father, “Day from day, His salvation;” of whom it is here
said, “O visit us in Thy salvation! And let all the people say,” the
predestined people of the circumcision and of the uncircumcision, a holy
race, an adopted people, “So be it! So be it!” <span
id="fr_4869"></span>[4870](#fn_4869.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4813"></span>[525:4814](1080117.htm#fr_4813.md) <span
id="ii.CVI-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.CVI-p2"></span> Lat. CV.

<span id="fn_4814"></span>[526:4815](1080117.htm#fr_4814.md) <span
id="ii.CVI-p4.3"></span>

<span id="ii.CVI-p5"></span> [1 Cor. x.
5](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#005.md)<span id="ii.CVI-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4815"></span>[526:4816](1080117.htm#fr_4815.md) <span
id="ii.CVI-p5.3"></span>

<span id="ii.CVI-p6"></span> “Some copies read, ‘for He is gracious,’
others, ‘for He is sweet:’ one Greek word, <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.CVI-p6.1"></span>χρηστὸς</span>, having been differently
translated. Also in the words, ‘for His mercy endureth to the end of the
world;’ the Greek hath <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.CVI-p6.2"></span>εἰς τον αἰῶνα</span>, which may be interpreted
‘for ever.’”

<span id="fn_4816"></span>[526:4817](1080117.htm#fr_4816.md) <span
id="ii.CVI-p6.3"></span>

<span id="ii.CVI-p7"></span> \[[Luke
12:47](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#047.md),
[48](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#048.md)<span
id="ii.CVI-p7.1"></span>.—C.\]

<span id="fn_4817"></span>[526:4818](1080117.htm#fr_4817.md) <span
id="ii.CVI-p8.3"></span>

<span id="ii.CVI-p9"></span> [Philip. ii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#013.md)<span id="ii.CVI-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4818"></span>[526:4819](1080117.htm#fr_4818.md) <span
id="ii.CVI-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CVI-p10"></span> [Philip. ii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#013.md)<span id="ii.CVI-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4819"></span>[527:4820](1080117.htm#fr_4819.md) <span
id="ii.CVI-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CVI-p12"></span> [Ps. xciv.
15](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#015.md)<span id="ii.CVI-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4820"></span>[527:4821](1080117.htm#fr_4820.md) <span
id="ii.CVI-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CVI-p13"></span> [Ps. xcvii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#002.md)<span id="ii.CVI-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4821"></span>[527:4822](1080117.htm#fr_4821.md) <span
id="ii.CVI-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CVI-p14"></span> [Ps. xxxvii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#006.md)<span id="ii.CVI-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4822"></span>[527:4823](1080117.htm#fr_4822.md) <span
id="ii.CVI-p15.3"></span>

<span id="ii.CVI-p16"></span> *Bonitate*.

<span id="fn_4823"></span>[527:4824](1080117.htm#fr_4823.md) <span
id="ii.CVI-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CVI-p17"></span> [Ps. lxxxv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/psa085.htm#013.md)<span id="ii.CVI-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4824"></span>[527:4825](1080117.htm#fr_4824.md) <span
id="ii.CVI-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CVI-p18"></span> [John ix.
41](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#041.md)<span id="ii.CVI-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4825"></span>[527:4826](1080117.htm#fr_4825.md) <span
id="ii.CVI-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CVI-p19"></span> [Ps. cxlvi.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#008.md)<span id="ii.CVI-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4826"></span>[527:4827](1080117.htm#fr_4826.md) <span
id="ii.CVI-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CVI-p20"></span> [Ps. xliii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa043.htm#005.md)<span id="ii.CVI-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4827"></span>[527:4828](1080117.htm#fr_4827.md) <span
id="ii.CVI-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CVI-p21"></span> [Matt. vi.
11](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#011.md)<span id="ii.CVI-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4828"></span>[527:4829](1080117.htm#fr_4828.md) <span
id="ii.CVI-p22.3"></span>

<span id="ii.CVI-p23"></span> \[A *thesis* which might be maintained
against the brilliant paradox of Warburton.—C.\]

<span id="fn_4829"></span>[528:4830](1080117.htm#fr_4829.md) <span
id="ii.CVI-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CVI-p24"></span> \[The author says, “The copy which I was
reading from, had the passage thus: And a star had been prefixed to
these two last words, ‘even the Red Sea:’ which doth mark those readings
which occur in the Hebrew, and not in the Septuagint translation. But
most of the copies, whether Greek or Latin, which I have been able to
inspect, read thus: ‘and they provoked,’ or, and this is more literally
from the Greek, ‘and they wrought bitterness, as they went up in the Red
Sea.’…The word, ‘went up,’ is used, from the position of the land being
such, that we speak of going down from the land of Canaan into Egypt,
and of going up from Egypt into it.”—C.\]

<span id="fn_4830"></span>[528:4831](1080117.htm#fr_4830.md) <span
id="ii.CVI-p27.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CVI-p28"></span> *Odientium*.

<span id="fn_4831"></span>[528:4832](1080117.htm#fr_4831.md) <span
id="ii.CVI-p30.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CVI-p31"></span> *Verbis*.

<span id="fn_4832"></span>[528:4833](1080117.htm#fr_4832.md) <span
id="ii.CVI-p31.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CVI-p32"></span> *In verba*.

<span id="fn_4833"></span>[528:4834](1080117.htm#fr_4833.md) <span
id="ii.CVI-p32.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CVI-p33"></span> *In verbis*.

<span id="fn_4834"></span>[528:4835](1080117.htm#fr_4834.md) <span
id="ii.CVI-p33.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CVI-p34"></span> [Exod.
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#001.md), [Rev.
15:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#003.md)<span
id="ii.CVI-p34.1"></span>.—C.\]

<span id="fn_4835"></span>[528:4836](1080117.htm#fr_4835.md) <span
id="ii.CVI-p35.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CVI-p36"></span> [John
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#004.md),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#013.md)<span id="ii.CVI-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4836"></span>[528:4837](1080117.htm#fr_4836.md) <span
id="ii.CVI-p37.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CVI-p38"></span> [Ps. cvi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#012.md)<span id="ii.CVI-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4837"></span>[528:4838](1080117.htm#fr_4837.md) <span
id="ii.CVI-p39.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CVI-p40"></span> [Matt. v.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#006.md)<span id="ii.CVI-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4838"></span>[529:4839](1080117.htm#fr_4838.md) <span
id="ii.CVI-p40.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CVI-p41"></span> [Matt. vi.
26](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#026.md)<span id="ii.CVI-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4839"></span>[529:4840](1080117.htm#fr_4839.md) <span
id="ii.CVI-p42.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CVI-p43"></span> *Amaricationem*.

<span id="fn_4840"></span>[529:4841](1080117.htm#fr_4840.md) <span
id="ii.CVI-p44.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CVI-p45"></span> \[[Num.
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#001.md), [Jude
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#011.md)<span id="ii.CVI-p45.1"></span>.
Dathan and Abiram were laymen; Korah and others were Levites who
presumed to exercise the higher offices of the priesthood. [Num.
16:9](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#009.md),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#010.md), [2 Chr.
26:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2026.htm#018.md)<span
id="ii.CVI-p45.2"></span>.—C.\]

<span id="fn_4841"></span>[529:4842](1080117.htm#fr_4841.md) <span
id="ii.CVI-p47.3"></span>

<span id="ii.CVI-p48"></span> [Ps. cvi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#012.md)<span id="ii.CVI-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4842"></span>[529:4843](1080117.htm#fr_4842.md) <span
id="ii.CVI-p48.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CVI-p49"></span> [Rom. i.
23](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#023.md)<span id="ii.CVI-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4843"></span>[529:4844](1080117.htm#fr_4843.md) <span
id="ii.CVI-p51.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CVI-p52"></span> *Confractioni*.

<span id="fn_4844"></span>[529:4845](1080117.htm#fr_4844.md) <span
id="ii.CVI-p53.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CVI-p54"></span> [Exod. iii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#008.md)<span id="ii.CVI-p54.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4845"></span>[529:4846](1080117.htm#fr_4845.md) <span
id="ii.CVI-p54.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CVI-p55"></span> [Gal. iv.
26](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#026.md)<span id="ii.CVI-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4846"></span>[530:4847](1080117.htm#fr_4846.md) <span
id="ii.CVI-p58.3"></span>

<span id="ii.CVI-p59"></span> [Rom. i.
28](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#028.md)<span id="ii.CVI-p59.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4847"></span>[530:4848](1080117.htm#fr_4847.md) <span
id="ii.CVI-p60.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CVI-p61"></span> Oxf. <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.CVI-p61.1"></span>mss</span>. “They like the Gentiles.”

<span id="fn_4848"></span>[530:4849](1080117.htm#fr_4848.md) <span
id="ii.CVI-p61.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CVI-p62"></span> [Numb. xxv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#008.md)<span id="ii.CVI-p62.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4849"></span>[530:4850](1080117.htm#fr_4849.md) <span
id="ii.CVI-p64.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CVI-p65"></span> *Distinxit*.

<span id="fn_4850"></span>[530:4851](1080117.htm#fr_4850.md) <span
id="ii.CVI-p65.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CVI-p66"></span> [Deut. xxxii.
49-52](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#049.md)<span id="ii.CVI-p66.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4851"></span>[530:4852](1080117.htm#fr_4851.md) <span
id="ii.CVI-p68.3"></span>

<span id="ii.CVI-p69"></span> *Infecta*, Vulgate; *interfecta*=<span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.CVI-p69.1"></span>ἐφονοκτονήθη</span>, Sept.

<span id="fn_4852"></span>[531:4853](1080117.htm#fr_4852.md) <span
id="ii.CVI-p70.3"></span>

<span id="ii.CVI-p71"></span> \[Compare p. 426, § 6.—C.\]

<span id="fn_4853"></span>[531:4854](1080117.htm#fr_4853.md) <span
id="ii.CVI-p72.4"></span>

<span id="ii.CVI-p73"></span> [Philip. ii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#021.md)<span id="ii.CVI-p73.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4854"></span>[531:4855](1080117.htm#fr_4854.md) <span
id="ii.CVI-p73.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CVI-p74"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
28](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#028.md)<span id="ii.CVI-p74.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4855"></span>[531:4856](1080117.htm#fr_4855.md) <span
id="ii.CVI-p75.3"></span>

<span id="ii.CVI-p76"></span> [2 Cor. ii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#016.md)<span id="ii.CVI-p76.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4856"></span>[531:4857](1080117.htm#fr_4856.md) <span
id="ii.CVI-p77.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CVI-p78"></span> [Rom.
9:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#022.md),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#023.md)<span id="ii.CVI-p78.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4857"></span>[531:4858](1080117.htm#fr_4857.md) <span
id="ii.CVI-p78.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CVI-p79"></span> [1 Cor. vii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#007.md)<span id="ii.CVI-p79.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4858"></span>[531:4859](1080117.htm#fr_4858.md) <span
id="ii.CVI-p79.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CVI-p80"></span> [John xii.
31](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#031.md)<span id="ii.CVI-p80.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4859"></span>[531:4860](1080117.htm#fr_4859.md) <span
id="ii.CVI-p80.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CVI-p81"></span> [Col. i.
13](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#013.md)<span id="ii.CVI-p81.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4860"></span>[531:4861](1080117.htm#fr_4860.md) <span
id="ii.CVI-p81.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CVI-p82"></span> See LXX. [Ps. xcvi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#001.md)<span id="ii.CVI-p82.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4861"></span>[532:4862](1080117.htm#fr_4861.md) <span
id="ii.CVI-p82.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CVI-p83"></span> Above, § 5.

<span id="fn_4862"></span>[532:4863](1080117.htm#fr_4862.md) <span
id="ii.CVI-p84.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CVI-p85"></span> Oxf. <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.CVI-p85.1"></span>mss</span>. add, “so be it! so be it!”

<span id="fn_4863"></span>[532:4864](1080117.htm#fr_4863.md) <span
id="ii.CVI-p85.3"></span>

<span id="ii.CVI-p86"></span> [Ps. lxxxiv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#004.md)<span id="ii.CVI-p86.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4864"></span>[532:4865](1080117.htm#fr_4864.md) <span
id="ii.CVI-p86.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CVI-p87"></span> \[Vers. 4, 5, p. 527, *supra*.—C.\]

<span id="fn_4865"></span>[532:4866](1080117.htm#fr_4865.md) <span
id="ii.CVI-p87.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CVI-p88"></span> [Matt. xv.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#024.md)<span id="ii.CVI-p88.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4866"></span>[532:4867](1080117.htm#fr_4866.md) <span
id="ii.CVI-p88.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CVI-p89"></span> [John v.
24](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#024.md)<span id="ii.CVI-p89.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4867"></span>[532:4868](1080117.htm#fr_4867.md) <span
id="ii.CVI-p89.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CVI-p90"></span> [2 Thess. ii.
3-11](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#003.md)<span id="ii.CVI-p90.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4868"></span>[532:4869](1080117.htm#fr_4868.md) <span
id="ii.CVI-p90.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CVI-p91"></span> [John x.
16](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#016.md)<span id="ii.CVI-p91.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4869"></span>[532:4870](1080117.htm#fr_4869.md) <span
id="ii.CVI-p91.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CVI-p92"></span> Oxf. <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.CVI-p92.1"></span>mss</span>. add, “Amen.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm CVII](1080118.md)
