[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080021)  [Next](1080023.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.XVIII"></span>

<span id="ii.XVIII-p1"></span> <span id="ii.XVIII-p1.1"></span><span
class="c20"><span id="ii.XVIII-p1.2"></span>Psalm XVIII. <span
id="fr_521"></span>[522](#fn_521.md) </span>

<span id="ii.XVIII-p3"></span>To the end, for the servant of the Lord,
David himself.

<span id="ii.XVIII-p4"></span>1. That is, for the strong of hand, Christ
in His Manhood. <span id="fr_522"></span>[523](#fn_522.md) “The words of
this song which he spoke to the Lord on the day when the Lord delivered
him out of the hands of his enemies, and of the hand of Saul; and he
said, On the day when the Lord delivered him out of the hands of his
enemies and of the hand of Saul:” namely, the king of the Jews, whom
they had demanded for themselves. <span
id="fr_523"></span>[524](#fn_523.md) For as “David” is said to be by
interpretation, strong of hand; so “Saul” is said to be demanding. Now
it is well known, how that People demanded for themselves a king, and
received him for their king, not according to the will of God, but
according to their own will.

<span id="ii.XVIII-p7"></span>2. Christ, then, and the Church, that is,
whole Christ, the Head and the Body, saith here, “I will love Thee, O
Lord, My strength” ([Psa. 18.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#001.md)<span
id="ii.XVIII-p7.1"></span>). I will love Thee, O Lord, by whom I am
strong. <span id="fr_524"></span>[525](#fn_524.md)

<span id="ii.XVIII-p9"></span>3. “O Lord, My stay, and My refuge, and My
deliverer” ([Psa. 18.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#002.md)<span
id="ii.XVIII-p9.1"></span>). O Lord, who hast stayed Me, because I
sought refuge with Thee: and I sought refuge, because Thou hast
delivered Me. “My God is My helper; and I will hope in Him.” My God, who
hast first afforded me the help of Thy call, that I might be able to
hope in Thee. “My defender, and the horn of My salvation, and My
redeemer.” My defender, because I have not leant upon Myself, lifting up
as it were the horn of pride against Thee; but have found Thee a horn
indeed, that is, the sure <span id="page_51">p. 51</span> <span
id="ii.XVIII-Page_51"></span>height of salvation: and that I might find
it, Thou redeemedst Me.

<span id="ii.XVIII-p10"></span>4. “With praise will I call upon the
Lord, and I shall be safe from Mine enemies” ([Psa.
18.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#003.md)<span
id="ii.XVIII-p10.1"></span>). Seeking not My own but the Lord’s glory, I
will call upon Him, and there shall be no means whereby the errors of
ungodliness can hurt Me.

<span id="ii.XVIII-p11"></span>5. “The pains of death,” that is, of the
flesh, have “compassed Me about. And the overflowings of ungodliness
have troubled Me” ([Psa. 18.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#004.md)<span
id="ii.XVIII-p11.1"></span>). Ungodly troubles <span
id="fr_525"></span>[526](#fn_525.md) stirred up for a time, like torrents
of rain which will soon subside, have come on to trouble Me.

<span id="ii.XVIII-p13"></span>6. “The pains of hell compassed Me about”
([Psa. 18.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#005.md)<span
id="ii.XVIII-p13.1"></span>). Among those that compassed Me about to
destroy Me, were pains of envy, which work death, and lead on to the
hell of sin. “The snares of death prevented Me.” They prevented Me, so
that they wished to hurt Me first, which shall afterwards be recompensed
unto them. Now they seize unto destruction such men as they have evilly
persuaded by the boast of righteousness: in the name but not in the
reality of which they glory against the Gentiles.

<span id="ii.XVIII-p14"></span>7. “And in Mine oppression I called upon
the Lord, and cried unto My God. And He heard My voice from His holy
temple” ([Psa. 18.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#006.md)<span
id="ii.XVIII-p14.1"></span>). He heard from My heart, wherein He
dwelleth, My voice. “And My cry in His sight entered into His ears;” and
My cry, which I utter, not in the ears of men, but inwardly before Him
Himself, “entered into His ears.”

<span id="ii.XVIII-p15"></span>8. “And the earth was moved and trembled”
([Psa. 18.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#007.md)<span
id="ii.XVIII-p15.1"></span>). When the Son of Man was thus glorified,
sinners were moved and trembled. “And the foundations of the mountains
were troubled.” And the hopes of the proud, which were in this life,
were troubled. “And were moved, for God was wroth with them.” That is,
that the hope of temporal goods might have now no more establishment in
the hearts of men.

<span id="ii.XVIII-p16"></span>9. “There went up smoke in His wrath”
([Psa. 18.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#008.md)<span
id="ii.XVIII-p16.1"></span>). The tearful supplication of penitents went
up, when they came to know God’s threatenings against the ungodly. “And
fire burneth from His face.” And the ardour of love after repentance
burns by the knowledge of Him. “Coals were kindled from Him.” They, who
were already dead, abandoned by the fire of good desire and the light of
righteousness, and who remained in coldness and darkness, re-enkindled
and enlightened, have come to life again.

<span id="ii.XVIII-p17"></span>10. “And He bowed the heaven, and came
down” ([Psa. 18.9](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#009.md)<span
id="ii.XVIII-p17.1"></span>). And He humbled the just One, that He might
descend to men’s infirmity. “And darkness under His feet.” And the
ungodly, who savour of things earthly, in the darkness of their own
malice, knew not Him: for the earth under His feet is as it were His
footstool.

<span id="ii.XVIII-p18"></span>11. “And He mounted above the cherubim,
and did fly” ([Psa. 18.10](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#010.md)<span
id="ii.XVIII-p18.1"></span>). And He was exalted above the fulness of
knowledge, that no man should come to Him but by love: for “love is the
fulfilling of the law.” <span id="fr_526"></span>[527](#fn_526.md) And full
soon He showed to His lovers that He is incomprehensible, lest they
should suppose that He is comprehended by corporeal imaginations. “He
flew above the wings of the winds.” But that swiftness, whereby He
showed Himself to be incomprehensible, is above the powers of souls,
whereon as upon wings they raise themselves from earthly fears into the
air of liberty.

<span id="ii.XVIII-p20"></span>12. “And hath made darkness His hiding
place” ([Psa. 18.11](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#011.md)<span
id="ii.XVIII-p20.1"></span>). And hath settled the obscurity of the
Sacraments, and the hidden hope in the heart of believers, where He may
lie hid, and not abandon them. In this darkness too, wherein “we yet
walk by faith, and not by sight,” <span
id="fr_527"></span>[528](#fn_527.md) as long as “we hope for what we see
not, and with patience wait for it.” <span
id="fr_528"></span>[529](#fn_528.md) “Round about Him is His tabernacle.”
Yet they that believe Him turn to Him and encircle Him; for that He is
in the midst of them, since He is equally the friend of all, in whom as
in a tabernacle He at this time dwells. “Dark water in clouds of air.”
Nor let any one on this account, if he understand the Scripture, imagine
that he is already in that light, which will be when we shall have come
out of faith into sight: for in the prophets and in all the preachers of
the word of God there is obscure teaching.

<span id="ii.XVIII-p23"></span>13. “In respect of the brightness in His
sight” ([Psa. 18.12](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#012.md)<span
id="ii.XVIII-p23.1"></span>): in comparison with the brightness, which
is in the sight of His manifestation. “His clouds have passed over.” The
preachers of His word are not now bounded by the confines of Judæa, but
have passed over to the Gentiles. “Hail and coals of fire.” Reproofs are
figured, <span id="fr_529"></span>[530](#fn_529.md) whereby, as by hail,
the hard hearts are bruised: but if a cultivated and genial soil, that
is, a godly mind, receive them, the hail’s hardness dissolves into
water, that is, the terror of the lightning-charged, <span
id="fr_530"></span>[531](#fn_530.md) and as it were frozen, reproof
dissolves into satisfying doctrine; and hearts kindled by the fire of
love revive. All these things in His clouds have passed over to the
Gentiles.

<span id="ii.XVIII-p26"></span>14. “And the Lord hath thundered from
heaven” ([Psa. 18.13](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#013.md)<span
id="ii.XVIII-p26.1"></span>). And in confidence of the Gospel the Lord
hath sounded forth from the heart of the just One. “And the Highest gave
His voice;” that we might entertain it, and in <span id="page_52">p.
52</span> <span id="ii.XVIII-Page_52"></span>the depth of human things,
might hear things heavenly.

<span id="ii.XVIII-p27"></span>15. “And He sent out His arrows, and
scattered them” ([Psa. 18.14](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#014.md)<span
id="ii.XVIII-p27.1"></span>). And He sent out Evangelists traversing
straight paths on the wings of strength, not in their own power, but His
by whom they were sent. And “He scattered them,” to whom they were sent,
that to some of them they should be “the savour of life unto life, to
others the savour of death unto death.” <span
id="fr_531"></span>[532](#fn_531.md) “And He multiplied lightnings, and
troubled them.” And He multiplied miracles, and troubled them.

<span id="ii.XVIII-p29"></span>16. “And the fountains of water were
seen. And the fountains of water springing up into everlasting
life,” <span id="fr_532"></span>[533](#fn_532.md) which were made in the
preachers, were seen. “And the foundations of the round world were
revealed” ([Psa. 18.15](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#015.md)<span
id="ii.XVIII-p30.2"></span>). And the Prophets, who were not understood,
and upon whom was to be built the world of believers in the Lord, were
revealed. “At Thy chiding, O Lord:” crying out, “The kingdom of God is
come nigh unto you.” <span id="fr_533"></span>[534](#fn_533.md) “At the
blasting of the breath of Thy displeasure;” saying, “Except ye repent,
ye shall all likewise perish.” <span id="fr_534"></span>[535](#fn_534.md)

<span id="ii.XVIII-p33"></span>17. “He hath sent down from on high, and
hath fetched Me ([Psa. 18.16](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#016.md)<span
id="ii.XVIII-p33.1"></span>): by calling out of the Gentiles for an
inheritance “a glorious Church, not having spot, or wrinkle.” <span
id="fr_535"></span>[536](#fn_535.md) “He hath taken Me out of the multitude
of waters.” He hath taken Me out of the multitude of peoples.

<span id="ii.XVIII-p35"></span>18. “He hath delivered Me from My
strongest enemies” ([Psa. 18.17](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#017.md)<span
id="ii.XVIII-p35.1"></span>). He hath delivered Me from Mine enemies,
who prevailed to the afflicting and overturning of this temporal life of
Mine. “And from them which hate Me; for they are too strong for Me:” as
long as I am under them knowing not God.

<span id="ii.XVIII-p36"></span>19. “They have prevented Me in the day of
My affliction” ([Psa. 18.18](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#018.md)<span
id="ii.XVIII-p36.1"></span>). They have first injured Me, in the time
when I am bearing a mortal and toilsome body. “And the Lord hath become
My stay.” And since the stay of earthly pleasure was disturbed and torn
up by the bitterness of misery, the Lord hath become My stay.

<span id="ii.XVIII-p37"></span>20. “And hath brought Me forth into a
broad place” ([Psa. 18.19](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#019.md)<span
id="ii.XVIII-p37.1"></span>). And since I was enduring the straits of
the flesh, He brought Me forth into the spiritual breadth of faith. “He
hath delivered Me, because He desired Me.” Before that I desired Him, He
delivered Me from My most powerful enemies (who were envious of Me when
I once desired Him), and from them that hated Me, because I do desire
Him.

<span id="ii.XVIII-p38"></span>21. “And the Lord shall reward Me
according to My righteousness” ([Psa.
18.20](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#020.md)<span
id="ii.XVIII-p38.1"></span>). And the Lord shall reward Me according to
the righteousness of My good will, who first showed mercy, before that I
had the good will. “And according to the cleanness of My hands He will
recompense Me.” And according to the cleanness of My deeds He will
recompense Me, who hath given Me to do well by bringing Me forth into
the broad place of faith.

<span id="ii.XVIII-p39"></span>22. “Because I have kept the ways of the
Lord” ([Psa. 18.21](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#021.md)<span
id="ii.XVIII-p39.1"></span>). That the breadth of good works, that are
by faith, and the long-suffering of perseverance should follow after.

<span id="ii.XVIII-p40"></span>23. “Nor have I walked impiously apart
from My God.” “For all His judgments are <span
id="fr_536"></span>[537](#fn_536.md) in My sight” ([Psa.
18.22](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#022.md)<span
id="ii.XVIII-p41.2"></span>). “For” with persevering contemplation I
weigh “all His judgments,” that is, the rewards of the righteous, and
the punishments of the ungodly, and the scourges of such as are to be
chastened, and the trials of such as are to be proved. “And I have not
cast out His righteousness from Me:” as they do that faint under their
burden of them, and return to their own vomit.

<span id="ii.XVIII-p42"></span>24. “And I shall be undefiled with Him,
and I shall keep Myself from Mine iniquity” ([Psa.
18.23](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#023.md)<span
id="ii.XVIII-p42.1"></span>).

<span id="ii.XVIII-p43"></span>25. “And the Lord shall reward Me
according to My righteousness ([Psa.
18.24](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#024.md)<span
id="ii.XVIII-p43.1"></span>). Accordingly not only for the breadth of
faith, which worketh by love; but also for the length of perseverance,
will the Lord reward Me according to My righteousness. “And according to
the cleanness of My hands in the sight of His eyes.” Not as men see, but
“in the sight of His eyes.” For “the things that are seen are temporal;
but the things that are not seen are eternal:” <span
id="fr_537"></span>[538](#fn_537.md) whereto the height of hope appertains.

<span id="ii.XVIII-p45"></span>26. “With the holy Thou shalt be holy”
([Psa. 18.25](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#025.md)<span
id="ii.XVIII-p45.1"></span>). There is a hidden depth also, wherein Thou
art known to be holy with the holy, for that Thou makest holy. “And with
the harmless Thou shalt be harmless.” For Thou harmest no man, but each
one is bound by the bands of his own sins. <span
id="fr_538"></span>[539](#fn_538.md)

<span id="ii.XVIII-p47"></span>27. “And with the chosen Thou shalt be
chosen.” ([Psa. 18.26](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#026.md)<span
id="ii.XVIII-p47.1"></span>). And by him whom Thou choosest, Thou art
chosen. “And with the froward Thou shalt be froward.” And with the
froward Thou seemest froward: for they say, “The way of the Lord is not
right:” <span id="fr_539"></span>[540](#fn_539.md) and their way is not
right.

<span id="ii.XVIII-p49"></span>28. “For Thou wilt make whole the humble
people” ([Psa. 18.27](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#027.md)<span
id="ii.XVIII-p49.1"></span>). Now this seems froward to the froward,
that Thou wilt make them whole that confess their sins. “And Thou wilt
humble the eyes of the proud.” But them that are “ignorant of God’s
righteousness, and seek to establish their own,” <span
id="fr_540"></span>[541](#fn_540.md) Thou wilt humble.

<span id="ii.XVIII-p51"></span><span id="page_53">p. 53</span> <span
id="ii.XVIII-Page_53"></span>29. “For thou wilt light My candle, O Lord”
([Psa. 18.28](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#028.md)<span
id="ii.XVIII-p51.1"></span>). For our light is not from ourselves; but
“Thou wilt light my candle, O Lord. O my God, Thou wilt enlighten my
darkness.” For we through our sins are darkness; but “Thou, O my God,
wilt enlighten my darkness.”

<span id="ii.XVIII-p52"></span>30. “For by Thee shall I be delivered
from temptation” ([Psa. 18.29](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#029.md)<span
id="ii.XVIII-p52.1"></span>). For not by myself, but by Thee, shall I be
delivered from temptation. “And in my God shall I leap over the wall.”
And not in myself, but in my God shall I leap over the wall, which sin
has raised between men and the heavenly Jerusalem.

<span id="ii.XVIII-p53"></span>31. “My God, His way is undefiled” ([Psa.
18.30](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#030.md)<span
id="ii.XVIII-p53.1"></span>). My God cometh not unto men, except they
shall have purified the way of faith, whereby He may come to them; for
that “His way is undefiled.” “The words of the Lord have been proved by
fire.” The words of the Lord are tried by the fire of tribulation. “He
is the Protector of them that hope in Him.” And all that hope not in
themselves, but in Him, are not consumed by that same tribulation. For
hope followeth faith.

<span id="ii.XVIII-p54"></span>32. “For who is God, but the Lord?”
([Psa. 18.31](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#031.md)<span
id="ii.XVIII-p54.1"></span>) whom we serve. “And who God, but our God?”
And who is God, but the Lord? whom after good service we sons shall
possess as the hoped-for inheritance.

<span id="ii.XVIII-p55"></span>33. “God, who hath girded me with
strength” ([Psa. 18.32](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#032.md)<span
id="ii.XVIII-p55.1"></span>). God, who hath girded me that I might be
strong, lest the loosely flowing folds of desire hinder my deeds and
steps. “And hath made my way undefiled.” And hath made the way of love,
whereby I may come to Him, undefiled, as the way of faith is undefiled,
whereby He comes to me.

<span id="ii.XVIII-p56"></span>34. “Who hath made my feet perfect like
harts’ feet” ([Psa. 18.33](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#033.md)<span
id="ii.XVIII-p56.1"></span>). Who hath made my love perfect to surmount
the thorny and dark entanglements of this world. “And will set me up on
high.” And will fix my aim on the heavenly habitation, that “I may be
filled with all the fulness of God.” <span
id="fr_541"></span>[542](#fn_541.md)

<span id="ii.XVIII-p58"></span>35. “Who teacheth my hands for battle”
([Psa. 18.34](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#034.md)<span
id="ii.XVIII-p58.1"></span>). Who teacheth me to work for the overthrow
of mine enemies, who strive to shut the kingdom of heaven against us.
“And Thou hast made mine arms as a bow of steel.” And Thou hast made my
earnest striving after good works unwearied.

<span id="ii.XVIII-p59"></span>36. “And Thou hast given me the defence
of my salvation, and Thy right hand hath held me up” ([Psa.
18.35](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#035.md)<span
id="ii.XVIII-p59.1"></span>). And the favour of Thy grace hath held me
up. “And Thy discipline hath directed me to the end.” And Thy
correction, not suffering me to wander from the way, hath directed me
that whatsoever I do, I refer to that end, whereby I may cleave to Thee.
“And this Thy discipline, it shall teach me.” And that same correction
of Thine shall teach me to attain to that, whereunto it hath directed
me.

<span id="ii.XVIII-p60"></span>37. “Thou hast enlarged my steps under
me” ([Psa. 18.36](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#036.md)<span
id="ii.XVIII-p60.1"></span>). Nor shall the straits of the flesh hinder
me; for Thou hast enlarged my love, working in gladness even with these
mortal things and members which are under me. “And my footsteps have not
been weakened.” And either my goings, or the marks which I have
imprinted for the imitation of those that follow, have not been
weakened.

<span id="ii.XVIII-p61"></span>38. “I will follow up mine enemies, and
seize them” ([Psa. 18.37](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#037.md)<span
id="ii.XVIII-p61.1"></span>). I will follow up my carnal affections, and
will not be seized by them, but will seize them, so that they may be
consumed. “And I will not turn, till they fail.” And from this purpose I
will not turn myself to rest, till they fail who make a tumult about me.

<span id="ii.XVIII-p62"></span>39. “I will break them, and they shall
not be able to stand” ([Psa.
18.38](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#038.md)<span
id="ii.XVIII-p62.1"></span>): and they shall not hold out against me.
“They shall fall under my feet.” When they are cast down, I will place
before me the loves <span id="fr_542"></span>[543](#fn_542.md) whereby I
walk for evermore.

<span id="ii.XVIII-p64"></span>40. “And Thou hast girded me with
strength to the war” ([Psa. 18.39](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#039.md)<span
id="ii.XVIII-p64.1"></span>). And the loose desires of my flesh hast
Thou bound up with strength, that in such a fight I may not be
encumbered. “Thou hast supplanted under me them that rose up against
me.” Thou hast caused them to be deceived, who followed upon me, that
they should be brought under me, who desired to be over me.

<span id="ii.XVIII-p65"></span>41. “And thou hast given mine enemies the
back to me” ([Psa. 18.40](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#040.md)<span
id="ii.XVIII-p65.1"></span>). And thou hast turned mine enemies, and
hast made them to be a back to me, that is, to follow me. “And Thou hast
destroyed them that hate me.” But such other of them as have persisted
in hatred, Thou hast destroyed.

<span id="ii.XVIII-p66"></span>42. “They have cried out, and there was
none to save them” ([Psa. 18.41](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#041.md)<span
id="ii.XVIII-p66.1"></span>). For who can save them, whom Thou wouldest
not save? “To the Lord, and He did not hear them.” Nor did they cry out
to any chance one, but to the Lord: and He did not judge them worthy of
being heard, who depart not from their wickedness.

<span id="ii.XVIII-p67"></span>43. “And I will beat them as small as
dust before the face of the wind” ([Psa.
18.42](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#042.md)<span
id="ii.XVIII-p67.1"></span>). And I will beat them small; for dry they
are, receiving not the shower of God’s mercy; that borne aloft and
puffed up with pride they may be hurried along from firm and unshaken
hope, and as it were from the earth’s solidity and stability. “As the
clay of the streets I will destroy them.” In their wanton and loose
course along the broad ways of perdition, which many walk, will I
destroy them.

<span id="ii.XVIII-p68"></span><span id="page_54">p. 54</span> <span
id="ii.XVIII-Page_54"></span>44. “Thou wilt deliver Me from the
contradictions of the people” ([Psa.
18.43](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#043.md)<span
id="ii.XVIII-p68.1"></span>). Thou wilt deliver Me from the
contradictions of them who said, “If we send Him away, all the world
will go after Him.” <span id="fr_543"></span>[544](#fn_543.md)

<span id="ii.XVIII-p70"></span>45. “Thou shalt make Me the head of the
Gentiles. A people whom I have not known have served Me.” The people of
the Gentiles, whom in bodily presence I have not visited, have served
Me. “At the hearing of the ear they have obeyed Me” ([Psa.
18.44](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#044.md)<span
id="ii.XVIII-p70.1"></span>). They have not seen Me with the eye: but,
receiving my preachers, at the hearing of the ear they have obeyed Me.

<span id="ii.XVIII-p71"></span>46. “The strange children have lied unto
Me.” Children, not to be called Mine, but rather strange children, to
whom it is rightly said, “Ye are of your father the devil,” <span
id="fr_544"></span>[545](#fn_544.md) have lied unto Me. “The strange
children have waxen old” ([Psa.
18.45](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#045.md)<span
id="ii.XVIII-p72.2"></span>). The strange children, to whom for their
renovation I brought the new Testament, have remained in the old man.
“And they have halted from their own paths.” And like those that are
weak in one foot, for holding the old they have rejected the new
Testament, they have become halt, even in their old Law, rather
following their own traditions, than God’s. For they brought frivolous
charges of unwashen hands, <span id="fr_545"></span>[546](#fn_545.md)
because such were the paths, which themselves had made and worn by long
use, in wandering from the ways of God’s commands.

<span id="ii.XVIII-p74"></span>47. “The Lord liveth, and blessed be my
God.” “But to be carnally minded is death:” <span
id="fr_546"></span>[547](#fn_546.md) for “the Lord liveth, and blessed be
my God. And let the God of my salvation be exalted” ([Psa.
18.46](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#046.md)<span
id="ii.XVIII-p75.2"></span>). And let me not think after an earthly
fashion of the God of my salvation; nor look from Him for this earthly
salvation, but that on high.

<span id="ii.XVIII-p76"></span>48. “O God, who givest Me vengeance, and
subduest the people under Me” ([Psa.
18.47](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#047.md)<span
id="ii.XVIII-p76.1"></span>). O God, who avengest Me by subduing the
people under Me. “My Deliverer from My angry enemies:” the Jews crying
out, “Crucify Him, Crucify Him.” <span id="fr_547"></span>[548](#fn_547.md)

<span id="ii.XVIII-p78"></span>49. “From them that rise up against Me
Thou wilt exalt Me” ([Psa. 18.48](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#048.md)<span
id="ii.XVIII-p78.1"></span>). From the Jews that rise up against Me in
My passion, Thou wilt exalt Me in My resurrection. “From the unjust man
Thou wilt deliver Me.” From their unjust rule Thou wilt deliver Me.

<span id="ii.XVIII-p79"></span>50. “For this cause will I confess to
Thee among the Gentiles, O Lord” ([Psa.
18.49](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#049.md)<span
id="ii.XVIII-p79.1"></span>). For this cause shall the Gentiles confess
to Thee through Me, O Lord. “And I will sing unto Thy Name.” And Thou
shalt be more widely known by My good deeds.

<span id="ii.XVIII-p80"></span>51. “Magnifying the salvation of His
King” ([Psa. 18.50](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#050.md)<span
id="ii.XVIII-p80.1"></span>). God, who magnifieth, so as to make
wonderful, the salvation, which His Son giveth to believers. <span
id="fr_548"></span>[549](#fn_548.md) “And showing mercy to His Christ:”
God, who showeth mercy to His Christ: “To David and to His seed for
evermore:” to the Deliverer Himself strong of hand, who hath overcome
this world; and to them whom, as believers in the Gospel, He hath
begotten for evermore. What things soever are spoken in this Psalm which
cannot apply to the Lord Himself personally, that is to the Head of the
Church, must be referred to the Church. For whole Christ speaks here, in
whom are all His members.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_521"></span>[50:522](1080022.htm#fr_521.md) <span
id="ii.XVIII-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.XVIII-p2"></span> Lat. XVII.

<span id="fn_522"></span>[50:523](1080022.htm#fr_522.md) <span
id="ii.XVIII-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XVIII-p5"></span> *Secundum Hominem*.

<span id="fn_523"></span>[50:524](1080022.htm#fr_523.md) <span
id="ii.XVIII-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XVIII-p6"></span> [1 Sam. viii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#005.md)<span id="ii.XVIII-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_524"></span>[50:525](1080022.htm#fr_524.md) <span
id="ii.XVIII-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XVIII-p8"></span> \[[2 Sam.
xxii](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#000.md)<span
id="ii.XVIII-p8.1"></span>.—C.\]

<span id="fn_525"></span>[51:526](1080022.htm#fr_525.md) <span
id="ii.XVIII-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XVIII-p12"></span> Or, “crowds.”

<span id="fn_526"></span>[51:527](1080022.htm#fr_526.md) <span
id="ii.XVIII-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XVIII-p19"></span> [Rom. xiii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#010.md)<span id="ii.XVIII-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_527"></span>[51:528](1080022.htm#fr_527.md) <span
id="ii.XVIII-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XVIII-p21"></span> [2 Cor. v.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#007.md)<span id="ii.XVIII-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_528"></span>[51:529](1080022.htm#fr_528.md) <span
id="ii.XVIII-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XVIII-p22"></span> [Rom. viii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#025.md)<span id="ii.XVIII-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_529"></span>[51:530](1080022.htm#fr_529.md) <span
id="ii.XVIII-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XVIII-p24"></span> Read “full lightning-charged reproofs.”

<span id="fn_530"></span>[51:531](1080022.htm#fr_530.md) <span
id="ii.XVIII-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XVIII-p25"></span> *Fulguratæ*.

<span id="fn_531"></span>[52:532](1080022.htm#fr_531.md) <span
id="ii.XVIII-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XVIII-p28"></span> [2 Cor. ii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#016.md)<span id="ii.XVIII-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_532"></span>[52:533](1080022.htm#fr_532.md) <span
id="ii.XVIII-p29.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XVIII-p30"></span> [John iv.
14](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#014.md)<span id="ii.XVIII-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_533"></span>[52:534](1080022.htm#fr_533.md) <span
id="ii.XVIII-p30.3"></span>

<span id="ii.XVIII-p31"></span> [Luke x.
9](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#009.md)<span id="ii.XVIII-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_534"></span>[52:535](1080022.htm#fr_534.md) <span
id="ii.XVIII-p31.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XVIII-p32"></span> [Luke xiii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#005.md)<span id="ii.XVIII-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_535"></span>[52:536](1080022.htm#fr_535.md) <span
id="ii.XVIII-p33.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XVIII-p34"></span> [Eph. v.
27](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#027.md)<span id="ii.XVIII-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_536"></span>[52:537](1080022.htm#fr_536.md) <span
id="ii.XVIII-p40.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XVIII-p41"></span> Oxford <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.XVIII-p41.1"></span>mss</span>. “are always.”

<span id="fn_537"></span>[52:538](1080022.htm#fr_537.md) <span
id="ii.XVIII-p43.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XVIII-p44"></span> [2 Cor. iv.
18](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#018.md)<span id="ii.XVIII-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_538"></span>[52:539](1080022.htm#fr_538.md) <span
id="ii.XVIII-p45.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XVIII-p46"></span> [Prov. v.
22](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#022.md)<span id="ii.XVIII-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_539"></span>[52:540](1080022.htm#fr_539.md) <span
id="ii.XVIII-p47.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XVIII-p48"></span> [Ezek. xviii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#025.md)<span id="ii.XVIII-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_540"></span>[52:541](1080022.htm#fr_540.md) <span
id="ii.XVIII-p49.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XVIII-p50"></span> [Rom. x.
3](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#003.md)<span id="ii.XVIII-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_541"></span>[53:542](1080022.htm#fr_541.md) <span
id="ii.XVIII-p56.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XVIII-p57"></span> [Eph. iii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#019.md)<span id="ii.XVIII-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_542"></span>[53:543](1080022.htm#fr_542.md) <span
id="ii.XVIII-p62.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XVIII-p63"></span> See p. 37. “The foot of sinners; that
is, their love.”

<span id="fn_543"></span>[54:544](1080022.htm#fr_543.md) <span
id="ii.XVIII-p68.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XVIII-p69"></span> [John
11:48](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#048.md), [John
12:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#019.md)<span
id="ii.XVIII-p69.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_544"></span>[54:545](1080022.htm#fr_544.md) <span
id="ii.XVIII-p71.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XVIII-p72"></span> [John viii.
44](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#044.md)<span id="ii.XVIII-p72.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_545"></span>[54:546](1080022.htm#fr_545.md) <span
id="ii.XVIII-p72.3"></span>

<span id="ii.XVIII-p73"></span> [Matt. xv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#002.md)<span id="ii.XVIII-p73.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_546"></span>[54:547](1080022.htm#fr_546.md) <span
id="ii.XVIII-p74.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XVIII-p75"></span> [Rom. viii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#006.md)<span id="ii.XVIII-p75.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_547"></span>[54:548](1080022.htm#fr_547.md) <span
id="ii.XVIII-p76.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XVIII-p77"></span> [John xix.
6](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#006.md)<span id="ii.XVIII-p77.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_548"></span>[54:549](1080022.htm#fr_548.md) <span
id="ii.XVIII-p80.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XVIII-p81"></span> \[The epigraph of this Psalm in [2 Sam.
23:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#001.md), [Isa.
55:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#003.md), [Acts
13:34](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#034.md)<span
id="ii.XVIII-p81.1"></span>.—C.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm XIX](1080023.md)
