[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080042)  [Next](1080044.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.XXXVII.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVII.2-p1"></span> *On the Second Part of the
Psalm.* <span id="fr_872"></span>[873](#fn_872.md)

<span id="ii.XXXVII.2-p3"></span>1. Then follow these words: “The wicked
plotteth against the just, and gnasheth upon him with his teeth” ([Psa.
37.12](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#012.md)<span
id="ii.XXXVII.2-p3.1"></span>): “But the Lord shall laugh at him” ([Psa.
37.13](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#013.md)<span
id="ii.XXXVII.2-p3.2"></span>). At whom? Surely at the sinner, “gnashing
upon” the other “with his teeth.” But wherefore shall the Lord “laugh at
him”? “For He foreseeth that his day is coming.” He seems indeed full of
wrath, while, ignorant of the morrow that is in store for him, he is
threatening the just. But the Lord beholds and “foresees his day.” “What
day?” That in which “He will render to every man according to his
works.” For he is “treasuring up unto himself wrath against the day of
wrath, and revelation of the just judgment of God.” <span
id="fr_873"></span>[874](#fn_873.md) But it is the Lord that foresees it;
thou dost not foresee it. It hath been revealed to thee by Him who
foresees it. Thou didst not know of the “day of the unrighteous,” in
which he is to suffer punishment. But He who knows it hath revealed it
to thee. It is a main part of knowledge to join thyself to Him who hath
knowledge. He hath the eyes of knowledge: have thou the eyes of a
believing mind. That which God “sees,” be thou willing to believe. For
the day of the unjust, which God foresees, will come. What day is that?
The day for all vengeance! For it is necessary that vengeance should be
taken upon the ungodly, that vengeance be taken upon the unjust, whether
he turn, or whether he turn not. For if he shall turn from his ways,
that very thing, that his “injustice is come to an end,” is the
infliction of vengeance.…

<span id="ii.XXXVII.2-p5"></span>2. “The wicked have drawn out the
sword, and have bent their bow, to cast down the poor and needy, and to
slay such as be of upright heart” ([Psa.
37.14](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#014.md)<span
id="ii.XXXVII.2-p5.1"></span>). “Their weapon shall enter into their own
heart” ([Psa. 37.15](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#015.md)<span
id="ii.XXXVII.2-p5.2"></span>). It is an easy thing for his weapon, that
is, his sword, to reach thy body, even as the sword of the persecutors
reached the body of the Martyrs, but when the body had been smitten,
“the heart” remained unhurt; but his heart who “drew out the sword <span
id="page_95">p. 95</span> <span id="ii.XXXVII.2-Page_95"></span>against”
the body of the just did not clearly remain unhurt. This is attested by
this very Psalm. It saith, Their weapon, that is, “Their sword shall,”
not go into their body, but, “their weapon shall go into their own
heart.” They would fain have slain him in the body. Let them die the
death of the soul. For those whose bodies they sought to kill, the Lord
hath freed from anxiety, saying, “Fear not them who kill the body, but
cannot kill the soul.” <span id="fr_874"></span>[875](#fn_874.md) …

<span id="ii.XXXVII.2-p7"></span>3. “And their bows shall be broken.”
What is meant by, “And their bows shall be broken”? Their plots shall be
frustrated. For above He had said, “The wicked have drawn out the sword
and bent their bows.” By the “drawing out of the sword” he would have
understood open hostility; but by the“ bending of the bow,” secret
conspiracies. See! His sword destroys himself, and his laying of snares
is frustrated. What is meant by frustrated? That it does no mischief to
the righteous. How then, for instance (you ask), did it do no mischief
to the man, whom it thus stripped of his goods, whom it reduced to
straitened circumstances by taking away his possessions? He has still
cause to sing, “A little that a righteous man hath, is better than great
riches of the ungodly” ([Psa.
37.16](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#016.md)<span
id="ii.XXXVII.2-p7.1"></span>).

<span id="ii.XXXVII.2-p8"></span>4. …“For the arms of the wicked shall
be broken” ([Psa. 37.17](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#017.md)<span
id="ii.XXXVII.2-p8.1"></span>). Now by “their arms” is meant their
power. What will he do in hell? Will it be what the rich man had to do,
he who was wont “to fare sumptuously” in the upper world, and in hell
“was tormented”? <span id="fr_875"></span>[876](#fn_875.md) Therefore their
arms shall be broken; “but the Lord upholdeth the righteous.” How does
He “uphold” them? What saith He unto them? Even what is said in another
Psalm, “Wait on the Lord, be of good courage; and let thine heart be
strengthened. Wait, I say, on the Lord.” <span
id="fr_876"></span>[877](#fn_876.md) What is meant by this, “Wait on the
Lord”? Thou sufferest but for a time; thou shalt rest for ever: thy
trouble is short; thy happiness is to be everlasting. It is but for “a
little while” thou art to sorrow; thy joy shall have no end. But in the
midst of trouble does thy “foot” begin to “slip”? The example even of
Christ’s sufferings is set before thee. Consider what He endured for
thee, in whom no cause was found why He should endure it? How great
soever be thy sufferings, thou wilt not come to those insults, those
scourgings, to that robe of shame, to that crown of thorns, and last of
all to that Cross, which He endured; because that is now removed from
the number of human punishments. <span id="fr_877"></span>[878](#fn_877.md)
For though under the ancients criminals were crucified, in the present
day no one is crucified. It was honoured, and it came to an end. It came
to an end as a punishment; it is continued in glory. It hath removed
from the place of execution to the foreheads of Emperors. He who hath
invested His very sufferings with such honour, what doth He reserve for
His faithful servants?…

<span id="ii.XXXVII.2-p12"></span>5. But observe whether that was
fulfilled in his case which the Psalm now speaks of. “The Lord
strengtheneth the righteous.—Not only so” (saith that same Paul, whilst
suffering many evils), “but we glory in tribulations also: knowing that
tribulation worketh patience, and patience experience; and experience
hope; but hope maketh not ashamed, because the love of God is shed
abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost, which is given unto us.”  <span
id="fr_878"></span>[879](#fn_878.md) Justly is it said by him, now
righteous, now “strengthened.” As therefore those who persecuted him did
no harm to him, when now “strengthened,” so neither did he himself do
any harm to those whom he persecuted. “But the Lord,” he saith,
“strengtheneth the righteous.”…

<span id="ii.XXXVII.2-p14"></span>6. Therefore “the Lord does strengthen
the righteous.” In what way does He strengthen them? “The Lord knoweth
the ways <span id="fr_879"></span>[880](#fn_879.md) of the spotless ones”
([Psa. 37.18](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#018.md)<span
id="ii.XXXVII.2-p15.1"></span>). When they suffer ills, they are
believed to be walking ill ways by those who are ignorant, by those who
have not knowledge to discern “the ways of the spotless ones.” He who
“knoweth those ways,” knoweth by what way to lead His own, “them that
are gentle,” in the right way. Whence in another Psalm he said, “The
meek shall He guide in judgment; them that are gentle will He teach His
way.” <span id="fr_880"></span>[881](#fn_880.md) How, think you, was that
beggar, who lay covered with sores before the rich man’s door, <span
id="fr_881"></span>[882](#fn_881.md) spurned by the passers by! How did
they, probably, close their nostrils and spit at him! The Lord, however,
knew how to reserve <span id="fr_882"></span>[883](#fn_882.md) Paradise for
him. How did they, on the other hand, desire for themselves the life of
him who was “clad in purple and fine linen, and fared sumptuously every
day!” <span id="fr_883"></span>[884](#fn_883.md) But the Lord, who foresaw
that man’s “day coming,” knew the torments, the torments without end,
that were in store for him. Therefore “The Lord knoweth the ways of the
upright.”

<span id="ii.XXXVII.2-p20"></span>7. “And their inheritance shall be for
ever” ([Psa. 37.18](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#018.md)<span
id="ii.XXXVII.2-p20.1"></span>). This we hold by faith. Doth the Lord
too know it by faith? The Lord knoweth those things with as clear a
manifestation, as we cannot speak of even when we shall be made equal to
the Angels. For the things that shall be manifest to us, shall not be
equally manifest to us as they are now to Him, who is incapable of
change. Yet even of us ourselves what is <span id="page_96">p. 96</span>
<span id="ii.XXXVII.2-Page_96"></span>said? “Beloved, now are we the
sons of God: and it doth not yet appear what we shall be: but we know
that, when He shall appear, we shall be like Him, for we shall see Him
as He is.” <span id="fr_884"></span>[885](#fn_884.md) There is therefore
surely some blissful vision reserved for us; and if it can be now in
some measure conceived, “darkly and through a glass,” <span
id="fr_885"></span>[886](#fn_885.md) yet cannot we in any way express in
language the ravishing beauty of that bliss, which God reserves for them
that fear Him, which He consummates in those that hope in Him. It is for
that destination that our hearts are being disciplined in all the
troubles and trials of this life. Wonder not that it is in trouble that
thou art disciplined for it. It is for something glorious that thou art
being disciplined. Whence comes that speech of the now strengthened
righteous man: “The sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be
compared to the glory which shall be revealed in us”? <span
id="fr_886"></span>[887](#fn_886.md) What is that promised glory to be, but
to be made equal to the Angels and to see God? How great a benefit doth
he bestow on the blind man, who makes his eyes sound so as to be able to
see the light of this life.…What reward then shall we give unto that
Physician who restores soundness to our inward eyes, to enable them to
see a certain eternal Light, which is Himself?…

<span id="ii.XXXVII.2-p24"></span>8. “They shall not be ashamed in the
evil time” ([Psa. 37.19](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#019.md)<span
id="ii.XXXVII.2-p24.1"></span>). In the day of trouble, in the day of
distress, they shall not be “ashamed,” as he is ashamed whose hope
deceives him. Who is the man that is “ashamed”? He who saith, “I have
not found that which I was in hopes of.” Nor undeservedly either; for
thou didst hope it from thyself or from man, thy friend. But “cursed is
he that putteth his trust in man.” <span
id="fr_887"></span>[888](#fn_887.md) Thou art ashamed, because thy hope
hath deceived thee; thy hope that was set on a lie. For “every man is a
liar.” <span id="fr_888"></span>[889](#fn_888.md) But if thou dost place
thy hopes on thy God, thou art not made “ashamed.” For He in whom thou
hast put thy trust, cannot be deceived. <span
id="fr_889"></span>[890](#fn_889.md) Whence also the man whom we mentioned
just above, the now “strengthened” righteous man, when fallen on an evil
time, on the day of tribulation, what saith he to show that he was not
“ashamed”? “We glory in tribulation; knowing that tribulation worketh
patience, and patience experience, and experience hope; but hope maketh
not ashamed.” Whence is it that hope “maketh not ashamed”? Because it is
placed on God. Therefore follows immediately, “Because the love of God
is spread in our hearts by the Holy Spirit, which is given unto
us.” <span id="fr_890"></span>[891](#fn_890.md) The Holy Spirit hath been
given to us already: how should He deceive us, of whom we possess such
an “earnest” already? “They shall not be ashamed in the evil time, and
in the days of famine they shall be satisfied.”…

<span id="ii.XXXVII.2-p29"></span>9. “For the wicked shall perish. But
the enemies of the Lord, when they shall begin to glory, and to be
lifted up, immediately shall consume away utterly, even as the smoke”
([Psa. 37.20](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#020.md)<span
id="ii.XXXVII.2-p29.1"></span>). Recognise from the comparison itself
the thing which he intimates. Smoke, breaking forth from the place where
fire has been, rises up on high, and by the very act of rising up, it
swells into a large volume: but the larger that volume is, the more
unsubstantial does it become; for from that very largeness of volume,
which has no foundation or consistency, but is merely loose, shifting
and evanescent, it passes into air, and dissolves; so that you perceive
its very largeness to have been fatal to it. For the higher it ascends,
the farther it is extended, the wider the circumference which it spreads
itself over, the thinner, and the more rare and wasting and evanescent
does it become. “But the enemies of the Lord, when they shall begin to
glory, and to be lifted up, immediately shall consume away utterly even
as the smoke.” Of such as these was it said, “As Jannes and Jambres
withstood Moses, so do these also resist the Truth; men of corrupt
minds, reprobate concerning the faith.” <span
id="fr_891"></span>[892](#fn_891.md) But how is it that they resist the
Truth, except by the vain inflation of their swelling pride, while they
raise themselves up on high, as if great and righteous persons, though
on the point of passing away into empty air? But what saith he of them?
As if speaking of smoke, he says, “They shall proceed no farther, for
their folly shall be manifest unto all men, even as theirs also was.”…

<span id="ii.XXXVII.2-p31"></span>10. “The wicked borroweth, and payeth
not again” ([Psa. 37.20](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#020.md)<span
id="ii.XXXVII.2-p31.1"></span>). He receiveth, and will not repay. What
is it he will not repay? Thanksgiving. For what is it that God would
have of thee, what doth He require of thee, except that He may do thee
good? And how great are the benefits which the sinner hath received, and
which he will not repay! He hath received the gift of being; he hath
received the gift of being a man; and of a being highly distinguished
above the brutes; he hath received the form of a body, and the
distinction of the senses in the body, eyes for seeing, ears for
hearing, the nostrils for smelling, the palate for tasting, the hands
for touching, and the feet for walking; and even the very health and
soundness of the body. But up to this point we have these things in
common even with the brute; he hath received yet more than this; a mind
capable of understanding, capable of Truth, capable of distinguishing
right from wrong; capable of seeking after, of longing for, <span
id="page_97">p. 97</span> <span id="ii.XXXVII.2-Page_97"></span>its
Creator, of praising Him, and fixing itself upon Him. All this the
wicked man hath received as well as others; but by not living well, he
fails to repay that which he owes. Thus it is, “the wicked borroweth,
and payeth not again:” he will not requite Him from whom he hath
received; he will not return thanks; nay, he will even render evil for
good, blasphemies, murmuring against God, indignation. Thus it is that
he “borroweth, and payeth not again; but the righteous showeth mercy,
and lendeth” ([Psa. 37.21](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#021.md)<span
id="ii.XXXVII.2-p31.2"></span>). The one therefore hath nothing; the
other hath. See, on the one side, destitution: see, on the other,
wealth. The one receiveth and “payeth not again:” the “other showeth
mercy, and lendeth:” and he hath more than enough. What if he is poor?
Even so he is rich; do you but look at his riches with the eyes of
Religion. For thou lookest at the empty chest; but dost not look at the
conscience, that is full of God.…

<span id="ii.XXXVII.2-p32"></span>11. “For such as shall bless Him <span
id="fr_892"></span>[893](#fn_892.md) shall inherit the land” ([Psa.
37.23](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#023.md)<span
id="ii.XXXVII.2-p33.1"></span>), that is, <span
id="fr_893"></span>[894](#fn_893.md) they shall possess that righteous One:
the only One who both is truly righteous, and maketh righteous: who both
was poor in this world, and brought great riches to it, wherewith to
make those rich whom He found poor. For it is He who hath enriched the
hearts of the poor with the Holy Spirit; and having emptied out their
souls by confession of sins, hath filled them with the richness of
righteousness: He who was able to enrich the fisherman, who, by
forsaking his nets, spurned what he possessed already, but sought to
draw up what he possessed not. For “God hath chosen the weak things of
the world to confound the things which are mighty.” <span
id="fr_894"></span>[895](#fn_894.md) And it was not by an orator that He
gained to Himself the fisherman; but by the fisherman that He gained to
Himself the orator; by the fisherman that He gained the Senator; by the
fisherman that He gained the Emperor. For “such as shall bless Him shall
inherit the land;” they shall be fellow-heirs with Him, in that “land of
the living,” of which it is said in another Psalm, “Thou art my hope, my
portion in the land of the living.” <span
id="fr_895"></span>[896](#fn_895.md) …

<span id="ii.XXXVII.2-p37"></span>12. Observe what follows: “The steps
of a good man are ordered by the Lord; and he delighteth in His way”
([Psa. 37.23](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#023.md)<span
id="ii.XXXVII.2-p37.1"></span>). That man may himself “delight in the
Lord’s way,” his steps are ordered by the Lord Himself. For if the Lord
did not order the steps of man, so crooked are they naturally, that they
would always be going through crooked paths, and by pursuing crooked
ways, would be unable to return again. He however came, and called us,
and redeemed us, and shed His blood; He hath given this ransom; He hath
done this good, and suffered these evils. Consider Him in what He hath
done, He is God! Consider Him in what He hath suffered, He is Man! Who
is that God-Man? Hadst not thou, O man, forsaken God, God would not have
been made Man for thee! For that was too little for thee to requite, or
for Him to bestow, that He had made thee man; unless He Himself should
become Man for thee also. For it is He Himself that hath “ordered our
steps;” that we should “delight in His way.”…

<span id="ii.XXXVII.2-p38"></span>13. Now if man were to be through the
whole of his life in toil, and in sufferings, in pain, in tortures, in
prison, in scourgings, in hunger, and in thirst, every day and every
hour through the whole length of life, to the period of old age, yet the
whole life of man is but a few days. That labour being over, there is to
come the Eternal Kingdom; there is to come happiness without end; there
is to come equality with the Angels; there is to come Christ’s
inheritance, and Christ, our “joint Heir,” <span
id="fr_896"></span>[897](#fn_896.md) is to come. How great is the labour,
for which thou receivest so great a recompense? The Veterans who serve
in the wars, and move in the midst of wounds for so many years, enter
upon the military service from their youth, and quit it in old age: and
to obtain a few days of repose in their old age, when age itself begins
to weigh down those whom the wars do not break down, how great hardships
do they endure; what marches, what frosts, what burning suns; what
privations, what wounds, and what dangers! And while suffering all these
things, they fix their thoughts on nothing but those few days of repose
in old age, at which they know not whether they will ever arrive. Thus
it is, the “steps of a good man are ordered by the Lord, and he
delighteth in His way.” This is the point with which I commenced. If
thou dost “delight in the way” of Christ, and art truly a Christian (for
he is a Christian indeed who does not despise the way of Christ, but
“delighteth in” following Christ’s “way” through His sufferings), do not
thou go by any other way than that by which He Himself hath also gone.
It appears painful, but it is the very way of safety; another perhaps is
delightful, but it is full of robbers. “And he delighteth in His way.”

<span id="ii.XXXVII.2-p40"></span>14. “Though he fall, he shall not be
utterly cast down; for the <span id="page_98">p. 98</span> <span
id="ii.XXXVII.2-Page_98"></span>Lord upholdeth his hand” ([Psa.
37.24](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#024.md)<span
id="ii.XXXVII.2-p40.1"></span>). See what it is “to delight in” Christ’s
“way.” Should it happen that he suffers some tribulation; some
forfeiture of honour, some affliction, some loss, some contumely, or all
those other accidents incident to mankind frequently in this life, he
sets the Lord before him, what kind of trials He endured! and, “though
he fall he shall not be utterly cast down, for the Lord upholdeth his
hand,” because He has suffered before him. For what shouldest thou fear,
O man, whose steps are ordered so, that thou shouldest “delight in the
way of the Lord”? What shouldest thou fear? Pain? Christ was scourged.
Shouldest thou fear contumelies? He was reproached with, “Thou hast a
devil,” <span id="fr_897"></span>[898](#fn_897.md) who was Himself casting
out the devils. Haply thou fearest faction, and the conspiracy of the
wicked. Conspiracy was made against Him. Thou canst not make clear the
purity of thy conscience in some accusation, and sufferest wrong and
violence, because false witnesses are listened to against thee. False
witness was borne against Him first, not only before His death, but also
after His resurrection.…

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_872"></span>[94:873](1080043.htm#fr_872.md) <span
id="ii.XXXVII.2-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVII.2-p2"></span> Preached at another time.

<span id="fn_873"></span>[94:874](1080043.htm#fr_873.md) <span
id="ii.XXXVII.2-p3.3"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVII.2-p4"></span> [Rom.
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#006.md),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#005.md)<span id="ii.XXXVII.2-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_874"></span>[95:875](1080043.htm#fr_874.md) <span
id="ii.XXXVII.2-p5.3"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVII.2-p6"></span> [Matt. x.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#028.md)<span id="ii.XXXVII.2-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_875"></span>[95:876](1080043.htm#fr_875.md) <span
id="ii.XXXVII.2-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVII.2-p9"></span> [Luke
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#019.md),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#023.md)<span
id="ii.XXXVII.2-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_876"></span>[95:877](1080043.htm#fr_876.md) <span
id="ii.XXXVII.2-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVII.2-p10"></span> [Ps. xxvii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#014.md)<span
id="ii.XXXVII.2-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_877"></span>[95:878](1080043.htm#fr_877.md) <span
id="ii.XXXVII.2-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVII.2-p11"></span> \[Sozomen, b. i. cap. 8. This author
tells us that Constantine made this change, dictated alike by reverence
and humanity.—C.\]

<span id="fn_878"></span>[95:879](1080043.htm#fr_878.md) <span
id="ii.XXXVII.2-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVII.2-p13"></span> [Rom. v.
3-5](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#003.md)<span
id="ii.XXXVII.2-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_879"></span>[95:880](1080043.htm#fr_879.md) <span
id="ii.XXXVII.2-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVII.2-p15"></span> E.V. and Vulgate, “days.”

<span id="fn_880"></span>[95:881](1080043.htm#fr_880.md) <span
id="ii.XXXVII.2-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVII.2-p16"></span> [Ps. xxv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#009.md)<span id="ii.XXXVII.2-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_881"></span>[95:882](1080043.htm#fr_881.md) <span
id="ii.XXXVII.2-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVII.2-p17"></span> [Luke xvi.
20](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#020.md)<span
id="ii.XXXVII.2-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_882"></span>[95:883](1080043.htm#fr_882.md) <span
id="ii.XXXVII.2-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVII.2-p18"></span> *Al*. “knew that Paradise was in
store.”

<span id="fn_883"></span>[95:884](1080043.htm#fr_883.md) <span
id="ii.XXXVII.2-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVII.2-p19"></span> [Luke xvi.
19](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#019.md)<span
id="ii.XXXVII.2-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_884"></span>[96:885](1080043.htm#fr_884.md) <span
id="ii.XXXVII.2-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVII.2-p21"></span> [1 John iii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#002.md)<span id="ii.XXXVII.2-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_885"></span>[96:886](1080043.htm#fr_885.md) <span
id="ii.XXXVII.2-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVII.2-p22"></span> [1 Cor. xiii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#012.md)<span
id="ii.XXXVII.2-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_886"></span>[96:887](1080043.htm#fr_886.md) <span
id="ii.XXXVII.2-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVII.2-p23"></span> [Rom. viii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#018.md)<span
id="ii.XXXVII.2-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_887"></span>[96:888](1080043.htm#fr_887.md) <span
id="ii.XXXVII.2-p24.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVII.2-p25"></span> [Jer. xvii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#005.md)<span id="ii.XXXVII.2-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_888"></span>[96:889](1080043.htm#fr_888.md) <span
id="ii.XXXVII.2-p25.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVII.2-p26"></span> [Ps. cxvi.
11](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#011.md)<span
id="ii.XXXVII.2-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_889"></span>[96:890](1080043.htm#fr_889.md) <span
id="ii.XXXVII.2-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVII.2-p27"></span> *Al*. “deceive.”

<span id="fn_890"></span>[96:891](1080043.htm#fr_890.md) <span
id="ii.XXXVII.2-p27.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVII.2-p28"></span> [Rom. v.
3-5](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#003.md)<span
id="ii.XXXVII.2-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_891"></span>[96:892](1080043.htm#fr_891.md) <span
id="ii.XXXVII.2-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVII.2-p30"></span> [2 Tim. iii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#008.md)<span id="ii.XXXVII.2-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_892"></span>[97:893](1080043.htm#fr_892.md) <span
id="ii.XXXVII.2-p32.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVII.2-p33"></span> E.V. “such as be blessed.”

<span id="fn_893"></span>[97:894](1080043.htm#fr_893.md) <span
id="ii.XXXVII.2-p33.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVII.2-p34"></span> *Scilicet, Ben*. Conj. for *sicut*.

<span id="fn_894"></span>[97:895](1080043.htm#fr_894.md) <span
id="ii.XXXVII.2-p34.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVII.2-p35"></span> [1 Cor. i.
27](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#027.md)<span
id="ii.XXXVII.2-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_895"></span>[97:896](1080043.htm#fr_895.md) <span
id="ii.XXXVII.2-p35.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVII.2-p36"></span> [Ps. cxlii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#005.md)<span id="ii.XXXVII.2-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_896"></span>[97:897](1080043.htm#fr_896.md) <span
id="ii.XXXVII.2-p38.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVII.2-p39"></span> [Rom. viii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#017.md)<span
id="ii.XXXVII.2-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_897"></span>[98:898](1080043.htm#fr_897.md) <span
id="ii.XXXVII.2-p40.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVII.2-p41"></span> [John
7:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#020.md), [John
8:48](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#048.md)<span
id="ii.XXXVII.2-p41.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part 3](1080044.md)
