[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080128)  [Next](1080130) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.CXVIII"></span>

<span id="ii.CXVIII-p1"></span> <span id="ii.CXVIII-p1.1"></span><span
class="c20"><span id="ii.CXVIII-p1.2"></span>Psalm CXVIII. <span
id="fr_5099"></span>[5100](#fn_5099) </span>

<span id="ii.CXVIII-p3"></span>1. …We are taught in this Psalm, when we
chaunt Allelujah, which meaneth, Praise the Lord, that we should, when
we hear the words, “Confess unto the Lord” ([Psa.
118.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#001)<span
id="ii.CXVIII-p3.1"></span>), praise the Lord. The praise of God could
not be expressed in fewer words than these, “For He is good.” I see not
what can be more solemn than this brevity, since goodness is so
peculiarly the quality of God, that the Son of God Himself when
addressed by some one as “Good Master,” by one, namely, who beholding
His flesh, and comprehending not the fulness of His divine nature,
considered Him as man only, replied, “Why callest thou Me good? There is
none good but one, that is, God.” <span
id="fr_5100"></span>[5101](#fn_5100) And what is this but to say, If
thou wishest to call Me good, recognise Me as God? But since it is
addressed, in revelation of things to come, to a people freed from all
toil and wandering in pilgrimage, and from all admixture with the
wicked, which freedom was given it through the grace of God, who not
only doth not evil for evil, but even returneth good for evil; it is
most appropriately added, “Because His mercy endureth for ever.”

<span id="ii.CXVIII-p5"></span>2. “Let Israel now confess that He is
good, and that His mercy endureth for ever” ([Psa.
118.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#002)<span
id="ii.CXVIII-p5.1"></span>). “Let the house of Aaron now confess that
His mercy endureth for ever” ([Psa.
118.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#003)<span
id="ii.CXVIII-p5.2"></span>). “Yea, let all now that fear the Lord
confess that His mercy endureth for ever” ([Psa.
118.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#004)<span
id="ii.CXVIII-p5.3"></span>). Ye remember, I suppose, most beloved, what
is the house of Israel, what is the house of Aaron, and that both are
those that fear the Lord. For they are “the little and the great,” <span
id="fr_5101"></span>[5102](#fn_5101) who have already in another Psalm
been happily introduced into your hearts: in the number of whom all of
us should rejoice that we are joined together, in His grace who is good,
and whose mercy endureth for ever; since they were listened to who said,
“May the Lord increase you more and more, you and your children;” <span
id="fr_5102"></span>[5103](#fn_5102) that the host of the Gentiles might
be added to the Israelites who believed in Christ, of the number of whom
are the Apostles our fathers, for the exaltation of the perfect and the
obedience of the little children; that all of us when made one in
Christ, made one flock under one Shepherd, and the body of that Head,
like one man, may say, “I called upon the Lord in trouble, and the Lord
heard me at large” ([Psa. 118.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#005)<span
id="ii.CXVIII-p7.2"></span>). The narrow straits of our tribulation are
limited: but the large way whereby we pass along hath no end. “Who shall
lay anything to the charge of God’s elect?” <span
id="fr_5103"></span>[5104](#fn_5103)

<span id="ii.CXVIII-p9"></span>3. “The Lord is my helper; I will not
fear what man doeth unto me” ([Psa.
118.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#006)<span
id="ii.CXVIII-p9.1"></span>). But are men, then, the only enemies that
the Church hath? What is a man devoted to flesh and blood, save flesh
and blood? But the Apostle saith, “We wrestle not against flesh and
blood, but against,”…he saith, “spiritual wickedness in high
places;” <span id="fr_5104"></span>[5105](#fn_5104) that is, the devil
and his angels; that devil whom elsewhere he calleth “the prince of the
power of the air.” <span id="fr_5105"></span>[5106](#fn_5105) Hear
therefore what followeth: “The Lord is my helper: therefore shall I
despise mine enemies” ([Psa.
118.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#007)<span
id="ii.CXVIII-p11.2"></span>). From what class soever my enemies may
arise, whether from the number of evil men, or from the number of evil
angels; in the Lord’s help, unto whom we chant the confession of praise,
unto whom we sing Allelujah, they shall be despised.

<span id="ii.CXVIII-p12"></span>4. But, when my enemies have been
brought to contempt, let not my friend present himself unto me as a good
man, so as to bid me repose my hope in himself: for “It is better to
trust in the Lord, than to put any confidence in man” ([Psa.
118.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#008)<span
id="ii.CXVIII-p12.1"></span>). Nor let any one, who may in a certain
sense be styled a good angel, be regarded by myself as one in whom I
ought to put my trust: for “no one is good, save God alone;”  <span
id="fr_5106"></span>[5107](#fn_5106) and when a man or an angel appear
to aid us, when they do this of sincere affection, He doth it through
them, who made them good after their measure. “It is” therefore “better
to trust in the Lord, than to put any confidence in princes” ([Psa.
118.9](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#009)<span
id="ii.CXVIII-p13.2"></span>). For angels also are called princes, even
as we read in Daniel, “Michael, your prince.” <span
id="fr_5107"></span>[5108](#fn_5107)

<span id="ii.CXVIII-p15"></span>5. “All nations compassed me round
about, but in the Name of the Lord have I taken vengeance on them”
([Psa. 118.10](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#010)<span
id="ii.CXVIII-p15.1"></span>). “They kept me in on every side, they kept
me in, I say, on every side; but in the Name of the Lord have I taken
vengeance on them” ([Psa. 118.11](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#011)<span
id="ii.CXVIII-p15.2"></span>). He signifieth the toils and the victory
of the Church; but, as if the question were asked how she could have
overcome so great evils, he look<span id="page_558">p. 558</span> <span
id="ii.CXVIII-Page_558"></span>eth back to the example, and declareth
what she had first suffered in her Head, by adding what followeth, “They
kept me in on every side:” and the words, “All nations,” are with reason
not repeated here, because this was the act of the Jews alone. There
that very religious nation (which is the body of Christ, and in behalf
of which was done all that was done in mortal form with immortal power,
by that inward divinity, through the outward flesh), suffered from
persecutors, of whose race that flesh was assumed and hung upon the
cross.

<span id="ii.CXVIII-p16"></span>6. “They came about me as bees do a
hive, and burned up even as the fire among the thorns: and in the Name
of the Lord have I taken vengeance on them” ([Psa.
118.12](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#012)<span
id="ii.CXVIII-p16.1"></span>). Here then the order of the words
corresponds with the order of events. For we rightly understand that our
Lord Himself, the Head of the Church, was surrounded by persecutors,
even as bees surround a hive. For the Holy Spirit is speaking with
mystic subtlety of what was done by those who knew not what they did.
For bees make honey in the hives: while our Lord’s persecutors,
unconscious as they were, rendered Him sweeter unto us even by His very
Passion; so that we may taste and see how sweet is the Lord, <span
id="fr_5108"></span>[5109](#fn_5108) “Who died for our sins, and arose
for our justification.” <span id="fr_5109"></span>[5110](#fn_5109) But
what followeth, “and burned up even as the fire among the thorns,” is
better understood of His Body, that is, of a people spread abroad, whom
all nations compassed about, since it was gathered together from all
nations. They consumed this sinful flesh, and the grievous piercings of
this mortal life, in the flame of persecution. “Taken vengeance on
them:” either because they themselves, that wickedness, which in them
persecuted the righteous, having been extinguished, were joined with the
people of Christ; or because the rest of them, who have at this time
scorned the mercy of Him who calleth them, will at the end feel the
truth of Him who judgeth them.

<span id="ii.CXVIII-p19"></span>7. “I have been driven on like a heap of
sand, so that I was falling, but the Lord upheld me” ([Psa.
118.13](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#013)<span
id="ii.CXVIII-p19.1"></span>). For though there were a great multitude
of believers, that might be compared to the countless sand, and brought
into one communion as into one heap; yet “what is man, save Thou be
mindful of Him?” <span id="fr_5110"></span>[5111](#fn_5110) He said not,
the multitude of the Gentiles could not surpass the abundance of my
host, but, “the Lord,” he saith, “hath upheld me.” The persecution of
the Gentiles succeeded not in pushing forward, to its overthrow, the
host of the faithful dwelling together in the unity of the faith.

<span id="ii.CXVIII-p21"></span>8. “The Lord is my strength and my
praise, and is become my salvation” ([Psa.
118.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#004)<span
id="ii.CXVIII-p21.1"></span>). Who then fall, when they are pushed, save
they who choose to be their own strength and their own praise? For no
man falleth in the contest, except he whose strength and praise faileth.
He therefore whose strength and praise is the Lord, falleth no more than
the Lord falleth. And for this reason He hath become their salvation;
not that He hath become anything which He was not before, but because
they, when they believed on Him, became what they were not before, and
then He began to be salvation unto them when turned towards Him, which
He was not to them when turned away from Himself.

<span id="ii.CXVIII-p22"></span>9. “The voice of joy and health is in
the dwellings of the righteous” ([Psa.
118.15](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#015)<span
id="ii.CXVIII-p22.1"></span>); where they who raged against their bodies
thought there was the voice of sorrow and destruction. For they did not
know the inward joy of the saints in their future hope. Whence the
Apostle also saith, “As sorrowful, yet alway rejoicing;” <span
id="fr_5111"></span>[5112](#fn_5111) and again, “And not only so, but we
glory in tribulations also.” <span id="fr_5112"></span>[5113](#fn_5112)

<span id="ii.CXVIII-p25"></span>10. “The right hand of the Lord hath
brought mighty things to pass” ([Psa.
118.16](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#016)<span
id="ii.CXVIII-p25.1"></span>). What mighty things? saith he. “The right
hand of the Lord,” he saith, “hath exalted me.” It is a mighty thing to
exalt the humble, to deify the mortal, to bring perfection out of
infirmity, glory from subjection, victory from suffering, to give help,
to raise from trouble; that the true salvation of God might be laid open
to the afflicted, and the salvation of men might remain of no avail to
the persecutors. These are great things: but what art thou surprised at?
hear what he repeateth: “The right hand of the Lord hath brought mighty
things to pass.”

<span id="ii.CXVIII-p26"></span>11. “I shall not die, but live, and
declare the works of the Lord” ([Psa.
118.17](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#017)<span
id="ii.CXVIII-p26.1"></span>). But they, while they were dealing havoc
and death on every side, thought that the Church of Christ was dying.
Behold, he now declareth the works of the Lord. Everywhere Christ is the
glory of the blessed Martyrs. By being beaten He conquered those who
struck Him; by being patient of torments, the tormentors; <span
id="fr_5113"></span>[5114](#fn_5113) by loving, those who raged against
Him.

<span id="ii.CXVIII-p28"></span>12. Nevertheless, let him point out to
us, why the body of Christ, the holy Church, the people of adoption,
suffered such indignities. “The Lord,” he saith, “hast chastened and
corrected me, but He hath not given me over unto death” ([Psa.
118.18](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#018)<span
id="ii.CXVIII-p28.1"></span>). Let not then the boastful wicked imagine
that aught hath been permitted to their power: they would not have that
power, were it not given them from above. Oft doth the father of a
family command his sons to be corrected by the most worthless slaves;
though he designeth the heritage for the former, fetters for the latter.
<span id="page_559">p. 559</span> <span
id="ii.CXVIII-Page_559"></span>What is that heritage? Is it of gold, or
silver, or jewels, or farms, or pleasant estates? Consider how we enter
into it: and learn what it is.

<span id="ii.CXVIII-p29"></span>13. “Open me,” he saith, “the gates of
righteousness” ([Psa. 118.19](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#019)<span
id="ii.CXVIII-p29.1"></span>). Behold, we have heard of the gates. What
is within? “That I may,” he saith, “go into them, and give thanks unto
the Lord.” This is the confession of praise full of wonder, “even unto
the house of God, in the voice of joy and confession of praise, among
such as keep holiday:” <span id="fr_5114"></span>[5115](#fn_5114) this
is the everlasting bliss of the righteous, whereby they are blessed who
dwell in the Lord’s house, praising Him for evermore. <span
id="fr_5115"></span>[5116](#fn_5115)

<span id="ii.CXVIII-p32"></span>14. But consider how the gates of
righteousness are entered into. “These are the gates of the Lord” he
saith, “the righteous shall enter into them” ([Psa.
118.20](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#020)<span
id="ii.CXVIII-p32.1"></span>). At least let no wicked man enter there,
that Jerusalem which receiveth not one uncircumcised, where it is said,
“Without are dogs.” <span id="fr_5116"></span>[5117](#fn_5116) Be it
enough, that in my long pilgrimage “I have had my habitation among the
tents of Kedar:” <span id="fr_5117"></span>[5118](#fn_5117) I endured
even unto the end the intercourse of the wicked, but “these are the
gates of the Lord: the righteous shall enter into them.”

<span id="ii.CXVIII-p35"></span>15. “I will confess unto Thee, O Lord,
for Thou hast heard me, and art become my salvation” ([Psa.
118.21](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#021)<span
id="ii.CXVIII-p35.1"></span>). How often is that confession proved to be
one of praise, that doth not point out wounds to the physician, but
giveth thanks for the health it hath received. But the Physician Himself
is the Salvation.

<span id="ii.CXVIII-p36"></span>16. But who is this whom we speak of?
“The Stone which the builders rejected” ([Psa.
118.22](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#022)<span
id="ii.CXVIII-p36.1"></span>); for “It hath become the head Stone of the
corner” to “make in Himself of twain one new man, so making peace; and
that He might reconcile both unto God in one body;” <span
id="fr_5118"></span>[5119](#fn_5118) circumcision, to wit, and
uncircumcision.

<span id="ii.CXVIII-p38"></span>17. “By the Lord was it made unto it”
([Psa. 118.23](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#023)<span
id="ii.CXVIII-p38.1"></span>): that is, it is made into the head stone
of the corner by the Lord. For although He would not have become this,
had He not suffered: yet He became not this through those from whom He
suffered. For they who were building, refused Him: but in the edifice
which the Lord was secretly raising, that was made the head stone of the
corner which they rejected. “And it is marvellous in our eyes:” in the
eyes of the inner man, in the eyes of those that believe, those that
hope, those that love; not in the carnal eyes of those who, through
scorning Him as if He were a man, rejected Him.

<span id="ii.CXVIII-p39"></span>18. “This is the day which the Lord hath
made” ([Psa. 118.24](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#024)<span
id="ii.CXVIII-p39.1"></span>). This man remembereth that he had said in
former Psalms, “Since He hath inclined His ear unto me, therefore will I
call upon Him as long as I live;” <span
id="fr_5119"></span>[5120](#fn_5119) making mention of his old days;
whence he now saith, “This is the day which the Lord hath made;” that
is, wherein He hath given me Salvation. This is the day whereof He said,
“In an acceptable time have I heard thee, and in a day of Salvation have
I helped thee;” <span id="fr_5120"></span>[5121](#fn_5120) that is, a
day wherein He, the Mediator, hath become the head Stone of the corner.
“Let us rejoice,” therefore, “and be glad in Him.”

<span id="ii.CXVIII-p42"></span>19. “Save me now, O Lord: prosper Thou
well my way, O Lord” ([Psa.
118.25](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#025)<span
id="ii.CXVIII-p42.1"></span>). Because it is the day of Salvation, “save
me:” because we, returning from a long pilgrimage, are separated from
those who hated peace, with whom we were peaceful, and who, when we
spoke to them, made war upon us without a cause; “prosper well our way”
as we return, since Thou hast become our Way.

<span id="ii.CXVIII-p43"></span>20. “Blessed be He that cometh in the
Name of the Lord” ([Psa. 118.26](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#026)<span
id="ii.CXVIII-p43.1"></span>). Cursed, therefore, is he that cometh in
his own name; as He saith in the Gospel: “if another shall come in his
own name, him ye will receive.” <span
id="fr_5121"></span>[5122](#fn_5121) “We have blessed you out of the
house of God.” I believe that these are the words of the great to the
little, of those great ones, to wit, who in spirit commune with God the
Word, who is with God, as they may in this life; and yet temper their
discourse for the sake of the little ones, so that they may sincerely
say what the Apostle saith: “For whether we be beside ourselves, it is
to God: or whether we be sober, it is for your cause. For the love of
Christ constraineth us.” <span id="fr_5122"></span>[5123](#fn_5122) They
bless the little children from the inner house of the Lord, where that
praise faileth not age after age: consider therefore what they proclaim
from thence. <span id="fr_5123"></span>[5124](#fn_5123)

<span id="ii.CXVIII-p47"></span>21. “God is the Lord, who hath showed us
light” ([Psa. 118.27](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#027)<span
id="ii.CXVIII-p47.1"></span>). That Lord, who came in the Lord’s Name,
whom the builders refused, and who became the head Stone of the
corner, <span id="fr_5124"></span>[5125](#fn_5124) that “Mediator
between God and man, Jesus Christ,” <span
id="fr_5125"></span>[5126](#fn_5125) is God, He is equal with the
Father, He hath showed us light, that we might understand what we
believed, and declare it to you who understand it not as yet, but
already believe it. But that ye also may understand, “Declare a holy day
in full assemblies, even unto the horns of the altar;” that is, even
unto the inner house of God, from which we have blessed you, where are
the high places of the altar. “Declare a holy day,” not in a slothful
manner, but “in full assemblies” ([Psa.
118.28](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#028)<span
id="ii.CXVIII-p49.2"></span>). For this is the voice of joyfulness among
those that keep holy day, who <span id="page_560">p. 560</span> <span
id="ii.CXVIII-Page_560"></span>walk “in the place of the wonderful
tabernacle, even unto the house of God.” <span
id="fr_5126"></span>[5127](#fn_5126) For if there be there the spiritual
sacrifice, the everlasting sacrifice of praise, both the Priest is
everlasting, and the peaceful mind of the righteous an everlasting
altar.…

<span id="ii.CXVIII-p51"></span>22. And what shall we sing there, save
His praises? What else shall we say there, save, “Thou art my God, and I
will confess unto Thee; Thou art my God, and I will praise Thee. I wilt
confess unto Thee, for Thou hast heard me, and art become my Salvation.”
We will not say these things in loud words; but the love that abideth in
Him of itself crieth out in these words, and these words are love
itself. Thus as he began with praise, so he endeth: “Confess unto the
Lord, for He is gracious, and His mercy endureth for ever” ([Psa.
118.29](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#029)<span
id="ii.CXVIII-p51.1"></span>). With this the Psalm commenceth, with this
it endeth; since, as from the commencement which we have left behind, so
in the end, whither we are returning, there is not anything that can
more profitably please us, than the praise of God, and Allelujah
evermore.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5099"></span>[557:5100](1080129.htm#fr_5099) <span
id="ii.CXVIII-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.CXVIII-p2"></span> Lat. CXVII.

<span id="fn_5100"></span>[557:5101](1080129.htm#fr_5100) <span
id="ii.CXVIII-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXVIII-p4"></span> [Mark
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#017),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#018)<span id="ii.CXVIII-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5101"></span>[557:5102](1080129.htm#fr_5101) <span
id="ii.CXVIII-p5.4"></span>

<span id="ii.CXVIII-p6"></span> [Ps.
15:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#013)<span id="ii.CXVIII-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5102"></span>[557:5103](1080129.htm#fr_5102) <span
id="ii.CXVIII-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXVIII-p7"></span> [Ps. cxv.
14](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#014)<span id="ii.CXVIII-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5103"></span>[557:5104](1080129.htm#fr_5103) <span
id="ii.CXVIII-p7.3"></span>

<span id="ii.CXVIII-p8"></span> [Rom. viii.
33](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#033)<span id="ii.CXVIII-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5104"></span>[557:5105](1080129.htm#fr_5104) <span
id="ii.CXVIII-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXVIII-p10"></span> [Eph. vi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#012)<span id="ii.CXVIII-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5105"></span>[557:5106](1080129.htm#fr_5105) <span
id="ii.CXVIII-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXVIII-p11"></span> [Eph. ii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#002)<span id="ii.CXVIII-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5106"></span>[557:5107](1080129.htm#fr_5106) <span
id="ii.CXVIII-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXVIII-p13"></span> [Mark x.
18](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#018)<span id="ii.CXVIII-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5107"></span>[557:5108](1080129.htm#fr_5107) <span
id="ii.CXVIII-p13.3"></span>

<span id="ii.CXVIII-p14"></span> [Dan. xii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#001)<span id="ii.CXVIII-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5108"></span>[558:5109](1080129.htm#fr_5108) <span
id="ii.CXVIII-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXVIII-p17"></span> [Ps. xxxiv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#008)<span id="ii.CXVIII-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5109"></span>[558:5110](1080129.htm#fr_5109) <span
id="ii.CXVIII-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXVIII-p18"></span> [Rom. iv.
25](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#025)<span id="ii.CXVIII-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5110"></span>[558:5111](1080129.htm#fr_5110) <span
id="ii.CXVIII-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXVIII-p20"></span> [Ps. viii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#004)<span id="ii.CXVIII-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5111"></span>[558:5112](1080129.htm#fr_5111) <span
id="ii.CXVIII-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXVIII-p23"></span> [2 Cor. vi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#010)<span id="ii.CXVIII-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5112"></span>[558:5113](1080129.htm#fr_5112) <span
id="ii.CXVIII-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXVIII-p24"></span> [Rom. v.
3](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#003)<span id="ii.CXVIII-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5113"></span>[558:5114](1080129.htm#fr_5113) <span
id="ii.CXVIII-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXVIII-p27"></span> <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.CXVIII-p27.1"></span>mss</span>. *facientes*. Edd. *impatientes*.

<span id="fn_5114"></span>[559:5115](1080129.htm#fr_5114) <span
id="ii.CXVIII-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXVIII-p30"></span> [Ps. xlii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#004)<span id="ii.CXVIII-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5115"></span>[559:5116](1080129.htm#fr_5115) <span
id="ii.CXVIII-p30.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXVIII-p31"></span> [Ps. lxxxiv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#004)<span id="ii.CXVIII-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5116"></span>[559:5117](1080129.htm#fr_5116) <span
id="ii.CXVIII-p32.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXVIII-p33"></span> [Rev. xxii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#015)<span id="ii.CXVIII-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5117"></span>[559:5118](1080129.htm#fr_5117) <span
id="ii.CXVIII-p33.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXVIII-p34"></span> [Ps. cxx.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#005)<span id="ii.CXVIII-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5118"></span>[559:5119](1080129.htm#fr_5118) <span
id="ii.CXVIII-p36.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXVIII-p37"></span> [Eph.
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#015),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#016)<span id="ii.CXVIII-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5119"></span>[559:5120](1080129.htm#fr_5119) <span
id="ii.CXVIII-p39.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXVIII-p40"></span> [Ps. cxiv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#002)<span id="ii.CXVIII-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5120"></span>[559:5121](1080129.htm#fr_5120) <span
id="ii.CXVIII-p40.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXVIII-p41"></span> [Isa. xlix.
8](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#008)<span id="ii.CXVIII-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5121"></span>[559:5122](1080129.htm#fr_5121) <span
id="ii.CXVIII-p43.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXVIII-p44"></span> [John v.
43](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#043)<span id="ii.CXVIII-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5122"></span>[559:5123](1080129.htm#fr_5122) <span
id="ii.CXVIII-p44.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXVIII-p45"></span> [2 Cor.
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#014)<span id="ii.CXVIII-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5123"></span>[559:5124](1080129.htm#fr_5123) <span
id="ii.CXVIII-p45.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXVIII-p46"></span> \[Contrary to all his habitual usage,
our author fails to note just here what is written in St. [Matt.
21:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#015),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#016)<span id="ii.CXVIII-p46.1"></span>,
concerning this Paschal Psalm, and the hosannas of children in the
temple.—C.\]

<span id="fn_5124"></span>[559:5125](1080129.htm#fr_5124) <span
id="ii.CXVIII-p47.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXVIII-p48"></span> [Matt.
21:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#009),
[42](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#042)<span id="ii.CXVIII-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5125"></span>[559:5126](1080129.htm#fr_5125) <span
id="ii.CXVIII-p48.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXVIII-p49"></span> [1 Tim. ii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#005)<span id="ii.CXVIII-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5126"></span>[560:5127](1080129.htm#fr_5126) <span
id="ii.CXVIII-p49.3"></span>

<span id="ii.CXVIII-p50"></span> [Ps. xlii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#004)<span id="ii.CXVIII-p50.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm CXIX](1080130)
