[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080104)  [Next](1080106) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.XCIV"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIV-p1"></span> <span id="ii.XCIV-p1.1"></span><span
class="c20"><span id="ii.XCIV-p1.2"></span>Psalm XCIV. <span
id="fr_4357"></span>[4358](#fn_4357) </span>

<span id="ii.XCIV-p3"></span>1. As we listened with much attention,
while the Psalm was in reading, so let us listen attentively, while the
Lord revealeth the mysteries which He hath deigned to obscure in this
passage. For some mysteries in the Scriptures are shut up for this
reason, not that they may be denied, but that they may be opened unto
those who knock. If therefore ye knock with affection of piety, and
sincere heartfelt love, He, who seeth from what motives ye knock, will
open unto you. <span id="fr_4358"></span>[4359](#fn_4358) It is known
unto all of us (and I wish we may not be among their number), that may
murmur against God’s long-suffering, and grieve either that impious and
wicked men live in this world, or that they have great power; and what
is more, that the bad generally have great power against the good, and
that the bad often oppress the good; that the wicked exult, while the
good suffer; the evil are proud, while the good are humbled. Observing
such things in the human race (for they abound), impatient and weak
minds are perverted, as if they were good in vain; since God averteth,
or seemeth to avert, His eyes from the good works of the pious and
faithful, and to promote the wicked in those pleasures which they love.
Weak men, therefore, imagining that they live well in vain, are induced
either to imitate the wickedness of those whom they see flourishing: or
if either through bodily or mental weakness they are deterred from doing
wrong by a fear of the penal laws of the world; not because they love
justice, but, to speak more openly, fearing the condemnation of men
among men, they refrain indeed from wicked deeds, but refrain not from
wicked thoughts. And among their wicked thoughts, the chief is the
wickedness which leadeth them impiously to imagine that God is
neglectful, and regardless of human affairs: and that He either holdeth
in equal estimation the good and the wicked: or even, and this is a
still more pernicious notion, that He persecuteth the good, and
favoureth the wicked. He who thinketh thus, although he doth no harm to
any man, doth the greatest to himself, and is impious against himself,
and by his wickedness hurteth not God, but slayeth himself.…

<span id="ii.XCIV-p5"></span>2. The Psalm hath this title, that is, this
inscription: “A Psalm of David himself, on the fourth day of the week.”
This Psalm is about to teach patience in the sufferings of the
righteous: it enjoineth patience against the prosperity of the wicked,
and buildeth up patience. This is the drift of the whole of it, from
beginning to end. Wherefore then hath it such a title, “on the fourth of
the week”? The first of the week is the Lord’s day: the second, is the
second week-day, which people of the world call the Moon’s day: the
third, is the third weekday, which they term Mars’ day. The fourth of
the Sabbaths therefore is the fourth week-day, which by Pagans is styled
Mercury’s day, and also by many Christians; but I would not call it so:
and I wish they would change for the better, and cease to do so; for
they have a phrase of their own, which they may use. For these terms are
not of universal use: many nations have severally different names for
them: so that the mode of speech used by the Church better beseemeth the
mouth of a Christian. <span id="fr_4359"></span>[4360](#fn_4359) Yet if
custom hath induced any person to utter that <span id="page_460">p.
460</span> <span id="ii.XCIV-Page_460"></span>with his tongue which his
heart doth disapprove, let him remember, that all those whose names the
stars bear were men, and that the stars did not commence their existence
in the sky, when those men began theirs, but were there long before; but
on account of some mortal services rendered unto mortals, those men in
their own times, because they had great power, and were eminent in this
life, since they were beloved by men, not on account of eternal life,
but of temporal services, received divine honours. For then men of the
old world, in being deceived and wishing to deceive, pointed to the
stars in heaven, to flatter those who had done them any good service in
their affection for this life, saying, that that was the star of such a
man, this of another; while the man who had not beheld them before, so
as to see that those stars were there before the birth of the man, were
deceived into a belief: and thus this vain opinion was conceived. This
erroneous opinion the devil strengthened, Christ overthrew. According to
our mode of speech, then, the fourth of the week is taken for the fourth
day from the Lord’s day. Attend, therefore, beloved, to what this title
meaneth. Here is a great mystery, and a truly hidden one.…Let us
therefore recall from the holy Scripture in Genesis, what was created on
the first day; we find light: what was created on the second day; we
find the firmament, which God called heaven: what was created on the
third day; we find the form of earth and sea, and their separation, that
all the gathering together of the waters was called sea, and all that
was dry, the earth. On the fourth day, the Lord made the lights in
heaven: <span id="fr_4360"></span>[4361](#fn_4360) “The sun to rule the
day: the moon and stars to govern the night:” <span
id="fr_4361"></span>[4362](#fn_4361) this was the work of the fourth
day. What then is the reason that the Psalm hath taken its title from
the fourth day: the Psalm in which patience is enjoined against the
prosperity of the wicked, and the sufferings of the good. Thou findest
the Apostle Paul speaking. “Do all things without murmurings and
disputings: that ye may be blameless and harmless, the sons of God,
without rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and perverse nation, among
whom ye shine as lights in the world, holding forth the word of
life.” <span id="fr_4362"></span>[4363](#fn_4362) …

<span id="ii.XCIV-p10"></span>3. Let us now attend to the Psalm. “The
Lord is the God of vengeance; the God of vengeance hath dealt
confidently” ([Psa. 94.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#001)<span
id="ii.XCIV-p10.1"></span>). Dost thou think that He doth not punish?
“The God of vengeance” punisheth. What is, “The God of vengeance”? The
God of punishments. Thou murmurest surely because the bad are not
punished: yet do not murmur, lest thou be among those who are punished.
That man hath committed a theft, and liveth: thou murmurest against God,
because he who committed a theft on thee dieth not.…Therefore, if thou
wouldest have another correct his hand, do thou first correct thy
tongue: thou wouldest have him correct his heart towards man, correct
thy heart towards God; lest perchance, when thou desirest the vengeance
of God, if it come, it find thee first. For He will come: He will come,
and will judge those who continue in their wickedness, ungrateful for
the prolongation of His mercy, for His long-suffering, treasuring up
unto themselves wrath against the day of wrath, and revelation of the
righteous judgment of God, who will render to every man according to his
deeds: <span id="fr_4363"></span>[4364](#fn_4363) because, “The Lord is
the God of vengeance,” therefore hath He “dealt confidently.”…Our safety
is our Saviour: in Him He would place the hope of all the needy and
poor. And what saith He? “I will deal confidently in Him.” What meaneth
this? He will not fear, will not spare the lusts and vices of men.
Truly, as a faithful physician, with the healing knife of preaching in
His hand, He hath cut away all our wounded parts. Therefore such as He
was prophesied and preached beforehand, such was He found.…How great
things then did He, of whom it is said, “He taught them as one having
authority,” say unto them? “Woe unto you, Scribes and Pharisees,
hypocrites!” <span id="fr_4364"></span>[4365](#fn_4364) What great
things did He say unto them, before their face? He feared no one. Why?
Because He is the God of vengeance. For this reason He spared them not
in words, that they might remain for Him after to spare them in
judgment; because if they were unwilling to accept the healing of His
word, they would afterwards incur their Judge’s doom. Wherefore? Because
He hath said, “The Lord is the God of vengeance, the God of vengeance
hath dealt confidently;” that is, He hath spared no man in word. He who
spared not in word when about to suffer, will He spare in judgment when
about to judge? He who in His humility feared no man, will He fear any
man in His glory? From His dealing thus confidently in time past,
imagine how He will deal at the end of time. Murmur not then against
God, who seemeth to spare the wicked; but be thou good, and perhaps for
a season He may not spare thee the rod, that He may in the end spare
thee in judgment.…

<span id="ii.XCIV-p13"></span>4. And what followed, because He dealt
confidently? “Be exalted, Thou Judge of the world” ([Psa.
94.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#002)<span id="ii.XCIV-p13.1"></span>).
Because they imprisoned Him when humble, thinkest thou they will
imprison Him when exalted? Because they judged Him when <span
id="page_461">p. 461</span> <span id="ii.XCIV-Page_461"></span>mortal,
will they not be judged by Him when immortal? What then saith He? “Be
exalted,” Thou, who hast dealt confidently, the confidence of whose word
the wicked bore not, but thought they did a glorious deed, when they
seized and crucified Thee; they who ought to have seized on Thee with
faith, seized Thee with persecution. Thou then who hast among the wicked
dealt confidently, and hast feared no man, because Thou hast suffered,
“be exalted;” that is, arise again, depart into heaven. Let the Church
also bear with long-suffering what the Church’s Head hath borne with
long-suffering. “Be exalted, Thou Judge of the world: and reward the
proud after their deserving.” He will reward them, brethren. For what is
this, “Be exalted, Thou Judge of the world: and reward the proud after
their deserving”? This is the prophecy of one who doth predict, not the
boldness of one who commandeth. Not because the Prophet said, “Be
exalted, Thou Judge of the world,” did Christ obey the Prophet, in
arising from the dead, and ascending into heaven; but because Christ was
to do this, the Prophet predicted it. He seeth Christ abased in the
spirit, abased he seeth Him: fearing no man, in speech sparing no man,
and he saith, “He hath dealt confidently.” He seeth how confidently He
hath dealt, he seeth Him arrested, crucified, humbled, he seeth Him
rising from the dead, and ascending into heaven, and from thence to come
in judgment of those, among whose hands He had suffered every evil: “Be
exalted,” he saith, “Thou Judge of the world, and reward the proud after
their deserving.” The proud He will thus reward, not the humble. Who are
the proud? Those to whom it is little to do evil: but they even defend
their own sins. For on some of those who crucified Christ, miracles were
afterwards performed, when out of the number of the Jews themselves
there were found believers, and the blood of Christ was given unto them.
Their hands were impious, and red with the blood of Christ. He whose
blood they had shed, Himself washed them. They who had persecuted His
mortal body which they had seen, became part of His very body, that is,
the Church. They shed their own ransom, that they might drink their own
ransom. For afterwards more were converted.…

<span id="ii.XCIV-p14"></span>5. “Lord, how long shall the ungodly, how
long shall the ungodly triumph?” ([Psa.
94.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#003)<span id="ii.XCIV-p14.1"></span>).
“They answer, and will speak wickedness, they all will speak that work
unrighteousness” ([Psa. 94.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#004)<span
id="ii.XCIV-p14.2"></span>). What is their saying, but against God, when
they say: What profiteth it us that we live thus? What wilt thou reply?
Doth God truly regard our deeds? For because they live, they imagine
that God knoweth not their actions. Behold, what evil happeneth unto
them! If the officers <span id="fr_4365"></span>[4366](#fn_4365) knew
where they were, they would arrest them; and they therefore avoid the
officer’s eyes, that they may escape instant apprehension; but no one
can escape the eye of God, since He not only seeth within the closet,
but within the recesses of the heart. Even they themselves believe that
nothing can escape God: and because they do evil, and are conscious of
what they have done, and see that they live while God knoweth, though
they would not live if the officer discovered them; they say unto
themselves, These things please God: and, in truth, if they displeased
Him, as they displease kings, as they displease judges, as they
displease governors, as they displease recorders, <span
id="fr_4366"></span>[4367](#fn_4366) yet could we escape the eye of God,
as we do escape the eyes of those authorities? Therefore these things
please God.…Some righteous man cometh, and saith, Do not commit
iniquity. Wherefore? That thou mayest not die. Behold, iniquity I have
committed: why do I not die? That man wrought righteousness: and he is
dead: why is he dead? I have wrought iniquity: why hath not God carried
me off? Behold, that man did righteously: and why hath He thus visited
him? why suffereth He thus? They answer; this is the meaning of the word
“answer:” for they have a reply to make; because they are spared, from
the long-suffering of God, they discover an argument for their reply. He
spareth them for one reason, they answer for another, because they still
live. For the Apostle telleth us wherefore He spareth, he expoundeth the
grounds of the long-suffering of God: “And thinkest thou this, O man,
that judgest them which do such things, and doest the same, that thou
shalt escape the judgment of God? Or despisest thou the riches of His
goodness, and forbearance, and long-suffering; not knowing that the
long-suffering of God leadeth thee to repentance?” “But thou,” that is,
he who answereth and saith, If I displeased God, He would not spare me,
hear what he worketh for himself; hear the Apostle; “but after thy
hardness and impenitent heart treasurest up into thyself wrath against
the day of wrath, and revelation of the righteous judgment of God; who
will render to every man according to his deeds.” <span
id="fr_4367"></span>[4368](#fn_4367) He therefore increaseth His
long-suffering, thou increasest thine iniquity. His treasure will
consist in eternal mercy towards those who have not despised His mercy;
but thy treasure will be discovered in wrath, and <span id="page_462">p.
462</span> <span id="ii.XCIV-Page_462"></span>what thou daily layest up
by little and little, thou wilt find in the accumulated mass; thou
layest up by the grain, but thou wilt find the whole heap. Omit not to
watch thy slightest daily sins: rivers are filled from the smallest
drops.

<span id="ii.XCIV-p18"></span>6. …“They have humbled Thy people, O Lord;
and have troubled Thine heritage” ([Psa.
94.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#005)<span id="ii.XCIV-p18.1"></span>).
“They have murdered the widow, and the fatherless: and slain the
proselyte” ([Psa. 94.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#006)<span
id="ii.XCIV-p18.2"></span>); that is, the traveller, the pilgrim: the
comer from far, as the Psalmist calleth himself. Each of these
expressions is too clear in meaning to make it worth while to dwell upon
them.

<span id="ii.XCIV-p19"></span>7. “And they have said, The Lord shall not
see” ([Psa. 94.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#007)<span
id="ii.XCIV-p19.1"></span>): He observeth not, regardeth not these
things: He careth for other matters, He understandeth not. These are the
two assertions of the wicked: one which I have just quoted, “These
things hast thou done, and I held my tongue, and thou thoughtest
unrighteousness, that I will be like thyself.” What meaneth, “that I
will be like thyself”? Thou thinkest that I see thy deeds, and that they
are pleasing unto Me, because I do not punish them. There is another
assertion of the wicked: because God neither regardeth these things, nor
observeth that He may know how I live, God heedeth me not. Doth then God
make any reckoning of me? or doth He even take account of me? or of men
in general? Unhappy man! He cared for thee, that thou mightest exist:
doth He not care that thou live well? Such then are the words of these
last; “and yet they have said, The Lord shall not see: neither shall the
God of Jacob regard it.”

<span id="ii.XCIV-p20"></span>8. “Take heed now, ye that are unwise
among the people: O ye fools, some time understand!” ([Psa.
94.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#008)<span id="ii.XCIV-p20.1"></span>).
He teacheth His people whose feet might slip: any one among them seeth
the prosperity of the wicked, himself living well among the Saints of
God, that is, among the number of the sons of the Church: he seeth that
the wicked flourish, and work iniquity, he envieth, and is led to follow
them in their actions; because he seeth that apparently it profiteth him
nothing that he liveth well in humility, hoping for his reward here. For
if he hopeth for it in future, he loseth it not; because the time is not
yet come for him to receive it. Thou art working in a vineyard: execute
thy task, and thou shalt receive thy pay. Thou wouldest not exact it
from thy employer, before thy work was finished, and yet dost thou exact
it from God before thou dost work? This patience is part of thy work,
and thy pay dependeth upon thy work: thou who dost not choose to be
patient, choosest to work less upon the vineyard: since this act of
patience belongeth to thy labouring itself, which is to gain thy pay.
But if thou art treacherous, take care, lest thou shouldest not only not
receive thy pay, but also suffer punishment, because thou hast chosen to
be a treacherous labourer. When such a labourer beginneth to do ill, he
watcheth his employer’s eyes, who hired him for his vineyard, that he
may loiter when his eye is turned away; but the moment his eyes are
turned towards him, he worketh diligently. But God, who hired thee,
averteth not His eyes: thou canst not work treacherously: the eyes of
thy Master are ever upon thee: seek an opportunity to deceive Him, and
loiter if thou canst. If then any of you had any such ideas, when ye saw
the wicked flourishing, and if such thoughts caused your feet to slip in
the path of God; to you this Psalm speaketh: but if perchance none of
you be such, through you it doth address others, in these words, “Take
heed now;” since they had said, “The Lord shall not see: neither shall
the God of Jacob regard it.” “Take heed,” it saith, “now, ye that are
unwise among the people: and ye fools, some time understand!” <span
id="fr_4368"></span>[4369](#fn_4368)

<span id="ii.XCIV-p22"></span>9. “He that planted the ear, shall He not
hear? or He that made the eye, doth He not consider?” ([Psa.
94.9](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#009)<span id="ii.XCIV-p22.1"></span>)
“or He that instructeth the nations, shall He not reprove?” ([Psa.
94.10](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#010)<span
id="ii.XCIV-p22.2"></span>). This is what God is at present doing: He is
instructing the nations: for this reason he sent His word to man
throughout the world: He sent it by Angels, by Patriarchs, by Prophets,
by servants, through so many heralds going before the Judge. He sent
also His own Word Himself, He sent His own Son in Person: He sent the
servants of His Son, and in these very servants His own Son. Throughout
the world is everywhere preached the word of God. Where is it not said
unto men, Abandon your former wickedness, and turn yourselves to right
paths? He spareth, that ye may correct yourselves: He punished not
yesterday, in order that to-day ye may live well. He teacheth the
heathen, shall He not therefore reprove? will He not hear those whom He
teacheth? will He not judge those to whom He hath beforehand sent and
sown lessons of warning? If thou wast in a school, wouldest thou receive
a task, and not repeat it? When therefore thou receivest it from thy
master, thou art being taught: the Master giveth thy task into thy
hands, and shall He not exact it from thee when thou comest to repeat
it? or when thou hast begun to repeat it, shalt thou not be in fear of
stripes? At present then we are receiving our work: afterwards we are
placed before the Master, that we may give up to Him all our past tasks,
that is, that we may give an account of all those things which are now
being bestowed upon us. Hear the Apostle’s words: “We must all appear
before the judgment-seat <span id="page_463">p. 463</span> <span
id="ii.XCIV-Page_463"></span>of Christ,” etc. <span
id="fr_4369"></span>[4370](#fn_4369) “It is He that teacheth man
knowledge.” Doth He not know, who maketh thee to know?

<span id="ii.XCIV-p24"></span>10. “The Lord knoweth the thoughts of man,
that they are but vain” ([Psa.
94.11](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#011)<span
id="ii.XCIV-p24.1"></span>). For although thou knowest not the thoughts
of God, that they are righteous; “He knoweth the thoughts of man, that
they are but vain.” Even men have known the thoughts of God: but those
to whom He hath become a friend, it is to them He showeth His counsel.
Do not, brethren, despise yourselves: if ye approach the Lord with
faith, ye hear the thoughts of God; these ye are now learning, this is
told you, and for this reason ye are taught, why God spareth the wicked
in this life, that ye may not murmur against God, who teacheth man
knowledge. “The Lord knoweth the thoughts of man, that they are but
vain.” Abandon therefore the thoughts of man, which are vain: that ye
may take hold on the thoughts of God, which are wise. But who is he who
taketh hold on the thoughts of God? He who is placed in the firmament of
heaven. We have already chanted that Psalm, and have expounded this
expression therein.

<span id="ii.XCIV-p25"></span>11. “Blessed is the man whom Thou
chastenest, O Lord: and teachest him from Thy law” ([Psa.
94.12](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#012)<span
id="ii.XCIV-p25.1"></span>). Behold, thou hast the counsel of God,
wherefore He spareth the wicked: the pit is being digged for the sinner.
Thou wishest to bury him at once: the pit is as yet being dug for him:
do not be in haste to bury him. What mean the words, “until the pit be
digged up for the sinner”? or whom doth He mean by sinner? One man? No.
Whom then? The whole race of such that are sinners? No; them that are
proud; for he had said before, “Reward the proud after their deserving.”
For that publican, who would not so much as lift up his eyes to heaven,
but “smote upon his breast, saying, God be merciful to me a
sinner,” <span id="fr_4370"></span>[4371](#fn_4370) was a sinner; but
since he was not proud, and since God will render a recompense to the
proud; the pit is being dug not for him, but for them that are such,
until He render a recompense to the proud. In the words then, “until the
pit be digged up for the ungodly,” understand the proud. Who is the
proud? He who doth not by confession of his sins do penance, that he may
be healed through his humility. Who is the proud? He who chooseth to
arrogate to himself those few good things which he seemeth to possess,
and who doth detract from the mercy of God. Who is the proud? He who
although he doth ascribe unto God his good works, yet insulteth those
who do not those good works, and raiseth himself above them.…This then
is the Christian doctrine: no man doeth anything well except by His
grace. A man’s bad acts are his own: his good he doth of God’s bounty.
When he hath begun to do well, let not him ascribe it unto himself: when
he hath not attributed it to himself, let him give thanks to Him from
whom he hath received it. But when he doeth well, let him not insult him
who doth not as he doth nor exalt himself above him: for the grace of
God is not stayed at him, so that it cannot reach another.

<span id="ii.XCIV-p27"></span>12. “That Thou mayest give him patience in
days of malice: until the pit be digged up for the ungodly” ([Psa.
94.13](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#013)<span
id="ii.XCIV-p27.1"></span>). Have patience therefore every one, if thou
art a Christian, in time of malice. Days of malice are those in which
the ungodly appear to flourish, and the righteous to suffer; but the
suffering of the righteous is the rod of the Father, and the prosperity
of the ungodly is their own snare. For because God giveth you patience
in time of adversity, until the pit be digged up for the ungodly, do not
think that the Angels are standing in some place with mattocks, and are
digging that great pit which shall be able to contain the whole race of
the ungodly; and because ye see that the wicked are many, and say unto
yourselves carnally: Truly what pit can contain so great a multitude of
the wicked, such a crowd of sinners? where is a pit of such dimensions,
as to contain all, dug? when finished? therefore God spareth them. This
is not so: their very prosperity is the pit of the wicked: for into that
shall they fall, as it were into a pitfall. Attend, brethren, for it is
a great thing to know that prosperity is called a pitfall: “until the
pit be digged up for the ungodly.” For God spareth him whom He knoweth
to be ungodly and impious, in His own hidden justice: and this very
sparing of God, causeth him to be puffed up through his impunity.…The
proud man raiseth himself up against God: God sinketh him: and he
sinketh by the very act of raising himself up against God. For in
another Psalm <span id="fr_4371"></span>[4372](#fn_4371) he thus saith,
“Thou hast cast them down, while they were being exalted.” He said not,
Thou hast cast them down, because they were exalted; or, Thou hast cast
them down, after they were exalted; so that the period of their
exaltation be one, of their casting down another: but in the very act of
their exaltation were they cast down. For in proportion as the heart of
man is proud, so doth it recede from God; and if it recede from God, it
sinketh down into the deep. On the other hand, the humble heart bringeth
God unto it from heaven, so that He becometh very near unto it. Surely
God is lofty, God is above all the heavens, He surpasseth all the
Angels: how high must these be raised, to reach that exalted One? Do not
burst thy<span id="page_464">p. 464</span> <span
id="ii.XCIV-Page_464"></span>self by enlarging thyself; I give thee
other advice, lest perchance in enlarging thyself thou burst, through
pride: surely God is lofty: do thou humble thyself, and He will descend
unto thee.

<span id="ii.XCIV-p29"></span>13. …Do thou rejoice beneath the scourge:
because the heritage is kept for thee, “for the Lord will not cast off
His people” ([Psa. 94.14](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#014)<span
id="ii.XCIV-p29.1"></span>). He chasteneth for a season, He condemneth
not for ever: the others He spareth for a season, and will condemn them
for evermore. Make thy choice: dost thou wish temporary suffering, or
eternal punishment? temporal happiness, or eternal life? What doth God
threaten? Eternal punishment. What doth He promise? Eternal rest. His
scourging the good, is temporary: His sparing the wicked, is also
temporary. “Neither will He forsake His inheritance.”

<span id="ii.XCIV-p30"></span>14. “Until righteousness,” he saith, “turn
again unto judgment, and all they that have it are right in heart”
([Psa. 94.15](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#015)<span
id="ii.XCIV-p30.1"></span>). Listen now, and gain righteousness: for
judgment thou canst not yet have. Thou shouldest gain righteousness
first; but that very righteousness of thine shall turn unto judgment.
The Apostles had righteousness here on earth, and bore with the wicked.
But what is said unto them? “Ye shall sit on twelve thrones, judging the
twelve tribes of Israel.” <span id="fr_4372"></span>[4373](#fn_4372)
Their righteousness therefore shall turn unto judgment. For whoever is
righteous in this life, is so for this reason, that he may endure evils
with patience: let him suffer patiently the period of suffering, and the
day of judging cometh. But why do I speak of the servants of God? The
Lord Himself, who is the Judge of all living and dead, first chose to be
judged, and then to judge. Those who have righteousness at present, are
not yet judges. For the first thing is to have righteousness, and
afterwards to judge: He first endureth the wicked, and afterwards
judgeth them. Let there be righteousness now: afterwards it shall turn
again unto judgment. And so long He endureth wicked men, as God doth
will, as long as God’s Church shall endure them, that she may be taught
through their wickedness. Nevertheless, God will not cast off His
people, “all such as have it are right in heart.” Who are those who are
right in heart? Those whose will is the will of God. He spareth sinners:
thou dost wish Him at once to destroy sinners. Thy heart is crooked and
thy will perverted, when thy will is one way and the will of God
another. God wisheth to spare sinners: thou dost not wish sinners
spared. God is of long-suffering to sinners: thou dost not wish to
endure sinners.…Wish not to bend the will of God to thy will, but rather
correct thy will to His. The will of God is like a rule: behold,
suppose, thou hast twisted the rule: whence canst thou be set straight?
But the rule itself continueth straight: for it is immutable. As long as
the rule is straight, thou hast whither to turn thyself, and straighten
thy perversity; thou hast a means of correcting what is crooked in thee.
But what do men will? It is not enough that their own will is crooked;
they even wish to make the will of God crooked according to their own
heart, that God may do what they themselves will, when they ought to do
that which God willeth.…

<span id="ii.XCIV-p32"></span>15. “Who will rise up for me against the
wicked? or who will take my part against the evil doers?” ([Psa.
94.16](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#016)<span
id="ii.XCIV-p32.1"></span>). Many persuade us to divers evils: the
serpent ceaseth not to whisper to thee to work iniquity: whichever way
thou shalt turn, if perchance thou hast done well, thou seekest to live
well with some one, and thou hardly findest any one; many wicked men
surround thee, for there are few grains of wheat, and much chaff. This
floor hath its grains of corn, but as yet they suffer. Therefore the
whole mass of the wheat, when separated from the chaff, will be great:
the grains are few, but when compared with the chaff, still many in
themselves. When therefore the wicked cry out on every side, and say,
Why livest thou thus? Art thou the only Christian? Why dost thou not do
what others also do? Why dost thou not frequent the theatres, as others
do? Why dost thou not use charms and amulets? Why dost thou not consult
astrologers and soothsayers, even as others do? And thou crossest <span
id="fr_4373"></span>[4374](#fn_4373) thyself, and sayest, I am
Christian, that thou mayest repel them, whosoever they are; but the
enemy presses on, urges his attacks; what is worse, by the example of
Christians he choketh Christians. They toil on, in the midst of heat:
the Christian soul suffereth tribulation: yet it hath power to conquer:
hath it such power of itself? For this reason remark what he saith. For
he answereth, What doth it profit me that I now find charms for myself,
and gain a few days? I depart hence from this life, and repair unto my
Lord, who shall send me into the flames; because I have preferred a few
days to life eternal, He shall send me into hell. What hell? That of the
eternal judgment of God. Is it really so (the enemy answereth), unless
indeed thou really believest that God careth how men live? And perhaps
it is not an acquaintance who speaketh thus to thee in the street, but
thy wife at home, or possibly the husband to the faithful and holy wife,
her deceiver. If it be the woman to her husband, she is as Eve unto him;
if as the husband unto the wife, he is as the devil unto her: either she
is herself as Eve unto thee, or thou art a serpent unto her. Sometimes
the father would incline his thoughts to his son, and findeth him
wicked, utterly depraved: he is in a fever of misery, he wavers, he
seeketh how to subdue <span id="page_465">p. 465</span> <span
id="ii.XCIV-Page_465"></span>him, he is almost drawn in, and consenteth:
but may God be <span id="fr_4374"></span>[4375](#fn_4374) near him.…

<span id="ii.XCIV-p35"></span>16. “If the Lord,” he saith, “had not
helped me: within a little my soul had dwelt in hell” ([Psa.
94.17](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#017)<span
id="ii.XCIV-p35.1"></span>). I had almost plunged into that pit which is
preparing for sinners: that is, my soul had dwelt in hell. Because he
already began to waver, and nearly to consent, he looked back unto the
Lord. Suppose, for example’s sake, he was insulted to tempt him to
iniquity. For sometimes the wicked flock together, and insult the good;
especially if they are more in number, and if they have taken him alone,
as there is often much chaff about one grain of wheat (though there will
not be when the heap hath been fanned); he is then taken among many
wicked ones, is insulted, and surrounded; they wish to place themselves
over him, they torment him and insult him for his very righteousness. A
great Apostle! say they; Thou hast flown into heaven, as Elias did! Men
do these things, so that sometime, when he listeneth to the tongue of
men, he is ashamed to be good among the wicked. Let him therefore resist
the evil; but not of his own strength, lest he become proud, and when he
wishes to escape the proud, himself increase their number.…

<span id="ii.XCIV-p36"></span>17. “If I said, My foot hath slipt; Thy
mercy, O Lord, held me up” ([Psa.
94.18](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#018)<span
id="ii.XCIV-p36.1"></span>). See how God loveth confession. Thy foot
hath slipt, and thou sayest not, my foot hath slipt; but thou sayest
thou art firm, when thou art slipping. The moment thou beginnest to slip
or waver, confess thou that slip, that thou mayest not bewail thy total
fall; that He may help, so that thy soul be not in hell. God loveth
confession, loveth humility. Thou hast slipped, as a man; God helpeth
thee, nevertheless: yet say, “My foot hath slipt.” Why dost thou slip,
and yet sayest, I am firm? “When I said, My foot hath slipt, Thy mercy,
O Lord, hath held me up.” Just as Peter presumed, but not in strength of
his own. The Lord was seen to walk upon the sea, trampling on the heads
of all the proud in this life. In walking upon the foaming waves, He
figured His own course when He trampleth on the heads of the proud. The
Church too doth trample upon them: for Peter is the Church Herself.
Nevertheless, Peter dared not by himself walk upon the waters; but what
said he? “Lord, if it be Thou, bid me come unto Thee on the
water.” <span id="fr_4375"></span>[4376](#fn_4375) He in His own power,
Peter by His order; “bid me,” he saith, “come unto Thee.” He answered,
“Come.” For the Church also trampleth on the heads of the proud; but
since it is the Church, and hath human weakness, that these words might
be fulfilled, “If I said, My foot hath slipt,” Peter tottered on the
sea, and cried out, “Lord, save me!” <span
id="fr_4376"></span>[4377](#fn_4376) and so what is here put, “If I
said, My foot hath slipt,” is put there, “Lord, I perish.” And what is
here, “Thy mercy, O Lord, hath held me up,” is there put, “And
immediately Jesus stretched forth His hand, saying, O thou of little
faith, wherefore didst thou doubt?” <span
id="fr_4377"></span>[4378](#fn_4377) It is wonderful how God proveth
men: our very dangers render Him who rescueth us sweeter unto us. For
see what followeth: because he said, “If I said, My foot hath slipt, Thy
mercy, O Lord, hath held me up.” The Lord hath become especially sweet
unto him, in rescuing him from danger; and thus speaking of this very
sweetness of the Lord, he exclaimeth and saith, “O Lord, in the
multitude of the sorrows that I had in my heart, Thy comforts have
refreshed my soul” ([Psa. 94.19](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#019)<span
id="ii.XCIV-p39.2"></span>). Many sorrows, but many consolations: bitter
wounds, and sweet remedies.

<span id="ii.XCIV-p40"></span>18. “Wilt Thou have anything to do with
the stool of iniquity, who makest sorrow in learning?” ([Psa.
94.20](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#020)<span
id="ii.XCIV-p40.1"></span>). He hath said this, No wicked man sitteth
with Thee, nor shalt Thou have anything to do with the stool of
iniquity. And he giveth an account whereof he understandeth this, “For
Thou makest sorrow in learning.” For from this, because Thou hast not
spared us, do I understand that Thou hast nothing to do with the stool
of iniquity. Thou hast this in the Epistle of the Apostle Peter, and for
this reason he hath adduced a testimony from the Scripture: “for the
time is come,” he saith, “that judgment must begin at the house of God;”
that is, the time is come for the judgment of those who belong to the
house of God. If sons are scourged, what must the most wicked slaves
expect? For which reason he added: “And if it first begin at us, what
shall the end be of them that obey not the Gospel of God?” To which he
added this testimony: “For if the righteous scarcely be saved, where
shall the ungodly and sinner appear?” <span
id="fr_4378"></span>[4379](#fn_4378) How then shall the wicked be with
Thee, if Thou dost not even spare Thy faithful, in order that Thou
mayest exercise and teach them? <span
id="fr_4379"></span>[4380](#fn_4379) But as He spareth them not, for
this reason, that He may teach them: he saith, “For Thou makest sorrow
in learning.” “Makest,” that is, formest: from whence comes the word
*figulus* (from *fingo*), and a potter’s vessel is called fictile: not
in the meaning of fiction, a falsehood, but of forming so as to give
anything being and some sort of form; as before he said, “He that
fabricated (*finxit*) the eye, shall He not see?”  <span
id="fr_4380"></span>[4381](#fn_4380) Is that, “fabricated the eye” a
falsehood? Nay, it is understood He fashioned the eye, made the eye. And
is He not a potter when He makes men <span id="page_466">p. 466</span>
<span id="ii.XCIV-Page_466"></span>frail, weak, earthly? Hear the
Apostle: “We have this treasure in earthen vessels.” <span
id="fr_4381"></span>[4382](#fn_4381) …Behold our Lord Himself, how He
showeth Himself a potter. <span id="fr_4382"></span>[4383](#fn_4382)
Because He had made man of clay, He anointed him with clay, for whom He
had not made eyes in the womb. And so when he saith, “Hast Thou anything
to do,” etc., he saith, out of grief makest learning for us, so that
grief itself becomes our instruction. How is sorrow our learning? When
He scourgeth thee who died for thee, and who doth not promise bliss in
this life, and who cannot deceive, and when He giveth not here what thou
seekest. What will He give? when will He give? how much will He give,
who giveth not here, who here teacheth, who maketh sorrow in learning?
Thy labour is here, and rest is promised thee. Thou takest thought that
thou hast toil here: but take thought what sort of rest He promiseth.
Canst thou conceive it? If thou couldest, thou wouldest see that thy
toil here is nothing toward an equivalent.…

<span id="ii.XCIV-p46"></span>19. Attend, brethren; it is for
sale. <span id="fr_4383"></span>[4384](#fn_4383) What I have is for
sale, saith God unto thee, buy it. What hath He for sale? I have rest
for sale; buy it by thy toil. Attend, that we may be in Christ’s name
brave Christians: the remainder of the Psalm is but a little, let us not
be weary. For how can he be strong in doing, who faileth in hearing? The
Lord will help us to expound unto you the remainder. Attend then: God
hath, as it were, proclaimed the kingdom of heaven for sale. Thou sayest
unto Him, What is its value? The price is toil: if He were to say, its
price is gold, it would not suffice to say this only, but thou wouldest
seek to know how much gold; for there is a mass of gold, and half an
ounce, and a pound, and the like. He said “price,” that thou mightest
not be at pains to inquire, how long thou shouldest find it. The price
of the commodity is toil: how much toil is it? Now seek how much thou
shouldest toil for it. Thou art not as yet told how great that toil is
doomed to be, or how much toil is required of thee: God saith this unto
thee, I show thee how great that rest will be; do thou judge with what
measure of toil it should be bought.

<span id="ii.XCIV-p48"></span>20. …He promised rest: suffer trouble. He
threateneth eternal fire; despise temporal pains: and while Christ doth
watch, let thy heart be calmed, that thou also mayest reach the harbour.
For He would not fail to prepare a harbour, who provided a vessel. “Hast
Thou anything to do with the stool of iniquity, Thou who makest sorrow
in learning?” He trieth us with the wicked, and by their persecution He
teacheth us. By means of the malice of the wicked the good is scourged,
through the slave the son is chastened: thus is learning taught by
sorrow. What God alloweth them power to do, that do wicked men, whom He
spareth for a season, do.

<span id="ii.XCIV-p49"></span>21. For what followeth? “They will be
captious against the soul of the righteous” ([Psa.
94.21](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#021)<span
id="ii.XCIV-p49.1"></span>). Why will they be captious? Because they can
find no true ground of accusation. For how were they captious against
our Lord? They made up false accusations, <span
id="fr_4384"></span>[4385](#fn_4384) because they could not find true
ones. “And will condemn the innocent blood.” Why all this taketh place,
he will show in the sequel.

<span id="ii.XCIV-p51"></span>22. “And the Lord is become my refuge”
([Psa. 94.22](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#022)<span
id="ii.XCIV-p51.1"></span>), he saith. Thou wouldest not seek such a
refuge, if thou wert not in danger: but thou hast therefore been in
danger, that thou mightest seek for it: for He teacheth us by sorrow. He
causeth me tribulation from the malice of the wicked: pricked with that
tribulation, I begin to seek a refuge which I had ceased to seek for in
that worldly prosperity. For who, that is always prosperous, and
rejoiceth in present hopes, findeth it easy to remember God? Let the
hope of this life give way, and the hope of God advance; that thou
mayest say, “And the Lord is become my refuge:” may I sorrow for this
end that the Lord may become my refuge! “And my God the help of my
hope.” For as yet the Lord is our hope, since as long as we are here, we
are in hope, and not in possession. But lest we fail in hope, there is
near us a provision to encourage us, and to mitigate those very evils
which we suffer. For it is not said in vain, “God is faithful, who will
not suffer you to be tempted above that ye are able: but will with the
temptation also make a way to escape, that ye may be able to bear
it:” <span id="fr_4385"></span>[4386](#fn_4385) who will so put us into
that furnace of tribulation, that the vessel may be hardened, but not
broken. “And the Lord is become my refuge: and my God the help of my
hope.” Why then did He seem to thee to be as it were unjust, in that He
spareth the evil? See then how the Psalm is now set right, and be thou
set right together with the Psalm: for, for this reason the Psalm
contained thy words. What words? “Lord, how long shall the ungodly, how
long shall the ungodly triumph?” <span
id="fr_4386"></span>[4387](#fn_4386) The Psalm just now used thy words:
use therefore thyself the Psalm’s words in thy turn.

<span id="ii.XCIV-p54"></span>23. “And the Lord shall recompense them
according to their works, and after their own malice; the Lord our God
shall destroy them” ([Psa. 94.23](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#023)<span
id="ii.XCIV-p54.1"></span>). The words, “after their own malice,” are
not said without meaning. I am benefited through them: and yet it is
said to be their malice, and not their benefits. For assuredly He trieth
us, scourgeth us, by means of the wicked. To prepare us for what doth
<span id="page_467">p. 467</span> <span id="ii.XCIV-Page_467"></span>He
scourge us? Confessedly for the kingdom of heaven. “For He scourgeth
every son whom He receiveth; for what son is he whom the father
chasteneth not?” <span id="fr_4387"></span>[4388](#fn_4387) and when God
doth this, He is teaching us in order to an eternal heritage: and this
learning He often giveth us by means of wicked men, through whom He
trieth and perfecteth our love, which He doth will to be extended even
to our enemies. <span id="fr_4388"></span>[4389](#fn_4388) …Thus also
they who persecuted the Martyrs, by persecuting them on earth, sent them
into heaven: knowingly they caused them the loss of the present life,
while unconsciously they were bestowing upon them the gain of a future
life: but, nevertheless, unto all who persevered in their wicked hatred
of the righteous, will God recompense after their own iniquities, and in
their own malice will He destroy them. For as the goodness of the
righteous is hurtful unto the wicked, so is the iniquity of the wicked
beneficial unto the righteous.…

<span id="ii.XCIV-p57"></span>24. Let therefore the righteous bear with
the ungodly; let the temporal suffering of the righteous bear with the
temporal impunity of the wicked; for “the just shall live by
faith.” <span id="fr_4389"></span>[4390](#fn_4389) For there is no
righteousness of man in this life except to live by faith, “which
worketh by love.” <span id="fr_4390"></span>[4391](#fn_4390) But if he
liveth by faith, let him believe both that he will himself inherit rest
after his present toil, and that they will suffer eternal torments after
their present exultation. And if faith worketh by love, let him love his
enemies also, and, as far as in him lies, have the will to profit them;
for thus he will prevent their injuring him when they have the will. And
whenever perchance they have received power to hurt and tyrannize; let
him lift his heart above, where no man hurteth him, well taught and
chastened in the law of God, that he may “have patience given him in the
days of adversity, until the pit be digged up for the ungodly.”…

<span id="ii.XCIV-p60"></span>25. This I say, brethren, that ye may
profit from what ye have heard, and ruminate within yourselves: permit
not yourselves to forget, not only by thinking over again upon these
subjects, and discoursing upon them, but also by so living. For a good
life which is led after God’s commands, is like a pen, because it is
heard writing in our hearts. If it were written on wax, it would easily
be blotted out: write it in your hearts, in your character, and it shall
never be blotted out.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4357"></span>[459:4358](1080105.htm#fr_4357) <span
id="ii.XCIV-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIV-p2"></span> Lat. XCIII. Delivered in another’s
diocese, at the request of an assembly of bishops, as appears from the
conclusion.

<span id="fn_4358"></span>[459:4359](1080105.htm#fr_4358) <span
id="ii.XCIV-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIV-p4"></span> [Matt. vii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#007)<span id="ii.XCIV-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4359"></span>[459:4360](1080105.htm#fr_4359) <span
id="ii.XCIV-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIV-p6"></span> \[“The first day of the week,” etc.—C.\]

<span id="fn_4360"></span>[460:4361](1080105.htm#fr_4360) <span
id="ii.XCIV-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIV-p7"></span> [Gen. i.
3-19](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#003)<span id="ii.XCIV-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4361"></span>[460:4362](1080105.htm#fr_4361) <span
id="ii.XCIV-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIV-p8"></span> [Ps.
36:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#009)<span id="ii.XCIV-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4362"></span>[460:4363](1080105.htm#fr_4362) <span
id="ii.XCIV-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIV-p9"></span> [Philip. ii.
14-16](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#014)<span id="ii.XCIV-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4363"></span>[460:4364](1080105.htm#fr_4363) <span
id="ii.XCIV-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIV-p11"></span> [Rom. ii.
4-6](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#004)<span id="ii.XCIV-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4364"></span>[460:4365](1080105.htm#fr_4364) <span
id="ii.XCIV-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIV-p12"></span> [Matt.
23:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#013),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#016)<span id="ii.XCIV-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4365"></span>[461:4366](1080105.htm#fr_4365) <span
id="ii.XCIV-p14.3"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIV-p15"></span> *Stationarius*. Soldiers, and officers of
the governors, stationed in certain places through the provinces and
cities, who gave information to the magistrates of notorious offences.
Ex l. 1<span id="ii.XCIV-p15.1"></span>, c. *De Curios. et Stationar*.
libro 12, et ex l. 31, *De Episc. et Cler*. in C. Theod. Ben. Cod.
Theod. Gothof. l. vi. Tit. 29<span id="ii.XCIV-p15.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_4366"></span>[461:4367](1080105.htm#fr_4366) <span
id="ii.XCIV-p15.3"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIV-p16"></span> *Commentariensibus*, masters of prisons,
and notaries, whose duty it was to keep records of imprisonments and
offenders, and to receive indictments.—*Ben*.

<span id="fn_4367"></span>[461:4368](1080105.htm#fr_4367) <span
id="ii.XCIV-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIV-p17"></span> [Rom.
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#006)<span id="ii.XCIV-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4368"></span>[462:4369](1080105.htm#fr_4368) <span
id="ii.XCIV-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIV-p21"></span> \[On Plutarch’s “Delays of the Divine
Justice,” see the valuable translation of De Maistre, with that of
Amyot, Paris, 1853.—C.\]

<span id="fn_4369"></span>[463:4370](1080105.htm#fr_4369) <span
id="ii.XCIV-p22.3"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIV-p23"></span> [2 Cor.
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#010), [Rom.
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#010)<span id="ii.XCIV-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4370"></span>[463:4371](1080105.htm#fr_4370) <span
id="ii.XCIV-p25.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIV-p26"></span> [Luke xviii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#013)<span id="ii.XCIV-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4371"></span>[463:4372](1080105.htm#fr_4371) <span
id="ii.XCIV-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIV-p28"></span> [Ps. lxxii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#018)<span id="ii.XCIV-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4372"></span>[464:4373](1080105.htm#fr_4372) <span
id="ii.XCIV-p30.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIV-p31"></span> [Matt. xix.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#028)<span id="ii.XCIV-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4373"></span>[464:4374](1080105.htm#fr_4373) <span
id="ii.XCIV-p32.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIV-p33"></span> *Et tu signas te*.

<span id="fn_4374"></span>[465:4375](1080105.htm#fr_4374) <span
id="ii.XCIV-p33.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIV-p34"></span> *Al*. “God is.”

<span id="fn_4375"></span>[465:4376](1080105.htm#fr_4375) <span
id="ii.XCIV-p36.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIV-p37"></span> [Matt. xiv.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#028)<span id="ii.XCIV-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4376"></span>[465:4377](1080105.htm#fr_4376) <span
id="ii.XCIV-p37.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIV-p38"></span> [Matt. xiv.
30](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#030)<span id="ii.XCIV-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4377"></span>[465:4378](1080105.htm#fr_4377) <span
id="ii.XCIV-p38.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIV-p39"></span> [Matt. xiv.
31](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#031)<span id="ii.XCIV-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4378"></span>[465:4379](1080105.htm#fr_4378) <span
id="ii.XCIV-p40.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIV-p41"></span> [1 Pet.
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#017),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#018)<span id="ii.XCIV-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4379"></span>[465:4380](1080105.htm#fr_4379) <span
id="ii.XCIV-p41.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIV-p42"></span> [Prov. xi.
31](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#031)<span id="ii.XCIV-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4380"></span>[465:4381](1080105.htm#fr_4380) <span
id="ii.XCIV-p42.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIV-p43"></span> [Ps. xciv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#009)<span id="ii.XCIV-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4381"></span>[466:4382](1080105.htm#fr_4381) <span
id="ii.XCIV-p43.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIV-p44"></span> [2 Cor. iv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#007)<span id="ii.XCIV-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4382"></span>[466:4383](1080105.htm#fr_4382) <span
id="ii.XCIV-p44.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIV-p45"></span> [Rom.
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#021)<span id="ii.XCIV-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4383"></span>[466:4384](1080105.htm#fr_4383) <span
id="ii.XCIV-p46.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIV-p47"></span> \[He imitates the cries of one who sells,
*Sub hasta*.—C.\]

<span id="fn_4384"></span>[466:4385](1080105.htm#fr_4384) <span
id="ii.XCIV-p49.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIV-p50"></span> [Matt. xxvi.
59](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#059)<span id="ii.XCIV-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4385"></span>[466:4386](1080105.htm#fr_4385) <span
id="ii.XCIV-p51.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIV-p52"></span> [1 Cor. x.
13](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#013)<span id="ii.XCIV-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4386"></span>[466:4387](1080105.htm#fr_4386) <span
id="ii.XCIV-p52.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIV-p53"></span> [Ps. xciv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#003)<span id="ii.XCIV-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4387"></span>[467:4388](1080105.htm#fr_4387) <span
id="ii.XCIV-p54.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIV-p55"></span> [Heb. xii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#007)<span id="ii.XCIV-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4388"></span>[467:4389](1080105.htm#fr_4388) <span
id="ii.XCIV-p55.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIV-p56"></span> [Matt. v.
44](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#044)<span id="ii.XCIV-p56.1"></span>.
\[See p. 455, § 12, *supra*.—C.\]

<span id="fn_4389"></span>[467:4390](1080105.htm#fr_4389) <span
id="ii.XCIV-p57.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIV-p58"></span> [Rom. i.
17](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#017)<span id="ii.XCIV-p58.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4390"></span>[467:4391](1080105.htm#fr_4390) <span
id="ii.XCIV-p58.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIV-p59"></span> [Gal. v.
6](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#006)<span id="ii.XCIV-p59.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm XCV](1080106)
