[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080094)  [Next](1080096.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.LXXXIV"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p1"></span> <span id="ii.LXXXIV-p1.1"></span><span
class="c20"><span id="ii.LXXXIV-p1.2"></span>Psalm LXXXIV. <span
id="fr_3873"></span>[3874](#fn_3873.md) </span>

<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p3"></span>1. This Psalm is entitled, “For the
winepresses.” And, as you observed with me, my beloved (for I saw that
you attended most closely), nothing is said in its text either of any
press, or wine-basket, or vat, or of any of the instruments or the
building of a winepress; nothing of this kind did we hear read; so that
it is no easy question what is the meaning of this title inscribed upon
it, “for the winepresses.” For certainly, if after the title it
mentioned anything about such things as I enumerated, carnal persons
might have believed that it was a song concerning those visible
wine-presses; but as it has this title, yet says nothing afterwards of
those winepresses which we know so well, I cannot doubt that there are
other wine-presses, which the Spirit of God intended us to look for and
to understand here. Therefore, let us recall to mind what takes place in
these visible winepresses, and see how this takes place spiritually in
the Church. The grape hangs on the vines, and the olive on its trees.
For it is for these two fruits that presses are usually made ready; and
as long as they hang on their boughs, they seem to enjoy free air; and
neither is the grape wine, nor the olive oil, before they are pressed.
Thus it is with men whom God predestined before the world to be
conformed to the image of His only-begotten Son, <span
id="fr_3874"></span>[3875](#fn_3874.md) who has been first and especially
pressed in His Passion, as the great Cluster. Men of this kind,
therefore, before they draw near to the service of God, enjoy in the
world a kind of delicious liberty, like hanging grapes or olives: but as
it is said, “My son, when thou drawest near to the service of God, stand
in judgment and fear, and make thy soul ready for temptation:” <span
id="fr_3875"></span>[3876](#fn_3875.md) so each, as he draweth near to the
service of God, findeth that he is come to the winepress; he shall
undergo tribulation, shall be crushed, shall be pressed, not that he may
perish in this world, but that he may flow down into the storehouses of
God. He hath the coverings of carnal desires stripped off from him, like
grape-skins: for this hath taken place in him in carnal desires, of
which the Apostle speaks, “Put ye off the old man, and put on the new
man.”  <span id="fr_3876"></span>[3877](#fn_3876.md) All this is not done
but by pressure: therefore the Churches of God of this time are called
winepresses.

<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p7"></span>2. But who are we who are placed in the
wine-presses? “Sons of Core.” For this follows: “For the winepresses, to
the sons of Core.” The sons of Core has been explained, sons of the
bald: as far as those could explain it to us, who know that language,
according to their service due to God. <span
id="fr_3877"></span>[3878](#fn_3877.md) …

<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p9"></span>3. But being placed under pressure, we
are crushed for this purpose, that for our love by which we were borne
towards those worldly, secular, temporal, unstable, and perishable
things, having suffered in them, in this life, torments, and
tribulations of pressures, and abundance of temptations, we may begin to
seek that rest which is not of this life, nor of this earth; and the
Lord becomes, as is written, “a refuge for the poor man.”  <span
id="fr_3878"></span>[3879](#fn_3878.md) What is, “for the poor man”? For
him who is, as it were, destitute, without aid, without help, without
anything on which he may rest, in earth. For to such poor men, God is
present. For though men abound in money on earth,…they are filled more
with fear than with enjoyment. For what is so uncertain as a rolling
thing? It is not unfitly that money itself is stamped round, because it
remains not still. Such men, therefore, though they have something, are
yet poor. But those who have none of this wealth, but only desire it,
are counted also among rich men who will be rejected; for God takes
account not of power, but of will. The poor then are destitute of all
this world’s substance, for even though it abounds around them, they
know how fleeting it is; and crying unto God, having nothing in this
world with which they may delight themselves, and be held down, placed
in abundant pressures and temptations, as if in winepresses, they flow
down, having become oil or wine. What are these latter but good desires?
For God remains their only object of desire; now they love not earth.
For they love Him who made heaven and earth; they love Him, and are not
yet with Him. Their desire is delayed, in order that it may increase; it
increases, in order that it may receive. For it is not any little thing
that God will give to him who desires, nor does he need to be little
exercised to be made fit to receive so great a good: not anything which
He hath made will God give, but Himself who made all things. Exercise
thy<span id="page_401">p. 401</span> <span
id="ii.LXXXIV-Page_401"></span>self to receive God: that which thou
shalt have for ever, desire thou for a long time.…

<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p11"></span>4. Wherefore, most beloved, as each can,
make vows, and perform to the Lord God <span
id="fr_3879"></span>[3880](#fn_3879.md) what each can: let no one look
back, no one delight himself with his former interests, no one turn away
from that which is before to that which is behind: let him run until he
arrive: for we run not with the feet but with the desire. But let no one
in this life say that he hath arrived. For who can be so perfect as
Paul? <span id="fr_3880"></span>[3881](#fn_3880.md) Yet he saith,
“Brethren, I count not myself to have attained.”

<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p14"></span>5. If therefore thou feelest the
passions of this world, even when thou art happy, thou understandest now
that thou art in the winepress.…If therefore the world smile upon thee
with happiness, imagine thyself in the winepress, and say, “I found
trouble and heaviness, and I did call upon the name of the Lord.” <span
id="fr_3881"></span>[3882](#fn_3881.md) He said not, I found trouble,
without meaning, of such a kind as was hidden: for some troubles are
hidden from some in this world, who think they are happy while they are
absent from God. “For as long as we are in the body,” he saith, “we are
absent from the Lord.” <span id="fr_3882"></span>[3883](#fn_3882.md) If
thou wert absent from thy father, thou wouldest be unhappy: art thou
absent from the Lord, and happy? There are then some who think it is
well with them. But those who understand, that in whatever abundance of
wealth and pleasures, though all things obey their beck, though nothing
troublesome creep in, nothing adverse terrify, yet that they are in a
bad case as long as they are absent from the Lord; with a most keen eye
these have found trouble, and grief, and have called on the name of the
Lord. Such is he who sings in this Psalm. Who is he? The Body of Christ.
Who is that? You, if you will: all we, if we will: for Christ’s Body is
one.…

<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p17"></span>“How lovely are Thy tabernacles, O Lord
of Hosts” ([Psa. 84.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#001.md)<span
id="ii.LXXXIV-p17.1"></span>). He was in some tabernacles, that is, in
winepresses: but he longed for other tabernacles, where is no pressure:
in this he sighed for them, from these, he, as it were, flowed down into
them by the channel of longing desire.

<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p18"></span>6. And what follows? “My soul longeth
and faileth for the courts of the Lord” ([Psa.
84.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#002.md)<span
id="ii.LXXXIV-p18.1"></span>). It is not enough that it “longeth and
faileth:” for what doth it fail? “For the courts of the Lord.” The grape
when pressed hath failed: but for what? So as to be changed into wine,
and to flow into the vat, and into the rest of the storeroom, to be kept
there in great quiet. Here it is longed for, there it is received: here
are sighs, there joy: here prayers, there praises: here groans, there
rejoicing. Those things which I mentioned, let no one while here turn
from ashamed: let no one be unwilling to suffer. There is danger, lest
the grape, while it fears the winepress, should be devoured by birds or
by wild beasts.…

<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p19"></span>7. Thou hast heard a groan in the
winepress, “My soul longeth and faileth for the courts of the Lord:”
hear how it holdeth out, rejoicing in hope: “My heart and my flesh have
rejoiced in the living God.” Here they have rejoiced for that cause.
Whence cometh rejoicing, but of hope? Wherefore have they rejoiced? “In
the living God.” What has rejoiced in thee? “My heart and my flesh.” Why
have they rejoiced? “For,” saith he, “the sparrow hath found her a
house, and the turtle-dove a nest, where she may lay her young” ([Psa.
84.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#003.md)<span
id="ii.LXXXIV-p19.1"></span>). What is this? He had named two things,
and he adds two figures of birds which answer to them: he had said that
his heart rejoiced and his flesh, and to these two he made the sparrow
and turtle-dove to correspond: the heart as the sparrow, the flesh as
the dove. The sparrow hath found herself a home: my heart hath found
itself a home. She tries her wings in the virtues of this life, in
faith, and hope, and charity, by which she may fly unto her home: and
when she shall have come thither, she shall remain; and now the
complaining voice of the sparrow, which is here, shall no longer be
there. For it is the very complaining sparrow of whom in another Psalm
he saith, “Like a sparrow alone on the housetop.” <span
id="fr_3883"></span>[3884](#fn_3883.md) From the housetop he flies home.
Now let him be on the housetop, treading on his carnal house: he shall
have a heavenly house, a perpetual home: that sparrow shall make an end
of his complaints. But to the dove he hath given young, that is, to the
flesh: “the dove hath found a nest, where she may lay her young.” The
sparrow a home, the dove a nest, and a nest too where she may lay her
young. A home is chosen as for ever, a nest is framed for a time: with
the heart we think upon God, as if the sparrow flew to her home: with
the flesh we do good works. For ye see how many good works are done by
the flesh of the saints; for by this we work the things we are commanded
to work, by which we are helped in this life. “Break thy bread to the
hungry, and bring the poor and roofless into thy house; and if thou see
one naked, clothe him:” <span id="fr_3884"></span>[3885](#fn_3884.md) and
other such things which are commanded us we work only through the
flesh.…We speak, brethren, what ye know: how many seem to do good works
without the Church? <span id="fr_3885"></span>[3886](#fn_3885.md) how many
even Pagans feed the hungry, clothe the naked, receive the <span
id="page_402">p. 402</span> <span
id="ii.LXXXIV-Page_402"></span>stranger, visit the sick, comfort the
prisoner? how many do this? The dove seems, as it were, to bring forth
young: but finds not herself a nest. How many works may heretics do not
in the Church; they place not their young in a nest. They shall be
trampled on and crushed: they shall not be kept, shall not be
guarded.…In that faith lay thy young: in that nest work thy works. For
what the nests are, what that nest is, follows at once. Having said, And
the dove hath found herself a nest, where she may lay her young; as if
thou hadst asked, What nest? “Thy altars, O Lord of Hosts, my King and
my God.” What is, “My King and my God?” Thou who rulest me, who hast
created me.

<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p23"></span>8. …“Blessed are those who dwell in Thy
house” ([Psa. 84.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#004.md)<span
id="ii.LXXXIV-p23.1"></span>).…If thou hast thy own house, thou art
poor; if God’s, thou art rich. In thy own house thou wilt fear robbers;
of the house of God, He is Himself the wall. Therefore “blessed are
those who dwell in Thy house.” They possess the heavenly Jerusalem,
without constraint, without pressure, without difference and division of
boundaries; all have it, and each have all. Great are those riches.
Brother crowdeth not brother: there is no want there. Next, what will
they do there? For among men it is necessity which is the mother of all
employments. I have already said, in brief, brethren, run in your mind
through any occupations, and see if it is not necessity alone which
produces them. Those very eminent arts which seem so powerful in giving
help to others, the art of speaking in their defence or of medicine in
healing, for these are the most excellent employments in this life; take
away litigants, who is there for the advocate to help? take away wounds
and diseases? what is there for the physician to cure? And all those
employments of ours which are required and done for our daily life,
arise from necessity. To plough, to sow, to clear fallow ground, to
sail; what is it which produces all these works, but necessity and want?
Take away hunger, thirst, nakedness; who has need of all these
things?…For instance, the injunction, “Break thy bread to the hungry.”
For whom could you break bread, if there were nobody hungry? “Take in
the roofless poor into thy house.” <span
id="fr_3886"></span>[3887](#fn_3886.md) What stranger is there to take in,
where all live in their own country? What sick person to visit, where
they enjoy perpetual health? What litigants to reconcile, where there is
everlasting peace? What dead to bury, where there is eternal life? None
of those honourable actions which are common to all men will then be
your employment, nor any of these good works; the young swallows will
then fly out of their nest. What then? You have said already what we
shall have; “Those who dwell in Thy house are blessed.” Say now what
they shall do, for I see not then any need to induce me to action. Even
what I am now saying and arguing springs from some need. Will there be
any such argument there to teach the ignorant, or remind the forgetful?
Or will the Gospel be read in that country where the Word of God Itself
shall be contemplated?…“They shall be always praising Thee.” This shall
be our whole duty, an unceasing Hallelujah. Think not, my brethren, that
there will be any weariness there: if ye are not able to endure long
here in saying this, it is because <span
id="fr_3887"></span>[3888](#fn_3887.md) some want draws you away from that
enjoyment. If what is not seen gives not so much joy here, if with so
much eagerness under the pressure and weakness of the flesh we praise
that which we believe, how shall we praise that which we see? “When
death shall be swallowed up in victory, when this mortal shall have put
on immortality,” <span id="fr_3888"></span>[3889](#fn_3888.md) no one will
say, “I have been standing a long time;” no one will say, “I have fasted
a long time,” “I have watched a long time.” For there shall be great
endurance, and our immortal bodies shall be sustained in contemplation
of God. And if the word which we now dispense to you keeps your weak
flesh standing so long, what will be the effect of that joy? how will it
change us? “For we shall be like Him, since we shall see Him as He is.”
 <span id="fr_3889"></span>[3890](#fn_3889.md) Being made like Him, when
shall we ever faint? what shall draw us off? Brethren, we shall never be
satiated with the praise of God, with the love of God. If love could
fail, praise could fail. But if love be eternal, as there will there be
beauty inexhaustible, fear not lest thou be not able to praise for ever
Him whom thou shalt be able to love for ever. For this life let us sigh.

<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p28"></span>9. But how shall we come thither? “Happy
is the man whose strength is in Thee” ([Psa.
84.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#005.md)<span
id="ii.LXXXIV-p28.1"></span>). He knew where he was, and that by reason
of the frailty of his flesh he could not fly to that state of
blessedness: he thought upon his own burden, as it is said elsewhere;
“For the corruptible body weighs down the soul, and the earthly house
depresses the understanding which has many thoughts.”  <span
id="fr_3890"></span>[3891](#fn_3890.md) The Spirit calls upward, the weight
of the flesh calls back again downward: between the double effort to
raise and to weigh down, a kind of struggle ensues: this struggle goes
toward the pressure of the winepress. Hear how the Apostle describes
this same struggle of the winepress, for he was himself afflicted there,
there he was pressed.…“Miserable man that I am: who shall deliver me
from the body of this death? The grace of <span id="page_403">p.
403</span> <span id="ii.LXXXIV-Page_403"></span>God through Jesus Christ
our Lord.” <span id="fr_3891"></span>[3892](#fn_3891.md) …“For I delight in
the Law of God according to the inner man.” But what shall I do? how
shall I fly? how shall I arrive thither? “I see another law in my
members,” etc.…And as in the words of the Apostle, that difficulty and
that almost inextricable struggle is alleviated by the addition, “The
grace of God through Jesus Christ our Lord;” so here, when he sighed in
the ardent longing for the house of God, and those praises of God, and
when a kind of despair arose at the feeling of the burden of the body
and the weight of the flesh, again he awoke to hope, and said ([Psa.
84.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#005.md)<span
id="ii.LXXXIV-p30.2"></span>), “Blessed is the man whose taking up <span
id="fr_3892"></span>[3893](#fn_3892.md) is in Thee.”

<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p32"></span>10. What then does God supply by His
grace to him whom He taketh hold of to lead him on? He goes on to say:
“He hath placed steps <span id="fr_3893"></span>[3894](#fn_3893.md) in his
heart.”…Where does it place steps? “In his heart, in the valley of
weeping” ([Psa. 84.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#006.md)<span
id="ii.LXXXIV-p33.1"></span>). So here thou hast for a winepress the
valley of weeping, the very pious tears in tribulation are the new wine
of those that love.…They went forth “weeping,” he says, “casting their
seed.” <span id="fr_3894"></span>[3895](#fn_3894.md) Therefore, by the
grace of God may upward steps be placed in thy heart. Rise by loving.
Hence the Psalm “of degrees” is called.…“He hath placed steps of ascent
to the place which He hath appointed” ([Psa.
84.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#007.md)<span
id="ii.LXXXIV-p34.2"></span>). Now we lament; whence proceed our
lamentations, but from that place where the steps of our ascent are
placed? Whence comes our lamentation, but from that cause wherefore the
Apostle exclaimed that he was a wretched man, because he saw another law
in his members, warring against the law in his mind? <span
id="fr_3895"></span>[3896](#fn_3895.md) And whence does this proceed? From
the penalty of sin. And we thought that we could easily be righteous as
it were by our own strength, before we received the command; “but when
the command came, sin revived; but I died,” <span
id="fr_3896"></span>[3897](#fn_3896.md) saith the Apostle. For a law was
given to men, not such as could save them at once, but it was to show
them in what severe sickness they were lying.…But when sin was made
manifest by the law given, sin was but increased, for it is both sin,
and against the Law; “Sin,” saith he, “taking occasion by the command,
wrought in me all manner of concupiscence.” <span
id="fr_3897"></span>[3898](#fn_3897.md) What does he mean by “taking
occasion by the law”? Having received the command, men tried as by their
own strength to obey it; conquered by lust, they became guilty of
transgression of this very command also. But what saith the Apostle?
“Where sin abounded, grace hath much more abounded;” <span
id="fr_3898"></span>[3899](#fn_3898.md) that is, the disease increased, the
medicine became of more avail. Accordingly, my brethren, did those five
porches of Solomon, in the middle of which the pool lay, heal the sick
at all? The sick, says the Evangelist, lay in the five porches. <span
id="fr_3899"></span>[3900](#fn_3899.md) In the Gospel we have and read it.
Those five porches are the law in the five books of Moses. For this
cause the sick were brought forth from their houses that they might lie
in the porches. So the law brought the sick men forth, but did not heal
them: but by the blessing of God the water was disturbed, as by an Angel
descending into it. At the sight of the water troubled, the one person
who was able, descended and was healed. That water surrounded by the
five porches, was the people of the Jews shut up in their law. The Lord
came and disturbed this people, so that He Himself was slain. For if the
Lord had not troubled the Jews by coming down to them, would He have
been crucified? So that the troubled water signified the Passion of the
Lord, which arose from His troubling the Jewish people. The sick man who
believeth in this Passion, like him who descended into the troubled
water, is healed thereby. He whom the Law could not heal, that is, while
he lay in the porches, is healed by grace, by faith in the Passion of
our Lord Jesus Christ.…

<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p40"></span>11. “He shall give blessing,” saith he,
“who gave the law.”…Grace shall come after the law, grace itself is the
blessing. And what has that grace and blessing given unto us? “They
shall go from virtue to virtue.” For here by grace many virtues are
given. “For to one is given by the Spirit the word of wisdom, to another
the word of knowledge according to the same Spirit, to another faith, to
another the gift of healing, to another different kinds of tongues, to
another the interpretation of tongues, to another prophecy.” <span
id="fr_3900"></span>[3901](#fn_3900.md) Many virtues, but necessary for
this life; and from these virtues we go on to “a virtue.” To what
“virtue”? To “Christ the Virtue of God and the Wisdom of God.” <span
id="fr_3901"></span>[3902](#fn_3901.md) He giveth different virtues in this
place, who for all the virtues which are necessary and useful in this
valley of weeping shall give one virtue, Himself. For in Scripture and
in many writers four virtues are described useful for life: prudence, by
which we discern between good and evil; justice, by which we give each
person his due, “owing no man anything,” <span
id="fr_3902"></span>[3903](#fn_3902.md) but loving all men: temperance, by
which we restrain lusts; fortitude, by which we bear all troubles. These
virtues are now by the grace of God given unto us in the valley of
weeping: from these virtues we mount unto that other virtue. And what
will that be, but the virtue of the contemplation of God alone?…It
follows in that place: “They shall go from virtue to <span
id="page_404">p. 404</span> <span
id="ii.LXXXIV-Page_404"></span>virtue.” What virtue? That of
contemplation. What is contemplation? “The God of Gods shall appear in
Sion.” The God of Gods, Christ of the Christians.…When all is finished,
that mortality makes necessary, He shall appear to the pure in heart, as
He is, “God with God,” The Word with the Father, “by which all things
were made.”

<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p44"></span>12. And again, from the thought of those
joys he returns to his own sighs. He sees what has come before in hope,
and where he is in reality.…Therefore returning to the groans proper to
this place, he saith, “O Lord God of virtues, hear my prayer: hearken, O
God of Jacob” ([Psa. 84.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#008.md)<span
id="ii.LXXXIV-p44.1"></span>): for Jacob himself also Thou hast made
Israel out of Jacob. For God appeared unto him, and he was called
Israel,  <span id="fr_3903"></span>[3904](#fn_3903.md) seeing God. Hear me
therefore, O God of Jacob, and make me Israel. When shall I become
Israel? When the God of Gods shall appear in Sion.

<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p46"></span>13. “Behold, O God our defender. And
look on the face of Thy Christ” ([Psa.
84.9](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#009.md)<span
id="ii.LXXXIV-p46.1"></span>). For when doth God not look upon the face
of His Christ? What is this, “Look on the face of Thy Christ”? By the
face we are known. What is it then, Look on the face of Thy Christ?
Cause Thy Christ to become known to all. Look on the face of Thy Christ:
let Christ become known to all, that we may be able to go from strength
to strength, that grace may abound, since sin hath abounded.

<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p47"></span>14. “For one day in Thy courts is better
than a thousand” ([Psa. 84.10](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#010.md)<span
id="ii.LXXXIV-p47.1"></span>). Those courts they were for which he
sighed, for which he fainted. “My soul longeth and faileth for the
courts of the Lord:” <span id="fr_3904"></span>[3905](#fn_3904.md) one day
there is better than a thousand days. Men long for thousands of days,
and wish to live here long: let them despise these thousands of days,
let them long for one day, which has neither rising nor setting: one
day, an everlasting day, to which no yesterday yields, which no
to-morrow presses. Let this one day be longed for by us. What have we to
do with a thousand days? We go from the thousand days to one day; let us
hasten to that one day,  <span id="fr_3905"></span>[3906](#fn_3905.md) as
we go from strength to strength.

<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p50"></span>15. “I have chosen to be cast away in
the house of the Lord, rather than to dwell in the tents of sinners”
([Psa. 84.11](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#011.md)<span
id="ii.LXXXIV-p50.1"></span>). For he found the valley of weeping, he
found humility by which he might rise: he knoweth that if he would raise
himself he shall fall, if he humble himself he shall be exalted: he hath
chosen to be cast away, that he may be raised up. How many beside this
tabernacle of the Lord’s winepress, that is beside the Catholic Church,
wishing to be lifted up, and loving their honours, refuse to see the
truth. If this verse had been in their heart, would they not cast away
honours, and run to the valley of weeping, and hence find in their heart
the way of ascent, and hence go from virtues to virtue, placing their
hope in Christ, not in some man or another? A good word is this, a word
to rejoice in, a word to be chosen. He himself chose to be cast away in
the house of the Lord; but He who invited him to the feast, when he
chose a lower place calleth him to a higher one, and saith unto him, “Go
up higher.” <span id="fr_3906"></span>[3907](#fn_3906.md) Yet he chose not
but to be in the house of the Lord, in any part of it, so that he were
not outside the threshold.

<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p52"></span>16. Wherefore did he choose?…“Because
God loveth mercy and truth” ([Psa.
84.12](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#012.md)<span
id="ii.LXXXIV-p52.1"></span>). The Lord loveth mercy, by which He first
came to my help: He loveth truth, so as to give to him that believeth
what He has promised. <span id="fr_3907"></span>[3908](#fn_3907.md) Hear in
the case of the Apostle Paul, His mercy and truth, Paul who was first
Saul the persecutor. He needed mercy, and he has said that it was shown
towards him: “I who was before a blasphemer, and a persecutor, and
injurious: but I obtained mercy, that in me Christ Jesus might show
forth all longsuffering towards those who shall believe in Him unto life
eternal.” <span id="fr_3908"></span>[3909](#fn_3908.md) So that, when Paul
received pardon of such great crimes, no one should despair of any sins
whatever being forgiven him. Lo! Thou hast Mercy.…Lo, we see that Paul
holdeth Him a debtor, having received mercy, demanding truth. The Lord,
he says, shall give back in that day. What shall He give thee back, but
that which He oweth thee? How oweth He unto thee? What hast thou given
Him? “Who hath first given unto Him, and it shall be restored to him
again.”  <span id="fr_3909"></span>[3910](#fn_3909.md) The Lord Himself
hath made Himself a debtor, not by receiving, but by promising: it is
not said unto Him, Restore what Thou hast received: but, Restore what
Thou hast promised. He hath shown mercy unto me, he saith, that He might
make me innocent: for before I was a blasphemer and injurious: but by
His grace I have been made innocent. But He who first showed mercy, can
He deny His debt? “He loveth mercy and truth. He will give grace and
glory.” What grace, but that of which the same one said: “By the grace
of God I am what I am”? <span id="fr_3910"></span>[3911](#fn_3910.md) What
glory, but that of which he said, “There is laid up for me a crown of
glory”? <span id="fr_3911"></span>[3912](#fn_3911.md)

<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p58"></span>17. Therefore “the Lord will not
withhold good from those who walk in innocence” ([Psa.
84.12](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#012.md)<span
id="ii.LXXXIV-p58.1"></span>). Why then, O men, are ye unwilling to keep
innocence, except in order that ye may have good things?…Thou seest
wealth in the hands of robbers, of the impious, the wicked, <span
id="page_405">p. 405</span> <span id="ii.LXXXIV-Page_405"></span>the
base; in the hands of scandalous and criminal men thou seest wealth: God
giveth them these things on account of their fellowship in the human
race, for the abundant overflowing of His goodness: who also “maketh His
sun to rise upon the good and the evil, and causeth it to rain upon the
righteous and upon the sinners.” <span
id="fr_3912"></span>[3913](#fn_3912.md) Giveth He so much to the wicked,
and keepeth nothing for thee? He keepeth something: be at ease, He who
had mercy on thee when thou wast impious, doth He desert thee when thou
hast become pious? He who gave to the sinner the free gift of His Son’s
death, what keepeth He for the saved through that death? Therefore be at
ease. Hold Him a debtor, for thou hast believed in Him promising. What
then remains for us here, in the winepress, in affliction, in hardship,
in our present dangerous life? What remains for us, that we may arrive
thither? “O Lord God of virtues, blessed is the man that putteth his
hope in Thee.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3873"></span>[400:3874](1080095.htm#fr_3873.md) <span
id="ii.LXXXIV-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p2"></span> Lat. LXXXIII.

<span id="fn_3874"></span>[400:3875](1080095.htm#fr_3874.md) <span
id="ii.LXXXIV-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p4"></span> [Rom. viii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#029.md)<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3875"></span>[400:3876](1080095.htm#fr_3875.md) <span
id="ii.LXXXIV-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p5"></span> [Ecclesiasticus
2.1](../../../bib/apo/sir002.htm#001.md)<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3876"></span>[400:3877](1080095.htm#fr_3876.md) <span
id="ii.LXXXIV-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p6"></span> [Col.
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#009.md),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#010.md), [Eph.
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#022.md)<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3877"></span>[400:3878](1080095.htm#fr_3877.md) <span
id="ii.LXXXIV-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p8"></span> \[See pp. 132, 140, *supra*.—C.\]

<span id="fn_3878"></span>[400:3879](1080095.htm#fr_3878.md) <span
id="ii.LXXXIV-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p10"></span> [Ps. ix.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#009.md)<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3879"></span>[401:3880](1080095.htm#fr_3879.md) <span
id="ii.LXXXIV-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p12"></span> [Ps. lxxvi.
11](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#011.md)<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3880"></span>[401:3881](1080095.htm#fr_3880.md) <span
id="ii.LXXXIV-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p13"></span> [Phil. iii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#013.md)<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3881"></span>[401:3882](1080095.htm#fr_3881.md) <span
id="ii.LXXXIV-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p15"></span> [Ps.
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#003.md),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#004.md)<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3882"></span>[401:3883](1080095.htm#fr_3882.md) <span
id="ii.LXXXIV-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p16"></span> [2 Cor. v.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#006.md)<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3883"></span>[401:3884](1080095.htm#fr_3883.md) <span
id="ii.LXXXIV-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p20"></span> [Ps. cii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#007.md)<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3884"></span>[401:3885](1080095.htm#fr_3884.md) <span
id="ii.LXXXIV-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p21"></span> [Isa. lviii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#007.md)<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3885"></span>[401:3886](1080095.htm#fr_3885.md) <span
id="ii.LXXXIV-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p22"></span> Ed. Ben. refers to P. Lombard, *II.
Sent*. Dist. 41, where this passage is quoted on the question, “Are all
the works of those who are without faith evil?” \[See A.N.F. vol. ii. p.
517, note 4.—C.\]

<span id="fn_3886"></span>[402:3887](1080095.htm#fr_3886.md) <span
id="ii.LXXXIV-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p24"></span> [Isa. lviii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#007.md)<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3887"></span>[402:3888](1080095.htm#fr_3887.md) <span
id="ii.LXXXIV-p24.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p25"></span> Oxf. <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.LXXXIV-p25.1"></span>mss</span>. “want keeps you not away.”

<span id="fn_3888"></span>[402:3889](1080095.htm#fr_3888.md) <span
id="ii.LXXXIV-p25.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p26"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
54](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#054.md)<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3889"></span>[402:3890](1080095.htm#fr_3889.md) <span
id="ii.LXXXIV-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p27"></span> [1 John iii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#002.md)<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3890"></span>[402:3891](1080095.htm#fr_3890.md) <span
id="ii.LXXXIV-p28.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p29"></span> [Wisd. ix.
15](../../../bib/apo/wis009.htm#015.md)<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3891"></span>[403:3892](1080095.htm#fr_3891.md) <span
id="ii.LXXXIV-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p30"></span> [Rom.
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#024.md),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#025.md)<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3892"></span>[403:3893](1080095.htm#fr_3892.md) <span
id="ii.LXXXIV-p30.3"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p31"></span> *Susceptio*.

<span id="fn_3893"></span>[403:3894](1080095.htm#fr_3893.md) <span
id="ii.LXXXIV-p32.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p33"></span> *Ascensus*.

<span id="fn_3894"></span>[403:3895](1080095.htm#fr_3894.md) <span
id="ii.LXXXIV-p33.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p34"></span> [Ps.
26:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#005.md),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#006.md)<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3895"></span>[403:3896](1080095.htm#fr_3895.md) <span
id="ii.LXXXIV-p34.3"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p35"></span> [Rom. vii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#023.md)<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3896"></span>[403:3897](1080095.htm#fr_3896.md) <span
id="ii.LXXXIV-p35.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p36"></span> [Rom. vii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#009.md)<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3897"></span>[403:3898](1080095.htm#fr_3897.md) <span
id="ii.LXXXIV-p36.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p37"></span> [Rom. vii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#008.md)<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3898"></span>[403:3899](1080095.htm#fr_3898.md) <span
id="ii.LXXXIV-p37.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p38"></span> [Rom. v.
20](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#020.md)<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3899"></span>[403:3900](1080095.htm#fr_3899.md) <span
id="ii.LXXXIV-p38.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p39"></span> [John v.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#003.md)<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3900"></span>[403:3901](1080095.htm#fr_3900.md) <span
id="ii.LXXXIV-p40.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p41"></span> [1 Cor. xii.
8-10](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#008.md)<span
id="ii.LXXXIV-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3901"></span>[403:3902](1080095.htm#fr_3901.md) <span
id="ii.LXXXIV-p41.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p42"></span> [1 Cor. i.
24](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#024.md)<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3902"></span>[403:3903](1080095.htm#fr_3902.md) <span
id="ii.LXXXIV-p42.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p43"></span> [Rom. xiii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#008.md)<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3903"></span>[404:3904](1080095.htm#fr_3903.md) <span
id="ii.LXXXIV-p44.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p45"></span> [Gen. xxxii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#028.md)<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3904"></span>[404:3905](1080095.htm#fr_3904.md) <span
id="ii.LXXXIV-p47.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p48"></span> [Ps. lxxxiv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#002.md)<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3905"></span>[404:3906](1080095.htm#fr_3905.md) <span
id="ii.LXXXIV-p48.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p49"></span> Oxf. <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.LXXXIV-p49.1"></span>mss</span>. add, “let us hasten,” etc.

<span id="fn_3906"></span>[404:3907](1080095.htm#fr_3906.md) <span
id="ii.LXXXIV-p50.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p51"></span> [Luke xiv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#010.md)<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3907"></span>[404:3908](1080095.htm#fr_3907.md) <span
id="ii.LXXXIV-p52.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p53"></span> [Rom. xi.
29](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#029.md)<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3908"></span>[404:3909](1080095.htm#fr_3908.md) <span
id="ii.LXXXIV-p53.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p54"></span> [1 Tim.
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#013.md),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#016.md)<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p54.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3909"></span>[404:3910](1080095.htm#fr_3909.md) <span
id="ii.LXXXIV-p54.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p55"></span> [Rom. xi.
29](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#029.md)<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3910"></span>[404:3911](1080095.htm#fr_3910.md) <span
id="ii.LXXXIV-p55.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p56"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#010.md)<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3911"></span>[404:3912](1080095.htm#fr_3911.md) <span
id="ii.LXXXIV-p56.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p57"></span> [2 Tim. iv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#008.md)<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3912"></span>[405:3913](1080095.htm#fr_3912.md) <span
id="ii.LXXXIV-p58.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p59"></span> [Matt. v.
45](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#045.md)<span id="ii.LXXXIV-p59.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm LXXXV](1080096.md)
