[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080087)  [Next](1080089) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.LXXVII"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVII-p1"></span> <span id="ii.LXXVII-p1.1"></span><span
class="c20"><span id="ii.LXXVII-p1.2"></span>Psalm LXXVII. <span
id="fr_3482"></span>[3483](#fn_3482) </span>

<span id="ii.LXXVII-p3"></span>1. This Psalm’s lintel is thus inscribed:
“Unto the end, for Idithun, a Psalm to Asaph himself.” What “Unto the
end” is, ye know. Idithun is interpreted “leaping over those men,” Asaph
is interpreted “a congregation.” Here therefore there is speaking “a
congregation that leapeth over,” in order that it may reach the End,
which is Christ Jesus. <span id="fr_3483"></span>[3484](#fn_3483) …

<span id="ii.LXXVII-p5"></span>2. “With my voice,” he saith, “to the
Lord I have cried” ([Psa. 77.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#001)<span
id="ii.LXXVII-p5.1"></span>). But many men cry unto the Lord for the
sake of getting riches and avoiding losses, for the safety of their
friends, for the security of their house, for temporal felicity, for
secular dignity, lastly, even for mere soundness of body, which is the
inheritance <span id="fr_3484"></span>[3485](#fn_3484) of the poor man.
For such and such like things many men do cry unto the Lord; scarce one
for the sake of the Lord Himself. For an easy thing it is for a man to
desire anything of the Lord, and not to desire the Lord Himself; as if
forsooth that which He giveth could be sweeter than Himself that giveth.
Whosoever therefore doth cry unto the Lord for the sake of any other
thing, is not yet one that leapeth over.…He doth indeed hearken to thee
at the time when thou dost seek Himself, not when through Himself thou
dost seek any other thing. It hath been said of some men, “They cried,
and there was no one to save them; to the Lord, and He hearkened not
unto them.” <span id="fr_3485"></span>[3486](#fn_3485) For why? Because
the voice of them was not unto the Lord. This the Scripture doth express
in another place, where it saith of such men, “On the Lord they have not
called.” <span id="fr_3486"></span>[3487](#fn_3486) Unto Him they have
not ceased to cry, and yet upon the Lord they have not called. What is,
upon the Lord they have not called? They have not called the Lord unto
themselves: <span id="fr_3487"></span>[3488](#fn_3487) they have not
invited the Lord to their heart, they would not have themselves
inhabited by the Lord. And therefore what hath befallen them? “They have
trembled with fear where fear was not.” They have trembled about the
loss of things present, for the reason that they were not full of Him,
upon whom they have not called. They have not loved gratis, so that
after the loss of temporal things they could say, “As it hath pleased
the Lord, so hath been done, be the name of the Lord blessed.” <span
id="fr_3488"></span>[3489](#fn_3488) Therefore this man saith, “My voice
is unto the Lord, and He <span id="page_361">p. 361</span> <span
id="ii.LXXVII-Page_361"></span>doth hearken unto me.” Let him show us
how this cometh to pass.

<span id="ii.LXXVII-p11"></span>3. “In the day of tribulation I have
sought out God” ([Psa. 77.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#002)<span
id="ii.LXXVII-p11.1"></span>). Who art thou that doest this thing? In
the day of thy tribulation take heed what thou seekest out. If a jail be
the cause of tribulation, thou seekest to get forth from jail: if fever
be the cause of tribulation, thou seekest health: if hunger be the cause
of tribulation, thou seekest fulness: if losses be the cause of
tribulation, thou seekest gain: if expatriation be the cause of
tribulation, thou seekest the home of thy flesh. And why should I name
all things, or when could I name all things? Dost thou wish to be one
leaping over? In the day of thy tribulation seek out God: not through
God some other thing, but out of tribulation God, that to this end God
may take away tribulation, that thou mayest without anxiety cleave unto
God. “In the day of my tribulation, I have sought out God:” not any
other thing, but “God I have sought out.” And how hast thou sought out?
“With my hands in the night before Him.”…

<span id="ii.LXXVII-p12"></span>4. Tribulation must not be thought to be
this or that in particular. For every individual that doth not yet leap
over, thinketh that as yet to be no tribulation, unless it be a thing
which may have befallen this life of some sad occasion: but this man,
that leapeth over, doth count this whole life to be his tribulation. For
so much doth he love his supernal country, that the earthly pilgrimage
is of itself the greatest tribulation. For how can this life be
otherwise than a tribulation, I pray you? how can that not be a
tribulation, the whole whereof hath been called temptation? <span
id="fr_3489"></span>[3490](#fn_3489) Thou hast it written in the book of
Job, <span id="fr_3490"></span>[3491](#fn_3490) is not human life a
temptation upon earth? Hath he said, human life is tempted upon earth?
Nay, but life itself is a temptation. If therefore temptation, it must
surely be a tribulation. In this tribulation therefore, that is to say
in this life, this man that leapeth over hath sought out God. How? “With
my hands,” he saith. What is, “with my hands”? With my works. For he was
not seeking any thing corporeal, so that he might find and handle
something which he had lost, so that he might seek with hands coin,
gold, silver, vesture, in short everything which can be held in the
hands. Howbeit, even our Lord Jesus Christ Himself willed Himself to be
sought after with hands, when to His doubting disciple He showed the
scars. <span id="fr_3491"></span>[3492](#fn_3491) …What then, to us
belongeth not the seeking with hands? It belongeth to us, as I have
said, to seek with works. When so? “In the night.” What is, “in the
night”? In this age. For it is night until there shine forth day in the
glorified advent of our Lord Jesus Christ. For would ye see how it is
night? Unless we had here had a lantern, we should have remained in
darkness. For Peter saith,“ We too have more sure the prophetic
discourse, whereunto ye do well to give heed, as to a lantern shining in
a dark place, until day shine, and the day-star arise in your
hearts.” <span id="fr_3492"></span>[3493](#fn_3492) There is therefore
to come day after this night, meanwhile in this night a lantern is not
lacking. And this is perchance what we are now doing: by explaining
these passages, we are bringing in a lantern, in order that we may
rejoice in this night. Which indeed ought alway to be burning in your
houses. For to such men is said, “The Spirit quench ye not.” <span
id="fr_3493"></span>[3494](#fn_3493) And as though explaining what he
was saying, he continueth and saith, “Prophecy despise ye not:” that is,
let the lantern alway shine in you. And even this light by comparison
with a sort of ineffable day is called night. For the very life of
believers by comparison with the life of unbelievers is day.…Night and
day—day in comparison with unbelievers, night in comparison with the
Angels. For the Angels have a day, which we have not yet. Already we
have one that unbelievers have not: but not yet have believers that
which Angels have: but they will have, at the time when they will be
equal to the Angels of God, that which hath been promised to them in the
Resurrection. <span id="fr_3494"></span>[3495](#fn_3494) In this then
which is now day and yet night; night in comparison with the future day
for which we yearn, day in comparison with the past night which we have
renounced: in this night then, I say, let us seek God with our hands.
Let not works cease, let us seek God, be there no idle yearning. If we
are in the way, let us expend our means in order that we may be able to
reach the end. With hands let us seek God.…“With my hands in the night
before Him, and I have not been deceived.”

<span id="ii.LXXVII-p19"></span>5. …“My soul hath refused to be
comforted” ([Psa. 77.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#002)<span
id="ii.LXXVII-p19.1"></span>). So great weariness did here possess me,
that my soul did close the door against all comfort. Whence such
weariness to him? It may be that his vineyard hath been hailed on, or
his olive hath yielded no fruit, or the vintage hath been interrupted by
rain. Whence the weariness to him? Hear this out of another Psalm. For
therein is the voice of the same: “weariness hath bowed me down, because
of sinners forsaking Thy law.” <span
id="fr_3495"></span>[3496](#fn_3495) He saith then that he was overcome
with so great weariness because of this sort of evil thing; so as that
his soul refused to be comforted. Weariness had well nigh swallowed him
up, and sorrow had ingulfed him altogether beyond remedy, he refuseth to
be comforted. What then re<span id="page_362">p. 362</span> <span
id="ii.LXXVII-Page_362"></span>mained? In the first place, see whence he
is comforted. Had he not waited for one who might condole with
him? <span id="fr_3496"></span>[3497](#fn_3496) …“I have been mindful of
God, and I have been delighted” ([Psa.
77.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#003)<span
id="ii.LXXVII-p21.2"></span>). My hands had not wrought in vain, they
had found a great comforter. While not being idle, “I have been mindful
of God, and I have been delighted.” God must therefore be praised, of
whom this man being mindful, hath been delighted, and hath been
comforted in sorrowful case, and refreshed when safety was in a manner
despaired of: God must therefore be praised. In fine, because he hath
been comforted, in continuation he saith, “I have babbled.” In that same
comfort being made mindful of God, I have been delighted, and have
“babbled.” What is, “I have babbled”? I have rejoiced, I have exulted in
speaking. For babblers they are properly called, that by the common
people are named talkative, who at the approach of joy are neither able
nor willing to be silent. This man hath become such an one. And again he
saith what? “And my spirit hath fainted.”

<span id="ii.LXXVII-p22"></span>6. With weariness he had pined away; by
calling to mind God, he had been delighted, again in babbling he had
fainted: what followeth? “All mine enemies have anticipated watches”
([Psa. 77.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#004)<span
id="ii.LXXVII-p22.1"></span>). All mine enemies have kept watch over me;
they have exceeded in keeping watch over me; in watching they have been
beforehand with me. Where do they not lay traps? Have not mine enemies
anticipated all watches? For who are these enemies, but they of whom the
Apostle saith, “Ye have not wrestling against flesh and blood.” <span
id="fr_3497"></span>[3498](#fn_3497) …Against the devil and his angels
we are waging hostilities. Rulers of the world he hath called them,
because they do themselves rule the lovers of the world. For they do not
rule the world, as if they were rulers of heaven and earth: but he is
calling sinners the world.…With the devil and his angels there is no
concord. They do themselves grudge us the kingdom of Heaven. They cannot
at all be appeased towards us: because “all mine enemies have
anticipated watches.” They have watched more to deceive than I to guard
myself. For how can they have done otherwise than anticipate watches,
that have set everywhere scandals, everywhere traps? Weariness doth
invest the heart, we have to fear lest sorrow swallow us up: in joy to
fear lest the spirit faint in babbling: “all mine enemies have
anticipated watches.” In fine, in the midst of that same babbling,
whiles thou art speaking, and art speaking without fear, how much is
oft-times found which enemies would lay hold of and censure, whereon
they would even found accusation and slander—“he said so, he thought so,
he spake so!” What should man do, save that which followeth? “I have
been troubled, and I spake not.” Therefore when he was troubled, lest in
his babbling enemies anticipating watches should seek and find slanders,
he spake not.…

<span id="ii.LXXVII-p24"></span>7. “I have thought on ancient days”
([Psa. 77.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#005)<span
id="ii.LXXVII-p24.1"></span>). Now he, as if he were one who had been
beaten out of doors, hath taken refuge within: he is conversing in the
secret place of his own heart. And let him declare to us what he is
doing there. It is well with him. Observe what things he is thinking of,
I pray you. He is within, in his own house he is thinking of ancient
days. No one saith to him, thou hast spoken ill: no one saith to him,
thou hast spoken much: no one saith to him, thou hast thought
perversely. Thus may it be well with him, may God aid him: let him think
of the ancient days, and let him tell us what he hath done in his very
inner chamber, whereunto he hath arrived, over what he hath leaped,
where he hath abode. “I have thought on ancient days; and of eternal
years I have been mindful.” What are eternal years? It is a mighty
thought. See whether this thought requireth anything but great silence.
Apart from all noise without, from all tumult of things human let him
remain quiet within, that would think of those eternal years. Are the
years wherein we are eternal, or those wherein our ancestors have been,
or those wherein our posterity are to be? Far be it that they should be
esteemed eternal. For what part of these years doth remain? Behold we
speak and say, “in this year:” and what have we got of this year, save
the one day wherein we are. For the former days of this year have
already gone by, and are not to be had; but the future days have not yet
come. In one day we are, and we say, in this year: nay rather say thou,
to-day, if thou desirest to speak of anything present. For of the whole
year what hast thou got that is present? Whatsoever thereof is past, is
no longer; whatsoever thereof is future, is not yet: how then, “this
year”? Amend the expression: say, to-day. Thou speakest truth,
henceforth I will say, “to-day.” Again observe this too, how to-day the
morning hours have already past, the future hours have not yet come.
This too therefore amend: say, in this hour. And of this hour what hast
thou got? Some moments thereof have already gone by, those that are
future have not yet come. Say, in this moment. In what moment? While I
am uttering syllables, if I shall speak two syllables, the latter doth
not sound until the former hath gone by: in a word, in that same one
syllable, if it chance to have two letters, the latter letter doth not
sound, until the former hath <span id="page_363">p. 363</span> <span
id="ii.LXXVII-Page_363"></span>gone by. What then have we got of these
years? These years are changeable: the eternal years must be thought on,
years that stand, that are not made up of days that come and depart;
years whereof in another place the Scripture saith to God, “But Thou art
the Self-same, and Thy years shall not fail.” <span
id="fr_3498"></span>[3499](#fn_3498) On these years this man that
leapeth over, not in babbling without, but in silence <span
id="fr_3499"></span>[3500](#fn_3499) hath thought.

<span id="ii.LXXVII-p27"></span>8. “And I have meditated in the night
with my heart” ([Psa. 77.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#006)<span
id="ii.LXXVII-p27.1"></span>). No slanderous person seeketh for snares
in his words, in his heart he hath meditated. “I babbled.” Behold there
is the former babbling. Watch again, that thy spirit faint not. I did
not, he saith, I did not so babble as if it were abroad: in another way
now. How now? “I did babble, and did search out my spirit.” If he were
searching the earth to find veins of gold, no one would say that he was
foolish; nay, many men would call him wise, for desiring to come at
gold: how great treasures hath a man within, and he diggeth not! This
man was examining his spirit, and was speaking with that same his
spirit, and in the very speaking he was babbling. He was questioning
himself, was examining himself, was judge over himself. And he
continueth; “I did search my spirit.” He had to fear lest he should stay
within his own spirit: for he had babbled without; and because all his
enemies had anticipated watches, he found there sorrow, and his spirit
fainted. He that did babble without, lo, now doth begin to babble within
in safety, where being alone in secret, he is thinking on eternal
years.…

<span id="ii.LXXVII-p28"></span>9. And thou hast found what? “God will
not repel for everlasting” ([Psa.
77.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#007)<span
id="ii.LXXVII-p28.1"></span>). Weariness he had found in this life; in
no place a trustworthy, in no place a fearless comfort. Unto whatsoever
men he betook himself, in them he found scandal, or feared it. In no
place therefore was he free from care. An evil thing it was for him to
hold his peace, lest perchance he should keep silence from good words;
to speak and babble without was painful to him, lest all his enemies,
anticipating watches, should seek slanders in his words. Being
exceedingly straitened in this life, he thought much of another life,
where there is not this trial. And when is he to arrive thither? For it
cannot but be evident that our suffering here is the anger of God. This
thing is spoken of in Isaiah, “I will not be an avenger unto you for
everlasting, nor will I be angry with you at all times.”  <span
id="fr_3500"></span>[3501](#fn_3500) …Will this anger of God always
abide? This man hath not found this in silence. For he saith what? “God
will not repel for everlasting, and He will not add any more that it
should be well-pleasing to Him still.” That is, that it should be
well-pleasing to Him still to repel, and He will not add the repelling
for everlasting. He must needs recall to Himself His servants, He must
needs receive fugitives returning to the Lord, He must needs hearken to
the voice of them that are in fetters. “Or unto the end will He cut off
mercy from generation to generation?” ([Psa.
77.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#008)<span
id="ii.LXXVII-p29.2"></span>).

<span id="ii.LXXVII-p30"></span>10. “Or will God forget to be merciful?”
([Psa. 77.9](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#009)<span
id="ii.LXXVII-p30.1"></span>). In thee, from thee unto another there is
no mercy unless God bestow it on thee: and shall God Himself forget
mercy? The stream runneth: shall the spring itself be dried up? “Or
shall God forget to be merciful: or shall He keep back in anger His
mercies?” That is, shall He be so angry, as that He will not have mercy?
He will more easily keep back anger than mercy.

<span id="ii.LXXVII-p31"></span>11. “And I said.” Now leaping over
himself he hath said what? “Now I have begun:” ([Psa.
77.10](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#010)<span
id="ii.LXXVII-p31.1"></span>), when I had gone out even from myself.
Here henceforth there is no danger: for even to remain in myself, was
danger. “And I said, Now I have begun: this is the changing of the right
hand of the Lofty One.” Now the Lofty One hath begun to change me: now I
have begun something wherein I am secure: now I have entered a certain
palace <span id="fr_3501"></span>[3502](#fn_3501) of joys, wherein no
enemy is to be feared: now I have begun to be in that region, where all
mine enemies do not anticipate watches. “Now I have begun: this is the
changing of the right hand of the Lofty One.”

<span id="ii.LXXVII-p33"></span>12. “I have been mindful of the works of
the Lord” ([Psa. 77.11](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#011)<span
id="ii.LXXVII-p33.1"></span>). Now behold him roaming among the works of
the Lord. For he was babbling without, and being made sorrowful thereby
his spirit fainted: he babbled within with his own heart, and with his
spirit, and having searched out that same spirit he was mindful of the
eternal years, was mindful of the mercy of the Lord, how God will not
repel him for everlasting; and he began now fearlessly to rejoice in His
works, fearlessly to exult in the same. Let us hear now those very
works, and let us too exult. But let even us leap over in our
affections, and not rejoice in things temporal. For we too have our bed.
Why do we not enter therein? Why do we not abide in silence? Why do we
not search out our spirit? Why do we not think on the eternal years? Why
do we not rejoice in the works of God? In such sort now let us hear, and
let us take delight in Himself speaking, in order that when we shall
have departed hence, we may do that which we used to do while He spake;
if only we are making the beginning of Him whereof he spake in, “Now I
have begun.” To rejoice in the works of God, is to forget even <span
id="page_364">p. 364</span> <span
id="ii.LXXVII-Page_364"></span>thyself, if thou canst delight in Him
alone. For what is a better thing than He? Dost thou not see that, when
thou returnest to thyself, thou returnest to a worse thing? “for I shall
be mindful from the beginning of Thy wonderful works.”

<span id="ii.LXXVII-p34"></span>13. “And I will meditate on all Thy
works, and on Thy affections I will babble” ([Psa.
77.12](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#012)<span
id="ii.LXXVII-p34.1"></span>). Behold the third babbling! He babbled
without, when he hinted; he babbled in his spirit within, when he
advanced: he babbled on the works of God, when he arrived at the place
toward which he advanced. “And on Thy affections:” not on any
affections. What man doth live without affections? And do ye suppose,
brethren, that they who fear God, worship God, love God, have not any
affections? Wilt thou indeed suppose and dare to suppose, that painting,
the theatre, hunting, hawking, fishing, engage the affections, and the
meditation on God doth not engage certain interior affections of its
own, while we contemplate the universe, and place before our eyes the
spectacle of the natural world, and therein labour to discover the
Maker, and find Him nowhere unpleasing, but pleasing above  <span
id="fr_3502"></span>[3503](#fn_3502) all things?

<span id="ii.LXXVII-p36"></span>14. “O God, Thy way is in the Holy One”
([Psa. 77.13](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#013)<span
id="ii.LXXVII-p36.1"></span>). He is contemplating now the works of the
mercy of God around us, out of these he is babbling, and in these
affections he is exulting. At first he is beginning from thence, “Thy
way is in the Holy One?” What is that way of Thine which is in the Holy
One? “I am,” He saith, “the Way, the Truth, and the Life.” <span
id="fr_3503"></span>[3504](#fn_3503) Return therefore, ye men, from your
affections.…“Who is a great God, like our God?” <span
id="fr_3504"></span>[3505](#fn_3504) Gentiles have their affections
regarding their gods, they adore idols, they have eyes and they see not;
ears they have and they hear not; feet they have and they walk not. Why
dost thou walk to a God that walketh not? I do not, he saith, worship
such things, and what dost thou worship? The divinity which is there.
Thou dost then worship that whereof hath been said elsewhere, “for the
Gods of the nations are demons.” <span
id="fr_3505"></span>[3506](#fn_3505) Thou dost either worship idols, or
devils. Neither idols, nor devils, he saith. And what dost thou worship?
The stars, sun, moon, those things celestial. How much better Him that
hath made both things earthly and things celestial. “Who is a great God
like our God?”

<span id="ii.LXXVII-p40"></span>15. “Thou art the God that doest
wonderful things alone” ([Psa.
77.14](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#014)<span
id="ii.LXXVII-p40.1"></span>). Thou art indeed a great God, doing
wonderful things in body, in soul; alone doing them. The deaf have
heard, the blind have seen, the feeble have recovered, the dead have
risen, the paralytic have been strengthened. But these miracles were at
that time performed on bodies, let us see those wrought on the soul.
Sober are those that were a little before drunken, believers are those
that were a little before worshippers of idols: their goods they bestow
on the poor that did rob before those of others.…“Wonderful things
alone.” Moses too did them, but not alone: Elias too did them, even
Eliseus did them, the Apostles too did them, but no one of them alone.
That they might have power to do them, Thou wast with them: when Thou
didst them they were not with Thee. For they were not with Thee when
Thou didst them, inasmuch as Thou didst make even these very men. How
“alone”? Is it perchance the Father, and not the Son? Or the Son, and
not the Father? Nay, but Father and Son and Holy Ghost. For it is not
three Gods but one God that doeth wonderful things alone, and even in
this very leaper-over. For even his leaping over and arriving at these
things was a miracle of God: when he was babbling within with his own
spirit, in order that he might leap over even that same spirit of his,
and might delight in the works of God, he then did wonderful things
himself. But God hath done what? “Thou hast made known unto the people
Thy power.” <span id="fr_3506"></span>[3507](#fn_3506) Thence this
congregation of Asaph leaping over; because He hath made known in the
peoples His virtue. What virtue of His hath He made known in the
peoples? “But we preach Christ crucified,…Christ the power of God and
the wisdom of God.” <span id="fr_3507"></span>[3508](#fn_3507) If then
the virtue of God is Christ, He hath made known Christ in the peoples.
Do we not yet perceive so much as this; and are we so unwise, are we
lying so much below, do we so leap over nothing, as that we see not
this?

<span id="ii.LXXVII-p43"></span>16. “Thou hast redeemed in Thine arm Thy
people” ([Psa. 77.15](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#015)<span
id="ii.LXXVII-p43.1"></span>). “With Thine arm,” that is, with Thy
power. “And to whom hath the arm of the Lord been revealed?” <span
id="fr_3508"></span>[3509](#fn_3508) “Thou hast redeemed in Thine arm
Thy people, the sons of Israel and of Joseph.” How as if two peoples,
“the sons of Israel and of Joseph”? Are not the sons of Joseph among the
sons of Israel?…He hath admonished us of some distinction to be made.
Let us search out our spirit, perchance God hath placed there
something—God whom we ought even by night to seek with our hands, in
order that we may not be deceived—perchance we shall discover even
ourselves in this distinction of “sons of Israel and of Joseph.” By
Joseph He hath willed another people to be understood, hath willed that
the people of the Gentiles be understood. Why the people of the Gentiles
by Joseph? Because Joseph was sold into Egypt by his brethren. <span
id="fr_3509"></span>[3510](#fn_3509) That Joseph whom the brethren
envied, and sold <span id="page_365">p. 365</span> <span
id="ii.LXXVII-Page_365"></span>him into Egypt, when sold into Egypt,
toiled, was humbled; when made known and exalted, flourished, reigned.
And by all these things he hath signified what? What but Christ sold by
His brethren, banished from His own land, as it were into the Egypt of
the Gentiles? There at first humbled, when the Martyrs were suffering
persecutions: now exalted, as we see; inasmuch as there hath been
fulfilled in Him, “There shall adore Him all kinds of the earth, all
nations shall serve Him.” <span id="fr_3510"></span>[3511](#fn_3510)
Therefore Joseph is the people of the Gentiles, but Israel the people of
the Hebrew nation. God hath redeemed His people, “the sons of Israel and
of Joseph.” By means of what? By means of the corner stone, <span
id="fr_3511"></span>[3512](#fn_3511) wherein the two walls have been
joined together.

<span id="ii.LXXVII-p48"></span>17. And he continueth how? “The waters
have seen Thee, O God, and they have feared and the abysses have been
troubled” ([Psa. 77.16](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#016)<span
id="ii.LXXVII-p48.1"></span>). What are the waters? The peoples. What
are these waters hath been asked in the Apocalypse, <span
id="fr_3512"></span>[3513](#fn_3512) the answer was, the peoples. There
we find most clearly waters put by a figure for peoples. But above he
had said, “Thou hast made known in the peoples Thy virtue.” <span
id="fr_3513"></span>[3514](#fn_3513) With reason therefore, “the waters
have seen Thee, and they have feared.” They have been changed because
they have feared. What are the abysses? The depths of waters. What man
among the peoples is not troubled, when the conscience is smitten? Thou
seekest the depth of the sea, what is deeper than human conscience? That
is the depth which was troubled, when God redeemed with His arm His
people. In what manner were the abysses troubled? When all men poured
forth their consciences in confession.

<span id="ii.LXXVII-p51"></span>18. In praises of God, in confessions of
sins, in hymns and in songs, in prayers, “There is a multitude of the
sound of waters. The clouds have uttered a voice” ([Psa.
77.17](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#017)<span
id="ii.LXXVII-p51.1"></span>). Thence that sound of waters, thence the
troubling of the abysses, because “the clouds have uttered a voice.”
What clouds? The preachers of the word of truth. What clouds? Those
concerning which God doth menace a certain vineyard, which instead of
grape had brought forth thorns and He saith, “I will command My clouds,
that they rain no rain upon it.” <span
id="fr_3514"></span>[3515](#fn_3514) In a word, the Apostles forsaking
the Jews, went to the Gentiles: in preaching Christ among all nations,
“the clouds have uttered a voice.” “For Thine arrows have gone through.”
Those same voices of the clouds He hath again called arrows. For the
words of the Evangelists were arrows. For these things are allegories.
For properly neither an arrow is rain, nor rain is an arrow: but yet the
word of God is both an arrow because it doth smite; and rain because it
doth water. Let no one therefore any longer wonder at the troubling of
the abysses, when “Thine arrows have gone through.” What is, “have gone
through”? They have not stopped in the ears, but they have pierced the
heart. “The voice of Thy thunder is in the wheel” ([Psa.
77.18](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#018)<span
id="ii.LXXVII-p52.2"></span>). What is this? How are we to understand
it? May the Lord give aid. When boys we were wont to imagine, whenever
we heard thunderings from Heaven, that carriages were going forth as it
were from the stables. For thunder doth make a sort of rolling like
carriages. Must we return to these boyish thoughts, in order to
understand, “the voice of Thy thunder is in the wheel,” as though God
hath certain carriages in the clouds, and the passing along of the
carriages doth raise that sound? Far be it. This is boyish, vain,
trifling. What is then, “The voice of Thy thunder is in the wheel”? Thy
voice rolleth. Not even this do I understand. What shall we do? Let us
question Idithun himself, to see whether perchance he may himself
explain what he hath said: “The voice,” he saith, “of Thy thunder is in
the wheel.” I do not understand. I will hear what thou sayest: “Thy
lightnings have appeared to the round world.” Say then, I had no
understanding. The round world is a wheel. <span
id="fr_3515"></span>[3516](#fn_3515) For the circuit of the round world
is with reason called also an “orb:” whence also a small wheel is called
an “orbiculus.” “The voice of Thy thunder is in the wheel:” Thy
“lightnings have appeared to the round world.” Those clouds in a wheel
have gone about the round world, have gone about with thundering and
with lightning, they have shaken the abyss, with commandments they have
thundered, with miracles they have lightened. “Unto every land hath gone
forth the sound of them, and unto the ends of the orb the words of
them.” <span id="fr_3516"></span>[3517](#fn_3516) “The land hath been
moved and made to tremble:” that is, all men that dwell in the land. But
by a figure the land itself is sea. Why? Because all nations are called
by the name of sea, inasmuch as human life is bitter, and exposed to
storms and tempests. Moreover if thou observe this, how men devour one
another like fishes, how the stronger doth swallow up the weaker—it is
then a sea, unto it the Evangelists went.

<span id="ii.LXXVII-p55"></span>19. “Thy way is in the sea” ([Psa.
77.19](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#019)<span
id="ii.LXXVII-p55.1"></span>). But now Thy way was in the Holy One, now
“Thy way is in the sea:” because the Holy One Himself is in the sea, and
with reason even did walk upon the waters of the sea. <span
id="fr_3517"></span>[3518](#fn_3517) <span id="page_366">p. 366</span>
<span id="ii.LXXVII-Page_366"></span>“Thy way is in the sea,” that is,
Thy Christ is preached among the Gentiles.…“Thy way is in the sea, and
Thy paths in many waters,” that is, in many peoples. “And Thy footsteps
will not be known.” He hath touched certain, and wonder were it if it be
not those same Jews. Behold now the mercy of Christ hath been so
published to the Gentiles, that “Thy way is in the sea. Thy footsteps
will not be known.” How so, by whom will they not be known, save by
those who still say, Christ hath not yet come? Why do they say, Christ
hath not yet come? Because they do not yet recognise Him walking on the
sea.

<span id="ii.LXXVII-p57"></span>20. “Thou hast led home Thy people like
sheep in the hand of Moses and of Aaron” ([Psa.
77.20](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#020)<span
id="ii.LXXVII-p57.1"></span>). Why He hath added this is somewhat
difficult to discover.…They banished Christ; sick as they were, they
would not have Him for their Saviour; but He began to be among the
Gentiles, and among all nations, among many peoples. Nevertheless, a
remnant of that people hath been saved. The ungrateful multitude hath
remained without, even the halting breadth of Jacob’s thigh. <span
id="fr_3518"></span>[3519](#fn_3518) For the breadth of the thigh is
understood of the multitude of lineage, and among the greater part of
the Israelites a certain multitude became vain and foolish, so as not to
know the steps of Christ on the waters. “Thou hast led home Thy people
like sheep,” and they have not known Thee. Though Thou hast done such
great benefits unto them, hast divided sea, hast made them pass over dry
land between waters, hast drowned in the waves pursuing enemies, in the
desert hast rained manna for their hunger, leading them home “by the
hand of Moses and Aaron:” still they thrust Thee from them, so that in
the sea was Thy Way, and Thy steps they knew not.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3482"></span>[360:3483](1080088.htm#fr_3482) <span
id="ii.LXXVII-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVII-p2"></span> Lat. LXXVI. Sermon to the Commonalty.

<span id="fn_3483"></span>[360:3484](1080088.htm#fr_3483) <span
id="ii.LXXVII-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVII-p4"></span> \[See p. 112, *supra*.—C.\]

<span id="fn_3484"></span>[360:3485](1080088.htm#fr_3484) <span
id="ii.LXXVII-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVII-p6"></span> *Patrimonium*.

<span id="fn_3485"></span>[360:3486](1080088.htm#fr_3485) <span
id="ii.LXXVII-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVII-p7"></span> [Ps. xviii.
41](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#041)<span id="ii.LXXVII-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3486"></span>[360:3487](1080088.htm#fr_3486) <span
id="ii.LXXVII-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVII-p8"></span> [Ps. xiv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#004)<span id="ii.LXXVII-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3487"></span>[360:3488](1080088.htm#fr_3487) <span
id="ii.LXXVII-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVII-p9"></span> *In se non vocaverunt*.

<span id="fn_3488"></span>[360:3489](1080088.htm#fr_3488) <span
id="ii.LXXVII-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVII-p10"></span> [Job i.
21](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#021)<span id="ii.LXXVII-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3489"></span>[361:3490](1080088.htm#fr_3489) <span
id="ii.LXXVII-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVII-p13"></span> Or, “trial.”

<span id="fn_3490"></span>[361:3491](1080088.htm#fr_3490) <span
id="ii.LXXVII-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVII-p14"></span> [Job vii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#001)<span id="ii.LXXVII-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3491"></span>[361:3492](1080088.htm#fr_3491) <span
id="ii.LXXVII-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVII-p15"></span> [John xx.
27](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#027)<span id="ii.LXXVII-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3492"></span>[361:3493](1080088.htm#fr_3492) <span
id="ii.LXXVII-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVII-p16"></span> [2 Pet. i.
19](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#019)<span id="ii.LXXVII-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3493"></span>[361:3494](1080088.htm#fr_3493) <span
id="ii.LXXVII-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVII-p17"></span> [1 Thess. v.
19](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#019)<span id="ii.LXXVII-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3494"></span>[361:3495](1080088.htm#fr_3494) <span
id="ii.LXXVII-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVII-p18"></span> [Matt. xxii.
30](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#030)<span id="ii.LXXVII-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3495"></span>[361:3496](1080088.htm#fr_3495) <span
id="ii.LXXVII-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVII-p20"></span> [Ps. cxix.
53](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#053)<span id="ii.LXXVII-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3496"></span>[362:3497](1080088.htm#fr_3496) <span
id="ii.LXXVII-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVII-p21"></span> [Ps. lxviii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#020)<span id="ii.LXXVII-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3497"></span>[362:3498](1080088.htm#fr_3497) <span
id="ii.LXXVII-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVII-p23"></span> [Eph. vi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#012)<span id="ii.LXXVII-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3498"></span>[363:3499](1080088.htm#fr_3498) <span
id="ii.LXXVII-p24.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVII-p25"></span> [Ps. cii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#027)<span id="ii.LXXVII-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3499"></span>[363:3500](1080088.htm#fr_3499) <span
id="ii.LXXVII-p25.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVII-p26"></span> Oxf. <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.LXXVII-p26.1"></span>mss</span>. “his own silence.”

<span id="fn_3500"></span>[363:3501](1080088.htm#fr_3500) <span
id="ii.LXXVII-p28.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVII-p29"></span> [Isa. lvii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#016)<span id="ii.LXXVII-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3501"></span>[363:3502](1080088.htm#fr_3501) <span
id="ii.LXXVII-p31.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVII-p32"></span> *Al*. “air.”

<span id="fn_3502"></span>[364:3503](1080088.htm#fr_3502) <span
id="ii.LXXVII-p34.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVII-p35"></span> One <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.LXXVII-p35.1"></span>ms</span>. “through.”

<span id="fn_3503"></span>[364:3504](1080088.htm#fr_3503) <span
id="ii.LXXVII-p36.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVII-p37"></span> [John xiv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#006)<span id="ii.LXXVII-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3504"></span>[364:3505](1080088.htm#fr_3504) <span
id="ii.LXXVII-p37.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVII-p38"></span> [Ps. cxiii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#005)<span id="ii.LXXVII-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3505"></span>[364:3506](1080088.htm#fr_3505) <span
id="ii.LXXVII-p38.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVII-p39"></span> [Ps. cxxxv.
15](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#015)<span id="ii.LXXVII-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3506"></span>[364:3507](1080088.htm#fr_3506) <span
id="ii.LXXVII-p40.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVII-p41"></span> *Virtus*. “Virtue,” Oxf. ed.

<span id="fn_3507"></span>[364:3508](1080088.htm#fr_3507) <span
id="ii.LXXVII-p41.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVII-p42"></span> [1 Cor. i.
23](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#023)<span id="ii.LXXVII-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3508"></span>[364:3509](1080088.htm#fr_3508) <span
id="ii.LXXVII-p43.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVII-p44"></span> [Isa. liii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#001)<span id="ii.LXXVII-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3509"></span>[364:3510](1080088.htm#fr_3509) <span
id="ii.LXXVII-p44.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVII-p45"></span> [Gen. xxxvii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#028)<span id="ii.LXXVII-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3510"></span>[365:3511](1080088.htm#fr_3510) <span
id="ii.LXXVII-p45.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVII-p46"></span> [Ps. lxxii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#011)<span id="ii.LXXVII-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3511"></span>[365:3512](1080088.htm#fr_3511) <span
id="ii.LXXVII-p46.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVII-p47"></span> [Eph. ii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#020)<span id="ii.LXXVII-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3512"></span>[365:3513](1080088.htm#fr_3512) <span
id="ii.LXXVII-p48.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVII-p49"></span> [Rev. xvii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#015)<span id="ii.LXXVII-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3513"></span>[365:3514](1080088.htm#fr_3513) <span
id="ii.LXXVII-p49.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVII-p50"></span> [Ps. lxxvii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#014)<span id="ii.LXXVII-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3514"></span>[365:3515](1080088.htm#fr_3514) <span
id="ii.LXXVII-p51.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVII-p52"></span> [Isa. v.
6](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#006)<span id="ii.LXXVII-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3515"></span>[365:3516](1080088.htm#fr_3515) <span
id="ii.LXXVII-p52.3"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVII-p53"></span> \[No idea of a sphere, but of a plane,
bounded by the encircling horizon.—C.\]

<span id="fn_3516"></span>[365:3517](1080088.htm#fr_3516) <span
id="ii.LXXVII-p53.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVII-p54"></span> [Ps. xix.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#004)<span id="ii.LXXVII-p54.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3517"></span>[365:3518](1080088.htm#fr_3517) <span
id="ii.LXXVII-p55.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVII-p56"></span> [Matt. xiv.
25](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#025)<span id="ii.LXXVII-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3518"></span>[366:3519](1080088.htm#fr_3518) <span
id="ii.LXXVII-p57.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXVII-p58"></span> [Gen. xxxii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#032)<span id="ii.LXXVII-p58.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm LXXVIII](1080089)
