[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080109)  [Next](1080111) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.XCIX"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIX-p1"></span> <span id="ii.XCIX-p1.1"></span><span
class="c20"><span id="ii.XCIX-p1.2"></span>Psalm XCIX. <span
id="fr_4506"></span>[4507](#fn_4506) </span>

<span id="ii.XCIX-p3"></span>1. Beloved brethren, it ought already to be
known to you, as sons of the Church, and well instructed in the school
of Christ through all the books of our ancient fathers, who wrote the
words of God and the great things of God, that their wish was to consult
for our good, who were to live at this period, believers in Christ; who,
at a seasonable time came unto us, the first time, in humility; at the
second, destined to come in exaltation.…For thus it is said in the
Psalms: “Truth shall flourish out of the earth: and righteousness hath
looked down from heaven.” <span id="fr_4507"></span>[4508](#fn_4507)
Now, therefore, our whole design is, when we hear a Psalm, a Prophet, or
the Law, all of which was written before our Lord Jesus Christ came in
the flesh, to see Christ there, to understand Christ there. Attend
therefore, beloved, to this Psalm, with me, and let us herein seek
Christ; certainly He will appear to those who seek Him, who at first
appeared to those who sought Him not; and He will not desert those who
long for Him, who redeemed those who neglected Him. Behold, the Psalm
beginneth concerning Him: of Him it is said:—

<span id="ii.XCIX-p5"></span>2. “The Lord is King, be the people angry”
([Psa. 99.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa099.htm#001)<span
id="ii.XCIX-p5.1"></span>). For our Lord Jesus Christ began to reign,
began to be preached, after He arose from the dead and ascended into
heaven, after He had filled His disciples with the confidence of the
Holy Spirit, that they should not fear death, which He had already
killed in Himself. Our Lord Christ began then to be preached, that they
who wished for salvation might believe in Him; and the peoples who
worshipped idols were angry. They who worshipped what they had made were
angry, because He by whom they were made was declared. He announced, in
fact, through His disciples, Himself, who wished them to be converted
unto Him by whom they were made, and to be turned away from those things
which they had made themselves. They were angry with their Lord in
behalf of their idols, they who even if they were angry with their slave
on their idol’s account, were to be condemned. For their slave was
better than their idol: for God made their slave, the carpenter made
their idol. They were so angry in their idol’s behalf, that they feared
not to be angry with their Lord. But the words, “be they angry,” are a
prediction, not a command; for in a prophecy it is that this is said,
“The Lord is King, be the people angry.” Some good resulteth even from
the enraged people: let them be angry, and in their anger let the
Martyrs be crowned.…Ye heard when Jeremiah was being read before the
reading of the Apostle, <span id="fr_4508"></span>[4509](#fn_4508) if ye
listened; ye saw therein the times in which we now live. He said, “The
gods that have not made the heavens and the earth, let them perish from
the earth, and from under the heaven.” <span
id="fr_4509"></span>[4510](#fn_4509) He said not, The gods that have not
made the heavens and earth, let them perish from the heaven and from the
earth; because they never were in heaven: but what did he say? “Let them
perish from the earth, and from under the heaven.” As if, while the word
earth was repeated, the repetition of the word heaven were wanting
(because they never were in heaven): he repeateth the earth twice, since
it is under heaven. “Let them perish from the earth, and from under the
heaven,” from their temples. Consider if this be not now taking place;
if in a great measure it hath not already happened: for what, or how
much, hath remained? The idols remained rather in the hearts of the
pagans, than in the niches of the temples.

<span id="ii.XCIX-p8"></span>3. “He who sitteth between the cherubims:”
thou dost understand, “He is King: let the earth be stirred up.”…The
Cherubim is the seat of God, as the Scripture showeth us, a certain
exalted heavenly throne, which we see not; but the Word of God knoweth
it, knoweth it as His own seat: and the Word of God and the Spirit of
God hath Itself revealed to the servants of God where God sitteth. Not
that God doth sit, as doth man; but thou, if thou dost wish that God sit
in thee, if thou wilt be good, shalt be the seat of God; for thus is it
written, “The soul of the righteous is the seat of wisdom.” <span
id="fr_4510"></span>[4511](#fn_4510) For a throne is in our language
called a seat. For some, conversant with the Hebrew tongue, have
interpreted cherubim in the Latin language (for it is a Hebrew term) by
the words, fulness of knowledge. Therefore, because God surpasseth all
knowledge, He is said to sit above the fulness of knowledge. Let there
be therefore in thee fulness of knowledge, and even thou shalt be the
throne of God.…He knoweth all things: for our hairs are numbered before
God.  <span id="fr_4511"></span>[4512](#fn_4511) But the fulness of
knowledge which He willed man to know is different from this; the
knowledge which He willed thee to have, pertaineth to the law of God.
And who can, thou mayest perhaps say unto me, perfectly know the Law, so
that he may have within himself the ful<span id="page_484">p. 484</span>
<span id="ii.XCIX-Page_484"></span>ness of the knowledge of the Law, and
be able to be the seat of God? Be not disturbed; it is briefly told thee
what thou hast, if thou dost wish to have the fulness of knowledge, and
to become the throne of God: for the Apostle saith, “Love is the
fulfilling of the Law.” <span id="fr_4512"></span>[4513](#fn_4512) What
followeth then? Thou hast lost the whole of thine excuse. Ask thine
heart; see whether it hath love. If there be love there, there is the
fulfilment of the Law there also; already God dwelleth in thee, thou
hast become the throne of God. “Be the people angry;” what can the angry
people do against him who hath become the throne of God? Thou givest
heed unto them who rage against thee: Who is it that sitteth within
thee, thou givest not heed. Thou art become a heaven, and fearest thou
the earth? For the Scripture saith in another passage, that the Lord our
God doth declare, “The heaven is My throne.” <span
id="fr_4513"></span>[4514](#fn_4513) If therefore even thou by having
the fulness of knowledge, and by having love, hast been made the throne
of God, thou hast become a heaven. For this heaven which we look up to
with these eyes of ours, is not very precious before God. Holy souls are
the heaven of God; the minds of the Angels, and all the minds of His
servants, are the heaven of God.

<span id="ii.XCIX-p13"></span>4. “The Lord is great in Sion, and high
above all people” ([Psa. 99.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa099.htm#002)<span
id="ii.XCIX-p13.1"></span>).…He whom I spoke to thee of as above the
Cherubims, is great in Sion. Ask thou now, what is Sion? We know Sion to
be the city of God. The city of Jerusalem is called Sion; and is so
called according to a certain interpretation, for that Sion signifieth
watching, that is, sight and contemplation; for to watch is to look
forward to, or gaze upon, or strain the eyes to see. Now every soul is a
Sion, if it trieth to see that light which is to be seen. For if it
shall have gazed upon a light of its own, it is darkened; if upon His,
it is enlightened. But, now that it is clear that Sion is the city of
God; what is the city of God, but the Holy Church? For men who love one
another, and who love their God who dwelleth in them, constitute a city
unto God. Because a city is held together by some law; their very law is
Love; and that very Love is God: for openly it is written, “God is
Love.” <span id="fr_4514"></span>[4515](#fn_4514) He therefore who is
full of Love, is full of God; and many, full of love, constitute a city
full of God. That city of God is called Sion; the Church therefore is
Sion. In it God is great.…

<span id="ii.XCIX-p15"></span>5. Do ye imagine, brethren, that they
whose instruments re-echoed yesterday, are not angry with our fastings?
But let us not be angry with them, but let us fast for them. For the
Lord our God who sitteth in us hath said, He hath Himself commanded us
to pray for our enemies, to pray for them that persecute us: <span
id="fr_4515"></span>[4516](#fn_4515) and as the Church doth this, the
persecutors are almost extinct.…The drunken man doth not offend himself,
but he offendeth the sober man. Show me a man who is at last happy in
God, liveth gravely, sigheth for that everlasting peace which God hath
promised him; and see that when he hath seen a man dancing to an
instrument, he is more grieved for his madness, than for a man who is in
a frenzy from a fever. If then we know their evils, considering that we
also have been freed from those very evils, let us grieve for them; and
if we grieve for them, let us pray for them; and that we may be heard,
let us fast for them. For we do not keep our own fasts in their
holidays. Different are the fasts which we celebrate through the days of
the approaching Passover, through different seasons which are fixed for
us in Christ: but through their holidays we fast for this reason, that
when they are rejoicing, we may groan for them. For by their joy they
excite our grief, and cause us to remember how wretched they are as yet.
But since we see many freed thence, where we also have been, we ought
not to despair even of them. And if they are still enraged, let us pray;
and if still a particle of earth that hath remained behind be stirred up
against us, let us continue in lamentation for them, that to them also
God may grant understanding, and that with us they may hear those words,
in which we are at this moment rejoicing.

<span id="ii.XCIX-p17"></span>6. All these very people, over whom Thou
art great in Sion, “Let them confess unto Thy Name, which is great”
([Psa. 99.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa099.htm#003)<span
id="ii.XCIX-p17.1"></span>). Thy Name was little when they were enraged:
it hath become great; let them now confess. In what sense do we say,
that the Name of Christ was little, before it was spread abroad to so
great an extent? Because His report is meant by His Name. His Name was
small; already it hath become great. What nation is there that hath not
heard of the Name of Christ? Therefore let now the people confess unto
Thy Name, which is great, who before were enraged with Thy little Name.
Wherefore shall they confess? Because it is “wonderful and holy.” Thy
very Name is wonderful and holy. He is so preached as crucified, so
preached as humbled, so preached as judged, that He may come exalted,
that He may come living, that He may come to judge in power. He spareth
at present the people who blaspheme Him, because “the long-suffering of
God leadeth to repentance.” <span id="fr_4516"></span>[4517](#fn_4516)
For He who now spareth, will not always spare: nor will He, who is now
being preached that He may be feared, fail to come to judge. He will
come, my brethren, He will <span id="page_485">p. 485</span> <span
id="ii.XCIX-Page_485"></span>come: let us fear Him, and let us live so
that we may be found on His right hand. For He will come, and will
judge, so as to place some on the left hand, some on the right. <span
id="fr_4517"></span>[4518](#fn_4517) And He doth not act in an uncertain
manner, so as to err perchance betwixt men, so that he who should be set
on the right hand, be set on the left; or that he who ought to stand on
the left, by a mistake of God should stand on the right: He cannot err,
so as to place the evil where He ought to set the good; nor to place the
good, where He should have set the evil. If He cannot err, we err, if we
fear not; but if we have feared in this life, we shall not then have
what to fear for. “For the King’s honour loveth judgment.”…

<span id="ii.XCIX-p20"></span>7. “Thou hast prepared equity; Thou hast
wrought judgment and righteousness in Jacob.” For we too ought to have
judgment, we ought to have righteousness; but He worketh in us judgment
and righteousness, who created us in whom He might work them. How ought
we too to have judgment and righteousness? Thou hast judgment, when thou
dost distinguish evil from good: and righteousness when thou followest
the good, and turnest aside from the evil. By distinguishing them, thou
hast judgment; by doing, thou hast righteousness. “Eschew evil,” he
saith, “and do good; seek peace, and ensue it.” <span
id="fr_4518"></span>[4519](#fn_4518) Thou shouldest first have judgment,
then righteousness. What judgment? That thou mayest first judge what is
evil, and what is good. And what righteousness? That thou mayest shun
evil, and do good. But this thou wilt not gain from thyself; see what he
hath said, “Thou hast wrought judgment and righteousness in Jacob.”

<span id="ii.XCIX-p22"></span>8. “O magnify the Lord our God” ([Psa.
99.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa099.htm#005)<span id="ii.XCIX-p22.1"></span>).
Magnify Him truly, magnify Him well. Let us praise Him, let us magnify
Him who hath wrought the very righteousness which we have; who wrought
it in us, Himself. For who but He who justified us, wrought
righteousness in us? For of Christ it is said, “who justifieth the
ungodly.” <span id="fr_4519"></span>[4520](#fn_4519) …“And fall down
before <span id="fr_4520"></span>[4521](#fn_4520) His footstool: for He
is holy.” What are we to fall down before? His footstool. What is under
the feet is called a footstool, in Greek <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.XCIX-p24.1"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.XCIX-p24.2"></span>ποπόδιον</span>, in Latin *Scabellum* or
*Suppedaneum.* But consider, brethren, what he commandeth us to fall
down before. In another passage of the Scriptures it is said, “The
heaven is My throne, and the earth is My footstool.”  <span
id="fr_4521"></span>[4522](#fn_4521) Doth he then bid us worship the
earth, since in another passage it is said, that it is God’s footstool?
How then shall we worship the earth, when the Scripture saith openly,
“Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God”? <span
id="fr_4522"></span>[4523](#fn_4522) Yet here it saith, “fall down
before His footstool:” and, explaining to us what His footstool is, it
saith, “The earth is My footstool.” I am in doubt; I fear to worship the
earth, lest He who made the heaven and the earth condemn me; again, I
fear not to worship the footstool of my Lord, because the Psalm biddeth
me, “fall down before His footstool.” I ask, what is His footstool? and
the Scripture telleth me, “the earth is My footstool.” In hesitation I
turn unto Christ, since I am herein seeking Himself: and I discover how
the earth may be worshipped without impiety, <span
id="fr_4523"></span>[4524](#fn_4523) how His footstool may be worshipped
without impiety. For He took upon Him earth from earth; because flesh is
from earth, and He received flesh from the flesh of Mary. And because He
walked here in very flesh, and gave that very flesh to us to eat for our
salvation; and no one eateth that flesh, unless he hath first
worshipped: we have found out in what sense such a footstool of our
Lord’s may be worshipped, and not only that we sin not in worshipping
it, but that we sin in not worshipping. But doth the flesh give life?
Our Lord Himself, when He was speaking in praise of this same earth,
said, “It is the Spirit that quickeneth, the flesh profiteth
nothing.”…But when our Lord praised it, He was speaking of His own
flesh, and He had said, “Except a man eat My flesh, he shall have no
life in him.” <span id="fr_4524"></span>[4525](#fn_4524) Some disciples
of His, about seventy, <span id="fr_4525"></span>[4526](#fn_4525) were
offended, and said, “This is an hard saying, who can hear it?” And they
went back, and walked no more with Him. It seemed unto them hard that He
said, “Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of Man, ye have no life in
you:” they received it foolishly, they thought of it carnally, and
imagined that the Lord would cut off parts from His body, and give unto
them; and they said, “This is a hard saying.” It was they who were hard,
not the saying; for unless they had been hard, and not meek, they would
have said unto themselves, He saith not this without reason, but there
must be some latent mystery herein. They would have remained with Him,
softened, not hard: and would have learnt that from Him which they who
remained, when the others departed, learnt. For when twelve disciples
had remained with Him, on their departure, these remaining followers
suggested to Him, as if in grief for the death of the former, that they
were offended by His words, and turned back. But He instructed them, and
saith unto them, “It is the Spirit that quickeneth, but the flesh
profiteth nothing; the words that I have spoken unto you, they are
spirit, and they are life.” <span id="fr_4526"></span>[4527](#fn_4526)
Understand spiritu<span id="page_486">p. 486</span> <span
id="ii.XCIX-Page_486"></span>ally what I have said; ye are not to eat
this body which ye see; nor to drink that blood which they who will
crucify Me shall pour forth. I have commended unto you a certain
mystery; spiritually understood, it will quicken. Although it is needful
that this be visibly celebrated, yet it must be spiritually
understood. <span id="fr_4527"></span>[4528](#fn_4527)

<span id="ii.XCIX-p32"></span>9. “Moses and Aaron among His priests, and
Samuel among such as call upon His Name: these called upon the Lord, and
He heard them” ([Psa. 99.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa099.htm#006)<span
id="ii.XCIX-p32.1"></span>). “He spake unto them out of the cloudy
pillar” ([Psa. 99.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa099.htm#007)<span
id="ii.XCIX-p32.2"></span>).…Of Moses it is not there stated that he was
a priest. But if he was not this, what was he? Could he be anything
greater than a priest? This Psalm declareth that he also was himself a
priest: “Moses and Aaron among His priests.” They therefore were the
Lord’s priests. Samuel is read of later in the Book of Kings: this
Samuel is in David’s times; for he anointed the holy David. Samuel from
his infancy grew up in the temple.…He mentioneth these: and by these
desireth us to understand all the saints. Yet why hath he here named
those? Because we said that we ought here to understand Christ. Attend,
holy brethren. He said above, “O magnify the Lord our God: and fall down
before His footstool, for He is holy:” praising some one, that is, our
Lord Jesus Christ; whose footstool is to be worshipped, because He
assumed flesh, in which He was to appear before the human race; and
wishing to show unto us that the ancient fathers also had preached of
Him, because our Lord Jesus Christ is Himself the True Priest, he
mentioned these, because God spake unto them out of the cloudy pillar.
What meaneth, “out of the cloudy pillar”? He was speaking figuratively.
For if He spoke in some cloud, those obscure words predicted some one
unknown, yet to be manifest. This unknown one is no longer unknown; for
He is known by us, our Lord Jesus Christ.…He who first spoke out of the
cloudy pillar, hath in Person spoken unto us in His footstool; that is,
on earth, when He had assumed the flesh, for which reason we worship His
footstool, for He is holy. He Himself used to speak out of the cloud,
which was not then understood: He hath spoken in His own footstool, and
the words of His cloud have been understood. “They kept His testimonies,
and the law that He gave them.”…“Thou heardest them,” he saith, “O Lord
our God: Thou wast forgiving to them, O God” ([Psa.
99.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa099.htm#008)<span id="ii.XCIX-p32.3"></span>).
God is not said to be forgiving toward anything but sins: when He
pardoneth sins, then He forgiveth. And what had He in them to punish, so
that He was forgiving in pardoning them? He was forgiving in pardoning
their sins, He was also forgiving in punishing them. For what followeth?
“And punishedst all their own affections.” Even in punishing them Thou
wast forgiving toward them: for not in remitting, but also in punishing
their sins, hast Thou been forgiving. Consider, my brethren, what he
hath taught us here: attend. God is angry with him whom, when he
sinneth, He scourgeth not: for unto him to whom He is truly forgiving,
He not only remitteth sins, that they may not injure him in a future
life; but also chasteneth him, that he delight not in continual sin.

<span id="ii.XCIX-p33"></span>10. Come, my brethren; if we ask how these
were punished, the Lord will aid me to tell you. Let us consider these
three persons, Moses, Aaron, and Samuel: and how they were punished,
since he said, “Thou hast punished all their own affections:” meaning
those affections of theirs, which the Lord knew in their hearts, which
men knew not. For they were living in the midst of the people of God,
without complaint from man. But what do we say? That perhaps the early
life of Moses was sinful; for he fled from Egypt, after slaying a
man. <span id="fr_4528"></span>[4529](#fn_4528) The early life of Aaron
also was such as would displease God; for he allowed a maddened and
infatuated people to make an idol to worship; <span
id="fr_4529"></span>[4530](#fn_4529) and an idol was made for God’s
people to worship. What sin did Samuel, who was given up when an infant
to the temple? He passed all his life amid the holy sacraments of God:
from childhood the servant of God. Nothing was ever said of Samuel,
nothing by men. Perhaps God knew of somewhat there to chasten; since
even what seemeth perfect unto men, unto that Perfection is still
imperfect. Artists show many of their works to the unskilful; and when
the unskilful have pronounced them perfect, the artists polish them
still further, as they know what is still wanting to them, so that men
wonder at things they had imagined already perfect having received so
much additional polish. This happeneth in buildings, and in paintings,
and in embroidery, and almost in every species of art. At first they
judge it to be already in a manner perfect, so that their eyes desire
nothing further: but the judgment of the inexperienced eye is one, and
that of the rule of art another. Thus also these Saints were living
before the eyes of God, as if faultless, as if perfect, as if Angels:
but He who punished all their own affections, knew what was wanting in
them. But He punished them not in anger, but in mercy: He punished them
that He might perfect what He had begun, not to condemn what He had cast
away. God therefore punished all their affections. How did He punish
Samuel? <span id="page_487">p. 487</span> <span
id="ii.XCIX-Page_487"></span>where is this punishment?…What was said
unto Moses was a type, not a punishment. What punishment is death to an
old man? What punishment was it, not to enter into that land, into which
unworthy men entered? But what is said of Aaron? He also died an old
man: his sons succeeded him in the priesthood: his son afterwards ruled
in the priesthood: how did He punish Aaron also? <span
id="fr_4530"></span>[4531](#fn_4530) Samuel also died a holy old man,
leaving his sons as his successors. <span
id="fr_4531"></span>[4532](#fn_4531) I seek for the punishment inflicted
upon them, and according to men I find it not: but according to what I
know the servants of God suffer every day, they were day by day
punished. Read ye, and see the punishments, and ye also who are advanced
bear the punishments. Every day they suffered from the obstinate people,
every day they suffered from the ungodly livers; and were compelled to
live among those whose lives they daily censured. This was their
punishment. He unto whom it is small hath not advanced far; for the
ungodliness of others tormenteth thee in proportion as thou hast
departed far from thine own.…

<span id="ii.XCIX-p38"></span>11. “O magnify the Lord our God!” ([Psa.
99.9](../../../bib/kjv/psa099.htm#009)<span id="ii.XCIX-p38.1"></span>).
Again we magnify Him. He who is merciful even when He striketh, how is
He to be praised, how is He to be magnified? Canst thou show this unto
thy son, and cannot God? For thou art not good when thou dost caress thy
son, and evil when thou strikest him. Both when thou dost caress him
thou art a father, and when thou strikest him, thou art his father: thou
dost caress him, that he may not faint; thou strikest him, that he may
not perish. “O magnify the Lord our God, and worship Him upon His holy
hill: for the Lord our God is holy.” As he said above, “O magnify the
Lord our God and fall down before His footstool:” <span
id="fr_4532"></span>[4533](#fn_4532) now we have understood what it is
to worship His footstool: thus also but now after he had magnified the
Lord our God, that no man might magnify Him apart from His hill, he hath
also praised His hill. What is His hill? We read elsewhere concerning
this hill, that a stone was cut from the hill without hands, and
shattered all the kingdoms of the earth, and the stone itself increased.
This is the vision of Daniel which I am relating. This stone which was
cut from the hill without hands increased, and “became,” he saith, “a
great mountain, and filled the whole face of the earth.” <span
id="fr_4533"></span>[4534](#fn_4533) Let us worship on that great
mountain, if we desire to be heard. Heretics <span
id="fr_4534"></span>[4535](#fn_4534) do not worship on that mountain,
because it hath filled the whole earth; they have stuck fast on part of
it, and have lost the whole. If they acknowledge the Catholic Church,
they will worship on this hill with us. For we already see how that
stone that was cut from the mountain without hands hath increased, and
how great tracts of earth it hath prevailed over, and unto what nations
it hath extended. What is the mountain whence the stone was hewn without
hands? The Jewish kingdom, in the first place; since they worshipped one
God. Thence was hewn the stone, our Lord Jesus Christ.…That stone then
was born of the mountain without hands: it increased, and by its
increase broke all the kingdoms of the earth. It hath become a great
mountain, and hath filled the whole face of the earth. This is the
Catholic Church, in whose communion rejoice that ye are. But they who
are not in her communion, since they worship and praise God apart from
this same mountain, are not heard unto eternal life; although they may
be heard unto certain temporal things. Let them not flatter themselves,
because God heareth them in some things: for He heareth Pagans also in
some things. Do not the Pagans cry unto God, and it raineth? Wherefore?
Because He maketh His sun to rise over the good and the bad, and sendeth
rain upon the just and the unjust. <span
id="fr_4535"></span>[4536](#fn_4535) Boast not therefore, Pagan, that
when thou criest unto God, God sendeth rain, for He sendeth rain upon
the just and the unjust. He hath heard thee in temporal things: He
heareth thee not in things eternal, unless thou hast worshipped in His
holy hill. “Worship Him upon His holy hill: for the Lord our God is
holy.”…

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4506"></span>[483:4507](1080110.htm#fr_4506) <span
id="ii.XCIX-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIX-p2"></span> Lat. XCVIII. A sermon to the people.

<span id="fn_4507"></span>[483:4508](1080110.htm#fr_4507) <span
id="ii.XCIX-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIX-p4"></span> [Ps. lxxxv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/psa085.htm#011)<span id="ii.XCIX-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4508"></span>[483:4509](1080110.htm#fr_4508) <span
id="ii.XCIX-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIX-p6"></span> \[The Lesson from the prophet, and the
Epistle for the day.—C.\]

<span id="fn_4509"></span>[483:4510](1080110.htm#fr_4509) <span
id="ii.XCIX-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIX-p7"></span> [Jer. x.
11](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#011)<span id="ii.XCIX-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4510"></span>[483:4511](1080110.htm#fr_4510) <span
id="ii.XCIX-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIX-p9"></span> [Prov. xii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#023)<span id="ii.XCIX-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4511"></span>[483:4512](1080110.htm#fr_4511) <span
id="ii.XCIX-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIX-p10"></span> [Matt. x.
30](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#030)<span id="ii.XCIX-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4512"></span>[484:4513](1080110.htm#fr_4512) <span
id="ii.XCIX-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIX-p11"></span> [Rom. xiii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#010)<span id="ii.XCIX-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4513"></span>[484:4514](1080110.htm#fr_4513) <span
id="ii.XCIX-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIX-p12"></span> [Isa. lxvi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#001)<span id="ii.XCIX-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4514"></span>[484:4515](1080110.htm#fr_4514) <span
id="ii.XCIX-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIX-p14"></span> [1 John iv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#008)<span id="ii.XCIX-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4515"></span>[484:4516](1080110.htm#fr_4515) <span
id="ii.XCIX-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIX-p16"></span> [Matt. v.
44](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#044)<span id="ii.XCIX-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4516"></span>[484:4517](1080110.htm#fr_4516) <span
id="ii.XCIX-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIX-p18"></span> [Rom. ii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#004)<span id="ii.XCIX-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4517"></span>[485:4518](1080110.htm#fr_4517) <span
id="ii.XCIX-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIX-p19"></span> [Matt. xxv.
31-33](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#031)<span id="ii.XCIX-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4518"></span>[485:4519](1080110.htm#fr_4518) <span
id="ii.XCIX-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIX-p21"></span> [Ps. xxxiv.
14](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#014)<span id="ii.XCIX-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4519"></span>[485:4520](1080110.htm#fr_4519) <span
id="ii.XCIX-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIX-p23"></span> [Rom. iv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#005)<span id="ii.XCIX-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4520"></span>[485:4521](1080110.htm#fr_4520) <span
id="ii.XCIX-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIX-p24"></span> *Adorate*. See p. 477, n. 2.

<span id="fn_4521"></span>[485:4522](1080110.htm#fr_4521) <span
id="ii.XCIX-p24.3"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIX-p25"></span> [Isa. lxvi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#001)<span id="ii.XCIX-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4522"></span>[485:4523](1080110.htm#fr_4522) <span
id="ii.XCIX-p25.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIX-p26"></span> [Deut. vi.
13](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#013)<span id="ii.XCIX-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4523"></span>[485:4524](1080110.htm#fr_4523) <span
id="ii.XCIX-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIX-p27"></span> *2 Sent*. Dist. 9, c. *aliis autem*.

<span id="fn_4524"></span>[485:4525](1080110.htm#fr_4524) <span
id="ii.XCIX-p27.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIX-p28"></span> [John vi.
54](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#054)<span id="ii.XCIX-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4525"></span>[485:4526](1080110.htm#fr_4525) <span
id="ii.XCIX-p28.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIX-p29"></span> *Septuaginta fermè*. It is difficult to
know whence this number comes, unless it is that of *the* Seventy. But
they can hardly be supposed identical with these. One might think it a
gloss but for the mention of “twelve.”

<span id="fn_4526"></span>[485:4527](1080110.htm#fr_4526) <span
id="ii.XCIX-p29.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIX-p30"></span> [John vi.
63](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#063)<span id="ii.XCIX-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4527"></span>[486:4528](1080110.htm#fr_4527) <span
id="ii.XCIX-p30.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIX-p31"></span> \[A clear exposition of the Catholic
doctrine against the modern Roman, which was unknown to antiquity. See
the treatise of Ratramn. ed. (Lat. and Eng.) Oxford, 1838.—C.\]

<span id="fn_4528"></span>[486:4529](1080110.htm#fr_4528) <span
id="ii.XCIX-p33.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIX-p34"></span> [Exod. ii.
12-15](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#012)<span id="ii.XCIX-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4529"></span>[486:4530](1080110.htm#fr_4529) <span
id="ii.XCIX-p34.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIX-p35"></span> [Exod. xxxii.
1-4](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#001)<span id="ii.XCIX-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4530"></span>[487:4531](1080110.htm#fr_4530) <span
id="ii.XCIX-p35.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIX-p36"></span> [Num.
20:24](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#024), [Num.
33:38](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#038)<span id="ii.XCIX-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4531"></span>[487:4532](1080110.htm#fr_4531) <span
id="ii.XCIX-p36.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIX-p37"></span> [1 Sam.
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#001), [1 Sam.
25:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#001)<span id="ii.XCIX-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4532"></span>[487:4533](1080110.htm#fr_4532) <span
id="ii.XCIX-p38.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIX-p39"></span> [Ps. xcix.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa099.htm#005)<span id="ii.XCIX-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4533"></span>[487:4534](1080110.htm#fr_4533) <span
id="ii.XCIX-p39.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIX-p40"></span> [Dan.
2:34](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#034),
[35](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#035)<span id="ii.XCIX-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4534"></span>[487:4535](1080110.htm#fr_4534) <span
id="ii.XCIX-p40.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIX-p41"></span> Donatists.

<span id="fn_4535"></span>[487:4536](1080110.htm#fr_4535) <span
id="ii.XCIX-p41.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XCIX-p42"></span> [Matt. v.
45](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#045)<span id="ii.XCIX-p42.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm C](1080111)
