[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080011)  [Next](1080013) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.VIII"></span>

<span id="ii.VIII-p1"></span> <span id="ii.VIII-p1.1"></span><span
class="c20"><span id="ii.VIII-p1.2"></span>Psalm VIII.</span>

<span id="ii.VIII-p2"></span>*To the end, for the wine-presses, a psalm
of David himself.* <span id="fr_276"></span>[277](#fn_276)

<span id="ii.VIII-p4"></span>1. He seems to say nothing of wine-presses
in the text of the Psalm of which this is the title. By which it
appears, that one and the same thing is often signified in Scripture by
many and various similitudes. We may then take wine-presses to be
Churches, on the same principle by which we understand also by a
threshing-floor the Church. For whether in the threshing-floor, or in
the wine-press, there is nothing else done but the clearing the produce
of its covering; which is necessary, both for its first growth <span
id="page_28">p. 28</span> <span id="ii.VIII-Page_28"></span>and
increase, and arrival at the maturity either of the harvest or the
vintage. Of these coverings or supporters then; that is, of chaff, on
the threshing-floor, the corn; and of husks, in the presses, the wine is
stripped: as in the Churches, from the multitude of worldly men, which
is collected together with the good, for whose birth and adaptating to
the divine word that multitude was necessary, this is effected, that by
spiritual love they be separated through the operation of God’s
ministers. For now so it is that the good are, for a time, separated
from the bad, not in space, but in affection: although they have
converse together in the Churches, as far as respects bodily presence.
But another time will come, the corn will be stored up apart in the
granaries, and the wine in the cellars. “The wheat,” saith he, “He will
lay up in garners; but the chaff He will burn with fire unquenchable.”
 <span id="fr_277"></span>[278](#fn_277) The same thing may be thus
understood in another similitude: the wine He will lay up in cellars,
but the husks He will cast forth to cattle: so that by the bellies of
the cattle we may be allowed by way of similitude to understand the
pains of hell.

<span id="ii.VIII-p6"></span>2. There is another interpretation
concerning the wine-presses, yet still keeping to the meaning of
Churches. For even the Divine Word may be understood by the grape: for
the Lord even has been called a Cluster of grapes; which they that were
sent before by the people of Israel brought from the land of promise
hanging on a staff, crucified as it were. <span
id="fr_278"></span>[279](#fn_278) Accordingly, when the Divine Word
maketh use of, by the necessity of declaring Himself, the sound of the
voice, whereby to convey Himself to the ears of the hearers; in the same
sound of the voice, as it were in husks, knowledge, like the wine, is
enclosed: and so this grape comes into the ears, as into the pressing
machines of the wine-pressers. For there the separation is made, that
the sound may reach as far as the ear; but knowledge be received in the
memory of those that hear, as it were in a sort of vat; whence it passes
into discipline of the conversation and habit of mind, as from the vat
into the cellar: where if it do not through negligence grow sour, it
will acquire soundness by age. For it grew sour among the Jews, and this
sour vinegar they gave the Lord to drink. <span
id="fr_279"></span>[280](#fn_279) For that wine, which from the produce
of the vine of the New Testament the Lord is to drink with His saints in
the kingdom of His Father, <span id="fr_280"></span>[281](#fn_280) must
needs be most sweet and most sound.

<span id="ii.VIII-p10"></span>3. “Wine-presses” are also usually taken
for martyrdoms, as if when they who have confessed the name of Christ
have been trodden down by the blows of persecution, their mortal remains
as husks remained on earth, but their souls flowed forth into the rest
of a heavenly habitation. Nor yet by this interpretation do we depart
from the fruitfulness of the Churches. It is sung then, “for the
wine-presses,” for the Church’s establishment; when our Lord after His
resurrection ascended into heaven. For then He sent the Holy Ghost: by
whom the disciples being fulfilled preached with confidence the Word of
God, that Churches might be collected.

<span id="ii.VIII-p11"></span>4. Accordingly it is said, “O Lord, our
Lord, how admirable is Thy Name in all the earth!” ([Psa.
8.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#001)<span id="ii.VIII-p11.1"></span>).
I ask, how is His Name wonderful in all the earth? The answer is, “For
Thy glory has been raised above the heavens.” So that the meaning is
this, O Lord, who art our Lord, how do all that inhabit the earth admire
Thee! for Thy glory hath been raised from earthly humiliation above the
heavens. For hence it appeared who Thou wast that descendedst, when it
was by some seen, and by the rest believed, whither it was that Thou
ascendedst.

<span id="ii.VIII-p12"></span>5. “Out of the mouth of babes and
sucklings Thou hast made perfect praise, because of Thine enemies”
([Psa. 8.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#002)<span
id="ii.VIII-p12.1"></span>). I cannot take babes and sucklings to be any
other than those to whom the Apostle says, “As unto babes in Christ I
have given you milk to drink, not meat.” <span
id="fr_281"></span>[282](#fn_281) Who were meant by those who went
before the Lord praising Him, of whom the Lord Himself used this
testimony, when He answered the Jews who bade Him rebuke them, “Have ye
not read, out of the mouth of babes and sucklings Thou hast made perfect
praise?” <span id="fr_282"></span>[283](#fn_282) Now with good reason He
says not, Thou hast made, but, “Thou hast made perfect praise.” For
there are in the Churches also those who now no more drink milk, but eat
meat: whom the same Apostle points out, saying, “We speak wisdom among
them that are perfect;” <span id="fr_283"></span>[284](#fn_283) but not
by those only are the Churches perfected; for if there were only these,
little consideration would be had of the human race. But consideration
is had, when they too, who are not as yet capable of the knowledge of
things spiritual and eternal, are nourished by the faith of the temporal
history, which for our salvation after the Patriarchs and Prophets was
administered by the most excellent Power and Wisdom of God, even in the
Sacrament of the assumed Manhood, in which there is salvation for every
one that believeth; to the end that moved by Its authority each one may
obey Its precepts, whereby being purified and “rooted and grounded in
love,” he may be able to run with Saints, no more now a child in milk,
but a young man in meat, “to comprehend the breadth, the length, the
height, and depth, to know also the surpassing knowledge of the love of
Christ.” <span id="fr_284"></span>[285](#fn_284)

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span> <span id="ii.VIII-Page_29"></span>

<span id="ii.VIII-p17"></span>6. “Out of the mouth of babes and
sucklings Thou hast made perfect praise, because of Thine enemies.” By
enemies to this dispensation, which has been wrought through Jesus
Christ and Him crucified, we ought generally to understand all who
forbid belief in things unknown, <span id="fr_285"></span>[286](#fn_285)
and promise certain knowledge: <span id="fr_286"></span>[287](#fn_286)
as all heretics do, and they who in the superstition of the Gentiles are
called philosophers. Not that the promise of knowledge is to be blamed;
but because they deem the most healthful and necessary step of faith is
to be neglected, by which we must needs ascend to something certain,
which nothing but that which is eternal can be. Hence it appears that
they do not possess even this knowledge, which in contempt of faith they
promise; seeing that they know not so useful and necessary a step
thereof. “Out of the mouth,” then “of babes and sucklings Thou hast made
perfect praise,” Thou, our Lord, declaring first by the Apostle, “Except
ye believe, ye shall not understand;” <span
id="fr_287"></span>[288](#fn_287) and saying by His own mouth, “Blessed
are they that have not seen, and shall believe.” <span
id="fr_288"></span>[289](#fn_288) “Because of the enemies:” against whom
too that is said, “I confess to Thee, O Lord of heaven and earth,
because Thou hast hid these things from the wise, and revealed them unto
babes.” <span id="fr_289"></span>[290](#fn_289) “From the wise,” he
saith, not the really wise, but those who deem themselves such. “That
Thou mayest destroy the enemy and the defender.” Whom but the
heretic? <span id="fr_290"></span>[291](#fn_290) For he is both an enemy
and a defender, who when he would assault the Christian faith, seems to
defend it. Although the philosophers too of this world may be well taken
as the enemies and defenders: forasmuch as the Son of God is the Power
and Wisdom of God by which every one is enlightened who is made wise by
the truth: of which they profess themselves to be lovers, whence too
their name of philosophers; and therefore they seem to defend it, while
they are its enemies, since they cease not to recommend noxious
superstitions, that the elements of this world should be worshipped and
revered.

<span id="ii.VIII-p24"></span>7. “For I shall see Thy heavens, the works
of Thy fingers” ([Psa. 8.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#003)<span
id="ii.VIII-p24.1"></span>). We read that the law was written with the
finger of God, and given through Moses, His holy servant: by which
finger of God many understand the Holy Ghost. <span
id="fr_291"></span>[292](#fn_291) Wherefore if, by the fingers of God,
we are right in understanding these same ministers filled with the Holy
Ghost, by reason of this same Spirit which worketh in them, since by
them all holy Scripture has been completed for us; we understand
consistently with this, that, in this place, the books of both
Testaments are called “the heavens.” Now it is said too of Moses
himself, by the magicians of king Pharaoh, when they were conquered by
him, “This is the finger of God.”  <span
id="fr_292"></span>[293](#fn_292) And what is written, “The heavens
shall be rolled up as a book.” <span id="fr_293"></span>[294](#fn_293)
Although it be said of this æthereal heaven, yet naturally, according to
the same image, the heavens of books are named by allegory. “For I shall
see,” he says, “the heavens, the works of Thy fingers:” that is, I shall
discern and understand the Scriptures, which Thou, by the operation of
the Holy Ghost, hast written by Thy ministers.

<span id="ii.VIII-p28"></span>8. Accordingly the heavens named above
also may be interpreted as the same books, where he says, “For Thy glory
hath been raised above the heavens:” so that the complete meaning should
be this, “For Thy glory hath been raised above the heavens;” for Thy
glory hath exceeded the declarations of all the Scriptures: “Out of the
mouth of babes and sucklings Thou hast made perfect praise,” that they
should begin by belief in the Scriptures, who would arrive at the
knowledge of Thy glory: which hath been raised above the Scriptures, in
that it passeth by and transcends the announcements of all words and
languages. Therefore hath God lowered the Scriptures even to the
capacity of babes and sucklings, as it is sung in another Psalm, “And He
lowered the heaven, and came down:” <span
id="fr_294"></span>[295](#fn_294) and this did He because of the
enemies, who through pride of talkativeness, being enemies of the cross
of Christ, even when they do speak some truth, still cannot profit babes
and sucklings. So is the enemy and defender destroyed, who, whether he
seem to defend wisdom, or even the name of Christ, still, from the step
of this faith, <span id="fr_295"></span>[296](#fn_295) assaults that
truth, which he so readily makes promise of. Whereby too he is convicted
of not possessing it; since by assaulting the step thereof, namely
faith, he knows not how one should mount up thereto. Hence then is the
rash and blind promiser of truth, who is the enemy and defender,
destroyed, when the heavens, the works of God’s fingers, are seen, that
is, when the Scriptures, brought down even to the slowness of babes, are
understood; and by means of the lowness of the faith of the history,
which was transacted in time, they raise them, well nurtured and
strengthened, unto the grand height of the understanding of things
eternal, up to those things which they establish. <span
id="fr_296"></span>[297](#fn_296) For these heavens, that is, these
books, are the works of God’s fingers; for by the operation of the Holy
Ghost in the Saints they were completed. For they that have regarded
their own glory rather than man’s salvation, have spoken <span
id="page_30">p. 30</span> <span id="ii.VIII-Page_30"></span>without the
Holy Ghost, in whom are the bowels of the mercy of God.

<span id="ii.VIII-p32"></span>9. “For I shall see the heavens, the works
of Thy fingers, the moon and the stars, which Thou hast ordained.” The
moon and stars are ordained in the heavens; since both the Church
universal, to signify which the moon is often put, and Churches in the
several places particularly, which I imagine to be intimated by the name
of stars, are established in the same Scriptures, which we believe to be
expressed by the word heavens. <span id="fr_297"></span>[298](#fn_297)
But why the moon justly signifies the Church, will be more seasonably
considered in another Psalm, where it is said, “The sinners have bent
their bow, that they may shoot in the obscure moon the upright in
heart.” <span id="fr_298"></span>[299](#fn_298)

<span id="ii.VIII-p35"></span>10. “What is man, that Thou art mindful of
him? or the son of man, that Thou visitest him?” ([Psa.
8.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#004)<span id="ii.VIII-p35.1"></span>).
It may be asked, what distinction there is between man and son of man.
For if there were none, it would not be expressed thus, “man, or son of
man,” disjunctively. For if it were written thus, “What is man, that
Thou art mindful of him, and son of man, that Thou visitest him?” it
might appear to be a repetition of the word “man.” But now when the
expression is, “man or son of-man,” a distinction is more clearly
intimated. This is certainly to be remembered, that every son of man is
a man; although every man cannot be taken to be a son of man. Adam, for
instance, was a man, but not a son of man. Wherefore we may from hence
consider and distinguish what is the difference in this place between
man and son of man; namely, that they who bear the image of the earthy
man, who is not a son of man, should be signified by the name of men;
but that they who bear the image of the heavenly Man, <span
id="fr_299"></span>[300](#fn_299) should be rather called sons of men;
for the former again is called the old man <span
id="fr_300"></span>[301](#fn_300) and the latter the new; but the new is
born of the old, since spiritual regeneration is begun by a change of an
earthy, and worldly life; <span id="fr_301"></span>[302](#fn_301) and
therefore the latter is called son of man. “Man” then in this place is
earthy, but “son of man” heavenly; and the former is far removed from
God, but the latter present with God; and therefore is He mindful of the
former, as in far distance from Him; but the latter He visiteth, with
whom being present He enlighteneth him with His countenance. For
“salvation is far from sinners;” <span id="fr_302"></span>[303](#fn_302)
and, “The light of Thy countenance hath been stamped upon us, O
Lord.” <span id="fr_303"></span>[304](#fn_303) So in another Psalm he
saith, that men in conjunction with beasts are made whole together with
these beasts, not by any present inward illumination, but by the
multiplication of the mercy of God, whereby His goodness reacheth even
to the lowest things; for the wholeness of carnal men is carnal, as of
the beasts; but separating the sons of men from those whom being men he
joined with cattle, he proclaims that they are made blessed, after a far
more exalted method, by the enlightening of the truth itself, and by a
certain inundation of the fountain of life. For he speaketh thus: “Men
and beasts Thou wilt make whole, O Lord, as Thy mercy hath been
multiplied, O God. But the sons of men shall put their trust in the
covering of Thy wings. They shall be inebriated with the richness of
Thine house, and of the torrent of Thy pleasures Thou shalt make them
drink. For with Thee is the fountain of life, and in Thy light shall we
see light. Extend Thy mercy to them that know Thee.” <span
id="fr_304"></span>[305](#fn_304) Through the multiplication of mercy
then He is mindful of man, as of beasts; for that multiplied mercy
reacheth even to them that are afar off; but He visiteth the son of man,
over whom, placed under the covering of His wings, He extendeth mercy,
and in His light giveth light, and maketh him drink of His pleasures,
and inebriateth him with the richness of His house, to forget the
sorrows and the wanderings of his former conversation. This son of man,
that is, the new man, the repentance of the old man begets with pain and
tears. He, though new, is nevertheless called yet carnal, whilst he is
fed with milk; “I would not speak unto you as unto spiritual, but as
unto carnal,” says the Apostle. And to show that they were already
regenerate, he says, “As unto babes in Christ, I have given you milk to
drink, not meat.” And when he relapses, as often happens, to the old
life, he hears in reproof that he is a man; “Are ye not men,” he says,
“and walk as men?”  <span id="fr_305"></span>[306](#fn_305)

<span id="ii.VIII-p43"></span>11. Therefore was the son of man first
visited in the person of the very Lord Man, born of the Virgin Mary. Of
whom, by reason of the very weakness of the flesh, which the Wisdom of
God vouchsafed to bear, and the humiliation of the Passion, it is justly
said, “Thou hast lowered Him a little lower than the Angels” ([Psa.
8.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#005)<span id="ii.VIII-p43.1"></span>).
But that glorifying is added, in which He rose and ascended up into
heaven; “With glory,” he says, “and with honour hast Thou crowned Him;
and hast set Him over the works of Thine hands” ([Psa.
8.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#006)<span id="ii.VIII-p43.2"></span>).
Since even Angels are the works of God’s hands, even over Angels we
understand the Only-begotten Son to have been set; whom we hear and
believe, by the humiliation of the carnal generation and passion, to
have been lowered a little lower than the Angels.

<span id="ii.VIII-p44"></span>12. “Thou hast put,” he says, “all things
in subjection under His feet.” When he says, “all things,” he excepts
nothing. And that he might <span id="page_31">p. 31</span> <span
id="ii.VIII-Page_31"></span>not be allowed to understand it otherwise,
the Apostle enjoins it to be believed thus, when he says, “He being
excepted which put all things under Him.” <span
id="fr_306"></span>[307](#fn_306) And to the Hebrews he uses this very
testimony from this Psalm, when he would have it to be understood that
all things are in such sort put under our Lord Jesus Christ, as that
nothing should be excepted. <span id="fr_307"></span>[308](#fn_307) And
yet he does not seem, as it were, to subjoin any great thing, when he
says, “All sheep and oxen, yea, moreover, the beasts of the field, birds
of the air, and the fish of the sea, which walk through the paths of the
sea” ([Psa. 8.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#007)<span
id="ii.VIII-p46.2"></span>). For, leaving the heavenly excellencies and
powers, and all the hosts of Angels, leaving even man himself, he seems
to have put under Him the beasts merely; unless by sheep and oxen we
understand holy souls, either yielding the fruit of innocence, or even
working that the earth may bear fruit, that is, that earthly men may be
regenerated unto spiritual richness. By these holy souls then we ought
to understand not those of men only, but of all Angels too, if we would
gather from hence that all things are put under our Lord Jesus Christ.
For there will be no creature that will not be put under Him, under whom
the pre-eminent <span id="fr_308"></span>[309](#fn_308) spirits, that I
may so speak, are put. But whence shall we prove that sheep can be
interpreted even, not of men, but of the blessed spirits of the
angelical creatures on high? May we from the Lord’s saying that He had
left ninety and nine sheep in the mountains, that is, in the higher
regions, and had come down for one? <span
id="fr_309"></span>[310](#fn_309) For if we take the one lost sheep to
be the human soul in Adam, since Eve even was made out of his
side, <span id="fr_310"></span>[311](#fn_310) for the spiritual handling
and consideration of all which things this is not the time, it remains
that, by the ninety and nine left in the mountains, spirits not human,
but angelical, should be meant. For as regards the oxen, this sentence
is easily despatched; since men themselves are for no other reason
called oxen, but because by preaching the Gospel of the word of God they
imitate Angels, as where it is said, “Thou shalt not muzzle the ox that
treadeth out the corn.”  <span id="fr_311"></span>[312](#fn_311) How
much more easily then do we take the Angels themselves, the messengers
of truth, to be oxen, when Evangelists by the participation of their
title are called oxen? “Thou hast put under” therefore, he says, “all
sheep and oxen,” that is, all the holy spiritual creation; in which we
include that of holy men, who are in the Church, in those wine-presses
to wit, which are intimated under the other similitude of the moon and
stars. <span id="fr_312"></span>[313](#fn_312)

<span id="ii.VIII-p52"></span>13. “Yea moreover,” saith he, “the beasts
of the field.” <span id="fr_313"></span>[314](#fn_313) The addition of
“moreover” is by no means idle. First, because by beasts of the plain
may be understood both sheep and oxen: so that, if goats are the beasts
of rocky and mountainous regions, sheep may be well taken to be the
beasts of the field. Accordingly had it been written even thus, “all
sheep and oxen and beasts of the field;” it might be reasonably asked
what beasts of the plain meant, since even sheep and oxen could be taken
as such. But the addition of “moreover” besides, obliges us, beyond
question, to recognise some difference or another. But under this word,
“moreover,” not only “beasts of the field,” but also “birds of the air,
and fish of the sea, which walk through the paths of the sea” ([Psa.
8.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#008)<span id="ii.VIII-p53.1"></span>),
are to be taken in. What is then this distinction? Call to mind the
“wine-presses,” holding husks and wine; and the threshing-floor,
containing chaff and corn; and the nets, in which were enclosed good
fish and bad; and the ark of Noah, in which were both unclean and clean
animals: <span id="fr_314"></span>[315](#fn_314) and you will see that
the Churches for a while, now in this time, unto the last time of
judgment, contain not only sheep and oxen, that is, holy laymen and holy
ministers, but “moreover beasts of the field, birds of the air, and
birds of the sea, that walk through the paths of the sea.” For the
beasts of the field were very fitly understood, as men rejoicing in the
pleasure of the flesh where they mount up to nothing high, nothing
laborious. For the field is also “the broad way, that leadeth to
destruction:” <span id="fr_315"></span>[316](#fn_315) and in a field is
Abel slain. <span id="fr_316"></span>[317](#fn_316) Wherefore there is
cause to fear, lest one coming down from the mountains of God’s
righteousness (“for thy righteousness,” he says, “is as the mountains of
God” <span id="fr_317"></span>[318](#fn_317) ) making choice of the
broad and easy paths of carnal pleasure, be slain by the devil. See now
too “the birds of heaven,” the proud, of whom it is said, “They have set
their mouth against the heaven.” <span id="fr_318"></span>[319](#fn_318)
See how they are carried on high by the wind, “who say, We will magnify
our tongue, our lips are our own, who is our Lord?” <span
id="fr_319"></span>[320](#fn_319) Behold too the fish of the sea, that
is, the curious; who walk through the paths of the sea, that is, search
in the deep after the temporal things of this world: which, like paths
in the sea, vanish and perish, as quickly as the water comes together
again after it has given room, in their passage, to ships, or to
whatsoever walketh or swimmeth. For he said not merely, who walk the
paths of the sea; but “walk through,” he said; showing the very
determined earnestness of those who seek after vain and fleeting things.
Now these three kinds <span id="page_32">p. 32</span> <span
id="ii.VIII-Page_32"></span>of vice, namely, the pleasure of the flesh,
and pride, and curiosity, include all sins. And they appear to me to be
enumerated by the Apostle John, when he says, “Love not the world; for
all that is in the world is the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the
eyes, and the pride of life.” <span id="fr_320"></span>[321](#fn_320)
For through the eyes especially prevails curiosity. To what the rest
indeed belong is clear. And that temptation of the Lord Man was
threefold: by food, that is, by the lust of the flesh, where it is
suggested, “command these stones that they be made bread:” <span
id="fr_321"></span>[322](#fn_321) by vain boasting, where, when
stationed on a mountain, all the kingdoms of this earth are shown Him,
and promised if He would worship: <span
id="fr_322"></span>[323](#fn_322) by curiosity, where, from the pinnacle
of the temple, He is advised to cast Himself down, for the sake of
trying whether He would be borne up by Angels. <span
id="fr_323"></span>[324](#fn_323) And accordingly after that the enemy
could prevail with Him by none of these temptations, this is said of
him, “When the devil had ended all his temptation.” <span
id="fr_324"></span>[325](#fn_324) With a reference then to the meaning
of the wine-presses, not only the wine, but the husks too are put under
His feet; to wit, not only sheep and oxen, that is, the holy souls of
believers, either in the laity, or in the ministry; but moreover both
beasts of pleasure, and birds of pride, and fish of curiosity. All which
classes of sinners we see mingled now in the Churches with the good and
holy. May He work then in His Churches, and separate the wine from the
husks: let us give heed, that we be wine, and sheep or oxen; not husks,
or beasts of the field, or birds of heaven, or fish of the sea, which
walk through the paths of the sea. Not that these names can be
understood and explained in this way only, but the explanation of them
must be according to the place where they are found. For elsewhere they
have other meanings. And this rule must be kept to in every allegory,
that what is expressed by the similitude should be considered agreeably
to the meaning of the particular place: for this is the manner of the
Lord’s and the Apostles’ teaching. Let us repeat then the last verse,
which is also put at the beginning of the Psalm, and let us praise God,
saying, “O Lord our Lord, how wonderful is Thy name in all the earth!”
For fitly, after the matter of the discourse, is the return made to the
heading, whither all that discourse must be referred.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_276"></span>[27:277](1080012.htm#fr_276) <span
id="ii.VIII-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.VIII-p3"></span> See on [Ps.
lxxxiv.](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#000)<span id="ii.VIII-p3.1"></span>
\[The octave of [Ps. i](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#000)<span
id="ii.VIII-p3.2"></span>., and understood by the Fathers of the
ascension of Christ. It was probably sung at the Jewish Feast of
Tabernacles.—C.\]

<span id="fn_277"></span>[28:278](1080012.htm#fr_277) <span
id="ii.VIII-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.VIII-p5"></span> [Luke iii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#017)<span id="ii.VIII-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_278"></span>[28:279](1080012.htm#fr_278) <span
id="ii.VIII-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.VIII-p7"></span> [Numb. xiii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#023)<span id="ii.VIII-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_279"></span>[28:280](1080012.htm#fr_279) <span
id="ii.VIII-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.VIII-p8"></span> [John xix.
29](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#029)<span id="ii.VIII-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_280"></span>[28:281](1080012.htm#fr_280) <span
id="ii.VIII-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.VIII-p9"></span> [Matt. xxvi.
29](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#029)<span id="ii.VIII-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_281"></span>[28:282](1080012.htm#fr_281) <span
id="ii.VIII-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ii.VIII-p13"></span> [1 Cor.
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#002)<span id="ii.VIII-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_282"></span>[28:283](1080012.htm#fr_282) <span
id="ii.VIII-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ii.VIII-p14"></span> [Matt. xxi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#016)<span id="ii.VIII-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_283"></span>[28:284](1080012.htm#fr_283) <span
id="ii.VIII-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ii.VIII-p15"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#006)<span id="ii.VIII-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_284"></span>[28:285](1080012.htm#fr_284) <span
id="ii.VIII-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ii.VIII-p16"></span> [Eph. iii.
17-19](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#017)<span id="ii.VIII-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_285"></span>[29:286](1080012.htm#fr_285) <span
id="ii.VIII-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ii.VIII-p18"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
6-10](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#006)<span id="ii.VIII-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_286"></span>[29:287](1080012.htm#fr_286) <span
id="ii.VIII-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ii.VIII-p19"></span> See “On Profit of Believing.”

<span id="fn_287"></span>[29:288](1080012.htm#fr_287) <span
id="ii.VIII-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ii.VIII-p20"></span> [Isa.
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#009), [Acts
13:27](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#027)<span id="ii.VIII-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_288"></span>[29:289](1080012.htm#fr_288) <span
id="ii.VIII-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ii.VIII-p21"></span> [John xx.
29](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#029)<span id="ii.VIII-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_289"></span>[29:290](1080012.htm#fr_289) <span
id="ii.VIII-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ii.VIII-p22"></span> [Matt. xi.
25](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#025)<span id="ii.VIII-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_290"></span>[29:291](1080012.htm#fr_290) <span
id="ii.VIII-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ii.VIII-p23"></span> See on [Ps.
cii.](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#000)<span id="ii.VIII-p23.1"></span>,
and St. Greg. on Job, Intr. § 15.

<span id="fn_291"></span>[29:292](1080012.htm#fr_291) <span
id="ii.VIII-p24.2"></span>

<span id="ii.VIII-p25"></span> [Exod.
31:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#018), [Exod.
34:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#028), [Deut.
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#010)<span id="ii.VIII-p25.1"></span>.
\[The “arm of the Lord” is understood by the Fathers of the Son; so also
the “right hand of the Lord.” The “finger” (proceeding from head and
hand) is understood of the Holy Spirit. So the Latin hymn, “Dextræ Dei
tu Digitus.”—C.\]

<span id="fn_292"></span>[29:293](1080012.htm#fr_292) <span
id="ii.VIII-p25.2"></span>

<span id="ii.VIII-p26"></span> [Exod. viii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#019)<span id="ii.VIII-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_293"></span>[29:294](1080012.htm#fr_293) <span
id="ii.VIII-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ii.VIII-p27"></span> [Isa.
34:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#004), [Rev.
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#014)<span id="ii.VIII-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_294"></span>[29:295](1080012.htm#fr_294) <span
id="ii.VIII-p28.1"></span>

<span id="ii.VIII-p29"></span> [Ps. xviii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#009)<span id="ii.VIII-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_295"></span>[29:296](1080012.htm#fr_295) <span
id="ii.VIII-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ii.VIII-p30"></span> *Al*. step of faith.

<span id="fn_296"></span>[29:297](1080012.htm#fr_296) <span
id="ii.VIII-p30.1"></span>

<span id="ii.VIII-p31"></span> Oxford <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.VIII-p31.1"></span>mss</span>. “and establish them in it,” for
“up,” etc.

<span id="fn_297"></span>[30:298](1080012.htm#fr_297) <span
id="ii.VIII-p32.1"></span>

<span id="ii.VIII-p33"></span> \[Here is intimated Augustin’s idea of
the Catholic Church, in which individual national churches hold their
own autonomies.—C.\]

<span id="fn_298"></span>[30:299](1080012.htm#fr_298) <span
id="ii.VIII-p33.1"></span>

<span id="ii.VIII-p34"></span> [Ps. xi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#002)<span id="ii.VIII-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_299"></span>[30:300](1080012.htm#fr_299) <span
id="ii.VIII-p35.2"></span>

<span id="ii.VIII-p36"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
49](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#049)<span id="ii.VIII-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_300"></span>[30:301](1080012.htm#fr_300) <span
id="ii.VIII-p36.2"></span>

<span id="ii.VIII-p37"></span> Oxford <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.VIII-p37.1"></span>mss</span>. “called man, and the old man.”

<span id="fn_301"></span>[30:302](1080012.htm#fr_301) <span
id="ii.VIII-p37.2"></span>

<span id="ii.VIII-p38"></span> [Eph.
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#022),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#024)<span id="ii.VIII-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_302"></span>[30:303](1080012.htm#fr_302) <span
id="ii.VIII-p38.2"></span>

<span id="ii.VIII-p39"></span> [Ps. cxix.
155](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#155)<span id="ii.VIII-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_303"></span>[30:304](1080012.htm#fr_303) <span
id="ii.VIII-p39.2"></span>

<span id="ii.VIII-p40"></span> [Ps. iv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#006)<span id="ii.VIII-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_304"></span>[30:305](1080012.htm#fr_304) <span
id="ii.VIII-p40.2"></span>

<span id="ii.VIII-p41"></span> [Ps. xxxvi.
6-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#006)<span id="ii.VIII-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_305"></span>[30:306](1080012.htm#fr_305) <span
id="ii.VIII-p41.2"></span>

<span id="ii.VIII-p42"></span> [1 Cor.
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#003)<span id="ii.VIII-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_306"></span>[31:307](1080012.htm#fr_306) <span
id="ii.VIII-p44.1"></span>

<span id="ii.VIII-p45"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
27](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#027)<span id="ii.VIII-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_307"></span>[31:308](1080012.htm#fr_307) <span
id="ii.VIII-p45.2"></span>

<span id="ii.VIII-p46"></span> [Heb. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#008)<span id="ii.VIII-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_308"></span>[31:309](1080012.htm#fr_308) <span
id="ii.VIII-p46.3"></span>

<span id="ii.VIII-p47"></span> *Primates*.

<span id="fn_309"></span>[31:310](1080012.htm#fr_309) <span
id="ii.VIII-p47.1"></span>

<span id="ii.VIII-p48"></span> [Matt.
18:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#012), [Luke
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#004)<span id="ii.VIII-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_310"></span>[31:311](1080012.htm#fr_310) <span
id="ii.VIII-p48.2"></span>

<span id="ii.VIII-p49"></span> [Gen.
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#021),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#022)<span id="ii.VIII-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_311"></span>[31:312](1080012.htm#fr_311) <span
id="ii.VIII-p49.2"></span>

<span id="ii.VIII-p50"></span> [1 Cor.
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#009), [1 Tim.
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#018)<span id="ii.VIII-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_312"></span>[31:313](1080012.htm#fr_312) <span
id="ii.VIII-p50.2"></span>

<span id="ii.VIII-p51"></span> \[See p. 27, and p. 30, note 1,
*supra*.—C.\]

<span id="fn_313"></span>[31:314](1080012.htm#fr_313) <span
id="ii.VIII-p52.1"></span>

<span id="ii.VIII-p53"></span> *Campi*.

<span id="fn_314"></span>[31:315](1080012.htm#fr_314) <span
id="ii.VIII-p53.2"></span>

<span id="ii.VIII-p54"></span> See on title. [Matt.
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#012), [Matt.
13:47](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#047), [Gen.
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#008)<span id="ii.VIII-p54.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_315"></span>[31:316](1080012.htm#fr_315) <span
id="ii.VIII-p54.2"></span>

<span id="ii.VIII-p55"></span> [Matt. vii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#013)<span id="ii.VIII-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_316"></span>[31:317](1080012.htm#fr_316) <span
id="ii.VIII-p55.2"></span>

<span id="ii.VIII-p56"></span> [Gen. iv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#008)<span id="ii.VIII-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_317"></span>[31:318](1080012.htm#fr_317) <span
id="ii.VIII-p56.2"></span>

<span id="ii.VIII-p57"></span> [Ps. xxxvi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#006)<span id="ii.VIII-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_318"></span>[31:319](1080012.htm#fr_318) <span
id="ii.VIII-p57.2"></span>

<span id="ii.VIII-p58"></span> [Ps. lxxiii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#009)<span id="ii.VIII-p58.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_319"></span>[31:320](1080012.htm#fr_319) <span
id="ii.VIII-p58.2"></span>

<span id="ii.VIII-p59"></span> [Ps. xii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#004)<span id="ii.VIII-p59.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_320"></span>[32:321](1080012.htm#fr_320) <span
id="ii.VIII-p59.2"></span>

<span id="ii.VIII-p60"></span> [1 John
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#015),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#016)<span id="ii.VIII-p60.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_321"></span>[32:322](1080012.htm#fr_321) <span
id="ii.VIII-p60.2"></span>

<span id="ii.VIII-p61"></span> [Matt. iv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#003)<span id="ii.VIII-p61.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_322"></span>[32:323](1080012.htm#fr_322) <span
id="ii.VIII-p61.2"></span>

<span id="ii.VIII-p62"></span> [Matt.
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#009)<span id="ii.VIII-p62.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_323"></span>[32:324](1080012.htm#fr_323) <span
id="ii.VIII-p62.2"></span>

<span id="ii.VIII-p63"></span> [Matt. iv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#006)<span id="ii.VIII-p63.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_324"></span>[32:325](1080012.htm#fr_324) <span
id="ii.VIII-p63.2"></span>

<span id="ii.VIII-p64"></span> [Luke iv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#013)<span id="ii.VIII-p64.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm IX](1080013)
