[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080105)  [Next](1080107) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.XCV"></span>

<span id="ii.XCV-p1"></span> <span id="ii.XCV-p1.1"></span><span
class="c20"><span id="ii.XCV-p1.2"></span>Psalm XCV. <span
id="fr_4391"></span>[4392](#fn_4391) </span>

<span id="ii.XCV-p3"></span>1. I could wish, brethren, that we were
rather listening to our father: but even this is a good thing, to obey
our father. Since therefore he who deigneth to pray for us, hath ordered
us, I will speak unto you, beloved, what from the present Psalm Jesus
Christ our common Lord shall deign to give us. Now the title of the
Psalm is “David’s Song of praise.” The “Song of praise” signifieth both
cheerfulness, in that it is a song; and devotion, for it is praise. For
what ought a man to praise more than that which pleaseth him so, that it
is impossible that it can displease him? In the praising of God
therefore we praise with security. There he who praiseth is safe, where
he feareth not lest he be ashamed for the object of his praise. Let us
therefore both praise and sing; that is, let us praise with cheerfulness
and joy. But what we are about to praise, this Psalm in the following
verses showeth us.

<span id="ii.XCV-p4"></span>2. “O come, let us sing unto the Lord”
([Psa. 95.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#001)<span
id="ii.XCV-p4.1"></span>). He calleth us to a great banquet of joy, not
one of this world, but in the Lord. For if there were not in this life a
wicked joy which is to be distinguished from a righteous joy, it would
be enough to say, “Come, let us rejoice;” but he has briefly
distinguished it. What is it to rejoice aright? To rejoice in the Lord.
Thou shouldest piously joy in the Lord, if thou dost wish safely to
trample upon the world. But what is the word, “Come”? Whence doth He
call them to come, with whom he wisheth to rejoice in the Lord; except
that, while they are afar, they may by coming draw nearer, by drawing
nearer they may approach, and by approaching rejoice? But whence are
they afar? Can a man be locally distant from Him who is everywhere?…It
is not by place, but by being unlike Him, that a man is afar from God.
What is to be unlike Him? it meaneth, a bad life, bad habits; for if by
good habits we approach God, by bad habits we recede from God.…If
therefore by unlikeness we recede from God, by likeness we approach unto
God. What likeness? That after which we were created, which by sinning
we had corrupted in ourselves, which we have received again through the
remission of sins, which is renewed in us in the mind within, that it
may be engraved a second time as if on coin, that is, the image of our
God upon our soul, and that we may return to His treasures.…

<span id="ii.XCV-p5"></span>3. “Let us make a joyful <span
id="fr_4392"></span>[4393](#fn_4392) noise unto God, our
salvation.”…Consider, beloved, those who make a joyful noise in any
ordinary songs, as in a sort of competition of worldly joy; and ye see
them while reciting the written lines bursting forth with a joy, that
the tongue sufficeth not to express the measure of; how they shout,
indicating by that utterance the feeling of the mind, <span
id="page_468">p. 468</span> <span id="ii.XCV-Page_468"></span>which
cannot in words express what is conceived in the heart. If they then in
earthly joy make a joyful noise; might we not do so from heavenly joy,
which truly we cannot express in words?

<span id="ii.XCV-p7"></span>4. “Let us prevent His face by confession”
([Psa. 95.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#002)<span
id="ii.XCV-p7.1"></span>). Confession hath a double meaning in
Scripture. There is a confession of him who praiseth, there is that of
him who groaneth. The confession of praise pertaineth to the honour of
Him who is praised: the confession of groaning to the repentance of him
who confesseth. For men confess when they praise God: they confess when
they accuse themselves; and the tongue hath no more worthy use. Truly, I
believe these to be the very vows, of which he speaketh in another
Psalm: “I will pay Thee my vows, which I distinguished with my
lips.” <span id="fr_4393"></span>[4394](#fn_4393) Nothing is more
elevated than that distinguishing, nothing is so necessary both to
understand and to do. How then dost thou distinguish the vows which thou
payest unto God? By praising Him, by accusing thyself; because it is His
mercy, to forgive us our sins. For if He chose to deal with us after our
deserts, He would find cause only to condemn. “O come,” he said
therefore, that we may at last go back from our sins, and that He may
not cast up with us our accounts for the past; but that as it were a new
account may be commenced, all the bonds of our debts having been
burnt.…The more therefore thou despairedst of thyself on account of thy
iniquities, do thou confess thy sins; for so much greater is the praise
of Him who forgiveth, as is the fulness of the penitent’s confession
more abundant. Let us not therefore imagine that we have receded from
the song of praise, in understanding here that confession by which we
acknowledge our transgressions: this is even a part of the song of
praise; for when we confess our sins, we praise the glory of God.

<span id="ii.XCV-p9"></span>5. “And make a joyful <span
id="fr_4394"></span>[4395](#fn_4394) noise unto Him with Psalms.” We
have already said what it is “to make a joyful noise:” the word is
repeated, that it may be confirmed by the act: the very repetition is an
exhortation. For we have not forgotten, so as to wish to be again
admonished what was said above, that we should make a joyful noise: but
usually in passages of strong feeling a well-known word is repeated, not
to make it more familiar, but that the very repetition may strengthen
the impression made: for it is repeated that we may understand the
feeling of the speaker.…Hear now: “For the Lord is a great God, and a
great King above all gods” ([Psa.
95.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#003)<span id="ii.XCV-p10.1"></span>)
“For the Lord will not cast off His people.” <span
id="fr_4395"></span>[4396](#fn_4395) Praise be unto Him, and shouts of
joy be unto Him! What people shall He not cast off? we have no right to
make our own explanation here: for the Apostle hath prescribed this unto
us, he hath explained whereof it is said. For this was the Jewish
people, the people where were the prophets, the people where were the
patriarchs, the people begotten according to the flesh from the seed of
Abraham; the people in which all the mysteries which promised our
Saviour preceded us; the people among whom was instituted the temple,
the anointing, the Priest for a figure, that when all these shadows were
past, the Light itself might come; this therefore was the people of God;
to it were the prophets sent, in it those who were sent were born; to it
were delivered and entrusted the revelations of God. What then? is the
whole of that people condemned? far be it. It is called the good
olive-tree by the Apostle, for it commenced with the patriarchs.…This
then is the tree itself: though some of its boughs have been broken, yet
all have not. For if all the boughs were broken, whence is Peter? whence
John? whence Thomas? whence Matthew? whence Andrew? whence are all those
Apostles? whence that very Apostle Paul who was speaking to us but now,
and by his own fruit bearing witness to the good olive? Were not all
these of that people? Whence also those five hundred brethren to whom
our Lord appeared after His resurrection? <span
id="fr_4396"></span>[4397](#fn_4396) Whence were so many thousands at
the words of Peter (when the Apostles, filled with the Holy Spirit,
spoke with the tongues of all nations <span
id="fr_4397"></span>[4398](#fn_4397) ) converted with such zeal for the
honour of God and their own accusation, that they who first shed the
Lord’s blood in their rage, learnt how to drink it now that they
believed? And all these five thousand were so converted that they sold
their own property, and laid the price of it at the Apostles’
feet. <span id="fr_4398"></span>[4399](#fn_4398) That which one rich man
did not do, when he heard from the Lord’s mouth, and sorrowfully
departed from Him, <span id="fr_4399"></span>[4400](#fn_4399) this so
many thousands of those men by whose hands Christ had been crucified,
did on a sudden. In proportion as the wound was deeper in their own
hearts, with the greater eagerness did they seek for a physician. Since
therefore all these were from thence, the Psalm saith of them, “For the
Lord will not cast off His people.”…

<span id="ii.XCV-p16"></span>6. What doth the Psalm add? “In His hand
are all the corners of the earth” ([Psa.
95.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#004)<span id="ii.XCV-p16.1"></span>):
we recognise the corner stone: the corner stone is Christ. There cannot
be a corner, unless it hath united in itself two walls: they come from
different sides to one corner, but they are not opposed to each other in
the corner. The circumcision cometh from one side: the uncircumcision
from the other; in Christ both peoples have met together: because He
hath become the stone, of which it is written, “The stone <span
id="page_469">p. 469</span> <span id="ii.XCV-Page_469"></span>which the
builders rejected, hath become the head of the corner.” <span
id="fr_4400"></span>[4401](#fn_4400) …

<span id="ii.XCV-p18"></span>7. “For the sea is His and He made it”
([Psa. 95.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#005)<span
id="ii.XCV-p18.1"></span>). For the sea is this world, but God made also
the sea: nor can the waves rage save only so far as to the shore, where
He hath marked their bounds. There is therefore no temptation, that hath
not received its measure.…“And His hands prepared the dry land.” Be thou
the dry land: thirst for the grace of God: that as a sweet shower it may
come upon thee, may find in thee fruit. He alloweth not the waves to
cover what He hath sown. “And His hands prepared the dry land.” Hence
also therefore let us shout unto the Lord.

<span id="ii.XCV-p19"></span>8. “O come, let us worship, and fall down
to Him; and mourn before the Lord our Maker” ([Psa.
95.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#006)<span
id="ii.XCV-p19.1"></span>).…Perhaps thou art burning with the
consciousness of a fault; blot out with tears the flame of thy sin:
mourn before the Lord: fearlessly mourn before the Lord, who made thee;
for He despiseth not the work of His own hands in thee. Think not thou
canst be restored by thyself. By thyself thou mayest fall off, thou
canst not restore thyself: He who made thee restoreth thee. “Let us
mourn before the Lord our Maker:” weep before Him, confess unto Him,
prevent His face in confession. For who art thou who mournest before
Him, and confessest unto Him, but one whom He created? The thing created
hath no slight confidence in Him who created it, and that in no
indifferent fashion, but according to His own image and likeness.

<span id="ii.XCV-p20"></span>9. “For He is the Lord our God” ([Psa.
95.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#007)<span id="ii.XCV-p20.1"></span>).
But that we may without fear fall down and kneel before Him, what are
we? “We are the people of His pasture, and the sheep of His hand.” See
how elegantly he hath transposed the order of the words, and as it were
not given its own attribute to each word; that we may understand these
very same to be the sheep, who are also the people. He said not, the
sheep of His pasture, and the people of His hand; which might be thought
more congruous, since the sheep belong to the pasture; but He said, “the
people of His pasture.” The people are therefore sheep, since he saith,
“the people of His pasture:” the people themselves are sheep.…He
praiseth these sheep also in the Song of Solomon, speaking of some
perfect ones as the teeth of His Spouse the Holy Church: “Thy teeth are
like a flock of sheep that are even shorn, which come up from the
washing; whereof every one beareth twins, and there is none
barren.” <span id="fr_4401"></span>[4402](#fn_4401) What meaneth, “Thy
teeth”? These by whom thou speakest: for the teeth of the Church are
those through whom she speaketh. Of what sort are thy teeth? “Like a
flock of sheep that are shorn.” Why, “that are shorn”? Because they have
laid aside the burdens of the world. Were not those sheep, of which I
was a little before speaking, shorn, whom the bidding of God had shorn,
when He saith, “Go and sell that thou hast, and give to the poor; and
thou shalt find treasure in heaven: and come and follow Me”? <span
id="fr_4402"></span>[4403](#fn_4402) They performed this bidding: shorn
they came. And because those who believe in Christ are baptized, what is
there said? “which come up from the washing;” that is, come up from the
cleansing. “Whereof every one beareth twins.” What twins? Those two
commandments, wherefrom hang all the Law and the Prophets. <span
id="fr_4403"></span>[4404](#fn_4403)

<span id="ii.XCV-p24"></span>10. Therefore, “To-day if ye will hear His
voice, harden not your hearts” ([Psa.
95.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#008)<span id="ii.XCV-p24.1"></span>).
O my people, the people of God! God addresses His people: not only the
people of His which He shall not cast off, but also all His people. For
He speaketh in the corner stone <span
id="fr_4404"></span>[4405](#fn_4404) to each wall: that is, prophecy
speaketh in Christ, both to the people of the Jews, and the people of
the Gentiles. For some time ye heard His voice through Moses, and
hardened your hearts. He then, when you hardened your hearts, spoke
through a herald; He now speaketh by Himself, let your hearts soften. He
who used to send heralds before Him, hath now deigned to come Himself;
He here speaketh by His own mouth, He who used to speak by the mouths of
the Prophets.

<span id="ii.XCV-p26"></span>11. “As in the provocation, and in the day
of temptation in the wilderness, where your fathers proved Me” ([Psa.
95.9](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#009)<span id="ii.XCV-p26.1"></span>).
Let such be no more your fathers: imitate them not. They were your
fathers, but if ye do not imitate them, they shall not be your fathers:
yet as ye were born of them, they were your fathers. And if the heathen
who came from the ends of the earth, in the words of Jeremias, “The
Gentiles shall come unto Thee from the ends of the earth, and shall say,
Surely our forefathers have inherited lies, vanity, and things wherein
there is no profit:” <span id="fr_4405"></span>[4406](#fn_4405) if the
heathen forsook their idols, to come to the God of Israel; ought Israel
whom their own God led from Egypt through the Red Sea, <span
id="fr_4406"></span>[4407](#fn_4406) wherein He overwhelmed their
pursuing foes; whom He led out into the wilderness, fed with
manna, <span id="fr_4407"></span>[4408](#fn_4407) never took His rod
from correcting them, never deprived them of the blessings of His mercy;
ought they to desert their own God, when the heathen have come unto Him?
“When your fathers tempted Me, proved Me, and saw My works.…

<span id="ii.XCV-p30"></span>12. “Forty years long was I very near unto
this generation, and said, It is a people that do <span id="page_470">p.
470</span> <span id="ii.XCV-Page_470"></span>always err in their hearts;
for they have not known My ways” ([Psa.
95.10](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#010)<span id="ii.XCV-p30.1"></span>).
The forty years have the same meaning as the word “always.” For that
number forty indicates the fulness of ages, as if the ages were
perfected in this number. Hence our Lord fasted forty days, forty days
He was tempted in the desert, <span id="fr_4408"></span>[4409](#fn_4408)
and forty days He was with His disciples after His resurrection. <span
id="fr_4409"></span>[4410](#fn_4409) On the first forty days He showed
us temptation, on the latter forty days consolation: since beyond doubt
when we are tempted we are consoled. For His body, that is, the Church,
must needs suffer temptations in this world: but that Comforter, who
said, “Lo, I am with you alway, even unto the end of the world,” <span
id="fr_4410"></span>[4411](#fn_4410) is not wanting. For this was I with
them forty years, to show such a race of men, which alway provoketh Me,
even unto the end of the world: because by those forty years He meant to
signify the whole of this world’s duration.

<span id="ii.XCV-p34"></span>13. …We began with exulting joy: but this
Psalm hath ended with great fear: “Unto whom I sware in My wrath, that
they should not enter into My rest” ([Psa.
95.11](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#011)<span id="ii.XCV-p34.1"></span>).
It is a great thing for God to speak: how much greater for Him to swear?
Thou shouldest fear a man when he sweareth, lest he do somewhat on
account of his oath against his will: how much more shouldest thou fear
God, when He sweareth, seeing He can swear nought rashly? He chose the
act of swearing for a confirmation. And by whom doth God swear? By
Himself: for He hath no greater by whom to swear. <span
id="fr_4411"></span>[4412](#fn_4411) By Himself He confirmeth His
promises: by Himself He confirmeth His threats. Let no man say in his
heart, His promise is true; His threat is false: as His promise is true,
so is His threat sure. Thou oughtest to be equally assured of rest, of
happiness, of eternity, of immortality, if thou hast executed His
commandments; as of destruction, of the burning of eternal fire, of
damnation with the devil, if thou hast despised His commandments.…

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4391"></span>[467:4392](1080106.htm#fr_4391) <span
id="ii.XCV-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.XCV-p2"></span> Lat. XCIV. A discourse delivered at the
bidding of Aurelius bishop of Carthage, or perhaps of Valerius bishop of
Hippo, and consequently either before or shortly after St. Augustin was
consecrated bishop.

<span id="fn_4392"></span>[467:4393](1080106.htm#fr_4392) <span
id="ii.XCV-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XCV-p6"></span> *Jubilemus*.

<span id="fn_4393"></span>[468:4394](1080106.htm#fr_4393) <span
id="ii.XCV-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCV-p8"></span> [Ps.
66:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#014)<span id="ii.XCV-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4394"></span>[468:4395](1080106.htm#fr_4394) <span
id="ii.XCV-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XCV-p10"></span> *Jubilemus*.

<span id="fn_4395"></span>[468:4396](1080106.htm#fr_4395) <span
id="ii.XCV-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCV-p11"></span> [Ps. xciv.
14](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#014)<span id="ii.XCV-p11.1"></span>. In
the Sept. these nine words are added.

<span id="fn_4396"></span>[468:4397](1080106.htm#fr_4396) <span
id="ii.XCV-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCV-p12"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#006)<span id="ii.XCV-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4397"></span>[468:4398](1080106.htm#fr_4397) <span
id="ii.XCV-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCV-p13"></span> [Acts ii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#004)<span id="ii.XCV-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4398"></span>[468:4399](1080106.htm#fr_4398) <span
id="ii.XCV-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCV-p14"></span> [Acts
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#004), [Acts
2:44](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#044)<span id="ii.XCV-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4399"></span>[468:4400](1080106.htm#fr_4399) <span
id="ii.XCV-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCV-p15"></span> [Matt.
19:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#021),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#022)<span id="ii.XCV-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4400"></span>[469:4401](1080106.htm#fr_4400) <span
id="ii.XCV-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCV-p17"></span> [Ps. cxviii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#022)<span id="ii.XCV-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4401"></span>[469:4402](1080106.htm#fr_4401) <span
id="ii.XCV-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCV-p21"></span> [Cant.
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#002), [Cant.
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#005)<span id="ii.XCV-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4402"></span>[469:4403](1080106.htm#fr_4402) <span
id="ii.XCV-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCV-p22"></span> [Matt. xix.
21](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#021)<span id="ii.XCV-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4403"></span>[469:4404](1080106.htm#fr_4403) <span
id="ii.XCV-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCV-p23"></span> [Matt. xxii.
40](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#040)<span id="ii.XCV-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4404"></span>[469:4405](1080106.htm#fr_4404) <span
id="ii.XCV-p24.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCV-p25"></span> [Eph. ii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#020)<span id="ii.XCV-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4405"></span>[469:4406](1080106.htm#fr_4405) <span
id="ii.XCV-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCV-p27"></span> [Jer. xvi.
19](../../../bib/kjv/jer016.htm#019)<span id="ii.XCV-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4406"></span>[469:4407](1080106.htm#fr_4406) <span
id="ii.XCV-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCV-p28"></span> [Exod.
14:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#021),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#022)<span id="ii.XCV-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4407"></span>[469:4408](1080106.htm#fr_4407) <span
id="ii.XCV-p28.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCV-p29"></span> [Exod. xvi.
13-35](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#013)<span id="ii.XCV-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4408"></span>[470:4409](1080106.htm#fr_4408) <span
id="ii.XCV-p30.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCV-p31"></span> [Matt. iv.
1-11](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#001)<span id="ii.XCV-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4409"></span>[470:4410](1080106.htm#fr_4409) <span
id="ii.XCV-p31.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCV-p32"></span> [Acts i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#003)<span id="ii.XCV-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4410"></span>[470:4411](1080106.htm#fr_4410) <span
id="ii.XCV-p32.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCV-p33"></span> [Matt. xxviii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#020)<span id="ii.XCV-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4411"></span>[470:4412](1080106.htm#fr_4411) <span
id="ii.XCV-p34.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCV-p35"></span> [Heb. vi.
13](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#013)<span id="ii.XCV-p35.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm XCVI](1080107)
