[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080179)  [Next](1080181.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.CXLVII"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p1"></span> <span id="ii.CXLVII-p1.1"></span><span
class="c20"><span id="ii.CXLVII-p1.2"></span>Psalm CXLVII. <span
id="fr_5900"></span>[5901](#fn_5900.md) </span>

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p3"></span>1. It is said to us, “Praise the Lord”
([Psa. 147.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#001.md)<span
id="ii.CXLVII-p3.1"></span>). This is said to all nations, not to us
alone. And these words, sounded forth through separate places by the
Readers, each Church heareth separately; but the one same Voice of God
proclaimeth unto all, that we praise Him. And as though we asked
wherefore we ought to praise the Lord, behold what reason he hath
brought forward: “Praise the Lord,” he saith, “for a Psalm is good.” Is
this all the reward of them that praise?…The “Psalm” is praise of God.
This then he saith, “Praise the Lord, for it is good to praise the
Lord.” Let us not thus pass over the praise of the Lord. It is spoken,
and hath passed: it is done, and we are silent: we have praised, and
then rested; we have sung, and then rested. We go forth to some business
which awaits us, and when other employments have found us, shall the
praise of God cease in us? Not so: thy tongue praiseth but for a while,
let thy life ever praise. Thus then “a Psalm is good.”

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p4"></span>2. For a “Psalm” is a song, not any kind
of song, but a song to a psaltery. A psaltery is a kind of instrument of
music, like the lyre and the harp, and such kinds of instruments, which
were invented for music. He therefore who singeth Psalms, not only
singeth with his voice, but with a certain instrument besides, which is
called a psaltery, he accompanieth his voice with his hands. Wilt thou
then sing a Psalm? Let not thy voice alone sound the praises of God; but
let thy works also be in harmony with thy voice.…To please then the ear,
sing with thy voice; but with thy heart be not silent, with thy life be
not still. Thou devisest no fraud in thy heart: thou singest a Psalm to
God. When thou eatest and drinkest, sing a Psalm: not by intermingling
sweet sounds suited to the ear, but by eating and drinking moderately,
frugally, temperately: for thus saith the Apostle, “whether ye eat or
drink, or whatever ye do, do all to the glory of God.”  <span
id="fr_5901"></span>[5902](#fn_5901.md) …If by immoderate voracity thou
exceedest the due bounds of nature, and gluttest thyself in excess of
wine, however great praises of God thy tongue sound, yet thy life
blasphemeth Him. After food and drink thou liest down to sleep: in thy
bed neither commit any pollution, nor go beyond the license given by the
law of God: let thy marriage bed be kept chaste with thy wife: and if
thou desire to beget children, yet let there not be unbridled sensuality
of lust: in thy bed give honour to thy wife, <span
id="fr_5902"></span>[5903](#fn_5902.md) for ye are both members of Christ,
both made by Him, both renewed by His Blood: so doing thou praisest God,
nor will thy praise be altogether silent. What, when sleep has come over
thee? Let not an evil conscience rouse thee from rest: so doth the
innocence of thy sleep praise God.…

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p7"></span>3. “Let praises be pleasant to our God.”
How? If He be praised by our good lives. Hear that then praise will be
pleasant to Him. In another place it is said, “Praise is not seemly in
the mouth of a sinner.” <span id="fr_5903"></span>[5904](#fn_5903.md) If
then in the mouth of a sinner praise is not seemly, neither is it
pleasant, for that only is pleasant which is seemly.…For praise may be
pleasant to a man, when he heareth one praising with neat and clever
sentiments, and with a sweet voice; but “let praise be pleasant to our
God,” whose ears are open not to the mouth, but to the heart; not to the
tongue, but to the life of him that praiseth.

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p9"></span>4. Who is “our God,” that praise should
be pleasant to Him? He maketh Himself sweet to us, He commendeth Himself
to us; thanks to His condescension.…“But God commendeth His love to
us”…“in that, while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us.” <span
id="fr_5904"></span>[5905](#fn_5904.md) …Let us see whether it be the
commendation which the Apostle speaketh of, that Christ died for the
sinners and ungodly: “the Lord who buildeth up Jerusalem, and gathereth
the dispersions of Israel” ([Psa.
147.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#002.md)<span
id="ii.CXLVII-p10.2"></span>). For the people of Jerusalem are the
people of Israel. It is Jerusalem “eternal in the heavens,” whereof the
Angels are citizens also.…All the citizens then of that city, through
“seeing God,” rejoice in that great and wide and heavenly city; they
gaze upon God Himself. But we are wanderers from that city, driven out
by sin, that we should not remain there; weighed down by mortality, that
we should not return thither. God looked back on our wandering, and He
<span id="page_666">p. 666</span> <span
id="ii.CXLVII-Page_666"></span>who “buildeth up Jerusalem,” restored the
part that had fallen. How restored He the part that had fallen?…He sent
then to our captive estate His Son as a Redeemer. Take with Thee, said
He, a bag, bear therein the price of the captives. For He put on Him our
mortal flesh, and therein was the Blood, by the shedding of which we
were to be redeemed. With that Blood He “gathered the dispersions of
Israel.” And if He gathered them that before were dispersed, how must we
strive that they be gathered who now are dispersed? If the dispersed
have been gathered, that in the Hand of the Builder they might be
fashioned into the building, how should they be gathered who through
disquiet have fallen from the Hand of the Builder? Behold whom we
praise; behold to whom we owe praise all our life long.

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p11"></span>5. How doth He gather? What doeth He in
order to gather? “Who healeth the bruised in heart” ([Psa.
147.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#003.md)<span
id="ii.CXLVII-p11.1"></span>). Behold the way in which the dispersions
of Israel are gathered, by the healing of the bruised in heart. They who
are not of a bruised heart, are not healed. What is to bruise the heart?
Let it be known, brethren, let it be done, that ye may be able to be
healed. For it is told in many other places of Scripture;…“the sacrifice
of God is a troubled spirit, a bruised and contrite heart God will not
despise.” He healeth then the bruised in heart, for He draweth nigh unto
them to heal them; as is said in another place, “the Lord is nigh unto
them who have bruised their heart.” <span
id="fr_5905"></span>[5906](#fn_5905.md) Who are they that have “bruised
their heart”? The humble. Who are they that have not “bruised their
heart”? The proud. The bruised heart shall be healed, the puffed up
heart shall be dashed down. For for this purpose perhaps is it dashed
down, that being bruised it may be healed. Let not our heart then,
brethren, desire to be set upright, before it be upright. It is ill for
that to be uplifted which is not first corrected.…

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p13"></span>6. What are the means whereby He
“bindeth up their bruises”? Just as physicians bind up fractures. For
sometimes (observe this, beloved; it is well known to those who have
observed it, or have heard it from physicians), sometimes when limbs are
sound, but are crooked and distorted, physicians break them in order to
set them straight, and make a new wound, because the soundness which was
distorted was amiss.…

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p14"></span>7. What are these means whereby He
bindeth? The sacraments of this present life, whereby in the mean time
we obtain our comfort: and all the words we speak to you, words which
sound and pass away, all that is done in the Church in this present
time, are the means whereby “He bindeth up our bruises.” For just as,
when the limb has become perfectly sound, the physician taketh off the
bandage; so in our own city Jerusalem, when we shall have been made
equal to the Angels, think ye that we shall receive there, what we have
received here? Will it be needful then that the Gospel be read to us,
that our faith may abide? or that hands be laid upon us by any Bishop?
All these are means of binding up fractures; when we have attained
perfect soundness, they will be taken off; but we should never attain
it, if they were not bound up.

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p15"></span>8. “Who telleth the number of the stars,
and calleth them all by their names” ([Psa.
147.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#004.md)<span
id="ii.CXLVII-p15.1"></span>). What great matter is it for God to “tell
the number of the stars”! Men even have endeavoured to do this; whether
they have been able to achieve it, is their concern; they would not
however attempt it, did they not think that they should achieve it. Let
us leave alone what they can do, and how far they have attained; for God
I think it no great matter to count all the stars. Or doth He perhaps go
over the number, lest He should forget it? Is it any great thing for God
to number the stars, by whom “the very hairs of your head are
numbered”? <span id="fr_5906"></span>[5907](#fn_5906.md) The stars are
certain lights in the Church comforting our night; all of whom the
Apostle saith, “In the midst of a crooked and perverse generation, among
whom ye shine as lights in the world, holding the Word of life.” <span
id="fr_5907"></span>[5908](#fn_5907.md) These stars God counteth; all who
shall reign with Him, all who are to be gathered into the Body of His
only-begotten Son, He hath counted, and still counteth them. Whoso is
unworthy, is not even counted. Many too have believed, or rather may,
with a kind of shadowy appearance of faith, have attached themselves to
His people: yet He knoweth what He counteth, what He winnoweth away. For
so great is the height of the Gospel, that it hath come to pass as was
said, “I have declared, and have spoken: they are multiplied above
number:” <span id="fr_5908"></span>[5909](#fn_5908.md) there are then among
the people certain supernumeraries, so to speak. What do I mean by
supernumeraries? More than will be there. Within these walls are more
than will be in the kingdom of God, in the heavenly Jerusalem; these are
above the number. Let each one of you consider whether he shineth in
darkness, whether he refuseth to be led astray by the dark iniquity of
the world; if he be not led astray, nor conquered, he will be, as it
were, a star, which God already numbereth. “And calling them all by
their names,” he saith. Herein is our whole reward. We may have certain
names with God, that God may <span id="page_667">p. 667</span> <span
id="ii.CXLVII-Page_667"></span>know our names, this we ought to wish,
for this to act, for this to busy ourselves, as far as we are able; not
to rejoice in other things, not even in certain spiritual gifts.…When
the disciples returned from their mission exulting, and saying, “Lord,
even the devils are subject unto us in Thy Name”  <span
id="fr_5909"></span>[5910](#fn_5909.md) —then He (knowing that many would
say, “have we not in Thy Name cast out devils?” to whom He should say,
“I know you not”) said, “In this rejoice not, that the devils are
subject unto you; but rather rejoice, because your names are written in
heaven.” <span id="fr_5910"></span>[5911](#fn_5910.md)

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p21"></span>9. “Great is our Lord” ([Psa.
147.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#005.md)<span
id="ii.CXLVII-p21.1"></span>). The Psalmist is filled with joy, he hath
poured out his words wonderfully: yet somewhat he was unable to speak,
and how availed he to think on it? “And great is His power, and of His
understanding is no numbering.” He who “numbereth the stars,” Himself
cannot be numbered. Who can expound this? who can worthily even imagine
what is meant by, “and of His understanding is no number”?…Whatsoever
then that is infinite this world containeth, though it be infinite to
man, yet is not to God: too little is it to say, to God: even by the
angels it is numbered. His understanding surpasses all calculators; it
cannot be counted by us. Numbers themselves who numbereth? What than is
there with God? wherewith made He all things, and where made He all
things, to whom it is said, “Thou hast arrayed all things in measure,
number, and weight”?  <span id="fr_5911"></span>[5912](#fn_5911.md) Or who
can number, or measure, or weigh, measure and number and weight
themselves, wherein God hath ordered all things? Therefore, “of His
understanding is no number.” Let human voices be hushed, human thoughts
still: let them not stretch themselves out to incomprehensible things,
as though they could comprehend them, but as though they were to partake
of them, for partakers we shall be.…Partakers then we shall be: let none
doubt it: Scripture saith it. And of what shall we be partakers, as
though these were parts in God, as though God were divided into parts?
Who then can explain how many become partakers of one single substance?
Require not then that which I think ye see cannot fitly be said: but
return to the healing of the Saviour, bruise your heart. He will guide
it, He will bind it up where it is broken, He will make it perfectly
sound; and then those things will not be impossible with us, which now
are impossible. For it is good that he confess weakness, who desireth to
attain to the divine nature.

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p23"></span>10. “The Lord taketh up the gentle”
([Psa. 147.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#006.md)<span
id="ii.CXLVII-p23.1"></span>). For example; thou understandest not, thou
failest to understand, canst not attain: honour God’s Scripture, honour
God’s Word, though it be not plain: in reverence wait for understanding.
Be not wanton to accuse either the obscurity or seeming contradiction of
Scripture. There is nothing in it contradictory: somewhat there is which
is obscure, not in order that it may be denied thee, but that it may
exercise him that shall afterward receive it. When then it is obscure,
that is the Physician’s doing, that thou mayest knock. He willed that
thou shouldest be exercised in knocking; He willed it, that He might
open to thee when thou knockest. By knocking thou shalt be exercised;
exercised, thou shalt be enlarged; enlarged, thou shalt contain what is
given. Be not then indignant for that it is shut; be mild, be gentle.
Kick not against what is dark, nor say, It were better said, if it were
said thus. For how canst thou thus say, or judge how it is expedient it
be said? It is said as it is expedient it be said. Let not the sick man
seek to amend his remedies: the Physician knoweth how to temper them:
believe Him who careth for thee. Therefore what cometh next?…“The Lord
taketh up the gentle, but humbleth the sinners even to the ground,” he
intended a certain sort of sinners to be understood, from the gentleness
mentioned first. By sinners then in this place, we understand the
fierce, and those who are not gentle. Wherefore doth He “humble them
even to the earth”? They carp at objects of understanding, they shall
perceive only things earthly. <span id="fr_5912"></span>[5913](#fn_5912.md)

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p25"></span>11. “Begin to the Lord in confession”
([Psa. 147.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#007.md)<span
id="ii.CXLVII-p25.1"></span>). Begin with this, if thou wouldest arrive
at a clear understanding of the truth. If thou wilt be brought from the
road of faith to the profession of the reality, “begin in confession.”
First accuse thyself: accuse thyself, praise God. What after confession?
Let good works follow. “Sing unto our God upon the harp.” What is, “Upon
the harp”? As I have already explained, just like the Psalm upon the
psaltery, so also is the “harp:” not with voice only, but with works.

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p26"></span>12. …“Who covereth the heaven with
clouds, who prepareth rain for the earth” ([Psa.
147.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#008.md)<span
id="ii.CXLVII-p26.1"></span>). Now thou art alarmed, because thou canst
not see the heaven: when it hath rained thou shalt gather fruit, and
shalt see clear sky. Perhaps our God hath done this. For had we not the
obscurity of Scripture as an occasion, we should not say to you those
things wherein ye rejoice. This then perhaps is the rain whereat ye
rejoice. It would not be possible for it to be expressed to you by our
tongue, were it not that God covereth with clouds of figures the heaven
of the Scriptures. For this purpose willed He that the words of the
Prophets should <span id="page_668">p. 668</span> <span
id="ii.CXLVII-Page_668"></span>be obscure, that the servants of God
might afterwards have that by interpreting which they might flow over
the ears and hearts of men, that they might receive from the clouds of
God the fatness of spiritual joy. “Who maketh grass to grow upon the
mountains, and herb for the service of men.” Behold the fruit of the
rain. “Who maketh,” saith he, “grass to grow upon the mountains.” Doth
it not also grow upon the low ground? Yes, but it is a great thing that
it groweth “on the mountains.”…For nothing could be more barren than the
hard mountains. “And herb for the service of men.” What “service”?
Listen to Paul himself. “And ourselves,” saith he, “your servants for
Jesus Christ’s sake.”  <span id="fr_5913"></span>[5914](#fn_5913.md) He who
said, “If we have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great thing if
we reap your carnal things?” yet said, that he was a “servant.” For we
are your servants, brethren. Let none of us speak of himself, as though
he were greater than you. We shall be greater if we are more humble.
“But whosoever will be great among you” (it is the Lord’s saying),
“shall be your servant.” <span id="fr_5914"></span>[5915](#fn_5914.md) Paul
the Apostle, indeed, living by his own labour, refused even to receive
“the grass of the mountains;” he chose to want; nevertheless, the
mountains gave “grass.” Because he chose not to receive, ought the
mountains therefore not to give, and so to remain barren? Fruit is due
to the rain, food is due to the servant, as the Lord saith, “Eat such
things as they give you:” and that they should not think that they gave
aught of their own, He added, “for the labourer is worthy of his
hire.” <span id="fr_5915"></span>[5916](#fn_5915.md)

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p30"></span>13. …Just now has been read, “Give to
every one that asketh of thee;” <span
id="fr_5916"></span>[5917](#fn_5916.md) and in another place
Scripture <span id="fr_5917"></span>[5918](#fn_5917.md) saith, “Let alms
sweat in thy hand, till thou findest a righteous man to whom to give
it.” One there is who seeketh thee, another thou oughtest to seek. Leave
not indeed him who seeketh thee empty, for, “give to every one that
asketh of thee;” yet still there is another whom thou oughtest to seek;
“find a righteous man to whom to give it.” Ye will never do this, unless
ye have somewhat set aside from your substance, each what pleaseth him
according to the needs of his family, as a sort of debt to be paid to
the treasury. If Christ have not a state <span
id="fr_5918"></span>[5919](#fn_5918.md) of His own, neither hath He a
treasury. <span id="fr_5919"></span>[5920](#fn_5919.md) …Cut off then and
prune off some fixed <span id="fr_5920"></span>[5921](#fn_5920.md) sum
either from thy yearly profits or thy daily gains, else thou seemest as
it were to give of thy capital, and thy hand must needs hesitate, when
thou puttest it forth to that which thou hast not vowed. Cut off some
part of thy income; a tenth if thou choosest, though that is but little.
For it is said that the Pharisees gave a tenth; “I fast twice in the
week, I give tithes of all that I possess.” <span
id="fr_5921"></span>[5922](#fn_5921.md) And what saith the Lord? “Except
your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven.” <span
id="fr_5922"></span>[5923](#fn_5922.md) He whose righteousness thou
oughtest to exceed, giveth a tenth: thou givest not even a thousandth.
How wilt thou surpass him whom thou matchest not? “Who prepareth rain
for the earth.”

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p38"></span>14. “And giveth unto the cattle their
food” ([Psa. 147.9](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#009.md)<span
id="ii.CXLVII-p38.1"></span>). These are the cattle he meaneth, even
God’s flocks. God defraudeth not His flock of their food through men,
for whose “service He maketh the grass to grow.” “And to the young of
the ravens that call upon Him.” Shall we perchance think this, that the
ravens call upon God to give them their food? Think not that the
unreasoning creature calls upon God: no creature knows how to call upon
God, save the reasonable alone. Consider it as spoken in a figure, lest
thou think, as some evil men say, that the souls of men migrate into
cattle, dogs, swine, ravens. Give this no place in your hearts or in
your faith. The soul of man is made after the image of God: He will not
give His image to dog or swine. Who are “the young of the ravens”? The
Israelites used to say that they alone were righteous, because to them
the Law had been given: all other men of every nation they used to call
sinners. And in truth all nations were given up to sin, to idolatry, to
the worship of stones and stocks: but did they continue so? Although the
ravens themselves, our fathers, did not, yet we, “the young of the
ravens,” do call upon God. <span id="fr_5923"></span>[5924](#fn_5923.md)
…For “the young of the ravens,” who seemed to worship the images of
their forefathers, have advanced, and turned to God. And now thou
hearest “the young of the ravens” calling upon the one God. What then?
Sayest thou to “the young of the ravens,” “hast thou left thy father?”
Plainly I have, saith he; for he is a raven who calls not upon God. I,
“the young of the raven,” do call upon God.

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p40"></span>15. “In the power of an horse He will
not take pleasure” ([Psa. 147.10](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#010.md)<span
id="ii.CXLVII-p40.1"></span>). The power “of an horse” is pride. For the
horse seemeth adapted as it were to bear a man aloft, that he may be
more uplifted as he goes. And in truth he has a neck which typifieth a
sort of pride. Let not men exalt themselves upon their worth, let them
<span id="page_669">p. 669</span> <span
id="ii.CXLVII-Page_669"></span>not think themselves uplifted by their
distinctions; let them beware lest they be thrown by an untamed
horse. <span id="fr_5924"></span>[5925](#fn_5924.md) …“Nor in the
tabernacle of a man will He delight.” For the tabernacle of the Lord is
the Holy Church spread throughout the whole world. Heretics, separating
themselves from the Church’s tabernacles, have set up tabernacles for
themselves. For if perchance it be the lot of any, who is good and
pious, who confesseth his own weakness, who is “the young of a raven
that calleth on God,” not to enjoy worldly distinction, he goeth not out
of the Church, he setteth not up for himself a tent outside the Church,
wherein God will not delight. But what saith he? “I have chosen to be
cast away in the house of God, rather than to dwell in the tents of
sinners.” <span id="fr_5925"></span>[5926](#fn_5925.md)

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p43"></span>16. But what addeth he? “The Lord will
delight in them that fear Him, and in them that hope in His mercy”
([Psa. 147.11](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#011.md)<span
id="ii.CXLVII-p43.1"></span>). A robber is feared, and a wild beast is
feared, and an unjust and powerful man is much feared. “The Lord will
delight in them that hope in His mercy.” Behold, Judas, who betrayed our
Lord, feared, but he did not hope in His mercy.…It is well indeed that
thou hast feared, but only if thou trustedst in His mercy, whom thou
hast feared. He in despair “went and hanged himself.” In such wise then
fear the Lord, that thou trust in His mercy.…

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p44"></span>17. “Praise in unison, O Jerusalem, thy
God” ([Psa. 147.12](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#012.md)<span
id="ii.CXLVII-p44.1"></span>). Abiding yet in captivity, they behold
those flocks, or rather, the one flock of all its citizens, gathered
from all sides into that city; they see the joy of the mass, now after
threshings and winnowings placed in the garner, fearing nothing,
suffering no toil nor trouble; and, as yet abiding here, in the midst of
the threshing they send forward their joy of hope, and pant for it,
joining as it were their hearts to the Angels of God, and to that people
which shall abide with them in joy for ever. For what wilt thou then do,
O Jerusalem? Surely toil and groaning will pass away. What wilt thou do?
wilt thou plough, or sow, or plant vines, or make voyages, or trade?
What wilt thou do? Will it still be thy duty to be engaged in the works
thou now doest, good though they are, and spring from mercy? Consider
thy numbers, consider on all sides thy company: see whether any hungers,
for thee to give bread to; see whether any thirsts, for thee to give a
cup of cold water to; see whether any is a stranger, for thee to take
in; see whether any is sick, for thee to visit; see whether any is at
strife, for thee to reconcile him; see whether any is dying, for thee to
bury him. What then wilt thou do? “Praise in unison, O Jerusalem, thy
God.” Behold, this is thy business. As is wont to be said in
inscriptions, “Use it and be happy.” <span
id="fr_5926"></span>[5927](#fn_5926.md)

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p46"></span>18. Be ye Jerusalem; remember of whom it
is said, “Lord, in Thy city their image Thou shalt bring to
nought.” <span id="fr_5927"></span>[5928](#fn_5927.md) These are they who
now rejoice in such pomps; among them are they who have not come hither
to-day because there is a show. To whom is it a gift? <span
id="fr_5928"></span>[5929](#fn_5928.md) to whom is it a loss? or why is it
a gift? why is it a loss? For not they only who exhibit such shows are
smitten with loss, but with much greater loss are they smitten who
delight in gazing on them. The former have their chest drained of its
gold, the latter have their breast robbed of the riches of
righteousness. Most of the exhibiters of shows have to mourn for selling
their estates; how ought the sinners to mourn, for losing their souls:
Was it then for this that the Lord cried out on the Lord’s Day, “Watch
ye,” that to-day men should watch in this way. I beseech you, ye
citizens of Jerusalem, I beseech you by the peace of Jerusalem, by the
Redeemer, the Builder, the Ruler of Jerusalem, that ye address your
prayers to God for them. May they see, may they feel, that they are
trifling; and, intent as they are on the sights which please them, may
at length look on themselves, and be displeased. For in many we rejoice
that this has already been done: and once we too sat there and were mad:
and how many think we now sit there, who shall yet be, not only
Christians, but also Bishops! From what is past, we conjecture what is
to be: from what has already been done, we announce beforehand what God
will do. Let your prayers be wakeful, ye groan not for nothing.
Certainly they who have already escaped, praying for those who are still
in danger, because they too having been among those in danger, are
heard; and God shall drag His people out of the captivity of Babylon; by
all means He shall redeem and deliver them, and the number of the saints
who bear the image of God shall be perfected.…“Praise in unison,”
because thou consistest of many: “praise,” because thou hast been made
one. <span id="fr_5929"></span>[5930](#fn_5929.md) “We being many,” saith
the Apostle, “are one in Christ.” <span
id="fr_5930"></span>[5931](#fn_5930.md) As then we are many, “we praise in
unison;” as we are one, we “praise.” The same are many and one, because
He in whom they are one <span id="fr_5931"></span>[5932](#fn_5931.md) is
ever One. <span id="fr_5932"></span>[5933](#fn_5932.md)

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p53"></span>19. Wherefore, saith this Jerusalem, do
I praise in unison the Lord, and, as Sion, praise my God? Jerusalem is
the same as Sion. For different reasons has it the two names. Jerusalem
meaneth <span id="page_670">p. 670</span> <span
id="ii.CXLVII-Page_670"></span>“visions of peace;” Sion meaneth
“watching.” <span id="fr_5933"></span>[5934](#fn_5933.md) See whether these
words do not sound like sights; <span
id="fr_5934"></span>[5935](#fn_5934.md) that the Gentiles may not think
that they have sights and we have none. Sometimes after the theatre or
amphitheatre breaks up, when the crowd of lost ones begins to be vomited
forth from that den, sometimes, retaining in their minds images of their
vain amusements, and feeding their memory with things not only useless
but even hurtful, rejoicing in them as if they were sweet, while they
are really deadly; they see often, it may be, the servants of God pass
by, they recognise them by their garb or headdress, or they know them by
sight, <span id="fr_5935"></span>[5936](#fn_5935.md) and they say to one
another, or inwardly, “Wretched people, how much they lose!” Brethren,
let us return their good will (for they do mean it well) with prayers to
the Lord. They wish us well; but “he that loveth iniquity, hateth his
own soul.” <span id="fr_5936"></span>[5937](#fn_5936.md) If he hateth his
own soul, how shall he love my soul? Yet with a perverse, and empty, and
vain good will, if indeed it may be called good will, they grieve that
we lose what they love: let us pray that they lose not what we love.
Behold of what character that Jerusalem is to be which he exhorteth to
praise, or rather foreseeth will praise. For the praises of that city,
when we shall see and love and praise, will not need to be urged on and
stirred up by the voice of prophecy; but the Prophets now say this, to
drink in as far as while they remain in this flesh they can, the future
joys of the blessed, and then giving them forth into our ears, to arouse
in us love of that city. Let us burn with longing, let us not be
slothful in spirit. “Praise thy God, O Sion.”

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p58"></span>20. He saith, “He hath made strong the
bars of thy gates” ([Psa. 147.13](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#013.md)<span
id="ii.CXLVII-p58.1"></span>). The making bars strong is not for open
gates, but shut ones, wherefore most manuscripts read, “He hath made
strong the bolts <span id="fr_5937"></span>[5938](#fn_5937.md) of thy
gates.” Observe, beloved. He biddeth Jerusalem when closed in to praise
the Lord. We praise in unison now, we praise now; but it is amid
offences. Many where we wish not, enter in: many though we wish it not,
go out: therefore offences are frequent. “And because iniquity hath
abounded,” saith the Truth, “the love of many waxeth cold:” <span
id="fr_5938"></span>[5939](#fn_5938.md) because men come in whom we cannot
discern, because men go out whom we cannot retain. Wherefore is this?
Because not yet is there perfection, not yet is there the bliss that
shall be. Wherefore is this? Because as yet it is the threshing-floor,
not yet the garner. What therefore will be then, save no fear that aught
of this kind will happen? He said not only, He hath set, but, “He hath
made strong the bars of thy gates.” Let none go out, let none come in.
Let none go out, we rejoice: let none come in, we fear. Nay, fear not
this: when thou hast entered it will be said: only be thou in the number
of virgins, who carried their oil with them.…

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p61"></span>21. “He hath blessed thy children within
thee.” Who? He “who hath set peace as thy borders.” How ye all
exult! <span id="fr_5939"></span>[5940](#fn_5939.md) Love peace, my
brethren. Greatly are we delighted, when the love of peace crieth from
your hearts. How greatly doth it delight you! I had said nothing: I had
explained nothing: I but read the verse, and ye shouted. What was it
that shouted in you? The love of peace.…children of the kingdom, O
citizens of Jerusalem, in Jerusalem is the vision of peace: and all who
love peace are blest in her, and they enter in, when the doors are being
shut, and the bars made strong. This, which when but named ye so love
and esteem, this follow after, this long for: this love in your home, in
your business, in your wives, in your sons, in your slaves, in your
friends, in your enemies.…

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p63"></span>22. What ye cried out a while ago at the
very mention of peace, ye cried from longing: your cry was from thirst,
not from fulness; for there will be perfect righteousness where will be
perfect peace. Now we hunger and thirst after righteousness. “They shall
be filled.” <span id="fr_5940"></span>[5941](#fn_5940.md) How shall they be
filled? When we have arrived at peace. Therefore when he had said, “Who
hath set peace for thy borders,” because there is fulness and no want,
he added at once, “and filleth thee with the fat of wheat” ([Psa.
147.14](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#014.md)<span
id="ii.CXLVII-p64.2"></span>).…

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p65"></span>23. “Who sendeth forth His Word to the
earth” ([Psa. 147.15](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#015.md)<span
id="ii.CXLVII-p65.1"></span>). Behold, on earth we toil, weary,
fainting, sluggish, cold: when should we be raised up to the fat of
wheat that satisfieth, did not He send His Word to the earth, whereby we
were weighed down, to the earth, whereby we were hindered from
returning? He sent His Word, He deserted us not even in the wilderness,
He rained manna from heaven. “Who sendeth forth His Word to the earth;”
and to earth His Word came. How? or what is His Word? “Even unto
swiftness His Word runneth.” He said not, “His Word is swift,” but, “His
Word runneth even unto swiftness.” Let us understand, my brethren: He
could not have chosen a better word. He who is hot grows hot by heat, he
who is cold grows cold by cold, he who is swift becometh swift by
swiftness.…To what degree then doth it run? “Even to swiftness.”
Increase as much as you will the swiftness of the Word, and say, It is
as swift as this or that, as birds, as the winds, as the Angels; is any
of these as great as swiftness itself, “even unto swiftness”? What is
swiftness itself, breth<span id="page_671">p. 671</span> <span
id="ii.CXLVII-Page_671"></span>ren? It is everywhere; it is not in part.
This belongeth to the Word of God, not to be in part, to be everywhere
by Himself the Word, whereby He is “the Power of God and the Wisdom of
God,” <span id="fr_5941"></span>[5942](#fn_5941.md) before He had taken
flesh upon Him. If we think of God in the Form of God, the Word equal to
the Father, this is the Wisdom of God, of which is said, “It reacheth
from one end to the other mightily.” <span
id="fr_5942"></span>[5943](#fn_5942.md) What mighty speed! “It reacheth
from one end to the other mightily.”…

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p68"></span>24. We then are burdened by the
sluggishness of this cold body, and the bonds of this earthly and
corruptible life; have we no hope of receiving “the Word,” which
“runneth even unto swiftness”? or hath abandoned us, though by the body
we are depressed to the lowest depths? Did not He predestinate us,
before we were born in this mortal and sluggish body? He then, who
predestinated us, gave snow to the earth, even ourselves. For now let us
come to those somewhat obscure verses of the Psalm, let those
entanglements begin to be unrolled. Behold, we are sluggish on this
earth, and are as it were frozen here. And just as happens to the flakes
of snow, for they freeze above, then fall down; so as love groweth cold,
human nature falleth down to this earth, and involved in a sluggish body
becometh like snow. But in that snow are predestined sons of God. For,
“He giveth snow like wool” ([Psa.
147.16](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#016.md)<span
id="ii.CXLVII-p68.1"></span>). What is “like wool”? It meaneth, of the
snow which He hath given, of these, who are as yet slow in spirit and
cold, whom He hath predestinated, He is about to make somewhat. For wool
is the material of a garment: when we see wool, we look on it as a sort
of preparation for a garment. Therefore since He hath predestinated
these, who at present are cold and creep on earth, and as yet glow not
with the spirit of love (for as yet He speaketh of predestination), God
hath given these as a sort of wool: He is about to make of them a
garment. Rightly did the “raiment” of Christ “shine” on the mountain,
“like snow.” <span id="fr_5943"></span>[5944](#fn_5943.md) The raiment of
Christ did shine like snow, as though of that snow a garment had already
been made: of which wool, that is, of the snow which He gave like wool,
they being as yet predestined, were sluggish: but wait, see what
followeth. Since He gave them as wool, a garment is made of them. For as
the Church is called the Body of Christ, so is the Church also called
the garment of Christ: hence cometh that which is said by the Apostle,
“that He might present it to Himself a glorious Church, not having spot
or wrinkle.” <span id="fr_5944"></span>[5945](#fn_5944.md) Let Him then
present unto Himself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle; let
Him make Himself a garment of that wool, which He had predestinated in
the snow. While men are yet unbelieving, and cold, and sluggish, let Him
make a garment of this wool. That it may be washed from spots, let it be
cleansed by faith: that it may have no wrinkle, let it be stretched out
upon the cross.…

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p71"></span>25. “He scattereth mist like ashes.” “He
scattereth,” saith the Psalmist, “mist like ashes.” Who? He “who giveth
snow like wool.” For whom He predestined, He calleth to repentance; for
“whom He predestined, them He also called.” But “ashes” are connected
with repentance. Hear Him calling to repentance, when He upbraided
certain cities, saying, “Woe unto thee, Chorazin! woe unto thee,
Bethsaida! for if the mighty works which have been done in you had been
done in Tyre and Sidon, they had long ago repented in dust and
ashes.” <span id="fr_5945"></span>[5946](#fn_5945.md) Therefore, “He
scattereth mist like ashes.” What is, “He scattereth mist like ashes”?
When a man is called to learn about God, and it is said to him, “Receive
the truth;” he beginneth to wish to receive the Truth, but is not able;
he seeth that He is under a sort of darkness, which before he saw
not.…Wander not in the mist, follow in faith. But forasmuch as thou
endeavourest to see and art not able, repent of thy sins, for mist is
scattered like ashes. Repent thee now of having been obstinate against
God, repent of having followed thine own evil ways. Thou hast come into
this state where it is difficult for thee to see the vision of bliss,
and the mist will be healthful to thee, which God scattereth like ashes.
Thou thyself art as yet a mist, but like ashes. For they that are
penitent, as yet roll themselves in ashes, my brethren, testifying, as
it were, that they are like it, saying unto God, “I am ashes.” For a
certain Scripture saith, “I have despised myself, and wasted away, I
have reckoned myself earth and ashes.” <span
id="fr_5946"></span>[5947](#fn_5946.md) This is the humility of the
penitent. When Abraham speaketh to his God, and wisheth the burning of
Sodom to be disclosed to him, he saith, “I am but earth and
ashes.” <span id="fr_5947"></span>[5948](#fn_5947.md) How hath this
humility ever been found in great and holy men!

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p75"></span>26. “Who sendeth His crystal like
morsels of bread” ([Psa. 147.17](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#017.md)<span
id="ii.CXLVII-p75.1"></span>). We need not spend our toil again in
saying what crystal is. We have already said it, and I do not think that
ye, beloved, have forgotten it. What is then, “He sendeth His crystal
like morsels of bread”? What is “crystal”? It is very hard, it is very
tightly congealed; it can not, like snow, be easily melted. Snow,
hardened by many years’ duration, and by the succession of ages, is
called “crystal,” and this “He send<span id="page_672">p. 672</span>
<span id="ii.CXLVII-Page_672"></span>eth like morsels of bread.” What
meaneth this? They were too hard, no longer fit to be compared to snow,
but to crystal; but they too are predestinated and called, and some of
them even so as to feed others, to be useful to others also. And what
need is there to enumerate many, whom we happen to know, this one and
that one? Every one when he thinks can recall to mind how hardened and
obstinate some of those whom he knows have been, how they have struggled
against the truth; yet now they preach the truth, they have been made
morsels of bread. Who is that one Bread? “We being many,” saith the
Apostle, “are one Body in Christ;” <span
id="fr_5948"></span>[5949](#fn_5948.md) he saith also, “we being many are
one Bread and one Body.” <span id="fr_5949"></span>[5950](#fn_5949.md) If
then the whole Body of Christ is one Bread, the members of Christ are
morsels of Bread. Of some that are hard He maketh members of Himself,
and useful for feeding others.…Behold, the Apostle Paul was a crystal,
hard, resisting the truth, crying out against the Gospel, hardening
himself, as it were, against the sun.…Since then he was crystal, he
appeared clear and white, but he was hard and very cold. How was he
bright and white? “An Hebrew of the Hebrews; as touching the law, a
Pharisee.” Behold the brightness of crystal. Now hear the hardness of
crystal. “As touching zeal, persecuting the Church” <span
id="fr_5950"></span>[5951](#fn_5950.md) of Christ. Among the stoners of the
holy martyr Stephen, was he, hard, perhaps harder than all. “For he kept
the raiment of all who were stoning,” <span
id="fr_5951"></span>[5952](#fn_5951.md) so that he stoned by the hands of
all.

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p80"></span>27. Thus then we see “the snow, the
mist, the crystal:” it is good that He blow and thaw them. For if He
blow not, if He Himself thaw not the hardness of this ice, “in the face
of His cold who shall stand?” He abandoneth a sinner, behold, He calleth
him not; behold, He openeth not his perception; behold, He poureth not
in grace; let the man thaw himself, if he can, from the ice of folly. He
cannot. Wherefore can he not? “In the face of His cold who shall stand?”
Behold him then growing harder, and saying, “O wretched man that I am!
who shall deliver me from the body of this death?” Behold, I am growing
cold, behold, I am growing hard, what heat shall thaw me that I may run?
“Who shall deliver me from the body of this death?.…In the face of His
cold who shall stand?” And who shall free himself, if God abandon him?
Who is it that freeth? “The grace of God, through Jesus Christ our
Lord.”  <span id="fr_5952"></span>[5953](#fn_5952.md) Are we then to
despair? God forbid. For it goeth on, “He shall send out His Word, and
melt them” ([Psa. 147.18](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#018.md)<span
id="ii.CXLVII-p81.2"></span>). Let not then the snow despair, nor the
mist, nor the crystal. For of the snow, as of wool, a garment is being
made. That mist findeth safety in repentance: for, “whom He
predestinated, them He also called.” But even though they be the very
hardest among the predestinated, though they have been for a long time
hardening, and are become crystal, they will not be hard to the mercy of
God. “He shall send out His Word, and melt them.” What is “melt”?
Understand not “melt” in an ill sense: it meaneth, He shall liquefy, He
shall thaw them. For they are hard through pride. Rightly is pride
called also dulness: for whatever is dull, is also cold.…Despair not
even of the crystal. Hear a saying of the crystal. “Who before was a
blasphemer, and a persecutor, and injurious.” <span
id="fr_5953"></span>[5954](#fn_5953.md) But wherefore doth God melt the
crystal? That the snow despair not of itself. For he saith, “For this
cause I obtained mercy, that in me first Jesus Christ might show forth
all long-suffering, for a pattern to them that hereafter should believe
on Him unto eternal life.” <span id="fr_5954"></span>[5955](#fn_5954.md)
God then calleth unto the Gentiles, “Be melted, O crystal; come, ye
snows.” “His Spirit shall blow, and the waters shall flow.” Lo, the
“crystal” and the “snows” are melted, they turn into water, “let them
that thirst, come and drink.” <span id="fr_5955"></span>[5956](#fn_5955.md)
Saul, hard as crystal, persecuted Stephen unto death; Paul, now in the
living water, <span id="fr_5956"></span>[5957](#fn_5956.md) calleth the
Gentiles to the Fount.…

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p86"></span>28. “Announcing His Word unto Jacob, His
Righteousnesses and Judgments unto Israel” ([Psa.
147.19](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#019.md)<span
id="ii.CXLVII-p86.1"></span>). What “Righteousnesses,” what “Judgments”?
Because whatever mankind had suffered here before, when it was “snow”
and “mist” and “crystal,” it suffered for the deserts of its pride and
uplifting against God. Let us go back to the origin of our fall, and see
that most truly is it sung in the Psalm, “Before I was troubled I went
wrong.” <span id="fr_5957"></span>[5958](#fn_5957.md) But he who says,
“Before I was troubled I went wrong,” saith also, “It is good for me
that Thou hast humbled me, that I may learn Thy Righteousnesses.” <span
id="fr_5958"></span>[5959](#fn_5958.md) These righteousnesses Jacob learnt
from God, who made him to wrestle with an Angel; under the guise of
which Angel, God Himself wrestled with him. He held Him, he exerted
violence to hold Him, he prevailed to hold Him: He caused Himself to be
held, in mercy, not in weakness. Jacob therefore wrestled, and
prevailed: he held Him and when he seemed to have conquered Him asked to
be blessed of Him. <span id="fr_5959"></span>[5960](#fn_5959.md) How did he
understand with Whom he had wrestled, Whom he had held? Wherefore did he
wrestle violently, and hold Him? Because “the kingdom of heaven
suffereth violence, and the violent take it by force.” <span
id="fr_5960"></span>[5961](#fn_5960.md) Wherefore then did he wrestle?
Because it is with toil. Wherefore do we with <span id="page_673">p.
673</span> <span id="ii.CXLVII-Page_673"></span>difficulty hold, what we
so easily lose? Lest, easily getting back what we have lost, we learn to
lose that which we hold. Let man have toil to hold: he will hold firmly,
what he has only held after toil. These His judgments therefore God
manifested to Jacob and Israel.…

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p91"></span>29. “He hath not done so to the whole
race” ([Psa. 147.20](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#020.md)<span
id="ii.CXLVII-p91.1"></span>). Let none deceive you: it is not announced
to any nation, this judgment of God; namely, how the righteous and the
unrighteous suffer, how all suffer for their deserts, how the righteous
themselves are freed by the grace of God, not in their own merits. This
is not announced to the whole race, but only to Jacob, only to Israel.
What then do we, if He hath not announced it to the whole race, but only
to Jacob, only to Israel? Where will we be? In Jacob. “He hath not
manifested His judgments to them.” To whom? To all nations. How then are
the “snows” called, when the crystal is melted? How are the nations
called, now Paul is justified? How, save to be in Jacob? The wild olive
is cut off from its stock, to be grafted into the olive: now they belong
to the olive, no longer ought they to be called nations, <span
id="fr_5961"></span>[5962](#fn_5961.md) but one nation in Christ, the
nation of Jacob, the nation of Israel…What is Israel? “Seeing God.”
Where shall he see God? In peace. What peace? The peace of Jerusalem;
for, saith he, “He hath set peace for thy borders.” There shall we
praise: there shall we all be one, in One, unto One: for then, though
many, we shall not be scattered.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5900"></span>[665:5901](1080180.htm#fr_5900.md) <span
id="ii.CXLVII-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p2"></span> Lat. CXLVI. Sermon to the people of
Carthage.

<span id="fn_5901"></span>[665:5902](1080180.htm#fr_5901.md) <span
id="ii.CXLVII-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p5"></span> [1 Cor. x.
31](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#031.md)<span id="ii.CXLVII-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5902"></span>[665:5903](1080180.htm#fr_5902.md) <span
id="ii.CXLVII-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p6"></span> [1 Pet. iii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#007.md)<span id="ii.CXLVII-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5903"></span>[665:5904](1080180.htm#fr_5903.md) <span
id="ii.CXLVII-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p8"></span> [Ecclesiasticus
15.9](../../../bib/apo/sir015.htm#009.md)<span id="ii.CXLVII-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5904"></span>[665:5905](1080180.htm#fr_5904.md) <span
id="ii.CXLVII-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p10"></span> [Rom. v.
8](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#008.md)<span id="ii.CXLVII-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5905"></span>[666:5906](1080180.htm#fr_5905.md) <span
id="ii.CXLVII-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p12"></span> [Ps. xxxiv.
18](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#018.md)<span id="ii.CXLVII-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5906"></span>[666:5907](1080180.htm#fr_5906.md) <span
id="ii.CXLVII-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p16"></span> [Matt. x.
30](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#030.md)<span id="ii.CXLVII-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5907"></span>[666:5908](1080180.htm#fr_5907.md) <span
id="ii.CXLVII-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p17"></span> [Philip. ii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#015.md)<span id="ii.CXLVII-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5908"></span>[666:5909](1080180.htm#fr_5908.md) <span
id="ii.CXLVII-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p18"></span> [Ps. xl.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#005.md)<span id="ii.CXLVII-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5909"></span>[667:5910](1080180.htm#fr_5909.md) <span
id="ii.CXLVII-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p19"></span> [Luke x.
17](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#017.md)<span id="ii.CXLVII-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5910"></span>[667:5911](1080180.htm#fr_5910.md) <span
id="ii.CXLVII-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p20"></span> [Luke x.
20](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#020.md)<span id="ii.CXLVII-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5911"></span>[667:5912](1080180.htm#fr_5911.md) <span
id="ii.CXLVII-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p22"></span> [Wisd. xi.
20](../../../bib/apo/wis011.htm#020.md)<span id="ii.CXLVII-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5912"></span>[667:5913](1080180.htm#fr_5912.md) <span
id="ii.CXLVII-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p24"></span> \[See this series, vol. iv. p. 364.
Here is a digression upon men “not gentle,”—the Manichees.—C.\]

<span id="fn_5913"></span>[668:5914](1080180.htm#fr_5913.md) <span
id="ii.CXLVII-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p27"></span> [2 Cor. iv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#005.md)<span id="ii.CXLVII-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5914"></span>[668:5915](1080180.htm#fr_5914.md) <span
id="ii.CXLVII-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p28"></span> [Matt. xx.
26](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#026.md)<span id="ii.CXLVII-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5915"></span>[668:5916](1080180.htm#fr_5915.md) <span
id="ii.CXLVII-p28.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p29"></span> [Luke
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#007.md),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#008.md)<span id="ii.CXLVII-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5916"></span>[668:5917](1080180.htm#fr_5916.md) <span
id="ii.CXLVII-p30.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p31"></span> [Luke vi.
30](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#030.md)<span id="ii.CXLVII-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5917"></span>[668:5918](1080180.htm#fr_5917.md) <span
id="ii.CXLVII-p31.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p32"></span> The Benedictine editors were unable to
identify this text.

<span id="fn_5918"></span>[668:5919](1080180.htm#fr_5918.md) <span
id="ii.CXLVII-p32.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p33"></span> *Rempublicam*.

<span id="fn_5919"></span>[668:5920](1080180.htm#fr_5919.md) <span
id="ii.CXLVII-p33.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p34"></span> *Fiscus*. \[The author says: “For know
ye what *fiscus* means? *Fiscus* is a bag, and from the same source come
also the words *fiscella* and *fiscina*. Think not that *fiscus* is a
kind of dragon, because men are alarmed when they hear of the collector
of the *fiscus*: the *fiscus* is the public purse. The Lord had one here
on earth when he had the bag: and the bag was entrusted to Judas.”—C.\]

<span id="fn_5920"></span>[668:5921](1080180.htm#fr_5920.md) <span
id="ii.CXLVII-p34.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p35"></span> *Aliquid fixum*; other <span
class="c21"><span id="ii.CXLVII-p35.1"></span>mss</span>. *fisco*, which
suits the context better; “prune off somewhat for the treasury,”*i.e*.
Christ’s treasury.

<span id="fn_5921"></span>[668:5922](1080180.htm#fr_5921.md) <span
id="ii.CXLVII-p35.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p36"></span> [Luke xviii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#012.md)<span id="ii.CXLVII-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5922"></span>[668:5923](1080180.htm#fr_5922.md) <span
id="ii.CXLVII-p36.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p37"></span> [Matt. v.
20](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#020.md)<span id="ii.CXLVII-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5923"></span>[668:5924](1080180.htm#fr_5923.md) <span
id="ii.CXLVII-p38.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p39"></span> [1 Pet. i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#018.md)<span id="ii.CXLVII-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5924"></span>[669:5925](1080180.htm#fr_5924.md) <span
id="ii.CXLVII-p40.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p41"></span> [Ps. xx.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#007.md)<span id="ii.CXLVII-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5925"></span>[669:5926](1080180.htm#fr_5925.md) <span
id="ii.CXLVII-p41.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p42"></span> [Ps. lxxxiv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#010.md)<span id="ii.CXLVII-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5926"></span>[669:5927](1080180.htm#fr_5926.md) <span
id="ii.CXLVII-p44.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p45"></span> *Utere felix*. This and other like
expressions seem, from Morcelli, *Opera Epigraphica*, vol. i. p. 415, to
have been usual in inscriptions upon cups and like works of art,
probably when given as presents.

<span id="fn_5927"></span>[669:5928](1080180.htm#fr_5927.md) <span
id="ii.CXLVII-p46.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p47"></span> [Ps. lxxiii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#020.md)<span id="ii.CXLVII-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5928"></span>[669:5929](1080180.htm#fr_5928.md) <span
id="ii.CXLVII-p47.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p48"></span> A play on the double meaning of the
word *munus*, which, meaning literally “a gift,” is also used in a
special sense for “as how of gladiators.”

<span id="fn_5929"></span>[669:5930](1080180.htm#fr_5929.md) <span
id="ii.CXLVII-p48.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p49"></span> *Unum*.

<span id="fn_5930"></span>[669:5931](1080180.htm#fr_5930.md) <span
id="ii.CXLVII-p49.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p50"></span> [1 Cor. x.
17](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#017.md)<span id="ii.CXLVII-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5931"></span>[669:5932](1080180.htm#fr_5931.md) <span
id="ii.CXLVII-p50.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p51"></span> *Unum*.

<span id="fn_5932"></span>[669:5933](1080180.htm#fr_5932.md) <span
id="ii.CXLVII-p51.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p52"></span> *Unus*.

<span id="fn_5933"></span>[670:5934](1080180.htm#fr_5933.md) <span
id="ii.CXLVII-p53.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p54"></span> *Speculatio*.

<span id="fn_5934"></span>[670:5935](1080180.htm#fr_5934.md) <span
id="ii.CXLVII-p54.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p55"></span> *Spectacula*.

<span id="fn_5935"></span>[670:5936](1080180.htm#fr_5935.md) <span
id="ii.CXLVII-p55.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p56"></span> There is better reading in some <span
class="c21"><span id="ii.CXLVII-p56.1"></span>mss</span>.: *fortè* for
*fronte*, “or they happen to know them.”

<span id="fn_5936"></span>[670:5937](1080180.htm#fr_5936.md) <span
id="ii.CXLVII-p56.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p57"></span> [Ps. xi.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#005.md)<span id="ii.CXLVII-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5937"></span>[670:5938](1080180.htm#fr_5937.md) <span
id="ii.CXLVII-p58.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p59"></span> *Seras*.

<span id="fn_5938"></span>[670:5939](1080180.htm#fr_5938.md) <span
id="ii.CXLVII-p59.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p60"></span> [Matt. xxiv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#012.md)<span id="ii.CXLVII-p60.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5939"></span>[670:5940](1080180.htm#fr_5939.md) <span
id="ii.CXLVII-p61.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p62"></span> \[Here were applauses. The Donatists
were warlike.—C.\]

<span id="fn_5940"></span>[670:5941](1080180.htm#fr_5940.md) <span
id="ii.CXLVII-p63.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p64"></span> [Matt. v.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#006.md)<span id="ii.CXLVII-p64.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5941"></span>[671:5942](1080180.htm#fr_5941.md) <span
id="ii.CXLVII-p65.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p66"></span> [1 Cor. i.
24](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#024.md)<span id="ii.CXLVII-p66.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5942"></span>[671:5943](1080180.htm#fr_5942.md) <span
id="ii.CXLVII-p66.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p67"></span> [Wisd. viii.
1](../../../bib/apo/wis008.htm#001.md)<span id="ii.CXLVII-p67.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5943"></span>[671:5944](1080180.htm#fr_5943.md) <span
id="ii.CXLVII-p68.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p69"></span> [Matt. xvii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#002.md)<span id="ii.CXLVII-p69.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5944"></span>[671:5945](1080180.htm#fr_5944.md) <span
id="ii.CXLVII-p69.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p70"></span> [Eph. v.
27](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#027.md)<span id="ii.CXLVII-p70.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5945"></span>[671:5946](1080180.htm#fr_5945.md) <span
id="ii.CXLVII-p71.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p72"></span> [Matt. xi.
21](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#021.md)<span id="ii.CXLVII-p72.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5946"></span>[671:5947](1080180.htm#fr_5946.md) <span
id="ii.CXLVII-p72.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p73"></span> [Job xxx.
19](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#019.md)<span id="ii.CXLVII-p73.1"></span>,
Vulg.

<span id="fn_5947"></span>[671:5948](1080180.htm#fr_5947.md) <span
id="ii.CXLVII-p73.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p74"></span> [Gen. xviii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#027.md)<span id="ii.CXLVII-p74.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5948"></span>[672:5949](1080180.htm#fr_5948.md) <span
id="ii.CXLVII-p75.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p76"></span> [Rom. xii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#005.md)<span id="ii.CXLVII-p76.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5949"></span>[672:5950](1080180.htm#fr_5949.md) <span
id="ii.CXLVII-p76.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p77"></span> [1 Cor. x.
17](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#017.md)<span id="ii.CXLVII-p77.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5950"></span>[672:5951](1080180.htm#fr_5950.md) <span
id="ii.CXLVII-p77.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p78"></span> [Phil.
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#005.md),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#006.md)<span id="ii.CXLVII-p78.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5951"></span>[672:5952](1080180.htm#fr_5951.md) <span
id="ii.CXLVII-p78.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p79"></span> [Acts xxii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#020.md)<span id="ii.CXLVII-p79.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5952"></span>[672:5953](1080180.htm#fr_5952.md) <span
id="ii.CXLVII-p80.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p81"></span> [Rom.
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#024.md),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#025.md)<span id="ii.CXLVII-p81.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5953"></span>[672:5954](1080180.htm#fr_5953.md) <span
id="ii.CXLVII-p81.3"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p82"></span> [1 Tim. i.
13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#013.md)<span id="ii.CXLVII-p82.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5954"></span>[672:5955](1080180.htm#fr_5954.md) <span
id="ii.CXLVII-p82.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p83"></span> [1 Tim. i.
16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#016.md)<span id="ii.CXLVII-p83.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5955"></span>[672:5956](1080180.htm#fr_5955.md) <span
id="ii.CXLVII-p83.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p84"></span> [John vii.
37](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#037.md)<span id="ii.CXLVII-p84.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5956"></span>[672:5957](1080180.htm#fr_5956.md) <span
id="ii.CXLVII-p84.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p85"></span> [John iv.
14](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#014.md)<span id="ii.CXLVII-p85.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5957"></span>[672:5958](1080180.htm#fr_5957.md) <span
id="ii.CXLVII-p86.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p87"></span> [Ps. cxix.
67](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#067.md)<span id="ii.CXLVII-p87.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5958"></span>[672:5959](1080180.htm#fr_5958.md) <span
id="ii.CXLVII-p87.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p88"></span> [Ps. cxix.
71](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#071.md)<span id="ii.CXLVII-p88.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5959"></span>[672:5960](1080180.htm#fr_5959.md) <span
id="ii.CXLVII-p88.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p89"></span> [Gen. xxxii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#024.md)<span id="ii.CXLVII-p89.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_5960"></span>[672:5961](1080180.htm#fr_5960.md) <span
id="ii.CXLVII-p89.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p90"></span> [Matt. xi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#012.md)<span id="ii.CXLVII-p90.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5961"></span>[673:5962](1080180.htm#fr_5961.md) <span
id="ii.CXLVII-p91.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLVII-p92"></span> *Gentes*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm CXLVIII](1080181.md)
