[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080182)  [Next](1080184.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.CL"></span>

<span id="ii.CL-p1"></span> <span id="ii.CL-p1.1"></span><span
class="c20"><span id="ii.CL-p1.2"></span>Psalm CL. <span
id="fr_6004"></span>[6005](#fn_6004.md) </span>

<span id="ii.CL-p3"></span>1. Although the arrangement of the Psalms,
which seems to me to contain the secret of a mighty mystery, hath not
yet been revealed unto me, yet, by the fact that they in all amount to
one hundred and fifty, they suggest somewhat even to us, who have not as
yet pierced with the eye of our mind the depth of their entire
arrangement, whereon we may without being over-bold, so far as God
giveth, be able to speak. Firstly, the number fifteen, whereof it is a
multiple this number fifteen, I say, signifieth the agreement of the two
Testaments. For in the former is observed the Sabbath, which signifieth
rest; in the latter the Lord’s Day, which signifieth resurrection. The
Sabbath is the seventh day, but the Lord’s Day, coming after the
seventh, must needs be the eighth, and is also to be reckoned the first.
For it is called the first day of the week, <span
id="fr_6005"></span>[6006](#fn_6005.md) and so from it are reckoned the
second, third, fourth, and so on to the seventh day of the week, which
is the Sabbath. But from Lord’s Day to Lord’s Day is eight days, wherein
is declared the revelation of the New Testament, which in the Old was as
it were veiled under earthly promises. Further, seven and eight make
fifteen. Of the same number too are the Psalms which are called “of the
steps,” because that was the number of the steps of the Temple. Further
too, the number fifty in itself also containeth a great mystery. <span
id="fr_6006"></span>[6007](#fn_6006.md) For it consisteth of a week of
weeks, with the addition of one as an eighth to complete the number of
fifty. For seven times seven make forty-nine, whereto one is added to
make fifty. And this number fifty is of so great meaning, that it was
after the completion of that number of days from the Lord’s
Resurrection, that, on the fiftieth day exactly, the Holy Spirit came
upon those who were gathered together in Christ. And this Holy Spirit is
in Scripture especially spoken of by the number seven, whether in Isaiah
or in the Apocalypse, where the seven Spirits of God are most directly
mentioned, on account of the sevenfold operation of one and the
self-same Spirit. <span id="fr_6007"></span>[6008](#fn_6007.md) And this
sevenfold operation is mentioned in Isaiah. <span
id="fr_6008"></span>[6009](#fn_6008.md) …Hence also the Holy Spirit is
spoken of under the number seven. But this period of fifty the Lord
divided into forty and ten: for on the fortieth day after His
Resurrection He ascended into heaven, and then after ten days were
completed He sent the Holy Spirit: under the number forty setting forth
to us the period of temporal sojourn in this world. For the number four
prevaileth in forty; and the world and the year have each four parts;
and by the addition of the number ten, as a sort of reward added for the
fulfilment of the law in good works, eternity itself is figured. This
fifty the number one hundred and fifty containeth three times, as though
it were multiplied by the Trinity. Wherefore for this reason too we make
out that this number of the Psalm is not unsuitable. <span
id="fr_6009"></span>[6010](#fn_6009.md)

<span id="ii.CL-p9"></span>2. Now in that some have believed that the
Psalms are divided into five books, they have been led by the fact, that
so often at the end of Psalms are the words, “so be it, so be it.” But
when I endeavoured to make out the principle of this division, I was not
able; for neither are the five parts equal one to another, neither in
quantity of contents, nor yet even in number of Psalms, so as for each
to contain thirty. And if each book end with, “so be it, so be it,” we
may reasonably ask, why the fifth and last book hath not the same
conclusion. We however, following the authority of canonical Scripture,
where it is said, “For it is written in the book of Psalms,” <span
id="fr_6010"></span>[6011](#fn_6010.md) know that there is but one book of
Psalms. And I see indeed how this can be true, <span id="page_682">p.
682</span> <span id="ii.CL-Page_682"></span>and yet the other be true
also, without contravening it. For it may be that there was some custom
in Hebrew literature, whereby that is called one book which yet consists
of more than one, just as of many churches one church consisteth, and of
many heavens one heaven, <span id="fr_6011"></span>[6012](#fn_6011.md) …and
one land of many lands. For it is our everyday habit to say, “the
globe <span id="fr_6012"></span>[6013](#fn_6012.md) of the earth,” and “the
globe of the lands.” And when it is said, “It is written in the book of
Psalms,” though the customary way of speaking is such that he seem to
have wished to suggest that there is but one book, yet to this it may be
answered, that the words mean “in a book of the Psalms,” that is, “in
any one of those five books.” And this is in common language so
unprecedented, or at least so rare, that we are only convinced that the
twelve Prophets made one book, because we read in like manner, “As it is
written in the book of the Prophets.” <span
id="fr_6013"></span>[6014](#fn_6013.md) There are some too who call all the
canonical Scriptures together one book, <span
id="fr_6014"></span>[6015](#fn_6014.md) because they agree in a very
wondrous and divine unity.…

<span id="ii.CL-p15"></span>3. Whichever then of these is understood,
this book, in its parts of fifty Psalms each, gives an answer important
and very worthy of consideration. For it seems to me not without
significance, that the fiftieth is of penitence, the hundredth of mercy
and judgment, the hundred and fiftieth of the praise of God in His
saints. For thus do we advance to an everlasting life of happiness,
first by condemning our own sins, then by living aright, that, having
condemned our ill life, and lived a good life, we may attain to
everlasting life. Our predestination is not wrought in ourselves, but in
secret with Him, in His foreknowledge. <span
id="fr_6015"></span>[6016](#fn_6015.md) But we are called by the preaching
of repentance. We are justified in the calling of mercy and fear of
judgment. He feareth not judgment, who hath previously attained
salvation. Being called, we renounce the devil by repentance, that we
may not continue under his yoke: being justified, we are healed by
mercy, that we may not fear judgment: being glorified, we pass into
everlasting life, where we praise God without end.…The verse wherewith
this Psalm concludeth is the voice of life everlasting.

<span id="ii.CL-p17"></span>4. “Praise the Lord in His saints,” that is,
in those whom He hath glorified: “praise Him in the firmament of His
power” ([Psa. 150.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#001.md)<span
id="ii.CL-p17.1"></span>). “Praise Him in His deeds of strength;” or, as
others have explained it, “in His deeds of power: praise Him according
to the multitude of His greatness” ([Psa.
150.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#002)<span id="ii.CL-p17.2"></span>.md).
All these His saints are; as the Apostle saith, “But we may be the
righteousness of God in Him.” <span id="fr_6016"></span>[6017](#fn_6016.md)
If then they be the righteousness of God, which He hath wrought in them,
why are they not also the strength of Christ which He hath wrought in
them, that they should rise again from the dead? For in Christ’s
resurrection, “strength” is especially set forth to us, for in His
Passion was weakness, as the Apostle saith. <span
id="fr_6017"></span>[6018](#fn_6017.md) And well doth it say, “the
firmament of His power.” For it is the “firmament of His power” that He
“dieth no more, death hath no more dominion over Him.” <span
id="fr_6018"></span>[6019](#fn_6018.md) Why should not they also be called
“the works of” God’s “strength,” which He hath done in them: yea rather,
they themselves are the works of His strength; just as it is said, “We
are the righteousness of God in Him.” For what more powerful than that
He should reign for ever, with all His enemies put under His feet? Why
should not they also be “the multitude of His greatness”? not that
whereby He is great, but whereby He hath made them great, many as they
are, that is, thousands of thousands. Just as righteousness too is
understood in two ways, that whereby He is righteous, and that which He
worketh in us, so as to make us His righteousness. These same saints are
signified by all the musical instruments in succession, to praise God
in. For what the Psalmist began with, saying, “Praise the Lord in His
saints,” that he carrieth out, signifying in various ways these same
saints of His.

<span id="ii.CL-p21"></span>5. “Praise Him in the sound of the trumpet”
([Psa. 150.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#003.md)<span
id="ii.CL-p21.1"></span>): on account of the surpassing clearness of
note of their praise. “Praise Him in the psaltery and harp.” The
psaltery praiseth God from things above, the harp praiseth God from
things below; I mean, from things in heaven, and things in earth, as He
who made heaven and earth. We have already in another Psalm, <span
id="fr_6019"></span>[6020](#fn_6019.md) explained that the psaltery hath
that board, whereon the series of strings rests that it may give a
better sound, above, whereas the harp has it below. “Praise Him in the
timbrel and choir” ([Psa. 150.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#004.md)<span
id="ii.CL-p22.1"></span>). The “timbrel” praiseth God when the flesh is
now changed, so that there is in it no weakness of earthly corruption.
For the timbrel is made of leather dried and strengthened. The “choir”
praiseth God when society made peaceful praiseth Him. “Praise Him on the
strings and organ.” Both psaltery and harp, which have been mentioned
above, have strings. But “organ” is a general name for all instruments
of music, although usage has now obtained that those are specially
called organ which are inflated with bellows: but I do not think that
this kind is meant here. <span id="fr_6020"></span>[6021](#fn_6020.md) For
<span id="page_683">p. 683</span> <span id="ii.CL-Page_683"></span>since
organ is a Greek word, applied generally, as I have said, to all musical
instruments, this instrument, to which bellows are applied, is called by
the Greeks by another name: but it being called organ is rather a Latin
and conversational usage. When then he saith, “on the strings and
organ,” he seemeth to me to have intended to signify some instrument
which hath strings. For it is not psalteries and harps only that have
strings: but, because in the psaltery, and harp, on account of the sound
from things below and things above, somewhat has been found which can be
understood after this distinction, he hath suggested to us to seek some
other meaning in the strings themselves: for they too are flesh, but
flesh now set free from corruption. And to those, it may be, he added
the organ, to signify that they sound not each separately, but sound
together in most harmonious diversity, just as they are arranged in a
musical instrument. For even then the saints of God will have their
differences, accordant, not discordant, that is, agreeing, not
disagreeing, just as sweetest harmony arises from sounds differing
indeed, but not opposed to one another.

<span id="ii.CL-p24"></span>6. “Praise Him on the well-sounding cymbals,
praise Him on cymbals of jubilation” ([Psa.
150.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#005)<span id="ii.CL-p24.1"></span>.md).
Cymbals touch one another in order to sound, and therefore are by some
compared to our lips. But I think it better to understand that God is in
a manner praised on the cymbal, when each is honoured by his neighbour,
not by himself, and then honouring one another, they give praise to God.
But lest any should understand such cymbals as sound without life,
therefore I think he added, “on cymbals of jubilation.” For “jubilation”
that is, unspeakable praise, proceedeth not, save from life. Nor do I
think that I should pass over what musicians say, that there are three
kinds of sounds, by voice, by breath, by striking: by voice, uttered by
throat and windpipe, when man singeth without any instrument; by breath,
as by pipe, or anything of that sort: by striking, as by harp, or
anything of that kind. None then of these kinds is omitted here: for
there is voice in the choir, breath in the trumpet, striking in the
harp, representing mind, spirit, body, <span
id="fr_6021"></span>[6022](#fn_6021.md) but by similitudes, not in the
proper sense of the words. When then he proposed, “Praise God in His
saints,” to whom said he this, save to themselves? And in whom are they
to praise God, save in themselves? For ye, saith he, are “His saints;”
ye are “His strength,” but that which He wrought in you; ye are “His
mighty works, and the multitude of His greatness,” which He hath wrought
and set forth in you. Ye are “trumpet, psaltery, harp, timbrel, choir,
strings, and organ, cymbals of jubilation sounding well,” because
sounding in harmony. All these are ye: let nought that is vile, nought
that is transitory, nought that is ludicrous, be here thought of. And
since to savour of the flesh is death, “let every spirit praise the
Lord” ([Psa. 150.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#006.md)<span
id="ii.CL-p25.1"></span>).

<span id="ii.CL-p26"></span><span class="c20"><span
id="ii.CL-p26.1"></span>Prayer of St. Augustin.</span>

<span id="ii.CL-p27"></span>Which he was wont to use after his Sermons
and Lectures.

<span id="ii.CL-p28"></span><span class="c21"><span
id="ii.CL-p28.1"></span>Turn</span> we to the Lord God, the Father
Almighty, and with pure hearts offer to Him, so far as our meanness can,
great and true thanks, with all our hearts praying His exceeding
kindness, that of His good pleasure He would deign to hear our prayers,
that by His Power He would drive out the enemy from our deeds and
thoughts, that He would increase our faith, guide our understandings,
give us spiritual thoughts, and lead us to His bliss, through Jesus
Christ His Son our Lord, who liveth and reigneth with Him, in the Unity
of the Holy Spirit, one God, for ever and ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_6004"></span>[681:6005](1080183.htm#fr_6004.md) <span
id="ii.CL-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.CL-p2"></span> Lat. CL.

<span id="fn_6005"></span>[681:6006](1080183.htm#fr_6005.md) <span
id="ii.CL-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CL-p4"></span> *Una Sabbati*.

<span id="fn_6006"></span>[681:6007](1080183.htm#fr_6006.md) <span
id="ii.CL-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CL-p5"></span> \[See p. 181, note 12, *supra*.—C.\]

<span id="fn_6007"></span>[681:6008](1080183.htm#fr_6007.md) <span
id="ii.CL-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CL-p6"></span> [Rev. i.
20](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#020.md)<span id="ii.CL-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_6008"></span>[681:6009](1080183.htm#fr_6008.md) <span
id="ii.CL-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CL-p7"></span> [Isa. xi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#002.md)<span id="ii.CL-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_6009"></span>[681:6010](1080183.htm#fr_6009.md) <span
id="ii.CL-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CL-p8"></span> \[He adds: “For in the number of the fishes
too which were caught in the nets which were let down after the
Resurrection, by the adding of three to one hundred and fifty, we seem
to have a kind of suggestion given us, into how many parts that number
ought to be divided, namely, that it should contain three fifties.
Though there is another account too of that number of fishes, one much
more deep and pleasing, namely, that we arrive at the same number, by
setting down seventeen in a column, and adding all the numbers from one
to seventeen together. But in the number *ten* is signified the Law, in
*seven*, Grace; for nought fulfilleth the Law save ‘Love ([Rom. v.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#005)<span id="ii.CL-p8.1"></span>.md) by the
Holy Spirit,’ who is set forth under the number *seven*.”—C.\]

<span id="fn_6010"></span>[681:6011](1080183.htm#fr_6010.md) <span
id="ii.CL-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CL-p10"></span> [Acts i.
20](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#020.md)<span id="ii.CL-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_6011"></span>[682:6012](1080183.htm#fr_6011.md) <span
id="ii.CL-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CL-p11"></span> [Ps.
21:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#002.md), [Gen.
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#008.md)<span id="ii.CL-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_6012"></span>[682:6013](1080183.htm#fr_6012.md) <span
id="ii.CL-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CL-p12"></span> *Orbem terræ*, and *orbem terrarum*. \[But
by *orbis terræ* does he mean “globe”? See p. 365, note 6, *supra*.—C.\]

<span id="fn_6013"></span>[682:6014](1080183.htm#fr_6013.md) <span
id="ii.CL-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CL-p13"></span> [Acts vii.
42](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#042.md)<span id="ii.CL-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_6014"></span>[682:6015](1080183.htm#fr_6014.md) <span
id="ii.CL-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CL-p14"></span> [Ps. xl.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#008.md)<span id="ii.CL-p14.1"></span>.
\[*i.e*. the Bible. In the Middle Ages called rather “the Holy
Library.”—C.\]

<span id="fn_6015"></span>[682:6016](1080183.htm#fr_6015.md) <span
id="ii.CL-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CL-p16"></span> [Rom. viii.
30](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#030.md)<span id="ii.CL-p16.1"></span>.
\[See p. 231, *supra*.—C.\]

<span id="fn_6016"></span>[682:6017](1080183.htm#fr_6016.md) <span
id="ii.CL-p17.3"></span>

<span id="ii.CL-p18"></span> [2 Cor. v.
21](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#021.md)<span id="ii.CL-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_6017"></span>[682:6018](1080183.htm#fr_6017.md) <span
id="ii.CL-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CL-p19"></span> [2 Cor.
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#004.md), [Phil.
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#010.md)<span id="ii.CL-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_6018"></span>[682:6019](1080183.htm#fr_6018.md) <span
id="ii.CL-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CL-p20"></span> [Rom. vi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#009.md)<span id="ii.CL-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_6019"></span>[682:6020](1080183.htm#fr_6019.md) <span
id="ii.CL-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CL-p22"></span> See vol. i. p. 312.

<span id="fn_6020"></span>[682:6021](1080183.htm#fr_6020.md) <span
id="ii.CL-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CL-p23"></span> \[See p. 229, note 1, *supra*.—C.\]

<span id="fn_6021"></span>[683:6022](1080183.htm#fr_6021.md) <span
id="ii.CL-p24.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CL-p25"></span> \[The tripartite nature of man recognised.
See A.N.F. vol. iii. p. 474.—C.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Index of Subjects](1080184.md)
