[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080090)  [Next](1080092) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.LXXX"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXX-p1"></span> <span id="ii.LXXX-p1.1"></span><span
class="c20"><span id="ii.LXXX-p1.2"></span>Psalm LXXX. <span
id="fr_3740"></span>[3741](#fn_3740) </span>

<span id="ii.LXXX-p3"></span>1. …If perchance things obscure demand the
office of an interpreter, those things which are evident ought to
require of me the office of a reader. The song here is of the Advent of
the Lord and of our Saviour Jesus Christ, and of His vineyard. But the
singer of the song is that Asaph, as far as doth appear, enlightened and
converted, by whose name ye know the synagogue to be signified. Lastly,
the title of the Psalm is: “For the end in behalf of them that shall be
changed;” that is, for the better. For Christ, the end of the Law, <span
id="fr_3741"></span>[3742](#fn_3741) hath come on purpose that He should
change men for the better. And he addeth, “a testimony to Asaph
himself.” A good testimony of truth. Lastly, this testimony doth confess
both Christ and the vineyard; that is, Head and Body, King and people,
Shepherd and flock, and the entire mystery of all Scriptures, Christ and
the Church. But the title of the Psalm doth conclude with, “for the
Assyrians.” The Assyrians are interpreted, “men guiding.” Therefore it
is no longer a generation which hath not guided the heart <span
id="fr_3742"></span>[3743](#fn_3742) thereof, but now a generation
guiding. Therefore hear we what he saith in this testimony.

<span id="ii.LXXX-p6"></span>2. What is, “Thou that feedest Israel,
hearken, Thou that conducteth Joseph like sheep”? ([Psa.
80.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#001)<span id="ii.LXXX-p6.1"></span>).
He is being invoked to come, He is being expected until He come, He is
being yearned for until He come. Therefore may He find “men guiding:”
“Thou that conductest,” he saith, “Joseph like sheep:” Joseph himself
like sheep. Joseph himself are the sheep, and Joseph himself is a sheep.
Observe Joseph; for although even the interpretation of his name doth
aid us much, for it signifieth increase; and He came indeed in order
that the grain given to death <span id="fr_3743"></span>[3744](#fn_3743)
might arise manifold; <span id="fr_3744"></span>[3745](#fn_3744) that
is, that the people of God might be increased.…“Thou that sittest upon
the Cherubin.” Cherubin is the seat of the glory of God, and is
interpreted the fulness of knowledge. There God sitteth in the fulness
of knowledge. Though we understand the Cherubin to be the exalted powers
and virtues of the heavens: yet, if thou wilt, thou wilt be
Cherubin. <span id="fr_3745"></span>[3746](#fn_3745) For if Cherubin is
the seat of God, hear what saith the Scripture: “The soul of a just man
is the seat of wisdom.” How, thou sayest, shall I be the fulness of
knowledge? Who shall fulfil this? Thou hast the means of fulfilling it:
“The fulness of the Law is love.” <span
id="fr_3746"></span>[3747](#fn_3746) Do not run after many things, and
strain thyself. The amplitude of the branches doth terrify thee: hold by
the root, and of the greatness of the tree think not. Be there in thee
love, and the fulness of knowledge must needs follow. For what doth he
not know that knoweth love? Inasmuch as it hath been said, “God is
love.” <span id="fr_3747"></span>[3748](#fn_3747) “Appear.” For we went
astray because Thou didst not appear. “Before Ephraim and Benjamin and
Manasse” ([Psa. 80.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#002)<span
id="ii.LXXX-p11.2"></span>). Appear, I say, before the nation of the
Jews, before the people of Israel. For there is Ephraim, there Manasses,
there Benjamin. But to the interpretation let us look: Ephraim is
fruit-bearing, <span id="page_387">p. 387</span> <span
id="ii.LXXX-Page_387"></span>Benjamin son of right hand, Manasses one
forgetful. Appear Thou then before one made fruitful, before a son of
the right hand: appear Thou before one forgetful, in order that he may
be no longer forgetful, but Thou mayest come into his mind that hast
delivered him.…For weak Thou wast when it was being said, “If Son of God
He is, let Him come down from the Cross.” <span
id="fr_3748"></span>[3749](#fn_3748) Thou wast seeming to have no power:
the persecutor had power over Thee: and Thou didst show this aforetime,
for Jacob too himself prevailed in wrestling, a man with an angel. Would
he at any time, except the angel had been willing? And man prevailed,
and the angel was conquered: and victorious man holdeth the angel, and
saith, “I will not let thee go, except thou shalt have blessed
me.” <span id="fr_3749"></span>[3750](#fn_3749) A great sacrament! He
both standeth conquered, and blesseth the conqueror. Conquered, because
he willed it; in flesh weak, in majesty strong.…Having been crucified of
weakness, rise Thou in power: <span id="fr_3750"></span>[3751](#fn_3750)
“Stir up Thy power, and come Thou, to save us.”

<span id="ii.LXXX-p15"></span>3. “O God, convert us.” For averse we have
been from Thee, and except Thou convert us, we shall not be converted.
“And illumine Thy face, and we shall be saved” ([Psa.
80.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#003)<span id="ii.LXXX-p15.1"></span>).
Hath He anywise a darkened face? He hath not a darkened face, but He
placed before it a cloud of flesh, and as it were a veil of weakness;
and when He hung on the tree, He was not thought the Same as He was
after to be acknowledged when He was sitting in Heaven. For thus it hath
come to pass. Christ present on the earth, and doing miracles, Asaph
knew not; but when He had died, after that He rose again, and ascended
into Heaven, he knew Him. He was pricked to the heart, and he may have
spoken <span id="fr_3751"></span>[3752](#fn_3751) also of Him this
testimony which now we acknowledge in this Psalm. Thou didst cover Thy
face, and we were sick: illumine Thou the same, and we shall be whole.

<span id="ii.LXXX-p17"></span>4. “O Lord God of virtues, how long wilt
Thou be angry with the prayer of Thy servant?” ([Psa.
80.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#004)<span id="ii.LXXX-p17.1"></span>).
Now Thy servant. Thou wast angry at the prayer of Thy enemy, wilt Thou
still be angry with the prayer of Thy servant? Thou hast converted us,
we know Thee, and wilt Thou still be angry with the prayer of Thy
servant? Thou wilt evidently be angry, in fact, as a father correcting,
not as a judge condemning. In such manner evidently Thou wilt be angry,
because it hath been written, “My son, drawing near unto the service of
God, stand thou in righteousness and in fear, and prepare thy soul for
temptation.” <span id="fr_3752"></span>[3753](#fn_3752) Think not that
now the wrath of God hath passed away, because thou hast been converted.
The wrath of God <span id="fr_3753"></span>[3754](#fn_3753) hath passed
away from thee, but only so that it condemn not for everlasting. But He
scourgeth, He spareth not: because He scourgeth every son whom He
receiveth. <span id="fr_3754"></span>[3755](#fn_3754) If thou refusest
to be scourged, why dost thou desire to be received? He scourgeth every
son whom He receiveth. He who did not spare even His only Son, scourgeth
every one. But nevertheless, “How long wilt Thou be angry with the
prayer of Thy servant?” No longer thine enemy: but, “Thou wilt be angry
with the prayer of Thy servant,” how long? There followeth: “Thou wilt
feed us with the bread of tears, and wilt give us to drink with tears in
measure” ([Psa. 80.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#005)<span
id="ii.LXXX-p20.2"></span>). What is, “in measure”? Hear the Apostle:
“Faithful is God, who doth not suffer you to be tempted above that ye
are able to bear.” <span id="fr_3755"></span>[3756](#fn_3755) The
measure is, according to your powers: the measure is, that thou be
instructed, not that thou be crushed.

<span id="ii.LXXX-p22"></span>5. “Thou hast set us for a contradiction
to our neighbours” ([Psa. 80.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#006)<span
id="ii.LXXX-p22.1"></span>). Evidently this did come to pass: for out of
Asaph were chosen they that should go to the Gentiles and preach Christ,
and should have it said to them, “Who is this proclaimer of new
demons?” <span id="fr_3756"></span>[3757](#fn_3756) “Thou hast set us
for a contradiction to our neighbours.” For they were preaching Him who
was the subject of the contradiction. Whom did they preach? That after
He was dead, Christ rose again. Who would hear this? Who would know
this? It is a new thing. But signs did follow, and to an incredible
thing miracles gave credibility. He was contradicted, but the
contradictor was conquered, and from being a contradictor was made a
believer. There, however, was a great flame: there the martyrs fed with
the bread of tears, and given to drink in tears, but in measure, not
more than they are able to bear; in order that after the measure of
tears there should follow a crown of joys. “And our enemies have sneered
at us.” And where are they that sneered? For a long while it was said,
Who are they that worship the Dead One, that adore the Crucified? For a
long while so it was said. Where is the nose of them that sneered? Now
do not they that censure flee into caves, that they may not be seen? But
ye see what followeth: “O Lord God of virtues, convert us, and show Thy
face, and we shall be whole” ([Psa.
80.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#007)<span id="ii.LXXX-p23.2"></span>).
“A vineyard out of Egypt Thou hast brought over, Thou hast cast out the
nations, and hast planted her” ([Psa.
80.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#008)<span id="ii.LXXX-p23.3"></span>).
It was done, we know. How many nations were cast out? Amorites,
Cethites, Jebusites, Gergesites, and Evites: after whose expulsion and
overthrow, there was led in the people deliv<span id="page_388">p.
388</span> <span id="ii.LXXX-Page_388"></span>ered out of Egypt, into
the land of promise. Whence the vineyard was cast out, and where she was
planted, we have heard. Let us see what next was done, how she believed,
how much she grew, what ground she covered.

<span id="ii.LXXX-p24"></span>6. “A way Thou hast made in the sight of
her, and hast planted the roots of her, and she hath filled the land”
([Psa. 80.9](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#009)<span
id="ii.LXXX-p24.1"></span>). Would she have filled the land, unless a
way had been made in the sight of her? What was the way which was made
in the sight of her? “I am,” He saith, “the Way, the Truth, and the
Life.” <span id="fr_3757"></span>[3758](#fn_3757) With reason she hath
filled the land. That hath now been said of this vineyard, which hath
been accomplished at the last. But in the mean time what? “She hath
covered the mountains with her shadow, and with her branch the cedars of
God” ([Psa. 80.10](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#010)<span
id="ii.LXXX-p25.2"></span>). “Thou hast stretched out her boughs even
unto the sea, and even unto the river her shoots” ([Psa.
80.11](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#011)<span
id="ii.LXXX-p25.3"></span>). This requireth the office of an expositor,
that of a reader and praiser <span id="fr_3758"></span>[3759](#fn_3758)
doth not suffice: aid me with attention; for the mention of this
vineyard in this Psalm is wont to overcloud with darkness the
inattentive.…But nevertheless the first Jewish nation was this vine. But
the Jewish nation reigned as far as the sea and as far as the river. As
far as the sea; it appeareth in Scripture <span
id="fr_3759"></span>[3760](#fn_3759) that the sea was in the vicinity
thereof. And as far as the river Jordan. For on the other side of Jordan
some part of the Jews was established, but within Jordan was the whole
nation. Therefore, “even unto the sea and even unto the river,” is the
kingdom of the Jews, the kingdom of Israel: but not “from sea even unto
sea, and from the river even unto the ends of the round world;” <span
id="fr_3760"></span>[3761](#fn_3760) this is the future perfection of
the vineyard, concerning which in this place he hath foretold. When, I
say, he had foretold to thee the perfection, he returneth to the
beginning, out of which the perfection was made. Of the beginning wilt
thou hear? “Even unto the river.” Of the end wilt thou hear? “He shall
have dominion from sea even unto sea:” <span
id="fr_3761"></span>[3762](#fn_3761) that is, “she hath filled the
earth.” Let us look then to the testimony of Asaph, as to what was done
to the first vineyard, and what must be expected for the second
vineyard, nay to the same vineyard.…What then, the vineyard before the
sight whereof a way was made, that she should fill the earth, at first
was where? “Her shadow covered the mountains.” Who are the mountains?
The Prophets. Why did her shadow cover them? Because darkly they spake
the things which were foretold as to come. Thou hearest from the
Prophets, Keep the Sabbath-day, on the eighth day circumcise a child,
offer sacrifice of ram, of calf, of he-goat. Be not troubled, her shadow
doth cover the mountains of God; there will come after the shadow a
manifestation. “And her shrubs the cedars of God,” that is, she hath
covered the cedars of God; very lofty, but of God. For the cedars are
types of the proud, that must needs be overthrown. The “cedars of
Lebanon,” the heights of the world, this vineyard did cover in growing,
and the mountains of God, all the holy Prophets and Patriarchs.

<span id="ii.LXXX-p30"></span>7. Then what? “Wherefore hast Thou thrown
down her enclosure?” ([Psa. 80.12](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#012)<span
id="ii.LXXX-p30.1"></span>). Now ye see the overthrow of that nation of
the Jews: already out of another Psalm ye have heard, “with axe and
hammer <span id="fr_3762"></span>[3763](#fn_3762) they have thrown her
down.” <span id="fr_3763"></span>[3764](#fn_3763) When could this have
been done, except her enclosure had been thrown down. What is her
enclosure? Her defence. For she bore herself proudly against her
planter. The servants that were sent to her and demanded a recompense,
the husbandmen they scourged, beat, slew: there came also the Only Son,
they said, “This is the Heir; come, let us kill Him, and our own the
inheritance will be:” they killed Him, and out of the vineyard they cast
Him forth.  <span id="fr_3764"></span>[3765](#fn_3764) When cast forth,
He did more perfectly possess the place whence He was cast forth. For
thus He threatens her through Isaiah, “I will throw down her enclosure.”
Wherefore? “For I looked that she should bring forth grapes, but she
brought forth thorns.” <span id="fr_3765"></span>[3766](#fn_3765) I
looked for fruit from thence, and I found sin. Why then dost thou ask, O
Asaph, “Why hast Thou thrown down her enclosure?” For knowest thou not
why? I looked that she should do judgment, and she did iniquity. Must
not her enclosure needs be thrown down? And there came the Gentiles when
the enclosure was thrown down, the vineyard was assailed, and the
kingdom of the Jews effaced. This at first he is lamenting, but not
without hope. For of directing the heart he is now speaking, that is,
for the “Assyrians,” for “men directing,” the Psalm is. “Wherefore hast
Thou thrown down her enclosure: and there pluck off her grapes all men
passing along the way.” What is “men passing along the way?” Men having
dominion for a time.

<span id="ii.LXXX-p35"></span>8. “There hath laid her waste the boar
from the wood” ([Psa. 80.13](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#013)<span
id="ii.LXXX-p35.1"></span>). In the boar from the wood what do we
understand? To the Jews a swine is an abomination, and in a swine they
imagine as it were the uncleanness of the Gentiles. But by the Gentiles
was overthrown the nation of the Jews: but that king who overthrew, was
not only an unclean swine, but was also a boar. For what is a boar but a
savage swine, a furious swine? “A boar from the wood hath laid her
waste.” “From the wood,” from <span id="page_389">p. 389</span> <span
id="ii.LXXX-Page_389"></span>the Gentiles. For she was a vineyard, but
the Gentiles were woods. But when the Gentiles believed, there was said
what? “Then there shall exult all the trees of the woods.” <span
id="fr_3766"></span>[3767](#fn_3766) “The boar from the wood hath laid
her waste; and a singular wild beast hath devoured her.” “A singular
wild beast” is what? The very boar that laid her waste is the singular
wild beast. Singular, because proud. For thus saith every proud one, It
is I, it is I, and no other.

<span id="ii.LXXX-p37"></span>9. But with what profit is this? “O God of
virtues turn Thou nevertheless” ([Psa.
80.14](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#014)<span
id="ii.LXXX-p37.1"></span>). Although these things have been done, “Turn
Thou nevertheless.” “Look from heaven and see, and visit this vineyard.”
“And perfect Thou her whom Thy right hand hath planted” ([Psa.
80.15](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#015)<span
id="ii.LXXX-p37.2"></span>). No other plant Thou, but this make Thou
perfect. For she is the very seed of Abraham, she is the very seed in
whom all nations shall be blessed: <span
id="fr_3767"></span>[3768](#fn_3767) there is the root where is borne
the graffed wild olive. “Perfect Thou this vineyard which Thy right hand
hath planted.” But wherein doth He perfect? “And upon the Son of man,
whom Thou hast strengthened to Thyself.” What can be more evident? Why
do ye still expect, that we should still explain to you in discourse,
and should we not rather cry out with you in admiration, “Perfect Thou
this vineyard which Thy right hand hath planted, and upon the Son of
man” perfect her? What Son of man? Him “whom Thou hast strengthened to
Thyself.” A mighty stronghold: build as much as thou art able. “For
other foundation no one is able to lay, except that which is laid, which
is Christ Jesus.” <span id="fr_3768"></span>[3769](#fn_3768)

<span id="ii.LXXX-p40"></span>10. “Things burned with fire, and dug up,
by the rebuke of Thy countenance shall perish” ([Psa.
80.16](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#016)<span
id="ii.LXXX-p40.1"></span>). What are the things burned with fire and
dug up which shall perish from the rebuke of His countenance? Let us see
and perceive what are the things burned with fire and dug up. Christ
hath rebuked what? Sins: by the rebuke of His countenance sins have
perished. Why then are sins burned with fire and dug up? Of all sins,
two things are the cause in man, desire and fear. <span
id="fr_3769"></span>[3770](#fn_3769) Think, examine, question your
hearts, sift your consciences, see whether there can be sins, except
they be either of desire, or of fear. There is set before thee a reward
to induce thee to sin, that is, a thing which delighteth thee; thou
doest it, because thou desirest it. But perchance thou wilt not be
allured by bribes; thou art terrified with menaces, thou doest it
because thou fearest. A man would bribe thee, for example, to bear false
witness. Countless cases there are, but I am setting before you the
plainer cases, whereby ye may imagine the rest. Hast thou hearkened unto
God, and hast thou said in thy heart, “What doth it profit a man, if he
gain the whole world, but of his own soul suffer loss?” <span
id="fr_3770"></span>[3771](#fn_3770) I am not allured by a bribe to lose
my soul <span id="fr_3771"></span>[3772](#fn_3771) to gain money. He
turneth himself to stir up fear within thee, he who was not able to
corrupt thee with a bribe, beginneth to threaten loss, banishment,
massacres, perchance, and death. Therein now, if desire prevailed not,
perchance fear will prevail to make thee sin.…What had evil fear done?
It had dug up, as it were. For love doth inflame, fear doth humble:
therefore, sins of evil love, with fire were lighted: sins of evil fear
were dug up. On the one hand, evil fear doth humble, and good love doth
light; but in different ways respectively. For even the husbandman
interceding for the tree, that it should not be cut down, saith, “I will
dig about it, and will apply a basket of dung.” <span
id="fr_3772"></span>[3773](#fn_3772) The dug trench doth signify the
godly humility of one fearing, and the basket of dung the profitable
squalid state of one repenting. But concerning the fire of good love the
Lord saith, “Fire I have come to send into the world.” <span
id="fr_3773"></span>[3774](#fn_3773) With which fire may the fervent in
spirit burn, and they too that are inflamed with the love of God and
their neighbour. And thus, as all good works are wrought by good fear
and good love, so by evil fear and evil love all sins are committed.
Therefore, “Things set alight with fire and dug up,” to wit, all sins,
“by the rebuke of Thy countenance shall perish.”

<span id="ii.LXXX-p46"></span>11. “Let Thy hand be upon the Man of Thy
right hand, and upon the Son of Man whom Thou hast strengthened Thyself”
([Psa. 80.17](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#017)<span
id="ii.LXXX-p46.1"></span>). “And we depart not from Thee.…Thou wilt
quicken us, and Thy Name we will invoke” ([Psa.
80.18](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#018)<span
id="ii.LXXX-p46.2"></span>). Thou shalt be sweet to us, “Thou wilt
quicken us.” For aforetime we did love earth, not Thee: but Thou hast
mortified our members which are upon the earth. <span
id="fr_3774"></span>[3775](#fn_3774) For the Old Testament, having
earthly promises, seemeth to exhort that God should not be loved for
nought, but that He should be loved because He giveth something on
earth. What dost thou love, so as not to love God? Tell me. Love, if
thou canst, anything which He hath not made. Look round upon the whole
creation, see whether in any place thou art held with the birdlime of
desire, and hindered from loving the Creator, except it be by that very
thing which He hath Himself created, whom thou despisest. But why dost
thou love those things, except because they are beautiful? Can they be
as beautiful as He by whom they were made? Thou admirest these things,
because thou seest not Him: but through those things which thou
admirest, love Him whom thou seest not. Examine the creation; if of
itself it is, stay therein: but if it is of Him, for no other reason is
it pre<span id="page_390">p. 390</span> <span
id="ii.LXXX-Page_390"></span>judicial to a lover, than because it is
preferred to the Creator. Why have I said this? With reference to this
verse, brethren. Dead, I say, were they that did worship God that it
might be well with them after the flesh: “For to be wise after the flesh
is death:” <span id="fr_3775"></span>[3776](#fn_3775) and dead are they
that do not worship God gratis, that is, because of Himself He is good,
not because He giveth such and such good things, which He giveth even to
men not good. Money wilt thou have of God? Even a robber hath it. Wife,
abundance of children, soundness of body, the world’s dignity, observe
how many evil men have. Is this all for the sake of which thou dost
worship Him? Thy feet will totter, <span
id="fr_3776"></span>[3777](#fn_3776) thou wilt suppose thyself to
worship without cause, when thou seest those things to be with them who
do not worship Him. All these things, I say, He giveth even to evil men,
Himself alone He reserveth for good men. “Thou wilt quicken us;” for
dead we were, when to earthly things we did cleave; dead we were, when
of the earthly man we did bear the image. “Thou wilt quicken us;” Thou
wilt renew us, the life of the inward man Thou wilt give us. “And Thy
Name we will invoke;” that is, Thee we will love. Thou to us wilt be the
sweet forgiver of our sins, Thou wilt be the entire reward of the
justified. “O Lord God of virtues, convert us, and show Thy face, and we
shall be whole” ([Psa. 80.20](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#020)<span
id="ii.LXXX-p49.2"></span>).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3740"></span>[386:3741](1080091.htm#fr_3740) <span
id="ii.LXXX-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXX-p2"></span> Lat. LXXIX. A Sermon delivered to the
people.

<span id="fn_3741"></span>[386:3742](1080091.htm#fr_3741) <span
id="ii.LXXX-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXX-p4"></span> [Rom. x.
4](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#004)<span id="ii.LXXX-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3742"></span>[386:3743](1080091.htm#fr_3742) <span
id="ii.LXXX-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXX-p5"></span> [Ps. lxxviii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#008)<span id="ii.LXXX-p5.1"></span>, p.
369, *supra*.

<span id="fn_3743"></span>[386:3744](1080091.htm#fr_3743) <span
id="ii.LXXX-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXX-p7"></span> *Mortificatum*.

<span id="fn_3744"></span>[386:3745](1080091.htm#fr_3744) <span
id="ii.LXXX-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXX-p8"></span> [John xii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#024)<span id="ii.LXXX-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3745"></span>[386:3746](1080091.htm#fr_3745) <span
id="ii.LXXX-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXX-p9"></span> See St. Macarius, Hom. 1.

<span id="fn_3746"></span>[386:3747](1080091.htm#fr_3746) <span
id="ii.LXXX-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXX-p10"></span> [Rom. xiii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#010)<span id="ii.LXXX-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3747"></span>[386:3748](1080091.htm#fr_3747) <span
id="ii.LXXX-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXX-p11"></span> [1 John iv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#008)<span id="ii.LXXX-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3748"></span>[387:3749](1080091.htm#fr_3748) <span
id="ii.LXXX-p11.3"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXX-p12"></span> [Matt. xxvii.
40](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#040)<span id="ii.LXXX-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3749"></span>[387:3750](1080091.htm#fr_3749) <span
id="ii.LXXX-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXX-p13"></span> [Gen. xxxii.
26](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#026)<span id="ii.LXXX-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3750"></span>[387:3751](1080091.htm#fr_3750) <span
id="ii.LXXX-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXX-p14"></span> [2 Cor. xiii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#004)<span id="ii.LXXX-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3751"></span>[387:3752](1080091.htm#fr_3751) <span
id="ii.LXXX-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXX-p16"></span> Oxf. <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.LXXX-p16.1"></span>mss</span>. “he spoke.”

<span id="fn_3752"></span>[387:3753](1080091.htm#fr_3752) <span
id="ii.LXXX-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXX-p18"></span> [Ecclesiasticus
2.1](../../../bib/apo/sir002.htm#001)<span id="ii.LXXX-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3753"></span>[387:3754](1080091.htm#fr_3753) <span
id="ii.LXXX-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXX-p19"></span> So Oxf. <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.LXXX-p19.1"></span>mss</span>.; Ben. “it.”

<span id="fn_3754"></span>[387:3755](1080091.htm#fr_3754) <span
id="ii.LXXX-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXX-p20"></span> [Heb. xii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#006)<span id="ii.LXXX-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3755"></span>[387:3756](1080091.htm#fr_3755) <span
id="ii.LXXX-p20.3"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXX-p21"></span> [1 Cor. x.
13](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#013)<span id="ii.LXXX-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3756"></span>[387:3757](1080091.htm#fr_3756) <span
id="ii.LXXX-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXX-p23"></span> [Acts xvii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#018)<span id="ii.LXXX-p23.1"></span>.
E.V. “strange gods.”

<span id="fn_3757"></span>[388:3758](1080091.htm#fr_3757) <span
id="ii.LXXX-p24.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXX-p25"></span> [John xiv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#006)<span id="ii.LXXX-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3758"></span>[388:3759](1080091.htm#fr_3758) <span
id="ii.LXXX-p25.4"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXX-p26"></span> One <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.LXXX-p26.1"></span>ms</span>. “hearer.”

<span id="fn_3759"></span>[388:3760](1080091.htm#fr_3759) <span
id="ii.LXXX-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXX-p27"></span> [Numb. xxxiv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/num034.htm#005)<span id="ii.LXXX-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3760"></span>[388:3761](1080091.htm#fr_3760) <span
id="ii.LXXX-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXX-p28"></span> [Ps. lxxii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#008)<span id="ii.LXXX-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3761"></span>[388:3762](1080091.htm#fr_3761) <span
id="ii.LXXX-p28.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXX-p29"></span> [Ps. lxxii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#008)<span id="ii.LXXX-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3762"></span>[388:3763](1080091.htm#fr_3762) <span
id="ii.LXXX-p30.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXX-p31"></span> *Fractorio*.

<span id="fn_3763"></span>[388:3764](1080091.htm#fr_3763) <span
id="ii.LXXX-p31.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXX-p32"></span> [Ps. lxxiv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#006)<span id="ii.LXXX-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3764"></span>[388:3765](1080091.htm#fr_3764) <span
id="ii.LXXX-p32.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXX-p33"></span> [Matt. xxi.
35](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#035)<span id="ii.LXXX-p33.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_3765"></span>[388:3766](1080091.htm#fr_3765) <span
id="ii.LXXX-p33.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXX-p34"></span> [Isa. v.
2](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#002)<span id="ii.LXXX-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3766"></span>[389:3767](1080091.htm#fr_3766) <span
id="ii.LXXX-p35.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXX-p36"></span> [Ps. xcvi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#012)<span id="ii.LXXX-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3767"></span>[389:3768](1080091.htm#fr_3767) <span
id="ii.LXXX-p37.3"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXX-p38"></span> [Gen. xxii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#018)<span id="ii.LXXX-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3768"></span>[389:3769](1080091.htm#fr_3768) <span
id="ii.LXXX-p38.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXX-p39"></span> [1 Cor. iii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#011)<span id="ii.LXXX-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3769"></span>[389:3770](1080091.htm#fr_3769) <span
id="ii.LXXX-p40.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXX-p41"></span> All sins are either of desire or of fear.

<span id="fn_3770"></span>[389:3771](1080091.htm#fr_3770) <span
id="ii.LXXX-p41.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXX-p42"></span> [Matt. xvi.
26](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#026)<span id="ii.LXXX-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3771"></span>[389:3772](1080091.htm#fr_3771) <span
id="ii.LXXX-p42.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXX-p43"></span> Or, “life.”

<span id="fn_3772"></span>[389:3773](1080091.htm#fr_3772) <span
id="ii.LXXX-p43.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXX-p44"></span> [Luke xiii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#008)<span id="ii.LXXX-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3773"></span>[389:3774](1080091.htm#fr_3773) <span
id="ii.LXXX-p44.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXX-p45"></span> [Luke xii.
49](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#049)<span id="ii.LXXX-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3774"></span>[389:3775](1080091.htm#fr_3774) <span
id="ii.LXXX-p46.3"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXX-p47"></span> [Col. iii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#005)<span id="ii.LXXX-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3775"></span>[390:3776](1080091.htm#fr_3775) <span
id="ii.LXXX-p47.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXX-p48"></span> [Rom. viii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#006)<span id="ii.LXXX-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3776"></span>[390:3777](1080091.htm#fr_3776) <span
id="ii.LXXX-p48.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXX-p49"></span> [Ps. lxxiii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#002)<span id="ii.LXXX-p49.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm LXXXI](1080092)
