[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080063)  [Next](1080065) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.LV"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p1"></span> <span id="ii.LV-p1.1"></span><span
class="c20"><span id="ii.LV-p1.2"></span>Psalm LV. <span
id="fr_1975"></span>[1976](#fn_1975) </span>

<span id="ii.LV-p3"></span>1. Of this Psalm the title is: “At the end,
in hymns, understanding to David himself.” What the “end” is, we will
briefly call to your recollection, because ye have known it. “For the
end of the Law is Christ, for righteousness unto every man
believing.” <span id="fr_1976"></span>[1977](#fn_1976) Be the attention
therefore directed unto the End, directed unto Christ. Wherefore is He
called the end? Because whatever we do, to Him we refer it, and when to
Him we shall have come home, more to ask we shall not have. For there is
an end spoken of which doth consume, there is an end spoken of which
doth make perfect. In one sense, for instance, we understand it, when we
hear, there is ended the food which was in eating; and in another sense
we understand it when we hear, there is ended the vesture which was in
weaving: in each case we hear, there is ended; but the food so that it
no longer is, the vesture so that it is perfected. Our end therefore
ought to be our perfection, our perfection Christ. For in Him we are
made perfect, because of Himself the Head, the Members are we. And he
hath been spoken of as “the End of the Law,” because without Him no one
doth make perfect the Law. When therefore ye hear in the Psalms, “At the
end,”—for many Psalms are thus superscribed,—be not your thought upon
consuming, but upon consummation.

<span id="ii.LV-p5"></span>2. “In hymns:” in praises. For whether we are
troubled and are straitened, or whether we rejoice and exult, He is to
be praised, who both in tribulations doth instruct, and in gladness doth
comfort. For the praise of God from the heart and mouth of a Christian
man ought not to depart; not that he may be praising in prosperity, and
speaking evil in adversity; but after the manner that this Psalm doth
prescribe, “I will speak good of the Lord in every time, alway the
praise of Him is in my mouth.” Thou dost rejoice; acknowledge a Father
indulging: thou art troubled; acknowledge a Father chastening. Whether
He indulge, or whether He chasten, He is instructing one for whom He is
preparing an inheritance.

<span id="ii.LV-p6"></span>3. What then is, “Understanding to David
himself”? David indeed was, as we know, a holy prophet, king of Israel,
son of Jesse: <span id="fr_1977"></span>[1978](#fn_1977) but because out
of his seed there came for our salvation after the flesh the Lord Jesus
Christ, <span id="fr_1978"></span>[1979](#fn_1978) often under that name
He is figured, and David instead of Christ is in a figure set down,
because of the origin of the Flesh of the Same. For after some sort He
is Son of David, after some sort He is the Lord of David; Son of David
after the flesh, Lord of David after the divinity. For if by Him have
been made all things, <span id="fr_1979"></span>[1980](#fn_1979) by Him
also David himself hath been made, out of whose seed He came to men.
Moreover, when the Lord had questioned the Jews, whose Son they affirmed
Christ to be, they made answer, “David’s:” where the Lord chides the
Jews, when they said that He was the Son of David. <span
id="fr_1980"></span>[1981](#fn_1980) He saw that they had stayed at the
flesh, and had lost sight of the divinity; and He reproveth them by
propounding a question: “How then doth David himself in spirit call Him
Lord, ‘The Lord hath said unto my Lord.’…If then He in spirit calleth
Him Lord, how is He is Son?” <span id="fr_1981"></span>[1982](#fn_1981)
A question He propounded; His being Son He denied not. Ye have heard
“Lord;” say ye how He is his “Son:” ye have heard “Son;” say how He is
“Lord.” This question the Catholic Faith solveth. How “Lord”? Because
“In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with <span
id="page_210">p. 210</span> <span id="ii.LV-Page_210"></span>God, and
the Word was God.” <span id="fr_1982"></span>[1983](#fn_1982) How “Son”?
Because “The Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us.” <span
id="fr_1983"></span>[1984](#fn_1983) Because then David in a figure is
Christ, but Christ, as we have often reminded your Love, is both Head
and Body; neither ought we to speak of ourselves as alien from Christ,
of whom we are members, nor to count ourselves as if we were any other
thing: because “The two shall be in one flesh.” <span
id="fr_1984"></span>[1985](#fn_1984) “This is a great Sacrament,” saith
the Apostle, “but I speak in regard of Christ and the Church.” <span
id="fr_1985"></span>[1986](#fn_1985) Because then whole Christ is “Head
and Body;” when we hear, “Understanding to David himself,” understand we
ourselves also in David. Let the members of Christ understand, and
Christ in His members understand, and the members of Christ in Christ
understand: because Head and Members are one Christ. The Head was in
heaven, and was saying, “Why dost thou persecute Me?” <span
id="fr_1986"></span>[1987](#fn_1986) We with Him are in heaven through
hope, Himself is with us on earth through love. Therefore “understanding
to David himself.” Be we admonished when we hear, and let the Church
understand: for there belongeth to us great diligence to understand in
what evil we now are, and from what evil we desire to be delivered,
remembering the Prayer of the Lord, where at the end we say, “Deliver us
from evil.” <span id="fr_1987"></span>[1988](#fn_1987) Therefore amid
many tribulations of this world, this Psalm complaineth somewhat of
understanding. He lamenteth not with it, who hath not understanding. But
furthermore, dearly beloved, we ought to remember, that after the image
of God we have been made, and that not in any other part than in the
understanding itself. For in many things by beasts we are surpassed: but
when a man knoweth himself to have been made after the image of
God, <span id="fr_1988"></span>[1989](#fn_1988) therein something in
himself he acknowledgeth to be more than hath been given to dumb
animals. But on consideration of all those things which a man hath, he
findeth himself in this thing peculiarly distinguished from a dumb
animal, in that he hath himself an understanding. Whence certain men
despising in themselves that peculiar and especial thing which from
their Maker they had received, the Maker Himself reproveth, saying, “Do
not become like horse and mule, in which there is no
understanding.” <span id="fr_1989"></span>[1990](#fn_1989) …

<span id="ii.LV-p20"></span>4. “Hear Thou, O God, my entreaty, and
despise not my prayer: give heed unto me, and hearken unto me” ([Psa.
55.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#001)<span id="ii.LV-p20.1"></span>).
Of one earnest, anxious, of one set in tribulation, are these words. He
is praying, suffering many things, from evil yearning to be delivered:
it remaineth that we hear in what evil he is, and when he beginneth to
speak, let us acknowledge there ourselves to be; in order that the
tribulation being shared, we may conjoin prayer. “I have been made sad
in my exercise, and have been troubled” ([Psa.
55.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#002)<span id="ii.LV-p20.2"></span>).
Where made sad, where troubled? “In my exercise,” he saith. Of evil men,
whom he suffereth, he hath made mention, and the same suffering of evil
men he hath called his “exercise.” Think ye not that without profit
there are evil men in this world, and that no good God maketh of them.
Every evil man either on this account liveth that he may be corrected,
or on this account liveth that through him a good man may be exercised.
O that therefore they that do now exercise us would be converted, and
together with us be exercised! Nevertheless, so long as they are such as
to exercise, let us not hate them: because in that wherein any one of
them is evil, whether unto the end he is to persevere, we know not; and
ofttimes when to thyself thou seemest to have been hating an enemy, thou
hast been hating a brother, and knowest not. The devil and his angels in
the holy Scriptures have been manifested to us, that for fire
everlasting they have been destined. Of them only must amendment be
despaired of.…Therefore since this rule of Love for thee is fixed, that
imitating the Father thou shouldest love an enemy: for, He saith, “love
your enemies:” <span id="fr_1990"></span>[1991](#fn_1990) in this
precept how wouldest thou be exercised, if thou hadst no enemy to
suffer? Thou seest then that he profiteth thee somewhat: and let God
sparing evil men profit thee, so that thou show mercy: because perchance
thou too, if thou art a good man, out of an evil man hast been made a
good man: and if God spared not evil men, not even thou wouldest be
found to return thanks. May He therefore spare others, that hath spared
thee also. For it were not right, when thou hadst passed through, to
close up the way of godliness.

<span id="ii.LV-p22"></span>5. Whence then doth this man pray, set among
evil men, with whose enmities he was being exercised? Why saith he, “I
have been made sad in my exercise, and have been troubled”? While he is
extending his love so as to love enemies, he hath been affected with
disgust, being bayed at all around by the enmities of many men, by the
frenzy of many and under a sort of human infirmity he hath sunk. He hath
seen himself now begin to be pierced through with an evil suggestion of
the devil, to bring on hatred against his enemies: wrestling against
hatred in order to perfect love herself, in the very fight, and in the
wrestling, he hath been troubled. For there is his voice in another
Psalm, “Mine eye hath been troubled, because of anger.” And what
followeth there? “I have waxen old among all mine enemies.” <span
id="fr_1991"></span>[1992](#fn_1991) As if in storm and waves he were
beginning to sink, like <span id="page_211">p. 211</span> <span
id="ii.LV-Page_211"></span>Peter. <span
id="fr_1992"></span>[1993](#fn_1992) For he doth trample the waves of
this world, that loveth enemies. Christ on the sea was walking fearless,
from whose heart there could not by any means be taken away the love of
an enemy, who hanging on the Cross did say, “Father, forgive them, for
they know not what they do.” <span id="fr_1993"></span>[1994](#fn_1993)
Peter too would walk. He as Head, Peter as Body: because, “Upon this
rock,” He saith, “I will build My Church.” <span
id="fr_1994"></span>[1995](#fn_1994) He was bidden to walk, and he was
walking by the Grace of Him bidding, not by his own strength. But when
he saw the wind mighty, he feared; and then he began to sink, being
troubled in his exercise. By what mighty wind? “By the voice of the
enemy, and by the tribulation of the sinner” ([Psa.
55.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#003)<span id="ii.LV-p26.2"></span>).
Therefore, in the same manner as he cried out on the waves, “Lord, I
perish, save me,”  <span id="fr_1995"></span>[1996](#fn_1995) a similar
voice from this man hath preceded, “Hearken unto me.” Wherefore? For
what sufferest thou? Of what dost thou groan? “I have been made sad in
my exercise.” To be exercised indeed among evil men Thou hast set me,
but too much they have risen up, beyond my powers: calm Thou one
troubled, stretch forth a hand to one sinking. “For they have brought
down upon me iniquity, and in anger they were shadowing me.” Ye have
heard of waves and winds: one as it were humbled they were insulting,
and he was praying: on every side against him with the roar of insult
they were raging, but he within was calling upon Him whom they did not
see.…

<span id="ii.LV-p28"></span>6. But this man being troubled and made sad
was praying, his eye being disturbed as it were on account of
anger. <span id="fr_1996"></span>[1997](#fn_1996) But the anger of a
brother if it shall have been inveterate is then hatred. Anger doth
trouble the eye, hatred doth quench it: anger is a straw, hatred is a
beam. Sometimes thou hatest and chidest an angry man: in thee is hatred,
in him whom thou chidest anger: with reason to thee is said, “Cast out
first the beam from thine own eye, and so thou shalt see to cast out the
straw from thy brother’s eye.” <span
id="fr_1997"></span>[1998](#fn_1997) For that ye may know how much
difference there is between anger and hatred: day by day men are angry
with their sons, show me them that hate their <span
id="fr_1998"></span>[1999](#fn_1998) sons! This man being troubled was
praying even when made sad, wrestling against all revilings of all
revilers; not in order that he might conquer any one of them by giving
back reviling, but that he might not hate any one of them. Hence he
prayeth, hence asketh: “From the voice of the enemy and from the
tribulation of the sinner.” “My heart hath been troubled in me” ([Psa.
55.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#004)<span id="ii.LV-p31.2"></span>).
This is the same as elsewhere hath been said, “Mine eye because of anger
hath been troubled.” <span id="fr_1999"></span>[2000](#fn_1999) And if
eye hath been troubled, what followeth? “And fear of death hath fallen
upon me.” Our life is love: if life is love, death is hatred. When a man
hath begun to fear lest he should hate him that he was loving, it is
death he is fearing; and a sharper death, and a more inward death,
whereby soul is killed, not body. Thou didst mind a man raging against
thee; what was he to do, against whom thine own Lord had given thee
security, saying, “Fear not them that kill the body”? <span
id="fr_2000"></span>[2001](#fn_2000) He by raging killeth body, thou by
keeping hatred hast killed soul; and he the body of another, thou thine
own soul. “Fear,” therefore, “of death hath fallen upon me.”

<span id="ii.LV-p34"></span>7. “Fearfulness and trembling have come upon
me, and darkness hath covered me” ([Psa.
55.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#005)<span id="ii.LV-p34.1"></span>).
“And I have said,” “He that hateth his brother, is in darkness until
now.” <span id="fr_2001"></span>[2002](#fn_2001) If love is light,
hatred is darkness. And what saith to himself one set in that weakness
and troubled in that exercise? “Who shall give me wings as to a dove,
and I shall fly and shall rest?” ([Psa.
55.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#006)<span id="ii.LV-p35.2"></span>).
Either for death he was wishing, or for solitude he was longing. So
long, he saith, as this is the work with me, as this command is given
me, that I should love enemies, the revilings of these men, increasing
and shadowing me, do derange mine eye, perturb my sight, penetrate my
heart, slay my soul. I could wish to depart, but <span
id="fr_2002"></span>[2003](#fn_2002) weak I am, lest by abiding I should
add sins to sins: or at least may I be separated for a little space from
mankind, lest my wound suffer from frequent blows, in order that when it
hath been made whole it may be brought back to the exercise. This is
what takes place, brethren, and there ariseth ofttimes in the mind of
the servant of God a longing for solitude, for no other reason than
because of the multitude of tribulations and scandals, and he saith,
“Who shall give me wings?” Doth he find himself without wings, or rather
with bound wings? If they are wanting, be they given; if bound, be they
loosed; because even he that looseth a bird’s wings, either giveth, or
giveth back to it its wings. For it had not as though its own them,
wherewith it could not fly. Bound wings make a burden. “Who,” he saith,
“shall give me wings as to a dove, and I shall fly and shall rest?”
Shall rest, where? I have said there are two senses here: either, as
saith the Apostle, “To be dissolved and to be with Christ, for it is by
far the best thing.” <span id="fr_2003"></span>[2004](#fn_2003) …Even he
that amended cannot be, is thine, either by the fellowship of the human
race, or ofttimes by Church Communion; he is within, what wilt thou do?
whither wilt go? whither separate thyself, in order that these things
thou mayest not suffer? But go to him, <span id="page_212">p. 212</span>
<span id="ii.LV-Page_212"></span>speak, exhort, coax, threaten, reprove.
I have done all things, whatever powers I had I have expended and have
drained, nothing I see have I prevailed; all my labour hath been spent
out, sorrow hath remained. How then shall my heart rest from such men,
except I say, “Who shall give me wings?” “As to a dove,” however, not as
to a raven. A dove seeketh a flying away from troubles, but she loseth
not love. For a dove as a type of love is set forth, and in her the
plaint is loved. Nothing is so fond of plaints as a dove: day and night
she complaineth, as though she were set here where she ought to
complain. What then saith this lover? Revilings of men to bear I am
unable, they roar, with frenzy are carried away, are inflamed with
indignation, in anger they shadow <span
id="fr_2004"></span>[2005](#fn_2004) me; to do good to them I am unable;
O that I might rest somewhere, being separated from them in body, not in
love; lest in me there should be troubled love itself: with my words and
my speech no good can I do them, by praying for them perchance I shall
do good. These words men say, but ofttimes they are so bound, that to
fly they are not able. For perchance they are not bound with any
birdlime, but are bound by duty. But if they are bound with care and
duty, and to leave it are unable, let them say, “I was wishing to be
dissolved and to be with Christ, for it is by far the best thing: to
abide in the flesh is necessary because of you.” <span
id="fr_2005"></span>[2006](#fn_2005) A dove bound back by affection, not
by cupidity, was not able to fly away because of duty to be fulfilled,
not because of little merit. Nevertheless a longing in heart must needs
be; nor doth any man suffer this longing, but he that hath begun to walk
in that narrow way: <span id="fr_2006"></span>[2007](#fn_2006) in order
that he may know that there are not wanting to the Church persecutions,
even in this time, when a calm is seen in the Church, at least with
respect to those persecutions which our Martyrs have suffered. But there
are not wanting persecutions, because a true saying is this, “All that
will godly to live in Christ, shall suffer persecution.” <span
id="fr_2007"></span>[2008](#fn_2007) …

<span id="ii.LV-p42"></span>8. “Behold I have gone afar fleeing, and
have abode in the desert” ([Psa.
55.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#007)<span id="ii.LV-p42.1"></span>).
In what desert? Wherever thou shalt be, there will gather them together
other men, the desert with thee they will seek, will attach themselves
to thy life, thou canst not thrust back the society of brethren: there
are mingled with thee also evil men; still exercise is thy due portion,
“Behold I have gone afar, and have abode in the desert.” In what desert?
It is perchance in the conscience, whither no man entereth, where no one
is with thee, where thou art and God. For if in the desert, in any
place, what wilt thou do with men gathering themselves together? For
thou wilt not be able to be separated from mankind, so long as among men
thou livest. <span id="fr_2008"></span>[2009](#fn_2008) …

<span id="ii.LV-p44"></span>9. “I was looking for him that should save
me from weakness of mind and tempest” ([Psa.
55.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#008)<span id="ii.LV-p44.1"></span>).
Sea there is, tempest there is: nothing for thee remaineth but to cry
out, “Lord, I perish.” <span id="fr_2009"></span>[2010](#fn_2009) Let
Him stretch forth hand, who doth the waves tread fearlessly, let Him
relieve thy dread, let Him confirm in Himself thy security, let Him
speak to thee within, and say to thee, “Give heed to Me, what I have
borne:” an evil brother perchance thou art suffering, or an enemy
without art suffering; which of these have I not suffered? There roared
without Jews, within a disciple was betraying. There rageth therefore
tempest, but He doth save men from weakness of mind, and tempest.
Perchance thy ship is being troubled, because He in thee is sleeping.
The sea was raging, the bark wherein the disciples were sailing was
being tossed; but Christ was sleeping: at length it was seen by them
that among them was sleeping the Ruler <span
id="fr_2010"></span>[2011](#fn_2010) and Creator of winds; they drew
near and awoke Christ; <span id="fr_2011"></span>[2012](#fn_2011) He
commanded <span id="fr_2012"></span>[2013](#fn_2012) the winds, and
there was a great calm. With reason then perchance thy heart is
troubled, because thou hast forgotten Him on whom thou hast believed:
beyond endurance thou art suffering, because it hath not come into thy
mind what for thee Christ hath borne. If unto thy mind cometh not
Christ, He sleepeth: awake Christ, recall faith. For then in thee Christ
is sleeping, if thou hast forgotten the sufferings of Christ: then in
thee Christ is watching, if thou hast remembered the sufferings of
Christ. But when with full heart thou shalt have considered what He hath
suffered, wilt not thou too with equanimity endure? and perchance
rejoicing, because thou hast been found in some likeness of the
sufferings of thy King. When therefore on these things thinking thou
hast begun to be comforted and to rejoice, He hath arisen, He hath
commanded the winds; therefore there is a great calm. “I was looking for
Him that should save me from weakness of mind and tempest.”

<span id="ii.LV-p49"></span>10. “Sink, O Lord, and divide the tongues of
them” ([Psa. 55.9](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#009)<span
id="ii.LV-p49.1"></span>). He is referring to men troubling him and
shadowing him, and he hath wished this thing not of anger, brethren.
They that have wickedly lifted up themselves, for them it is expedient
that they be sunk. They that have wickedly conspired, it is expedient
for them that their tongues should be divided: to good let them consent,
and let their tongues agree together. But if to one purpose <span
id="fr_2013"></span>[2014](#fn_2013) there were a whispering against
me, <span id="fr_2014"></span>[2015](#fn_2014) he saith, all mine
ene<span id="page_213">p. 213</span> <span
id="ii.LV-Page_213"></span>mies, let them lose their “one purpose” in
evil, divided be the tongues of them, let them not with themselves agree
together. “Sink, O Lord, and divide the tongues of them.” Wherefore
“sink”? Because themselves they have lifted up. Wherefore “divide”?
Because for an evil thing they have united. Recollect that tower of
proud men made after the deluge: what said the proud men? Lest we perish
in a deluge, let us make a lofty tower. <span
id="fr_2015"></span>[2016](#fn_2015) In pride they were thinking
themselves to be fortified, they builded up a lofty tower, and the Lord
divided the tongues of them. Then they began not to understand one
another; hence arose the beginning of many tongues. For before, one
tongue there was: but one tongue for men agreeing was good, one tongue
for humble men was good: but when that gathering together did into a
union of pride fall headlong, God spared them; even though He divided
the tongues, lest by understanding one another they should make a
destructive unity. Through proud men, divided were the tongues; through
humble Apostles, united were the tongues. Spirit of pride dispersed
tongues, Spirit Holy united tongues. For when the Holy Spirit came upon
the disciples, with the tongues of all men they spake, <span
id="fr_2016"></span>[2017](#fn_2016) by all men they were understood:
tongues dispersed, into one were united. Therefore if still they rage
and are Gentiles, it is expedient for them divided to have their
tongues. They would have one tongue; let them come to the Church;
because even among the diversity of tongues of flesh, one is the tongue
in faith of heart.

<span id="ii.LV-p54"></span>11. “For I have seen iniquity and
contradiction in the city.” With reason this man was seeking the desert,
for he saw iniquity and contradiction in the city. There is a certain
city turbulent: the same it was that was building a tower, the same was
confounded and called Babylon, the same through innumerable nations
dispersed: <span id="fr_2017"></span>[2018](#fn_2017) thence is gathered
the Church into the desert of a good conscience. For he saw
contradiction in the city. “Christ cometh.”—“What Christ?” thou
contradictest.—“Son of God.”—“And hath God a Son?” thou
contradictest.—“He was born of a virgin, suffered, rose again.”—“And
whence is it possible for this to be done?” thou contradictest.—Give
heed at least to the glory of the Cross itself. Now on the brow of kings
that Cross hath been fixed, over which enemies insulted. The effect hath
proved the virtue. <span id="fr_2018"></span>[2019](#fn_2018) It hath
subdued the world, not with steel, but with wood. The wood of the Cross
deserving of insults hath seemed to enemies, and before the wood itself
standing they were wagging the head, and saying, “If Son of God He is,
let Him come down from the Cross.” <span
id="fr_2019"></span>[2020](#fn_2019) He was stretching forth His hands
to a people unbelieving and contradicting. For if just he is that of
faith liveth, <span id="fr_2020"></span>[2021](#fn_2020) unjust he is
that hath not faith. By that which here he saith “iniquity,” I
understand unbelief. The Lord therefore was seeing in the city iniquity
and contradiction, and was stretching forth His hands to a people
unbelieving and contradicting: and nevertheless waiting for these same,
He was saying, “Father, forgive them, for they know not what they
do.” <span id="fr_2021"></span>[2022](#fn_2021) Even now indeed there
rage the remnant of that city, even now they contradict. From the brows
of all men now He is stretching forth hands to the remnant unbelieving
and contradicting.

<span id="ii.LV-p60"></span>12. “Day and night there will compass it
upon the walls thereof iniquity, and labour.” <span
id="fr_2022"></span>[2023](#fn_2022) “Upon the walls thereof;” upon the
fortifications thereof, holding as it were the heads thereof, the noble
men thereof. If that noble man were a Christian, not one would remain a
pagan! Oft-times men say, “no one would remain a pagan, if he were a
Christian.” Ofttimes men say, “If he too were made a Christian, who
would remain a pagan?” Because therefore not yet they are made
Christians, as if walls they are of that city unbelieving and
contradicting. How long shall these walls stand? Not always shall they
stand. The Ark is going around the walls of Jericho: there shall come a
time at the seventh going round of the Ark, when all the walls of the
city unbelieving and contradicting shall fall. <span
id="fr_2023"></span>[2024](#fn_2023) Until it come to pass, this man is
being troubled in his exercise; and enduring the remains of men
contradicting, he would choose wings for flying away, would choose the
rest of the desert. Yea let him continue amid men contradicting, let him
endure menaces, drink revilings, and look for Him that will save him
from weakness of mind and tempest: let him look upon the Head, the
pattern for his life, <span id="fr_2024"></span>[2025](#fn_2024) let him
be made calm in hope, even if he is troubled in fact. “Day and night
there will compass it upon the walls thereof iniquity; and labour in the
midst thereof and injustice.” And for this reason labour is there,
because iniquity is there: because injustice is there, therefore also
labour is there. But let them hear him stretching forth hands. “Come
unto Me, all ye that labour.” <span id="fr_2025"></span>[2026](#fn_2025)
Ye cry, ye contradict, ye revile: He on the contrary, “Come unto Me, all
ye that labour,” in your pride, and ye shall rest in My humility. “Learn
of Me,” He saith, “for meek I am and humble in heart, and ye shall find
rest unto your souls.” <span id="fr_2026"></span>[2027](#fn_2026) For
whence do they labour, but because they are not meek and humble in <span
id="page_214">p. 214</span> <span id="ii.LV-Page_214"></span>heart? God
humble was made, let man blush to be proud.

<span id="ii.LV-p66"></span>13. “There hath not failed from the streets
thereof usury and deceit” ([Psa.
55.11](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#011)<span id="ii.LV-p66.1"></span>).
Usury and deceit are not hidden at least, because they are evil things,
but in public they rage. For he that in his house doth any evil thing,
however for his evil thing doth blush: “In the streets thereof usury and
deceit.” Money-lending <span id="fr_2027"></span>[2028](#fn_2027) even
hath a profession, Money-lending also is called a science; a corporation
is spoken of, a corporation as if necessary to the state, and of its
profession it payeth revenue; so entirely indeed in the streets is that
which should have been hidden. There is also another usury worse, when
thou forgivest not that which to thee is owed; and the eye is disturbed
in that verse of the prayer, “Forgive us our debts—as we too forgive our
debtors.”  <span id="fr_2028"></span>[2029](#fn_2028) For what there
wilt thou do, when thou art going to pray, and coming to that same
verse? An insulting word thou hast heard: thou wouldest exact the
punishment of condemnation. Do but consent to exact just so much as thou
hast given, thou usurer of injuries! With the fist thou hast been
smitten, slaying thou seekest. Evil usury! How wilt thou go to prayer?
If thou shalt have left praying, which way wilt thou come round unto the
Lord? Behold thou wilt say: “Our Father which art in heaven, hallowed be
Thy Name, Thy kingdom come, Thy will be done, as in heaven so on earth.”
Thou wilt say, “Our daily bread give us to-day.” Thou wilt come to,
“Forgive us our debts, as we also forgive our debtors.” <span
id="fr_2029"></span>[2030](#fn_2029) Even in that evil city let there
abound these usuries; let them not enter the walls where the breast is
smitten! What wilt thou do? because there thou and that verse are <span
id="fr_2030"></span>[2031](#fn_2030) in the midst? Petitions for thee
hath a heavenly Lawyer composed. <span
id="fr_2031"></span>[2032](#fn_2031) He that knew what used there to be
done, said to thee, “Otherwise thou shalt not obtain.” “Verily, verily,
I say unto you, that if ye shall have forgiven men sins, they shall be
forgiven you; but if ye shall not have forgiven sins unto men, neither
will your Father forgive you.” <span
id="fr_2032"></span>[2033](#fn_2032) Who saith this? He that knoweth
what there is being done, in the place whereat thou art standing to make
request. See how Himself hath willed to be thy Advocate; Himself thy
Counsellor, <span id="fr_2033"></span>[2034](#fn_2033) Himself the
Assessor of the Father, Himself thy Judge hath said, “Otherwise thou
shalt not receive.” What wilt thou do? Thou wilt not receive, unless
thou shalt speak; wilt not receive if falsely thou shalt speak.
Therefore either thou must do and speak, or else what thou askest thou
wilt not earn; because they that this do not do, are in the midst of
those evil usuries. Be they engaged therein, that yet do idols either
adore or desire: do not thou, O people of God, do not thou, O people of
Christ, do not thou the Body of Him the Head! Give heed to the
bond <span id="fr_2034"></span>[2035](#fn_2034) of thy peace, give heed
to the promise of thy life. For what doth it profit thee, that thou
exactest for injuries which thou hast endured? doth vengeance refresh
thee? Therefore, over the evil of another shalt thou rejoice? Thou hast
suffered evil; pardon thou; be not ye two. <span
id="fr_2035"></span>[2036](#fn_2035) …

<span id="ii.LV-p76"></span>14. “For if an enemy had upbraided me”
([Psa. 55.12](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#012)<span
id="ii.LV-p76.1"></span>). And indeed above he was “troubled in his
exercise” by the voice of the enemy and by the tribulation of the
sinner, perhaps being placed in that city, that proud city that was
building a tower, which was “sunk,” <span
id="fr_2036"></span>[2037](#fn_2036) that divided might be the tongues:
give heed to his inward groaning because of perils from false brethren.
“For if an enemy had upbraided me, I would have undergone it assuredly,
and if he that did hate me had over me spoken great words,” that is,
through pride had on me trampled, did magnify himself above me, did
threaten me all in his power: “I would hide myself assuredly from him.”
From him that is abroad, thou wouldest hide thyself where? Amid those
that are within. But now see whether anything else remaineth, but that
thou seek solitude. “But thou,” he saith, “man of one mind, my guide and
my friend” ([Psa. 55.13](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#013)<span
id="ii.LV-p77.2"></span>). Perchance sometimes good counsel thou hast
given, perchance sometimes thou hast gone before me, and some wholesome
advice thou hast given me: in the Church of God together we have been.
“But thou,…that together with me didst take sweet morsels” ([Psa.
55.14](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#014)<span id="ii.LV-p77.3"></span>).
What are the sweet morsels? Not all they that are present know: but let
them not be soured that do know, in order that they may be able to say
to them that as yet know not: “Taste ye and see, how sweet is the
Lord.” <span id="fr_2037"></span>[2038](#fn_2037) “In the House of God
we have walked with consent.” Whence then dissension? Thou that wast
within, hast become one without. He hath walked with me in the House of
God with consent: another house hath he set up against the House of God.
Wherefore hath that been forsaken, wherein we have walked with
consent? <span id="fr_2038"></span>[2039](#fn_2038) wherefore hath that
been deserted, wherein together we did take sweet morsels?

<span id="ii.LV-p80"></span>15. “Let there come death upon them, and let
them go down unto Hell living” ([Psa.
55.15](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#015)<span id="ii.LV-p80.1"></span>).
How hath he cited and hath made us call to mind that first beginning of
schism, when in that first people of the Jews certain proud men <span
id="page_215">p. 215</span> <span id="ii.LV-Page_215"></span>separated
themselves, and would without have sacrificed? A new death upon them
came: the earth opened herself, and swallowed them up alive. <span
id="fr_2039"></span>[2040](#fn_2039) “Let there come,” he saith, “death
upon them, and let them go down into Hell living.” What is “living”?
knowing that they are perishing, and yet perishing. Hear of living men
perishing and being swallowed up in a gulf of the earth, that is, being
swallowed up in the voraciousness of earthly desires. <span
id="fr_2040"></span>[2041](#fn_2040) Thou sayest to a man, What aileth
thee, brother? Brethren we are, one God we invoke, in one Christ we
believe, one Gospel we hear, one Psalm we sing, one Amen we respond, one
Hallelujah we sound, one Easter we celebrate: why art thou without and I
am within? Ofttimes one straitened, and perceiving how true are the
charges which are made, saith, May God requite our ancestors! Therefore
alive he perisheth. In the next place thou continuest and thus givest
warning. At least let the evil of separation stand alone, why dost thou
adjoin thereto that of rebaptism? Acknowledge in me what thou hast; and
if thou hatest me, spare thou Christ in me. And this evil thing doth
frequently and very greatly displease them.…Because they themselves have
the Scriptures in their hands, and know well by daily reading how the
Church Catholic through the whole world is so spread, that in a word all
contradiction is void; and that there cannot be found any support for
their schism they know well: therefore unto the lower places living they
go down, because the evil which they do, they know evil to be. But the
former a fire of divine indignation consumed. For being inflamed with
desire of strife, from their evil leaders they would not depart. There
came upon fire a fire, upon the heat of dissension the heat of
consuming. “For naughtiness is in their lodgings, in the midst of them.”
“In their lodgings,” <span id="fr_2041"></span>[2042](#fn_2041) wherein
they tarry and pass away. For here they are not alway to be: and
nevertheless in defence of a temporal animosity they are fighting so
fiercely. “In their lodgings is iniquity; in the midst of them is
iniquity:” no part of them is so near the middle of them as their heart.

<span id="ii.LV-p84"></span>16. “Therefore to the Lord I have cried out”
([Psa. 55.16](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#016)<span
id="ii.LV-p84.1"></span>). The Body of Christ and the oneness of Christ
in anguish, in weariness, in uneasiness, in the tribulation of its
exercise, that One Man, Oneness in One Body set, when He was wearying
His soul in crying out from the ends of the earth; saith, “From the ends
of the earth to Thee I have cried out, when My heart was being
vexed.” <span id="fr_2042"></span>[2043](#fn_2042) Himself one, but a
oneness <span id="fr_2043"></span>[2044](#fn_2043) that One! and Himself
one, not in one place one, but from the ends of the earth is crying as
one. How from the ends of the earth should there cry one, except there
were one? “I to the Lord have cried out.” Rightly do thou cry out to the
Lord, cry not to Donatus: lest for thee he be instead of the Lord a
lord, that under the Lord would not be a fellow-servant.

<span id="ii.LV-p87"></span>17. “In evening, in morning, at noon-day I
will recount and will tell forth, and He shall hearken to my
voice” <span id="fr_2044"></span>[2045](#fn_2044) ([Psa.
55.18](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#018)<span id="ii.LV-p88.2"></span>).
Do thou proclaim glad tidings, keep not secret that which thou hast
received, “in evening” of things gone by, “in morning” of things to be,
at “noonday” of things ever to be. Therefore, to that which he saith “in
evening” belongeth that which he recounteth: to that which he saith, “in
morning,” belongeth that which he telleth forth: to that which he saith
“at noon-day,” belongeth that wherein his voice is hearkened to. For the
end is at noon-day; that is to say, whence there is no going down unto
setting. For at noon-day there is light full high, the splendour of
wisdom, the fervour of love. “In evening and in morning and at
noon-day.” “In evening,” the Lord on the Cross; “in morning,” in
Resurrection; “at noon-day,” in Ascension. I will recount in evening the
patience of Him dying, I will tell forth in morning the life of Him
rising, I will pray that He hearken at noon-day sitting at the right
hand of the Father. He shall hearken to my voice, That intercedeth for
us. <span id="fr_2045"></span>[2046](#fn_2045) How great is the security
of this man. How great the consolation, how great the refuge “from
weakness of mind and tempest,” against evil men, against ungodly men
both without and within, and in the case of those that are without
though they had been within.

<span id="ii.LV-p90"></span>18. Therefore, my Brethren, those that in
the very congregation of these walls ye see to be rebellious men, proud,
seeking their own, lifted up; not having a zeal for God that is chaste,
sound, quiet, but ascribing to themselves much; ready for dissension,
but not finding opportunity; are the very chaff of the Lord’s
floor. <span id="fr_2046"></span>[2047](#fn_2046) From hence these few
men the wind of pride hath dislodged: the whole floor will not fly, save
when He at the last shall winnow. But what shall we do, save with this
man sing, with this man pray, with this man mourn and say securely, “He
shall redeem in peace my soul” ([Psa.
55.18](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#018)<span id="ii.LV-p91.2"></span>).
Against them that love not peace: “in peace He shall redeem my soul.”
“Because with those that hated peace I was peace-making.”  <span
id="fr_2047"></span>[2048](#fn_2047) “He shall redeem in peace my soul,
from those that draw near to me.” For from those that are afar from me,
it is an easy case: not so soon doth he deceive me that saith, Come,
pray to an idol: he is very far from <span id="page_216">p. 216</span>
<span id="ii.LV-Page_216"></span>me. Art thou a Christian? A Christian,
he saith. Out of a neighbouring place he is my adversary, he is at hand.
“He shall redeem in peace my soul, from those that draw near to me: for
in many things they were with me.” Wherefore have I said, “draw near to
me”? Because “in many things they were with me.” In this verse two
propositions occur. “In many things they were with me.” Baptism we had
both of us, in that they were with me: the Gospel we both read, they
were in that with me: the festivals of martyrs we celebrated, they were
there with me: Easter’s solemnity we attended, they were there with me.
But not entirely with me: in schism not with me, in heresy not with me.
In many things with me, in few things not with me. But in these few
things wherein not with me, there is no profit to them of the many
things wherein they were with me. For see, brethren, how many things
hath recounted the Apostle Paul: one thing, he hath said, if it shall
have been wanting, in vain are those things. “If with the tongues of men
and of angels I shall speak,” he saith, “if I have all prophecy, and all
faith, and all knowledge; if mountains I shall remove, if I shall bestow
all my goods upon the poor, if I shall deliver my body even so that it
be burned.” <span id="fr_2048"></span>[2049](#fn_2048) How many things
he hath enumerated! To all these many things let there be wanting one
thing, charity; the former in number are more, the latter in weight is
greater. Therefore in all Sacraments they are with me, in one charity
not with me: “In many things they were with me.” Again, by a different
expression: “For in many things they were with me.” They that themselves
have separated from me, with me they were, not in few things, but in
many things. For throughout the whole world few are the grains, many are
the chaffs. Therefore he saith what? In chaff with me they were, in
wheat with me they were not. And the chaff is nearly related to the
wheat, from one seed it goeth forth, in one field is rooted, with one
rain is nourished, the same reaper it suffereth, the same threshing
sustaineth, the same winnowing awaiteth, *but* not into one barn
entereth.

<span id="ii.LV-p94"></span>19. “God will hear me, and He shall humble
them That is before ages” ([Psa.
55.19](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#019)<span id="ii.LV-p94.1"></span>).
For they rely on some leader or other of theirs that hath begun but
yesterday. “He shall humble them That is before ages.” For even if with
reference to time Christ is of Mary the Virgin, nevertheless before
ages: “In the beginning He is the Word and the Word with God, and the
Word God.” <span id="fr_2049"></span>[2050](#fn_2049) “He shall humble
them That is before ages. For to them is no changing:” of them I “speak
to whom is no changing.” He knew of some to persevere, and in the
perseverance of their own wickedness to die. For we see them, and to
them is no changing: they that die in that same perverseness, in that
same schism, to them is no changing. God shall humble them, shall humble
them in damnation, because they are exalted in dissension. To them is no
changing, because they are not changed for the better, but for the
worse: neither while they are here, nor in the resurrection. For all we
shall rise again, but <span id="fr_2050"></span>[2051](#fn_2050) not all
shall be changed. Wherefore? Because “’To them is no changing: and they
have not feared God.”…

<span id="ii.LV-p97"></span>20. “He stretcheth forth His hand in
requiting” ([Psa. 55.20](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#020)<span
id="ii.LV-p97.1"></span>). “They have polluted His Testament.” Read the
testament which they have polluted: “In thy seed shall be blessed all
nations.” <span id="fr_2051"></span>[2052](#fn_2051) Thou against these
words of the Testator sayest what? The Africa of holy Donatus hath alone
deserved this grace, in him hath remained the Church of Christ. Say at
least the Church of Donatus. Wherefore addest thou, of Christ? Of whom
it is said, “In thy seed shall be blessed all nations.” After Donatus
wilt thou go? Set aside Christ, and then secede. See therefore what
followeth: “They have polluted His Testament.” What Testament? To
Abraham have been spoken the promises, and to his seed. The Apostle
saith, “Nevertheless, a man’s testament confirmed no one maketh void, or
super-addeth to: to Abraham have been spoken the promises, and to his
seed. He saith not, And to seeds, as if in many; but as if in one, And
to thy Seed, which is Christ.” <span
id="fr_2052"></span>[2053](#fn_2052) In this Christ, therefore, what
Testament hath been promised? “In thy seed shall be blessed all
nations.” Thou that hast given up the unity of all nations, and in a
part hast remained, hast polluted His Testament.…

<span id="ii.LV-p100"></span>21. “And His heart hath drawn near” ([Psa.
55.22](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#022)<span id="ii.LV-p100.1"></span>).
Of whom do we understand it, except of Him, by the anger of whom they
have been divided? How “hath his heart drawn near”? In such sort, that
we may understand His will. For by heretics hath been vindicated the
Catholic Church, and by those that think evil have been proved those
that think well. For many things lay hid in the Scriptures: and when
heretics had been cut off, with questions they troubled the Church of
God: then those things were opened which lay hid, and the will of God
was understood. <span id="fr_2053"></span>[2054](#fn_2053) Thence is
said in another Psalm, “In order that they might be excluded that have
been proved with silver.” <span id="fr_2054"></span>[2055](#fn_2054) For
let them be excluded, He hath said, let them come forth, let them
appear. Whence even in silver-working men are called “excluders,” that
is, pressers out <span id="page_217">p. 217</span> <span
id="ii.LV-Page_217"></span>of form from the sort of confusion of the
lump. Therefore many men that could understand and expound the
Scriptures very excellently, were hidden among the people of God: but
they did not declare the solution of difficult questions, when no
reviler again urged them. For was the Trinity perfectly treated of
before the Arians snarled thereat? Was repentance perfectly treated of
before the Novatians opposed? So not perfectly of Baptism was it
treated, before rebaptizers removed outside <span
id="fr_2055"></span>[2056](#fn_2055) contradicted; nor of the very
oneness of Christ were the doctrines clearly stated which have been
stated, save after that this separation began to press upon the weak: in
order that they that knew how to treat of and solve these questions
(lest the weak should perish vexed with the questions of the ungodly),
by their discourses and disputations should bring out unto open day the
dark things of the Law. <span id="fr_2056"></span>[2057](#fn_2056) …This
obscure sense see in what manner the Apostle bringeth out into light;
“It is needful,” he saith, “that also heresies there be, in order that
men proved may be made manifest among you.” <span
id="fr_2057"></span>[2058](#fn_2057) What is “men proved”? Proved with
silver, proved with the word. What is “may be made manifest”? May be
brought out. <span id="fr_2058"></span>[2059](#fn_2058) Wherefore this?
Because of heretics. So therefore these also “have been divided because
of the anger of His countenance, and His heart hath drawn near.”

<span id="ii.LV-p107"></span>22. “His discourses have been softened
above oil, and themselves are darts” ([Psa.
55.21](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#021)<span id="ii.LV-p107.1"></span>).
For certain things in the Scriptures were seeming hard, while they were
obscure; when explained, they have been softened. For even the first
heresy in the disciples of Christ, as it were from the hardness of His
discourse arose. For when He said, “Except a man shall have eaten My
flesh and shall have drunk My blood, he shall not have life in himself:”
they, not understanding, said to one another, “Hard is this discourse,
who can hear it?” Saying that, “Hard is this discourse,” they separated
from Him: He remained with the others, the twelve. When they had
intimated to Him, that by His discourse they had been scandalized, “Will
ye also,” He saith, “choose to go?” Then Peter: “Thou hast the Word of
life eternal: to whom shall we go?” <span
id="fr_2059"></span>[2060](#fn_2059) Attend, we beseech you, and ye
little ones learn godliness. Did Peter by any means at that time
understand the secret of that discourse of the Lord? Not yet he
understood: but that good were the words which he understood not, godly
he believed. Therefore if hard is a discourse, and not yet is
understood, be it hard to an ungodly man, but to thee be it by godliness
softened: for whenever it is solved, it both will become for thee oil,
and even unto the bones it will penetrate.

<span id="ii.LV-p109"></span>23. Furthermore, just as Peter, after their
having been scandalized by the hardness, as they thought, of the
discourse of the Lord, even then said, “to whom shall we go?” so he hath
added, “Cast upon the Lord thy care, and He shall Himself nourish thee
up” ([Psa. 55.22](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#022)<span
id="ii.LV-p109.1"></span>). A little one thou art, not yet thou
understandest the secret things of words: perchance from thee the bread
is hidden, and as yet with milk thou must be fed: <span
id="fr_2060"></span>[2061](#fn_2060) be not angry with the breasts: they
will make thee fit for the table, for which now little fitted thou art.
Behold by the division of heretics many hard things have been softened:
His discourses that were hard have been softened above oil, and they are
themselves darts. They have armed men preaching the Gospel: and the very
discourses are aimed at the breast of every one that heareth, by men
instant in season and out of season: by those discourses, by those
words, as though by arrows, hearts of men unto the love of peace are
smitten. Hard they were, and soft they have been made. Being softened
they have not lost their virtue, but into darts have been
converted.…Upon the Lord cast thyself. Behold thou wilt cast thyself
upon the Lord, let no one put himself in the place of the Lord. “Cast
upon the Lord thy care.”…

<span id="ii.LV-p111"></span>24. But to the others what? “But Thou, O
God, shall bring them down unto the pit of corruption” ([Psa.
55.23](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#023)<span id="ii.LV-p111.1"></span>).
The pit of corruption is the darkness of sinking under. When blind
leadeth blind, they both fall into a ditch. <span
id="fr_2061"></span>[2062](#fn_2061) God bringeth them down into the pit
of corruption, not because He is the author of their own guilt, but
because He is Himself the judge of their iniquities. “For God hath
delivered them unto the desires of their heart.” <span
id="fr_2062"></span>[2063](#fn_2062) For they have loved darkness, and
not light; they have loved blindness, and not seeing. For behold the
Lord Jesus hath shone out to the whole world, let them sing in unity
with the whole world: “For there is not one that can hide himself from
the heat of Him.” <span id="fr_2063"></span>[2064](#fn_2063) But they
passing over from the whole to a part, from the body to a wound, from
life to a limb cut off, shall meet with what, but going into the pit of
corruption?

<span id="ii.LV-p115"></span>25. “Men of bloods and of deceitfulness.”
Men of bloods, because of slayings he calleth them: and O that they were
corporal and not spiritual slayings. For blood from the flesh going
forth, is seen and shuddered at: who seeth the blood of the heart in a
man rebaptized? Those deaths require other eyes. Although even about
these visible deaths Circumcelliones armed <span id="page_218">p.
218</span> <span id="ii.LV-Page_218"></span>everywhere remain not quiet.
And if we think of these visible deaths, there are men of bloods. Give
heed to the armed man, whether he is a man of peace and not of blood. If
at least a club only he were to carry, well; but he carrieth a sling,
carrieth an axe, carrieth stones, carrieth lances; and carrying these
weapons, wherever they may they scour, for the blood of innocent men
they thirst. <span id="fr_2064"></span>[2065](#fn_2064) Therefore even
with regard to these visible deaths there are men of bloods. But even of
them let us say, O that such deaths alone they perpetrated, and souls
they slew not. These that are men of bloods and of deceit, let them not
suppose that we thus wrongly understand men of bloods, of them that kill
souls: they themselves of their Maximianists <span
id="fr_2065"></span>[2066](#fn_2065) have so understood it. For when
they condemned them, in the very sentence of their Council they have set
down these words: “Swift are the feet of them to shed the blood” (of the
proclaimers <span id="fr_2066"></span>[2067](#fn_2066) ), “tribulation
and calamity are in the ways of them, and the way of peace they have not
known.” <span id="fr_2067"></span>[2068](#fn_2067) This of the
Maximianists they have said. But I ask of them, when have the
Maximianists shed the body’s blood; not because they too would not shed,
if there were so great a multitude as could shed, but because of the
fear in their minority rather they have suffered somewhat from others,
than have themselves at any time done any such thing. Therefore I
question the Donatist and say: In thy Council thou hast set down of the
Maximianists, “Swift are the feet of them to shed blood.” Show me one of
whom the Maximianists have hurt so much as a finger! What other thing to
me is he to answer, than that which I say? They that have separated
themselves from unity, <span id="fr_2068"></span>[2069](#fn_2068) and
who slay souls by leading astray, spiritually, not carnally, do shed
blood. Very well thou hast expounded, but in thy exposition acknowledge
their own deeds. “Men of bloods and of deceitfulness.” In guile is
deceitfulness, in dissimulation, in seduction. What therefore of those
very men that have been divided because of the anger of His countenance?
They are themselves men of bloods and of deceit.

<span id="ii.LV-p121"></span>26. But of them he saith what? “They shall
not halve their days.” What is, “They shall not halve their days”? They
shall not make progress as much as they think: within the time which
they expect, they shall perish. For he is that partridge, whereof hath
been said, “In the half of his days they shall leave him, and in his
last days he shall be an unwise one.” <span
id="fr_2069"></span>[2070](#fn_2069) They make progress, but for a time.
For what saith the Apostle? “But evil men and seducers shall make
progress for the worse, themselves erring, and other men into error
driving.” <span id="fr_2070"></span>[2071](#fn_2070) But “a blind man
leading a blind man, together into a ditch they fall.” <span
id="fr_2071"></span>[2072](#fn_2071) Deservedly they fall “into the pit
of corruption.” What therefore saith he? They shall make progress for
the worse: not however for long. For a little before he hath said, “But
further they shall not make progress:” <span
id="fr_2072"></span>[2073](#fn_2072) that is, “shall not halve their
days.” Let the Apostle proceed and tell wherefore: “For the madness of
them shall be manifest to all men, as also was that of the others.” “But
I in Thee will hope, O Lord.” But deservedly they shall not halve their
days, because in man they have hoped. But I from days temporal have
reached unto day eternal. Wherefore? Because in Thee I have hoped, O
Lord.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1975"></span>[209:1976](1080064.htm#fr_1975) <span
id="ii.LV-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p2"></span> Lat. LIV. From a sermon to the people,
wherein he is discoursing of enduring evil men, and disputing against
the Donatists.

<span id="fn_1976"></span>[209:1977](1080064.htm#fr_1976) <span
id="ii.LV-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p4"></span> [Rom. x.
4](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#004)<span id="ii.LV-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1977"></span>[209:1978](1080064.htm#fr_1977) <span
id="ii.LV-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p7"></span> [2 Sam. xxiii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#001)<span id="ii.LV-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1978"></span>[209:1979](1080064.htm#fr_1978) <span
id="ii.LV-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p8"></span> [Rom. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#003)<span id="ii.LV-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1979"></span>[209:1980](1080064.htm#fr_1979) <span
id="ii.LV-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p9"></span> [John i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003)<span id="ii.LV-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1980"></span>[209:1981](1080064.htm#fr_1980) <span
id="ii.LV-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p10"></span> Oxf. <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.LV-p10.1"></span>mss</span>. add 16 words ending here.

<span id="fn_1981"></span>[209:1982](1080064.htm#fr_1981) <span
id="ii.LV-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p11"></span> [Matt. xxii.
43-45](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#043)<span id="ii.LV-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1982"></span>[210:1983](1080064.htm#fr_1982) <span
id="ii.LV-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p12"></span> [John i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span id="ii.LV-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1983"></span>[210:1984](1080064.htm#fr_1983) <span
id="ii.LV-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p13"></span> [John i.
14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014)<span id="ii.LV-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1984"></span>[210:1985](1080064.htm#fr_1984) <span
id="ii.LV-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p14"></span> [Gen. ii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#024)<span id="ii.LV-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1985"></span>[210:1986](1080064.htm#fr_1985) <span
id="ii.LV-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p15"></span> [Eph. v.
32](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#032)<span id="ii.LV-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1986"></span>[210:1987](1080064.htm#fr_1986) <span
id="ii.LV-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p16"></span> [Acts ix.
4](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#004)<span id="ii.LV-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1987"></span>[210:1988](1080064.htm#fr_1987) <span
id="ii.LV-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p17"></span> [Matt. vi.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#013)<span id="ii.LV-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1988"></span>[210:1989](1080064.htm#fr_1988) <span
id="ii.LV-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p18"></span> [Gen. i.
26](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#026)<span id="ii.LV-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1989"></span>[210:1990](1080064.htm#fr_1989) <span
id="ii.LV-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p19"></span> [Ps. xxxii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#009)<span id="ii.LV-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1990"></span>[210:1991](1080064.htm#fr_1990) <span
id="ii.LV-p20.3"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p21"></span> [Luke vi.
27](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#027)<span id="ii.LV-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1991"></span>[210:1992](1080064.htm#fr_1991) <span
id="ii.LV-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p23"></span> [Ps. vi.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#007)<span id="ii.LV-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1992"></span>[211:1993](1080064.htm#fr_1992) <span
id="ii.LV-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p24"></span> [Matt. xiv.
30](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#030)<span id="ii.LV-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1993"></span>[211:1994](1080064.htm#fr_1993) <span
id="ii.LV-p24.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p25"></span> [Luke xxiii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#034)<span id="ii.LV-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1994"></span>[211:1995](1080064.htm#fr_1994) <span
id="ii.LV-p25.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p26"></span> [Matt. xvi.
18](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#018)<span id="ii.LV-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1995"></span>[211:1996](1080064.htm#fr_1995) <span
id="ii.LV-p26.3"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p27"></span> [Matt. xiv.
30](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#030)<span id="ii.LV-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1996"></span>[211:1997](1080064.htm#fr_1996) <span
id="ii.LV-p28.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p29"></span> [Ps. vi.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#007)<span id="ii.LV-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1997"></span>[211:1998](1080064.htm#fr_1997) <span
id="ii.LV-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p30"></span> [Matt. vii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#005)<span id="ii.LV-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1998"></span>[211:1999](1080064.htm#fr_1998) <span
id="ii.LV-p30.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p31"></span> Oxf. <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.LV-p31.1"></span>mss</span>. “him that hateth.”

<span id="fn_1999"></span>[211:2000](1080064.htm#fr_1999) <span
id="ii.LV-p31.3"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p32"></span> [Ps. vi.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#007)<span id="ii.LV-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2000"></span>[211:2001](1080064.htm#fr_2000) <span
id="ii.LV-p32.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p33"></span> [Matt. x.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#028)<span id="ii.LV-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2001"></span>[211:2002](1080064.htm#fr_2001) <span
id="ii.LV-p34.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p35"></span> [1 John
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#009),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#011)<span id="ii.LV-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2002"></span>[211:2003](1080064.htm#fr_2002) <span
id="ii.LV-p35.3"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p36"></span> Oxf. <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.LV-p36.1"></span>mss</span>. “for as much as.”

<span id="fn_2003"></span>[211:2004](1080064.htm#fr_2003) <span
id="ii.LV-p36.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p37"></span> [Philip. i.
23](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#023)<span id="ii.LV-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2004"></span>[212:2005](1080064.htm#fr_2004) <span
id="ii.LV-p37.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p38"></span> *Adumbrant*.

<span id="fn_2005"></span>[212:2006](1080064.htm#fr_2005) <span
id="ii.LV-p38.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p39"></span> [Phil.
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#023),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#024)<span id="ii.LV-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2006"></span>[212:2007](1080064.htm#fr_2006) <span
id="ii.LV-p39.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p40"></span> [Matt. vii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#014)<span id="ii.LV-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2007"></span>[212:2008](1080064.htm#fr_2007) <span
id="ii.LV-p40.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p41"></span> [2 Tim. iii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#012)<span id="ii.LV-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2008"></span>[212:2009](1080064.htm#fr_2008) <span
id="ii.LV-p42.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p43"></span> \[Professor Cooke’s *Scientific Culture*,
pp. 291, 292. New York, 1885.—C.\]

<span id="fn_2009"></span>[212:2010](1080064.htm#fr_2009) <span
id="ii.LV-p44.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p45"></span> [Matt. xiv.
30](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#030)<span id="ii.LV-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2010"></span>[212:2011](1080064.htm#fr_2010) <span
id="ii.LV-p45.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p46"></span> *Imperator*.

<span id="fn_2011"></span>[212:2012](1080064.htm#fr_2011) <span
id="ii.LV-p46.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p47"></span> [Matt.
8:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#024),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#025)<span id="ii.LV-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2012"></span>[212:2013](1080064.htm#fr_2012) <span
id="ii.LV-p47.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p48"></span> *Imperavit*.

<span id="fn_2013"></span>[212:2014](1080064.htm#fr_2013) <span
id="ii.LV-p49.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p50"></span> *In idipsum*.

<span id="fn_2014"></span>[212:2015](1080064.htm#fr_2014) <span
id="ii.LV-p50.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p51"></span> [Ps. xli.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#007)<span id="ii.LV-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2015"></span>[213:2016](1080064.htm#fr_2015) <span
id="ii.LV-p51.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p52"></span> [Gen. xi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#004)<span id="ii.LV-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2016"></span>[213:2017](1080064.htm#fr_2016) <span
id="ii.LV-p52.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p53"></span> [Acts ii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#004)<span id="ii.LV-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2017"></span>[213:2018](1080064.htm#fr_2017) <span
id="ii.LV-p54.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p55"></span> [Gen. xi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#009)<span id="ii.LV-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2018"></span>[213:2019](1080064.htm#fr_2018) <span
id="ii.LV-p55.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p56"></span> Nearly all <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.LV-p56.1"></span>mss</span>. “By effect prove the virtue.”—*Ben*.

<span id="fn_2019"></span>[213:2020](1080064.htm#fr_2019) <span
id="ii.LV-p56.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p57"></span> [Matt. xxvii.
40](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#040)<span id="ii.LV-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2020"></span>[213:2021](1080064.htm#fr_2020) <span
id="ii.LV-p57.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p58"></span> [Rom. i.
17](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#017)<span id="ii.LV-p58.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2021"></span>[213:2022](1080064.htm#fr_2021) <span
id="ii.LV-p58.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p59"></span> [Luke xxiii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#034)<span id="ii.LV-p59.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2022"></span>[213:2023](1080064.htm#fr_2022) <span
id="ii.LV-p60.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p61"></span> Oxf. <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.LV-p61.1"></span>mss</span>. omit “and labour.”

<span id="fn_2023"></span>[213:2024](1080064.htm#fr_2023) <span
id="ii.LV-p61.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p62"></span> [Josh. vi.
5](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#005)<span id="ii.LV-p62.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2024"></span>[213:2025](1080064.htm#fr_2024) <span
id="ii.LV-p62.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p63"></span> Or, “way.”

<span id="fn_2025"></span>[213:2026](1080064.htm#fr_2025) <span
id="ii.LV-p63.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p64"></span> [Matt. xi.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#028)<span id="ii.LV-p64.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2026"></span>[213:2027](1080064.htm#fr_2026) <span
id="ii.LV-p64.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p65"></span> [Matt. xi.
29](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#029)<span id="ii.LV-p65.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2027"></span>[214:2028](1080064.htm#fr_2027) <span
id="ii.LV-p66.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p67"></span> *Fœnus*. \[See note 2, p. 99, *supra*.—C.\]

<span id="fn_2028"></span>[214:2029](1080064.htm#fr_2028) <span
id="ii.LV-p67.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p68"></span> [Matt. vi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#012)<span id="ii.LV-p68.1"></span>. So
Oxf. <span class="c21"><span id="ii.LV-p68.2"></span>mss</span>.

<span id="fn_2029"></span>[214:2030](1080064.htm#fr_2029) <span
id="ii.LV-p68.3"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p69"></span> [Matt. vi.
9-12](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#009)<span id="ii.LV-p69.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2030"></span>[214:2031](1080064.htm#fr_2030) <span
id="ii.LV-p69.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p70"></span> Oxf. <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.LV-p70.1"></span>mss</span>. “Where thou and that verse are
there.”

<span id="fn_2031"></span>[214:2032](1080064.htm#fr_2031) <span
id="ii.LV-p70.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p71"></span> See Tract. 7, On the Gospel of St. John, §
11.

<span id="fn_2032"></span>[214:2033](1080064.htm#fr_2032) <span
id="ii.LV-p71.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p72"></span> [Matt. vi.
14](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#014)<span id="ii.LV-p72.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2033"></span>[214:2034](1080064.htm#fr_2033) <span
id="ii.LV-p72.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p73"></span> *Jurisperitus*; *i.e*., lawyer.

<span id="fn_2034"></span>[214:2035](1080064.htm#fr_2034) <span
id="ii.LV-p73.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p74"></span> *Vinculum*.

<span id="fn_2035"></span>[214:2036](1080064.htm#fr_2035) <span
id="ii.LV-p74.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p75"></span> *i.e*., evil men.

<span id="fn_2036"></span>[214:2037](1080064.htm#fr_2036) <span
id="ii.LV-p76.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p77"></span> <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.LV-p77.1"></span>mss</span>. *submersa* (not *subversa*),
alluding to ver. 9.—*Ben*.

<span id="fn_2037"></span>[214:2038](1080064.htm#fr_2037) <span
id="ii.LV-p77.4"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p78"></span> [Ps. xxxiv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#008)<span id="ii.LV-p78.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2038"></span>[214:2039](1080064.htm#fr_2038) <span
id="ii.LV-p78.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p79"></span> Against the Donatists.

<span id="fn_2039"></span>[215:2040](1080064.htm#fr_2039) <span
id="ii.LV-p80.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p81"></span> [Num. xvi.
31](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#031)<span id="ii.LV-p81.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2040"></span>[215:2041](1080064.htm#fr_2040) <span
id="ii.LV-p81.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p82"></span> Against the Donatists.

<span id="fn_2041"></span>[215:2042](1080064.htm#fr_2041) <span
id="ii.LV-p82.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p83"></span> *Hospitiis*.

<span id="fn_2042"></span>[215:2043](1080064.htm#fr_2042) <span
id="ii.LV-p84.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p85"></span> [Ps. lxi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa061.htm#002)<span id="ii.LV-p85.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2043"></span>[215:2044](1080064.htm#fr_2043) <span
id="ii.LV-p85.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p86"></span> *Unitas*.

<span id="fn_2044"></span>[215:2045](1080064.htm#fr_2044) <span
id="ii.LV-p87.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p88"></span> \[[Acts
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#015), [Acts
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#001), [Acts
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#003),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#009)<span id="ii.LV-p88.1"></span>. The
Apostles observed the “hours of prayer;” and they survive,
theoretically, in the liturgies of Christendom. A.N.F. vol. iii. p.
689.—C.\]

<span id="fn_2045"></span>[215:2046](1080064.htm#fr_2045) <span
id="ii.LV-p88.3"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p89"></span> [Rom. viii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#034)<span id="ii.LV-p89.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2046"></span>[215:2047](1080064.htm#fr_2046) <span
id="ii.LV-p90.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p91"></span> [Matt. iii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#012)<span id="ii.LV-p91.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2047"></span>[215:2048](1080064.htm#fr_2047) <span
id="ii.LV-p91.3"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p92"></span> [Ps.
20:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#007)<span id="ii.LV-p92.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2048"></span>[216:2049](1080064.htm#fr_2048) <span
id="ii.LV-p92.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p93"></span> [1 Cor. xiii.
1-3](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#001)<span id="ii.LV-p93.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2049"></span>[216:2050](1080064.htm#fr_2049) <span
id="ii.LV-p94.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p95"></span> [John i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span id="ii.LV-p95.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2050"></span>[216:2051](1080064.htm#fr_2050) <span
id="ii.LV-p95.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p96"></span> E.V. omits “not.” [1 Cor. xv.
51](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#051)<span id="ii.LV-p96.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2051"></span>[216:2052](1080064.htm#fr_2051) <span
id="ii.LV-p97.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p98"></span> [Gen.
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#003), [Gen.
26:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#004)<span id="ii.LV-p98.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2052"></span>[216:2053](1080064.htm#fr_2052) <span
id="ii.LV-p98.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p99"></span> [Gal.
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#015),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#016)<span id="ii.LV-p99.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2053"></span>[216:2054](1080064.htm#fr_2053) <span
id="ii.LV-p100.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p101"></span> \[Scripture is the rule of faith. See
Tertull. vol. iii. p. 265, A.N.F., and hereafter in this series, Vincent
of Lerins, *passim*.—C.\]

<span id="fn_2054"></span>[216:2055](1080064.htm#fr_2054) <span
id="ii.LV-p101.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p102"></span> [Ps. lxviii.
30](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#030)<span id="ii.LV-p102.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2055"></span>[217:2056](1080064.htm#fr_2055) <span
id="ii.LV-p102.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p103"></span> *Foris positi*.

<span id="fn_2056"></span>[217:2057](1080064.htm#fr_2056) <span
id="ii.LV-p103.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p104"></span> \[That is, not by new ideas incorporated
with old truth, but by collecting into *focus* the testimony of all
recognised doctors of the Church as to the true meaning and intent of
Holy Scripture. This is development as distinguished from
corruption.—C.\]

<span id="fn_2057"></span>[217:2058](1080064.htm#fr_2057) <span
id="ii.LV-p104.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p105"></span> [1 Cor. xi.
19](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#019)<span id="ii.LV-p105.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2058"></span>[217:2059](1080064.htm#fr_2058) <span
id="ii.LV-p105.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p106"></span> *Excludantur*.

<span id="fn_2059"></span>[217:2060](1080064.htm#fr_2059) <span
id="ii.LV-p107.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p108"></span> [John vi.
53](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#053)<span id="ii.LV-p108.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_2060"></span>[217:2061](1080064.htm#fr_2060) <span
id="ii.LV-p109.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p110"></span> [1 Cor. iii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#001)<span id="ii.LV-p110.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2061"></span>[217:2062](1080064.htm#fr_2061) <span
id="ii.LV-p111.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p112"></span> [Matt. xv.
14](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#014)<span id="ii.LV-p112.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2062"></span>[217:2063](1080064.htm#fr_2062) <span
id="ii.LV-p112.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p113"></span> [Rom. i.
24](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#024)<span id="ii.LV-p113.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2063"></span>[217:2064](1080064.htm#fr_2063) <span
id="ii.LV-p113.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p114"></span> [Ps. xix.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#006)<span id="ii.LV-p114.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2064"></span>[218:2065](1080064.htm#fr_2064) <span
id="ii.LV-p115.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p116"></span> \[What but *Circumcelliones* were the
perpetrators of the Bartholomew massacres, of the *Dragonnades*, of the
awful butcheries under Alva?—C.\]

<span id="fn_2065"></span>[218:2066](1080064.htm#fr_2065) <span
id="ii.LV-p116.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p117"></span> See on [Ps.
xxxvi.](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#000)<span id="ii.LV-p117.1"></span>

<span id="fn_2066"></span>[218:2067](1080064.htm#fr_2066) <span
id="ii.LV-p117.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p118"></span> The word *annuntiatorum* is omitted in
some copies. It is not in the sentence of the Synod of Bagai, as given
in the fourth book against Crescontius, c. 4.—*Ben*.

<span id="fn_2067"></span>[218:2068](1080064.htm#fr_2067) <span
id="ii.LV-p118.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p119"></span> [Ps.
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#007), [Rom.
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#015)<span id="ii.LV-p119.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2068"></span>[218:2069](1080064.htm#fr_2068) <span
id="ii.LV-p119.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p120"></span> \[How fearfully this comes home to those
who separated themselves from the Nicene unity under lead of Nicholas
and his Decretals, in the ninth age! ([John xiii.
30](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#030)<span id="ii.LV-p120.1"></span>.)
The “Dark Ages” instantly settled upon the Church. See A.N.F. vol. viii.
p. 642.—C.\]

<span id="fn_2069"></span>[218:2070](1080064.htm#fr_2069) <span
id="ii.LV-p121.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p122"></span> [Jer. xvii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#011)<span id="ii.LV-p122.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2070"></span>[218:2071](1080064.htm#fr_2070) <span
id="ii.LV-p122.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p123"></span> [2 Tim. iii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#013)<span id="ii.LV-p123.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2071"></span>[218:2072](1080064.htm#fr_2071) <span
id="ii.LV-p123.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p124"></span> [Matt. xv.
14](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#014)<span id="ii.LV-p124.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2072"></span>[218:2073](1080064.htm#fr_2072) <span
id="ii.LV-p124.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LV-p125"></span> [2 Tim. iii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#009)<span id="ii.LV-p125.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm LVI](1080065)
