[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080022)  [Next](1080024) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.XIX"></span>

<span id="ii.XIX-p1"></span> <span id="ii.XIX-p1.1"></span><span
class="c20"><span id="ii.XIX-p1.2"></span>Psalm XIX. <span
id="fr_549"></span>[550](#fn_549) </span>

<span id="ii.XIX-p3"></span>To the end, a psalm of David himself.

<span id="ii.XIX-p4"></span>1. It is a well-known title; nor does the
Lord Jesus Christ say what follows, but it is said of Him.

<span id="ii.XIX-p5"></span>2. “The heavens tell out the glory of God”
([Psa. 19.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#001)<span
id="ii.XIX-p5.1"></span>). The righteous Evangelists, in whom, as in the
heavens, God dwelleth, set forth the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ, or
the glory wherewith the Son glorified the Father upon earth. “And the
firmament showeth forth the works of His hands.” And the firmament
showeth forth the deeds of the Lord’s power, that now made heaven by the
assurance of the Holy Ghost, which before was earth by fear.

<span id="ii.XIX-p6"></span>3. “Day unto day uttereth word” ([Psa.
19.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#002)<span id="ii.XIX-p6.1"></span>).
To the spiritual the Spirit giveth out the fulness of the unchangeable
Wisdom of God, the Word which in the beginning is God with God. <span
id="fr_550"></span>[551](#fn_550) “And night unto night announceth
knowledge.” And to the fleshly, as to those afar off, the mortality of
the flesh, by conveying faith, announceth future knowledge.

<span id="ii.XIX-p8"></span>4. “There is no speech nor language, in
which their voices are not heard” ([Psa.
19.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#003)<span id="ii.XIX-p8.1"></span>).
In which the voices of the Evangelists have not been heard, seeing that
the Gospel was preached in every tongue.

<span id="ii.XIX-p9"></span>5. “Their sound is gone out into all the
earth, and their words to the ends of the world” <span
id="fr_551"></span>[552](#fn_551) ([Psa.
19.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#004)<span id="ii.XIX-p10.2"></span>).

<span id="ii.XIX-p11"></span>6. “In the sun hath He set His tabernacle.”
Now that He might war against the powers of temporal error, the Lord,
being about to send not peace but a sword on earth, <span
id="fr_552"></span>[553](#fn_552) in time, or in manifestation, set so
to say His military dwelling, that is, the dispensation of His
incarnation. “And He as a bridegroom coming forth out of His chamber”
([Psa. 19.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#005)<span
id="ii.XIX-p12.2"></span>). And He, coming forth <span id="page_55">p.
55</span> <span id="ii.XIX-Page_55"></span>out of the Virgin’s womb,
where God was united to man’s nature as a bridegroom to a bride.
“Rejoiced as a giant to run His way.” Rejoiced as One exceeding strong,
and surpassing all other men in power incomparable, not to inhabit, but
to run His way. For, “He stood not in the way of sinners.” <span
id="fr_553"></span>[554](#fn_553)

<span id="ii.XIX-p14"></span>7. “His going forth is from the highest
heaven” ([Psa. 19.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#006)<span
id="ii.XIX-p14.1"></span>). From the Father is His going forth, not that
in time, but from everlasting, whereby He was born of the Father. “And
His meeting is even to the height of heaven.” And in the fulness of the
Godhead He meets even to an equality with the Father. <span
id="fr_554"></span>[555](#fn_554) “And there is none that may hide
himself from His heat.” But whereas, “the Word was even made flesh, and
dwelt in us,” <span id="fr_555"></span>[556](#fn_555) assuming our
mortality, He permitted no man to excuse himself from the shadow of
death; for the heat of the Word penetrated even it.

<span id="ii.XIX-p17"></span>8. “The law of the Lord is undefiled,
converting souls” ([Psa. 19.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#007)<span
id="ii.XIX-p17.1"></span>). The law of the Lord, therefore, is Himself
who came to fulfil the law, not to destroy it; <span
id="fr_556"></span>[557](#fn_556) an undefiled law, “Who did no sin,
neither was guile found in His mouth,” <span
id="fr_557"></span>[558](#fn_557) not oppressing souls with the yoke of
bondage, but converting them to imitate Him in liberty. “The testimony
of the Lord is sure, giving wisdom to babes.” “The testimony of the Lord
is sure;” for, “no man knoweth the Father save the Son, and he to
whomsoever the Son will reveal Him,” <span
id="fr_558"></span>[559](#fn_558) which things have been hidden from the
wise and revealed to babes; <span id="fr_559"></span>[560](#fn_559) for,
“God resisteth the proud, but giveth grace to the humble.” <span
id="fr_560"></span>[561](#fn_560)

<span id="ii.XIX-p23"></span>9. “The statutes of the Lord are right,
rejoicing the heart” ([Psa. 19.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#008)<span
id="ii.XIX-p23.1"></span>). All the statutes of the Lord are right in
Him who taught not what He did not; that they who should imitate Him
might rejoice in heart, in those things which they should do freely with
love, not slavishly with fear. “The commandment of the Lord is lucid,
enlightening the eyes.” “The commandment of the Lord is lucid,” with no
veil of carnal observances, enlightening the sight of the inner man.

<span id="ii.XIX-p24"></span>10. “The fear of the Lord is chaste,
enduring for ever” ([Psa. 19.9](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#009)<span
id="ii.XIX-p24.1"></span>). “The fear of the Lord;” not that
distressing <span id="fr_561"></span>[562](#fn_561) fear under the law,
dreading exceedingly the withdrawal of temporal goods, by the love of
which the soul commits fornication; but that chaste fear wherewith the
Church, the more ardently she loves her Spouse, the more carefully does
she take heed of offending Him, and therefore, “perfect love casteth”
not “out” this “fear,” <span id="fr_562"></span>[563](#fn_562) but it
endureth for ever.

<span id="ii.XIX-p27"></span>11. “The judgments of the Lord are true,
justified together.” The judgments of Him, who “judgeth no man, but hath
committed all judgment unto the Son,” <span
id="fr_563"></span>[564](#fn_563) are justified in truth unchangeably.
For neither in His threatenings nor His promises doth God deceive any
man, nor can any withdraw either from the ungodly His punishment, or
from the godly His reward. “To be desired more than gold, and much
precious stone” ([Psa. 19.10](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#010)<span
id="ii.XIX-p28.2"></span>). Whether it be “gold and stone itself much,”
or “much precious,” or “much to be desired;” still, the judgments of God
are to be desired more than the pomp of this world; by desire of which
it is brought to pass that the judgments of God are not desired, but
feared, or despised, or not believed. But if any be himself gold and
precious stone, that he may not be consumed by fire, but received into
the treasury of God, more than himself does he desire the judgments of
God, whose will he preferreth to his own. “And sweeter than honey and
the honey comb.” And whether one be even now honey, who, disenthralled
already from the chains of this life, is awaiting the day when he may
come up to God’s feast; or whether he be yet as the honey comb, wrapped
about with this life as it were with wax, not mixed and become one with
it, but filling it, needing some pressure of God’s hand, not oppressing
but expressing it, whereby from life temporal it may be strained out
into life eternal: to such an one the judgments of God are sweeter than
he himself is to himself, for that they are “sweeter than honey and the
honey comb.”

<span id="ii.XIX-p29"></span>12. “For Thy servant keepeth them” ([Psa.
19.11](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#011)<span id="ii.XIX-p29.1"></span>).
For to him who keepeth them not the day of the Lord is bitter. “In
keeping them there is great reward.” Not in any external benefit, but in
the thing itself, that God’s judgments are kept, is there great reward;
great because one rejoiceth therein.

<span id="ii.XIX-p30"></span>13. “Who understandeth sins?” ([Psa.
19.12](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#012)<span id="ii.XIX-p30.1"></span>)
But what sort of sweetness can there be in sins, where there is no
understanding? For who can understand sins, which close the very eye, to
which truth is pleasant, to which the judgments of God are desirable and
sweet? yea, as darkness closes the eye, so do sins the mind, and suffer
it not to see either the light, or itself.

<span id="ii.XIX-p31"></span>14. “Cleanse me, O Lord, from my secret
faults.” From the lusts which lie hid in me, cleanse me, O Lord. “And
from the” faults “of others preserve Thy servant” ([Psa.
19.13](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#013)<span id="ii.XIX-p31.1"></span>).
Let me not be led astray by others. For he is not a prey to the faults
of others, who is cleansed from his own. Preserve therefore from the
lusts of others, not the proud man, and him who would be his own master,
but, Thy servant. “If <span id="page_56">p. 56</span> <span
id="ii.XIX-Page_56"></span>they get not the dominion over me, then shall
I be undefiled.” If neither my own secret sins, nor those of others, get
the dominion over me, then shall I be undefiled. For there is no third
source of sin, but one’s own secret sin, by which the devil fell, and
another’s sin, by which man is seduced, so as by consenting to make it
his own. “And I shall be cleansed from the great offence.” What but
pride? for there is none greater than apostasy from God, which is “the
beginning of the pride of man.” <span id="fr_564"></span>[565](#fn_564)
And he shall indeed be undefiled, who is free from this offence also;
for this is the last to them who are returning to God, which was the
first as they departed from Him.

<span id="ii.XIX-p33"></span>15. “And the words of my mouth shall be
pleasing, and the meditation of my heart is always in Thy sight” ([Psa.
19.14](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#014)<span id="ii.XIX-p33.1"></span>).
The meditation of my heart is not after the vain glory of pleasing men,
for now there is pride no more, but in Thy sight alway, who regardest a
pure conscience. “O Lord, my Helper, and my Redeemer” <span
id="fr_565"></span>[566](#fn_565) ([Psa.
19.15](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#015)<span id="ii.XIX-p34.2"></span>).
O Lord, my Helper, in my approach to Thee; for Thou art my Redeemer,
that I might set out unto Thee: lest any attributing to his own wisdom
his conversion to Thee, or to his own strength his attaining to Thee,
should be rather driven back by Thee, who resistest the proud; for he is
not cleansed from the great offence, nor pleasing in Thy sight, who
redeemest us that we may be converted, and helpest us that we may attain
unto Thee.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_549"></span>[54:550](1080023.htm#fr_549) <span
id="ii.XIX-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.XIX-p2"></span> Lat. XVIII.

<span id="fn_550"></span>[54:551](1080023.htm#fr_550) <span
id="ii.XIX-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XIX-p7"></span> [John i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span id="ii.XIX-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_551"></span>[54:552](1080023.htm#fr_551) <span
id="ii.XIX-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XIX-p10"></span> \[[Rom. x.
18](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#018)<span id="ii.XIX-p10.1"></span>.
“And therefore are *we even speaking here*” says our author in his
second homily (omitted) on this Psalm.—C.\]

<span id="fn_552"></span>[54:553](1080023.htm#fr_552) <span
id="ii.XIX-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XIX-p12"></span> [Matt. x.
34](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#034)<span id="ii.XIX-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_553"></span>[55:554](1080023.htm#fr_553) <span
id="ii.XIX-p12.3"></span>

<span id="ii.XIX-p13"></span> [Ps. i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)<span id="ii.XIX-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_554"></span>[55:555](1080023.htm#fr_554) <span
id="ii.XIX-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XIX-p15"></span> Vid. in Psalm lviii (lix. E.V.).
*Enarrat*. i. § 10.

<span id="fn_555"></span>[55:556](1080023.htm#fr_555) <span
id="ii.XIX-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XIX-p16"></span> [John i.
14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014)<span id="ii.XIX-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_556"></span>[55:557](1080023.htm#fr_556) <span
id="ii.XIX-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XIX-p18"></span> [Matt. v.
17](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#017)<span id="ii.XIX-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_557"></span>[55:558](1080023.htm#fr_557) <span
id="ii.XIX-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XIX-p19"></span> [1 Pet. ii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#022)<span id="ii.XIX-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_558"></span>[55:559](1080023.htm#fr_558) <span
id="ii.XIX-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XIX-p20"></span> [Matt. xi.
27](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#027)<span id="ii.XIX-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_559"></span>[55:560](1080023.htm#fr_559) <span
id="ii.XIX-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XIX-p21"></span> [Luke x.
21](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#021)<span id="ii.XIX-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_560"></span>[55:561](1080023.htm#fr_560) <span
id="ii.XIX-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XIX-p22"></span> [Jas. iv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#006)<span id="ii.XIX-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_561"></span>[55:562](1080023.htm#fr_561) <span
id="ii.XIX-p24.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XIX-p25"></span> *Pœnalis*.

<span id="fn_562"></span>[55:563](1080023.htm#fr_562) <span
id="ii.XIX-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XIX-p26"></span> [1 John iv.
18](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#018)<span id="ii.XIX-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_563"></span>[55:564](1080023.htm#fr_563) <span
id="ii.XIX-p27.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XIX-p28"></span> [John v.
22](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#022)<span id="ii.XIX-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_564"></span>[56:565](1080023.htm#fr_564) <span
id="ii.XIX-p31.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XIX-p32"></span> [Ecclesiasticus
10.12](../../../bib/apo/sir010.htm#012)<span id="ii.XIX-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_565"></span>[56:566](1080023.htm#fr_565) <span
id="ii.XIX-p33.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XIX-p34"></span> \[Here the word is rendered “Redeemer” in
the Septuagint, and is the same in the Hebrew as in [Job xix.
25](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#025)<span
id="ii.XIX-p34.1"></span>.—C.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm XX](1080024)
