[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080160)  [Next](1080162.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.CXXVIII"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXVIII-p1"></span> <span id="page_609">p. 609</span> <span
id="ii.CXXVIII-Page_609"></span>[Psalm
CXXVIII](../../../bib/kjv/psa128.htm#000.md)<span
id="ii.CXXVIII-p1.1"></span><span class="c20"><span
id="ii.CXXVIII-p1.2"></span>. <span id="fr_5532"></span>[5533](#fn_5532.md)
</span>

<span id="ii.CXXVIII-p3"></span>1. Felix the Martyr, <span
id="fr_5533"></span>[5534](#fn_5533.md) truly Felix, i.e. “Happy” both in
his name and his crown, whose birthday this is, despised the world. Was
he, because he feared the Lord, thence happy, thence blessed, because
his wife was as a fruitful vine upon the earth, and his children stood
around his table? All these blessings he hath perfectly, but in the Body
of Him who is here described; and, because he understood them in this
sense, he scorned things present, that he might receive things future.
Ye are aware, brethren, that he suffered not the death that other
martyrs suffered. For he confessed, and was set aside for torments; on
another day his body was discovered lifeless. They had closed the prison
to his body, not to his spirit. The executioners found him gone; when
they were preparing to torture, they spent their rage for nought. He was
lying dead, without sense to them, that he might not be tortured; with
sense with God, that he might be crowned. Whence was he also happy,
brethren, not only in name, but in the reward of everlasting life, if he
loved these things.

<span id="ii.CXXVIII-p5"></span>2. “Blessed are all they that fear the
Lord, and walk in His ways” ([Psa.
128.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa128.htm#001.md)<span
id="ii.CXXVIII-p5.1"></span>). He speaketh to many; but since these many
are one in Christ, in the next words he speaketh in the singular: “For
thou shalt eat the labours of thy fruits.”…When I speak of Christians in
the plural, I understand one in the One Christ. Ye are therefore many,
and ye are one; we are many, and we are one. How are we many, and yet
one? Because we cling unto Him whose members we are; and since our Head
is in heaven, that His members may follow.…Let us therefore so hear this
Psalm, as considering it to be spoken of Christ: and all of us who cling
unto the Body of Christ, and have been made members of Christ, walk in
the ways of the Lord; and let us fear the Lord with a chaste fear, with
a fear that abideth for ever.…

<span id="ii.CXXVIII-p6"></span>3. “Thou shalt eat the labours of thy
fruits” ([Psa. 128.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa128.htm#002.md)<span
id="ii.CXXVIII-p6.1"></span>). And ye, O thou, ye many who are One,
“Thou shalt eat of the labours of thy fruits.” He seemeth to speak
perversely to those who understand not: for he should have said, thou
shalt eat the fruit of thy labours. For many eat the fruit of their
labours. They labour in the vineyard; they eat not the toil itself; but
what ariseth from their labour they eat. They labour about trees that
bear fruit: who would eat labours? But the fruit of these labours, the
produce of these trees; it is this that delighteth the husbandman. What
meaneth, “Thou shalt eat the labours of thy fruits”? At present we have
toils: the fruits will come afterwards. But since their labours
themselves are not without joy, on account of the hope whereof we have a
little before spoken, “Rejoicing in hope, patient in tribulation;”
 <span id="fr_5534"></span>[5535](#fn_5534.md) at present those very
labours delight us, and make us joyful in hope. If therefore our toil
has been what could be eaten, and could also delight us; what will be
the fruit of our labour when eaten? “They who went weeping on their way,
scattering their seed,” <span id="fr_5535"></span>[5536](#fn_5535.md) did
eat their labours; with how much greater pleasure will they eat the
fruits of their labours, who “shall come again with joy, bearing their
sheaves with them”?…“Blessed art thou, and well shall it be with thee.”
“Blessed art thou,” is of the present: “well shall it be with thee,” is
of the future. When thou eatest the labours of thy fruits, “blessed art
thou;” when thou hast reached the fruit of thy labours, “well shall it
be with thee.” What hath he said? For if it be well with thee, thou wilt
be happy: and if thou wilt be happy, thou wilt also have all well with
thee. But there is a difference between hope and attainment. If hope be
so sweet, how much sweeter will reality be?

<span id="ii.CXXVIII-p9"></span>4. Let us now come to the words, “Thy
wife” ([Psa. 128.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa128.htm#003.md)<span
id="ii.CXXVIII-p9.1"></span>): it is said unto Christ. His wife,
therefore, is the Church: His Church, His wife, we ourselves are. “As a
fruitful vineyard.” But in whom is the vineyard fruitful? For we see
many barren ones entering those walls; we see that many intemperate,
usurious persons, slave dealers, enter these walls, and such as resort
to fortune-tellers, go to enchanters and enchantresses when they have a
headache. Is this the fruitfulness of the vine? Is this the fecundity of
the wife? It is not. These are thorns, but the vineyard is not
everywhere thorny. It hath a certain fruitfulness, and is a fruitful
vine; but in whom? “Upon the sides of thy house.” Not all are called the
sides of the house. For I ask what are the sides. What shall I say? Are
they walls, strong stones, as it were? If he were speaking of this
bodily tenement, we should perhaps understand this by sides. We mean by
the sides of the house, those who cling unto Christ.…

<span id="ii.CXXVIII-p10"></span>5. “Thy children.” The wife and the
children are the same. In these carnal marriages and wedlocks, the wife
is one, the children other: in the Church, she who is the wife, is the
children also. For the Apostles belonged to the Church, and were among
the members of the Church. They were therefore in His wife, and were His
wife according to their own portion which they held in His members. Why
then is <span id="page_610">p. 610</span> <span
id="ii.CXXVIII-Page_610"></span>it said concerning them, “When the
Bridegroom shall be taken from them, then shall the children of the
Bridegroom fast”? <span id="fr_5536"></span>[5537](#fn_5536.md) She who is
the wife, then, is the children also. I speak a wonderful thing, my
brethren. In the words of the Lord, we find the Church to be both His
brethren, and His sisters, and His mother. <span
id="fr_5537"></span>[5538](#fn_5537.md) …For Mary was among the sides of
His House, and His relatives coming of the kindred of the Virgin Mary,
who believed on Him, were among the sides of His House; not in respect
of their carnal consanguinity, but inasmuch as they heard the Word of
God, and obeyed it.…He added; “For whosoever shall do the will of My
Father which is in heaven, the same is My brother, and sister, and
mother.” <span id="fr_5538"></span>[5539](#fn_5538.md) “Brother,” perhaps,
on account of the male sex whom the Church hath: “sister,” on account of
the women whom Christ hath here in His members. How “mother,” save that
Christ Himself is in those Christians, whom the Church daily bringeth
forth Christians through baptism? In those therefore in whom thou
understandest the wife, in them thou understandest the mother, in them
the children.

<span id="ii.CXXVIII-p14"></span>6. …Such children ought therefore to be
“around” the Lord’s “table, like olive-branches.” <span
id="fr_5539"></span>[5540](#fn_5539.md) A complete Vine it is, a great
bliss: who would now refuse to be there? When thou seest any blasphemer
have a wife, children, grandchildren, and thyself perchance without
them, envy them not; discern that the promise hath been fulfilled in
thee also, but spiritually. If therefore we have, why have we? Because
we fear the Lord. “Lo, thus shall the man be blessed that feareth the
Lord” ([Psa. 128.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa128.htm#004.md)<span
id="ii.CXXVIII-p15.2"></span>). He is the man, who is also the men; and
the men are one man; because many are one, because Christ is One.

<span id="ii.CXXVIII-p16"></span>7. “The Lord from out of Sion bless
thee: and mayest thou see thee good things that are of Jerusalem” ([Psa.
128.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa128.htm#005.md)<span
id="ii.CXXVIII-p16.1"></span>). Even to the birds was it said, “Be
fruitful and multiply.” <span id="fr_5540"></span>[5541](#fn_5540.md) Dost
thou wish to hold as a great blessing what was given unto birds? Who can
be ignorant, that it was given indeed by the voice of God? But use these
goods, if thou receive them; and rather think how thou mayest nourish
those who have been born, than that others may be born. For it is not
happiness to have children, but to have good ones. Labour in the task of
nourishing them, if they be born; but if they be not born, give thanks
unto God.…Thy children are infants: thou dost caress the infants: the
infants caress thee: do they abide thus? But thou wishest they may grow,
thou wishest that their age may increase. But consider that when one age
cometh, another dieth. When boyhood cometh, infancy dieth; when youth
cometh, boyhood dieth: when manhood cometh, youth dieth; when old age
cometh, manhood dieth: when death cometh, all age dieth. As many
successions of ages as thou wishest for, so many deaths of ages dost
thou wish for. These things therefore “are” not. Finally, are children
born unto thee to share life with thee on earth, or rather to shut thee
out and to succeed thee? Rejoicest thou in those born to exclude thee?
Boys when born speak somewhat like this to their parents: “Now then,
begin to think of removing hence, let us too play our parts on the
stage.” For the whole life of temptation in the human race is a stage
play; <span id="fr_5541"></span>[5542](#fn_5541.md) for it is said, “Every
man living is altogether vanity.” <span
id="fr_5542"></span>[5543](#fn_5542.md) Nevertheless, if we rejoice in
children who will succeed us; how much must we rejoice in children with
whom we shall remain, and in that Father for whom we are born, who will
not die, but that we may evermore live with Him? These are the good
things of Jerusalem: for they “are.” And how long shall I see the good
things of Jerusalem? “All thy life long.” If thy life be for ever, thou
wilt see the good things of Jerusalem for evermore.…

<span id="ii.CXXVIII-p20"></span>8. For, “if in this life only,” saith
the Apostle, “we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most
miserable.” <span id="fr_5543"></span>[5544](#fn_5543.md) For what reason
were the Martyrs condemned to beasts? What is that good? Can it be
declared? by what means, or what tongue can tell it? or what ears can
hear it? That indeed, “Neither ear hath heard, nor hath it entered into
man’s heart:” <span id="fr_5544"></span>[5545](#fn_5544.md) only let us
love, only let us grow in grace: ye see, then, that battles are not
wanting, and that we fight with our lusts. We fight outwardly with
unbelieving and disobedient men; we fight inwardly with carnal
suggestions and perturbations: we everywhere as yet fight.…What sort of
peace then is this? One from Jerusalem, for Jerusalem is interpreted, A
vision of Peace. Thus then “mayest thou see the good things that are of
Jerusalem,” and that, “all thy life long—and mayest thou see,” not only
thy children, but, “thy children’s children.” What meaneth, Thy
children? Thy works which thou here dost. Who are thy children’s
children? The fruits of thy works. Thou givest alms: these are thy
children: for the sake of thine alms thou receivest everlasting life,
these are thy children’s children. “Mayest thou see thy children’s
children;” and there shall be “peace upon Israel” ([Psa.
128.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa128.htm#006.md)<span
id="ii.CXXVIII-p22.2"></span>), the last words of the Psalm.…

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5532"></span>[609:5533](1080161.htm#fr_5532.md) <span
id="ii.CXXVIII-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXVIII-p2"></span> Lat. CXXVII. A sermon to the people on
the day of St. Felix the Martyr. \[I have transposed the first
paragraph.—C.\]

<span id="fn_5533"></span>[609:5534](1080161.htm#fr_5533.md) <span
id="ii.CXXVIII-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXVIII-p4"></span> He is said to have suffered martyrdom
at Thinissa, or Thimisa, not far from Hippo, on the 6th of
November.—*Ben*. (*Mart. Rom*. has Tuneti.)

<span id="fn_5534"></span>[609:5535](1080161.htm#fr_5534.md) <span
id="ii.CXXVIII-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXVIII-p7"></span> [Rom. xii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#012.md)<span id="ii.CXXVIII-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5535"></span>[609:5536](1080161.htm#fr_5535.md) <span
id="ii.CXXVIII-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXVIII-p8"></span> [Ps. cxxvi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#006.md)<span id="ii.CXXVIII-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5536"></span>[610:5537](1080161.htm#fr_5536.md) <span
id="ii.CXXVIII-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXVIII-p11"></span> [Matt. ix.
15](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#015.md)<span id="ii.CXXVIII-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5537"></span>[610:5538](1080161.htm#fr_5537.md) <span
id="ii.CXXVIII-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXVIII-p12"></span> [Matt. xii.
46](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#046.md)<span id="ii.CXXVIII-p12.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_5538"></span>[610:5539](1080161.htm#fr_5538.md) <span
id="ii.CXXVIII-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXVIII-p13"></span> [Matt. xii.
48-50](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#048.md)<span
id="ii.CXXVIII-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5539"></span>[610:5540](1080161.htm#fr_5539.md) <span
id="ii.CXXVIII-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXVIII-p15"></span> [Ps. cxxxviii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#003.md)<span id="ii.CXXVIII-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5540"></span>[610:5541](1080161.htm#fr_5540.md) <span
id="ii.CXXVIII-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXVIII-p17"></span> [Gen. i.
22](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#022.md)<span id="ii.CXXVIII-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5541"></span>[610:5542](1080161.htm#fr_5541.md) <span
id="ii.CXXVIII-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXVIII-p18"></span> \[A text illustrated by our great
English dramatist.—C.\]

<span id="fn_5542"></span>[610:5543](1080161.htm#fr_5542.md) <span
id="ii.CXXVIII-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXVIII-p19"></span> [Ps. xxxix.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#005.md)<span id="ii.CXXVIII-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5543"></span>[610:5544](1080161.htm#fr_5543.md) <span
id="ii.CXXVIII-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXVIII-p21"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
19](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#019.md)<span id="ii.CXXVIII-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5544"></span>[610:5545](1080161.htm#fr_5544.md) <span
id="ii.CXXVIII-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXVIII-p22"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#009.md)<span id="ii.CXXVIII-p22.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm CXXIX](1080162.md)
