[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080134)  [Next](1080136) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.CXIX.v"></span>

<span id="ii.CXIX.v-p1"></span> *<span class="c2"><span
id="ii.CXIX.v-p1.1"></span>He.</span>*

<span id="ii.CXIX.v-p2"></span>31. In this great Psalm there cometh next
in order that which, with the Lord’s help, we must consider and treat
of. “Set a law for me, O Lord, the way of Thy statutes, and I shall seek
it alway” ([Psa. 119.33](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#033)<span
id="ii.CXIX.v-p2.1"></span>).…

<span id="ii.CXIX.v-p3"></span>32. Why doth this man still pray for a
law to be laid down for him; which, if it had not been laid down for
him, he could not have run the way of God’s commandments in the breadth
of his heart? But since one speaketh who is growing in grace, and who
knoweth that it is God’s gift that he profiteth in grace; what else doth
he pray, when he prayeth that a law may be laid down for him, save that
he may profit more and more? As, if thou holdest a full cup, and givest
it to a thirsty man; he both exhausts it by drinking it, and prayeth for
it by still longing for it.…

<span id="ii.CXIX.v-p4"></span>33. But what meaneth, “Evermore”?…Doth
“evermore” mean as long as we live here, because we progress in grace so
long; but after this life, he who was in a good course of improvement
here, is made perfect there? Here the law of God is examined into, as
long as we progress in it, both by knowing it and by loving it: but
there its fulness abideth for our enjoyment, not for our examination.
Thus also is this spoken, “Seek His face evermore.”  <span
id="fr_5162"></span>[5163](#fn_5162) Where, evermore, save here? For we
shall not there also seek the face of God, when “we shall see face to
face.” <span id="fr_5163"></span>[5164](#fn_5163) Or if that which is
loved without a change of affection is rightly said to be sought after,
and our only object is, that it be not lost, we shall indeed evermore
seek the law of God, that is, the truth of God: for in this very Psalm
it is said, “And Thy law is the truth.” <span
id="fr_5164"></span>[5165](#fn_5164) It is now sought, that it may be
held fast; it will then be held fast that it may not be lost.…

<span id="ii.CXIX.v-p8"></span>34. “Give me understanding, and I shall
search Thy law, yea, I shall keep it with my whole heart” ([Psa.
119.34](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#034)<span
id="ii.CXIX.v-p8.1"></span>). For when each man hath searched the law,
and searched its deep things, in which its whole meaning doth consist;
he ought indeed to love God with all his heart, with all his soul, with
all his mind; and his neighbour as himself. “For on these two
commandments hang all the Law and the Prophets.”  <span
id="fr_5165"></span>[5166](#fn_5165) This he seemeth to have promised,
when he said, “Yea, I shall keep it with my whole heart.”

<span id="ii.CXIX.v-p10"></span>35. But since he hath no power to do
even this, save he be aided by Him who commandeth him to do what He
commandeth, “Make me,” he addeth, “to go in the path of Thy
commandments, for therein is my desire” ([Psa.
119.35](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#035)<span
id="ii.CXIX.v-p10.1"></span>). My desire is powerless, unless Thou
Thyself makest me to go where I desire. And this is surely the very
path, that is, the path of God’s commandments, which he had already said
that he had run, when his heart was enlarged by the Lord. And this he
calleth a “path,” because “the way is narrow which leadeth unto
life;” <span id="fr_5166"></span>[5167](#fn_5166) and since it is
narrow, we cannot run therein save with a heart enlarged.…

<span id="ii.CXIX.v-p12"></span>36. He next saith, “Incline mine heart
unto Thy testimonies, and not to covetousness” ([Psa.
119.36](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#036)<span
id="ii.CXIX.v-p12.1"></span>). This then he prayeth, that he may profit
in the will itself. <span id="fr_5167"></span>[5168](#fn_5167) …But the
Apostle saith, “Avarice is a root of all evils.” <span
id="fr_5168"></span>[5169](#fn_5168) But in the Greek, whence these
words have been rendered into our tongue, the word used by the Apostle
is not <span class="Greek"><span id="ii.CXIX.v-p14.2"></span>
πλεονεξία</span>, which occurs in this passage of the Psalms; but <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.CXIX.v-p14.3"></span>φιλαργυρία</span>, by
which is signified “love of money.” But the Apostle must be understood
to have meant genus by species when he used this word, that is, to have
meant avarice universally and generally by love of money, which is truly
the root of all evils. <span id="fr_5169"></span>[5170](#fn_5169) …If
therefore our heart be not inclined to covetousness, we fear God only
for God’s sake, so that He is the only reward of our serving Him. Let us
love Him in Himself, let us love Him in ourselves, Him in our neighbours
whom we love as ourselves, whether they have Him, or in order that they
may have Him.…

<span id="ii.CXIX.v-p16"></span>37. The next words in the Psalm which we
have undertaken to expound are, “O turn away mine eyes, lest they behold
vanity: and quicken Thou me in Thy way” ([Psa.
119.37](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#037)<span
id="ii.CXIX.v-p16.1"></span>). Vanity and truth are directly contrary to
one another. The desires of this world are vanity: but Christ, who
freeth us from the world, is truth. He is the way, too, wherein this man
wisheth to be quickened, for He is also the life: “I am the way, the
truth, and the life,” <span id="fr_5170"></span>[5171](#fn_5170) are His
own words.

<span id="ii.CXIX.v-p18"></span>38. …He prayeth that those eyes
wherewith we consider on what account we do what we do, may be turned
away that they behold not vanity; that is, that he may not look to
vanity, as his motive, when he doeth anything good. In this vanity the
first place is held by the love of men’s praise, on account of which
many great deeds have been wrought by those who are styled great in this
world, and who have been much praised in heathen states, seeking glory
not with God, but among men, and on account of this <span
id="page_566">p. 566</span> <span id="ii.CXIX.v-Page_566"></span>living
in appearance prudently, courageously, temperately, and righteously; and
when they have reached this they have reached their reward: vain men,
and vain reward. <span id="fr_5171"></span>[5172](#fn_5171) …Moreover,
if it be a vain thing to do good works for the sake of men’s praises,
how much more vain for the sake of getting money, or increasing it, or
retaining it, and any other temporal advantage, which cometh unto us
from without? Since “all things are vanity: what is man’s abundance,
with all his toil, wherein he laboureth under the sun?” <span
id="fr_5172"></span>[5173](#fn_5172) For our temporal welfare itself
finally we ought not to do our good works, but rather for the sake of
that everlasting welfare which we hope for, where we may enjoy an
unchangeable good, which we shall have from God, nay, what God Himself
is unto us. For if God’s Saints were to do good works for the sake of
this temporal welfare, never would the martyrs of Christ achieve a good
work of confession in the loss of this same welfare.…

<span id="ii.CXIX.v-p21"></span>39. “O stablish Thy word in Thy servant,
that I may fear Thee” ([Psa.
119.38](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#038)<span
id="ii.CXIX.v-p21.1"></span>). And what else is this than, Grant unto me
that I may do according to what Thou sayest? For the word of God is not
stablished in those who remove it in themselves by acting contrary to
it; but it is stablished in those in whom it is immoveable. God
therefore stablisheth His word, that they may fear Him, in those unto
whom He giveth the spirit of the fear of Him; not that fear of which the
Apostle saith, “Ye have not received the spirit of bondage again to
fear;” <span id="fr_5173"></span>[5174](#fn_5173) for “perfect love
casteth out” this “fear,” <span id="fr_5174"></span>[5175](#fn_5174) but
that fear which the Prophet calleth “the spirit of the fear of the
Lord;” <span id="fr_5175"></span>[5176](#fn_5175) that fear which “is
pure, and endureth for ever;” <span id="fr_5176"></span>[5177](#fn_5176)
that fear which feareth to offend Him whom it loveth.

<span id="ii.CXIX.v-p26"></span>40. “Take away my reproach which I have
suspected, for Thy judgments are sweet” ([Psa.
119.39](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#039)<span
id="ii.CXIX.v-p26.1"></span>). Who is he who suspected his own reproach,
and who doth not know his own reproach better than that of his
neighbour? For a man may rather suspect another’s than his own; since he
knoweth not that which he suspecteth; but in each one’s own reproach
there is not suspicion for him, but knowledge, wherein conscience
speaketh. What then mean the words, “the rebuke which I have suspected”?
The meaning of them must be derived from the former verse; since as long
as a man doth not turn away his eyes lest they behold vanity, he
suspecteth in others what is going on in himself; so that he believeth
another to worship God, or do good works, from the same motive as
himself. For men can see what we do, but with a view to what end we act,
is hidden.…

<span id="ii.CXIX.v-p27"></span>41. “Behold, I have coveted Thy
commandments: O quicken Thou me in Thy righteousness” ([Psa.
119.40](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#040)<span
id="ii.CXIX.v-p27.1"></span>). Behold, I have coveted to love Thee with
all my heart, and with all my soul, and with all my mind, and my
neighbour as myself, but, “O quicken Thou me” not in my own, but “in Thy
righteousness,” that is, fill me with that love which I have longed for.
Aid me that I may do that which Thou chargest me: Thyself give what Thou
dost command. “O quicken Thou me in Thy righteousness:” for in myself I
had that which would cause my death: but I find not save in Thee whence
I may live. Christ is Thy righteousness, “Who of God is made unto us
wisdom,” etc. <span id="fr_5177"></span>[5178](#fn_5177) And in Him I
find Thy commandments, which I have coveted, that in Thy righteousness,
that is, in Him, Thou mayest quicken me. For the Word Himself is God;
and “the Word was made flesh,” <span
id="fr_5178"></span>[5179](#fn_5178) that He Himself also might be my
neighbour.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5162"></span>[565:5163](1080135.htm#fr_5162) <span
id="ii.CXIX.v-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXIX.v-p5"></span> [Ps. cv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#004)<span id="ii.CXIX.v-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5163"></span>[565:5164](1080135.htm#fr_5163) <span
id="ii.CXIX.v-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXIX.v-p6"></span> [1 Cor. xiii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#012)<span id="ii.CXIX.v-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5164"></span>[565:5165](1080135.htm#fr_5164) <span
id="ii.CXIX.v-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXIX.v-p7"></span> [Ps. cxix.
142](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#142)<span id="ii.CXIX.v-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5165"></span>[565:5166](1080135.htm#fr_5165) <span
id="ii.CXIX.v-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXIX.v-p9"></span> [Matt. xxii.
37-40](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#037)<span
id="ii.CXIX.v-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5166"></span>[565:5167](1080135.htm#fr_5166) <span
id="ii.CXIX.v-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXIX.v-p11"></span> [Matt. vii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#014)<span id="ii.CXIX.v-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5167"></span>[565:5168](1080135.htm#fr_5167) <span
id="ii.CXIX.v-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXIX.v-p13"></span> \[He says: “He useth here a Greek
expression, from which covetousness generally may be understood, whereby
every man seeketh more than is enough: for the word <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.CXIX.v-p13.1"></span>πλ™ον</span> meaneth
*more*, and Ÿ<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.CXIX.v-p13.2"></span>ξις</span> signifieth *having*, being
derived from the verb to have. It is therefore termed <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.CXIX.v-p13.3"></span>πλεονεξια</span>, from
having too much: a word which the Latin translators in this passage have
variously rendered by emolument, utility, and avarice, which last is
best.”—C.\]

<span id="fn_5168"></span>[565:5169](1080135.htm#fr_5168) <span
id="ii.CXIX.v-p13.4"></span>

<span id="ii.CXIX.v-p14"></span> [1 Tim. vi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#010)<span id="ii.CXIX.v-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5169"></span>[565:5170](1080135.htm#fr_5169) <span
id="ii.CXIX.v-p14.4"></span>

<span id="ii.CXIX.v-p15"></span> [Gen. iii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#005)<span id="ii.CXIX.v-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5170"></span>[565:5171](1080135.htm#fr_5170) <span
id="ii.CXIX.v-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXIX.v-p17"></span> [John xiv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#006)<span id="ii.CXIX.v-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5171"></span>[566:5172](1080135.htm#fr_5171) <span
id="ii.CXIX.v-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXIX.v-p19"></span> [Matt. vi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#001)<span id="ii.CXIX.v-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5172"></span>[566:5173](1080135.htm#fr_5172) <span
id="ii.CXIX.v-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXIX.v-p20"></span> [Eccl.
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#003)<span id="ii.CXIX.v-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5173"></span>[566:5174](1080135.htm#fr_5173) <span
id="ii.CXIX.v-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXIX.v-p22"></span> [Rom. viii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#015)<span id="ii.CXIX.v-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5174"></span>[566:5175](1080135.htm#fr_5174) <span
id="ii.CXIX.v-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXIX.v-p23"></span> [1 John iv.
18](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#018)<span id="ii.CXIX.v-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5175"></span>[566:5176](1080135.htm#fr_5175) <span
id="ii.CXIX.v-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXIX.v-p24"></span> [Isa. xi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#002)<span id="ii.CXIX.v-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5176"></span>[566:5177](1080135.htm#fr_5176) <span
id="ii.CXIX.v-p24.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXIX.v-p25"></span> [Ps. xix.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#009)<span id="ii.CXIX.v-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5177"></span>[566:5178](1080135.htm#fr_5177) <span
id="ii.CXIX.v-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXIX.v-p28"></span> [1 Cor.
1:30](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#030),
[31](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#031)<span id="ii.CXIX.v-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5178"></span>[566:5179](1080135.htm#fr_5178) <span
id="ii.CXIX.v-p28.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXIX.v-p29"></span> [John i.
14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014)<span id="ii.CXIX.v-p29.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Vav.](1080136)
