[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080175)  [Next](1080177) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.CXLIII"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLIII-p1"></span> <span id="ii.CXLIII-p1.1"></span><span
class="c20"><span id="ii.CXLIII-p1.2"></span>Psalm CXLIII. <span
id="fr_5810"></span>[5811](#fn_5810) </span>

<span id="ii.CXLIII-p3"></span>1. …The title of the Psalm is, “To David
himself, when his son was pursuing him.” We know from the Books of
Kings <span id="fr_5811"></span>[5812](#fn_5811) that this happened:…but
we must recognise here another David, truly “strong in hand,” which is
the explanation of David, even our Lord Jesus Christ. For all those
events of past time were figures of things to come. Let us seek then in
this Psalm our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, announcing Himself
beforehand in His prophecy, and foretelling what should happen at this
time by things which were done long ago. For He Himself foretold Himself
in the Prophets: for He is the Word of God. Nor did they say ought of
this kind, save when filled with the Word of God. They announced then
Christ, being filled with Christ, <span
id="fr_5812"></span>[5813](#fn_5812) they went before Him about to come,
and He deserted not them going before.…

<span id="ii.CXLIII-p6"></span>2. Let then our Lord speak; let Christ
with us, whole Christ, speak. “Lord, hear my prayer, receive with Thine
ears my entreaty” ([Psa. 143.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa143.htm#001)<span
id="ii.CXLIII-p6.1"></span>). “Hear” and “receive with ears” are the
same thing. It is repetition, it is confirmation. “In Thy truth hear me,
in Thy righteousness.” Take it not without emphasis when it is said, “in
Thy righteousness.” For it is a commendation of grace, that none of us
think his righteousness his own. For this is the righteousness of God,
which God hath given thee to possess. For what saith the Apostle of
them, who would boast of their own righteousness? Speaking of the Jews,
he saith, “they have a zeal of God, but not according to
knowledge.” <span id="fr_5813"></span>[5814](#fn_5813) …Thou art
perverse, because thou imputest what thou hast done ill to God, what
well to thyself: thou wilt be right, when thou imputest what thou hast
done ill to thyself, what well to God.…Behold, “in Thy righteousness
hear me.” For when I look upon myself, nought else do I find mine own,
save sin.

<span id="ii.CXLIII-p8"></span>3. “And enter not into judgment with Thy
servant” ([Psa. 143.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa143.htm#002)<span
id="ii.CXLIII-p8.1"></span>). Who are willing to enter into judgment
with Him, save they who, “being <span id="page_652">p. 652</span> <span
id="ii.CXLIII-Page_652"></span>ignorant of the righteousness of God, go
about to establish their own?” “Wherefore have we fasted, and Thou hast
not seen; wherefore have we afflicted our souls, and Thou takest no
knowledge?” <span id="fr_5814"></span>[5815](#fn_5814) As though they
would say, “We have done what Thou hast commanded, wherefore dost Thou
not render to us what Thou hast promised?” God answereth thee: I will
give to thee to receive what I have promised: I have given thee that
thou shouldest do that whereby thou mayest receive. Finally, to such
proud ones the Prophet speaketh; “Wherefore will ye plead with Me? ye
have all transgressed against Me, saith the Lord.” <span
id="fr_5815"></span>[5816](#fn_5815) Why will ye enter into judgment
with Me, and recount your own righteousnesses?…“For before Thee every
one living shall not be justified.” “Every one living;” living, that is,
here, living in the flesh, living in expectation of death; born a man;
deriving his life of man; sprung from Adam, a living Adam; every one
thus living may perhaps be justified before himself, but not before
Thee. How before himself? By pleasing himself, displeasing Thee. Enter
not then into judgment with me, O Lord my God. How straight soever I
seem to myself, Thou bringest forth a standard from Thy store-house,
Thou fittest me to it, and I am found crooked. Well is it said, “with
Thy servant.” It is unworthy of Thee to enter into judgment with Thy
servant, or even with Thy friend. <span
id="fr_5816"></span>[5817](#fn_5816) …What of the Apostles
themselves?…That ye may perceive it at once, they learnt to pray what we
pray: to them was given the pattern of prayer by the heavenly
Counsellor. “After this manner,” saith He, “pray ye.” <span
id="fr_5817"></span>[5818](#fn_5817) And having set down certain things
first, He laid down this too to be said by the leaders of the sheep, the
chief members of the Shepherd and Gatherer <span
id="fr_5818"></span>[5819](#fn_5818) of the one flock; even they learnt
to say, “Forgive us our debts.” <span
id="fr_5819"></span>[5820](#fn_5819) They said not, “Thanks be to Thee,
who hast forgiven us our debts, as we too forgive our debtors,” but,
“Forgive, as we forgive.” But surely the faithful prayed then, surely
the Apostles prayed then, for this Lord’s Prayer was given rather to the
faithful. If those debts only were meant which are forgiven by Baptism,
it would befit catechumens rather to say, “Forgive us our debts.” Let
the Apostles then say, yea let them say, “Forgive us our debts.” And
when it is said to them, “Wherefore say ye this? what are your debts?”
let them answer, “for in Thy sight every one living shall not be
justified.”

<span id="ii.CXLIII-p15"></span>4. “For the enemy hath persecuted my
soul: he hath humbled my life on the earth” ([Psa.
143.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa143.htm#003)<span
id="ii.CXLIII-p15.1"></span>). Here we speak, here our Head speaketh for
us. Manifestly both the devil persecuted the Soul of Christ and Judas
the Soul of his Master: and now too the same devil remaineth to
persecute the Body of Christ, and one Judas succeedeth another. There
lacketh not then of whom the Body too may say, “For the enemy hath
persecuted my soul.” For what doth each one who persecuteth us endeavour
save to make us abandon our heavenly hope, and savour of the earth,
yield to our persecutor, and love earthly things? “They have laid me in
dark places, as the dead of the world.” This ye hear more readily from
the Head; this ye perceive more readily in the Head. For He died indeed
for us, yet was He not one of the “dead of the world.” For who are the
“dead of the world”? And how was not He one of the “dead of the world”?
“The dead of the world” are those who have died of their own desert,
receiving the reward of iniquity, deriving death from the sin
transmissed to them; according as it is said, “For I was conceived in
iniquity.” <span id="fr_5820"></span>[5821](#fn_5820) …In dying, saith
He, I do the will of My Father, but I am not deserving of death. Nought
have I done wherefore I should die, yet is it Mine own doing that I die,
that by the death of an innocent One, they may be freed who had
wherefore they should die. “They set me in places,” as though in Hades,
as though in the tomb, as though in His very Passion, “as the dead of
the world.” <span id="fr_5821"></span>[5822](#fn_5821)

<span id="ii.CXLIII-p18"></span>5. “And My Spirit within me,” saith He,
“suffered weariness” ([Psa. 143.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa143.htm#004)<span
id="ii.CXLIII-p18.1"></span>). Remember, “My soul is exceeding
sorrowful, even unto death.” <span id="fr_5822"></span>[5823](#fn_5822)
Here we see one voice. Do we not see plainly the transition from the
Head to the members, from the members to the Head?…

<span id="ii.CXLIII-p20"></span>6. But we too were there. He goes to the
members. “I have called to mind the days of old” ([Psa.
143.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa143.htm#005)<span
id="ii.CXLIII-p20.1"></span>). Did He “call to mind the days of old,” by
whom every day was made? No, but the body speaketh, each one who has
been justified by His grace, who dwelleth in Him in love and devout
humility, speaketh and saith, “I have meditated upon all Thy works:”
plainly because Thou hast made all things good, and nothing would have
stood fast, which was not established by Thee. Thy creation is made a
spectacle unto me: I have sought in the work the Artificer, in all that
is made the Maker. Wherefore this, to what purpose this, save that he
might understand, that whatever there was of good in himself was made by
Him.…Look back then upon the Framer of thy life, the Author of thy
substance, of thy righteousness, and of thy salvation: “meditate upon
the works of His hands,” for the righteousness too which is in thee,
thou wilt find to pertain to His hand. Hear the Apostle teaching thee
this, “not of works,” he saith, “lest any should boast.” Have <span
id="page_653">p. 653</span> <span id="ii.CXLIII-Page_653"></span>we no
good works? Plainly we have: but see what follows; “for we are His
workmanship,” <span id="fr_5823"></span>[5824](#fn_5823) saith he. “We
are His workmanship:” perhaps in thus speaking of workmanship, he meant
to mention the nature whereby we are men? Evidently not: he was speaking
of works. But let us not make conjectures; let the text go on, “for we
are His workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works.” Think not
then that thou thyself doest anything, save in so far as thou art
evil.…“Work out your own salvation,” saith the Apostle, “with fear and
trembling.”  <span id="fr_5824"></span>[5825](#fn_5824) If we do work
out our own salvation, wherefore with fear, wherefore with trembling,
when what we work is in our own power? Hear wherefore with fear and
trembling: “for it is God that worketh in you both to will and to do, of
His good pleasure.” Therefore “with fear and trembling,” that it may
delight our Maker to work in the lowly valley.…

<span id="ii.CXLIII-p23"></span>7. “I stretched forth,” saith he, “my
hands to Thee: my soul is as a land without water to Thee” ([Psa.
143.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa143.htm#006)<span
id="ii.CXLIII-p23.1"></span>). Rain upon me, saith he, to bring forth
from me good fruit. “For the Lord shall give sweetness, that our land
may give her fruit.” <span id="fr_5825"></span>[5826](#fn_5825) “I have
stretched forth my hands to Thee; my soul is as a land without water,”
not to me, but “to Thee.” I can thirst for Thee, I cannot water myself.

<span id="ii.CXLIII-p25"></span>8. “Speedily hear me, Lord” ([Psa.
143.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa143.htm#007)<span
id="ii.CXLIII-p25.1"></span>). For what need of delay to inflame my
thirst, when already I thirst so eagerly? Thou didst delay the rain,
that I might drink and imbibe, not reject, Thy inflowing. If then Thou
didst for this cause delay, now give; for “my spirit hath failed.” Let
Thy Spirit fill me. This is the reason why Thou shouldest speedily hear
me. I am now become “poor in spirit,” make Thou me “blessed in the
kingdom of heaven.” <span id="fr_5826"></span>[5827](#fn_5826) For he in
whom his own spirit liveth, is proud, is puffed up with his own spirit
against God.…

<span id="ii.CXLIII-p27"></span>9. “Turn not Thou away Thy Face from
me.” Thou didst turn it away from me when proud. For once I was full,
and in my fulness I was puffed up. Once “in my fulness I said, I shall
never be moved.” “I said in my fulness, I shall not be moved,” knowing
not Thy Righteousness, and establishing mine own; but “Thou, Lord, in
Thy Will hast afforded strength to my beauty.” “I said in my fulness, I
shall not be moved,” but from Thee came whatever fulness I had. And to
prove to me that it was from Thee, “Thou didst turn away Thy Face from
me, and I was troubled.” <span id="fr_5827"></span>[5828](#fn_5827)
After this trouble, where into I was cast, because Thou didst turn away
Thy Face, after the weariness of my spirit, after my heart was troubled
within me, because Thou didst turn away Thy Face, then became I “like a
land without water to Thee: turn not Thou away Thy Face.” Thou turnedst
it away from me when proud; give it back to me now I am humble. Because,
if Thou turn it away, “I shall be like to them that go down into the
pit.” What is, “that go down into the pit”? When the sinner has come
into the depth of sins, he will show contempt. They “go down into the
pit,” who lose even confession; against which is said, “Let not the pit
close her mouth over me.” <span id="fr_5828"></span>[5829](#fn_5828)
This depth Scripture calleth mostly “a pit,” into which depth when a
sinner hath come, “he showeth contempt.” What is, “he showeth contempt”?
He no longer believeth in Providence, or if he do believe, he thinketh
that he has no longer aught to do with it.…

<span id="ii.CXLIII-p30"></span>10. “Make me to hear in the morning Thy
mercy, for in Thee have I hoped” ([Psa.
143.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa143.htm#008)<span
id="ii.CXLIII-p30.1"></span>). Behold, I am in the night, yet “in Thee
have I hoped,” until the iniquity of the night pass away. “For we have,”
as Peter saith, “a more sure word of prophecy, whereunto ye do well that
ye take heed, as unto a light that shineth in a dark place, until the
day dawn, and the daystar arise in your hearts.” “Morning” then he
calleth the time after the end of the world, when we shall see what in
this world we believe. But what here, until the morning come? For it is
not enough to hope for the morning; we must do somewhat. Why do
somewhat? God is to be sought with the hands in the night. What is,
“with the hands”? By good works. Since then we must thus hope for the
morning, and bear this night, and persevere in this patience until the
day dawn, what meanwhile must we do here? lest perchance thou think that
thou wilt do aught of thyself, whereby thou mayest earn to be brought to
the morning. “Make known to me, O Lord, the way wherein I must walk.”
Therefore did He kindle the lamp of prophecy, therefore did He send the
Lord in the vessel, <span id="fr_5829"></span>[5830](#fn_5829) as it
were, of the flesh, who should even say, “My strength is dried up like a
potsherd.” <span id="fr_5830"></span>[5831](#fn_5830) Walk by prophecy,
walk by the lamp of future things predicted, walk by the word of God.…

<span id="ii.CXLIII-p33"></span>11. “Deliver me from mine enemies, O
Lord, for unto Thee have I fled for refuge” ([Psa.
143.9](../../../bib/kjv/psa143.htm#009)<span
id="ii.CXLIII-p33.1"></span>). I who once fled from Thee, now flee to
Thee. For Adam fled from the Face of God, and hid himself among the
trees of Paradise, so that of him was said in the Book of Job, “As a
servant that fleeth from his Lord, and findeth a shadow.” <span
id="fr_5831"></span>[5832](#fn_5831) He fled from the Face of his Lord,
and found a shadow. Woe to him, if he continue in the shade, lest it be
said afterward, “All things are passed away like a shadow.” <span
id="fr_5832"></span>[5833](#fn_5832) The rulers of <span
id="page_654">p. 654</span> <span id="ii.CXLIII-Page_654"></span>this
world, of this darkness, the rulers of the wicked; against these ye
wrestle. Great is your conflict, not to see your enemies, and yet to
conquer. Against the rulers of this world, of this darkness, the devil,
that is, and his angels; not the rulers of that world, whereof is said,
“the world was made by Him,” but that world whereof is said, “the world
knew Him not.” <span id="fr_5833"></span>[5834](#fn_5833) “For unto Thee
have I fled for refuge.”…Whither should I flee? “Whither shall I go from
Thy Spirit?” <span id="fr_5834"></span>[5835](#fn_5834)

<span id="ii.CXLIII-p38"></span>12. “Teach me to do Thy will, for Thou
art my God” ([Psa. 143.10](../../../bib/kjv/psa143.htm#010)<span
id="ii.CXLIII-p38.1"></span>). Glorious confession! glorious rule! “For
Thou,” saith he, “art my God.” To another will I hasten to be re-made,
if by another I was made. Thou art my all, “for Thou art my God.” Shall
I seek a father to get an inheritance? “Thou art my God,” not only the
Giver of mine inheritance, but mine Inheritance itself. “The Lord is the
portion of mine inheritance.” <span id="fr_5835"></span>[5836](#fn_5835)
Shall I seek a patron, to obtain redemption? “Thou art my God.” Lastly,
having been created, do I desire to be re-created? “Thou art my God,” my
Creator, who hast created me by Thy Word, and re-created me by Thy Word.
“Teach Thou me:” for it cannot be that Thou art my God, and yet I am to
be mine own master. See how grace is commended to us. This hold fast,
this drink in, this let none drive out of your hearts, lest ye have “a
zeal, of God, but not according to knowledge.” <span
id="fr_5836"></span>[5837](#fn_5836) Say then this: “Thy good Spirit,”
not my bad one, “Thy good Spirit shall lead me into the right land.” For
my bad spirit hath led me into a crooked land. And what have I deserved?
What can be reckoned as my good works without Thy aid, through which I
might obtain and be worthy to be led by Thy Spirit into the right land?

<span id="ii.CXLIII-p41"></span>13. Listen, then, with all your power,
to the commendation of Grace, whereby ye are saved without price. “For
Thy Name’s sake, O Lord, Thou shalt quicken me in Thy righteousness”
([Psa. 143.11](../../../bib/kjv/psa143.htm#011)<span
id="ii.CXLIII-p41.1"></span>); not in mine own: not because I have
deserved, but because Thou hast mercy. For were I to show mine own
desert, nought should I deserve of Thee, save punishment. Thou hast
pruned off from me mine own merits; Thou hast grafted in Thine own
gifts. “Thou shalt bring forth my soul out of tribulation.” “And in thy
mercy shalt bring mine enemies to destruction: and thou shalt destroy
all them that afflict my soul; for I am Thy servant” ([Psa.
143.12](../../../bib/kjv/psa143.htm#012)<span
id="ii.CXLIII-p41.2"></span>).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5810"></span>[651:5811](1080176.htm#fr_5810) <span
id="ii.CXLIII-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLIII-p2"></span> Lat. CXLII. A sermon to the people.

<span id="fn_5811"></span>[651:5812](1080176.htm#fr_5811) <span
id="ii.CXLIII-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLIII-p4"></span> [2 Sam.
xv](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#000)<span id="ii.CXLIII-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5812"></span>[651:5813](1080176.htm#fr_5812) <span
id="ii.CXLIII-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLIII-p5"></span> \[[1 Pet.
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#012)<span
id="ii.CXLIII-p5.1"></span>.—C.\]

<span id="fn_5813"></span>[651:5814](1080176.htm#fr_5813) <span
id="ii.CXLIII-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLIII-p7"></span> [Rom. x.
2](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#002)<span id="ii.CXLIII-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5814"></span>[652:5815](1080176.htm#fr_5814) <span
id="ii.CXLIII-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLIII-p9"></span> [Isa. lviii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#003)<span id="ii.CXLIII-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5815"></span>[652:5816](1080176.htm#fr_5815) <span
id="ii.CXLIII-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLIII-p10"></span> [Jer. ii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#029)<span id="ii.CXLIII-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5816"></span>[652:5817](1080176.htm#fr_5816) <span
id="ii.CXLIII-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLIII-p11"></span> [Matt. v.
40](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#040)<span id="ii.CXLIII-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5817"></span>[652:5818](1080176.htm#fr_5817) <span
id="ii.CXLIII-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLIII-p12"></span> [Matt. vi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#009)<span id="ii.CXLIII-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5818"></span>[652:5819](1080176.htm#fr_5818) <span
id="ii.CXLIII-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLIII-p13"></span> *Congregatoris*; <span
class="c21"><span id="ii.CXLIII-p13.1"></span> mss</span>.
*Congregatores*, The gatherers.

<span id="fn_5819"></span>[652:5820](1080176.htm#fr_5819) <span
id="ii.CXLIII-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLIII-p14"></span> [Matt. vi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#012)<span id="ii.CXLIII-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5820"></span>[652:5821](1080176.htm#fr_5820) <span
id="ii.CXLIII-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLIII-p16"></span> [Ps. li.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#005)<span id="ii.CXLIII-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5821"></span>[652:5822](1080176.htm#fr_5821) <span
id="ii.CXLIII-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLIII-p17"></span> [Ps.
38:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#005)<span id="ii.CXLIII-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5822"></span>[652:5823](1080176.htm#fr_5822) <span
id="ii.CXLIII-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLIII-p19"></span> [Matt. xxvi.
38](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#038)<span id="ii.CXLIII-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5823"></span>[653:5824](1080176.htm#fr_5823) <span
id="ii.CXLIII-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLIII-p21"></span> [Eph.
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#010)<span id="ii.CXLIII-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5824"></span>[653:5825](1080176.htm#fr_5824) <span
id="ii.CXLIII-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLIII-p22"></span> [Phil.
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#013)<span id="ii.CXLIII-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5825"></span>[653:5826](1080176.htm#fr_5825) <span
id="ii.CXLIII-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLIII-p24"></span> [Ps. lxxxv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/psa085.htm#012)<span id="ii.CXLIII-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5826"></span>[653:5827](1080176.htm#fr_5826) <span
id="ii.CXLIII-p25.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLIII-p26"></span> [Matt. v.
3](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#003)<span id="ii.CXLIII-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5827"></span>[653:5828](1080176.htm#fr_5827) <span
id="ii.CXLIII-p27.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLIII-p28"></span> [Ps.
30:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#007)<span id="ii.CXLIII-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5828"></span>[653:5829](1080176.htm#fr_5828) <span
id="ii.CXLIII-p28.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLIII-p29"></span> [Ps. lxix.
15](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#015)<span id="ii.CXLIII-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5829"></span>[653:5830](1080176.htm#fr_5829) <span
id="ii.CXLIII-p30.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLIII-p31"></span> *Testâ*.

<span id="fn_5830"></span>[653:5831](1080176.htm#fr_5830) <span
id="ii.CXLIII-p31.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLIII-p32"></span> [Ps. xxii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#015)<span id="ii.CXLIII-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5831"></span>[653:5832](1080176.htm#fr_5831) <span
id="ii.CXLIII-p33.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLIII-p34"></span> [Job vii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#002)<span id="ii.CXLIII-p34.1"></span>,
LXX.

<span id="fn_5832"></span>[653:5833](1080176.htm#fr_5832) <span
id="ii.CXLIII-p34.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLIII-p35"></span> [Wisd. v.
9](../../../bib/apo/wis005.htm#009)<span id="ii.CXLIII-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5833"></span>[654:5834](1080176.htm#fr_5833) <span
id="ii.CXLIII-p35.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLIII-p36"></span> [John i.
10](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#010)<span id="ii.CXLIII-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5834"></span>[654:5835](1080176.htm#fr_5834) <span
id="ii.CXLIII-p36.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLIII-p37"></span> [Ps. cxxxix.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#007)<span id="ii.CXLIII-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5835"></span>[654:5836](1080176.htm#fr_5835) <span
id="ii.CXLIII-p38.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLIII-p39"></span> [Ps. xvi.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#005)<span id="ii.CXLIII-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5836"></span>[654:5837](1080176.htm#fr_5836) <span
id="ii.CXLIII-p39.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXLIII-p40"></span> [Rom. x.
2](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#002)<span id="ii.CXLIII-p40.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm CXLIV](1080177)
