[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080120)  [Next](1080122) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.CX"></span>

<span id="ii.CX-p1"></span> <span id="ii.CX-p1.1"></span><span
class="c20"><span id="ii.CX-p1.2"></span>Psalm CX. <span
id="fr_4954"></span>[4955](#fn_4954) </span>

<span id="ii.CX-p3"></span>1. …This Psalm is one of those promises,
surely and openly prophesying our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ; so that
we are utterly unable to doubt that Christ is announced in this Psalm,
since we are now Christians, and believe the Gospel. For when our Lord
and Saviour Jesus Christ asked of the Jews, whose Son they alleged
Christ to be, and they had replied, “the Son of David;” He at once
replied to their answer, “How then doth David in spirit call Him Lord,
saying, The Lord said unto My Lord?” etc. “If then,” He asked, “David in
the spirit call Him Lord, how is He his son?” <span
id="fr_4955"></span>[4956](#fn_4955) With this verse this Psalm
beginneth.

<span id="ii.CX-p5"></span>2. “The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit Thou on
My right hand, until I make Thine enemies Thy footstool” ([Psa.
110.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#001)<span id="ii.CX-p5.1"></span>).
We ought, therefore, thoroughly to consider this question proposed to
the Jews by the Lord, in the very commencement of the Psalm. For if what
the .Jews answered be asked of us, whether we confess or deny it; God
forbid that we should deny it. If it be said to us, Is Christ the Son of
David, or not? if we reply, No, we contradict the Gospel for the Gospel
of St. Matthew thus beginneth, “The book of the generation of Jesus
Christ, the Son of David.” <span id="fr_4956"></span>[4957](#fn_4956)
The Evangelist declareth, that he is writing the book of the generation
of Jesus Christ, the Son of David. The Jews, then, when questioned by
Christ, whose Son they believed Christ to be, rightly answered, the Son
of David. The Gospel agreeth with their answer. Not only the suspicion
of the Jews, but the faith of Christians, doth declare this.…“If then
David in the spirit called Him Lord, how is He his son?” The Jews were
silent at this question: they found no further reply: yet they did not
seek Him as the Lord, for they did not acknowledge Him to be Himself
that Son of David. But let us, brethren, both believe and declare: for,
“with the heart we believe unto righteousness: but with the mouth
confession is made unto salvation;” <span
id="fr_4957"></span>[4958](#fn_4957) let us believe, I say, and let us
declare both the Son of David, and the Lord of David. Let us not be
ashamed of the Son of David, lest we find the Lord of David angry with
us.

<span id="ii.CX-p8"></span>3. …We know that Christ sitteth at the right
hand of the Father, since His resurrection from the dead, and ascent
into heaven. It is already done: we saw not it, but we have believed it:
we have read it in the Scripture, have heard it preached, and hold it by
faith. So that by the very circumstance that Christ was David’s Son, He
became His Lord also. For That which was born of the seed of David was
so honoured, that It was also the Lord of David. Thou wonderest at this,
as if the same did not happen in human affairs. For if it should happen,
that the son of any private person be made a king, will he not be his
father’s lord? What is yet more wonderful may happen, not only that the
son of a private person, by being made a king, may <span
id="page_542">p. 542</span> <span id="ii.CX-Page_542"></span>become his
father’s lord; but that the son of a layman, by being made a Bishop, may
become his father’s father. So that in this very circumstance, that
Christ took upon Him the flesh, that He died in the flesh, that He rose
again in the same flesh, that in the same He ascended into Heaven, and
sitteth on the right hand of His Father, in this same flesh so honoured,
so brightened, so changed into a heavenly garb, He is both David’s Son,
and David’s Lord.…

<span id="ii.CX-p9"></span>4. Christ, therefore, sitteth at the right
hand of God, the Son is on the right hand of the Father, hidden from us.
Let us believe. Two things are here said: that God said, “Sit Thou on My
right hand;” and added, “until I make Thy enemies Thy footstool;” that
is, beneath Thy feet. Thou dost not see Christ sitting at the right hand
of the Father: yet thou canst see this, how His enemies are made His
footstool. While the latter is fulfilled openly, believe the former to
be fulfilled secretly. What enemies are made His footstool? Those to
whom imagining vain things it is said, “Why do the heathen so furiously
rage together: and why do the people imagine a vain thing?” etc. <span
id="fr_4958"></span>[4959](#fn_4958) …He therefore sitteth at the right
hand of God, till His enemies be placed beneath His feet. This is going
on, this is taking place: although it is accomplished by degrees, it is
going on without end. For though the heathen rage, will they, taking
counsel together against Christ, prevent the fulfilment of these words:
“I will give thee the heathen for thine inheritance, and the utmost
parts of the earth for thy possession”?…“Their memorial is perished with
a cry;” but, “The Lord shall endure for ever:” <span
id="fr_4959"></span>[4960](#fn_4959) as another Psalm, but not another
Spirit, saith.

<span id="ii.CX-p12"></span>5. And what followeth? “The Lord shall send
the rod of Thy power out of Sion” ([Psa.
110.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#002)<span id="ii.CX-p12.1"></span>).
It appeareth, brethren, it most clearly appeareth, that the Prophet is
not speaking of that kingdom of Christ, in which He reigneth for ever
with His Father, Ruler of the things which are made through Him: for
when doth not God the Word reign, who is in the beginning with
God? <span id="fr_4960"></span>[4961](#fn_4960) For it is said, “Now
unto the King eternal, immortal, invisible, the only wise God, be honour
and glory for ever and ever.” <span id="fr_4961"></span>[4962](#fn_4961)
To what eternal King? To one invisible, incorruptible. For in this, that
Christ is with the Father, invisible and incorruptible, because He is
His Word, and His Power, and His Wisdom, and God with God, through whom
all things were made; He is “King eternal;” but, nevertheless, that
reign of temporal government, by which, through the mediation of His
flesh, He called us into eternity, beginneth with Christians; but of His
reign there shall be no end. His enemies therefore are made His
footstool, while He is sitting on the right hand of His Father, as it is
written; this is now going on, this will go on unto the end.…

<span id="ii.CX-p15"></span>6. When therefore He hath sent the rod of
His power out of Sion: what shall happen? “Be Thou ruler, even in the
midst among Thine enemies.” First, “Be Thou ruler in the midst of Thine
enemies:” in the midst of the raging heathen. For shall He rule “in the
midst of His enemies” at a later season, when the Saints have received
their reward, and the ungodly their condemnation? And what wonder if He
shall then rule, when the righteous reign with Him for ever, and the
ungodly burn with eternal punishments? What wonder, if He shall then?
Now “in the midst of Thine enemies,” now in this transition of ages, in
this propagation and succession of human mortality, now while the
torrent of time is gliding by, unto this is the rod of Thy power sent
out of Sion, “that Thou mayest be Ruler in the midst of Thine enemies.”
Rule Thou, rule among Pagans, Jews, heretics, false brethren. Rule Thou,
rule, O Son of David, Lord of David, rule in the midst of Pagans, Jews,
heretics, false brethren. “Be Thou Ruler in the midst of Thine enemies.”
We understand not this verse aright, if we do not see that it is already
going on.…

<span id="ii.CX-p16"></span>7. “With Thee the beginning on the day of
Thy power” ([Psa. 110.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#003)<span
id="ii.CX-p16.1"></span>). What is this day of His power, when is there
beginning with Him, or what beginning, or in what sense is there
beginning with Him, since He is the Beginning?…

<span id="ii.CX-p17"></span>8. What meaneth, “With Thee is the
beginning”? Suppose anything you please as the beginning. Of Christ
Himself, it would rather have been said, Thou art the Beginning, than,
With Thee is the beginning. For He answered to those who asked Him, “Who
art Thou?” and said, “Even the same that I said unto you, the
Beginning;” <span id="fr_4962"></span>[4963](#fn_4962) since His Father
also is the Beginning, of whom is the only-begotten Son, in which
Beginning was the Word, for the Word was with God. What then, if both
the Father and the Son are the beginning, are there two beginnings? God
forbid! For as the Father is God, and the Son is God, but the Father and
the Son are not two Gods, but one God: so is the Father Beginning and
the Son Beginning, but the Father and the Son are not two, but one
Beginning. “With Thee is the beginning.” Then it shall appear in what
sense the beginning is with Thee. Not that the beginning is not with
Thee here also. For hast Thou not also said, “Behold, ye shall be
scattered, every man to his own, and shall leave Me alone; but I am
<span id="page_543">p. 543</span> <span id="ii.CX-Page_543"></span>not
alone, because the Father is with Me”? <span
id="fr_4963"></span>[4964](#fn_4963) Here therefore also, the beginning
is with Thee. For Thou hast said elsewhere also, “But the Father that
dwelleth in Me, He doeth His works.” <span
id="fr_4964"></span>[4965](#fn_4964) “With Thee is the beginning:” nor
was the Father ever separated from Thee. But when the Beginning shall
appear to be with Thee, then shall it be manifest unto all who are made
like Thee; since they shall see Thee as Thou art; <span
id="fr_4965"></span>[4966](#fn_4965) for Philip saw Thee here, and
sought the Father. <span id="fr_4966"></span>[4967](#fn_4966) Then
therefore shall be seen what now is believed: then shall “the beginning
be with Thee” in the sight of the righteous, in the sight of saints; the
ungodly being removed, that they may not see the brightness of the
Lord.…

<span id="ii.CX-p23"></span>9. Explain of what power thou speakest.
Because here also, as is said, His power is mentioned, when the rod of
His power is sent forth out of Sion, that He may be Ruler in the midst
of His enemies. Of what power speakest thou, “In the splendour of the
saints”? “In the splendour,” he saith, “of the saints.” He speaketh of
that power when the saints shall be in splendour; not when still
carrying about their earthly flesh, and groaning in a mortal and
corruptible body.…

<span id="ii.CX-p24"></span>10. But this is put off, this will be
granted afterwards: what is there now? “From the womb I have begotten
Thee, before the morning star.” What is here? If God hath a Son, hath He
also a womb? Like fleshly bodies, He hath not; for He hath not a bosom
either; yet it is said, “He who is in the bosom of the Father, hath
declared Him.” <span id="fr_4967"></span>[4968](#fn_4967) But that which
is the womb, is the bosom also: both bosom and womb are put for a secret
place. What meaneth, “from the womb”? From what is secret, from what is
hidden; from Myself, from My substance; this is the meaning of “from the
womb;” for, “Who shall declare His generation?” <span
id="fr_4968"></span>[4969](#fn_4968) Let us then understand the Father
saying unto the Son, “From My womb before the morning star have I
brought Thee forth.” What then meaneth, “before the morning star”? The
morning star is put for the stars, as if the Scripture signified the
whole from a part, and from one conspicuous star all the stars. But how
were those stars created? “That they may be for signs, and for seasons,
and for days, and years.” <span id="fr_4969"></span>[4970](#fn_4969)
…This expression also, “before the morning star,” is used both
figuratively and literally, and was thus fulfilled. For the Lord was
born at night from the womb of the Virgin Mary; the testimony of the
shepherds doth assert this, who were “keeping watch over their
flock.” <span id="fr_4970"></span>[4971](#fn_4970) *So David:* O Thou,
my Lord, who sittest at the right hand of my Lord, whence art Thou my
Son, except because, “From the womb before the morning star I have
begotten Thee”?

<span id="ii.CX-p29"></span>11. And unto what art Thou born? “The Lord
hath sworn, and will not repent: Thou art a Priest for ever after the
order of Melchizedec” ([Psa.
110.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#004)<span id="ii.CX-p29.1"></span>).
For unto this wast Thou born from the womb before the morning star, that
Thou mightest be a Priest for ever after the order of Melchizedec. For
in that character in which He was born of the Father, God with God,
coeternal with Him who begot Him, He is not a Priest; but He is a Priest
on account of the flesh which He assumed, on account of the victim which
He was to offer for us received from us. “The Lord,” then, “hath sworn.”
What then meaneth, the Lord hath sworn? Doth the Lord, who forbiddeth
men to swear, <span id="fr_4971"></span>[4972](#fn_4971) Himself swear?
Or doth He possibly forbid man to swear chiefly on this account, that he
may not fall into perjury, and for this reason the Lord may swear, since
He cannot be forsworn. For man, who, through a habit of swearing, may
slip into perjury, is rightly forbidden to swear: for he will be farther
from perjury in proportion as he is far from swearing. For the man who
sweareth, may swear truly or falsely: but he who sweareth not, cannot
swear falsely; for he sweareth not at all. Why then should not the Lord
swear, since the Lord’s oath is the seal of the promise? Let Him swear
by all means. What then dost thou, when thou swearest? Thou callest God
to witness: this is to swear, to call God to witness; and for this
reason there must be anxiety, that thou mayest not call God to witness
anything false. If therefore thou by an oath dost call God to witness,
why then should not God also call Himself to witness with an oath? “I
live, saith the Lord,” this is the Lord’s oath.…“The Lord sware,” then,
that is, confirmed: “He will not repent,” He will not change. What?
“Thou art a Priest for ever. “For ever,” for He will not repent. But
Priest, in what sense? Will there be those victims, victims offered by
the Patriarchs, altars of blood, and tabernacle, and those sacred
emblems of the Old Covenant? God forbid! These things are already
abolished; the temple being destroyed, that priesthood taken away, their
victim and their sacrifice having alike disappeared, not even the Jews
have these things. They see that the priesthood after the order of Aaron
hath already perished, and they do not recognise the Priesthood after
the order of Melchizedec. I speak unto believers. If catechumens
understand not something, let them lay aside sloth, and hasten unto
knowledge. It is not therefore <span id="page_544">p. 544</span> <span
id="ii.CX-Page_544"></span>needful for me to disclose mysteries here:
 <span id="fr_4972"></span>[4973](#fn_4972) let the Scriptures intimate
to you what is the Priesthood after the order of Melchizedec.

<span id="ii.CX-p32"></span>12. “The Lord on Thy right hand” ([Psa.
110.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#005)<span id="ii.CX-p32.1"></span>).
The Lord had said, “Sit Thou on My right hand;” now the Lord is on His
right hand, as if they changed seats.…That very Christ, the “Lord on Thy
right hand,” unto whom Thou hast sworn, and it will not repent Thee:
what doth He, Priest for evermore? What doth He, who is at the right
hand of God, and intercedeth for us, <span
id="fr_4973"></span>[4974](#fn_4973) like a priest entering into the
inner places, and into the holy of holies, into the mysteries of heaven,
He alone being without sin, and therefore easily purifying from
sins. <span id="fr_4974"></span>[4975](#fn_4974) He therefore “on Thy
right hand shall wound even kings in the day of His wrath.” What kings,
dost thou ask? Hast thou forgotten? “The kings of the earth stood up,
and the rulers took counsel together against the Lord, and against His
Anointed.” <span id="fr_4975"></span>[4976](#fn_4975) These kings He
wounded by His glory, and by the weight of His Name made kings weak, so
that they had not power to effect what they wished. For they strove
amain to blot out the Christian name from the earth, and could not; for
“Whosoever shall fall on this stone shall be broken.” <span
id="fr_4976"></span>[4977](#fn_4976) Kings therefore fall on this “stone
of offence,” and are therefore wounded, when they say, Who is Christ? I
know not what Jew or what Galilean He may have been, who died, who was
slain in such a manner! The stone is before thy feet, lying, so to
speak, mean and humble: therefore by scorning thou dost stumble, by
stumbling thou fallest, by falling thou art wounded.…“But on whomsoever
it shall fall, it will grind him to powder.” <span
id="fr_4977"></span>[4978](#fn_4977) When therefore any one falleth upon
it, it lieth as it were low; it then woundeth: but when it shall grind
him to powder, then it will come from above. See how in these two words,
it shall wound him and grind him to powder: he striketh upon it, and it
shall come down upon him: are distinguished the two seasons, of the
humiliation and the majesty of Christ, of hidden punishment and future
judgment. He will not crush, when He cometh, that man whom He doth not
wound when He lieth in a contemptible appearance.…

<span id="ii.CX-p38"></span>13. “He shall judge among the heathen: He
shall fill up what hath fallen” ([Psa.
110.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#006)<span id="ii.CX-p38.1"></span>).
Whoever thou art who art obstinate against Christ, thou hast raised on
high a tower that must fall. It is good that thou shouldest cast thyself
down, become humble, throw thyself at the feet of Him who sitteth on the
right hand of the Father, that in thee a ruin may be made to be built
up. For if thou abidest in thy evil height, thou shalt be cast down when
thou canst not be built up. For of such the Scripture saith in another
passage: “Therefore shall He break down, and not build them up.” <span
id="fr_4978"></span>[4979](#fn_4978) Beyond doubt he would not say
*this* of some, unless there were some whom He broke down so as to build
them up again. And this is going on at this time, while Christ is
judging among the heathen in such a manner as to fill up what hath
fallen. “He shall smite many heads over the earth.” Here upon the earth
in this life He shall smite many heads. He maketh them humble instead of
proud; and I dare to say, my brethren, that it is more profitable to
walk here humbly with the head wounded, than with the head erect to fall
into the judgment of eternal death. He will smite many heads when he
causeth them to fall, but He will fill them up and build them up again.

<span id="ii.CX-p40"></span>14. “He shall drink of the brook <span
id="fr_4979"></span>[4980](#fn_4979) in the way, therefore shall he lift
up his head” ([Psa. 110.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#007)<span
id="ii.CX-p41.1"></span>). Let us consider Him drinking of the brook in
the way: first of all, what is the brook? the onward flow of human
mortality: for as a brook is gathered together by the rain, overflows,
roars, runs, and by running runs down, that is, finishes its course; so
is all this course of mortality. Men are born, they live, they die, and
when some die others are born, and when they die others are born, they
succeed, they flock together, they depart and will not remain. What is
held fast here? what doth not run? what is not on its way to the abyss
as if it was gathered together from rain? For as a river suddenly drawn
together from rain from the drops of showers runneth into the sea, and
is seen no more, nor was it seen before it was collected from the rain;
so this hidden rain is collected together from hidden sources, and
floweth on; at death again it travelleth where it is hidden: this
intermediate state soundeth and passeth away. Of this brook He drinketh,
He hath not disdained to drink of this brook; for to drink of this brook
was to Him to be born and to die. What this brook hath, is birth and
death; Christ assumed this, He was born, He died. “Therefore hath He
lifted up His head;” that is, because He was humble, and “became
obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross: therefore God also
hath highly exalted Him, and given Him a Name which is above every name;
that at the Name of Jesus every knee shall bow, of things in Heaven, and
things in earth, and things under the earth; and that every tongue shall
confess that Jesus Christ the Lord is in the glory of God the
Father.” <span id="fr_4980"></span>[4981](#fn_4980)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4954"></span>[541:4955](1080121.htm#fr_4954) <span
id="ii.CX-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.CX-p2"></span> Lat. CIX. A sermon to the people.

<span id="fn_4955"></span>[541:4956](1080121.htm#fr_4955) <span
id="ii.CX-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CX-p4"></span> [Matt. xxii.
42-45](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#042)<span id="ii.CX-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4956"></span>[541:4957](1080121.htm#fr_4956) <span
id="ii.CX-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CX-p6"></span> [Matt. i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001)<span id="ii.CX-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4957"></span>[541:4958](1080121.htm#fr_4957) <span
id="ii.CX-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CX-p7"></span> [Rom. x.
10](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#010)<span id="ii.CX-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4958"></span>[542:4959](1080121.htm#fr_4958) <span
id="ii.CX-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CX-p10"></span> [Ps. ii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001)<span id="ii.CX-p10.1"></span>, etc.

<span id="fn_4959"></span>[542:4960](1080121.htm#fr_4959) <span
id="ii.CX-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CX-p11"></span> [Ps. ix.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#007)<span id="ii.CX-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4960"></span>[542:4961](1080121.htm#fr_4960) <span
id="ii.CX-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CX-p13"></span> [John i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span id="ii.CX-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4961"></span>[542:4962](1080121.htm#fr_4961) <span
id="ii.CX-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CX-p14"></span> [1 Tim. i.
17](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#017)<span id="ii.CX-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4962"></span>[542:4963](1080121.htm#fr_4962) <span
id="ii.CX-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CX-p18"></span> [John viii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#025)<span id="ii.CX-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4963"></span>[543:4964](1080121.htm#fr_4963) <span
id="ii.CX-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CX-p19"></span> [John xvi.
32](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#032)<span id="ii.CX-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4964"></span>[543:4965](1080121.htm#fr_4964) <span
id="ii.CX-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CX-p20"></span> [John xiv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#010)<span id="ii.CX-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4965"></span>[543:4966](1080121.htm#fr_4965) <span
id="ii.CX-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CX-p21"></span> [1 John iii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#002)<span id="ii.CX-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4966"></span>[543:4967](1080121.htm#fr_4966) <span
id="ii.CX-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CX-p22"></span> [John xiv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#008)<span id="ii.CX-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4967"></span>[543:4968](1080121.htm#fr_4967) <span
id="ii.CX-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CX-p25"></span> [John i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018)<span id="ii.CX-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4968"></span>[543:4969](1080121.htm#fr_4968) <span
id="ii.CX-p25.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CX-p26"></span> [Isa. liii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#008)<span id="ii.CX-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4969"></span>[543:4970](1080121.htm#fr_4969) <span
id="ii.CX-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CX-p27"></span> [Gen. i.
14](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#014)<span id="ii.CX-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4970"></span>[543:4971](1080121.htm#fr_4970) <span
id="ii.CX-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CX-p28"></span> [Luke
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#008)<span id="ii.CX-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4971"></span>[543:4972](1080121.htm#fr_4971) <span
id="ii.CX-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CX-p30"></span> [Matt. v.
34](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#034)<span id="ii.CX-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4972"></span>[544:4973](1080121.htm#fr_4972) <span
id="ii.CX-p30.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CX-p31"></span> \[He says elsewhere on [Ps.
civ.](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#000)<span id="ii.CX-p31.1"></span>
ver. 3: “What is that which is hidden, and is not public in the Church?
The Sacrament of Baptism, the Sacrament of the Eucharist. For our good
works even Pagans see, but Sacraments are hidden from them.” Note the
implications: two Sacraments, and no public celebration of the
Eucharist. See A.N.F. vol. viii. Primitive Liturgies *passim*.—C.\]

<span id="fn_4973"></span>[544:4974](1080121.htm#fr_4973) <span
id="ii.CX-p32.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CX-p33"></span> [Rom. viii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#034)<span id="ii.CX-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4974"></span>[544:4975](1080121.htm#fr_4974) <span
id="ii.CX-p33.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CX-p34"></span> [Heb.
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#012),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#014),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#024)<span id="ii.CX-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4975"></span>[544:4976](1080121.htm#fr_4975) <span
id="ii.CX-p34.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CX-p35"></span> [Ps. ii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#002)<span id="ii.CX-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4976"></span>[544:4977](1080121.htm#fr_4976) <span
id="ii.CX-p35.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CX-p36"></span> [Matt. xxi.
44](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#044)<span id="ii.CX-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4977"></span>[544:4978](1080121.htm#fr_4977) <span
id="ii.CX-p36.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CX-p37"></span> [Luke xx.
18](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#018)<span id="ii.CX-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4978"></span>[544:4979](1080121.htm#fr_4978) <span
id="ii.CX-p38.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CX-p39"></span> [Ps. xxviii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#005)<span id="ii.CX-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4979"></span>[544:4980](1080121.htm#fr_4979) <span
id="ii.CX-p40.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CX-p41"></span> *De torrente*.

<span id="fn_4980"></span>[544:4981](1080121.htm#fr_4980) <span
id="ii.CX-p41.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CX-p42"></span> [Philip. ii.
8-11](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#008)<span id="ii.CX-p42.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm CXI](1080122)
