[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080154)  [Next](1080156) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.CXXII"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXII-p1"></span> <span id="ii.CXXII-p1.1"></span><span
class="c20"><span id="ii.CXXII-p1.2"></span>Psalm CXXII. <span
id="fr_5422"></span>[5423](#fn_5422) </span>

<span id="ii.CXXII-p3"></span>1. As impure love inflames the mind, and
summons the soul destined to perish to lust for earthly things, and to
follow what is perishable, and precipitates it into lowest places, and
sinks it into the abyss; so holy love raiseth us to heavenly things, and
inflames us to what is eternal, and excites the soul to those things
which do not pass away nor die, and from the abyss of hell raiseth it to
heaven. Yet all love hath a power of its own, nor can love in the soul
of the lover be idle; it must needs draw it on. But dost thou wish to
know of what sort love is? See whither it leadeth…

<span id="ii.CXXII-p4"></span>2. This Psalm is a “Song of
degrees;” <span id="fr_5423"></span>[5424](#fn_5423) as we have often
said to you, for these degrees <span
id="fr_5424"></span>[5425](#fn_5424) are not of descent, but of ascent.
He therefore longeth to ascend. And whither doth he wish to ascend, save
into heaven? What meaneth, into heaven? Doth he wish to ascend that he
may be with the sun, moon, and stars? Far be it! But there is in heaven
the eternal Jerusalem, where are our fellow-citizens, the Angels: we are
wanderers on earth from these our fellow-citizens. We sigh in our
pilgrimage; we shall rejoice in the city. But we find companions in this
pilgrimage, who have already seen this city herself; who summon us to
run towards her. At these he also rejoiceth, who saith, “I rejoiced in
them who said unto me, We will go into the house of the Lord” ([Psa.
122.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa122.htm#001)<span
id="ii.CXXII-p6.1"></span>)…

<span id="ii.CXXII-p7"></span>3. “Our feet were standing in the courts
of Jerusalem” ([Psa. 122.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa122.htm#002)<span
id="ii.CXXII-p7.1"></span>)…Consider what thou wilt be there; and
although thou art as yet on the road, place this before thine eyes, as
if thou wert already standing, as if thou wert already rejoicing without
ceasing among the Angels; as if that which is written were realized in
thee: “Blessed are they that dwell in Thy house; they will be alway
praising Thee.” <span id="fr_5425"></span>[5426](#fn_5425) “Our feet
stood in the courts of Jerusalem.” What Jerusalem? This earthly
Jerusalem also is wont to be called by the name: though this Jerusalem
is but the shadow of that. And what great thing is it to stand in this
Jerusalem, since this Jerusalem hath not been able to stand, but hath
been turned into a ruin? Doth then the Holy Spirit pronounce this, out
of the kindled heart of the loving Psalmist, as a great thing? Is not it
that Jerusalem, unto whom the Lord said, “O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou
that killest the Prophets,” etc. <span
id="fr_5426"></span>[5427](#fn_5426) What great thing then did he
desire; to stand among those who slew the Prophets, and stoned them that
were sent unto them? God forbid that he should think of that Jerusalem,
who so loveth, who so burneth, who so longeth to reach that Jerusalem,
“our Mother,” <span id="fr_5427"></span>[5428](#fn_5427) of which the
Apostle saith, that She is “eternal in the Heavens.” <span
id="fr_5428"></span>[5429](#fn_5428)

<span id="ii.CXXII-p12"></span>4. “Jerusalem that is being built as a
city” ([Psa. 122.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa122.htm#003)<span
id="ii.CXXII-p12.1"></span>). Brethren, when David was uttering these
words, that city had been finished, it was not being built. It is some
city he speaketh of, therefore, which is now being built, unto which
living stones run in faith, of whom Peter saith, “Ye also, as lively
stones, are built up a spiritual house;” <span
id="fr_5429"></span>[5430](#fn_5429) that is, the holy temple of God.
What meaneth, ye are built up as lively stones? Thou <span
id="page_594">p. 594</span> <span id="ii.CXXII-Page_594"></span>livest,
if thou believest: but if thou believest, thou art made a temple of God;
for the Apostle Paul saith, “The temple of God is holy, which temple are
ye.” <span id="fr_5430"></span>[5431](#fn_5430) This city is therefore
now in building; stones are cut down from the hills by the hands of
those who preach truth, they are squared that they may enter into an
everlasting structure. There are still many stones in the hands of the
Builder: let them not fall from His hands, that they may be built
perfect into the structure of the temple. This, then, is the “Jerusalem
that is being built as a city:” Christ is its foundation. The Apostle
Paul saith, “Other foundation can no man lay than that is laid, which is
Christ Jesus.” <span id="fr_5431"></span>[5432](#fn_5431) When a
foundation is laid on earth, the walls are built above, and the weight
of the walls tends towards the lowest parts, because the foundation is
laid at the bottom. But if our foundation be in heaven, let us be built
towards heaven. Bodies have built the edifice of this basilica, <span
id="fr_5432"></span>[5433](#fn_5432) the ample size of which ye see; and
since bodies have built it, they placed the foundation lowest: but since
we are spiritually built, our foundation is placed at the highest point.
Let us therefore run thither, where we may be built…But what Jerusalem
do I speak of? Is it that, he asketh, which ye see standing, raised on
the structure of its walls? No; but the “Jerusalem which is being built
as a city.” Why not, a city, instead of, “as a city;” save because those
walls, so built in Jerusalem, were a visible city, as it is by all
called a city, literally; but this is being built “as a city,” for they
who enter it are like living stones; for they are not literally stones?
Just as they are called stones, and yet are not so: so the city styled
“as a city,” is not a city; for he said, “is being built.” For by the
word building, he meant to be understood the structure, and cohesion of
bodies and walls. For a city  <span id="fr_5433"></span>[5434](#fn_5433)
is properly understood of the men that inhabit there. But in saying “is
building,” he showed us that he meant a town. And since a spiritual
building hath some resemblance to a bodily building, therefore it “is
building as a city.”

<span id="ii.CXXII-p18"></span>5. But let the following words remove all
doubt that we ought not to understand carnally the words, “Whose
partaking is in the same.” <span id="fr_5434"></span>[5435](#fn_5434)
…What meaneth, “the same”? What is ever in the same state; not what is
now in one state, now in another. What then is, “the same,” save that
which is? What is that which is? That which is everlasting…Behold “The
Same: <span class="c21"><span id="ii.CXXII-p19.1"></span>I Am that I
Am,</span> <span class="c13"><span id="ii.CXXII-p19.2"></span> I
AM</span>.” Thou canst not understand; it is much to understand, it is
much to apprehend. Remember what He, whom thou canst not comprehend,
became for thee. Remember the flesh of Christ, towards which thou wast
raised when sick, and when left half dead from the wounds of robbers,
that thou mightest be brought to the Inn, and there mightest be
cured. <span id="fr_5435"></span>[5436](#fn_5435) Let us therefore run
unto the Lord’s house, and reach the city where our feet may stand; the
city “that is building as a city: whose partaking is in The Same.”…

<span id="ii.CXXII-p21"></span>6. That city “which partaketh in the
same,” partaketh in its stability: justly therefore, since he is made a
sharer in its stability, saith he who runneth thither. For all things
there stand where nought passeth by. Dost thou too wish to stand there
and not to pass by? Run thither. Nobody hath “the same” from himself…

<span id="ii.CXXII-p22"></span>7. “For thither the tribes went up”
([Psa. 122.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa122.htm#004)<span
id="ii.CXXII-p22.1"></span>). We were asking whither he ascendeth who
hath fallen; for we said, it is the voice of a man who is ascending, of
the Church rising. Can we tell whither it ascendeth? whither it goeth?
whither it is raised? “Thither,” he saith, “the tribes went up.”
Whither? To “partaking in the Same.” But what are the tribes? Many know,
many know not. For if we use the word “curies” in its proper sense, we
understand nothing, save the “curies” which exist in each particular
city, whence the terms “curiales” and “decuriones,” that is, the
citizens of a curia or a decuria; and ye know that each city hath such
curies. But there are, or were at one time, curies of the people in
those cities, and one city hath many curies, as Rome hath thirty-five
curies of the people. <span id="fr_5436"></span>[5437](#fn_5436) These
are called tribes. The people of Israel had twelve of these, according
to the sons of Jacob.

<span id="ii.CXXII-p24"></span>8. There were twelve tribes of the people
of Israel: but there were good, and there were bad among them. For how
evil were those tribes which crucified our Lord! How good those who
recognised the Lord! Those tribes then who crucified the Lord, were
tribes of the devil. When therefore he here said, “For thither the
tribes go up;” that thou mightest not understand all the tribes, he
added, “even the tribes of the Lord.”…What are the tribes of the Lord?
“A testimony unto Israel.” Hear, brethren, what this meaneth. “A
testimony to Israel:” that is, whereby it may be known that it is truly
Israel…He is such in whom there is no guile. And what did the Lord say,
when He saw Nathanael? “Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom is no
guile.” <span id="fr_5437"></span>[5438](#fn_5437) If therefore he is a
true Israelite, in whom there is no guile, those tribes go up to
Jerusalem, in whom there is no guile.<span id="page_595">p. 595</span>
<span id="ii.CXXII-Page_595"></span>…Wherefore do they go up? “To
confess unto Thy Name, O Lord.” It could not be more nobly expressed. As
pride presumeth, so doth humility confess. As he is a presumer, who
wishes to appear what he is not, so is he a confessor, who does not wish
that to be seen which himself is, and loves That which He is. To this
therefore do Israelites go up, in whom is no guile, because they are
truly Israelites, because in them is the testimony of Israel.

<span id="ii.CXXII-p26"></span>9. “For there were seated seats for
judgment” ([Psa. 122.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa122.htm#005)<span
id="ii.CXXII-p26.1"></span>). This is a wonderful riddle, a wonderful
question, if it be not understood. He calleth those seats, which the
Greeks call thrones. The Greeks call chairs thrones, as a term of
honour. Therefore, my brethren, it is not wonderful if even we should
sit on seats, or chairs; but that these seats themselves should sit,
when shall we be able to understand this? As if some one should say: let
stools or chairs sit here. We sit on chairs, we sit on seats, we sit on
stools; the seats themselves sit not. What then meaneth this, “For there
were seated seats for judgment”?…If therefore heaven be the seat of God,
and the Apostles are heaven; they themselves are become the seat of God,
the throne of God. It is said in another passage: <span
id="fr_5438"></span>[5439](#fn_5438) “The soul of the righteous is the
throne of wisdom.” A great truth, a great truth, is declared; the throne
of wisdom is the soul of the righteous; that is, wisdom sitteth in the
soul of the righteous as it were in her chair, in her throne, and thence
judgeth whatsoever she judgeth. There were therefore thrones of wisdom,
and therefore the Lord said unto them, “Ye shall sit upon twelve
thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel.” <span
id="fr_5439"></span>[5440](#fn_5439) So they also shall sit upon twelve
seats, and they are themselves the seats of God; for of them it is said,
“For there were seated seats.” Who sat? “Seats.” And who are the seats?
They of whom it is said, “The soul of the righteous is the seat of
wisdom.” Who are the seats? The heavens. Who are the heavens? Heaven.
What is heaven? That of which the Lord saith, “Heaven is My seat.” <span
id="fr_5440"></span>[5441](#fn_5440) The righteous then themselves are
the seats; and have seats; and seats shall be seated in that Jerusalem.
For what purpose? “For judgment.” Ye shall sit, He saith, on twelve
thrones, O ye thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel. Judging
whom? Those who are below on earth. Who will judge? They who have become
heaven. But they who shall be judged, will be divided into two bodies:
one will be on the right hand, the other on the left…

<span id="ii.CXXII-p30"></span>10. He at once addeth, as unto the seats
themselves, “Enquire ye the things that are for the peace of Jerusalem”
([Psa. 122.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa122.htm#006)<span
id="ii.CXXII-p30.1"></span>). O ye seats, who now sit unto judgment, and
are made the seats of the Lord who judgeth (since they who judge,
enquire; they who are judged, are enquired of), “Enquire ye,” he saith,
“the things that are for the peace of Jerusalem.” What will they find by
asking? That some have done deeds of charity, that others have not.
Those whom they shall find to have done deeds of charity, they will
summon them unto Jerusalem; for these deeds are “for the peace of
Jerusalem.” Love is a powerful thing, my brethren, love is a powerful
thing. Do ye wish to see how powerful a thing love is?…If charity be
destitute of means, so that it cannot find what to bestow upon the poor,
let it love: let it give “one cup of cold water;” <span
id="fr_5441"></span>[5442](#fn_5441) as much shall be laid to its
account, as to Zaccheus who gave half his patrimony to the poor. <span
id="fr_5442"></span>[5443](#fn_5442) Wherefore this? The one gave so
little, the other so much, and shall so much be imputed to the former?
Just so much. For though his resources are unequal, his charity is not
unequal.

<span id="ii.CXXII-p33"></span>11. …“And plenteousness,” he addeth, “for
them that love thee.” He addresses Jerusalem herself, They have
plenteousness who love her. Plenteousness after want: here they are
destitute, there they are affluent; here they are weak, there they are
strong; here they want, there they are rich. How have they become rich?
Because they gave here what they received from God for a season, and
received there what God will afterwards pay back for evermore. Here, my
brethren, even rich men are poor. It is a good thing for a rich man to
acknowledge himself poor: for if he think himself full, that is mere
puffing, not plenteousness. Let him own himself empty, that he may be
filled. What hath he? Gold. What hath he not yet? Everlasting life. Let
him consider what he hath, and see what he hath not. Brethren, of that
which he hath, let him give, that he may receive what he hath not; let
him purchase out of that which he hath, that which he hath not, “and
plenteousness for them that love thee.”

<span id="ii.CXXII-p34"></span>12. “Peace be in thy strength” ([Psa.
122.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa122.htm#007)<span
id="ii.CXXII-p34.1"></span>). O Jerusalem, O city, who art being built
as a city, whose partaking is in “The Same:” “Peace be in thy strength:”
peace be in thy love; for thy strength is thy love. Hear the Song of
songs: “Love is strong as death.” <span
id="fr_5443"></span>[5444](#fn_5443) A great saying that, brethren,
“Love is strong as death.” The strength of charity could not be
expressed in grander terms than these, “Love is strong as death.” For
who resisteth death, my brethren? Consider, my brethren. Fire, waves,
the sword, are resisted: we resist principalities, we resist <span
id="page_596">p. 596</span> <span id="ii.CXXII-Page_596"></span>kings;
death cometh alone, who resisteth it? There is nought more powerful than
it. Charity therefore is compared with its strength, in the words, “Love
is strong as death.” And since this love slayeth what we have been, that
we may be what we were not; love createth a sort of death in us. This
death he had died who said, “The world is crucified unto me, and I unto
the world:” <span id="fr_5444"></span>[5445](#fn_5444) this death they
had died unto whom he said, “Ye are dead, and your life is hid with
Christ in God.” <span id="fr_5445"></span>[5446](#fn_5445) Love is
strong as death…

<span id="ii.CXXII-p38"></span>13. Thus as he was here speaking of
charity, he addeth, “For my brethren and companions’ sake, I spoke peace
of thee” ([Psa. 122.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa122.htm#008)<span
id="ii.CXXII-p38.1"></span>). O Jerusalem, thou city whose partaking is
in The Same, I in this life and on this earth, I poor, he saith, I a
stranger and groaning, not as yet enjoying to the full thy peace, and
preaching thy peace; preach it not for my own sake, as the heretics, who
seeking their own glory, say, Peace be with you: and have not the peace
which they preach to the people. For if they had peace, they would not
tear asunder unity. “I,” he saith, “spoke peace of thee.” But wherefore?
“For my brethren and companions’ sake:” not for my own honour, not for
my own money, not for my life; for, “To me to live is Christ, and to die
is gain.” But, “I spoke peace of thee, for my brethren and companions’
sakes.” For he wished to depart, and to be with Christ: but, since he
must preach these things to his companions and his brethren, to abide in
the flesh, he addeth, is more needful for you. <span
id="fr_5446"></span>[5447](#fn_5446)

<span id="ii.CXXII-p40"></span>14. “Because of the house of the Lord my
God, I have sought good things for thee” ([Psa.
122.9](../../../bib/kjv/psa122.htm#009)<span
id="ii.CXXII-p40.1"></span>). Not on my own account have sought good
things, for then I should not seek for thee, but for myself; and so
should I not have them, because I should not seek them for thee; but,
“Because of the house of the Lord my God,” because of the Church,
because of the Saints, because of the pilgrims; because of the poor,
that they may go up; because we say to them, we will go into the house
of the Lord: because of the house of the Lord my God itself, I have
sought good things for Thee. These long and needful words gather ye,
brethren, eat them, drink them, and grow strong, run, and seize.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5422"></span>[593:5423](1080155.htm#fr_5422) <span
id="ii.CXXII-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXII-p2"></span> Lat. CXXI. A discourse to the common
people.

<span id="fn_5423"></span>[593:5424](1080155.htm#fr_5423) <span
id="ii.CXXII-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXII-p5"></span> See on [Ps.
xxxix.](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#000)<span id="ii.CXXII-p5.1"></span>
p. 112, and on [Ps. cxx.](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#000)<span
id="ii.CXXII-p5.2"></span> p. 589.

<span id="fn_5424"></span>[593:5425](1080155.htm#fr_5424) <span
id="ii.CXXII-p5.3"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXII-p6"></span> Or, “steps.”

<span id="fn_5425"></span>[593:5426](1080155.htm#fr_5425) <span
id="ii.CXXII-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXII-p8"></span> [Ps. lxxxiv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#004)<span id="ii.CXXII-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5426"></span>[593:5427](1080155.htm#fr_5426) <span
id="ii.CXXII-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXII-p9"></span> [Matt. xxiii.
37](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#037)<span id="ii.CXXII-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5427"></span>[593:5428](1080155.htm#fr_5427) <span
id="ii.CXXII-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXII-p10"></span> [Gal. iv.
26](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#026)<span id="ii.CXXII-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5428"></span>[593:5429](1080155.htm#fr_5428) <span
id="ii.CXXII-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXII-p11"></span> [2 Cor. v.
1](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#001)<span id="ii.CXXII-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5429"></span>[593:5430](1080155.htm#fr_5429) <span
id="ii.CXXII-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXII-p13"></span> [1 Pet. ii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#005)<span id="ii.CXXII-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5430"></span>[594:5431](1080155.htm#fr_5430) <span
id="ii.CXXII-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXII-p14"></span> [1 Cor. iii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#017)<span id="ii.CXXII-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5431"></span>[594:5432](1080155.htm#fr_5431) <span
id="ii.CXXII-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXII-p15"></span> [1 Cor. iii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#011)<span id="ii.CXXII-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5432"></span>[594:5433](1080155.htm#fr_5432) <span
id="ii.CXXII-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXII-p16"></span> \[Note this proof of the costly
Christian architecture of this age. The *Basilica*, however, was
originally an imperial court turned into a church.—C.\]

<span id="fn_5433"></span>[594:5434](1080155.htm#fr_5433) <span
id="ii.CXXII-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXII-p17"></span> *Civitas*.

<span id="fn_5434"></span>[594:5435](1080155.htm#fr_5434) <span
id="ii.CXXII-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXII-p19"></span> *In id ipsum*.

<span id="fn_5435"></span>[594:5436](1080155.htm#fr_5435) <span
id="ii.CXXII-p19.3"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXII-p20"></span> [Luke
10:30](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#030),
[34](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#034)<span id="ii.CXXII-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5436"></span>[594:5437](1080155.htm#fr_5436) <span
id="ii.CXXII-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXII-p23"></span> Thirty, according to Liv. i. 13, Cic.
*De Rep.* ii. 8; thirty-five afterwards, according to Sext. Pomp. in v.
*Curia*, who seems to confound them with the “Tribes.” See Pollet,
*Hist. For. Rom*. in *Poleni Supplem*. t. i. p. 516.

<span id="fn_5437"></span>[594:5438](1080155.htm#fr_5437) <span
id="ii.CXXII-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXII-p25"></span> [John i.
47](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#047)<span id="ii.CXXII-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5438"></span>[595:5439](1080155.htm#fr_5438) <span
id="ii.CXXII-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXII-p27"></span> \[See p. 475, note 6. References there
do not satisfy the Oxford editor, and here he puts a mark of inquiry;
thus, “—?”—C.\]

<span id="fn_5439"></span>[595:5440](1080155.htm#fr_5439) <span
id="ii.CXXII-p27.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXII-p28"></span> [Matt. xix.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#028)<span id="ii.CXXII-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5440"></span>[595:5441](1080155.htm#fr_5440) <span
id="ii.CXXII-p28.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXII-p29"></span> [Isa. lxvi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#001)<span id="ii.CXXII-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5441"></span>[595:5442](1080155.htm#fr_5441) <span
id="ii.CXXII-p30.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXII-p31"></span> [Matt. x.
42](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#042)<span id="ii.CXXII-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5442"></span>[595:5443](1080155.htm#fr_5442) <span
id="ii.CXXII-p31.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXII-p32"></span> [Luke xix.
8](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#008)<span id="ii.CXXII-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5443"></span>[595:5444](1080155.htm#fr_5443) <span
id="ii.CXXII-p34.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXII-p35"></span> [Song of Sol.
8.6](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#006)<span id="ii.CXXII-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5444"></span>[596:5445](1080155.htm#fr_5444) <span
id="ii.CXXII-p35.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXII-p36"></span> [Gal. vi.
14](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#014)<span id="ii.CXXII-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5445"></span>[596:5446](1080155.htm#fr_5445) <span
id="ii.CXXII-p36.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXII-p37"></span> [Col. iii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#003)<span id="ii.CXXII-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5446"></span>[596:5447](1080155.htm#fr_5446) <span
id="ii.CXXII-p38.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXII-p39"></span> [Phil.
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#021),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#023),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#024)<span id="ii.CXXII-p39.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm CXXIII](1080156)
