[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080075)  [Next](1080077) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.LXV"></span>

<span id="ii.LXV-p1"></span> <span id="ii.LXV-p1.1"></span><span
class="c20"><span id="ii.LXV-p1.2"></span>Psalm LXV. <span
id="fr_2532"></span>[2533](#fn_2532) </span>

<span id="ii.LXV-p3"></span>1. The voice of holy prophecy must be
confessed in the very title of this Psalm. It is inscribed, “Unto the
end, a Psalm of David, a song of Jeremiah and Ezekiel, on account of the
people of transmigration when they were beginning to go forth.” How it
fared with our fathers <span id="fr_2533"></span>[2534](#fn_2533) in the
time of the transmigration to Babylon, is not known to all, but only to
those that diligently study the Holy Scriptures, either by hearing or by
reading. For the captive people Israel from the city of Jerusalem was
led into slavery unto Babylon. <span
id="fr_2534"></span>[2535](#fn_2534) But holy Jeremiah prophesied, that
after seventy years the people would return out of captivity, and would
rebuild the very city Jerusalem, which they had mourned as having been
overthrown by enemies. But at that time there were prophets in that
captivity of the people dwelling in Babylon, among whom was also the
prophet Ezekiel. But that people was waiting until there should be
fulfilled the <span id="page_268">p. 268</span> <span
id="ii.LXV-Page_268"></span>space of seventy years, according to the
prophecy of Jeremiah. <span id="fr_2535"></span>[2536](#fn_2535) It came
to pass, when the seventy years had been completed, the temple was
restored which had been thrown down: and there returned from captivity a
great part of that people. But whereas the Apostle saith, “these things
in figure happened unto them, but they have been written for our sakes,
upon whom the end of the world hath come:” <span
id="fr_2536"></span>[2537](#fn_2536) we also ought to know first our
captivity, then our deliverance: we ought to know the Babylon wherein we
are captives, and the Jerusalem for a return to which we are sighing.
For these two cities, according to the letter, in reality are two
cities. And the former Jerusalem indeed by the Jews is not now
inhabited. For after the crucifixion of the Lord vengeance was taken
upon them with a great scourge, and being rooted up from that place
where, with impious licentiousness being infuriated, they had madly
raged against their Physician, they have been dispersed throughout all
nations, and that land hath been given to Christians: and there is
fulfilled what the Lord had said to them, “Therefore the kingdom shall
be taken away from you, and it shall be given to a nation doing
justice.” <span id="fr_2537"></span>[2538](#fn_2537) But when they saw
great multitudes then following the Lord, preaching the kingdom of
Heaven, and doing wonderful things, the rulers of that city said, “If we
shall have let Him go, all men will go after Him, and there shall come
the Romans, and shall take from us both place and nation.” <span
id="fr_2538"></span>[2539](#fn_2538) That they might not lose their
place, they killed the Lord; and they lost it, even because they killed.
Therefore that city, being one earthly, did bear the figure of a certain
city everlasting in the Heavens: but when that which was signified began
more evidently to be preached, the shadow, whereby it was being
signified, was thrown down: for this reason in that place now the temple
is no more, which had been constructed for the image of the future Body
of the Lord. We have the light, the shadow hath passed away:
nevertheless, still in a kind of captivity we are: “So long as we are,”
he saith, “in the body, we are sojourning afar from the Lord.” <span
id="fr_2539"></span>[2540](#fn_2539)

<span id="ii.LXV-p11"></span>2. And see ye the names of those two
cities, Babylon and Jerusalem. Babylon is interpreted confusion,
Jerusalem vision of peace. Observe now the city of confusion, in order
that ye may perceive the vision of peace; that ye may endure that, sigh
for this. Whereby can those two cities be distinguished? Can we anywise
now separate them from each other? They are mingled, and from the very
beginning of mankind mingled they run on unto the end of the world.
Jerusalem received beginning through Abel, Babylon through Cain: for the
buildings of the cities were afterwards erected. That Jerusalem in the
land of the Jebusites was builded: for at first it used to be called
Jebus, <span id="fr_2540"></span>[2541](#fn_2540) from thence the nation
of the Jebusites was expelled, when the people of God was delivered from
Egypt, and led into the land of promise. But Babylon was builded in the
most interior regions of Persia, which for a long time raised its head
above the rest of nations. These two cities then at particular times
were builded, so that there might be shown a figure of two cities begun
of old, and to remain even unto the end in this world, but at the end to
be severed. Whereby then can we now show them, that are mingled? At that
time the Lord shall show, when some He shall set on the right hand,
others on the left. Jerusalem on the right hand shall be, Babylon on the
left.…Two loves make up these two cities: love of God maketh Jerusalem,
love of the world maketh Babylon. Therefore let each one question
himself as to what he loveth: and he shall find of which he is a
citizen: and if he shall have found himself to be a citizen of Babylon,
let him root out cupidity, implant charity: but if he shall have found
himself a citizen of Jerusalem, let him endure captivity, hope for
liberty.…Now therefore let us hear of, brethren, hear of, and sing of,
and long for, that city whereof we are citizens. And what are the joys
which are sung of to us? In what manner in ourselves is formed again the
love of our city, which by long sojourning we had forgotten? But our
Father hath sent from thence letters to us, God hath supplied to us the
Scriptures, by which letters there should be wrought in us a longing for
return: because by loving our sojourning, to enemies we had turned our
face, and our back to our fatherland. What then is here sung?

<span id="ii.LXV-p13"></span>3. “For Thee a hymn is meet, O God, in
Sion” ([Psa. 65.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#001)<span
id="ii.LXV-p13.1"></span>). That fatherland is Sion: Jerusalem is the
very same as Sion; and of this name the interpretation ye ought to know.
As Jerusalem is interpreted vision of peace, so Sion *Beholding,* <span
id="fr_2541"></span>[2542](#fn_2541) that is, vision and contemplation.
Some great inexplicable sight to us is promised: and this is God Himself
that hath builded the city. Beauteous and graceful the city, how much
more beauteous a Builder it hath! “For Thee a hymn is meet, O God,” he
saith. But where? “In Sion:” in Babylon it is not meet. For when a man
beginneth to be renewed, already with heart in Jerusalem he singeth,
with the Apostle saying, “Our conversation is in the Heavens.”  <span
id="fr_2542"></span>[2543](#fn_2542) For “in the flesh though walking,”
he saith, “not after the flesh we war.” <span
id="fr_2543"></span>[2544](#fn_2543) Already in longing we are there,
already hope into that land, as it were an anchor, we have sent before,
<span id="page_269">p. 269</span> <span id="ii.LXV-Page_269"></span>lest
in this sea being tossed we suffer shipwreck. In like manner therefore
as of a ship which is at anchor, we rightly say that already she is come
to land, for still she rolleth, but to land in a manner she hath been
brought safe in the teeth of winds and in the teeth of storms; so
against the temptations of this sojourning, our hope being grounded in
that city Jerusalem causeth us not to be carried away upon rocks. He
therefore that according to this hope singeth, in that city singeth: let
him therefore say, “For Thee a hymn is meet, O God, in Sion.”…

<span id="ii.LXV-p17"></span>4. “And to Thee shall there be paid a vow
in Jerusalem.” Here we vow, and a good thing it is that there we should
pay. But who are they that here do vow and pay not? They that persevere
not even unto the end <span id="fr_2544"></span>[2545](#fn_2544) in that
which they have vowed. Whence saith another Psalm, “Vow ye, and pay ye
unto the Lord your God:” <span id="fr_2545"></span>[2546](#fn_2545) and,
“to Thee shall it be paid in Jerusalem.” For there shall we be whole,
that is, entire in the resurrection of just men: there shall be paid our
whole vow, not soul alone, but the very flesh also, no longer
corruptible, because no longer in Babylon, but now a body heavenly and
changed. What sort of change is promised? “For we all shall rise again,”
saith the Apostle, “but we shall not <span
id="fr_2546"></span>[2547](#fn_2546) all be changed.…Where is, O death,
thy sting?” <span id="fr_2547"></span>[2548](#fn_2547) For now while
there begin in use the first-fruits of the mind, from whence is the
longing for Jerusalem, many things of corruptible flesh do contend
against us, which will not contend, when death shall have been swallowed
up in victory. Peace shall conquer, and war shall be ended. But when
peace shall conquer, that city shall conquer which is called the vision
of peace. On the part of death therefore shall be no contention. Now
with how great a death do we contend! For thence are carnal pleasures,
which to us even unlawfully do suggest many things: to which we give no
consent, but nevertheless in giving no consent we contend.…

<span id="ii.LXV-p22"></span>5. “Hearken,” he saith, “to my prayer, unto
Thee every flesh shall come” ([Psa.
65.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#002)<span id="ii.LXV-p22.1"></span>).
And we have the Lord saying, that there was given to Him “power over
every flesh.” <span id="fr_2548"></span>[2549](#fn_2548) That King
therefore began even now to appear, when there was being said, “Unto
Thee every flesh shall come.” “To Thee,” he saith, “every flesh shall
come.” Wherefore to Him shall “every” flesh come? Because flesh He hath
taken to Him. Whither shall there come every flesh? He took the
first-fruits thereof out of the womb of the Virgin; and now that the
first-fruits have been taken to Him, the rest shall follow, in order
that the holocaust may be completed. Whence then “every flesh”? Every
man. And whence every man? Have all been foretold, as going to believe
in Christ? Have not many ungodly men been foretold, that shall be
condemned also? Do not daily men not believing die in their own
unbelief? After what manner therefore do we understand, “Unto Thee every
flesh shall come”? By “every flesh” he hath signified, “flesh of every
kind:” out of every kind of flesh they shall come to Thee. What is, out
of every kind of flesh? Have there come poor men, and have there not
come rich men? Have there come humble men, and not come lofty men? Have
there come unlearned men, and not come learned men? Have there come men,
and not come women? Have there come masters, and not come servants? Have
there come old men, and not come young men; or have there come young
men, and not come youths; or have there come youths, and not come boys;
or have there come boys, and have there not been brought infants? In a
word, have there come Jews  <span id="fr_2549"></span>[2550](#fn_2549)
(for thence were the Apostles, thence many thousands of men at first
betraying, afterwards believing <span
id="fr_2550"></span>[2551](#fn_2550) ), and have there not come Greeks;
or have there come Greeks, and not come Romans; or have there come
Romans, and not come Barbarians? And who could number all nations coming
to Him, to whom hath been said, “Unto Thee every flesh shall come”?

<span id="ii.LXV-p26"></span>6. “The discourses of unjust men have
prevailed over us, and our iniquities Thou shalt propitiate” <span
id="fr_2551"></span>[2552](#fn_2551) ([Psa.
65.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#003)<span
id="ii.LXV-p27.2"></span>).…Every man, in whatsoever place he is born,
of that same land or region or city learneth the language, is habituated
to the manners and life of that place. What should a boy do, born among
Heathens, to avoid worshipping a stone, inasmuch as his parents have
suggested that worship? from them the first words he hath heard, that
error with his milk he hath sucked in; and because they that used to
speak were elders, and the boy that was learning to speak was an infant,
what could the little one do but follow the authority of elders, and
deem that to be good which they recommended? Therefore nations that are
converted to Christ afterwards, and taking to heart the impieties of
their parents, and saying now what the prophet Jeremias himself said,
“Truly a lie our fathers have worshipped, vanity which hath not profited
them” <span id="fr_2552"></span>[2553](#fn_2552) —when, I say, they now
say this, they renounce the opinions and blasphemies of their unjust
parents.…There have led us away men teaching evil things, citizens of
Babylon they have made us, we have left the Creator, have adored the
creature: have left Him by whom we were made, have adored that which we
ourselves <span id="page_270">p. 270</span> <span
id="ii.LXV-Page_270"></span>have made. For “the discourses of unjust men
have prevailed over us:” but nevertheless they have not crushed us.
Wherefore? “Our impieties Thou shalt propitiate,” is not said except to
some priest offering somewhat, whereby impiety may be expiated and
propitiated. For impiety is then said to be propitiated, when God is
made propitious to the impiety. What is it for God to be made propitious
to impiety? It is, His becoming forgiving, and giving pardon. But in
order that God’s pardon may be obtained, propitiation is made through
some sacrifice. There hath come forth therefore, sent from God the Lord,
One our Priest; He took upon Him from us that which He might offer to
the Lord; we are speaking of those same first-fruits of the flesh from
the womb of the Virgin. This holocaust He offered to God. He stretched
out His hands on the Cross, in order that He might say, “Let My prayer
be directed as incense in Thy sight, and the lifting up of My hands an
evening sacrifice.” <span id="fr_2553"></span>[2554](#fn_2553) As ye
know, the Lord about eventide hung on the Cross: <span
id="fr_2554"></span>[2555](#fn_2554) and our impieties were propitiated;
otherwise they had swallowed up: the discourses of unjust men had
prevailed over us; there had led us astray preachers of Jupiter, and of
Saturn, and of Mercury: “the discourses of ungodly men had prevailed
over us.” But what wilt Thou do? “Our impieties Thou wilt propitiate.”
Thou art the priest, Thou the victim; Thou the offerer, Thou the
offering. <span id="fr_2555"></span>[2556](#fn_2555) …

<span id="ii.LXV-p32"></span>7. “Blessed is he whom Thou hast chosen,
and hast taken to Thee” ([Psa.
65.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#004)<span id="ii.LXV-p32.1"></span>).
Who is he that is chosen by Him and taken to Him? Was any one
chosen <span id="fr_2556"></span>[2557](#fn_2556) by our Saviour Jesus
Christ, or was Himself after the flesh, because He is man, chosen and
taken to Him?…Or hath not rather Christ Himself taken to Him some
blessed one, and the same whom He hath taken to Him is not spoken of in
the plural number but in the singular? For one man He hath taken to Him,
because unity He hath taken to Him. Schisms He hath not taken to Him,
heresies He hath not taken to Him: a multitude they have made of
themselves, there is not one to be taken to Him. But they that abide in
the bond of Christ and are the members of Him, make in a manner one man,
of whom saith the Apostle, “Until we all arrive at the acknowledging of
the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the age of the
fulness of Christ.” <span id="fr_2557"></span>[2558](#fn_2557) Therefore
one man is taken to Him, to which the Head is Christ; because “the Head
of the man is Christ.” <span id="fr_2558"></span>[2559](#fn_2558) The
same is that blessed man that “hath not departed in the counsel of
ungodly men,” <span id="fr_2559"></span>[2560](#fn_2559) and the like
things which there are spoken of: the same is He that is taken to Him.
He is not without us, in His own members we are, under one Head we are
governed, by one Spirit we all live, one fatherland we all long for.…And
to us He will give what? “He shall inhabit,” he saith, “in Thy courts.”
Jerusalem, that is, to which they sing that begin to go forth from
Babylon: “He shall inhabit in Thy courts: we shall be filled with the
good things of Thy House.” What are the good things of the House of God?
Brethren, let us set before ourselves some rich house, with what
numerous good things it is crowded, how abundantly it is furnished, how
many vessels there are there of gold and also of silver; how great an
establishment of servants, how many horses and animals, in a word, how
much the house itself delights us with pictures, marble, ceilings,
pillars, recesses, chambers:—all such things are indeed objects of
desire, but still they are of the confusion of Babylon. Cut off all such
longings, O citizen of Jerusalem, cut them off; if thou wilt return, let
not captivity delight thee. But hast thou already begun to go forth? Do
not look back, do not loiter on the road. Still there are not wanting
foes to recommend thee captivity and sojourning: no longer let there
prevail against thee the discourses of ungodly men. For the House of God
long thou, and for the good things of that House long thou: but do not
long for such things as thou art wont to long for either in thy house,
or in the house of thy neighbour, or in the house of thy patron.…

<span id="ii.LXV-p37"></span>8. “Thy holy Temple is marvellous in
righteousness” ([Psa. 65.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#005)<span
id="ii.LXV-p37.1"></span>). These are the good things of that House. He
hath not said, Thy holy Temple is marvellous in pillars, marvellous in
marbles, marvellous in glided ceilings; but is “marvellous in
righteousness.” Without thou hast eyes wherewith thou mayest see
marbles, and gold: within is an eye wherewith may be seen the beauty of
righteousness. If there is no beauty in righteousness, why is a
righteous old man loved? What bringeth he in body that may please the
eyes? Crooked limbs, brow wrinkled, head blanched with gray hairs,
dotage everywhere full of plaints. But perchance because thine eyes this
decrepit old man pleaseth not, thine ears he pleaseth: with what words?
with what song? Even if perchance when a young man he sang well, all
with age hath been lost. Doth perchance the sound of his words please
thine ears, that can hardly articulate whole words for loss of teeth?
Nevertheless, if righteous he is, if another man’s goods he coveteth
not, if of his own that he possesseth he distributeth to the needy, if
he giveth good advice, and soundly judgeth, if he believeth the entire
faith, if for his belief in the faith he is ready to expend even those
very shattered limbs, for many Martyrs are <span id="page_271">p.
271</span> <span id="ii.LXV-Page_271"></span>even old men; why do we
love him? What good thing in him do we see with the eyes of the flesh?
Not any. There is therefore a kind of beauty in righteousness, which we
see with the eye of the heart, and we love, and we kindle with
affection: how much men found to love in those same Martyrs, though
beasts tare their limbs! Is it possible but that when blood was staining
all parts, when with the teeth of monsters their bowels gushed out, the
eyes had nothing but objects to shudder at? What was there to be loved,
except that in that hideous spectacle of mangled limbs, entire was the
beauty of righteousness? These are the good things of the House of God,
with these prepare thyself to be satisfied.…“Blessed they which hunger
and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be filled.” <span
id="fr_2560"></span>[2561](#fn_2560) “Thy holy Temple is marvellous in
righteousness.” And that same temple, brethren, do not imagine to be
aught but yourselves. Love ye righteousness, and ye are the Temple of
God.

<span id="ii.LXV-p39"></span>9. “Hearken to us, O God, our Saviour”
([Psa. 65.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#005)<span
id="ii.LXV-p39.1"></span>). He hath disclosed now Whom he nameth as God.
The “Saviour” specially is the Lord Jesus Christ. It hath appeared now
more openly of Whom he had said, “Unto Thee every flesh shall
come.” <span id="fr_2561"></span>[2562](#fn_2561) That One Man that is
taken unto Him into the Temple of God, is both many and is One. In the
person of One he hath said, “Hearken, O God, i.e., to my hunger:” <span
id="fr_2562"></span>[2563](#fn_2562) and because the same One of many is
composed, now he saith, “Hearken to us, O God, our Saviour.” Hear Him
now more openly preached: “Hearken to us, O God, our Saviour, the Hope
of all the ends of the earth and in the sea afar.” Behold wherefore hath
been said “Unto Thee every flesh shall come.” From every quarter they
come. “Hope of all the ends of the earth,” not hope of one corner, not
hope of Judæa alone, not hope of Africa alone, not hope of Pannonia, not
hope of East or of West: but “Hope of all the ends of the earth, and in
the sea afar:” of the very ends of the earth. “And in the sea afar:” and
because in the sea, therefore afar. For the sea by a figure is spoken of
this world, with saltness bitter, with storms troubled; where men of
perverse and depraved appetites have become like fishes devouring one
another. Observe the evil sea, bitter sea, with waves violent, observe
with what sort of men it is filled. Who desireth an inheritance except
through the death of another? Who desireth gain except by the loss of
another? By the fall of others how many men wish to be exalted? How
many, in order that they may buy, desire for other men to sell their
goods? How they mutually oppress, and how they that are able do devour!
And when one fish hath devoured, the greater the less, itself also is
devoured by some greater.…Because evil fishes that were taken within the
nets they said they would not endure; they themselves have become more
evil than they whom they said <span id="fr_2563"></span>[2564](#fn_2563)
they could not endure. For those nets did take fishes both good and
evil. The Lord saith, “The kingdom of Heaven is like to a sein cast into
the sea, which gathereth of every kind, which, when it had been filled,
drawing out, and sitting on the shore, they gathered the good into
vessels, but the evil they cast out: so it shall be,” He saith, “in the
consummation of the world.” <span id="fr_2564"></span>[2565](#fn_2564)
He showeth what is the shore, He showeth what is the end of the sea.
“The angels shall go forth, and shall sever the evil from the midst of
the just, and shall cast them into the furnace of fire: there shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth.” Ha! ye citizens of Jerusalem that are
within the nets, and are good fishes; endure the evil, the nets break ye
not: together with them ye are in a sea, not together with them will ye
be in the vessels. For “Hope” He is “of the ends of the earth,” Himself
is Hope “also in the sea afar.” Afar, because also in the sea.

<span id="ii.LXV-p44"></span>10. “Preparing mountains in His strength”
([Psa. 65.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#006)<span
id="ii.LXV-p44.1"></span>). Not in their strength. For He hath prepared
great preachers, and those same He hath called mountains; humble in
themselves, exalted in Him. “Preparing mountains in His strength.” What
saith one of those same mountains? “We ourselves in our own selves have
had the answer of death, in order that in ourselves we should not trust,
but in God that raiseth the dead.”  <span
id="fr_2565"></span>[2566](#fn_2565) He that in himself doth trust, and
in Christ trusteth not, is not of those mountains which He hath prepared
in His strength. “Preparing mountains in His strength: girded about in
power.” “Power,” I understand: “girded about,” is what? They that put
Christ in the midst, “girded about” they make Him, that is on all sides
begirt. We all have Him in common, therefore in the midst He is: all we
gird Him about that believe in Him: and because our faith is not of our
strength, but of His power; therefore girded about He is in His power;
not in our own strength.

<span id="ii.LXV-p46"></span>11. “That troublest the bottom of the sea”
([Psa. 65.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#007)<span
id="ii.LXV-p46.1"></span>). He hath done this: it is seen what He hath
done. For He hath prepared mountains in His strength, hath sent them to
preach: girded about He is by believers in power: and moved is the sea,
moved is the world, and it beginneth to persecute His saints. “Girded
about in power: that troublest the bottom of the sea.” He hath not said,
that troublest the <span id="page_272">p. 272</span> <span
id="ii.LXV-Page_272"></span>sea; but “the bottom of the sea.” The bottom
of the sea is the heart of ungodly men. For just as from the bottom more
thoroughly all things are stirred, and the bottom holdeth firm all
things: so whatsoever hath gone forth: by tongue, by hands, by divers
powers for the persecution of the Church, from the bottom hath gone
forth. For if there were not the root of iniquity in the heart, all
those things would not have gone forth against Christ. The bottom He
troubled, perchance in order that the bottom He might also empty: for in
the case of certain evil men He emptied the sea from the bottom, and
made the sea a desert place. Another Psalm saith this, “That turneth sea
into dry land.” <span id="fr_2566"></span>[2567](#fn_2566) All ungodly
and heathen men that have believed were sea, have been made land; with
salt waves at first barren, afterwards with the fruit of righteousness
productive. “That troublest the bottom of the sea: the sound of its
waves who shall endure?” “Who shall endure,” is what? What man shall
endure the sound of the waves of the sea, the behests of the high powers
of the world? But whence are they endured? Because He prepareth
mountains in His strength. In that therefore which he hath said “who
shall” endure he saith thus: We ourselves of our own selves should not
be able to endure those persecutions, unless He gave strength.

<span id="ii.LXV-p48"></span>12. “The nations shall be troubled” ([Psa.
65.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#008)<span id="ii.LXV-p48.1"></span>).
At first they shall be troubled: but those mountains prepared in the
strength of Christ, are they troubled? Troubled is the sea, against the
mountains it dasheth: the sea breaketh, unshaken the mountains have
remained. “The nations shall be troubled, and all men shall fear.”
Behold now all men fear: they that before have been troubled do now all
fear. The Christians feared not, and now the Christians are feared. All
that did persecute do now fear. For He hath overcome that is girded
about with power, to Him hath come every flesh in such sort, that the
rest by their very minority do now fear. And all men shall fear, that
inhabit the ends of the earth, because of Thy signs. For miracles the
Apostles wrought, and thence all the ends of the earth have feared and
have believed. “Outgoings in morning and in evening Thou shalt delight:”
that is, Thou makest delightful. Already in this life what is there
being promised to us? There are outgoings in morning, there are
outgoings in the evening. By the morning he signifieth the prosperity of
the world, by the evening he signifieth the trouble of the world.…At
first when he was promising gain, it was morning to thee: but now
evening draweth on, sad thou hast become. But He that hath given thee an
outgoing in the morning, will give one also in the evening. In the same
manner as thou hast contemned the morning of the world by the light of
the Lord, so contemn the evening also by the sufferings of the Lord, in
saying to thy soul, What more will this man do to me, than my Lord hath
suffered for me? May I <span id="fr_2567"></span>[2568](#fn_2567) hold
fast justice, not consent to iniquity. Let him vent his rage on the
flesh, the trap will be broken, and I will fly to my Lord, that saith to
me, “Do not fear them that kill the body, but the soul are not able to
kill.” <span id="fr_2568"></span>[2569](#fn_2568) And for the body
itself He hath given security, saying, “A hair of your head shall not
perish.” <span id="fr_2569"></span>[2570](#fn_2569) Nobly here he hath
set down, “Thou wilt delight outgoings in morning and in evening.” For
if thou take not delight in the very outgoing, thou wilt not labour to
go out thence. Thou runnest thy head into the promised gain, if thou art
not delighted with the promise of the Saviour. And again thou yieldest
to one tempting and terrifying, if thou find no delight in Him that
suffered before thee, in order that He might make an outgoing for thee.

<span id="ii.LXV-p52"></span>13. “Thou hast visited the earth, and hast
inebriated it” ([Psa. 65.9](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#009)<span
id="ii.LXV-p52.1"></span>). Whence hast inebriated the earth? “Thy cup
inebriating how glorious it is!” <span
id="fr_2570"></span>[2571](#fn_2570) “Thou hast visited the earth, and
hast inebriated it.” Thou hast sent Thy clouds, they have rained down
the preaching of the truth, inebriated is the earth. “Thou hast
multiplied to enrich it.” Whence? “The river of God is filled with
water.” What is the river of God? The people of God. The first people
was filled with water, wherewith the rest of the earth might be watered.
Hear Him promising water: “If any man thirst, let him come to Me and
drink: he that believeth on Me, rivers of living water from his belly
shall flow:” <span id="fr_2571"></span>[2572](#fn_2571) if rivers, one
river also; for in respect of unity many are one. Many Churches and one
Church, many faithful and one Bride of Christ: so many rivers and one
river. Many Israelites believed, and were fulfilled with the Holy
Spirit; from thence they were scattered abroad through the nations, they
began to preach the truth, and from the river of God that was filled
with water, was the whole earth watered. “Thou hast prepared food for
them: because thus is Thy preparing.” Not because they have deserved of
Thee, whom Thou hast forgiven sins: the merits of them were evil, but
Thou for Thy mercy’s sake, “because thus is Thy preparing,” thus “Thou
hast prepared food for them.”

<span id="ii.LXV-p55"></span>14. “The furrows thereof inebriate Thou”
([Psa. 65.10](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#010)<span
id="ii.LXV-p55.1"></span>). Let there be made therefore at first furrows
to be inebriated: let the hardness of our breast be opened with the
share of the word of God, “The furrows thereof inebriate Thou: multiply
the generations thereof.” We see, they <span id="page_273">p. 273</span>
<span id="ii.LXV-Page_273"></span>believe, and by them believing other
men believe, and because of those others believe; and it is not
sufficient for one man, that having become himself a believer, he should
gain one. So is multiplied seed too: a few grains are scattered, and
fields spring up. “In the drops thereof it shall rejoice, when it shall
rise up.” That is, before it be perchance enlarged to the bulk of a
river, “when it shall rise up, in its drops,” that is, in those meet for
it, “it shall rejoice.” For upon those that are yet babes, and upon the
weak, are dropped some portions of the sacraments, because they cannot
receive the fulness of the truth. Hear in what manner he droppeth upon
babes, while they are rising up, that is, in their recent rising having
small capacities: the Apostle saith, “To you I could not speak as if to
spiritual, but as if to carnal, as if to babes in Christ.” <span
id="fr_2572"></span>[2573](#fn_2572) When he saith, “to babes in
Christ,” he speaketh of them as already risen up, but not yet meet to
receive that plenteous wisdom, whereof he saith, “Wisdom we speak among
perfect men.” <span id="fr_2573"></span>[2574](#fn_2573) Let it rejoice
in its drops, while it is rising up and is growing, when strengthened it
shall receive wisdom also: in the same manner as an infant is fed with
milk, and becometh fit for meat, and nevertheless at first out of that
very meat for which it was not fit, for it milk is made.

<span id="ii.LXV-p58"></span>15. “Thou shalt bless the crown of the year
of Thy goodness” ([Psa. 65.11](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#011)<span
id="ii.LXV-p58.1"></span>). Seed is now sowing, that which is sown is
growing, there will be the harvest too. And now over the seed the enemy
hath sown tares; and there have risen up evil ones among the good, false
Christians, having like leaf, but not like fruit. For those are properly
called tares, <span id="fr_2574"></span>[2575](#fn_2574) which spring up
in the manner of wheat, for instance darnel, for instance wild oats, and
all such as have the first leaf the same. Therefore of the sowing of the
tares thus saith the Lord: “There hath come an enemy, and hath sown over
them tares;” <span id="fr_2575"></span>[2576](#fn_2575) but what hath he
done to the grain? The wheat is not choked by the tares, nay, through
endurance of the tares the fruit of the wheat is increased. For the Lord
Himself said to certain workmen desiring to root up the tares, “Suffer
ye both to grow unto the harvest.” <span
id="fr_2576"></span>[2577](#fn_2576) …Conquer the devil, and thou wilt
have a crown. “Thou shalt bless the crown of the year of Thy goodness.”
Again he maketh reference to the goodness of God, lest any one boast of
his own merits. “Thy plains shall be filled with abundance.”

<span id="ii.LXV-p62"></span>16. “The ends of the desert shall grow fat,
and the hills shall be encircled with exultation” ([Psa.
65.12](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#012)<span id="ii.LXV-p62.1"></span>).
Plains, hills, ends of the desert, the same are also men. Plains,
because of the equality: because of equality, I say, from thence just
peoples have been called plains. Hills, because of lifting up: because
God doth lift up in Himself those that humble themselves. Ends of the
desert are all nations. Wherefore ends of the desert? Deserted they
were, to them no Prophet had been sent: they were in like case as is a
desert where no man passeth by. No word of God was sent to the nations:
to the people Israel alone the Prophets preached. We came to the
Lord; <span id="fr_2577"></span>[2578](#fn_2577) the wheat believed
among that same people of the Jews. For He said at that time to the
disciples, “Ye say, far off is the harvest: look back, and see how white
are the lands to harvest.” There hath been therefore a first harvest,
there will be a second in the last age. The first harvest was of Jews,
because there were sent to them Prophets proclaiming a coming Saviour.
Therefore the Lord said to His disciples, “See how white are the lands
to harvest:”  <span id="fr_2578"></span>[2579](#fn_2578) the lands, to
wit, of Judæa. “Other men,” He saith, “have laboured, and into their
labours ye have entered.” <span id="fr_2579"></span>[2580](#fn_2579) The
Prophets laboured to sow, and ye with the sickle have entered into their
labours. There hath been finished therefore the first harvest, and
thence, with that very wheat which then was purged, hath been sown the
round world; so that there ariseth an other harvest, which at the end is
to be reaped. In the second harvest have been sown tares, now here there
is labour. Just as in that first harvest the Prophets laboured until the
Lord came: so in that second harvest the Apostles laboured, and all
preachers of the truth labour, even until at the end the Lord send unto
the harvest His Angels. Aforetime, I say, a desert there was, “but the
ends of the desert shall grow fat.” Behold where the Prophets had given
no sound, the Lord of the Prophets hath been received, “The ends of the
desert shall grow fat, and with exultation the hills shall be
encircled.”

<span id="ii.LXV-p66"></span>17. “Clothed have been the rams of the
sheep” ([Psa. 65.13](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#013)<span
id="ii.LXV-p66.1"></span>): “with exultation” must be understood. For
with what exultation the hills are encircled, with the same are clothed
the rams of the sheep. Rams are the very same as hills. For hills they
are because of more eminent grace; rams, because they are leaders of the
flocks.…“They shall shout:” thence they shall abound with wheat, because
they shall shout. What shall they shout? “For a hymn they shall say.”
For one thing it is to shout against God, another thing to say a hymn;
one thing to shout iniquities, another thing to shout the praises of
God. If thou shout in blasphemy, thorns thou hast brought forth: if thou
shoutest in a hymn, thou aboundest in wheat.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2532"></span>[267:2533](1080076.htm#fr_2532) <span
id="ii.LXV-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.LXV-p2"></span> Lat. LXIV. Sermon to the Commonalty.

<span id="fn_2533"></span>[267:2534](1080076.htm#fr_2533) <span
id="ii.LXV-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXV-p4"></span> \[The student of the Ante-Nicene Fathers
will remember similar references to the Hebrew faithful as *our*
fathers.—C.\]

<span id="fn_2534"></span>[267:2535](1080076.htm#fr_2534) <span
id="ii.LXV-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXV-p5"></span> [2 Kings xxiv.
14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#014)<span id="ii.LXV-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2535"></span>[268:2536](1080076.htm#fr_2535) <span
id="ii.LXV-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXV-p6"></span> [Jer.
25:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#011), [Jer.
29:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#010)<span id="ii.LXV-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2536"></span>[268:2537](1080076.htm#fr_2536) <span
id="ii.LXV-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXV-p7"></span> [1 Cor. x.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#011)<span id="ii.LXV-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2537"></span>[268:2538](1080076.htm#fr_2537) <span
id="ii.LXV-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXV-p8"></span> [Matt. xxi.
43](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#043)<span id="ii.LXV-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2538"></span>[268:2539](1080076.htm#fr_2538) <span
id="ii.LXV-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXV-p9"></span> [John xi.
48](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#048)<span id="ii.LXV-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2539"></span>[268:2540](1080076.htm#fr_2539) <span
id="ii.LXV-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXV-p10"></span> [2 Cor. v.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#006)<span id="ii.LXV-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2540"></span>[268:2541](1080076.htm#fr_2540) <span
id="ii.LXV-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXV-p12"></span> [Josh. xviii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#028)<span id="ii.LXV-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2541"></span>[268:2542](1080076.htm#fr_2541) <span
id="ii.LXV-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXV-p14"></span> *Speculati*.

<span id="fn_2542"></span>[268:2543](1080076.htm#fr_2542) <span
id="ii.LXV-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXV-p15"></span> [Philip. iii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#020)<span id="ii.LXV-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2543"></span>[268:2544](1080076.htm#fr_2543) <span
id="ii.LXV-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXV-p16"></span> [2 Cor. x.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#003)<span id="ii.LXV-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2544"></span>[269:2545](1080076.htm#fr_2544) <span
id="ii.LXV-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXV-p18"></span> [Matt. xxiv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#013)<span id="ii.LXV-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2545"></span>[269:2546](1080076.htm#fr_2545) <span
id="ii.LXV-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXV-p19"></span> [Ps. lxxvi.
11](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#011)<span id="ii.LXV-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2546"></span>[269:2547](1080076.htm#fr_2546) <span
id="ii.LXV-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXV-p20"></span> “Not” is wanting in our text.

<span id="fn_2547"></span>[269:2548](1080076.htm#fr_2547) <span
id="ii.LXV-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXV-p21"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
51](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#051)<span id="ii.LXV-p21.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_2548"></span>[269:2549](1080076.htm#fr_2548) <span
id="ii.LXV-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXV-p23"></span> [John xvii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#002)<span id="ii.LXV-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2549"></span>[269:2550](1080076.htm#fr_2549) <span
id="ii.LXV-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXV-p24"></span> Oxf. <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.LXV-p24.1"></span>mss</span>. “have there not come Jews (for,
etc.), or have there come Jews and not come Greeks,” etc.

<span id="fn_2550"></span>[269:2551](1080076.htm#fr_2550) <span
id="ii.LXV-p24.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXV-p25"></span> [Acts ii.
41](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#041)<span id="ii.LXV-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2551"></span>[269:2552](1080076.htm#fr_2551) <span
id="ii.LXV-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXV-p27"></span> *Propitiaberis*. One <span
class="c21"><span id="ii.LXV-p27.1"></span>mss</span>. here, and many
below, *propitiabis*.

<span id="fn_2552"></span>[269:2553](1080076.htm#fr_2552) <span
id="ii.LXV-p27.3"></span>

<span id="ii.LXV-p28"></span> [Jer. xvi.
19](../../../bib/kjv/jer016.htm#019)<span id="ii.LXV-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2553"></span>[270:2554](1080076.htm#fr_2553) <span
id="ii.LXV-p28.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXV-p29"></span> [Ps. cxli.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#002)<span id="ii.LXV-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2554"></span>[270:2555](1080076.htm#fr_2554) <span
id="ii.LXV-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXV-p30"></span> [Matt. xxvii.
46](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#046)<span id="ii.LXV-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2555"></span>[270:2556](1080076.htm#fr_2555) <span
id="ii.LXV-p30.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXV-p31"></span> [Heb. ix.
7](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#007)<span id="ii.LXV-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2556"></span>[270:2557](1080076.htm#fr_2556) <span
id="ii.LXV-p32.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXV-p33"></span> Oxf. <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.LXV-p33.1"></span>mss</span>. “taken and chosen.”

<span id="fn_2557"></span>[270:2558](1080076.htm#fr_2557) <span
id="ii.LXV-p33.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXV-p34"></span> [Eph. iv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#013)<span id="ii.LXV-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2558"></span>[270:2559](1080076.htm#fr_2558) <span
id="ii.LXV-p34.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXV-p35"></span> [1 Cor. xi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#003)<span id="ii.LXV-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2559"></span>[270:2560](1080076.htm#fr_2559) <span
id="ii.LXV-p35.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXV-p36"></span> [Ps. i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)<span id="ii.LXV-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2560"></span>[271:2561](1080076.htm#fr_2560) <span
id="ii.LXV-p37.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXV-p38"></span> [Matt. v.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#006)<span id="ii.LXV-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2561"></span>[271:2562](1080076.htm#fr_2561) <span
id="ii.LXV-p39.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXV-p40"></span> [Ps. lxv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#002)<span id="ii.LXV-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2562"></span>[271:2563](1080076.htm#fr_2562) <span
id="ii.LXV-p40.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXV-p41"></span> [Ps. lxv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#004)<span id="ii.LXV-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2563"></span>[271:2564](1080076.htm#fr_2563) <span
id="ii.LXV-p41.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXV-p42"></span> *Al*. “pretended.”

<span id="fn_2564"></span>[271:2565](1080076.htm#fr_2564) <span
id="ii.LXV-p42.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXV-p43"></span> [Matt. xiii.
47-49](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#047)<span id="ii.LXV-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2565"></span>[271:2566](1080076.htm#fr_2565) <span
id="ii.LXV-p44.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXV-p45"></span> [2 Cor. i.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#009)<span id="ii.LXV-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2566"></span>[272:2567](1080076.htm#fr_2566) <span
id="ii.LXV-p46.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXV-p47"></span> [Ps. lxvi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#006)<span id="ii.LXV-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2567"></span>[272:2568](1080076.htm#fr_2567) <span
id="ii.LXV-p48.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXV-p49"></span> Oxf. <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.LXV-p49.1"></span>mss</span>. and old ed. “that I may.”

<span id="fn_2568"></span>[272:2569](1080076.htm#fr_2568) <span
id="ii.LXV-p49.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXV-p50"></span> [Matt. x.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#028)<span id="ii.LXV-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2569"></span>[272:2570](1080076.htm#fr_2569) <span
id="ii.LXV-p50.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXV-p51"></span> [Luke xxi.
18](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#018)<span id="ii.LXV-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2570"></span>[272:2571](1080076.htm#fr_2570) <span
id="ii.LXV-p52.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXV-p53"></span> [Ps. xxiii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#005)<span id="ii.LXV-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2571"></span>[272:2572](1080076.htm#fr_2571) <span
id="ii.LXV-p53.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXV-p54"></span> [John
7:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#037),
[38](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#038)<span id="ii.LXV-p54.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2572"></span>[273:2573](1080076.htm#fr_2572) <span
id="ii.LXV-p55.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXV-p56"></span> [1 Cor. iii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#001)<span id="ii.LXV-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2573"></span>[273:2574](1080076.htm#fr_2573) <span
id="ii.LXV-p56.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXV-p57"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#006)<span id="ii.LXV-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2574"></span>[273:2575](1080076.htm#fr_2574) <span
id="ii.LXV-p58.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXV-p59"></span> *Zizania*.

<span id="fn_2575"></span>[273:2576](1080076.htm#fr_2575) <span
id="ii.LXV-p59.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXV-p60"></span> [Matt. xiii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#025)<span id="ii.LXV-p60.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2576"></span>[273:2577](1080076.htm#fr_2576) <span
id="ii.LXV-p60.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXV-p61"></span> [Matt. xiii.
30](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#030)<span id="ii.LXV-p61.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2577"></span>[273:2578](1080076.htm#fr_2577) <span
id="ii.LXV-p62.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXV-p63"></span> *Ventum est ad Dominum*; al. *a Domino*,
“The Lord came.”

<span id="fn_2578"></span>[273:2579](1080076.htm#fr_2578) <span
id="ii.LXV-p63.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXV-p64"></span> [John iv.
35](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#035)<span id="ii.LXV-p64.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2579"></span>[273:2580](1080076.htm#fr_2579) <span
id="ii.LXV-p64.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXV-p65"></span> [John iv.
38](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#038)<span id="ii.LXV-p65.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm LXVI](1080077)
