[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080142)  [Next](1080144.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.CXIX.xiii"></span>

<span id="ii.CXIX.xiii-p1"></span> *<span class="c2"><span
id="ii.CXIX.xiii-p1.1"></span>Mem.</span>*

<span id="ii.CXIX.xiii-p2"></span>97. We have frequently admonished you,
that love was to be understood by that praiseworthy breadth, by means of
which, while we do the commandments of God, we feel no straitness. On
this account also after saying above in this great Psalm, “Thy
commandment is exceeding broad:” <span
id="fr_5265"></span>[5266](#fn_5265.md) in the following verse he showeth
wherefore it is broad: “what love have I unto Thy law, O Lord!” ([Psa.
119.97](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#097.md)<span
id="ii.CXIX.xiii-p3.2"></span>). Love is therefore the breadth of the
commandment. For how can it be that what God commandeth to be loved, be
loved, and yet the commandment itself be not loved? For this itself is
the law; “in all the day,” he saith, “is my study in it.” Behold how I
have loved it, that in the whole day my study is in it; or rather, as
the Greek hath it, “all the day long,” which more fully expresses the
continuance of meditation. Now that is to be understood through all
time; which is, for ever. By such love lust is driven out: lust, which
repeatedly opposeth our performing the commandments of the law, when
“the flesh lusteth against the spirit:” <span
id="fr_5266"></span>[5267](#fn_5266.md) against which the spirit lusting,
ought so to love the law of God, that it be its study during the whole
day.…

<span id="ii.CXIX.xiii-p5"></span>98. And he then addeth: “Thou hast
made me to understand Thy commandment above mine enemies; for it is ever
with me” ([Psa. 119.98](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#098.md)<span
id="ii.CXIX.xiii-p5.1"></span>). For “they have indeed a zeal of God,
but not according to knowledge,” etc. <span
id="fr_5267"></span>[5268](#fn_5267.md) But the Psalmist, who understandeth
the commandment of God above these his enemies, wishes to be found with
the Apostle, “not having” his “own righteousness, which is of the law,
but that which is of the faith of Christ, which is of God;” <span
id="fr_5268"></span>[5269](#fn_5268.md) not that the Law which his enemies
read is not of God, but because they do not understand it, like him who
understandeth it above his enemies, by clinging to the Stone upon which
they stumbled. For “Christ is the end of the law,” etc., <span
id="fr_5269"></span>[5270](#fn_5269.md) “that they may be justified freely
through His grace;” <span id="fr_5270"></span>[5271](#fn_5270.md) not like
those who imagine that they obey the law of their own strength, and are
therefore, though by God’s law, yet still endeavouring to set up their
own righteousness; but as the son of promise, who hungering and athirst
after it, <span id="fr_5271"></span>[5272](#fn_5271.md) by seeking, by
asking, by knocking, <span id="fr_5272"></span>[5273](#fn_5272.md) as it
were begs it of the Father, that being adopted he may receive it through
His only-begotten Son.…His enemies sought from the same commandment
temporal rewards; and therefore it was not unto them for ever, as it was
unto this man. For they who have translated “for ever” have rendered
better than they who have written “for an age,” since at the end of time
there can be no longer a commandment of the law.…

<span id="ii.CXIX.xiii-p12"></span>99. But what meaneth the following
verse, “I have more understanding than my teachers”? ([Psa.
119.99](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#099.md)<span
id="ii.CXIX.xiii-p12.1"></span>). Who is he who had more understanding
than all his teachers? Who, I ask, is he, who dareth to prefer himself
in understanding above all the Prophets, who not only by speaking taught
with so excellent authority those who lived with them, but also their
posterity by writing?…What is here said, could not have been spoken in
Solomon’s person.…I recognise plainly Him who had more understanding
than His teachers, since when He was a boy of twelve years of age, Jesus
remained behind in Jerusalem, and was found by His parents after three
days’ space, “sitting in the temple among the doctors, hearing them and
asking them questions.” <span id="fr_5273"></span>[5274](#fn_5273.md) The
Son Himself hath said, “As My Father hath taught Me, I speak these
things.” <span id="fr_5274"></span>[5275](#fn_5274.md) It is very difficult
to understand this of the Person of the Word; unless we can comprehend
that it is the same thing for the Son to be taught as to be begotten of
the Father.…“He took upon Himself the form of a servant;” <span
id="fr_5275"></span>[5276](#fn_5275.md) for when He had assumed this form,
men of more advanced age might think Him fit to be taught as a boy; but
He whom the Father taught, had more understanding than all His teachers.
“For Thy testimonies,” He saith, “are my study.” For this reason He had
more understanding than all His teachers, because He studied the
testimonies of God, which, as concerning Himself, He knew better than
they, when He spoke these words: “Ye sent unto John, and he bare witness
unto the truth. But I receive not testimony from man,” etc. <span
id="fr_5276"></span>[5277](#fn_5276.md)

<span id="ii.CXIX.xiii-p17"></span>100. But these teachers may be
understood very reasonably to be those aged men, of whom he presently
saith, “I am wiser than mine elders” ([Psa.
119.100](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#100.md)<span
id="ii.CXIX.xiii-p17.1"></span>). And this seemeth to me to be repeated
here thus, that that age of His which is well known to us in the Gospel
might be called to our remembrance; the age of boyhood, during which He
was sitting among the aged, understanding more than all His teachers.
For the <span id="page_577">p. 577</span> <span
id="ii.CXIX.xiii-Page_577"></span>smaller and the greater in age are
wont to be termed younger and elder, although neither of them hath
arrived at or approached old age; although if we are concerned to seek
in the Gospel the express term, elders, more than whom He understood, we
find it when the Scribes and Pharisees said unto Him, “Why do Thy
disciples transgression the tradition of the elders? for they wash not
their hands when they eat bread.” <span
id="fr_5277"></span>[5278](#fn_5277.md) Behold the transgression of the
tradition of the elders is objected to Him. But He who was wiser than
His elders, let us hear what answer He made them. “Why do ye also, He
asked, “transgress the commandment of God by your tradition?” <span
id="fr_5278"></span>[5279](#fn_5278.md) …

<span id="ii.CXIX.xiii-p20"></span>101. But what cometh next, doth not
seem to apply to the Head, but to the Body: “I have refrained my feet
from every evil way, that I may keep Thy words” ([Psa.
119.101](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#101.md)<span
id="ii.CXIX.xiii-p20.1"></span>). For that Head of ours, the Saviour of
the Body Himself, could not be borne by carnal lust into any evil way,
so that it should be needful for Him to refrain His feet, as though they
would go thither of their own accord; which we do, when we refrain our
evil desires, which He had not, that they may not follow evil ways. For
thus we are able to keep the word of God, if we “go not after our evil
lusts,” <span id="fr_5279"></span>[5280](#fn_5279.md) so that they attain
unto the evils desired; but rather curb them with the spirit which
lusteth against the flesh, <span id="fr_5280"></span>[5281](#fn_5280.md)
that they may not drag us away, seduced and overthrown, through evil
ways.

<span id="ii.CXIX.xiii-p23"></span>102. “I have not shrunk,” he saith,
“from Thy judgments: for Thou hast laid down a law for me” ([Psa.
119.102](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#102.md)<span
id="ii.CXIX.xiii-p23.1"></span>). He hath stated what made him fear, so
that he refrained his feet from every evil way.…Thou, more inward than
my inmost self, Thou hast laid down a law within my heart by Thy Spirit,
as it were by Thy fingers, that I might not fear it as a slave without
love, but might love it with a chaste fear as a son, and fear it with a
chaste love.

<span id="ii.CXIX.xiii-p24"></span>103. Consider then what followeth: “O
how sweet are Thy words unto my throat!” ([Psa.
119.103](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#103.md)<span
id="ii.CXIX.xiii-p24.1"></span>). Or, as it is more literally rendered
from the Greek, “Thy utterances, above honey and the honeycomb unto my
mouth.” This is that sweetness which the Lord giveth, “So that the earth
yield her increase:” <span id="fr_5281"></span>[5282](#fn_5281.md) that we
do good truly in a good spirit, that is, not from the dread of carnal
evil, but from the gladness of spiritual good. Some copies indeed do not
read “honeycomb:” but the majority do. Now the open teaching of wisdom
is like unto honey; but that is like the comb which is squeezed from the
more recondite mysteries, as if from cells of wax, by the mouth of the
teacher, as if he were chewing it: but it is sweet to the mouth of the
heart, not to the mouth of the flesh.

<span id="ii.CXIX.xiii-p26"></span>104. But what mean the words,
“Through Thy commandments I get understanding”? ([Psa.
119.104](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#104.md)<span
id="ii.CXIX.xiii-p26.1"></span>). For the expressions, I have understood
Thy commandments: and, “I get understanding through Thy commandments;”
are different. Something else then he signifieth that he hath understood
from the commandments of God: that is, as far as I can see, he saith,
that by obeying God’s commandments he hath arrived at the comprehension
of those things which he had longed to know.…These then are the words of
the spiritual members of Christ, “Through Thy commandments I get
understanding.” For the body of Christ rightly saith these words in
those, to whom, while they keep the commandments, a richer knowledge of
wisdom is given on account of this very keeping of the commandments.
“Therefore,” he addeth, “I hate all evil ways.” For it is needful that
the love of righteousness should hate all iniquity: that love, which is
so much the stronger, in proportion as the sweetness of a higher wisdom
doth inspire it, a wisdom given unto him who obeyeth God, and getteth
understanding from His commandments.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5265"></span>[576:5266](1080143.htm#fr_5265.md) <span
id="ii.CXIX.xiii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXIX.xiii-p3"></span> [Ps. cxix.
96](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#096.md)<span
id="ii.CXIX.xiii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5266"></span>[576:5267](1080143.htm#fr_5266.md) <span
id="ii.CXIX.xiii-p3.3"></span>

<span id="ii.CXIX.xiii-p4"></span> [Gal. v.
17](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#017.md)<span
id="ii.CXIX.xiii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5267"></span>[576:5268](1080143.htm#fr_5267.md) <span
id="ii.CXIX.xiii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXIX.xiii-p6"></span> [Rom.
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#002.md),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#003.md)<span
id="ii.CXIX.xiii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5268"></span>[576:5269](1080143.htm#fr_5268.md) <span
id="ii.CXIX.xiii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXIX.xiii-p7"></span> [Philip. iii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#009.md)<span id="ii.CXIX.xiii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5269"></span>[576:5270](1080143.htm#fr_5269.md) <span
id="ii.CXIX.xiii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXIX.xiii-p8"></span> [Rom. x.
4](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#004.md)<span id="ii.CXIX.xiii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5270"></span>[576:5271](1080143.htm#fr_5270.md) <span
id="ii.CXIX.xiii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXIX.xiii-p9"></span> [Rom. iii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#024.md)<span
id="ii.CXIX.xiii-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5271"></span>[576:5272](1080143.htm#fr_5271.md) <span
id="ii.CXIX.xiii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXIX.xiii-p10"></span> [Matt. v.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#006.md)<span
id="ii.CXIX.xiii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5272"></span>[576:5273](1080143.htm#fr_5272.md) <span
id="ii.CXIX.xiii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXIX.xiii-p11"></span> [Matt. vii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#007.md)<span
id="ii.CXIX.xiii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5273"></span>[576:5274](1080143.htm#fr_5273.md) <span
id="ii.CXIX.xiii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXIX.xiii-p13"></span> [Luke ii.
42-46](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#042.md)<span
id="ii.CXIX.xiii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5274"></span>[576:5275](1080143.htm#fr_5274.md) <span
id="ii.CXIX.xiii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXIX.xiii-p14"></span> [John viii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#028.md)<span
id="ii.CXIX.xiii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5275"></span>[576:5276](1080143.htm#fr_5275.md) <span
id="ii.CXIX.xiii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXIX.xiii-p15"></span> [Philip. ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#007.md)<span
id="ii.CXIX.xiii-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5276"></span>[576:5277](1080143.htm#fr_5276.md) <span
id="ii.CXIX.xiii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXIX.xiii-p16"></span> [John v.
33-36](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#033.md)<span
id="ii.CXIX.xiii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5277"></span>[577:5278](1080143.htm#fr_5277.md) <span
id="ii.CXIX.xiii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXIX.xiii-p18"></span> [Matt. xv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#002.md)<span
id="ii.CXIX.xiii-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5278"></span>[577:5279](1080143.htm#fr_5278.md) <span
id="ii.CXIX.xiii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXIX.xiii-p19"></span> [Matt. xv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#003.md)<span
id="ii.CXIX.xiii-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5279"></span>[577:5280](1080143.htm#fr_5279.md) <span
id="ii.CXIX.xiii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXIX.xiii-p21"></span> [Ecclesiasticus
18.30](../../../bib/apo/sir018.htm#030.md)<span
id="ii.CXIX.xiii-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5280"></span>[577:5281](1080143.htm#fr_5280.md) <span
id="ii.CXIX.xiii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXIX.xiii-p22"></span> [Gal. v.
17](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#017.md)<span
id="ii.CXIX.xiii-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5281"></span>[577:5282](1080143.htm#fr_5281.md) <span
id="ii.CXIX.xiii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXIX.xiii-p25"></span> [Ps. lxxxv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/psa085.htm#012.md)<span
id="ii.CXIX.xiii-p25.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Nun.](1080144.md)
