[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080169)  [Next](1080171.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.CXXXVII"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXXVII-p1"></span> <span id="ii.CXXXVII-p1.1"></span><span
class="c20"><span id="ii.CXXXVII-p1.2"></span>Psalm CXXXVII. <span
id="fr_5695"></span>[5696](#fn_5695.md) </span>

<span id="ii.CXXXVII-p3"></span>1. …But to-day we have sung, “By the
waters of Babylon we sat down and wept, when we remembered Sion” ([Psa.
137.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#001.md)<span
id="ii.CXXXVII-p3.1"></span>).…

<span id="ii.CXXXVII-p4"></span>2. Observe “the waters of Babylon.” “The
waters of Babylon” are all things which here are loved, and pass away.
One man, for example, loveth to practise husbandry, to grow rich
thereby, to employ his mind therein, thence to gain pleasure: let him
observe the issue, and see that what he hath loved is not a foundation
of Jerusalem, but a stream of Babylon. Another saith, It is a grand
thing to be a soldier: all husbandmen fear those who are soldiers.…

<span id="ii.CXXXVII-p5"></span>3. But then other citizens of the holy
Jerusalem, understanding their captivity, mark how the natural wishes
and the various lusts of men hurry and drag them hither and thither, and
drive them into the sea; they see this, and they throw not themselves
into the waters of Babylon, but “sit down and weep,” either for those
who are being carried away by them, or themselves whose deserts have
placed them in Babylon, but sitting, that is, humbling themselves. O
holy Sion, where all stands firm and nothing flows! Who hath thrown us
headlong into this? Why have we left thy Founder and thy society?
Behold, placed where all things are flowing and gliding away, scarce
one, if he can grasp the tree, shall be snatched from the stream and
escape. Humbling ourselves then in our captivity, let us “sit by the
waters of Babylon,” let us not dare to plunge ourselves in those
streams, nor to be proud and lifted up in the evil and sadness of our
captivity, but let us sit, and so weep. Let us sit “by” the waters, not
beneath the waters, of Babylon; such be our humility, that it overwhelm
us not. Sit “by” the waters, not “in” the waters, not “under” the
waters; but yet sit, in humble fashion, talk not as thou wouldest in
Jerusalem.…

<span id="ii.CXXXVII-p6"></span>4. For many weep with the weeping of
Babylon, because they rejoice also with the joy of Babylon. When men
rejoice at gains and weep at losses, both are of Babylon. Thou oughtest
to weep, but in the remembrance of Sion. If thou weepest in the
remembrance of Sion, thou oughtest to weep even when it is well with
thee in Babylon.…

<span id="ii.CXXXVII-p7"></span>5. “On the willows in the midst thereof
we hung up our instruments of music” ([Psa.
137.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#002.md)<span
id="ii.CXXXVII-p7.1"></span>). The citizens of Jerusalem have their
“instruments of music,” God’s Scriptures, God’s commands, God’s
promises, meditation on the life to come; but while they are dwelling
“in Babylon,” they “hang up their instruments.” Willows are unfruitful
trees, and here so placed, that no good whatever can be understood of
them: elsewhere perhaps there may. Here understand barren trees, growing
by the waters of Babylon. These trees are watered by the waters of
Babylon, and bring forth no fruit; just as there are men greedy,
covetous, barren in good works, citizens of Babylon in such wise, that
they are even trees of that region; they are <span id="page_631">p.
631</span> <span id="ii.CXXXVII-Page_631"></span>fed there by these
pleasures of transitory things, as though watered by “the waters of
Babylon.” Thou seekest fruit of them, and nowhere findest it.…Therefore
by deferring to apply the Scriptures to them, “we hang up our
instruments of music upon the willows.” For we hold them not worthy to
carry our instruments. We do not therefore insert our instruments into
them and bind them to them, but defer to use them, and so hang them up.
For the willows are the unfruitful trees of Babylon, fed by temporal
pleasures, as by the “waters of Babylon.”

<span id="ii.CXXXVII-p8"></span>6. “For there they that led us captive
demanded of us words of songs, and they that led us away, an hymn”
([Psa. 137.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#003.md)<span
id="ii.CXXXVII-p8.1"></span>). They demanded of us words of songs and an
hymn, who led us captive.…We are tempted by the delights of earthly
things, and we struggle daily with the suggestions of unlawful
pleasures; scarce do we breathe freely even in prayer: we understand
that we are captives. But who led us captive? what men? what race? what
king? If we are redeemed, we once were captives. Who hath redeemed us?
Christ. From whom hath He redeemed us? From the devil. The devil then
and his angels led us captive: and they would not lead us, unless we
consented.…

<span id="ii.CXXXVII-p9"></span>7. “Those” then “who have led us
captive,” the devil and his angels, when have they spoken unto us: “Sing
us one of the songs of Sion”? What answer we? Babylon beareth thee,
Babylon containeth thee, Babylon nourisheth thee, Babylon speaks by thy
mouth, thou knowest not to take in save what glitters for the present,
thou knowest not how to meditate on things of eternity, thou takest not
in what thou askest. “How shall we sing the Lord’s song in a strange
land?” ([Psa. 137.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#004.md)<span
id="ii.CXXXVII-p9.1"></span>). Truly, brethren, so it is. Begin to wish
to preach the truth in such measure as ye know it, and see how needful
it is for you to endure such mockers, persecutors of the truth, full of
falsehood. Reply to them, when they ask of you what they cannot take in,
and say in full confidence of your holy song, “How shall we sing the
Lord’s song in a strange land!”

<span id="ii.CXXXVII-p10"></span>8. But take heed how thou dwellest
among them, O people of God, O body of Christ, O high-born band of
wanderers (for thy home is not here, but elsewhere), lest when thou
lovest them, strivest for their friendship, and fearest to displease
such men, Babylon begin to delight thee and thou forget Jerusalem. In
fear then of this, see what the Psalmist subjoins, see what follows. “If
I forget thee, O Jerusalem” ([Psa.
137.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#005.md)<span
id="ii.CXXXVII-p10.1"></span>), amid the speeches of those who hold me
captive, amid the speeches of treacherous men, amid the speeches of men
who ask with ill intent, asking, yet unwilling to learn.…What then? “If
I forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my right hand forget me.”

<span id="ii.CXXXVII-p11"></span>9. “Let my tongue cleave to my jaws, if
I remember not thee” ([Psa. 137.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#006.md)<span
id="ii.CXXXVII-p11.1"></span>). That is, let me be dumb, he saith, if I
remember not thee. For what word, what sound doth he utter, who uttereth
not songs of Sion? That is our tongue, the song of Jerusalem. The song
of the love of this world is a strange tongue, a barbarous tongue, which
we have learnt in our captivity. Dumb then will he be to God, who
forgetteth Jerusalem. And it is not enough to remember: for her enemies
too remember her, desiring to overthrow her. “What is that city?” say
they; “who are the Christians? what sort of men are the Christians?
would they were not Christians.” Now the captive band hath conquered its
capturers; still they murmur, and rage, and desire to slay the holy city
that dwells as a stranger among them. Not enough then is it to remember:
take heed how thou rememberest. For some things we remember in hate,
some in love. And so, when he had said, “If I forget thee, O Jerusalem,”
etc., he added at once, “if I prefer not Jerusalem in the height of my
joy.” For there is the height of joy where we enjoy God, where we are
safe of united brotherhood, and the union of citizenship. There no
tempter shall assail us, no one be able so much as to urge us on to any
allurement: there nought will delight us but good: there all want will
die, there perfect bliss will dawn on us.

<span id="ii.CXXXVII-p12"></span>10. Then he turneth to God in prayer
against the enemies of that city. “Remember, O Lord, the children of
Edom” ([Psa. 137.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#007.md)<span
id="ii.CXXXVII-p12.1"></span>). Edom is the same who is also called
Esau: for ye heard just now the words of the Apostle read, “Jacob have I
loved, but Esau have I hated.” <span
id="fr_5696"></span>[5697](#fn_5696.md) …Esau then signifieth all the
carnal, Jacob all the spiritual.…All carnal persons are enemies to
spiritual persons, for all such, desiring present things, persecute
those whom they see to long for things eternal. Against these the
Psalmist, looking back to Jerusalem, and beseeching God that he may be
delivered from captivity, saith—what? “Remember, O Lord, the children of
Edom.” Deliver us from carnal men, from those who imitate Esau, who are
elder brethren, yet enemies. They were first-born, but the last-born
have won the pre-eminence, for the lust of the flesh hath cast down the
former, the contempt of lust hath lifted up the latter. The other live,
and envy, and persecute. “In the day of Jerusalem.” The day of
Jerusalem, wherein it was tried, wherein it was held captive, or the day
of Jerusalem’s happiness, wherein it is freed, wherein it reaches its
goal, wherein it is made partaker of eternity? “Remember,” saith he, “O
Lord,” forget not those “who said, Rase it, rase it, even to the
foundation thereof.” Remember then, it <span id="page_632">p. 632</span>
<span id="ii.CXXXVII-Page_632"></span>means, that day wherein they
willed to overthrow Jerusalem. For how great persecutions hath the
Church suffered! How did the children of Edom, that is, carnal men,
servants of the devil and his angels, who worshipped stocks and stones,
and followed the lusts of the flesh, how did they say, “Extirpate the
Christians, destroy the Christians, let not one remain, overthrow them
even to the foundation!” Have not these things been said? And when they
were said, the persecutors were rejected, the martyrs crowned.…

<span id="ii.CXXXVII-p14"></span>11. Then he turneth himself to her, “O
daughter of Babylon, unhappy;” unhappy in thy very exulting, thy
presumption, thine enmity; “unhappy daughter of Babylon!” ([Psa.
137.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#008.md)<span
id="ii.CXXXVII-p14.1"></span>). The city is called both Babylon, and
daughter of Babylon: just as they speak of “Jerusalem” and “the daughter
of Jerusalem,” “Sion” and “the daughter of Sion,” “the Church” and “the
daughter of the Church.” As it succeedeth the other, it is called
“daughter;” as it is preferred before the other, it is called “mother.”
There was a former Babylon; did the people remain in it? Because it
succeedeth to Babylon, it is called daughter of Babylon. O daughter of
Babylon, “unhappy” thou!…

<span id="ii.CXXXVII-p15"></span>12. “Happy shall he be that repayeth
thee, as thou hast served us.” What repayment meaneth he? Herewith the
Psalm closeth, “Happy, that taketh and dasheth thy little ones against
the rock” ([Psa. 137.9](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#009.md)<span
id="ii.CXXXVII-p15.1"></span>). Her he calleth unhappy, but him happy
who payeth her as she hath served us. Do we ask, what reward? This is
the repayment. For what hath that Babylon done to us? We have already
sung in another Psalm, “The words of the wicked have prevailed against
us.” <span id="fr_5697"></span>[5698](#fn_5697.md) For when we were born,
the confusion of this world found us, and choked us while yet infants
with the empty notions of divers errors. The infant that is born
destined to be a citizen of Jerusalem, and in God’s predestination
already a citizen, but meanwhile a prisoner for a time, when learneth he
to love ought, save what his parents have whispered into his ears? They
teach him and train him in avarice, robbery, daily lying, the worship of
divers idols and devils, the unlawful remedies of enchantments and
amulets. What shall one yet an infant do, a tender soul, observing what
its elders do, save follow that which it seeth them doing. Babylon then
has persecuted us when little, but God hath given us when grown up
knowledge of ourselves, that we should not follow the errors of our
parents.…How shall they repay her? As she hath served us. Let her little
ones be choked in turn: yea let her little ones in turn be dashed, and
die. What are the little ones of Babylon? Evil desires at their birth.
For there are, who have to fight with inveterate lusts. When lust is
born, before evil habit giveth it strength against thee, when lust is
little, by no means let it gain the strength of evil habit; when it is
little, dash it. But thou fearest, lest though dashed it die not; “Dash
it against the Rock; and that Rock is Christ.” <span
id="fr_5698"></span>[5699](#fn_5698.md)

<span id="ii.CXXXVII-p18"></span>13. Brethren, let not your instruments
of music rest in your work: sing one to another songs of Sion. Readily
have ye heard; the more readily do what ye have heard, if ye wish not to
be willows of Babylon fed by its streams, and bringing no fruit. But
sigh for the everlasting Jerusalem: whither your hope goeth before, let
your life follow; there we shall be with Christ. Christ now is our Head;
now He ruleth us from above; in that city He will fold us to Himself; we
shall be equal to the Angels of God. We should not dare to imagine this
of ourselves, did not the Truth promise it. This then desire, brethren,
this day and night think on. Howsoever the world shine happily on you,
presume not, parley not willingly with your lusts. Is it a grown-up
enemy? let it be slain upon the Rock. Is it a little enemy? let it be
dashed against the Rock. Slay the grown-up ones on the Rock, and dash
the little ones against the Rock. Let the Rock conquer. Be built upon
the Rock, if ye desire not to be swept away either by the stream, or the
winds, or the rain. If ye wish to be armed against temptations in this
world, let longing for the everlasting Jerusalem grow and be
strengthened in your hearts. Your captivity will pass away, your
happiness will come; the last enemy shall be destroyed, and we shall
triumph with our King, without death.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5695"></span>[630:5696](1080170.htm#fr_5695.md) <span
id="ii.CXXXVII-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXXVII-p2"></span> Lat. CXXXVI. A sermon to the people

<span id="fn_5696"></span>[631:5697](1080170.htm#fr_5696.md) <span
id="ii.CXXXVII-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXXVII-p13"></span> [Rom. ix.
13](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#013.md)<span id="ii.CXXXVII-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5697"></span>[632:5698](1080170.htm#fr_5697.md) <span
id="ii.CXXXVII-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXXVII-p16"></span> [Ps. lxv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#003.md)<span id="ii.CXXXVII-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5698"></span>[632:5699](1080170.htm#fr_5698.md) <span
id="ii.CXXXVII-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXXVII-p17"></span> [1 Cor. x.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#004.md)<span id="ii.CXXXVII-p17.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm CXXXVIII](1080171.md)
