[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080037)  [Next](1080039.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.XXXIV"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXIV-p1"></span> <span id="ii.XXXIV-p1.1"></span><span
class="c20"><span id="ii.XXXIV-p1.2"></span>Psalm XXXIV. <span
id="fr_700"></span>[701](#fn_700.md) </span>

<span id="ii.XXXIV-p3"></span>A psalm of David, when he changed his
countenance before Abimelech, and he sent him away, and he departed.

<span id="ii.XXXIV-p4"></span>1. Because there was there a sacrifice
after the order of Aaron, and afterwards He of His Own Body and Blood
appointed a sacrifice after the order of Melchizedek; He changed then
His Countenance in the Priesthood, and sent away the kingdom of the
Jews, and came to the Gentiles. What then is, “He affected”? <span
id="fr_701"></span>[702](#fn_701.md) He was full of affection. For what is
so full of <span id="page_73">p. 73</span> <span
id="ii.XXXIV-Page_73"></span>affection as the Mercy of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who, seeing our infirmity, that He might deliver us from
everlasting death, underwent temporal death with such great injury and
contumely? “And He drummed:” because a drum is not made, except when a
skin is extended on wood; and David drummed, to signify that Christ
should be crucified. But, “He drummed upon the doors of the city:” what
are “the doors of the city,” but our hearts which we had closed against
Christ, who by the drum of His Cross hath opened the hearts of mortal
men? “And was carried in His Own Hands:” how “carried in His Own Hands”?
Because when He commended His Own Body and Blood, He took into His Hands
that which the faithful know; and in a manner carried Himself, when He
said, “This is My Body.” <span id="fr_702"></span>[703](#fn_702.md) “And He
fell down at the doors of the gate;” that is, He humbled Himself. For
this it is, to fall down even at the very beginning of our faith. For
the door of the gate is the beginning of faith; whence beginneth the
Church, and arriveth at last even unto sight: that as it believeth those
things which it seeth not, it may deserve to enjoy them, when it shall
have begun to see face to face. So is the title of the Psalm; briefly we
have heard it; let us now hear the very words of Him that affecteth, and
drummeth upon the doors of the city.

<span id="ii.XXXIV-p7"></span>2. “I will bless the Lord at all times;
His praise shall be ever in my mouth” ([Psa.
34.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#001)<span id="ii.XXXIV-p7.1"></span>.md).
So speaketh Christ, so also let a Christian speak; for a Christian is in
the Body of Christ; and therefore was Christ made Man, that that
Christian might be enabled to be an Angel, who saith, “I will bless the
Lord at all times.” When shall I “bless the Lord”? When He blesseth
thee? When the goods of this world abound? When thou hast great
abundance of corn, oil, and wine, of gold and silver, of servants and
cattle; when this mortal health remaineth unwounded and sound; when all
that are born to thee grow up, nothing is withdrawn by immature death,
happiness wholly reigneth in thy house, and all things overflow around
thee; then shalt thou bless the Lord? No; but “at all times.” Therefore
both then, and when according to the time, or according to the scourges
of our Lord God, these things are troubled, are taken away, are seldom
born to thee, and born pass away. For these things come to pass, and
thence followeth penury, need, labour, pain, and temptation. But thou,
who hast sung, “I will bless the Lord at all times: His praise shall be
ever in my mouth,” both when He giveth them, bless; and when He taketh
them away, bless. For it is He that giveth, it is He that taketh away:
but Himself from him that blesseth Him He taketh not away.

<span id="ii.XXXIV-p8"></span>3. But who is it that blesseth the Lord at
all times, except the humble in heart. For very humility taught our Lord
in His Own Body and Blood: because when He commendeth His Own Body and
Blood, He commendeth His Humility, in that which is written in this
history, in that seeming madness of David, which we have passed by, “And
his spittle ran down over his beard.” <span
id="fr_703"></span>[704](#fn_703.md) When the Apostle was read, <span
id="fr_704"></span>[705](#fn_704.md) Ye heard the same spittle, but running
down over the beard. One saith perhaps, What spittle have we heard? Was
it not read but now, where the Apostle saith, “The Jews require a sign,
and the Greeks seek after wisdom?” But now it was read, “But we preach,”
saith he, “Christ crucified” (for then He drummed), “unto the Jews a
stumbling block, and unto the Greeks foolishness; but unto them which
are called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ the Power of God, and the
Wisdom of God. Because the Foolishness of God is wiser than men, and the
Weakness of God is stronger than men.” <span
id="fr_705"></span>[706](#fn_705.md) For spittle signifieth foolishness;
spittle signifieth weakness. But if the Foolishness of God is wiser than
men, and the Weakness of God is stronger than men; let not the spittle
as it were offend thee, but observe that it runneth down over the beard:
for as by the spittle, weakness; so by the beard, strength is signified.
He covered then His Strength by the body of His Weakness, and that which
without was weak, appeared as it were in spittle; but within His Divine
Strength was covered as a beard. Therefore humility is commended unto
us. Be humble if thou wouldest bless the Lord at all times, and that His
praise should be ever in thy mouth.…

<span id="ii.XXXIV-p12"></span>4. But wherefore doth man bless the Lord
at all times? Because he is humble. What is it to be humble? To take not
praise unto himself. Who would himself be praised, is proud: who is not
proud, is humble. Wouldest thou not then be proud? That thou mayest be
humble, say what is here written; “In the Lord shall my soul be praised:
the humble shall hear thereof and be glad” ([Psa.
34.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#002.md)<span
id="ii.XXXIV-p12.1"></span>). Those then who will not be praised in the
Lord, are not humble, but fierce, rough, lifted up, proud. Gentle cattle
would the Lord have; be thou the Lord’s *jumentum;* that is, be thou
humble. He sitteth upon thee, He ruleth thee: fear not lest thou
stumble, and fall headlong: that indeed is thy infirmity; but consider
Who sitteth upon thee. Thou art an ass’s colt, but thou carriest Christ.
<span id="page_74">p. 74</span> <span id="ii.XXXIV-Page_74"></span>For
even He on an ass’s colt came into the city; and that beast was
gentle.…“Be not ye as the horse or as the mule, which have no
understanding.” <span id="fr_706"></span>[707](#fn_706.md) For horse and
mule sometimes lift up their neck, and by their own fierceness throw off
their rider. They are tamed with the bit, with bridle, with stripes,
until they learn to submit, and to carry their master. But thou, before
thy jaws are bruised with the bridle, be humble, and carry thy Lord:
wish not praise for thyself, but praised be He who sitteth upon thee,
and say thou, “In the Lord shall my soul be praised; the humble shall
hear thereof, and be glad.”…

<span id="ii.XXXIV-p14"></span>5. Now followeth, “O magnify the Lord
with me” ([Psa. 34.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#003.md)<span
id="ii.XXXIV-p14.1"></span>). Who is this that exhorteth us, that we
should magnify the Lord with him? Whoever, Brethren, is in the body of
Christ, ought for this to labour, that the Lord may be magnified with
him. For he loveth the Lord, whoever he is. And how doth he love Him? So
as not to envy his fellow-lover.…Let them blush who so love God as to
envy others. Abandoned men love a charioteer, and whoever loveth a
charioteer or hunter, wisheth the whole people to love with him, and
exhorteth, saying, Love with me this pantomime, love with me this or
that shame. He calleth among the people that shame may be loved with
him; and doth not a Christian call in the Church, that the Truth of God
may be loved with him? Stir up then love in yourselves, Brethren; and
call to every one of yours, and say, “O magnify the Lord with me.” Let
there be in you that fervour. Wherefore are these things recited and
explained? If ye love God, bring quickly to the love of God all who are
joined unto you, and all who are in your house; if the Body of Christ is
loved by you, that is, if the unity of the Church, bring them quickly to
enjoy, and say, “O magnify the Lord with me.”

<span id="ii.XXXIV-p15"></span>6. “And let us exalt His Name
together.” <span id="fr_707"></span>[708](#fn_707.md) What is, “let us
exalt His Name together”? That is, in one. For many copies so have it,
“O magnify the Lord with me; and let us exalt His Name in one.” <span
id="fr_708"></span>[709](#fn_708.md) Whether it be said, “together,” or “in
one,” it is the same thing. Therefore bring quickly whom ye can, by
exhorting, by transporting, <span id="fr_709"></span>[710](#fn_709.md) by
beseeching, by disputing, by rendering a reason, with meekness, with
gentleness. Bring them quickly unto love; that if they magnify the Lord,
they may magnify Him in one.…

<span id="ii.XXXIV-p19"></span>7. “I sought the Lord, and He heard me”
([Psa. 34.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#004.md)<span
id="ii.XXXIV-p19.1"></span>). Where heard the Lord? Within. Where giveth
He? Within. There thou prayest, there thou art heard, there thou art
blessed. Thou hast prayed, thou art heard, thou art blessed; and he
knoweth not who standeth by thee: it is all carried on in secret, as the
Lord saith in the Gospel, “Enter into thy closet, and when thou hast
shut thy door, pray to thy Father which is in secret; and thy Father
which seeth in secret, shall reward thee openly.” <span
id="fr_710"></span>[711](#fn_710.md) When therefore thou enterest into thy
chamber, thou enterest into thy heart. Blessed are they who rejoice when
they enter into their heart, and find therein nought of evil.…

<span id="ii.XXXIV-p21"></span>8. “I sought the Lord, and He heard me.”
Who then are not heard, seek not the Lord. Attend, Holy Brethren; <span
id="fr_711"></span>[712](#fn_711.md) he said not, I sought gold from the
Lord, and He heard me; I sought from the Lord long life, and He heard
me; I sought from the Lord this or that, and He heard me. It is one
thing to seek anything from the Lord, another to seek the Lord Himself.
“I sought” (saith he) “the Lord, and He heard me.” But thou, when thou
prayest, saying, Kill that my enemy, seekest not the Lord, but, as it
were, makest thyself a judge over thy enemy, and makest thy God an
executioner.  <span id="fr_712"></span>[713](#fn_712.md) How knowest thou
that he is not better than thou, whose death thou seekest? In that very
thing haply he is, that he seeketh not thine. Therefore seek not from
the Lord anything without, but seek the Lord Himself, and He will hear
thee, and while thou yet speakest, He will say, “Lo, here I am.” <span
id="fr_713"></span>[714](#fn_713.md) …

<span id="ii.XXXIV-p25"></span>9. I have said who was the exhorter,
namely, that lover who would not alone embrace what he loveth, and
saith, “Approach unto Him, and be ye lightened” ([Psa.
34.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#005.md)<span
id="ii.XXXIV-p25.1"></span>). For he saith what he himself proved. For
some spiritual person in the Body of Christ, or even our Lord Jesus
Christ Himself according to the flesh, the Head exhorting His Own
Members, saith; what? “Approach unto Him, and be ye lightened.” Or
rather some spiritual Christian inviteth us to approach to our Lord
Jesus Christ Himself. But let us approach to Him and be lightened; not
as the Jews approached to Him, that they might be darkened; for they
approached to Him that they might crucify Him: let us approach to Him
that we may receive His Body and Blood. They by Him crucified were
darkened; we by eating and drinking The Crucified are lightened.
“Approach unto Him, and be ye lightened.” Lo, this is said to the
Gentiles. Christ was crucified amid the Jews raging and seeing; the
Gentiles were absent; lo, they have approached who were in darkness, and
they who saw not are lightened. Whereby approach the Gentiles? By
following with faith, by longing with the <span id="page_75">p.
75</span> <span id="ii.XXXIV-Page_75"></span>heart, by running with
charity. Thy feet are thy charity. Have two feet, be not lame. What are
thy two feet? The two commandments of love, of thy God, and of thy
Neighbour. With these feet run thou unto God, approach unto Him, for He
hath both exhorted thee to run, and hath Himself shed His Own Light, as
he hath magnificently and divinely continued. <span
id="fr_714"></span>[715](#fn_714.md) “And your faces shall not be ashamed.”
“Approach” (saith he) “unto Him, and be ye lightened; and your faces
shall not be ashamed.” No face shall be ashamed but of the proud.
Wherefore? Because he would be lifted up, and when he hath suffered
insult, or ignominy, or mischance in this world, or any affliction, he
is ashamed. But fear not thou, approach unto Him, and thou shalt not be
ashamed.…

<span id="ii.XXXIV-p27"></span>10. As the Prophet testifieth, “The poor
man cried, and the Lord heard him” ([Psa.
34.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#006.md)<span
id="ii.XXXIV-p27.1"></span>). He teacheth thee how thou mayest be heard.
Therefore art thou not heard, because thou art rich. Lest haply thou
say, thou criedst and wast not heard, hear wherefore; “The poor man
cried, and the Lord heard him.” As poor cry thou, and the Lord heareth.
And how shall I cry as poor? By not, if thou hast aught, presuming
therefrom upon thy own strength: by understanding that thou art needy;
by understanding that so long art thou poor, as thou hast not Him who
maketh thee rich. But how did the Lord hear him? “And saved him out of
all his troubles.” And how saveth He men out of all their troubles? “The
Angel of the Lord shall send <span id="fr_715"></span>[716](#fn_715.md)
round about them that fear Him, and shall deliver them” ([Psa.
34.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#007.md)<span
id="ii.XXXIV-p28.2"></span>). So it is written, brethren, not as some
bad copies have it, “The Lord shall send His Angel round about them that
fear Him, and He shall deliver them:” but thus, “The Angel of the Lord
shall send round about them that fear Him, and shall deliver them.” Whom
called He here the Angel of the Lord, who shall send round about them
that fear Him, and shall deliver them? Our Lord Jesus Christ Himself is
called in Prophecy, the Angel of the great Counsel, the Messenger of the
great Counsel; <span id="fr_716"></span>[717](#fn_716.md) so the Prophets
called Him. <span id="fr_717"></span>[718](#fn_717.md) Even He then, the
Angel of the great Counsel, that is, the Messenger, shall send unto them
that fear the Lord, and shall deliver them. Fear not then lest thou be
hid: wheresoever thou hast feared the Lord, there doth that Angel know
thee, who shall send to succour thee, and shall deliver thee.

<span id="ii.XXXIV-p31"></span>11. Now will He speak openly of the same
Sacrament, whereby He was carried in His Own Hands. “O taste and see
that the Lord is good” ([Psa.
34.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#008.md)<span
id="ii.XXXIV-p31.1"></span>). Doth not the Psalm now open itself, and
show thee that seeming insanity and constant madness, the same insanity
and sober inebriety of that David, who in a figure showed I know not
what, when in the person of king Achis they said to him, How is it?
 <span id="fr_718"></span>[719](#fn_718.md) When the Lord said, “Except a
man eat My Flesh and drink My Blood, he shall have no life in
him”? <span id="fr_719"></span>[720](#fn_719.md) And they in whom reigned
Achis, that is, error and ignorance, said; what said they? “How can this
man give us his flesh to eat?” <span id="fr_720"></span>[721](#fn_720.md)
If thou art ignorant, “Taste and see that the Lord is good:” but if thou
understandest not, thou art king Achis: David shall change His
Countenance and shall depart from thee, and shall quit thee, and shall
depart. <span id="fr_721"></span>[722](#fn_721.md)

<span id="ii.XXXIV-p36"></span>12. “Blessed is the man that trusteth in
Him.” Why needeth this to be explained at length? Whoever trusteth not
in the Lord, is miserable. Who is there that trusteth not in the Lord?
He that trusteth in himself.…

<span id="ii.XXXIV-p37"></span>13. “O fear the Lord, all ye His saints,
for there is no want to them that fear Him” ([Psa.
34.9](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#009.md)<span
id="ii.XXXIV-p37.1"></span>). For many therefore will not fear God the
Lord, lest they suffer hunger. It is said to them, Defraud not; and they
say, Whence can I feed myself? No art can be without imposture; no
business can be without fraud. But fraud God punisheth: fear God. But if
I should fear God, I shall not have whence to live. “O fear the Lord,
all ye His saints, for there is no want to them that fear Him.” He
promiseth plenty to him that trembleth, and doubteth, lest haply if he
should fear God, he should lose things superfluous. The Lord fed thee
despising Him, and will He desert thee fearing Him? Attend, and say not,
Such an one is rich, and I am poor. I fear the Lord, he by not fearing
how much has he gained, and I by fearing am bare! See what follows; “The
rich <span id="fr_722"></span>[723](#fn_722.md) do lack and suffer hunger,
but they that seek the Lord shall not want any good thing” ([Psa.
34.10](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#010.md)<span
id="ii.XXXIV-p38.1"></span>). If thou receive it according to the
letter, He seemeth to deceive thee, for thou seest that many rich men
that are wicked die in their riches, and are not made poor while they
live; thou seest them grow old, and come even to the end of life amid
great abundance and riches. Thou seest their funeral pomp celebrated
with great profusion, the man himself brought rich even to the
sepul<span id="page_76">p. 76</span> <span
id="ii.XXXIV-Page_76"></span>chre, having expired in beds of ivory, his
family weeping around; and thou sayest in thy mind, if haply thou
knowest some both sins and crimes done by him: I know what things that
man hath done; lo, he hath grown old, he hath died in his bed, his
friends follow him to the grave, his funeral is celebrated with all this
pomp; I know what he hath done; the Scripture has deceived me, and has
spoken falsely, where I hear and sing; “The rich do lack and suffer
hunger.” When was this man in need? when did he suffer hunger? “But they
that seek the Lord shall not want any good thing.” Daily I rise up to
Church, daily I bend the knee, daily I seek the Lord, and have nothing
good: this man sought not the Lord, and he hath died in the midst of all
these good things! Thus thinking, the snare of offence choketh him; for
he seeketh mortal food on the earth, and seeketh not a true reward in
heaven, and so he putteth his head into the devil’s noose, his jaws are
tied close, and the devil holdeth him fast unto evil doing, that so he
may imitate the evil men, whom he seeth to die in such plenty.

<span id="ii.XXXIV-p39"></span>14. Therefore understand it not so.…When
thou art filled with spiritual riches, canst thou be poor? And was he
therefore rich, because he had a bed of ivory; and art thou poor who
hast the chamber of thy heart filled with such jewelry of virtues,
justice, truth, charity, faith, endurance? Unfold thy riches, if thou
hast them, and compare them with the riches of the rich. But such an one
has found in the market mules of great value, and has bought them. If
thou couldest find faith to be sold, how much wouldest thou give for
that, which God willeth that thou shouldest have gratis, and thou art
ungrateful? Those rich then lack, they lack, and what is heavier, they
lack bread.…For He hath said, “I am the Living Bread which came down
from Heaven.” <span id="fr_723"></span>[724](#fn_723.md) And again,
“Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after righteousness: for
they shall be filled.” <span id="fr_724"></span>[725](#fn_724.md) “But they
that seek the Lord shall not want any good thing:” but what manner of
good, I have already said.

<span id="ii.XXXIV-p42"></span>15. “Come, ye children, hearken unto me:
I will teach you the fear of the Lord” ([Psa.
34.11](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#011.md)<span
id="ii.XXXIV-p42.1"></span>). Ye think, <span
id="fr_725"></span>[726](#fn_725.md) brethren, that I say this: think that
David saith it; think that an Apostle saith it; nay think that our Lord
Jesus Christ Himself saith it; “Come, ye children, hearken unto Me.” Let
us hearken unto Him together: hearken ye unto Him through us. For He
would teach us; He the Humble, He that drummeth, He that affecteth,
would teach us.…

<span id="ii.XXXIV-p44"></span>16. “What man is he that desireth life,
and loveth to see good days?” ([Psa.
34.12](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#012.md)<span
id="ii.XXXIV-p44.1"></span>). He asketh a question. Doth not every one
among you answer, I? Is there any man among you that loveth not life,
that is, that desireth not life, and loveth not to see good days? Do ye
not daily thus murmur, and thus speak; How long shall we suffer these
things? Daily are they worse and worse: in our fathers’ time were days
more joyful, were days better. O if thou couldest ask those same, thy
fathers, in like manner would they murmur to thee of their own days. Our
fathers were happy, miserable are we, evil days have we: such an one
ruled over us, we thought that after his death might some refreshing be
given to us; worse things have come: O God, show unto us good days!
“What man is he that desireth life, and loveth to see good days?” Let
him not seek here good days. A good thing he seeketh, but not in its
right place doth he seek it. As, if thou shouldest seek some righteous
man in a country, wherein he lived not, it would be said to thee, A good
man thou seekest, a great man thou seekest, seek him still, but not
here; in vain thou seekest him here, thou wilt never find him. Good days
thou seekest, together let us seek them, seek not here.…Read the
Scriptures.…

<span id="ii.XXXIV-p45"></span>17. Let not a Christian then murmur, let
him see whose steps he followeth: but if he loveth good days, let him
hearken unto Him teaching and saying, “Come, ye children, hearken unto
Me; I will teach you the fear of the Lord.” What wouldest thou? Life and
good days. Hear, and do. “Keep thy tongue from evil” ([Psa.
34.13](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#013.md)<span
id="ii.XXXIV-p45.1"></span>). This do. I will not, saith a miserable
man, I will not keep my tongue from evil, and yet I desire life and good
days. If a workman of thine should say to thee, I indeed lay waste this
vineyard, yet I require of thee my reward; thou broughtest me to the
vineyard to lop and prune it, I cut away all the useful wood, I will cut
short also the very trunks of the vines, that thou have thereon nothing
to gather, and when I have done this, thou shalt repay to me my labour.
Wouldest thou not call him mad? Wouldest thou not drive him from thy
house or ever he put his hand to the knife? Such are those men who would
both do evil, and swear falsely, and speak blasphemy against God, and
murmur, and defraud, and be drunken, and dispute, and commit adultery,
and use charms, and consult diviners, and withal see good days. To such
it is said, thou canst not doing ill seek a good reward. If thou art
unjust, shall God also be unjust? What shall I do, then? What desirest
thou? Life I desire, good days I desire. “Keep thy tongue from evil, and
thy lips that they speak no guile,” that is, defraud not any, lie not to
any.

<span id="ii.XXXIV-p46"></span>18. But what is, “Depart from evil”?
([Psa. 34.14](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#014.md)<span
id="ii.XXXIV-p46.1"></span>). It is little that thou injure none, murder
<span id="page_77">p. 77</span> <span id="ii.XXXIV-Page_77"></span>none,
steal not, commit not adultery, do no wrong, speak no false witness;
“Depart from evil.” When thou hast departed, thou sayest, Now I am safe,
I have done all, I shall have life, I shall see good days. Not only
saith he, “Depart from evil,” but also, “and do good.” It is nothing
that thou spoil not: clothe the naked. If thou hast not spoiled, thou
hast declined from evil; but thou wilt not do good, except thou receive
the stranger into thine house. So then depart from evil, as to do good.
“Seek peace, and ensue it.” He hath not said, Thou shalt have peace
here; seek it, and ensue it. Whither shall I ensue it? Whither it hath
gone before. For the Lord is our peace, hath risen again, and hath
ascended into Heaven. “Seek peace, and ensue it;” because when thou also
hast risen, this mortal shall be changed, and thou shalt embrace peace
there where no man shall trouble thee. For there is perfect peace, where
thou wilt not hunger.…

<span id="ii.XXXIV-p47"></span>19. “The Eyes of the Lord are upon the
righteous:” fear not then; labour; the eyes of the Lord are upon thee.
“And His Ears are open unto their prayers” ([Psa.
34.15](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#015.md)<span
id="ii.XXXIV-p47.1"></span>). What wouldest thou more? If an householder
in a great house should not hearken to a servant murmuring, he would
complain, and say, What hardship do we here suffer, and none heareth us.
Canst thou say this of God, What hardships I suffer, and none heareth
me? If He heard me, haply, sayest thou, He would take away my
tribulation: I cry unto Him, and yet have tribulation. Only do thou hold
fast His ways, and when thou art in tribulation, He heareth thee. But He
is a Physician, and still hast thou something of putrefaction; thou
criest out, but still He cutteth, and taketh not away His Hand, until He
hath cut as much as pleaseth Him. For that Physician is cruel who
heareth a man, and spareth his wound and putrefaction. How do mothers
rub their children in the baths for their health. Do not the little ones
cry out in their hands? Are they then cruel because they spare not, nor
hearken unto their tears? Are they not full of affection? And yet the
children cry out, and are not spared. So our God also is full of
charity, but therefore seemeth He not to hear, that He may spare and
heal us for everlasting.

<span id="ii.XXXIV-p48"></span>20. Haply say the wicked, I securely do
evil, because the Eyes of the Lord are not upon me: God attendeth to the
righteous, me He seeth not, and whatever I do, I do securely.
Immediately added the Holy Spirit, seeing the thoughts of men, and said,
“But the Face of the Lord is against them that do evil; to cut off the
remembrance of them from the earth” ([Psa.
34.16](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#016.md)<span
id="ii.XXXIV-p48.1"></span>).

<span id="ii.XXXIV-p49"></span>21. “The righteous cried, and the Lord
heard them, and delivered them out of all their troubles” ([Psa.
34.17](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#017.md)<span
id="ii.XXXIV-p49.1"></span>). Righteous were the Three Children; out of
the furnace cried they unto the Lord, and in His praises their flames
cooled. The flame could not approach nor hurt the innocent and righteous
Children praising God, and He delivered them out of the fire. <span
id="fr_726"></span>[727](#fn_726.md) Some one saith, Lo, truly righteous
were those who were heard, as it is written, “The righteous cried, and
the Lord heard them, and delivered them out of all their troubles:” but
I have cried, and He delivereth me not; either I am not righteous, or I
do not <span id="fr_727"></span>[728](#fn_727.md) the things which He
commandeth me, or haply He seeth me not. Fear not: only do what He
commandeth; and if He deliver thee not bodily, He will deliver thee
spiritually. For He who took out of the fire the Three Children, did He
take out of the fire the Maccabees? <span
id="fr_728"></span>[729](#fn_728.md) Did not the first sing hymns in the
flames, these last in the flames expire? The God of the Three Children,
was not He the God also of the Maccabees? The one He delivered, the
other He delivered not. Nay, He delivered both: but the Three Children
He so delivered, that even the carnal were confounded; but the Maccabees
therefore He delivered not so, that those who persecuted them should go
into greater torments, while they thought that they had overcome God’s
Martyrs. He delivered Peter, when the Angel came unto him being in
prison, and said, “Arise, and go forth,” <span
id="fr_729"></span>[730](#fn_729.md) and suddenly his chains were loosed,
and he followed the Angel, and He delivered him. Had Peter lost
righteousness when He delivered him not from the cross? Did He not
deliver him then? Even then He delivered him. Did his long life make him
unrighteous? Haply He heard him more at last than at first, when truly
He delivered him out of all his troubles. For when He first delivered
him, how many things did he suffer afterwards! For thither He sent him
at last, where he could have suffered no evil.

<span id="ii.XXXIV-p54"></span>22. “The Lord is nigh unto them that have
broken their heart; and saveth such as be lowly in spirit” ([Psa.
34.18](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#018.md)<span
id="ii.XXXIV-p54.1"></span>). God is High: let a Christian be lowly. If
he would that the Most High God draw nigh unto him, let him be lowly. A
great mystery, Brethren. God is above all: thou raisest thyself, and
touchest not Him: thou humblest thyself, and He descendeth unto thee.
“Many are the troubles of the righteous” ([Psa.
34.19](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#019.md)<span
id="ii.XXXIV-p54.2"></span>): doth He say, “Therefore let Christians be
righteous, therefore let them hear My Word, that they may suffer no
tribulation? He promiseth not this; but saith, “Many are the troubles of
the righteous.” Rather, if they be unrighteous they have fewer troubles,
if righteous they have many. But after few tribulations, or none, these
shall come to tribulation everlasting, whence <span id="page_78">p.
78</span> <span id="ii.XXXIV-Page_78"></span>they shall never be
delivered: but the righteous after many tribulations shall come to peace
everlasting, where they shall never suffer any evil. “Many are the
tribulations of the righteous: but the Lord delivereth him out of all.”

<span id="ii.XXXIV-p55"></span>23. “The Lord keepeth all their bones:
not one of them shall be broken” ([Psa.
34.20](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#020.md)<span
id="ii.XXXIV-p55.1"></span>): this also, Brethren, let us not receive
carnally. Bones are the firm supports of the faithful. For as in flesh
our bones give firmness, so in the heart of a Christian it is faith that
gives firmness. <span id="fr_730"></span>[731](#fn_730.md) The patience
then which is in faith, is as the bones of the inner man: this is that
which cannot be broken. “The Lord keepeth all their bones: not one of
them shall be broken.” If of our Lord God Jesus Christ he had said this,
“The Lord keepeth all the bones of His Son; not one of them shall be
broken;” as is prefigured of Him also in another place, when the lamb
was spoken of that should be slain, and it was said of it, “Neither
shall ye break a bone thereof:”  <span id="fr_731"></span>[732](#fn_731.md)
then was it fulfilled in the Lord, because when He hung upon the Cross,
He expired before they came to the Cross, and found His Body lifeless
already, and would not break His legs, that it might be fulfilled which
was written. <span id="fr_732"></span>[733](#fn_732.md) But He gave this
promise to other Christians also, “The Lord keepeth all their bones; not
one of them shall be broken.” Therefore, Brethren, if we see any Saint
suffer tribulation, and haply either by a Physician so cut, or by some
persecutor so mangled, that his bones be broken; let us not say, This
man was not righteous, for this hath the Lord promised to His righteous,
of whom He said, “The Lord keepeth all their bones; not one of them
shall be broken.” Wouldest thou see that He spoke of other bones, those
which we called the firm supports of faith, that is, patience and
endurance in all tribulations? For these are the bones which are not
broken. Hear, and see ye in the very Passion of our Lord, what I say.
The Lord was in the middle Crucified; near Him were two thieves: the one
mocked, the other believed: the one was condemned, the other justified:
the one had his punishment both in this world, and that which shall be,
but unto the other said the Lord, “Verily I say unto thee, To-day shalt
thou be with Me in Paradise;” <span id="fr_733"></span>[734](#fn_733.md)
and yet those who came brake not the bones of the Lord, but of the
thieves they brake: as much were broken the bones of the thief who
blasphemed, as of the thief who believed. Where then is that which is
spoken, “The Lord keepeth all their bones; not one of them shall be
broken”? Lo, unto whom He said, “To-day shalt thou be with Me in
Paradise,” could He keep all his bones? The Lord answereth thee: Yea, I
kept them: for the firm support of his faith could not be broken by
those blows whereby his legs were broken.

<span id="ii.XXXIV-p60"></span>24. “The death of sinners is the worst”
([Psa. 34.21](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#021.md)<span
id="ii.XXXIV-p60.1"></span>). Attend, Brethren, for the sake of those
things which I said. Truly Great is the Lord, and His Mercy, truly Great
is He who gave to us to eat His Body, wherein He suffered such great
things, and His Blood to drink. How regardeth He them that think evil
and say, “Such an one died ill, by beasts was he devoured: he was not a
righteous man, therefore he perished ill; for else would he not have
perished.” Is he then righteous who dieth in his own house and in his
own bed? This then (sayest thou) it is whereat I wonder; because I know
the sins and the crimes of this same man, and yet he died well; in his
own house, within his own doors, with no injury of travel, with none
even in mature <span id="fr_734"></span>[735](#fn_734.md) age. Hearken,
“The death of sinners is worst.” What seemeth to thee a good death, is
worst if thou couldest see within. Thou seest him outwardly lying on his
bed, dost thou see him inwardly carried to hell? Hearken, Brethren, and
learn from the Gospel what is the “worst death” of sinners. Were there
not two in that age, <span id="fr_735"></span>[736](#fn_735.md) a rich man
who was clothed in purple and fine linen, and fared sumptuously every
day; another a poor man who lay at his door full of sores, and the dogs
came and licked his sores, and he desired to be fed with the crumbs
which fell from the rich man’s table? Now it came to pass that the poor
man died (righteous was that poor man), and was carried by Angels into
Abraham’s bosom. He who saw his body lying at the rich man’s door, and
no man to bury it, what haply said he? So die he who is my enemy; and
whoever persecutes me, so may I see him. His body is accursed with
spitting, his wounds stink; and yet in Abraham’s bosom he resteth. <span
id="fr_736"></span>[737](#fn_736.md) If we are Christians, let us believe:
if we believe not, Brethren, let none feign himself a Christian. Faith
bringeth us to the end. As the Lord spake these things, so are they.
Doth indeed an astrologer <span id="fr_737"></span>[738](#fn_737.md) speak
unto thee, and it is true, and doth Christ speak, and it is false? But
by what sort of death died the rich man? What sort of death must it not
be in purple and fine linen, how sumptuous, how pompous! What funeral
ceremonies were there! In what spices was that body buried! And yet when
he was in hell, being in torments, from the finger of that despised poor
man he desired one drop of water to be poured upon his burning tongue,
and obtained it not. Learn then what meaneth, <span id="page_79">p.
79</span> <span id="ii.XXXIV-Page_79"></span>“The death of sinners is
worst;” and ask not beds covered with costly garments, and to have the
flesh wrapped in many rich things, friends exhibiting a show of
lamentation, a household beating their breasts, a crowd of attendants
going before and following when the body is carried out, marble and
gilded memorials. For if ye ask those things, they answer you what is
false, that of many not light sinners, but altogether wicked, the death
is best, who have deserved to be so lamented, so embalmed, so covered,
so carried out, so entombed. But ask the Gospel, and it will show to
your faith the soul of the rich man burning in torments, which was
nothing profited by all those honours and obsequies, which to his dead
body the vanity of the living did afford.

<span id="ii.XXXIV-p65"></span>25. But because there are many kinds of
sinners, and not to be a sinner is difficult, or perhaps in this life
impossible, he added immediately, of what kind of sinners the death is
worst. “And they that hate the righteous one” (saith he) “shall perish.”
What righteous one, but “Him that justifieth the ungodly”? <span
id="fr_738"></span>[739](#fn_738.md) Whom, but our Lord Jesus Christ, who
is also “the propitiation for our sins”? <span
id="fr_739"></span>[740](#fn_739.md) Who then hate Him, have the worst
death; because they die in their sins, who are not through Him
reconciled to our God. “For the Lord redeemeth the souls of His
servants.” But according to the soul is death to be understood either
the worst or best, not according to bodily either dishonour, or honours
which men see. “And none of them which trust in Him shall perish” ([Psa.
34.22](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#022.md)<span
id="ii.XXXIV-p67.2"></span>); this is the manner of human righteousness,
that mortal life, however advanced, because without sin it cannot be, in
this perisheth not, while it trusteth in Him, in whom is remission of
sins. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_700"></span>[72:701](1080038.htm#fr_700.md) <span
id="ii.XXXIV-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXIV-p2"></span> Lat. XXXIII.

<span id="fn_701"></span>[72:702](1080038.htm#fr_701.md) <span
id="ii.XXXIV-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXIV-p5"></span> \[[1 Sam. xxi.
13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1021.htm#013.md)<span id="ii.XXXIV-p5.1"></span>. He
follows the Septuagint, which differs from the Vulgate.—C.\]

<span id="fn_702"></span>[73:703](1080038.htm#fr_702.md) <span
id="ii.XXXIV-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXIV-p6"></span> [Matt. xxvi.
26](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#026.md)<span id="ii.XXXIV-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_703"></span>[73:704](1080038.htm#fr_703.md) <span
id="ii.XXXIV-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXIV-p9"></span> [1 Sam. xxi.
13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1021.htm#013.md)<span id="ii.XXXIV-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_704"></span>[73:705](1080038.htm#fr_704.md) <span
id="ii.XXXIV-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXIV-p10"></span> \[This expression, so frequent in St.
Augustin, refers to the Epistle for the day. As the Law and Prophets in
the synagogue, so also the Evangelists and Apostles were read
ceremonially in the Church.—C.\]

<span id="fn_705"></span>[73:706](1080038.htm#fr_705.md) <span
id="ii.XXXIV-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXIV-p11"></span> [1 Cor. i.
22-25](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#022.md)<span
id="ii.XXXIV-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_706"></span>[74:707](1080038.htm#fr_706.md) <span
id="ii.XXXIV-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXIV-p13"></span> [Ps. xxxii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#009.md)<span id="ii.XXXIV-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_707"></span>[74:708](1080038.htm#fr_707.md) <span
id="ii.XXXIV-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXIV-p16"></span> *In idipsum*.

<span id="fn_708"></span>[74:709](1080038.htm#fr_708.md) <span
id="ii.XXXIV-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXIV-p17"></span> *In unum*. \[In the Septuagint <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.XXXIV-p17.1"></span>ἐπὶ τὸ αὐτό</span>, as in
[Acts ii. 1](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#001.md)<span
id="ii.XXXIV-p17.2"></span>.—C.\]

<span id="fn_709"></span>[74:710](1080038.htm#fr_709.md) <span
id="ii.XXXIV-p17.3"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXIV-p18"></span> *Al*. “by working.”

<span id="fn_710"></span>[74:711](1080038.htm#fr_710.md) <span
id="ii.XXXIV-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXIV-p20"></span> [Matt. vi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#006.md)<span id="ii.XXXIV-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_711"></span>[74:712](1080038.htm#fr_711.md) <span
id="ii.XXXIV-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXIV-p22"></span> \[He makes the same exhortation to a
brother bishop who was present: *attendat, Sanctitas Vestra*.—C.\]

<span id="fn_712"></span>[74:713](1080038.htm#fr_712.md) <span
id="ii.XXXIV-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXIV-p23"></span> *Quæstionarium*.

<span id="fn_713"></span>[74:714](1080038.htm#fr_713.md) <span
id="ii.XXXIV-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXIV-p24"></span> [Isa. lxv.
24](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#024.md)<span id="ii.XXXIV-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_714"></span>[75:715](1080038.htm#fr_714.md) <span
id="ii.XXXIV-p25.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXIV-p26"></span> So our <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.XXXIV-p26.1"></span>mss</span>. and others, as Ed. Ben. says,
*magno consensu. Sicut magnifice et divine secutus est.* Ben. however
reads, “so that ye may be able magnificently and divinely to follow
Him.” *Sic, ut magnifice et divine se sequi possitis*. See on [Ps.
xxii.](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#000.md)<span id="ii.XXXIV-p26.2"></span>
Exp. ii. § 16. “Gloriously expressed.” The word is *magnifice*.

<span id="fn_715"></span>[75:716](1080038.htm#fr_715.md) <span
id="ii.XXXIV-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXIV-p28"></span> *Immittet*. LXX. <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.XXXIV-p28.1"></span>παρεμβαλεῖ</span>, “shall
encamp.”

<span id="fn_716"></span>[75:717](1080038.htm#fr_716.md) <span
id="ii.XXXIV-p28.3"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXIV-p29"></span> [Isa.
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006.md), [Mal.
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#001.md)<span id="ii.XXXIV-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_717"></span>[75:718](1080038.htm#fr_717.md) <span
id="ii.XXXIV-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXIV-p30"></span> \[See Ante-Nicene Fathers, vol. i. p.
223, note 7; also vol. v. p. 628, note 2, and *passim*.—C.\]

<span id="fn_718"></span>[75:719](1080038.htm#fr_718.md) <span
id="ii.XXXIV-p31.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXIV-p32"></span> *Al*. “when those wretched ones before
king Achis said, How is it?”

<span id="fn_719"></span>[75:720](1080038.htm#fr_719.md) <span
id="ii.XXXIV-p32.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXIV-p33"></span> [John vi.
53](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#053.md)<span id="ii.XXXIV-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_720"></span>[75:721](1080038.htm#fr_720.md) <span
id="ii.XXXIV-p33.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXIV-p34"></span> [John vi.
52](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#052.md)<span id="ii.XXXIV-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_721"></span>[75:722](1080038.htm#fr_721.md) <span
id="ii.XXXIV-p34.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXIV-p35"></span> \[Luther’s doctrine, and even Calvin’s,
admits of this language. Rhetorically, even Zwinglians might use the
same. For the primitive doctrine see Justin Martyr and Irenæus, A.N.F.
vol. i. p. 185, note 6, and 528, note 4. Observe also the fragment
(xiii.) on p. 570.—C.\]

<span id="fn_722"></span>[75:723](1080038.htm#fr_722.md) <span
id="ii.XXXIV-p37.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXIV-p38"></span> E.V. “The young lions do lack,” etc.

<span id="fn_723"></span>[76:724](1080038.htm#fr_723.md) <span
id="ii.XXXIV-p39.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXIV-p40"></span> [John vi.
51](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#051.md)<span id="ii.XXXIV-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_724"></span>[76:725](1080038.htm#fr_724.md) <span
id="ii.XXXIV-p40.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXIV-p41"></span> [Matt.
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#006.md), [Luke
1:53](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#053.md), [1 Sam.
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#005.md)<span id="ii.XXXIV-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_725"></span>[76:726](1080038.htm#fr_725.md) <span
id="ii.XXXIV-p42.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXIV-p43"></span> Most <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.XXXIV-p43.1"></span>mss</span>. “Think,” imperative, as in the
other clauses.

<span id="fn_726"></span>[77:727](1080038.htm#fr_726.md) <span
id="ii.XXXIV-p49.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXIV-p50"></span> [Dan. iii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#028.md)<span id="ii.XXXIV-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_727"></span>[77:728](1080038.htm#fr_727.md) <span
id="ii.XXXIV-p50.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXIV-p51"></span> *Al*. “and do not.”

<span id="fn_728"></span>[77:729](1080038.htm#fr_728.md) <span
id="ii.XXXIV-p51.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXIV-p52"></span> [2 Macc. vii.
3](../../../bib/apo/ma2007.htm#003.md)<span id="ii.XXXIV-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_729"></span>[77:730](1080038.htm#fr_729.md) <span
id="ii.XXXIV-p52.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXIV-p53"></span> [Acts xii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#007.md)<span id="ii.XXXIV-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_730"></span>[78:731](1080038.htm#fr_730.md) <span
id="ii.XXXIV-p55.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXIV-p56"></span> \[“Let us not receive carnally” is
language which reflects light upon ver. 8, p. 75, *supra*. Note also
what is here said of faith.—C.\]

<span id="fn_731"></span>[78:732](1080038.htm#fr_731.md) <span
id="ii.XXXIV-p56.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXIV-p57"></span> [Exod. xii.
46](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#046.md)<span id="ii.XXXIV-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_732"></span>[78:733](1080038.htm#fr_732.md) <span
id="ii.XXXIV-p57.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXIV-p58"></span> [John xix.
33](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#033.md)<span id="ii.XXXIV-p58.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_733"></span>[78:734](1080038.htm#fr_733.md) <span
id="ii.XXXIV-p58.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXIV-p59"></span> [Luke xxiii.
43](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#043.md)<span id="ii.XXXIV-p59.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_734"></span>[78:735](1080038.htm#fr_734.md) <span
id="ii.XXXIV-p60.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXIV-p61"></span> *Al*. “even at no premature.”

<span id="fn_735"></span>[78:736](1080038.htm#fr_735.md) <span
id="ii.XXXIV-p61.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXIV-p62"></span> *Al*. “in this world.”

<span id="fn_736"></span>[78:737](1080038.htm#fr_736.md) <span
id="ii.XXXIV-p62.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXIV-p63"></span> [Luke xvi.
19-22](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#019.md)<span
id="ii.XXXIV-p63.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_737"></span>[78:738](1080038.htm#fr_737.md) <span
id="ii.XXXIV-p63.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXIV-p64"></span> *Mathematicus*.

<span id="fn_738"></span>[79:739](1080038.htm#fr_738.md) <span
id="ii.XXXIV-p65.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXIV-p66"></span> [Rom. iv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#005.md)<span id="ii.XXXIV-p66.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_739"></span>[79:740](1080038.htm#fr_739.md) <span
id="ii.XXXIV-p66.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXIV-p67"></span> [1 John ii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#002.md)<span id="ii.XXXIV-p67.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm XXXV](1080039.md)
