[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080110)  [Next](1080112) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.C"></span>

<span id="ii.C-p1"></span> <span id="ii.C-p1.1"></span><span
class="c20"><span id="ii.C-p1.2"></span>Psalm C. <span
id="fr_4536"></span>[4537](#fn_4536) </span>

<span id="ii.C-p3"></span>1. Ye heard the Psalm, brethren, while it was
being chanted: it is short, and not obscure: as if I had given you an
assurance, that ye should not fear fatigue.…

<span id="ii.C-p4"></span>2. The title of this Psalm is, “A Psalm of
confession.” The verses are few, but big with great subjects; may the
seed bring forth within your hearts, the barn be prepared for the Lord’s
harvest.

<span id="ii.C-p5"></span>3. “Jubilate,” therefore, “unto the Lord, all
ye lands” ([Psa. 100.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#001)<span
id="ii.C-p5.1"></span>). This Psalm giveth this exhortation to us, that
we jubilate unto the Lord. Nor doth it, as it were, exhort one
particular corner of the earth, or one habitation or congregation of
men; but since it is aware that it hath sown blessings on every side, on
every side it doth exact jubilance. Doth all the earth at this moment
hear my voice? And yet the whole earth hath heard this voice. All the
earth is already jubilant in the Lord; and what is not as yet jubilant,
will be so. For blessing, extending <span id="page_488">p. 488</span>
<span id="ii.C-Page_488"></span>on every side, when the Church was
commencing to spread from Jerusalem throughout all nations, <span
id="fr_4537"></span>[4538](#fn_4537) everywhere overturneth ungodliness,
and everywhere buildeth up piety: the good are mingled with the wicked
throughout all lands. Every land is full of the discontented murmurs of
the wicked, and of the jubilance of the good. What then is it, “to
jubilate”? For the title of the present Psalm especially maketh us give
good heed to this word, for it is entitled, “A Psalm of confession.”
What meaneth, to jubilate with confession? It is the sentiment thus
expressed in another Psalm: “Blessed is the people that understandeth
jubilance.” Surely that which being understood maketh blessed is
something great. May therefore the Lord our God, who maketh men blessed,
grant me to understand what to say, and grant you to understand what ye
hear: “Blessed is the people that understandeth jubilance.” <span
id="fr_4538"></span>[4539](#fn_4538) Let us therefore run unto this
blessing, let us understand jubilance, let us not pour it forth without
understanding. Of what use is it to be jubilant and obey <span
id="fr_4539"></span>[4540](#fn_4539) this Psalm, when it saith,
“Jubilate unto the Lord, all ye lands,” and not to understand what
jubilance is, so that our voice only may be jubilant, our heart not so?
For the understanding is the utterance of the heart. <span
id="fr_4540"></span>[4541](#fn_4540)

<span id="ii.C-p10"></span>4. I am about to say what ye know. One who
jubilates, uttereth not words, but it is a certain sound of joy without
words: for it is the expression of a mind poured forth in joy,
expressing, as far as it is able, the affection, but not compassing the
feeling. A man rejoicing in his own exultation, after certain words
which cannot <span id="fr_4541"></span>[4542](#fn_4541) be uttered or
understood, bursteth forth into sounds of exultation without words, so
that it seemeth that he indeed doth rejoice with his voice itself, but
as if filled with excessive joy cannot express in words the subject of
that joy.…Those who are engaged at work in the fields are most given to
jubilate; reapers, or vintagers, or those who gather any of the fruits
of the earth, delighted with the abundant produce, and rejoicing in the
very richness and exuberance of the soil, sing in exultation; and among
the songs which they utter in words, they put in certain cries without
words in the exultation of a rejoicing mind; and this is what is meant
by jubilating. <span id="fr_4542"></span>[4543](#fn_4542) …

<span id="ii.C-p13"></span>5. When then are we jubilant? When we praise
that which cannot be uttered. For we observe the whole creation, the
earth and the sea, and all things that therein are: we observe that each
have their sources and causes, the power of production, the order of
birth, the limit of duration, the end in decease, that successive ages
run on without any confusion, that the stars roll, as it seemeth, from
the East to the West, and complete the courses of the years: we see how
the months are measured, how the hours extend; and in all these things a
certain invisible element, I know not what, but some principle <span
id="fr_4543"></span>[4544](#fn_4543) of unity, which is termed spirit or
soul, present in all living things, urging them to the pursuit of
pleasure and the avoidance of pain, and the preservation of their own
safety; that man also hath somewhat in common with the Angels of God;
not with cattle, such as life, hearing, sight, and so forth; but
somewhat which can understand God, which peculiarly doth belong to the
mind, which can distinguish justice and injustice, as the eye discerneth
white from black. In all this consideration of creation, which I have
run over as I could, let the soul ask itself: Who created all these
things? Who made them? Who made among them thyself?…I have observed the
whole creation, as far as I could. I have observed the bodily creation
in heaven and on earth, and the spiritual in myself who am speaking, who
animate my limbs, who exert voice, who move the tongue, who pronounce
words, and distinguish sensations. And when can I comprehend myself in
myself? How then can I comprehend what is above myself? Yet the sight of
God is promised to the human heart, and a certain operation of purifying
the heart is enjoined; this is the counsel of Scripture. Provide the
means of seeing what thou lovest, before thou try to see it. For unto
whom is it not sweet to hear of God and His Name, except to the ungodly,
who is far removed, separated from Him?…

<span id="ii.C-p15"></span>6. Be therefore like Him in piety, and
earnest in meditation: for “the invisible things of Him are clearly
seen, being understood by the things that are made;” <span
id="fr_4544"></span>[4545](#fn_4544) look upon the things that are made,
admire them, seek their author. If thou art unlike, thou wilt turn back;
if like, thou wilt rejoice. And when, being like Him, thou shalt have
begun to approach Him, and to feel God, the more love increaseth in
thee, since God is love, thou wilt perceive somewhat which thou wast
trying to say, and yet couldest not say. Before thou didst feel God,
thou didst think that thou couldest express <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.C-p16.2"></span>God</span>; thou beginnest to feel Him, and then
feelest that what thou dost feel thou canst not express. But when thou
hast herein found that what thou dost feel cannot be expressed, wilt
thou be mute, wilt thou not praise God? Wilt thou then be silent in the
praises of God, and wilt thou not offer up thanksgivings unto Him who
hath willed to make Himself known unto thee? Thou didst <span
id="page_489">p. 489</span> <span id="ii.C-Page_489"></span>praise Him
when thou wast seeking, wilt thou be silent when thou hast found Him? By
no means; thou wilt not be ungrateful. Honour is due to Him, reverence
is due to Him, great praise is due to Him. Consider thyself, see what
thou art: earth and ashes; look who it is hath deserved to see, and
What; consider who thou art, What to see, a man to see <span
class="c21"><span id="ii.C-p16.3"></span>God</span>! I recognise not the
man’s deserving, but the mercy of God. Praise therefore Him who hath
mercy.…

<span id="ii.C-p17"></span>7. “Serve the Lord with gladness.” All
servitude is full of bitterness: all who are bound to a lot of servitude
both are slaves, and discontented. Fear not the servitude of that Lord:
there will be no groaning there, no discontent, no indignation; no one
seeketh to be sold to another master, since it is a sweet service,
because we are all redeemed. Great happiness, brethren, it is, to be a
slave in that great house, although in bonds. Fear not, bound slave,
confess unto the Lord: ascribe thy bonds to thine own deservings;
confess in thy chains, if thou art desirous they be changed into
ornaments.…At the same time thou art slave, and free; slave, because
thou art created such; free, because thou art loved by God, by whom thou
wast created: yea, free indeed, because thou lovest Him by whom thou
wast made. Serve not with discontent; for thy murmurs do not tend to
release thee from serving, but to make thee a wicked servant. Thou art a
slave of the Lord, thou art a freedman of the Lord: seek not so to be
emancipated as to depart from the house of Him who frees thee.…

<span id="ii.C-p18"></span>8. I will, therefore, saith he, live separate
with a few good men: why should I live in common with crowds? Well:
those very few good men, from what crowds have they been strained out?
If however these few are all good: it is, nevertheless, a good and
praiseworthy design in man, to be with such as have chosen a quiet life;
distant from the bustle of the people, from noisy crowds, from the great
waves of life, they are as if in harbour. Is there therefore here that
joy? that jubilant gladness which is promised? Not as yet; but still
groans, still the anxiety of temptations. For even the harbour hath an
entrance somewhere or other; if it had not, no ship could enter it; it
must therefore be open on some side: but at times on this open side the
wind rusheth in; and where there are no rocks, ships dashed together
shatter one another. Where then is security, if not even in harbour? And
yet it must be confessed, it is true, that persons in harbour are in
their degree much better off than when afloat on the main. Let them love
one another, as ships in harbour, let them be bound together happily;
let them not dash against one another: let absolute equality be
preserved there, constancy in love; and when perchance the wind rusheth
in from the open side, let there be careful piloting there. Now what
will one who perchance presideth over such places, nay, who serveth his
brethren, in what are called monasteries, tell me? I will be cautious: I
will admit no wicked man. How wilt thou admit no evil one?…Those who are
about to enter, do not know themselves; how much less dost thou know
them? For many have promised themselves that they were about to fulfil
that holy life, which has all things in common, where no man calleth
anything his own, who have one soul and one heart in God: <span
id="fr_4545"></span>[4546](#fn_4545) they have been put into the
furnace, and have cracked. How then knowest thou him who is unknown even
to himself?…Where then is security? Here nowhere; in this life nowhere,
except solely in the hope of the promise of God. But there, when we
shall reach thereunto, is complete security, when the gates are shut,
and the bars of the gates of Jerusalem made fast; <span
id="fr_4546"></span>[4547](#fn_4546) there is truly full jubilance, and
great delight. Only do not thou feel secure in praising any sort of
life: “judge no man blessed before his death.” <span
id="fr_4547"></span>[4548](#fn_4547)

<span id="ii.C-p22"></span>9. By this means men are deceived, so that
they either do not undertake, or rashly attempt, a better life; because,
when they choose to praise, they praise without mention of the evil that
is mixed with the good: and those who choose to blame, do so with so
envious and perverse a mind, as to shut their eyes to the good, and
exaggerate only the evils which either actually exist there, or are
imagined. Thus it happeneth, that when any profession hath been ill,
that is, incautiously, praised, if it hath invited men by its own
reputation, they who betake themselves thither discover some such as
they did not believe to be there; and offended by the wicked recoil from
the good. Brethren, apply this teaching to your life, and hear in such a
manner that ye may live. The Church of God, to speak generally, is
magnified: Christians, and Christians alone, are called great, the
Catholic (Church) is magnified; all love each other; each and all do all
they can for one another; they give themselves up to prayers, fastings,
hymns; throughout the whole world, with peaceful unanimity God is
praised. Some one perhaps heareth this, who is ignorant that nothing is
said of the wicked who are mingled with them; he cometh, invited by
these praises, findeth bad men mixed with them, who were not mentioned
to him before he came; he is offended by false Christians, he flieth
from true Christians. Again, men who hate and slander them,
precipitately blame them: asking, what sort of men are Christians? Who
are Chris<span id="page_490">p. 490</span> <span
id="ii.C-Page_490"></span>tians? Covetous men, usurers. Are not the very
persons who fill the Churches on holidays the same who during the games
and other spectacles fill the theatres and amphitheatres? They are
drunken, gluttonous, envious, slanderers of each other. There are such,
but not such only. And this slanderer in his blindness saith nothing of
the good: and that praiser in his want of caution is silent about the
bad.…Thus also in that common life of brethren, which exists in a
monastery: great and holy men live therein, with daily hymns, prayers,
praises of God; their occupation is reading; they labour with their own
hands, and by this means support themselves; <span
id="fr_4548"></span>[4549](#fn_4548) they seek nothing covetously;
whatever is brought in for them by pious brethren, they use with
contentedness and charity; no one claimeth as his own what another hath
not; all love, all forbear one another mutually. Thou hast praised them;
thou hast praised; he who knoweth not what is going on within, who
knoweth not how, when the wind entereth, ships even in harbour dash
against one another, entereth as if in hope of security, expecting to
find no man to forbear; he findeth there evil brethren, who could not
have been found evil, if they had not been admitted (and they must be at
first tolerated, lest they should perchance reform; nor can they easily
be excluded, unless they have first been endured): and becometh himself
impatient beyond endurance. Who asked me here? I thought that love was
here. And irritated by the perversity of some few men, since he hath not
persevered in fulfilling his vow, he becometh a deserter of so holy a
design, and guilty of a vow he hath never discharged. And then, when he
hath gone forth himself too, he also becometh a reproacher, and a
slanderer; and records those things only (sometimes real), which he
asserts that he could not have endured. But the real troubles of the
wicked ought to be endured for the society of the good. The Scripture
saith unto him: “Woe unto those that have lost patience.” <span
id="fr_4549"></span>[4550](#fn_4549) And what is more, he belcheth
abroad the evil savour of his indignation, as a means to deter them who
are about to enter; because, when he had entered himself, he could not
persevere. Of what sort are they? Envious, quarrelsome, men who forbear
no man, covetous; saying, He did this there, and he did that there.
Wicked one, why art thou silent about the good! Thou sayest enough of
those whom thou couldest not endure: thou sayest nothing of those who
endured thy wickedness.…

<span id="ii.C-p25"></span>10. “O serve the Lord with gladness” ([Psa.
100.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#002)<span id="ii.C-p25.1"></span>):
he addresseth you, whoever ye are who endure all things in love, and
rejoice in hope. “Serve the Lord,” not in the bitterness of murmuring,
but in the “gladness of love.” “Come before His presence with
rejoicing.” It is easy to rejoice outwardly: rejoice before the presence
of God. Let not the tongue be too joyful: let the conscience be joyful.
“Come before His presence with a song.”

<span id="ii.C-p26"></span>11. “Be ye sure that the Lord He is God”
([Psa. 100.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#003)<span
id="ii.C-p26.1"></span>). Who knoweth not that the Lord, He is God? But
He speaketh of the Lord, whom men thought not God: “Be ye sure that the
Lord He is God.” Let not that Lord become vile in your sight: ye have
crucified Him, scourged Him, spit upon Him, crowned Him with thorns,
clothed Him in a dress of infamy, hung Him upon the Cross, pierced Him
with nails, wounded Him with a spear, placed guards at His tomb; He is
God. “It is He that hath made us, and not we ourselves.” It is He that
hath made us: “and without Him was not anything made that was
made.” <span id="fr_4550"></span>[4551](#fn_4550) What reason have ye
for exultation, what reason have ye for pride? Another made you; the
Same who made you, suffereth from you. But ye extol yourselves, and
glory in yourselves, as if ye were created by yourselves. It is good for
you that He who made you, make you perfect.…“We are His people, and the
sheep of His pasture.” Sheep and one sheep. These sheep are one sheep:
and how loving a Shepherd we have! He left the ninety and nine, and
descended to seek the one, He bringeth it back on His own
shoulders <span id="fr_4551"></span>[4552](#fn_4551) ransomed by His own
blood. That Shepherd dieth without fear for the sheep, who on His
resurrection regaineth His sheep.

<span id="ii.C-p29"></span>12. “Enter into His gates with confession”
([Psa. 100.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#003)<span
id="ii.C-p29.1"></span>). At the gates is the beginning: begin with
confession. Thence is the Psalm entitled, “A Psalm of Confession:” there
be joyful. Confess that ye were not made by yourselves, praise Him by
whom ye were made. Let thy good come from Him, in departing from whom
thou hast caused thine evil. “Enter into His gates with confession.” Let
the flock enter into the gates: let it not remain outside, a prey for
wolves. And how is it to enter? “With confession.” Let the gate, that
is, the commencement for thee, be confession. Whence it is said in
another Psalm, “Begin unto the Lord with confession.” <span
id="fr_4552"></span>[4553](#fn_4552) What he there calleth “Begin,” here
he calleth “Gates.” “Enter into His gates in confession.” What? And when
we have entered, shall we not still confess? Always confess Him: thou
hast always what to confess for. It is hard in this life for a man to be
so far changed, that no cause for censure be discoverable in him: thou
must needs blame thyself, lest He who shall condemn blame thee.
Therefore <span id="page_491">p. 491</span> <span
id="ii.C-Page_491"></span>even when thou hast entered His courts, then
also confess. When will there be no longer confession of sins? In that
rest, in that likeness to the Angels. But consider what I have said:
there will there be no confession of sins. I said not, there will be no
confession: for there will be confession of praise. Thou wilt ever
confess, that He is God, thou a creature; that He is thy Protector,
thyself protected. In Him thou shalt be as it were hid. <span
id="fr_4553"></span>[4554](#fn_4553) “Go into His courts with hymns; and
confess unto Him.” Confess in the gates; and when ye have entered the
courts, confess with hymns. Hymn are praises. Blame thyself, when thou
art entering; when thou hast entered, praise Him. “Open me the gates of
righteousness,” he saith in another Psalm, “that I may go into them, and
confess unto the Lord.” <span id="fr_4554"></span>[4555](#fn_4554) Did
he say, when I have entered, I will no longer confess? Even after his
entrance, he will confess. For what sins did our Lord Jesus Christ
confess, when He said, “I confess unto Thee, O Father”? <span
id="fr_4555"></span>[4556](#fn_4555) He confessed in praising Him, not
in accusing Himself. “Speak good of His Name.”

<span id="ii.C-p34"></span>13. “For the Lord is pleasant” ([Psa.
100.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#004)<span id="ii.C-p34.1"></span>).
Think not that ye faint in praising Him. Your praise of Him is like
food: the more ye praise Him, the more ye acquire strength, and He whom
ye praise becometh the more sweet. “His mercy is everlasting.” For He
will not cease to be merciful, after He hath freed thee: it belongeth to
His mercy to protect thee even unto eternal life. “His mercy,”
therefore, “is to everlasting: and His truth from generation to
generation” ([Psa. 100.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#005)<span
id="ii.C-p34.2"></span>). Understand by “from generation to generation,”
either every generation, or in two generations, the one earthly, the
other heavenly. Here there is one generation which produceth mortals;
another which maketh such as are everlasting. His Truth is both here,
and there. Imagine not that His truth is not here, if His truth were not
here, he would not say in another Psalm: “Truth is risen out of the
earth;” <span id="fr_4556"></span>[4557](#fn_4556) nor would Truth
Itself say, Lo, I am with you alway, even unto the end of the
world.” <span id="fr_4557"></span>[4558](#fn_4557)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4536"></span>[487:4537](1080111.htm#fr_4536) <span
id="ii.C-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.C-p2"></span> Lat. XCIX. A sermon to the people, in which
he speaketh remarkably concerning enduring evil men in the Church or in
a monastery.

<span id="fn_4537"></span>[488:4538](1080111.htm#fr_4537) <span
id="ii.C-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.C-p6"></span> [Luke xxiv.
47](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#047)<span id="ii.C-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4538"></span>[488:4539](1080111.htm#fr_4538) <span
id="ii.C-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.C-p7"></span> [Ps. lxxxix.
15](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#015)<span id="ii.C-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4539"></span>[488:4540](1080111.htm#fr_4539) <span
id="ii.C-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.C-p8"></span> *Al*. “not obey.”

<span id="fn_4540"></span>[488:4541](1080111.htm#fr_4540) <span
id="ii.C-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.C-p9"></span> See St. Greg. on [Job i.
7](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#007)<span id="ii.C-p9.1"></span>, Oxf.
Tr. vol. i. p. 73.

<span id="fn_4541"></span>[488:4542](1080111.htm#fr_4541) <span
id="ii.C-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii.C-p11"></span> Many <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.C-p11.1"></span>mss</span>. “which can.”

<span id="fn_4542"></span>[488:4543](1080111.htm#fr_4542) <span
id="ii.C-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ii.C-p12"></span> \[Coleridge instances the habitual notes of
the Swiss mountaineers, much in the same way.—C.\]

<span id="fn_4543"></span>[488:4544](1080111.htm#fr_4543) <span
id="ii.C-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ii.C-p14"></span> *Vestigium*, “trace.”

<span id="fn_4544"></span>[488:4545](1080111.htm#fr_4544) <span
id="ii.C-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ii.C-p16"></span> [Rom. i.
20](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#020)<span id="ii.C-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4545"></span>[489:4546](1080111.htm#fr_4545) <span
id="ii.C-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ii.C-p19"></span> [Acts iv.
32](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#032)<span id="ii.C-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4546"></span>[489:4547](1080111.htm#fr_4546) <span
id="ii.C-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ii.C-p20"></span> [Ps. cxlvii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#013)<span id="ii.C-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4547"></span>[489:4548](1080111.htm#fr_4547) <span
id="ii.C-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ii.C-p21"></span> [Ecclesiasticus
11.28](../../../bib/apo/sir011.htm#028)<span id="ii.C-p21.1"></span>.
\[See A.N.F. vol. vi. p. 279.—C.\]

<span id="fn_4548"></span>[490:4549](1080111.htm#fr_4548) <span
id="ii.C-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ii.C-p23"></span> *Inde se transigunt*.

<span id="fn_4549"></span>[490:4550](1080111.htm#fr_4549) <span
id="ii.C-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ii.C-p24"></span> [Eccles. ii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/ecc002.htm#016)<span id="ii.C-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4550"></span>[490:4551](1080111.htm#fr_4550) <span
id="ii.C-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ii.C-p27"></span> [John i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003)<span id="ii.C-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4551"></span>[490:4552](1080111.htm#fr_4551) <span
id="ii.C-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ii.C-p28"></span> [Luke
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#005)<span id="ii.C-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4552"></span>[490:4553](1080111.htm#fr_4552) <span
id="ii.C-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ii.C-p30"></span> [Ps. cxlvii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#007)<span id="ii.C-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4553"></span>[491:4554](1080111.htm#fr_4553) <span
id="ii.C-p30.2"></span>

<span id="ii.C-p31"></span> [Ps. xxxi.
20](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#020)<span id="ii.C-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4554"></span>[491:4555](1080111.htm#fr_4554) <span
id="ii.C-p31.2"></span>

<span id="ii.C-p32"></span> [Ps. cxviii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#019)<span id="ii.C-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4555"></span>[491:4556](1080111.htm#fr_4555) <span
id="ii.C-p32.2"></span>

<span id="ii.C-p33"></span> [Matt. xi.
25](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#025)<span id="ii.C-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4556"></span>[491:4557](1080111.htm#fr_4556) <span
id="ii.C-p34.3"></span>

<span id="ii.C-p35"></span> [Ps. xv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#012)<span id="ii.C-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4557"></span>[491:4558](1080111.htm#fr_4557) <span
id="ii.C-p35.2"></span>

<span id="ii.C-p36"></span> [Matt. xxviii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#020)<span id="ii.C-p36.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm CI](1080112)
