[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080052)  [Next](1080054.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.XLVI"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVI-p1"></span> <span id="ii.XLVI-p1.1"></span><span
class="c20"><span id="ii.XLVI-p1.2"></span>Psalm XLVI. <span
id="fr_1471"></span>[1472](#fn_1471.md) </span>

<span id="ii.XLVI-p3"></span>1. It is called, “A Psalm, to the end, for
the sons of Korah, for things secret.” Secret is it then; but He
Himself, who in the place of Calvary was crucified, ye know, hath rent
the veil, <span id="fr_1472"></span>[1473](#fn_1472.md) that the secrets of
the temple might be discovered. Furthermore since the Cross of our Lord
was a key, whereby things closed might be opened; let us trust that He
will be with us, that these secrets may be revealed. What is said, “To
the end,” always ought to be understood of Christ. For “Christ is the
end of the law for righteousness to every one that believeth.” <span
id="fr_1473"></span>[1474](#fn_1473.md) But The End He is called, not
because He consumeth, but because He perfecteth. For ended call we the
food which is eaten, and ended the coat which is woven, the former to
consumption, the latter to perfection. Because then we have not where to
go farther when we have come to Christ, Himself is called the end of our
course. Nor ought we to think, that when we have come to Him, we ought
to strive any further to come also to the Father. For this thought
Philip also, when he said to Him, “Lord, show us the Father, and it
sufficeth us.” When he said, “It sufficeth us,” he sought the end of
satisfaction and perfection. Then said He, “Have I been so long time
with you, and hast thou not known Me, Philip: he that hath seen Me, hath
seen the Father.” <span id="fr_1474"></span>[1475](#fn_1474.md) In Him then
have we the Father, because He is in the Father, <span id="page_156">p.
156</span> <span id="ii.XLVI-Page_156"></span>and the Father in Him, and
He and His Father are One. <span id="fr_1475"></span>[1476](#fn_1475.md)

<span id="ii.XLVI-p8"></span>2. “Our God is a refuge and strength”
([Psa. 46.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#001.md)<span
id="ii.XLVI-p8.1"></span>). There are some refuges wherein is no
strength, whereto when any fleeth, he is more weakened than
strengthened. Thou fleest, for example, to some one greater in the
world, that thou mayest make thyself a powerful friend; this seemeth to
thee a refuge. Yet so great are this world’s uncertainties, and so
frequent grow the ruins of the powerful day by day, that when to such
refuge thou art come, thou beginnest to fear more than ever therein.…Our
refuge is not such, but our refuge is strength. When thither we have
fled, we shall be firm.

<span id="ii.XLVI-p9"></span>3. “A helper in tribulations, which find us
out too much.” Tribulations are many, and in every tribulation unto God
must we flee; whether it be a tribulation in our estate, or in our
body’s health, or about the peril of those dearest to us, or any other
thing necessary to the sustaining of this life, refuge ought there to be
none at all to a Christian man, other than his Saviour, other than his
God, to whom when he has fled, he is strong. For he will not in himself
be strong, nor will he to himself be strength, but He will be his
strength, who has become his refuge. But, dearly beloved, among all
tribulations of the human soul is no greater tribulation than the
consciousness of sin. For if there be no wound herein, and that be sound
within man which is called conscience, wherever else he may suffer
tribulation, thither will he flee, and there find God.…Ye see, dearly
beloved, when trees are cut down and proved by the carpenters, sometimes
in the surface they seem as though injured and rotten; but the carpenter
looks into the inner marrow as it were of the tree, and if within he
find the wood sound, he promises that it will last in a building; nor
will he be very anxious about the injured surface, when that which is
within he declares sound. Furthermore, to man anything more inward than
conscience is not found; what then profits it, if what is without is
sound, and the marrow of conscience has become rotton? These are close
and vehement overmuch, and as this Psalm saith, too great tribulations;
yet even in these the Lord hath become a helper by forgiving sin. For
the consciences of the ungodly hateth nothing save indulgence; for if
one saith he hath great tribulations, being a confessed debtor to the
treasury, when he beholdeth the narrowness of his estate, and seeth that
he cannot be solvent; if on account of the distrainers every year
hanging over him, he saith that he suffereth great tribulations, and
doth not breathe freely except in hope of indulgence, and that in things
earthly; <span id="fr_1476"></span>[1477](#fn_1476.md) how much more the
debtor of penalties out of the abundance of sins: when shall he pay what
he owes out of his evil conscience, when if he pay, he perisheth? For to
pay this debt, is to undergo the penalties. Remaineth then that of His
indulgence, we may be secure, yet so that, indulgence received, we
return not again to contract debts.…

<span id="ii.XLVI-p11"></span>4. Now then, such security received, what
say they? “Therefore will not we fear, when the earth shall be
confounded” ([Psa. 46.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#002.md)<span
id="ii.XLVI-p11.1"></span>). Just before anxious, suddenly secure; out
of too great tribulations set in great tranquillity. For in them Christ
was sleeping, therefore were they tossed: Christ awoke (as but now we
heard out of the Gospel), He commanded the winds, and they were
still. <span id="fr_1477"></span>[1478](#fn_1477.md) Since Christ is in
each man’s heart by faith, it is signified to us, that his heart as a
ship in this world’s tempest is tossed, who forgetteth his faith: as
though Christ sleeping it is tossed, but Christ awaking cometh
tranquillity. Nay, the Lord Himself, what said He? “Where is your
faith?” <span id="fr_1478"></span>[1479](#fn_1478.md) Christ aroused,
aroused up faith, that what had been done in the ship, might be done in
their hearts. “A helper in tribulations, which found us <span
id="fr_1479"></span>[1480](#fn_1479.md) out too much.” He caused that
therein should be great tranquillity.

<span id="ii.XLVI-p15"></span>5. See what tranquillity: “Therefore will
not we fear when the earth shall be confounded, and the mountains shall
be carried into the heart of the sea.” Then we shall find not fear. Let
us seek mountains carried, and if we can find, it is manifest that this
is our security. The Lord truly said to His disciples, “If ye have faith
as a grain of mustard seed, ye shall say to this mountain, Be Thou
removed, and be Thou cast into the sea, and it shall be done.”  <span
id="fr_1480"></span>[1481](#fn_1480.md) Haply “to this mountain,” He said
of Himself; for He is called a Mountain: “It shall come to pass in the
last days, that the mountain of the Lord shall be manifest.” <span
id="fr_1481"></span>[1482](#fn_1481.md) But this Mountain is placed above
other mountains; because the Apostles also are mountains, supporting
this Mountain. Therefore followeth, “In the last days the Mountain of
the Lord shall be manifest, established in the top of the mountains.”
Therefore passeth It the tops of all mountains, and on the top of all
mountains is It placed; because the mountains are preaching The
Mountain. But the sea signifieth this world, in comparison of which sea,
like earth seemed the nation of the Jews. For it was not covered over
with the bitterness of idolatry, but, like dry land, was surrounded with
the bitterness of the Gentiles as with sea. It was to be, that the earth
be confounded, that is, that nation of <span id="page_157">p. 157</span>
<span id="ii.XLVI-Page_157"></span>the Jews; and that the mountains be
carried into the heart of the sea, that is, first that great Mountain
established in the top of the mountains. For He deserted the nation of
the Jews, and came among the Gentiles. He was carried from the earth
into the sea. Who carrying Him? The Apostles, to whom He had said, “If
ye have faith as a grain of mustard seed, ye shall say to this mountain,
Be thou removed, and be thou cast into the sea, and it shall be done:”
that is, through your most faithful preaching it shall come to pass,
that this mountain, that is, I Myself, be preached among the Gentiles,
be glorified among the Gentiles, be acknowledged among the Gentiles, and
that be fulfilled which was predicted of Me, “A people whom I have not
known shall serve Me.” <span id="fr_1482"></span>[1483](#fn_1482.md) …

<span id="ii.XLVI-p19"></span>6. “The waters thereof roared, and were
troubled” ([Psa. 46.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#003.md)<span
id="ii.XLVI-p19.1"></span>): when the Gospel was preached, “What is
this? He seemeth to be a setter forth of strange gods:” <span
id="fr_1483"></span>[1484](#fn_1483.md) this the Athenians; but the
Ephesians, with what tumult would they have slain the Apostles, when in
the theatre, for their goddess Diana, they made such an uproar, as to be
shouting, “Great is Diana of the Ephesians!” <span
id="fr_1484"></span>[1485](#fn_1484.md) Amidst which waves and roaring of
the sea, feared not they who to that refuge had fled. Nay, the Apostle
Paul would enter in to the theatre, and was kept back by the disciples,
because it was necessary that he should still abide in the flesh for
their sakes. But yet, “the waters thereof roared, and were troubled: the
mountains shook at the mightiness thereof.” Whose might? The sea’s? or
rather God’s, of whom was said, “refuge and strength, a helper in
tribulations, which have found us out too much?” For shaken were the
mountains, that is, the powers of this world. For one thing are the
mountains of God, another the mountains of the world: the mountains of
the world, they whose head is the devil, the mountains of God, they
whose Head is Christ. But by these mountains were shaken those
mountains. Then gave they their voices against Christians, when the
mountains were shaken, the waters roaring; for the mountains were
shaken, and there was made a great earthquake, with quaking of the sea.
But against whom this? Against the City founded upon a rock. The waters
roar, the mountains shake, the Gospel being preached. What then, the
City of God? Hear what followeth.

<span id="ii.XLVI-p22"></span>7. “The streams of the river make glad the
City of God” ([Psa. 46.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#004.md)<span
id="ii.XLVI-p22.1"></span>). When the mountains shake, when the sea
rages, God deserteth not His City, by the streams of the river. What are
these streams of the river? That overflowing of the Holy Spirit, of
which the Lord said, “If any man thirst, let him come unto Me, and
drink. He that believeth on Me, out of his bosom <span
id="fr_1485"></span>[1486](#fn_1485.md) shall flow rivers of living
water.” <span id="fr_1486"></span>[1487](#fn_1486.md) These rivers then
flowed out of the bosom <span id="fr_1487"></span>[1488](#fn_1487.md) of
Paul, Peter, John, the other Apostles, the other faithful Evangelists.
Since these rivers flowed from one river, many “streams of the river
make glad the City of God.” For that ye might know this to be said of
the Holy Spirit, in the same Gospel next said the Evangelist, “But this
spake He of the Spirit, which they that were to believe on Him should
receive. For the Holy Ghost was not yet given, because that Jesus was
not yet glorified.”  <span id="fr_1488"></span>[1489](#fn_1488.md) Jesus
being glorified after His Resurrection, glorified after His Ascension,
on the day of Pentecost came the Holy Spirit, and filled the
believers, <span id="fr_1489"></span>[1490](#fn_1489.md) who spake with
tongues, and began to preach the Gospel to the Gentiles. Hence was the
City of God made glad, while the sea was troubled by the roaring of its
waters, while the mountains were confounded, asking what they should do,
how drive out the new doctrine, how root out the race of Christians from
the earth. Against whom? Against the streams of the river making glad
the City of God. For thereby showed He of what river He spake; that He
signified the Holy Spirit, by “the streams of the river make glad the
City of God.” And what follows? “The Most High hath sanctified His
tabernacle:” since then there followeth the mention of Sanctification,
it is manifest that these streams of the river are to be understood of
the Holy Spirit, by whom is sanctified every godly soul believing in
Christ, that it may be made a citizen of the City of God.

<span id="ii.XLVI-p28"></span>8. “God is in the midst of her: she shall
not be moved” ([Psa. 46.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#005.md)<span
id="ii.XLVI-p28.1"></span>). Let the sea rage, the mountains shake; “God
is in the midst of her: she shall not be moved.” What is, “in the midst
of her”? That God stands in any one place, and they surround Him who
believe in Him? Then is God circumscribed by place; and broad that which
surroundeth, narrow that which is surrounded? God forbid. No such thing
imagine of God, who is contained in no place, whose seat is the
conscience of the godly: and so is God’s seat in the hearts of men, that
if man fall from God, God in Himself abideth, not falleth like one not
finding where to be. For rather doth He lift up thee, that thou mayest
be in Him, than so lean upon thee, as if thou withdraw thyself, to fall.
Himself if He withdraw, fall wilt thou: thyself if thou withdraw, fall
will not He. What then is, “God is in the midst of her”? It signifieth
that God is equal to all, and accepteth not persons. For as that which
<span id="page_158">p. 158</span> <span id="ii.XLVI-Page_158"></span>is
in the middle has equal distances to all the boundaries, so God is said
to be in the middle, because He consulteth equally for all. “God is in
the midst of her: she shall not be moved.” Wherefore shall she not be
moved? Because God is in the midst of her. He is “the Helper in
tribulations that have found us out too much. God shall help her with
His Countenance.” What is, “with His Countenance”? With manifestation of
Himself. How manifests God Himself, so as that we see His Countenance? I
have already told you; ye have learned God’s Presence; we have learned
it through His works. When from Him we receive any help so that we
cannot at all doubt that it was granted to us by the Lord, then God’s
Countenance is with us.

<span id="ii.XLVI-p29"></span>9. “The heathen are troubled” ([Psa.
46.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#006)<span id="ii.XLVI-p29.1"></span>.md).
And how troubled? why troubled? To cast down the City of God, in the
midst whereof is God? To overthrow the tabernacle sanctified, which God
helpeth with His Countenance? No: with a wholesome trouble are the
heathen now troubled. For what followeth? “And the kingdoms are bowed.”
Bowed, saith He, are the kingdoms; not now erected that they may rage,
but bowed that they may adore. When were the kingdoms bowed? When that
came to pass which was predicted in another Psalm, “All kings shall fall
down before Him, all nations shall serve Him.” <span
id="fr_1490"></span>[1491](#fn_1490.md) What cause made the kingdoms to
bow? Hear the cause. “The Most High gave His Voice, and the earth was
moved.” The fanatics <span id="fr_1491"></span>[1492](#fn_1491.md) of
idolatry, like frogs in the marshes, clamoured, the more tumultuously,
the more sordidly, in filth and mire. And what is the brawling of frogs
to the thunder of the clouds? For out of them “the Most High gave His
Voice, and the earth was moved:” He thundered out of His clouds. And
what are His clouds? His Apostles, His preachers, by whom He thundered
in precepts, lightened in miracles. The same are clouds who are also
mountains: mountains for their height and firmness, clouds for their
rain and fruitfulness. For these clouds watered the earth, of which it
was said, “The Most High gave His Voice, and the earth was moved.” For
it is of those clouds that He threateneth a certain barren vineyard,
whence the mountains were carried into the heart of the sea; “I will
command,” saith He, “the clouds that they rain no rain upon it.” <span
id="fr_1492"></span>[1493](#fn_1492.md) This was fulfilled in that which I
have mentioned, when the mountains were carried into the heart of the
sea; when it was said, “It was necessary that the word of God should
have been spoken first to you; but seeing ye put it from you, we turn to
the Gentiles;” <span id="fr_1493"></span>[1494](#fn_1493.md) then was
fulfilled, “I will command the clouds that they rain no rain upon it.”
The nation of the Jews hath just so remained as a fleece dry upon the
ground. For this, ye know, happened in a certain miracle, the ground was
dry, the fleece only was wet, yet rain in the fleece appeared not. <span
id="fr_1494"></span>[1495](#fn_1494.md) So also the mystery of the New
Testament appeared not in the nation of the Jews. What there was the
fleece, is here the veil. For in the fleece was veiled the mystery. But
on the ground, in all the nations open lieth Christ’s Gospel; the rain
is manifest, the Grace of Christ is bare, for it is not covered with a
veil. But that the rain might come out of it, the fleece was pressed.
For by pressure they from themselves excluded Christ, and the Lord now
from His clouds raineth on the ground, the fleece hath remained dry. But
of them then “the Most High gave His Voice,” out of those clouds; by
which Voice the kingdoms were bowed and worshipped.

<span id="ii.XLVI-p35"></span>10. “The Lord of Hosts is with us; the God
of Jacob is our taker up” ([Psa.
46.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#007)<span id="ii.XLVI-p35.1"></span>.md).
Not any man, not any power, not, in short, Angel, or any creature either
earthly or heavenly, but “the Lord of Hosts is with us; the God of Jacob
is our taker up.” He who sent Angels, came after Angels, came that
Angels might serve Him, came that men He might make equal to Angels.
Mighty Grace! If God be for us, who can be against us? “The Lord of
Hosts is with us.” What Lord of Hosts is with us? “If” (I say) “God be
for us, who can be against us? He that spared not His own Son, but
delivered Him up for us all; how hath He not with Him also freely
given <span id="fr_1495"></span>[1496](#fn_1495.md) us all things.” <span
id="fr_1496"></span>[1497](#fn_1496.md) Therefore be we secure, in
tranquillity of heart nourish we a good conscience with the Bread of the
Lord. “The Lord of Hosts is with us; the God of Jacob is our taker up.”
However great be thy infirmity, see who taketh thee up. One is sick, a
physician is called to him. His own taken-up, the Physician calleth the
sick man. Who hath taken him up? Even He. A great hope of salvation; a
great Physician hath taken him up. What Physician?  <span
id="fr_1497"></span>[1498](#fn_1497.md) Every Physician save He is man:
every Physician who cometh to a sick man, another day can be made sick,
beside Him. “The God of Jacob is our taker up.” Make thyself altogether
as a little child, such as are taken up by their parents. For those not
taken up, are exposed; those taken up are nursed. Thinkest thou God hath
so taken thee up, as when an infant thy mother took thee up? Not so, but
to eternity. For thy voice is in that Psalm, “My father and my mother
forsake me, but the Lord hath taken me up.” <span
id="fr_1498"></span>[1499](#fn_1498.md)

<span id="ii.XLVI-p40"></span><span id="page_159">p. 159</span> <span
id="ii.XLVI-Page_159"></span>11. “Come and see the works of the Lord”
([Psa. 46.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#008.md)<span
id="ii.XLVI-p40.1"></span>). Now of this taking up, what hath the Lord
done? Consider the whole world, come and see. For if thou comest not,
thou seest not; if thou seest not, thou believest not; if thou believest
not, thou standest afar off: if thou believest thou comest, if thou
believest thou seest. For how came we to that mountain? Not on foot? Is
it by ship? Is it on the wing? Is it on horses? For all that pertain to
space and place, be not concerned, trouble not thyself, He cometh to
thee. For out of a small stone He hath grown, and become a great
mountain, so that He hath filled all the face of the earth. Why then
wouldest thou by land come to Him, who filleth all lands? Lo, He hath
already come: watch thou. By growing He waketh even sleepers; if yet
there is not in them so deep sleep, as that they be hardened even
against the mountain coming; but they hear, “Awake, thou that sleepest,
and arise from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light.” <span
id="fr_1499"></span>[1500](#fn_1499.md) For it was a great thing for the
Jews to see the stone. For the stone was yet small: and small they
deservedly despised it, and despising they stumbled, and stumbling they
were broken; remains that they be ground to powder. For so was it said
of the stone, “Whosoever shall fall upon that stone shall be broken; but
on whomsoever it shall fall, it will grind him to powder.” <span
id="fr_1500"></span>[1501](#fn_1500.md) It is one thing to be broken,
another to be ground to powder. To be broken is less than to be ground
to powder: but none grindeth He coming exalted, save whom He brake lying
low. For now before His coming He lay low before the Jews, and they
stumbled at Him, and were broken; hereafter shall He come in His
Judgment, glorious and exalted, great and powerful, not weak to be
judged, but strong to judge, and grind to powder those who were broken
stumbling at Him. For “A stone of stumbling and a rock of
offence,” <span id="fr_1501"></span>[1502](#fn_1501.md) is He to them that
believe not. Therefore, brethren, no wonder if the Jews acknowledged not
Him, whom as a small stone lying before their feet they despised. They
are to be wondered at, who even now so great a mountain will not
acknowledge. The Jews at a small stone by not seeing stumbled; the
heretics stumble at a mountain. For now that stone hath grown, now say
we unto them, Lo, now is fulfilled the prophecy of Daniel, “The stone
that was small became a great mountain, and filled the whole
earth.” <span id="fr_1502"></span>[1503](#fn_1502.md) Wherefore stumble ye
at Him, and go not rather up to Him? Who is so blind as to stumble at a
mountain? Came He to thee that thou shouldest have whereat to stumble,
and not have whereto to go up? “Come ye, and let us go up to the
mountain of the Lord.” <span id="fr_1503"></span>[1504](#fn_1503.md) Isaiah
saith this: “Come ye, and let us go up.” What is, “Come ye, and let us
go up”? “Come ye,” is, Believe ye. “Let us go up,” is, Let us
profit. <span id="fr_1504"></span>[1505](#fn_1504.md) But they will neither
come, nor go up, nor believe, nor profit. They bark against the
mountain. Even now by so often stumbling on Him they are broken, and
will not go up, choosing always to stumble. Say we to them, “Come ye,
and see the works of the Lord:” what “prodigies He hath set forth
through the earth.” Prodigies are called, because they portend
something, those signs of miracles which were done when the world
believed. And what thereafter came to pass, and what did they portend?

<span id="ii.XLVI-p47"></span>12. “He maketh wars to cease unto the end
of the earth” ([Psa. 46.9](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#009.md)<span
id="ii.XLVI-p47.1"></span>). This not yet see we fulfilled: yet are
there wars, wars among nations for sovereignty; among sects, among Jews,
Pagans, Christians, heretics, are wars, frequent wars, some for the
truth, some for falsehood contending. Not yet then is this fulfilled,
“He maketh wars to cease unto the end of the earth;” but haply it shall
be fulfilled. Or is it now also fulfilled? In some it is fulfilled; in
the wheat it is fulfilled, in the tares it is not yet fulfilled. What is
this then, “He maketh wars to cease unto the end of the earth”? Wars He
calleth whereby it is warred against God. But who warreth against God?
Ungodliness. And what to God can ungodliness do? Nothing. What doth an
earthen vessel dashed against the rock, however vehemently dashed? With
so much greater harm to itself it cometh, with how much the greater
force it cometh. These wars were great, frequent were they. Against God
fought ungodliness, and earthen vessels were dashed in pieces, even men
by presuming on themselves, by too much prevailing by their own
strength. This is that, the shield whereof Job also named concerning one
ungodly. “He runneth against God, upon the stiff neck of his
shield.” <span id="fr_1505"></span>[1506](#fn_1505.md) What is, “upon the
stiff neck of his shield”? Presuming too much upon his own protection.
Were they such who said, “God is our refuge and strength, a Helper in
tribulations which have found us out too much”? or in another Psalm,
“For I will not trust in my bow, neither shall my sword save me.” <span
id="fr_1506"></span>[1507](#fn_1506.md) When one learneth that in himself
he is nothing, and help in himself has none, arms in him are broken in
pieces, wars are made to cease. Such wars then destroyed that Voice of
the Most High out of His holy clouds, whereby the earth was moved, and
the kingdoms were bowed. These wars hath He made to cease unto the end
of the earth. “He shall break the bow, and <span id="page_160">p.
160</span> <span id="ii.XLVI-Page_160"></span>dash in pieces the arms,
and burn the shield with fire.” Bow, arms, shield, fire.  <span
id="fr_1507"></span>[1508](#fn_1507.md) The bow is plots; arms, public
warfare; shields, vain presuming of self-protection: the fire wherewith
they are burned, is that whereof the Lord said, “I am come to send fire
on the earth;” <span id="fr_1508"></span>[1509](#fn_1508.md) of which fire
saith the Psalm, “There is nothing hid from the heat thereof.” <span
id="fr_1509"></span>[1510](#fn_1509.md) This fire burning, no arms of
ungodliness shall remain in us, needs must all be broken, dashed in
pieces, burned. Remain thou unharmed, not having any help of thine own;
and the more weak thou art, having no arms thine own, the more He taketh
thee up, of whom it is said, “The God of Jacob is our taker up.”…But
when God taketh us up, doth He send us away unarmed? He armeth us, but
with other arms, arms Evangelical, arms of truth, continence, salvation,
faith, hope, charity. These arms shall we have, but not of ourselves:
but the arms which of ourselves we had, are burnt up: yet if by that
fire of the Holy Spirit we are kindled, whereof it is said, “He shall
burn the shields with fire;” thee, who didst wish to be powerful in
thyself, hath God made weak, that He may make thee strong in Him,
because in thyself thou wast made weak.

<span id="ii.XLVI-p53"></span>13. What then followeth? “Be still.” To
what purpose? “And see that I am God” ([Psa.
46.10](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#010.md)<span
id="ii.XLVI-p53.1"></span>). That is, Not ye, but I am God. I created, I
create anew; I formed, I form anew; I made, I make anew. If thou
couldest not make thyself, how canst thou make thyself anew? This seeth
not the contentious tumult of man’s soul; to which contentious tumult is
it said, “Be still.” That is, restrain your souls from contradiction. Do
not argue, and, as it were, arm against God. Else yet live thy arms, not
yet burned up with fire. But if they are burned, “Be still;” because ye
have not wherewith to fight. But if ye be still in yourselves, and from
Me seek all, who before presumed on yourselves, then shall ye “see that
I am God.” “I will be exalted among the heathen, I will be exalted in
the earth.” Just before I said, by the name of earth is signified the
nation of the Jews, by the name of sea the other nations. The mountains
were carried into the heart of the sea; the nations are troubled, the
kingdoms are bowed; the Most High gave His Voice, and the earth was
moved. “The Lord of Hosts is with us, the God of Jacob is our taker up”
([Psa. 46.11](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#011.md)<span
id="ii.XLVI-p53.2"></span>). Miracles are done among the heathen, full
filled is the faith of the heathen; burned are the arms of human
presumption. Still are they, in tranquillity of heart, to acknowledge
God the Author of all their gifts. And after this glorifying, doth He
yet desert the people of the Jews? of which saith the Apostle, “I say
unto you, lest ye should be wise in your own conceits; that blindness in
part is happened unto Israel, until the fulness of the Gentiles be come
in.” <span id="fr_1510"></span>[1511](#fn_1510.md) That is, until the
mountains be carried hither, the clouds rain here, the Lord here bows
the kingdoms with His thunder, “until the fulness of the Gentiles be
come in.” And what thereafter? “And so all Israel shall be saved.”
Therefore, here too observing the same order, “I will be exalted” (saith
He) “among the heathen, I will be exalted in the earth;” that is, both
in the sea, and in the earth, that now might all say what followeth:
“the God of Jacob is our taker up.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1471"></span>[155:1472](1080053.htm#fr_1471.md) <span
id="ii.XLVI-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVI-p2"></span> Lat. XLV. \[In his exordium the Saint
recurs to his favourite idea as follows: “Korah is interpreted
‘Baldness,’ and that our Lord, since in the ‘place of the Bald skull’
\[[Matt. xxvii. 33](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#033.md)<span
id="ii.XLVI-p2.1"></span>\] He was crucified, hath drawn unto Him many;
like that corn of wheat, which except it die, should abide alone; and
that those who are drawn unto Him are called sons of Korah \[[John
12:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#024.md),
[32](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#032.md)<span id="ii.XLVI-p2.2"></span>\].
Thus much in the mystery. There were indeed some sons of Korah at the
time when this was first sung \[[1 Chron. xxvi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1026.htm#001.md)<span id="ii.XLVI-p2.3"></span>\],
but to us ought the Spirit to give life, not the letter to be a veil”
\[[2 Cor. iii. 6](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#006.md)<span
id="ii.XLVI-p2.4"></span>.\]—C.\]

<span id="fn_1472"></span>[155:1473](1080053.htm#fr_1472.md) <span
id="ii.XLVI-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVI-p4"></span> [Matt. xxvii.
51](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#051.md)<span id="ii.XLVI-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1473"></span>[155:1474](1080053.htm#fr_1473.md) <span
id="ii.XLVI-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVI-p5"></span> [Rom. x.
4](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#004.md)<span id="ii.XLVI-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1474"></span>[155:1475](1080053.htm#fr_1474.md) <span
id="ii.XLVI-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVI-p6"></span> [John
14:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#008.md),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#009.md)<span id="ii.XLVI-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1475"></span>[156:1476](1080053.htm#fr_1475.md) <span
id="ii.XLVI-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVI-p7"></span> [John
10:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#030.md),
[38](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#038.md)<span id="ii.XLVI-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1476"></span>[156:1477](1080053.htm#fr_1476.md) <span
id="ii.XLVI-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVI-p10"></span> Many <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.XLVI-p10.1"></span>mss</span>. “of earthly princes.”

<span id="fn_1477"></span>[156:1478](1080053.htm#fr_1477.md) <span
id="ii.XLVI-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVI-p12"></span> [Matt. viii.
24-26](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#024.md)<span id="ii.XLVI-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1478"></span>[156:1479](1080053.htm#fr_1478.md) <span
id="ii.XLVI-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVI-p13"></span> [Luke viii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#025.md)<span id="ii.XLVI-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1479"></span>[156:1480](1080053.htm#fr_1479.md) <span
id="ii.XLVI-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVI-p14"></span> *Al*. “them.”

<span id="fn_1480"></span>[156:1481](1080053.htm#fr_1480.md) <span
id="ii.XLVI-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVI-p16"></span> [Matt.
17:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#020.md), [Matt.
21:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#021.md)<span id="ii.XLVI-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1481"></span>[156:1482](1080053.htm#fr_1481.md) <span
id="ii.XLVI-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVI-p17"></span> [Isa. ii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#002.md)<span id="ii.XLVI-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1482"></span>[157:1483](1080053.htm#fr_1482.md) <span
id="ii.XLVI-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVI-p18"></span> [Ps. xviii.
43](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#043.md)<span id="ii.XLVI-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1483"></span>[157:1484](1080053.htm#fr_1483.md) <span
id="ii.XLVI-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVI-p20"></span> [Acts xvii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#018.md)<span id="ii.XLVI-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1484"></span>[157:1485](1080053.htm#fr_1484.md) <span
id="ii.XLVI-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVI-p21"></span> [Acts xix.
34](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#034.md)<span id="ii.XLVI-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1485"></span>[157:1486](1080053.htm#fr_1485.md) <span
id="ii.XLVI-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVI-p23"></span> \[“Belly,” English version. But I have
not hesitated to substitute a word more literal in fact, which relieves
the text of a ludicrous profanation.—C.\]

<span id="fn_1486"></span>[157:1487](1080053.htm#fr_1486.md) <span
id="ii.XLVI-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVI-p24"></span> [John
7:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#037.md),
[38](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#038.md)<span id="ii.XLVI-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1487"></span>[157:1488](1080053.htm#fr_1487.md) <span
id="ii.XLVI-p24.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVI-p25"></span> \[“Belly,” English version. But I have
not hesitated to substitute a word more literal in fact, which relieves
the text of a ludicrous profanation.—C.\]

<span id="fn_1488"></span>[157:1489](1080053.htm#fr_1488.md) <span
id="ii.XLVI-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVI-p26"></span> [John vii.
39](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#039.md)<span id="ii.XLVI-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1489"></span>[157:1490](1080053.htm#fr_1489.md) <span
id="ii.XLVI-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVI-p27"></span> [Acts
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#001.md),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#002.md)<span id="ii.XLVI-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1490"></span>[158:1491](1080053.htm#fr_1490.md) <span
id="ii.XLVI-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVI-p30"></span> [Ps. lxxii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#011.md)<span id="ii.XLVI-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1491"></span>[158:1492](1080053.htm#fr_1491.md) <span
id="ii.XLVI-p30.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVI-p31"></span> *Arreptitii*.

<span id="fn_1492"></span>[158:1493](1080053.htm#fr_1492.md) <span
id="ii.XLVI-p31.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVI-p32"></span> [Isa. v.
6](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#006.md)<span id="ii.XLVI-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1493"></span>[158:1494](1080053.htm#fr_1493.md) <span
id="ii.XLVI-p32.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVI-p33"></span> [Acts xiii.
46](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#046.md)<span id="ii.XLVI-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1494"></span>[158:1495](1080053.htm#fr_1494.md) <span
id="ii.XLVI-p33.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVI-p34"></span> [Judg. vi.
36-40](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#036.md)<span id="ii.XLVI-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1495"></span>[158:1496](1080053.htm#fr_1495.md) <span
id="ii.XLVI-p35.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVI-p36"></span> So Vulgate.

<span id="fn_1496"></span>[158:1497](1080053.htm#fr_1496.md) <span
id="ii.XLVI-p36.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVI-p37"></span> [Rom.
8:31](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#031.md),
[32](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#032.md)<span id="ii.XLVI-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1497"></span>[158:1498](1080053.htm#fr_1497.md) <span
id="ii.XLVI-p37.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVI-p38"></span> Oxf. <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.XLVI-p38.1"></span>mss</span>. add, “hath taken him up? What
Physician?”

<span id="fn_1498"></span>[158:1499](1080053.htm#fr_1498.md) <span
id="ii.XLVI-p38.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVI-p39"></span> [Ps. xxvii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#010.md)<span id="ii.XLVI-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1499"></span>[159:1500](1080053.htm#fr_1499.md) <span
id="ii.XLVI-p40.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVI-p41"></span> [Eph. v.
14](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#014.md)<span id="ii.XLVI-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1500"></span>[159:1501](1080053.htm#fr_1500.md) <span
id="ii.XLVI-p41.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVI-p42"></span> [Luke xx.
18](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#018.md)<span id="ii.XLVI-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1501"></span>[159:1502](1080053.htm#fr_1501.md) <span
id="ii.XLVI-p42.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVI-p43"></span> [1 Pet. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#008.md)<span id="ii.XLVI-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1502"></span>[159:1503](1080053.htm#fr_1502.md) <span
id="ii.XLVI-p43.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVI-p44"></span> [Dan. ii.
35](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#035.md)<span id="ii.XLVI-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1503"></span>[159:1504](1080053.htm#fr_1503.md) <span
id="ii.XLVI-p44.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVI-p45"></span> [Isa. ii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#003.md)<span id="ii.XLVI-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1504"></span>[159:1505](1080053.htm#fr_1504.md) <span
id="ii.XLVI-p45.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVI-p46"></span> Oxf. <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.XLVI-p46.1"></span>mss</span>. add, “*come, and let us go up*,
believe, and let us profit.”

<span id="fn_1505"></span>[159:1506](1080053.htm#fr_1505.md) <span
id="ii.XLVI-p47.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVI-p48"></span> [Job xv.
26](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#026.md)<span id="ii.XLVI-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1506"></span>[159:1507](1080053.htm#fr_1506.md) <span
id="ii.XLVI-p48.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVI-p49"></span> [Ps. xliv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#006.md)<span id="ii.XLVI-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1507"></span>[160:1508](1080053.htm#fr_1507.md) <span
id="ii.XLVI-p49.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVI-p50"></span> Oxf. <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.XLVI-p50.1"></span>mss</span>. “with fire.”

<span id="fn_1508"></span>[160:1509](1080053.htm#fr_1508.md) <span
id="ii.XLVI-p50.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVI-p51"></span> [Luke xii.
49](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#049.md)<span id="ii.XLVI-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1509"></span>[160:1510](1080053.htm#fr_1509.md) <span
id="ii.XLVI-p51.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVI-p52"></span> [Ps. xix.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#006.md)<span id="ii.XLVI-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1510"></span>[160:1511](1080053.htm#fr_1510.md) <span
id="ii.XLVI-p53.3"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVI-p54"></span> [Rom. xi.
25](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#025.md)<span id="ii.XLVI-p54.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm XLVII](1080054.md)
