[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sacred
Sexuality](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](krz07)  [Next](krz09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Karezza Method*, by J. William Lloyd \[1931\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_20b">p. 20b</span>

## WHEN SEX SATISFIES

For all finer natures, sex relations are only satisfying when touched by
moral and religious emotion - when they are serious - when they involve
the depths - when they inspire to the heights.

When sex *feels sacred in the use* it gives a divine innocence to the
moment, a satisfying sweetness of recollection in the memory.

Sex is only satisfying where it is absolutely free, in a liberty made
new and genuine by glad, mutual consent at every moment of its being.

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

Sex only satisfies when on both sides there are kindness, innocence,
consideration - a love that is *goodness in expression*, that *gives*
and *blesses*.

Sex only satisfies the finer natures when it unites souls, not merely
copulates bodies for a thrill.

An atmosphere of frivolity, recklessness, mere hedonism and indulgence
about sex, invariably reacts in disgust - the conscience instantly
stamps this as "sin."

Sex having two offices - to unite souls and propagate bodies - there are
for these offices two unions - Karezza-union for the deeper love,
orgasmal-union for physical begetting. Do not make the mistake of using
the latter for the former.

But sex is also like a food, and sexual contact with vital magnetic
exchange at certain not-too-long intervals, varying with different
temperaments, conditions and times of life, seems necessary for health
and satisfying living and is also a perfectly valid and justifying
reason for sexual embraces and caresses, even where there is only
innocent need on one side and tender kindness on the other, or where on
both sides there is only need and kindness. There is biological reason
to suppose that the function of sex to mysteriously feed and rejuvenate
is its oldest and perhaps most essential function, antedating its
reproductive function a long, long time.

Starting then from the beginning, the functions of sex may be read as
three:

1.  First: to feed and rejuvenate by contact-pressure (perhaps by a sort
    of catalysis) and a mysterious generation, interchange and mutual
    exchange of subtle processes and forces.
2.  Second: physical reproduction - child-creation.
3.  Third: soul-union, the mystery of love, affection,
    spiritual-companionship, mental-inspiration.

In all its normal aspects sex is creative and uniting, kind and
life-giving in function.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Duality and Spirituality in Sex](krz09)
