[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sacred
Sexuality](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](krz11)  [Next](krz13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Karezza Method*, by J. William Lloyd \[1931\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_29b">p. 29b</span>

## THE KAREZZA METHOD

Whoso would succeed with Karezza must begin with the mental and
spiritual values. Both the man and the woman, and perhaps especially the
woman, must resolve that they do not *wish* the orgasm - that there is a
greater spiritual and physical unity and emotional bliss to be obtained
without it, besides the sense of safety. This must be the fixed thought
and ideal of Karezza.

If you are novices, choose a time when you can both be all alone,
unhurried and free from interruptions. Concentrate yourselves entirely
on your love and joy and the blending of yourselves into one.

Let the room be warm, the surroundings pleasant and esthetic; and be as
unhampered by clothing as possible. Let both of you think more about
your love than your passion; translate your sex-passion as much as
possible into heart-passion; be sensitively alive to the charm of each
other's forms, tones, touch and fragrances; let the thought of

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

mutual tenderness and blessing never leave you for an instant, and make
everything that you do and say and feel and think religious in its
purity, idealism, aspiration. If you do not come nearer heaven in this
act and relation, than in anything else you do or ever will do, you fail
of perfect Karezza.

Let your embrace be music and a living poem.

Now to you, the man, I speak: Lie down beside your partner and begin to
caress her gently with the softness of your hands and fingertips. Tell
her to relax herself and lie utterly passive. Tell her to yield herself
to the bliss of utter peace and realization. Tell her that you love her
and that your whole being longs for entire unity with her. Remember that
you cannot use the word "love" too often. She will never tire of it and
it is your watchword. Be to her an incarnate blessing. Try to convey God
to her.

As your hands caress her, tell her how beautiful her features are to you
- her brow, her hair, her lips, her throat - her arms, hands, bosom,
waist, the flowing rounded lines of her limbs. Grow eloquent, poetic in
her praise. The Loved One can never be too much praised or appreciated
by the Lover. Spend plenty of time on these preparatory caresses.

Finally your touch will grow near and you will come to the focus of all,
"the love-flesh" - the Flower. Be tender; be tender, for this is
Holiness itself - the seal of God on the woman's person.

If there is dew and moisture here, a flowing with honey, you may begin -
that is if your own Finger of Love is firm and fit.

Let there be no hurry or thought of rudeness - be tender, be tender!
Have her lie in a straight line, easy, at peace, utterly relaxed and
willing.

Begin, seeing to it that the lips do not enfold to prevent. Be gentle,
tender, steady, steady. Keep your thoughts on love, not passion. Let her
help you by doing the same and murmuring to you, "I love you!" If your
passion threatens to overcome you, pause and sublimate it into
tenderness of love. Feel strong and confident and say, "I can!" Maintain
your own positiveness. Feel yourself stronger than she is, than your
passions are. But above all think of your spiritual love. Let her be
utterly relaxed physically, let her

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

hold the thought of Peace. Yet for her to hold the thought "I will help
him!" *would help*. Do not worry and do not mind how long you have to
wait before strength and self control return and you can go on. Finally
the stress subsides and you can continue. If she suffers pain, caress
her with your hands, pity her, and be tender and very sympathetic, but
reassure her and go on. She herself does not wish you to stop or to
fail. Reassure and help each other. When you do finally pass the gates
and enter the Hall of the Feast and the Holy of Holies, the worst of the
battle will be over and self-control much easier. Penetration can now be
perfect and complete.

Now let her put her arms around you and sweetly kiss you, but with
heart-love, not yet passion. Pour out your soul to her in extravagance
of out-gushing, poetic love. Praise her with every epithet you can
honestly use. Give her your soul's best, always your best - and call out
the best and purest from her.

At other times - and this is most important - be silent and quiet, but
try to feel yourself a magnetic battery, with the Finger of Love as the
positive pole, and pour out your vital electricity to her and
consciously direct it to her womb, her ovaries, her breasts, lips,
limbs, everywhere filling her in every nerve and fiber with your
magnetism, your life, love, strength, calmness and peace. This attitude
of *magnetation* is the important thing in Karezza, its secret of
sweetest success. In proportion as you acquire the habit and power of
withdrawing the electric qualities from your sexual stores and giving
them out in blessing to your partner from your sex-organs, hands, lips,
skin, everywhere; from your eyes and the tones of your voice; will you
acquire the power to diffuse and bestow the sex-glory, envelop
yourselves in its halo and aura, and to satisfy yourself and satisfy her
without an orgasm. Soon you will not even think of self-control, because
you will have no desire for the orgasm, nor will she. You will both
regard it as an awkward and interrupting accident. And the practice of
Magnetation will beautify and strengthen every organ in your body that
you thus use to express it, as well as hers. It is the great beautifier.
Every look from your eyes, yes, every touch of your hands, and the tones
of your voice will become vibrant with magnetic charm.

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

And while you are magnetizing her, try to feel your utter unity with
her. This is the real ideal and end of Karezza. You will finally enter
into such unity that in your fullest embrace you can hardly tell
yourselves apart and can read each other's thoughts. You will feel a
physical unity as if her blood flowed in your veins, her flesh were
yours. For this is the Soul-Blending Embrace.

If any part of her is weak or ill you can direct the magnetic currents
there with the conscious thought of healing.

But this is anticipation and a description of the perfect thing. Perhaps
at first you will have much difficulty and many failures. If while you
are penetrating you feel the orgasm irresistibly approaching, withdraw
entirely, lift yourself a little higher up and have the emission against
her body, while you are pressed close to her warmth and consoling love.
After all is over, wipe all away, carefully, with a convenient cloth,
and be very careful that no drops can reach her entrance. Then repose
quietly by her side, talking tenderly and lovingly. Do not worry - all
will come right - this is only a common accident with beginners and to
be expected - perhaps with the very passionate and fully-sexed, several
times in succession. Remember you are not yet used to each other or in
magnetic rapport. If she is a true woman she will never reproach you,
but will be all patience, sympathy, loyally working with you to attain
the perfect result.

At the end of an hour, not sooner, all discharges having long since
passed and dried up, if you can again feel potent it will be safe to
renew the attempt.  <span id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1) Caress her for a
while, exactly as at first, and be sure her nectar-moisture and
willingness are as at first. This is your sign of invitation - of her
blissful welcome and Nature's chrism. If she is dry, you will hurt her.
The top having been taken off your passion by the emission, you will
probably, this time, feel less pressure and be able to easily succeed,
but the second testicle may demand equal privileges and again you may
fail. Do exactly as at first and so continue till you do succeed.
Practice makes perfect and "it's dogged that does it," Thackeray said.
Never permit yourself to contemplate

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

anything but ultimate and ideal success. It is right here, after one or
two failures, that most men give up and declare the whole thing
impossible. Yet it is right here, and after such failures, that success
becomes easiest, because the discharges have lessened the seminal
pressure. If the attempt is renewed just as often as potency can be
renewed, success is certain. Any man can succeed if he will persevere.

When you have fully acquired the power you will go on from strength to
strength. You will amaze yourself and your partner by what is easily
possible to you. You will be able to make any motion you please, that
anybody can make anywhere, yet with no failures. You can take the most
unusual positions and change places with your partner. You can allow her
to be as active as she pleases, or to have the orgasm herself, if she
greatly desires it, with no danger to your equilibrium. You can continue
the embrace for half an hour, an hour, or even two hours. You can repeat
it twice, or perhaps three times, in twenty-four hours, with no
sensation of excess. And, so on. But keep the spiritual on top, dominant
- loving is the first thing, and at-one-ment in the highest fruition of
your souls, your real end. Sex-passion as an end in itself will degrade
you make it a tool of your spirit.

Karezza is *the* embrace - The Embrace - the most perfect and satisfying
thing in human life, between two mates who truly love. All other
caresses point to this and are unsatisfactory because they are not it.
It is the only embrace for the truly refined and poetic, as an adequate
ex-pression of their insatiable longing to be at one. It is Heaven, on
earth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1"></span>[32:2](krz12.htm#fr_1) To facilitate this -
immediately after the emission stroke, with a firm, gentle pressure,
upward from the anus to the scrotum, thus aiding complete discharge, and
thereafter soon urinate.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Woman's Part in Karezza](krz13)
