[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mgr03)  [Next](mgr05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00085N62Q/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Myths of Greece and Rome*, by Jane Harrison, \[1928\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### ZEUS (JOVE, JUPITER)

As to the primary origin and significance of Zeus there is happily no
doubt. He is the Indo-European sky-god in its two aspects; he is the god
of the Bright Sky and the shining ether, and also of the Dark Sky, the
god of thunder and rain. When the gods drew lots for shares in the
universe Poseidon, Homer tells us, drew the sea, Hades the murky
darkness, and Zeus "the wide heaven." The most primitive figures in
Greek theology, long before Homer, were Ouranos and Gaia, Heaven and
Earth; and of Ouranos Zeus had preserved many characteristics.
Accordingly, in Homer's pantheon, Zeus, before all things, is the
Loud-Thunderer, the Cloud-Gatherer; "he lighteneth, fashioning either a
rain unspeakable or hail or snow, when the flakes sprinkle the ploughed
lands." He has for his messenger Iris the Rainbow.

These traits, appropriate to the elemental sky-god, are a little
difficult to fit in with the moral characteristics of the model father,
husband, and ruler, and assuredly the human Zeus of Homer cannot command
our admiration. He is apt, as we have seen, to behave like the
uncontrolled

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

thunderstorm he once was. He explodes automatically at the smallest
opposition. Moreover, he is shamelessly licentious, he bullies and
maltreats his wife. Yet there are beginnings of better things. He has
his kindly aspect as god of strangers, beggars, and suppliants
generally.

For his complete moralization the figure of Zeus had to await the genius
of Æschylus. To Æschylus Zeus was at once the mysterious power that
moves the universe and the moral solution of all-world problems. He
cries: "Zeus, our Unknown, whom, since so to be called is his pleasure,
I so address. When I ponder upon all things I can conjecture naught but
Zeus to fit the need, if the burden of vanity is in very truth to be
cast from the soul." And again: "Never, never shall mortal counsels
overpass the harmony of Zeus." This is, indeed, a far cry from the
elemental thunderstorm.

It is not, however, only the genius of Æschylus that has enlarged,
softened, and beautified the conception of Zeus, till his elemental form
is almost wholly lost. Pheidias, in the great chryselephantine statue of
Zeus at Olympia, embodied the ideas of the time of Æschylus, and
Quintilian, in discussing this image, makes this notable statement: "Its
beauty seems to have added something to revealed religion." Dio
Chrysostom wrote as follows:

 

"Our Zeus is peaceful and altogether mild, as the guardian of Hellas
when she is of one mind and not distraught with faction, an image gentle
and august in perfect form, one who is the giver of life and breath and
every good gift, the common father and saviour and guardian of mankind.
The image brought to the troubled heart of the beholder something of its
own large repose. 'If there be any of mortals whatsoever that is heavy
laden in spirit, having suffered sorely many sorrows and calamities in
his life, nor yet winning for himself sweet sleep, even such an one,
methinks, standing

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

before the image of the god, would forget all things whatsoever in his
mortal life hard to be endured, so wondrously hast thou Pheidias,
conceived and wrought it, and such grace and light shine upon it from
thy art.'"

 

Such is the life history of Zeus from thunderstorm to Paraclete.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hera](mgr05)
