[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hindusim](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](seh06)  [Next](seh08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

### OUR ZENANA TERRACE

THOSE learned and artistic persons who now and then find their way to us
in the midst of the Hindu quarter here in Calcutta, to spend an hour or
two, will sometimes break off from their preoccupation with mediæval art
and modern monstrosity to assure us that the lane outside our door is a
genuine bit of Early Italian loveliness. We like to hear this stated,
though we had not needed to be told that our home was beautiful. In the
mists of November evenings, when a couple of street lamps, swung from
wall brackets at long distances, serve to light up the irregular
house-fronts--that stand side by side as if treading on each other's
toes in subdued and solemn eagerness--we could not have doubted that our
lane was very lovely. Here a small verandah carries the front backwards;
there a wall crowds forward, as if to see. The handsome old mouldings
round some doorway, again, are half obscured under successive coats of
plaster. And everywhere their dress of whitewash gives these substantial
Indian buildings a look as of tall persons,

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

decorously wrapped from head to foot in the white and unsewn garments of
the East, or, may-hap, at the clear black midnight, thrills one with a
suggestion of the pale and sheeted dead.

But if those strangers who have beauty in their hearts can be so
affected by our Indian lane, what would they say could they see with our
eyes our zenana terrace? Has the reader, in his Western home, some
favourite window, with view of lawn and trees, and fringed in early
spring with bursting bulbs, or some specially beloved ingle-nook, where
fire and picture and low seat make cosy welcome, filling him with the
sense of light and peace? In that case he can understand what our
terrace is to us. Third of our four courtyards, it opens on the level of
the second story. Rooms with higher roofs surround it on three sides,
and on the fourth it is enclosed by a high wall, part of which is
pierced, to form a screen. In the centre, perfect in its simplicity, a
light wooden railing, with four stone corner-posts, protects us from the
danger of a fall into the court below. And from the south-east angle of
the terrace a narrow staircase, ending in a square and solid tower,
climbs steeply up to the roofs and terraces above. Oh, that staircase!
By it Crivelli's Angel of Annunciation might fittingly descend, as
Herald of God, to seek below her who was blessed amongst all women. Of
one

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

thing at least we may be sure; between Crivelli's Angel and his
staircase there would in that case be no disparity.

Or we turn in the opposite direction, and, overtopping the western wall,
rise the gnarled boughs and fernlike leafage of a *neem* tree. Planted
according to old Calcutta custom beside a neighbour's house, to ward off
the malaria that comes with the east winds, this tree of healing is our
perpetual joy. Constant breath and motion does it give. In, out, and
about it play the sparrows, safe in its hiding from all their foes,
while human creatures talk, or gravely sit and watch, below. Nor are the
sparrows all its guests. On its outmost branches perch the crows--so
full of humour though they cannot laugh! We take but little notice of
these aggressive gentlemen, though we are well aware that our mode of
life is to them a subject of perpetual curiosity, and they frequently
warn and advise us as to the ways of their own kind, with the
friendliest intentions. A crow's manner makes one feel that his
information of to-day would, if possible, be his instructions of
to-morrow. And the pigeons come--the pigeons who live downstairs, in the
front courtyard, and sometimes talk the whole night long. Or a single
kingfisher will arrive, and for a couple of weeks together will give his
loud clear call from the same spot at the same hour, every day, and then

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

fly away. But what we love best are the little birds, and there are
many--the tiny *tun-tun*, so much smaller than the sparrow, and an
occasional *maina*, and now and then a down-swooping swallow, with other
kinds whose names we do not even know. Yes, and as in the early morning
or late afternoon we watch the birds that fly in flocks, away and away
to the north, with the sunlight shining on their white breasts and
under-wings, we know that if to these our dwelling-place offer any
landmark we owe it all to the *neem* tree that lives by our side. By its
graciousness and beauty alone are won what place we may enjoy in the
lives and counsels of the birds.

And something, however little, there surely is. In India all the small
birds and beasts that seek the shelter of the house are holy. They come
in the train of Lakshmi, the Goddess of Fortune, and show that her
presence is about us. And it was a yellow-clad *fakir* who, seated with
us one day in silent watching of the loves and quarrels, the
faithfulness and mutual forgiveness of the sparrows, suddenly broke his
musing with the words, "How wonderful that they can live thus without a
scripture!"

But our terrace wall, with the bed of flowers and creeper that runs
along it, turns a corner. From west it bends some short way to the
north. The way is very short, for here begin the dwelling-

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

rooms again. But in this end is the perforated curtain-like screen
through which the women-folk may take a furtive look at as much of the
gay world as can be seen in the neighbouring quarter. And above it, but
at some distance beyond, rise, to the sight of a watcher within the
house, the tall green-turbaned heads of a line of cocoanut palms. One
behind the other they stand, a procession that faces the light as it
rises in the east. An hour passes, and it strikes level against the
underside of their upright fronds, and then, for ten minutes or so, an
anthem, of light thrown back, is chanted to the ascending sun. Then all
again grows grey, veiled in the excessive radiance of the tropics, and
day wears on. But the morning glory of the palm-trees is not all. The
afternoon has come, and at an hour before sunset the eastward-shining
beams once more strike level with the great green crowns. This time,
however, the sun-rays are caught on the upper surface of low-hanging
down-curved leaves, and so twice every day the palm-trees worship God;
and Hindu eyes, trained to seek and respond to the cosmic spectacle,
look out from secluded dwellings behind enclosing walls to note this,
the matins and evensong of light.

Earlier and later float down to us, on the terrace, the sound of bells
rung in the prayer-room of each neighbouring household at the hour of
worship. Or again, in the moment of twilight,

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

ere yet the young moon is clear above the *neem*, there come as is fit
great thoughts, wide rendings of the veil that hides the Infinite. For
this terrace of ours, this hearth of the soul, is silent and hidden and
distant from the world, and whether at midnight in the starlight, or
seated in the daytime within the shadow of the wall, or even lingering
in the sun about the doorways, it is impossible there to forget
Crivelli's Angel, or to do aught but await, passive and half-expectant,
the inflood of the Divine upon the heart of man.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Hindu Widow and the Zenana](seh08)
