[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hindusim](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](seh02)  [Next](seh04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

# MARGARET NOBLE:

### IN MEMORIAM

IT is now nearly ten years since there was published, under the title of
*The Web of Indian Life*, a book which immediately found its appropriate
public. In England and America it was recognised as belonging to that
newer and finer type of interpretation as applied to the East of which
our time has produced some noteworthy examples; in India it was welcomed
as almost the first attempt on the part of an English writer to present
the ethical and social ideals embodied in the Indian woman and family.
Many among the readers of the book were aware that its author stood in a
unique relation to the Indian people: that she had identified herself
without reserve with their life and been dedicated wholly to their
service; while not a few were assured that she was destined to carry
forward the task thus brilliantly begun of revealing the inner side of
Eastern society to the West. But this was not to be. Two years ago she
died, with her work in India,

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

as it seemed to those who knew her best and had most reason to hope
greatly, hardly more than envisaged and planned.

 

Margaret Noble, known for some twelve years to multitudes of people
throughout India as Sister Nivedita, was of Irish parentage and birth,
and was born at Dungannon, Co. Tyrone, in 1867. Very soon afterwards her
father, Samuel Richmond Noble, entered the Lancashire Independent
College, in preparation for the Congregational ministry, but did not
live to fulfil his early promise. Margaret, his elder daughter, passed
from school in the north of England to a teacher's training, and was
fortunate enough to become acquainted in London with some of the most
enthusiastic apostles of the New Education. Her practical experience was
gained as teacher in various girls' schools, and more especially in
association with a Dutch lady who had established in a suburb of South
London a school of a thoroughly modern type. In 1892, being then in her
twenty-fifth year, she opened at Wimbledon a school of her own in which
she strove to give expression to the broad and fine conception of girls'
education with which then and afterwards she was identified. At
Wimbledon, too, she was the centre of a group of friends, eager
inquirers into everything, given to

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

the discussion of books, ethics, and society with the confident energy
of youth, and beginning in several directions social work which has
since borne varied fruit. Always, however, with Margaret Noble,
intellectual inquiry was immediately related to what she regarded as her
proper work--education; and she was one of the most active of those,
mostly, like herself, concerned with the newer applications of
educational theory, who, twenty years or so ago, founded the Sesame
Club, the earliest in this country of those social centres for men and
women which have since so largely multiplied.

Busy with her school and kindred schemes, abounding in life, a keen
reader and thinker, with a continually widening circle of friends--such
she was in 1895, when there came into her life the influence which in a
few months altered its whole current and purpose.

 

It was, as she has recorded in *The Master as I Saw Him*, at a
drawing-room meeting in November of the year just mentioned that
Margaret Noble for the first time met the Swami Vivekananda, who had
been recognised by many as a challenging figure in the London of that
time. He had appeared before the Parliament of Religions, held during
the Chicago Exhibition of 1893, as the first of the modern missionaries

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

of Hinduism to the Western world. He was unknown and had come
unheralded; but his discourse--the one incident of that curious assembly
that is remembered to-day--was epoch-marking. From it must be dated the
widespread interest in Indian thought and religion, and especially in
the philosophy of Vedanta, which has been so unmistakable a feature of
educated America during the past two decades.

You will hear from those who came within the scope of this masterful
teacher's influence many differing estimates of the effect created by
his personality and speech. Before leaving India, he had been known as
the specially chosen disciple of Ramakrishna Paramahamsa, the Bengali
saint who had lived in a temple-garden at Dakshineshwar, on the river a
few miles above Calcutta, and whose life and sayings were made known to
European readers through one of Max-Müller's later books. To Sister
Nivedita herself the life lived by Ramakrishna and extended and
interpreted by his chief follower summed up the Hindu consciousness, and
stood for the final proof of "the entire sufficiency of any single creed
or conception to lead the soul to God as its true goal."

"Henceforth," she wrote, "it is not true that each form of life or
worship is tolerated or understood by the Hindu mind: each form is
justified, welcomed, set

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

up for its passionate loving, for evermore. Henceforth, the supreme
crime for any follower of any Indian sect, whether orthodox or modern,
philosophic or popular, shall be the criticism of any other, as if it
were without the bounds of the Eternal Faith."

But Ramakrishna was a pure devotee: his concern was simply the
realisation in the individual of the Divine. Vivekananda was a man of
action. Not only did he carry westward the message of Vedantism, but he
had dreams of a renewal of the life of India through the infusion of
fresh knowledge and renascent ideals. He stood entirely aloof from
politics: yet it is hardly surprising that his younger followers should
have acclaimed him as something more than a teacher of Vedantism--as, in
truth, the prophet of New India in a sense which, it seems quite
certain, he never for a moment intended.

 

The Swami left America for England in August 1895, and a few weeks later
he had begun lecturing in London. Miss Noble had few opportunities of
hearing him before his return to America during the winter, but in the
spring of 1896 he was back in London, and was holding a class in the
house of an English friend in St. George's Road, near Victoria Station.
There she was a constant and for a time a hostile and contentious
hearer. Always passionately religious, she had in her girlhood

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>

become a member of the Anglican Church and was deeply responsive to its
ritual and sentiment. But the doctrines of orthodoxy had long since
ceased to hold her intelligence; and at twenty-eight, in the full tide
of her manifold intellectual interests, she was, it may be supposed, as
completely detached from the religious beliefs of her childhood as from
the occult ideas by which at that time some among her friends were
impressed. The message of Swami Vivekananda went to the mark, little as
she recognised this at the time. She disputed his assertions, fought him
in the discussion class, provided indeed the strongest antagonism which
he had to meet at any of his London gatherings. But it is clear that
from the first his influence was winning. About his teaching there was
nothing that could be associated with any sect or special doctrine.
Although himself obeying the impulse and fulfilling the purpose of his
master Ramakrishna, he dealt always impersonally with the body of truth
common to all religions, and dwelt upon the necessity, especially in the
present stage of the world's history, for the exchange of ideals between
peoples, and especially between East and West. He was, too, much more
than a preacher. While glorifying the Indian past and the ancient
contribution of his people to the intellectual wealth of the world, he
was a man of modern outlook, incessantly framing

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

concrete schemes for the social regeneration of India. He was bent upon
the firm establishment of the Order of Ramakrishna, of which he was the
head--an order which he designed not for contemplation alone, but for
social service; he would, if he could, have commanded vast resources for
educational enterprise; and he was resolved to initiate some definite
agency for the education of Indian women. This last was the part of his
programme which, from an early stage of their acquaintance, Swami
Vivekananda seems to have marked out as the special work of Margaret
Noble; and before he left England, at the end of 1896, she had come to
recognise the call. A year later she sailed for India, landed at
Calcutta in the beginning of 1898, and made her home with some American
friends at Belur, on the river a short distance from the city, where was
established the headquarters of the Ramakrishna Mission. Soon after her
arrival in Bengal she was admitted to the Order by the name of Nivedita
(the Dedicated)--thereafter the name by which she was known, far beyond
the bounds of her personal activity.

 

From May to October of her first year in India the Swami, Sister
Nivedita, and three other Western women travelled together in the
North-West, in Kumaon and Kashmir. The tour, which included a pilgrimage
to the famous shrine of Amarnath,

<span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span>

was rich in experience, afterwards recorded in *The Master as I Saw
Him*. It gave her, as she said in that book, glimpses of "a great
religious life of the ancient order, living itself out amidst the full
and torturing consciousness of all the anomalies and perplexities of the
modern transition." These fruitful journeyings ended in the autumn of
1898, and then it was that Sister Nivedita endeavoured to carry out her
project for an Indian school in the Hindu quarter of Calcutta. For
reasons which everyone who knows a little of the world of orthodox
Hinduism will appreciate, the experiment was attended with much
difficulty, and in the course of a few months it was abandoned in order
that new means and opportunities might be found. In June 1899,
accompanied by Vivekananda, Sister Nivedita left Calcutta for Europe,
and during the autumn they were fellow-guests in the house of some
invaluable American friends on the Hudson River. The Swami returned to
India at the close of 1900. This period of a year and a half furnished
Sister Nivedita with most of the opportunities of companionship and
discussion which gave her the special point of view which for the rest
of her life marked her interpretation of Indian life and thought. She
remained in England until the beginning of 1902, when she resumed her
work in Calcutta under conditions much more favourable

<span id="page_xv">p. xv</span>

to success than those which had accompanied its beginning. But the
personal association from which it had sprung was then almost at an end.
Swami Vivekananda died at Belur on July 4, 1902. A few months afterwards
Sister Nivedita was joined by an American colleague, Miss Christine
Greenstidel, and together they entered upon the work of enlarging the
scope of the school in Bose Para Lane, Bagh Bazar. In the early part of
the year 1905 a dangerous illness befel Sister Nivedita, and this was
followed, in the autumn of 1906, by a long spell of malarial fever, the
result of the visit of inquiry and service, described in this volume,
which she paid during the rainy season of that year to Eastern Bengal,
where the people were suffering miserably from famine and flood. The
terrible strain of these two illnesses broke down her magnificent
constitution, and physically she was never the same again. The last
three years of her life were largely spent in England and America. She
returned finally to India in the spring of 1911, and was staying for the
customary autumn holiday at Darjeeling when, on October 13, she died--a
fortnight before the close of her forty-fourth year. Indian friends
only, and those the most devoted, were with her at the last; and the
body was given to the fire with the Hindu rites of which she had so
often spoken and written.

<span id="page_xvi">p. xvi</span>

When people asked, as they constantly did, what Sister Nivedita was
doing in India, her own answer was always simple. She was a teacher, and
in India she was doing nothing else than applying the principles which
she had learned from her own instructors in Europe. The Swami
Vivekananda's practical aims had been predominantly educational, and his
English disciple went to India primarily under the belief that her own
part in the far-reaching work to which he had set his hand was to make a
school, in an Indian home, where the methods and ideals of the modern
educationist might be brought within the cloistral domain of the Eastern
wife and mother. Beginning as a tiny kindergarten, the school grew
steadily until it had a large attendance of little Hindu girls up to the
marriageable age, and a still larger number of married women and widows.
As conducted by Sister Nivedita and her colleague, the school involved
no uprooting from familiar surroundings. Neither child nor woman was
taken from her home into a foreign world; her schooling demanded only a
daily migration from one home to another in the same lane or ward. The
principle was, as Sister Nivedita herself expressed it, by means of
familiar factors of her daily life so to educate the Indian girl as to
enable her to realise those ends which are themselves integral
aspirations of that life. There was

<span id="page_xvii">p. xvii</span>

no attempt to convert her to any religious or social system alien from
her own; but rather, by means of her own customs and traditions, to
develop her in harmony with Indian ideals, the teachers themselves
following those ideals as far as they could be made practicable. It
appeared to some that Sister Nivedita, alike in her school and in the
zenana, was in certain respects a reactionary influence--upholding the
*purdah* and child marriage and perpetual widowhood as institutions
essential to the preservation of the society which she had learned to
admire. But she was far indeed from seeking to maintain the old
unchanged. "Under the old scheme," she said, "women found not only a
discipline but a career"; yet she saw that this old scheme was a
preparation and an opportunity fitted only to the soil in which it grew.
To the Indian as to the European woman the modern revolution has brought
a" narrowing of her lot, and has wrought havoc with the traditional
skill in handicraft. "To-day every Indian woman can cook, and that well.
But she cannot sew, and she has nothing but gossip and prayer, when the
afternoon siesta is over, wherewith to occupy her leisure." Hence Sister
Nivedita and her colleague found it necessary to teach the wives and
widows needlework of various kinds. But it may well be that they
themselves learned more of the irresistible movement of the modern
spirit

<span id="page_xviii">p. xviii</span>

in the orthodox world of Hinduism, when they found themselves met by an
insistent demand from the young wives to be taught English so that they
might become in some real sense the companions of their husbands.

The success that attended the Vivekananda school in Bagh Bazar was not
of the resounding kind; but it was a most noteworthy sign of the times;
and in the later years of Sister Nivedita's life it was prevented only
by the narrow means possessed by the Sisters from developing into a
great institution. Its influence, however, could never have been
measured by the number of its pupils or the amount of regular teaching
done within the modest rooms and courts which are described in the
opening chapters of this book. How long it took Sister Nivedita to
conquer the suspicions of the quiet, proud, and intensely
self-respecting people of Bagh Bazar I have no means of knowing: I can
speak only of what I saw when, some two or three years after she had
made her home among them, I had opportunities of observing her among the
surroundings into which she fitted so perfectly. She was then entirely
accepted by her Hindu neighbours. All their doors were open to her. In
the bazaars and lanes and by the riverside everybody knew her, and she
would be saluted as she passed with an affectionate reverence which was
beautiful

<span id="page_xix">p. xix</span>

and touching to see. The House of the Sisters was known of all; not as a
school merely, but as a centre of unfailing friendliness and succour.
The people remembered how, when the plague broke out among them, Sister
Nivedita had joined with the brethren of the Order of Ramakrishna in a
crusade of nursing and sanative cleansing. And in times when there was
no spectacular call of pestilence or flood, there went out from her
house a constant stream of social and personal service. For this, as
Sister Nivedita always maintained, there was an ever-increasing call
under the economic pressure upon the class which, with its more or less
of English education, was rendering clerical and professional service to
the ruling power.

 

Beginning thus, with the conviction that the European can work
fruitfully in India only upon the basis of perfect co-operation with the
children of the soil, Sister Nivedita was led to make the great
renunciation. The land to whose service she had devoted herself made an
overwhelming appeal to her--its history and thought, its people and
their life, its present state in subjection and social transition. There
could be no partial surrender with her: she gave herself utterly.
Accepting the lot of the Indian woman, living as her neighbours lived,
in a little native house severely

<span id="page_xx">p. xx</span>

devoid of all inessentials, she worked among them in all seasons--when
the splendid cold weather of Bengal gave place to the terrific heat, and
this in turn to the rains which every year made the narrow streets of
the quarter into rivulets. "Never have I known such complete
self-effacement," wrote her closest Indian woman friend:

"All the rare gifts that opened out a great career for her in the West
she laid at the service of our motherland. . . . She had so completely
identified herself with us that I never heard her use phrases like
'Indian need' or Indian women': it was always 'our need,' 'our women.'
She was never as an outsider who came to help, but one of us who was
striving and groping about to find salvation." <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0)

It needs not to be said that this was the secret of her extraordinary
power. India instinctively understands every form of renunciation, and
it would, I conceive, be impossible to exaggerate the impression made by
this life of absolute sincerity and self-dedication, with its rejoicing
acceptance of the austerity and simplicity of the old Indian order. But
this, of course, was not all. No one who knows the India of the past
decade will need to be told that the influence of her ideal and example
went out from the little house in Bagh Bazar in ever-widening circles as
the

<span id="page_xxi">p. xxi</span>

years went on. Sister Nivedita was the most fervent and convinced of
Nationalists: the word continually on her lips was Nationality. She had
unbounded faith in the reserve power of the Indian people, and her call
to the younger generation was a ringing challenge to them to rise, not
only to the height of the past, but to the demand of the future.
Unsparing she could be, at times, in criticising the Indian character;
but she never bated a jot of her belief in the certainty of its triumph,
and it went hard with anyone, European or Asiatic, who offered any kind
of insult or disparagement to the people of her adoption. The beginning
of her work in India coincided with a stage of extraordinary deadness in
public and intellectual life. But the change was already on the way, and
she had the joy of seeing the growth of a new spirit, the rapid
formation of new ideals, the dawn, as she believed, of a renascent
national life and power. The influences that have gone to the shaping of
the New India are still obscure; but this may be said with complete
assurance, that among them all there has been no single factor that has
surpassed, or equalled, the character and life and words of Margaret
Noble.

 

There were no rules of exclusion in the House of the Sisters, provided
only that the privileged

<span id="page_xxii">p. xxii</span>

male visitor did not intrude during the hours given up to the orthodox
Hindu ladies who came for tuition in needlework and English. And to one
engaged throughout the week in the merciless daily labour that generally
falls upon the Englishman in India, the Sundays in Bose Para Lane were a
refreshment and a stimulus the memory of which is never likely to pass
away. Breakfast was served with the extreme of simplicity on the little
veranda, and the group would not break up until long after the morning
sun had become too hot for a comfortable journey back through the
blazing streets. Her house was a wonderful rendezvous. Not often did one
meet a Western visitor, save at those times when an English or American
friend would be making a stay in Calcutta; but nowhere else, so far as
my experience went, was there an opportunity of making acquaintance with
so many interesting types of the Indian world. There would come members
of Council and leaders in the public affairs of Bengal; Indian artists,
men of letters, men of science; orators, teachers, journalists,
students; frequently a travelled member of the Order of Ramakrishna,
occasionally a wandering scholar, not seldom a public man or leader of
religion from a far province. The experience was beyond expression
delightful, and its influence, you knew, was to be felt along many
lines.

<span id="page_xxiii">p. xxiii</span>

There was a time, in the years which followed her return from the first
of her long visits to the West, when it seemed likely that Sister
Nivedita would develop into a regular and constant speaker. She gave
frequent addresses, and not in Calcutta alone. In the autumn of 1902 she
made a tour in Western India, where she lectured to large audiences.
This was succeeded by a similar tour in the Madras Presidency during the
same winter, and when at home she was constantly in request as a speaker
at meetings large and small. Latterly, however, she showed a disposition
to confine her activities to writing and to direct contact with those
who were making towards the New India of which she dreamed. Many of her
friends approved this change of plan; but it has always seemed to me
that public speech gave her the opportunity most adapted to the delivery
of her message. She varied greatly, it is true, on the platform. Always
rather at the mercy of a too difficult thesis, given to the use of
socio-philosophic terms, and following a too compressed method of
exposition, she not infrequently soared beyond the comprehension of her
audience. She spoke least successfully when under the strain of an
important occasion; most brilliantly when responding to the immediate
stimulus of a challenge in debate or of a suggestion or incident arising
naturally in the meeting. One thinks of her at

<span id="page_xxiv">p. xxiv</span>

her best (and how often she was so!) addressing some crowded gathering
in the years before her health was broken and before there came upon her
that sense of "the petty done, the undone vast," in which latterly she
seemed to abide. And from a score or so of occasions, differing greatly
in circumstances, I recall especially two as showing her in most
characteristic fashion.

The first was during the rainy season of 1902, when she cut short a
Sunday evening call at Bagh Bazar by saying that she was due at a
lecture. She allowed me to accompany her, and we went to a Bengali
school in the university quarter. The quadrangle was densely crowded
with youths and men, and on a dais was seated, alongside the symbolic
*tulsi* plant, a *Katkak* (one of the last survivals of the ancient
minstrels), who as we entered began a recital from the Ramayana. For an
hour or so he continued, [declaiming](errata.htm#0) and intoning, while
his hearers listened enrapt and a friendly interpreter explained to me,
the one outsider present, the movement of the story. When the recital
was finished Sister Nivedita rose to speak, without any preliminary (she
always disliked the intrusion of a chairman). She spoke, as always, from
the feeling of the moment as regards the expression, from long
reflection and conviction as regards the substance. And she began with a
reference to the recital to which they

<span id="page_xxv">p. xxv</span>

had just been listening, pointing her moral swiftly and powerfully. Did
they, she asked, think it was enough to learn and admire the ancient
stories and to glory in the ideals which had inspired the men and women
of early India? "Believe me, that is nothing. The Ramayana is not
something that came once for all, from a society that is dead and gone;
it is something springing ever from the living heart of a people. Our
word to the young Indian to-day is: Make your own Ramayana, not in
written stories, but in service and achievement for the motherland."

The other occasion, a year or two later, was one in which, at the first
glance, she seemed ex-extraordinarily "out of the picture." The hall of
the Dalhousie Institute, Calcutta, was filled with a mixed audience,
mostly Indian, for as odd a purpose as could well be imagined in that
country--to hear a debate on Marriage *versus* Celibacy. The discussion
had been arranged, as an anniversary treat, by the committee of a
Bengali public library, and the last of the Military Members of the
Viceroy's Council (Sir Edmond Elles) was in the chair. The case for
celibacy was stated by the late Sir Edward Law, the Finance Minister;
the case for marriage by an elderly Parsee member of the Indian Civil
Service. Both openers gave play to the easy facetiousness which is
commonly deemed appropriate to the

<span id="page_xxvi">p. xxvi</span>

public discussion of this and kindred subjects, and the meeting had
reached a low ebb when, towards the end, Sir Edmond Elles called upon
Sister Nivedita, who was seated on the platform with an English woman
friend. She began slowly, with a courteous half-humorous rebuke to the
chairman, and then in a few pointed and searching sentences outlined the
conception of wifehood as revealed in Eastern tradition. Developing
this, and incidentally crushing some criticism by a previous speaker of
the Western woman who makes a career for herself outside marriage, she
gave a brilliant little exposition of the contrasted and complementary
views of the place of woman as mother and as individual. It was
marvellously skilful, complete, and convincing, and the whole thing
occupied a bare ten minutes. But what interested one even more than the
perfection of the speech was the way in which the tone of the meeting
was transformed by the touchstone of her dominating spirit. Many times,
before and after that, I heard her speak: to groups of students, or in
the Calcutta Town Hall before a great audience, on her one absorbing
theme--the religion of Nationalism; to English gatherings in hall or
church or drawing-room. And I have thought, and still think, that her
gift of speech was something which, when fully exercised, I have never
known surpassed--so fine and sure was it

<span id="page_xxvii">p. xxvii</span>

in form, so deeply impassioned, of such flashing and undaunted
sincerity.

It cannot, perhaps, be said that any of her books fully represent the
strength and range of her mind, notwithstanding the fine literary
faculty which was undoubtedly hers. As with her speaking so with her
writing: it was most effective when it came out in attack or
controversy. There are things buried in Indian newspapers and magazines
which revealed an extraordinary power of direct and resonant expression,
and a grip of argument and affairs which she would not have blamed one
for praising as masculine. And yet her books, though so much less
wonderful than herself, are surely destined for a larger public than
they have yet reached. *Kali the Mother*, the little volume in which she
gave the firstfruits of her Indian studies under Vivekananda, showed
something of her interpretative faculty, although its title and
sentiment were startling to those English readers who knew only the
ordinary European view of the "bloody goddess." Into *The Web of Indian
Life* she put, as her friends knew, all the force of her mind and all
the intensity of her faith. The result was moving and powerful, if
unequal: it gave an earnest of what the world might have expected from
her had she lived to write the interpretation of Indian domestic life
and the social structure of Hinduism to which undoubtedly

<span id="page_xxviii">p. xxviii</span>

she would have devoted herself. Her later books display a steady advance
in mastery of expression. In *Cradle Tales of Hinduism* she retold a
number of the heroic stories of which she made constant use in her
lessons and addresses; and in *The Master as I Saw Him*, the last to be
published in her lifetime, she gave a picture of the Swami Vivekananda
as she had come to know him during the seven years of their association.
The task of writing the Life of the teacher to whom she owed the purpose
and direction of her own activity, she left to other hands.

 

No effort has been made in the foregoing rough sketch to portray the
personality, the rare and splendid and dauntless spirit, that was
Margaret Noble. To do this would be to attempt the impossible. So much
of the reality as can be conveyed to those who did not know her will be
contained in a collection of Letters and Memorials, which, it is hoped,
may before long be brought together. And in the meantime I am enabled to
quote a few brief tributes from some who, in England or India, were
associated in one way or another with her work and her ideal.

Nothing that she touched remained commonplace; her letters, much more
than her books, disclose the temper and genius that were known to her
friends and fellow-workers. Her dominant notes

<span id="page_xxix">p. xxix</span>

were clarity and sincerity and an incomparable vitality. She was, of all
the men and women one has known, the most vividly alive. Having
renounced all that most of us hold dearest, she had the right to be
earnest and to demand earnestness; but not in the smallest degree did
the overmastering purpose of her being remove her from the sphere of
personal relations. At all times she toiled with an absolute
concentration; her inner life was intense, austere, and deeply
controlled. Yet never was anyone more wholly and exquisitely human, more
lovely and spontaneous in the sharing of daily services and joys.
Professor Geddes has recalled the infinite changefulness of her moods.
They ran, in truth, over the whole scale: from the fierceness and scorn
of which Mr. Nevinson speaks to a sparkling playfulness that made her,
in India as in the West, the life and light of her circle. In matters of
personal conduct, as in weightier affairs of public or social activity,
she was an unequalled counsellor: so extraordinary in its rapidity and
sureness was her judgment. And those to whom she gave the ennobling gift
of her friendship knew her as the most perfect of comrades, while they
hold the memory of that gift as this world's highest benediction. They
think of her years of sustained and intense endeavour, of her open-eyed
and impassioned search for truth, of the courage that never quailed, the

<span id="page_xxx">p. xxx</span>

noble compassionate heart; they think of her tending the victims of
famine and plague, or ministering day by day among the humble folk with
whom her lot was cast: putting heart into the helpless and defeated,
showing to the young and perplexed the star of a glowing faith and
purpose, royally spending all the powers of a rich intelligence and an
overflowing humanity for all who called upon her in their need. And some
among them count it an honour beyond all price that they were permitted
to share, in however imperfect a measure, the mind and confidence of
this radiant child of God.

S. K. RATCLIFFE.

21 BUCKINGHAM STREET, LONDON, W.C.,  
                 *July* 1913.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[xx:1](seh03.htm#fr_0) Mrs. J. C. Bose, in the
*Modern Review* (Calcutta), November 1911.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: A Few Tributes](seh04)
