[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hindusim](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](seh09)  [Next](seh11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

### DOL-JATRA

IT was dawn of the beautiful morning that ends the full-moon night of
the month of *Phalgun*. In the sick room the light in the small earthen
cup flickered and went out, and the cool wind that comes with the first
light entered the chamber and fanned with its wings both the watcher and
the sick. It was then, in those first rapt moments of sunrise, that
there came, from far off by the Ganges side, the sound of the Indian
flute, incredibly mysterious and remote, rising and falling in gentle
cadences, pausing in sweetness, lingering in tenderness, dominated ever
by its own pathos. The music was a hymn of worship, and the night just
ended was the birthnight of Chaitanya--Chaitanya, the saint of Nuddea,
the poet and emancipator of Bengal. Oh wonderful birth at Nuddea, of the
Lover of the People, on the People's Feast! For this full-moon day of
*Phalgun* is not only the birthday of Gauranga, but also the *Holi Puja*
of the low castes and the *Dol-jatra* of the Hindu calendar.

Whatever else we do not know of the ancient countries, of one thing we
may be sure, that in

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

every case they must have had a yearly feast of Eros. We may gather,
moreover, from the climatic and geographical associations of each land,
the very moon of the festival in every case. It must always have taken
place in the spring-time. The memory of this left behind, here a
carnival, there a battle of flowers, and somewhere else a May Day
frolic, to tell a future age the path it went. Here in India, where all
ages persist, like geological strata piled one upon another, it is kept
to-day as it may have been in Assyria or Egypt, in early Greece or in
the empire of the Hittites.

On full-moon of the beautiful month of *Phalgun*--that month when the
*asoka* tree and the mango are in bloom, when the foliage buds of the
leaf-almond are long and slender against the blue, and when the scarlet
plumes of the *palash* stand out on its naked branches--occurs the
*Holi* festival, or *Dol-jatra* of some long pre-Hindu people. Pre-Hindu
they certainly were, although Hinduism has done its best to absorb and
assimilate the poetry they brought to it. For the *asoka* tree, they
say, only blooms when the footfall is heard by it of a beautiful woman,
and the fragrance of mango-blossoms is one of the five arrows of Madan's
bow--two morsels of the folk-lore that clearly belong to the spring and
nature festival. Madan, the Indian Love, is always depicted as a young
man, not as a child, who once upon a time

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

went clad in flowers--nay, his very weapon was made of them. And as he
wore it loose and unstrung beside his quiver, the eager bees hanging
above it gave it its proper form of the bow. So at least we are told in
Kalidas's immortal fragment. Wherever Madan is mentioned amongst the
educated, Kalidas must needs be remembered, for his was the brain that
gave the beautiful young archer his life-myth, and to his poem must all
go who would learn of the impious faring forth together of Love and his
comrade Spring, to shoot at the heart of the Great God, and of the fate
that befell their enterprise in the sacred grove of meditation. All the
love of the Indian soil and Indian nature that must have spoken in the
wild poetic souls of the earliest aborigines is here poured, together
with his own thought and learning, into the crucible of a great Hindu
poet, to form the poem of the birth of Kartik the War-Lord. But long
before Kalidas took up his lute, the Indian feast of Eros had been
Indianized, being interpreted as an incident in the idyll of the
sporting of the child Krishna in the meadows of Brindaban. Nothing is so
exquisite as this--the tale of the divine childhood as a cowherd amongst
the herd-boys and herd-girls beside the Jumna. At the age of eleven
Krishna passes off the peasant stage for ever, but years after, when his
forest-friends visit him in his palace, they refuse to

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

recognise their old playmate whom they now see in kingly robes, and will
not be satisfied till he has donned once more for them his childhood's
crown of a peacock's feather, with flute and simple village garments,
thus revealing himself again to their adoring love as the same Gopala
they knew of old.

Everyone who knows anything of the village customs of the North-West has
seen the place that swinging holds in the Indian peasant's conception of
a festival. Boys and girls; young men and young women, like English
rustics at a fair, swing and shout, applaud and deride each other, with
never a suggestion of that dignity which we commonly associate with
Oriental humanity. It is wonderful how easily, with a rope and a few
bamboos and a wooden seat, a swing can be made for a frolic. But in the
Himalayas, near every temple, we find swing-posts of deodar and stout
iron chains. Clearly there was a time when the festival was celebrated
everywhere, and since Brindaban must so obviously have known the giddy
delight, it followed that a swinging ceremony became part of the
religious ritual of the altar on the day of the Spring Feast. In other
words, Hinduism, by means of the Krishna legend, had absorbed into
itself, and in doing so, lent a greater dignity of interpretation to,
the Festival of Love of the country folk.

Hinduism absorbed, Hinduism reinterpreted,

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

but she never criticised or discountenanced the gaiety of the child
races. And still the lower castes maintained the old practices of the
season. There are perhaps two essential elements characteristic of the
festivals of Madan. One is the free mixing of men and women, with
probably a certain element of rough buffoonery, something like the old
St. Valentine's Day of Europe; and the other, the drawing together of
all the classes, ignoring social differences of higher civilisations of
later ages. These two characteristics have persisted to the present day
in the *Holi Puja* observances of the Hindu lower classes, and Hindu
gentlefolk of mature age will tell how in their childhood their mothers
would bend the head to receive the red-powder *tilaka* at the hands of
their Hindustani servants.

Out in the streets meanwhile the boys are at war with passing
pedestrians, all of whom are bound on this privileged day to submit to
being pelted with red powder. Yellow powders are sometimes used, but
this, say the best judges, is a mistake. The red alone is correct,
symbolising the sand of the Jumna, all stained with the blood of the
demons, whom Krishna slew. The wild and boisterous, impatient of the
priest's slow blessing, buy the powder straight from shops and throw it.
But gentler spirits wait, playing only with that which is duly offered
and sanctified in worship.

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> And great is the
reward of their patience, for such is the virtue of the blest powder
that it confers immunity, it is said, from all diseases of the season!

Here then in India to this day is played out every year the old-time
drama of the peasant in the spring; played, too, in a fashion of which,
however it may annoy the Philistine, neither the scholar nor the poet
could bear to sacrifice a single point. The joy of simple peoples in the
bridal of nature, and the festival of the great democracy of caste and
sex--these are two impulses that have given birth to all carnivals and
*Holi Pujas* that the world has ever known. And behind, watching over
them, suggesting a thought of poetry here, a touch of sanctity there,
and working to moderate possible excess only by her own benign presence
and her kindly tolerance, stands the ancient Mother-Church of Hinduism.
There was a wonderful dramatic fitness in the fact that in the fulness
of time it was on the full-moon of *Phalgun*, the day of the *Holi*
festival, that Chaitanya, apostle of rapture, lover of the poor and
lowly, the national saint and the preacher of democracy, was born here
in Bengal.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Janmastami; The Day of the Great Birth](seh11.md)
