[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hindusim](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](seh18)  [Next](seh20.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

### CHITORE

IT was almost midnight, as the moon grew near the full, when we looked
for the first time on the fortress of Chitore. The lights in the village
at its foot had been extinguished, and the hill with its great length
stood dark and isolated against the sky. Almost directly above the black
cleft of the Cow's Mouth stood the Tower of Victory of Kumbha Rana, like
a finger pointing upwards in witness of past glory. And even in the
darkness we could see the gentle curving lines of the walls following
the contour of hillside, with its three miles of length and one of
breadth. Silently we sat on a low stone a mile off and drank in the
scene. Even thus, on the first or last night of his journey, may some
Rajput of old have gazed hour after hour on this beloved home. Even thus
may Padmini have caught her first glimpse of this city of her fate I

It is not a connected story, this for which Chitore is famous. The wild
romance of which her annals are so full is a series of gleams and
flashes, lasting through hundreds of years. Like

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

watching from the plain the escalade of some rocky summit is the effort
of one who strives to picture the past of Chitore. Again and again do
the banners of the clansmen appear amidst trees and crags, only again
and again to be lost to sight. Wherever the mists of history lift, there
are revealed the old-time ideals of the courage and pride of woman and
the glory of man. Chitore is no mere chronological record; she is an
eternal symbol, the heart's heart of one phase of the Indian genius.

Architecturally the splendour of the city justifies her pride. The rock
on which she stands slopes inwards from all sides, with the result that
there are innumerable tanks and a water supply practically unlimited.
Within the walls are the remains of what has been virtually two cities,
one to the north-east, the ancient capital of the time before Bappa
Raoul, and one more modern which grew up between his accession in A.D.
728 and the evacuation under Akbar in 1568.

The old manor-grange, on whose veranda Bappa Raoul, in the eighth
century, administered justice, scarcely comports with our modern notions
of a palace. In front of it, not far away, is a Tower of Victory, now
crumbling to pieces, and everywhere the living rock of the original
foundation is close at hand. The life of the garrison within this
fortress must have been strangely like that of a camp.

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

Long and narrow, like some lean grey lion crouching for the spring, lies
walled Chitore on its craggy hill. And the newly-arrived traveller
watching it may see it to-night, as the returning escort may have seen
it when Padmini's marriage procession halted for the last time on the
homeward way, more than seven centuries ago. Then, as now, the long
heavy walls curved lovingly, like the canvas of a tent, about the city.
Little can the "lotus fair" Padmini have slept that night, the last of
the long journey from her father's distant stronghold. Rather must she
have gazed on through hour after hour of waking dreamfulness, counting
the tale of the turrets and bastions of the fortress that to-morrow she
would enter as bride and queen. Within her was the confidence of the
Indian wife, who thinks of herself as beginning what is only a new
chapter in an old story, as recovering a thread that was held but a
while ago, and dropped at death. Not for the first time were they to
take up to-morrow the tale of life together--it was an ancient
comradeship of the soul. Did no vision of the future cast its shadow
across the path before her to make Padmini shrink and pause, in the
glory of this her great homecoming? Had the bard whispered no word above
her cradle of the tragedy of greatness that lay before her? Did she know
that as long as winds should wail over Chitore they would sing her name,
that with her

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

would every stone and every building be associated in the world's memory
till the end of time? To her, what would be was but the following of the
path of Rajput honour. Was it not always said that, in the hour of
birth, the eyes of a boy were set upon a knife and those of a girl upon
a lamp--for the man must leave life by way of the sword and woman by
that of fire?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: An Indian Amulet](seh20.md)
