[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hindusim](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](seh23)  [Next](seh25.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

### THE DREAD SEVEN

BENEATH the *neem* they sit, as did the Norns of old beneath
Yggdrasil--those seven dread sisters, of whom Sitola, goddess of
Smallpox, is the first. All the rashes and eruptions they share amongst
them, and the youngest of the seven is the old friend of our childhood,
no less a personage than Measles herself. It is strange, we feel, this
element of fear that seems so often associated in ancient mythology with
the idea of femininity. Head of the Fates is she who cuts the thread of
life, and all the three are womenkind. Ate, the sleepless doom that
pursues after the shedder of blood, is a woman. The Harpies and avenging
Erinys are daughters, not sons, of the gods and of Night. And here in
India the power that is seen in the burning of fever and the wasting of
disease is conceived as the presence within a man of the Mother Herself.

The fact is an added token of the antiquity of the association. When the
administration of justice took the form of a curse or a vendetta,
pronounced by the grey-haired women of the

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

village; when all power was as yet in the hands of the Mothers, and men
were at best but their fierce and courageous children; when rulership
could not be conceived of apart from the feminine--thus early awoke the
idea of the divinity that is seen in the terrible and the irrevocable.
Among peoples whose geographical compactness and comparative density
hastened their political differentiation, the terror was more apt to
take the form of a reflection of the fear of man and his just wrath.
Righteous punishment was a thing to be looked for. The avenger of blood
was most to be dreaded of all foes. But in India, that land of vast
spaces and extended populations, the ideal of malign power remained
mysterious, incalculable, and supernatural. From the beginning there was
something inexplicable in the exercise of omnipotence. Could any sign of
divine presence be more convincing, because more incomprehensible, than
the spells of fever, or the anger of a rash? Naturally, then, the
practice of worship developed the opposite power, that of healing.

Very quaint are the descriptions given by the faithful of the Seven
Fearsome Sisters. That Smallpox makes affrighted goes without saying.
Her power is open and irrepressible, afflicting men at noonday. But each
one, even the youngest, has a potency of her own. Being the youngest,
indeed, gives to Measles, it is said, a peculiar

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

ability to do mischief. Her very age makes her the pet of her father and
mother. She is therefore much indulged. She lives suppressed: that is to
say, she is apt to exercise her powers in secret, and to leave behind
her when she goes some terrible memento of her visit, in a permanent
blindness, deafness, or lameness. It is evident here that a good deal of
fine medical observation has been put into the curious old myth of the
seven sisters.

It would be strange, however, if so careful an index of diagnosis were
entirely dissociated from all consideration of methods of treatment. As
we might have expected, the priests of Sitola come from a peculiar
caste, being known as Dom Brahmins, and are, in fact, doctors of a very
ancient order. The oldest worships are connected with libations, the
pouring-out of water before God; but in the worship of Sitola the idea
of a sanative cleanliness is very prominently brought forward. One will
sometimes, in the by-ways of some busy city, see women after nightfall
pouring out water in the road before a temple and sweeping the place
with a broom. They are praying to Sitola, the guide will tell us. For
those who know have laid down the law that this goddess demands
salutation with water and a broom. Indeed she clasps these in her own
arms as represented in her images; and she comes to us, they

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

say, riding on the washerman's donkey, an unclean beast. In this last
point, though undeniably forcible, public opinion is probably wrong.
Sitola is represented, it is true, as riding on an ass, but in all
likelihood this is because, in that remote past out of which she rose,
the ass was the fleet courser, the splendid and romantic steed, hero of
all the poetry that now centres in the horse. He may, in an age of
degeneration, be relegated to the use of the laundryman's caste, daily
parading the town with his load of soiled linen for the wash. But he is
most emphatically one of those who have seen better days. Once upon a
time he held a ruling position amongst animals, and in the Semitic races
his appearance in a procession would seem to have indicated semi-royal
state as late as the opening of the Christian era. Wild in the deserts
of Arabia, he appears in the liturgy of ancient Egypt as the Sun-god,
and scholars hold that traces of this identification may still be found
in the *Rig-Veda* itself. Even now there is a breed in Persia which is
famous and honoured, transcending even the horse in swiftness, and
making it seem in no wise ludicrous that a goddess should be seated on
an ass.

Many students will feel that the assignment of one whole divinity to the
province of a single disease argues a state of society in which there
was a very elaborate division of labour. Nor can

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

we help connecting this advance in social organisation with that sudden
accession of medical science of which the worship of Sitola constitutes
a remnant. The whole idea is a rare mixture of piety and wisdom. When
the patient first succumbs to the malady, there is many a village-wife
whose diagnosis is as valuable as the physician's or the priest's. The
one anxiety is that the eruption should have free way. Should it remain
suppressed, the case is regarded as grave. But if this is not so, and
matters appear promising, the next step is to feed with a sufficient
quantity of milk. The amount of this food that can be digested by a
smallpox patient of robust constitution is said to be quite incredible.
If the case is bad, however, there is nothing to be done but call for
the special attendance of a priest of Sitola. In this case the sick man
will be laid on the floor on cool banana leaves. He is also given
medicine brought by the priest. A twig of *neem* is supplied to him, and
except with it he is not allowed to touch his own skin. To tickle it
with the sacred twig is an invocation of blessing. At the same time
devotions are going on. At first, when the fell visitant was announced,
the women of the household repaired in the evening to temple or tree, to
offer their worship. Part of this consisted in placing flowers on top of
an inverted pot, at the feet of the goddess, If the flowers fall, she is

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

pleased, and grants the prayer of her suppliant. But if they remain
where they were placed, she is obdurate, and the end can hardly be
bright. I have been told of one case in which the women had placed their
flowers and sat in the attitude of prayer to see what was to be their
fate. The blossoms did not fall, and in agony of mind the whole party
bent still lower in prayer, imploring with clasped hands that the Devi
might take pity and grant a life much loved. At this second prayer, as
they watched and waited, the flowers fluttered down, slowly, slowly, and
each one felt that an invisible hand had taken them, and the prayer
would be fulfilled.

Only half the necessary offering is thus made, however. The idea, in
Bengal at least, is that the Mother has been asked to visit the abode of
her children and bless them with a healing touch. This is the element in
the myth to which prominence is given, though it is not quite clear that
there is not mixed with it an older notion that it is the presence of
the goddess that has brought disaster, and that she is being begged to
withdraw. Outside Bengal this last seems to be frankly the thought. But
here we are mainly in the attitude of entreating the Mother to enter the
house and bear away its misfortune. The more archaic fear may be traced
in the fact that, while the illness remains, none in the house will
venture to call it

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

by any name but "the mercy." And the visitors who generally throng to
see an invalid remain here, it is true, on the threshold; but still they
come, saying they are adoring the divine Mother, present in the sick. So
the conception of the healing divinity of sweetness has not yet wholly
emancipated itself from an older and less noble worship of fear; but it
is on the way to do so, for when the recovery has taken place it is
always unhesitatingly attributed to a visit of benediction, and many are
the household tales of special experiences illustrating this. From the
moment of the announcement, then, when the worship is offered, the house
and everyone in it has to be kept in a state of such exceptional purity
as is meet for those who expect a divine advent. No meat or fish may be
cooked within the walls. Only after bathing, and wearing the cleanest of
garments, may the sick be attended. Fresh flowers and incense are to be
offered daily. Water and the broom must do even more than their ordinary
work in constant cleansing. And finally, when the last remnant of his
illness is well past, the patient marks his own recovery by a delightful
bath, for which he has been prepared by massage, being rubbed with
sandal-paste and turmeric, ancient luxuries of the toilet, full of
coolness and fragrance.

The sons of Askr, or the ash, carried into Europe,

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

it is said, the use of bronze, the domesticated horse, and also the
knowledge of massage and of healing drugs and oils. We have seen that
the horse must have been subjugated by man and have reached the world's
great trade-routes at Babylon and Nineveh only after the ass had been
long familiar. We know also that it must have come from Central Asia,
and the probability is that it had been tamed long enough before the
memorising of the present *Rig-Veda* for its predecessor to be even
then, amongst the Aryans, only a dim and half-conscious tradition. That
Sitola and her sisters should number seven in all shows that they were
the creation of some race in whom astronomic studies and planetary lore
had already made the number seven peculiarly sacred and impressive, as
it was among the singers of the Vedas. They appear also, on comparing
their characters with those of the corresponding fear-creating goddesses
of Europe, to belong to a civilisation in which political and military
ideas were slower of growth and personal culture a larger factor. Bronze
is held by some scholars to have been the result of the exchange of
copper at Tamralipti or Tamluk, with the tin of Malacca, in the ages of
the Asiatic merchant-civilisation, which preceded the rise of
nationalities. In Asia, as also among the nomads of North America, there
seems to have been a short Copper Age preceding the Bronze, Copper

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

razors and copper axes have been found in India, and copper knives on
the site of ancient Troy. After this came bronze, and with bronze, as
far as Europe was concerned, the knowledge of medicine and the use of
the horse. Older, far older, than any of these, was that worship of the
rude stone beneath the *neem* tree, as the throne of the Mother, and
those seasonal dances that may have given rise to the tradition of the
birth of Askr, the first man, from the ash. Holy indeed is the ground
beneath the olive and the *neem*. Sacred homes of the Oil-Mother, from
them and their long past has come every notion of priestly anointing
that a younger world has seen. The chrism of baptism, the oil of
coronation, and the last sad rite of unction and benediction to the
forth-going soul--here, in the cool breeze that blows through our Indian
tree of healing, may have been the birth of all these, and of how much
more throughout the ages of aid and fellowship between man and man.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Kashmir Shawl](seh25.md)
