[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hindusim](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](seh19)  [Next](seh21.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

### AN INDIAN AMULET

IT lies beside me as I write, a heavy heart-shaped ornament, in pale old
bronze. On it, in low relief, is a quaint design of peacocks, pecking
their mutual beaks into a conventional-looking pot of basil that stands
between them. Its worth, in money, is some few farthings. For little
more it was bought; sold, doubtless, for something less; and it is worn
only by such as can at no time in their frugal lives afford the few
shillings necessary to buy its like in silver.

And yet, poor as it is, this Indian amulet may have been an heirloom in
its time. Generation after generation of mothers may have worn it daily,
as they went forth at dawn, and came back at sunset; worn it alike at
toil and at rest. Time after time may it have been handed on to the
little daughter on her marriage, or to the daughter-in-law when welcomed
for the first time to the peasant-home. Or the chain, or string of
coins, on which it hung, has been unclasped for ever maybe by the wearer
in the bitter hours of widowhood, or reverently lifted by a sorrowful
son or daughter

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

ere the dead form of the mother was borne forth to the village
burning-ghât. For it belongs, this simple rustic ornament, to another
order than the present. It comes of the time when no hard-and-fast line
divided art from industry; when, every need being met by manual toil,
the enthusiasm of the creator limited his work, and possessions could
not be quickly changed but must be made strong to accumulate from age to
age. The farmhouse kitchen of a century ago in Europe, shining with oak
and brass; the border of the Kashmir shawl in India, transferred by
skilful fingers from one web to another; and this amulet of mine, are
not modern in kind and origin, but mediæval.

If only it could utter all the secrets it may remember, what might we
not hope to hear! For according to the customs of Silâo, whence it came,
the place of this amulet is over the heart of the village maid. Thus it
has lain year in year out; and of the things that tell themselves in
silence, by the catching of a breath or the quickening of a pulse; of
the long sweet tale of wifely happiness and motherly cares; of the
struggle with poverty and the achievement of prosperity; of moments of
rapture and insight, kneeling before some image in a temple, or watching
the cows wend home at time of cowdust--of all these things how much it
has heard! How much, could it but speak, it might reveal!

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

And yet the story, told in such fashion and from such a viewpoint, might
after all seem strangely familiar. For it is open to question whether
there be much distance between the humanity of any two villages, though
one be Indian and the other English or Italian. In externals, of course,
their characteristics are strongly marked--there is no mistaking one for
another. I cannot forget the first time I saw that ancient market-town
in Behar, which is known as Silâo. How interesting a province is Behar
itself! The traveller in Brittany has heard the peasants talk of "going
into France," and similarly in Behar, though it is an integral part of
Bengal, one drops instinctively into the Breton attitude, and thinks of
the Gangetic Plain as of a foreign country. And Silâo is really ancient,
in the Eastern sense. It is only a tiny township, built of mud, yet it
is quite possible that its popped rice was as famous in the countryside
thirty-five centuries ago as it is to-day. So long since, at least, was
probably the first appearance of the neighbourhood on the stage of
history. The very dust is fraught with memories. On the time-worn
highroad, between Baragaon, the old university of Nalanda, and Rajgir,
the pre-Asokan capital of the kings of Bengal, stands the village, in
the midst of the far-stretching green of its fields of rice. And through
it Buddha must have passed, ere he overtook

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

the great multitude of goats going up to the sacrifice, and, according
to the legend, lifted the lame kid and carried it on his neck, that it
might keep pace with the herds. Often and often, even now, one may meet
with such good shepherds on the roads about Silâo, and still better, a
few miles farther on, outside the modern village of Rajgir. Daily there,
from dawn almost till noon, the constant patter of hoofs large and small
betokens the passing of hundreds of cows, buffaloes, sheep, and goats
out of the village, through the mountain-defile, with its hot springs,
into the pastures that cover to-day the hillsides and the ruins of Old
Rajgir. And here again, as afternoon draws on to dusk, one may witness
the return homeward of the flocks, or, later, watch while a missing cow
or two comes crashing through the brushwood, in answer to the call of
the herdsman from the outstanding rocks by the stream-side. It is then
that one may be happy enough to meet a belated goat-herd, his form
looming larger than common through the quickly-passing twilight, who
could not but have lingered, because, while he bears some footsore
little one, he also leads perhaps a weary mother, tenderly, along the
darkening road.

There are women-tenders of the herds, as well as men. Tall they are, and
free of gait, very gentle, and very very proud, these Hindu women of the
old rustic world. Their costumes alone

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

would be sufficient to mark them out as beautiful and distinguished,
though they are mere peasant folk; for it is rarely that one meets here
even a widow wearing the stainless white of the higher classes of
Bengal. Crimson and green and scarlet are, in Behar, the favourite
colours for the *sari*--that long broad scarf, which forms the main
garment as well as the veil of the Indian woman. The coarse clinging
cotton, covering the head and falling thence to the waist to form the
skirt, is embroidered all over, in a bold effective stitch, with the
little curling pine-cone, or palmetto, that is so characteristic an
element in Indian decoration. Long long ago these women have forgotten
its why and wherefore. They would not dream of connecting their adoption
of the admired design with the emblematic jewel on a royal turban; and
yet it is not unlikely that their constant use of the pattern
perpetuates the fact that six hundred years, or perhaps a thousand,
before Christ, Rajgir was a King's burgh.

Quite as beautiful as the *sari*, in its own way, is the little
bodice--oftenest of dark blue, outlined with scarlet--that covers the
bust and falls severely from the throat to conceal the head of the
skirt. It is cut back at the neck leaving the head free, and the tight
sleeves go only half-way to the elbow. Its greatest beauty, however,
lies in its straightness; there is very little cutting-out in

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

ancient costume. In the Greek *chiton*, the Japanese *kimono*, the
Himalayan *choga*, and in this *jama* and *sari* of Northern India there
is too much respect for the lines of material to suffer the
figure-modelling that we call dress-making. So this Behari blouse or
*jama* is made only of four pieces--two breadths back and front and a
half-breadth added under each arm, as *modistes* might say--and they are
all straight. But oh, how lissom and willowy is the figure within! And
how commandingly beautiful is often the dark face, with its large brown
eyes shadowed by the rich colours of the veil!

It was our first visit to Silâo, and we were in the very middle of the
bazaar, where three roads meet. We had clattered in our noisy vehicles
up the village street; past the old brass-shop, where an Indian
girl-friend, who had come like myself from the city, would one day find
and bring to me my amulet; past the village school, where twelve or
fifteen tousle-headed urchins were learning the three R's with the mud
floor for writing-surf ace; past the confectioners' shops, with the
fishes and peacocks cut in brass swinging in a row along the front for
sign-boards. We had reached the very thickest part of the modest
traffic, and had swung recklessly round the corner to the right, when, a
few paces down the street we were leaving on one side, we caught sight
of a girl

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

standing--tall, starry-eyed, and queenly. Her age may have been eighteen
or twenty. She was dressed in green, and stood there--sky and temple in
the background--with the frank look of a child, entirely unconscious of
observation. But her arms held the long stems, while the white buds
slept against each shoulder, of two great sheaves of water-lilies.

So buying and selling and eating and clothing are not the whole life of
Silâo. It was another proof, could one have been so foolish as to need
more, that no poet from the city can ever gaze so deep as the farm and
forest folk themselves into the beauty of Nature. For these blossoms had
been gathered but an hour before, from the ponds among the rice-fields.
They are the commonest wild things of that peasant world, where they are
known as "the lovers of the moon," because they open at
nightfall--unlike the lordly lotus, who watches open-eyed the footsteps
of the sun. And here they were offered for sale by one who had looked
into their golden hearts and known their loveliness, to any who might be
fain to lay flowers and prayers at the feet of God in the temple beyond.
The green-clad woman with her lilies stood in the busy market-place, as
the silent incarnation of the call to morning worship.

O sane and simple life of the Indian villages, firm-poised betwixt the
Unseen and the Seen! is

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

it of this my amulet would speak to me? Coming from some other peasant
woman, in all likelihood dead and gone, is the message that her lips too
would utter through it if they could, this same, of priest and chant and
worshipper, and of some tiny tabernacle, shadowed and lily-strewn and
cool, that stands in an Indian village as the place of morning-prayer?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: King Parikshit and the Frog Maiden](seh21.md)
