[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hindusim](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](seh21)  [Next](seh23.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

### GOPALER-MA: THE MOTHER OF THE CHRIST-CHILD

INDIAN languages are curiously rich in tender diminutives, the use of
which so much depends on association that they are incapable of
translation. It is clear, for instance, that if we address a little girl
of three as *Ma*, or a boy of the same age as *Bap*, that delicate
mingling of gravity and laughter which we intend to convey is a matter
entirely of the colour of the voice, and will defy any attempt to render
it in a foreign tongue. One of the most striking words of this class is
*Gopala*. Literally, it means the Cowherd, referring to Krishna--the
Krishna of Brindaban. But it has been so appropriated in this regard
that its actual significance can only be rendered in English as
"Christ-Child," and the woman who folds her baby-boy closer, calling him
Gopala, is paralleled amongst English mothers only by one who thinks of
her child as the Christ-Child, come to her out of night and storm
seeking to find His Own. In this sense the name is often on the lips of
all our household. For in one of the rooms of our zenana lives an old

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

old woman, who is known as *Gopaler-Ma*, the Christ-Child's Mother.

.         .         .         .         .         .         .         .

All night long we had been watching the slow hard breathing of the
dying. In, in, in, it would go, growing ever more and more still, till
one thought that never again could any movement occur in the aged frame,
and then freedom once more and a succession of quick deep inbreathings.
Such breathing, they said, was seen but seldom, and was the result of
long years of *Pranayama*, practised unconsciously over the beads, as
night and day the old woman had counted them, saying the name of her
*Ishtam*, "Gopala, Gopala, Gopala!"

For she beside whom we sat and watched was Gopaler-Ma, that saint whom
Sri Ramakrishna himself had treated as his mother.

Without a single want she lay there, as she had lived, the mind
suspended in the thought that had made its life, the face full of the
last sweetness and peace. A day and a night already had she lain thus by
the Ganges side. For at the moment of the rising of the full moon, we
had stepped with her over the threshold of the door, and had felt the
silent soaring of her spirit, as it cast off triumphantly the first of
its outer wrappings, the shell of home. But when she had reached the
*ghâts*, and lain awhile in the play of cool breezes and the brightness
of the moon, she had shown, as

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

the dying are wont to do, some signs of revival. And the candle of life
for many an hour thereafter had burnt up in its worn socket, before it
was finally to be put out.

It was not, perhaps, entire unconsciousness in which she lay. For to one
and another it would seem, now and again, as if she gave a look of
recognition, following them with her eyes. And on that last morning,
when a Brahmin came and chanted above her *slokas* from the Upanishads,
she had responded visibly, with what would almost represent excitement.
All her life long she had worshipped the idea of the Holy Child, and now
there seemed a fitness in the fact that at the last, dying of old age at
over ninety years, the worn-out frame had gone back to babyhood again,
and the twitching of the limbs or the turning of the head was the only
sign of volition she could give.

But even this had been sometime past, for now that night was with us
once again, she had lain still for many hours, with all the
consciousness turned inward, and the peace of one who asked nothing of
the world about her.

We, the waiting women, could hear from without the long low lapping of
the Ganges against the foot of the bathing-stairs, and the moaning
whisper of the rain-winds as now and again they swept down and caught
the surface of the waters. And once, was it at midnight, or was it an
hour or so

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

later?--once in the midst of the silence there came a rushing and
swirling of the river beneath the cloud-veiled moon, and the little
boats lying at anchor on the Ganges knocked against each other, and the
word went round, "The tide is coming in!" But some, to whom the passing
soul had been friend and *Guru*, sighed, for with the turn of that tide
had we not been warned that she would go forth, and her place and people
know her no more?

Hour upon hour had gone and still no change. Some who had rested rose,
and plied little offices of tenderness beside the sick, and another lay
down to snatch a spell of sleep. Suddenly there was a stir, and a light
hand touched the sleeper. "Call the bearers," said one, "for the end is
come!" Out on the terrace above the river-steps they sat, as they had
sat all night, holding deep talk of the past, and of the Lives with
which this life outgoing here had been a link, and easy enough were they
to call. A moment more and the dying form was lifted to the cot, and
then, on the shoulders of yellow and white clad bearers together, it was
borne swiftly out of the room to the north, and then down the few steps
that it needed to take Gopaler-Ma where she could lie with feet touching
the sacred waters, and so go forth.

There she lay, the last changed breaths coming at easy intervals, while
one of the monks, whom

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

she had known as boys, bent over her and with his brow to hers, half
spoke, half whispered the words that the Hindu loves to hear in his last
hour--*Om Ganga Narayana! Om Ganga Narayana Brahma!* A moment more, and
then with one voice from the circle of watchers came the [shout
of](errata.htm#3.md) *Haribol!* for the last breath had gone. The spirit of
Gopaler-Ma had taken flight, and only the garment of flesh was left
behind.

Then one at the head of the bier, looking up at the brightening of the
sky behind the clouds asked, "Is this the dawn?" And from the foot came
back the answer, "Yes it is the dawn!" And then, looking down, we saw
that the waters that had bathed the feet of the dying were already
receding--were already sunken some inches below us. Gopaler-Ma had died
indeed at the moment of dawn, on the very turn of the outgoing tide.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Indian Ash, or Tree of Healing](seh23.md)
