[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hindusim](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](seh25)  [Next](seh27.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

### THE LAND OF THE WATER-WAYS

THERE is no region, even in India, which was intended to compare, at
once in extent and in fertility, with the wide-stretching delta-lands of
East Bengal. Placed between the extreme mouth of the Ganges and the
Brahmaputra, from Calcutta on the west to Chittagong on the east, and
Dacca and Mymensingh on the north, lies this vast triangle of country,
measuring, as the crow flies, something like two hundred miles or more
every way. And it is painted on the surface of planet Earth in nature's
most vivid pigments of green and blue. Green for the fields and forests,
the palms and the gardens and the grain; and blue, blue, blue everywhere
else, for the sky above and for the waters beneath. To those who know
Holland, or even Venice, this land is full of subtle suggestions and
reminiscences of distant beauty. For it, too, is a country snatched from
the waters, though not by the hand of man. It, too, lies passive and
half-expectant under the unbroken dome of heaven, In it, too, the white
sail may suddenly come into vision at any moment across

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

the distant meadows. And it, too, bestows that irresistible calmness of
benediction that comes to the infinitely small in the presence of the
infinitely great.

There are of course differences. This is a tropical Holland. The wide
green flats are broken, not by stiff avenues of poplars and rows of
wintry pollard elms, but by long irregular fringes of jungle, groups of
cocoanut and betel-nut palms, clusters of delicate bamboos, outstanding
leaf-almonds here and there, with almost every branch of glossy verdure
ending in a leaf like a scarlet flag, and lines of upright banana
plants, hedging in the fruit and vegetable gardens of the homesteads.
These last, too, are, as is natural, strangely different from the prim
farmhouses of the Dutch with their red tiles. From the river-front we
see a large thatched roof, whose wide curving eaves overhang a cottage
built apparently of something like basket-work, but in fact of mats,
woven out of bamboo-splinters. The rafters and posts of this simple
structure are also of bamboo, and it may be that a single roof covers,
not only the home, but also a small open barn, holding a couple of cows,
while over the heads of these last is seen again a second storey with
floor made of split bamboo, and filled with rice-straw, thus answering
all the purposes of a hayloft. The floor of the cottage itself, in any
case, is made

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

of clean silver river-clay, packed solid and tight and smooth. And a
very good test of the wealth of the family lies in the height of this
modern plinth. Within, the dwelling has in all probability a
ground-floor, lifted a foot or two above this of mud, and made, like
that of the hayloft, of split-bamboo; and on this, with whatever they
may be able to command of comfort in the way of cushions, wadded sheets,
and cotton carpets, the household live. The one large room is often
partitioned into two or three smaller. Always there is an open veranda
outside which acts as the family reception-room. Almost always there is
some corner, either in but or ben, which is built off from the rest, and
used as the cooking room. And in every house there are wooden and bamboo
platforms overhead, which can be used either as store-cupboards or extra
sleeping rooms, according as the special occasion demands. The little
farmhouse, however, has no doorway of inferior dignity. Even when the
front entrance is towards the river bank, it is nevertheless almost
certain that the open veranda will be found on the far side, facing,
like a simple cloister, the interior of the little farmyard, on the two
or three other sides of which are placed similar, but probably still
less imposing, dwellings. Here, too, are the outbuildings and offices of
the farm, the husking-shed, the cow-house, the dovecote, and

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

the feeding-place for ducks, with close at hand the herb and fruit
garden. And the whole of this little group of reed-built chambers is
enclosed and connected with the next like it by the homestead grove of
palms and jungle-growth. It has its own boat, too, made of long narrow
planks of palm wood, in which seven or eight people can sit in single
file, so long as one or two remain constantly busied, baling out the
water with which it is as constantly filling. And finally, this cluster
of houses does not constitute a village. It may take twenty or more of
such, thrown like the links of a chain around and across the rice
fields, to make a single village-community. Hence, in this wonderful
country, it is sometimes possible, sitting in the low boat of the
water-lanes, to say that the village includes more than the horizon.

In the riverside villages, again, the *Chashas*, or peasants, and the
*Majhis*, boatmen or fisherfolk, dwell side by side. They are for the
most part Mohammedans and only sometimes Hindus. But the two do not
always live in separate villages. Nor is there any great difference
between them in point of civilisation. A few hundreds of years ago all
alike were Hindus, but to the low castes, Islam, with its message of
democracy and brotherly love, offers a great emancipation. And in East
Bengal these must have been swept into the fold, whole villages at a
time. The descendants of

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

such converts have the title "Sheikh" prefixed to their names, and here
they are all Sheikhs. But even now they appear like Hindus. Their widows
are loath to remarry. They wear the unbordered *sari* and cut the hair
short, like the Hindu widow. They object to cow-killing, like the
Hindus. Their children are trained, not in the knowledge of the Koran
alone, but also in the stories of the old Indian epics. And finally,
their homes are decorated with the same religious pictures and images as
those of the Hindu. In other words, it is one race practising the forms
of two different faiths, and even in India blood speaks louder than
creed.

They are a proud and self-respecting folk, these people of the villages
of East Bengal, decent and thrifty in all their ways, as conscious as
ourselves of subtle differences of rank and education, and full of the
spirit of independence and self-reliance. It is not easy here to buy the
trifle to which one takes a fancy. Permission to do so may be asked with
all possible formality and ceremony, but the answer is invariably the
smiling surrender of the object, as a gift. I have a little boatman's
lamp of black earthenware, which came to me in this way. It is one of
the loveliest things I ever saw, and its value in the village-markets
is, I am told, one farthing. But though I offered sixteen times that
sum, its owner would not hear of purchase,

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

insisting instead on presenting it to me. Of a similar significance was
my first encounter with the Barisal fisher-folk. In this land of canals,
it is customary to use for conveyance a very fine and commodious Indian
form of house-boat. The empty rooms, made of dark polished teak-wood,
are scrupulously clean, and we bring our own rugs and pillows, and sit
or lie on the floor for the journey. Outside, under bamboo arches,
covered with sliding hoods of reed mats, sit the boatmen. And a few
fishing-nets, or a spindle with its thread, or a small clay stove at
which cooking is going on, offer at once the only traces of furniture,
and the only elements of picturesque disorder, to be seen. The crew
consists of the men of a single family, from the grey-haired grandfather
or grand-uncle to the youngest boy. The women have been left at home in
the distant village, to tend the cows, and spin, and look after the
gardens. There is something of the dignity of Homer's peasant-kings in
such a scheme of life and work; and I was a little diffident with the
first boatmen I had accosted, in making inquiries as to whether the
prevailing famine and rise in prices had made themselves felt severely
by them and theirs. Their first effort was to put me at my ease. Gravely
and kindly they took up the question. Work, they said, had become scarce
everywhere. No one who could possibly do without

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

it would employ labour at such a time. Everyone naturally was cutting
his expenses down. They themselves, for instance, had lain to, at the
little quay where we found them, for ten days past, and this was the
first day they had been employed. Inevitably, therefore, things were a
little difficult. But they had managed. Oh yes! they had managed. And
they had no doubt that in some way or other they would contrive to go
on, With this abrupt reserve, this lowering of the visor, so to speak,
the subject was dropped, and could be pursued no further. Yet it was not
that the newcomer had been rebuked for impertinence, but rather that all
alike we had realised the sudden pain of the attempt to lay bare our
necessities to others.

And everywhere in the famine-villages I found the same thing. Here and
there as we went about, we would come upon someone whose store of money
or provisions was not yet wholly exhausted, someone who was still hoping
that public charity would prove unnecessary to his little household. And
wherever this happened the personal question would be skilfully evaded,
and any discussion of the situation quietly refused. It is needless to
say that the intense sensitiveness and delicacy of these Indian
villagers played its own part in helping to deepen our understanding of
the prevailing desolation. Every story told meant so much pride
overcome.

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

Like a great net made of cords of shining silver-blue, the
water-ways--broad rivers, narrower canals or *khals*, and narrowest of
all the little water-lanes--hold lovingly in their clasp this beautiful
land, which throughout the historic period has been known as the Granary
of Bengal. But the villages have a proverb, "With kings, with horned
beasts, and with a river a man may never be friends." Much as the heart
may go out in love, that is to say, there will surely come sooner or
later, with such, a moment of treachery, when they will deal out death
to him whom they have caressed. Alas, that this should have proved true
of our lovely rivers of East Bengal.

Already the villages had been many months in the grip of famine. For the
chief Indian harvest of the year is reaped in January, and in this year
of 1906 it was terribly scant. The rains twelve months ago, at the time
of sowing, were too little. Moreover, in some of the more ocean-exposed
districts there were salt floods, and the crops were ruined. Within a
month or two of this year's reaping, therefore, the long slow agony of
starvation must have set in amongst the people. But it was borne in grim
silence as long as possible, and only in the middle of June did the
terrible word Famine make itself heard. And yet, as if the cup of their
sorrows were not even now full, it became clear, on the breaking of the
monsoon, that the

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

rains this year were to be excessive; and finally, in the middle of
August, the rivers, swollen by heavy rains and melting snows in the far
north, suddenly broke their bounds, and the fair lands of Eastern Bengal
became a world under water, the floods doubling the disaster created by
the famine.

#### I.--FAMINE AND FLOOD

It was dawn on the 8th of September; one of those dawns of pearl and
opal that come to us in the Indian autumn. The water-lilies lay open
still, as they had lain all night long on the surface of the waters.
Here we paddled up to a cluster, lying touching one another, as if with
their heads on each other's shoulders, with golden hearts, and
rose-tinged petals. And we counted them and found them seven. Seven
lilies open in the dawn! The air was cool but not chill, and full of
quiet and fragrance. And all around us in every direction--inwards from
the edge of the river-current behind us, to the distant line of
farmstead groves, and right and left, all the way from one dark
jungle-border to another--stretched the smooth silver water, pierced by
the upspringing spears of the young rice, which here and there was so
scanty that each upright blade was companioned by its own reflection in
the water-mirror underneath. A world full of the joy of the senses--

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

not a gross or physical delight, but the silent in-flooding of
sense-rapture on the spirit--for him whose body was fed and mind at
rest.

A world of sense-joy. Was that how it looked to the women yonder,
standing up to their waists in water, to receive us, as we paddled and
punted towards their dwelling-place? Much sense-joy feel these others,
think we, who have taken refuge with their children, from their fallen
house, in the hayloft of a neighbour, and are living there, more like
birds than human beings--who can tell us how many days? Nay, for these,
and their like, there can be no joy of the senses, for the present is to
them a horror, and who knows what agony may await them in the near
future?

Or it was noon, and in a distant part of the country, not very far in
fact from the city, we waded in water above the knees, or shot in the
palm-boat across the rice-fields, finding our way from one farmhouse to
another. And still, in spite of the sorrow all about us, one could now
and then only catch one's breath, and feel how wondrous, to him who was
born amongst them, must be the brimful beauty of these rice-lands. Grey
clouds, grey mists, grey waters, and drizzling rain, we seemed to be
alone in a world-vastness, alone, alone. Suddenly a great wind would
catch the jungle-belt about us, and all the mangoes and palms respond,
moaning and wailing. Then again

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

it would pass, and silence come once more, upon the infinite monotony of
our level world, with the first sense back, of a fulness of something
that was neither life nor death, but on the mystic borderline between
the two--perhaps including both.

Never have I felt so strongly the oneness of the people the world over
as a few days ago, when I was allowed to begin my famine visits by
calling at one farmhouse after another in the district on the opposite
bank of the river to the town of Barisal. Some of these famine-stricken
dwellings belonged to Chashas, or peasant-labourers--men, that is to
say, who are employed as farm-hands, at a daily or monthly wage. And
there were besides these the houses of the well-to-do tenant farmers,
brought low like all the rest in this year of desolation by the very
extremity of economic disaster.

For we cannot say in India, as we might perhaps in Ireland, that the
higher classes live on one food, and the lower on another. There is here
no contrast, as of wheat and potatoes, so that one half of the village
may experience the last pangs of hunger while the other flourishes on
the abundance of its own crop. All over the Gangetic Plain and all over
the Gangetic Delta (and it is convenient to speak of all the rivers of
these parts, whatever their local names, as the Ganges) all classes
alike live on rice.

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> And when rice
fails them all alike starve. The employer of labour can, of course, hold
out longer than the labourer he employs, in the battle against want. He
ought to have something in the way of money and jewels. He has house,
tools, furniture, and cattle that can (though it is to no one's interest
that they should) be sold. He has even, if the worst should come to the
worst, a larger credit. And he uses it to the utmost. If a man be found
without resources in a year of supremely scanty harvest, we may be sure
that it will prove to be because he had already parted with home and
land in the former years, when ill-fortune was only growing upon him.

One home there was that I visited that morning, in which I would fain
hope to have made permanent friends. Its mistress was a young woman,
some few years widowed, whose grown-up son was the breadwinner of the
family. At the hour of our visit he was absent, seeking employment, and
they would have nothing to cook that day unless he should return with
rice. Not that this was stated or obtruded upon our notice. Rather we
came to understand the fact when our visit was past. Meanwhile, we sat
and chatted quietly in the closely-thatched veranda, and one noted a
daughter of the household, a girl of twelve or fourteen, clad with the
scantiness of the year's poverty, and sore of heart under the wound

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

to her girlish pride. There was a grey-haired granddame too, who told
us, not of the famine but of the deep abiding sorrow that all other pain
was wont to renew in her--the memory of the deaths, long ago, of seven
stalwart sons who had each grown to man's estate before, one by one,
they left her, to wait alone for the word of Allah ere she might see
them again in Paradise. A widowed neighbour crept in to talk and listen,
carrying a girl-baby in an extreme of emaciation, whom she was trying to
nurse back into life, its own mother being dead. But centre of all was
the gentle mistress of the home. One could gather her past happiness
from the story she told of the debts of the dead husband faithfully
discharged, and by her sensitive shrinking from the thought of
remarriage. Even as we sat talking her son came back from the city and
handed to his mother a bag containing some four pounds of rice, earned
by two days of labour, carrying bricks on the river in a boat. Work, he
said, was absolutely at a standstill, and one gathered from his words
the fear he did not utter, of the days when he must return empty-handed
from such quests. What would then be the fate of these helpless ones of
his kindred who were dependent on him for food?

The cheery old Hindu gentleman who accompanied me in my visits would
not, however, allow

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

any presentiment of coming evil. "Come, come, Lakshmi!" (Fortuna), he
said soothingly to the mother, who, weakened by long fasting, was
weeping quietly and silently. "We shall send you help--do not you fear!
And better times will be with us shortly--There, there! Don't forget!
The good days will come again." Like the captain of the ship in stormy
weather, it was not to the women he would admit the anxiety that was
weighing upon his own kind heart, with the thought of the awful month of
October to November, when the money contributed by the country and the
last rice held by the starving people would alike be exhausted and
heaven alone could tell where he would have to look for help.

The weeping woman dried her eyes and silently strove for self-control.
And then with the prayers and blessings of the aged Rizpah ringing in
our ears, we rose to leave for the boats that awaited us. But down to
the edge of the water-meadows came the women to see us off. And there
with my last look backwards I saw them standing, their hands raised in
the attitude of prayer. And I knew that they, in their want and anxiety,
were giving to us, well-fed and well-clothed, the beautiful salutation
of their people, "Peace be unto you!"

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

#### II.--THE COMMONWEALTH BASED ON RICE

How futile, when one has seen a famine, sound all discussions as to
whether or not India in the past has known as great catastrophes! A fair
mansion, standing on the side of a great river, suddenly falls in a year
of flood, and what remains of it henceforth is only a ruin. The house
fell the moment the waters reached a certain level. Yes; but it would
not have fallen at such a touch, only that, during long years before,
the underpinnings and foundations had been steadily snapped and
undermined. The final calamity was only the last scene in a drama of
disaster long proceeding in silence. And the house itself could never
have been built under such conditions. That is the whole argument. The
commonwealth was never built up under such conditions.

Everything that one sees in East Bengal to-day is so much saved from
happier times. Is it the pride and independence of fisher-folk and
farmers? Is it the delicate hospitality of starving villagers? Both
alike, if the present strain continue long enough, must assuredly give
way to a sordid pauperism. They could never, under such disadvantages,
have sprung into being. No, the ruin wrought by fire, or earthquake, or
tidal wave, may happen in an hour. But famine

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

implies a long train of preparatory circumstances, with which a bad
season, or a series of bad seasons, suddenly coincides, to work visible
devastation. That a certain combination of bad seasons must necessarily
recur in every century or half-century will, I presume, appear a truism
to the mathematician versed in the doctrines of chances, And that an
agricultural civilisation of three thousand years' standing should be
familiar with, and make provision for, the fact of such a recurrence,
will appear equally a truism to the student of sociology.

It is in accordance with this fact that the people of East Bengal have
been in the habit of keeping always stored in their houses some two or
three years' provision of rice at a time. All over India the family that
is rich enough buys its rice for the month or the year by the *maund*,
even as in England we buy coal by the ton. <span
id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3.md) But the farmer was supposed never to
encroach, for the purposes of the market, upon the store of grain that
was to secure food to his household and dependents, not only during the
current year, but also during two scanty harvests ahead, should the
country be so unfortunate as to experience these. Now those

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

who have followed the story I am telling will at once perceive the
necessity of this. The convention was etiquette. It was more, it was
morality--*Dharmma*, the national righteousness. But it was more even
than these: it was plain common-sense. For we have seen that the farmer
who cannot pay for labour even under the agricultural mischance of a bad
harvest (strictly parallel to a season of commercial or manufacturing
debits instead of credits), must necessarily fall from the position of
an employer of labour into that of the employee or day-labourer himself.
Instead of a farmer, he is now a *Chasha* or ploughman merely. Food may
return into the district, through relief associations or along the
railways, but this is not the same thing as its returning into his
hands. He has lost his social status, and it will be long before he can
possibly regain it. The security of the farmer as a capitalist depends,
then, upon this one thing, and upon it alone, that he keep in possession
a three-years supply of rice. In districts in the close neighbourhood of
Calcutta, where the houses of the peasants are built of more permanent
materials than further east, I know of nothing more pathetic to see than
the long array of village granaries, many of them structures of an
exquisite beauty, empty.

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

The rise in the money value of food is sufficient to explain to us the
impossibility for the East Bengal farmers, during recent years, of
abiding by the injunction of their forefathers that they should keep
rice in their granaries. They have lived in a world which regards it as
more essential that they should keep money in their purse.

What have been the causes at work to transfer the peasant's ambition
from rice to silver, from a well-filled granary to a well-filled till?
For unless the ambition has been so transferred it is clear that the
money value of grain could not have risen so rapidly. Only when a
province has been denuded, and all its food has to be imported, could
the crop of the country reach such values as those at present
prevailing.

With regard to this question, it is perhaps sufficient to say that all
over India a process is going on, in consequence of which the peasant
has come to look upon money as wealth. And this process may be briefly
indicated by the statement that rent and taxes have to be paid in coin.
The foreign tax-gatherer, or the foreign minister of the Exchequer,
knows nothing of rice as the ultimate standard of value. To them the
precious metals occupy this place. And here is a fact which would tend
of itself to impoverish the peasant, relatively to the other classes of
the community,

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

even if all the wealth of India remained within her own borders. The
fact that it does not do so is too well known to need repetition at this
point. My present object is merely to examine whether there be any local
or little-known circumstances which may recently have contributed in
some special measure to undermine the prosperity of East Bengal, and so
have prepared the way for the calamity I have described.

 

Famine is social paralysis. A civilisation that has taken thousands of
years to build up may be shattered by a single season of it. For
complete destitution of all classes together, in a given area, is apt to
knock out the links and rivets of the social system. At the present
moment, for instance, the farmers have neither money nor food to give in
exchange for labour. And without labour the rice of next year cannot be
saved, even to the extent that might still have been possible. Under
such circumstances, it is clear that food given to the farmer and his
peasants is not the same thing as food given the farmer for his
peasants. For in the latter case the food not only nourishes: it also
leads to the putting in of labour, necessary to the next harvest. In the
East there may be a greater readiness to return to the condition of
equilibrium when the shock is over than in younger lands better known to
ourselves. There may be: I do

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

not know that there is, for I have not yet had the chance of seeing. But
the difference can only at best be one of degree. Famine involves social
disorganisation as one of its secondary but most far-reaching effects.

For famine is many things besides hunger. True, it is hunger so keen
that one man whom I know, spending some days in a district as yet
unrelieved, could not sleep at night for the wail of the famine-stricken
in his ears. Hunger so keen, ah God! so keen! But it is more than this,
as we have already seen. It is the extreme of poverty, bringing among
other things nakedness, darkness at nightfall, ignorance, and unrepair
in its train. It is poverty breeding poverty. Under its pressure the
milk-cows are sold to the butcher, sometimes for eight annas or a
shilling, because their owners can no longer maintain them, and by the
new master are killed immediately for their hides, at the value of which
he bought them. When it comes, the seed of the next year is eaten as
food; the savings of lifetimes are scattered to the winds. Economic
relationships that seemed inherent in the social organism are broken to
pieces.

But over and above even these things, famine is more. It is the very
sickle of death, selecting its victims according to a certain invisible
but predetermined order, and what that order is, it may be worth our
while to inquire.

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

A few years ago there was a picture on exhibition in London, called, if
I am not mistaken, "The Stairway of Life." At the top of wide-spreading
steps stood youth and maiden hand-in-hand, and then, diverging with each
step downwards, towards the river of death at the bottom, one saw the
same pair, over and over again, at the different stages of life. This
picture has been constantly in my mind as I have gone about the famine
villages. Only the river of death that I see with the mind's eye is in
flood, and at each step of the stairway stand the different grades of
health and society, ranked according to the likelihood of their being
swept off by the rising waters.

On the lowest stand the beggars, for every Indian community has its
quota of these. There is here no poor-rate, and the hopelessly indigent
and helplessly feeble must needs be supported by the informal charity of
the village. Lonely old women they are for the most part, sunned and
wrinkled under all weathers, and they stand at the steamer-*ghâts*, or
in the bazaars, staff and begging-bowl in hand, not the least
picturesque of all the picturesque elements that go to make up the
Indian crowd.

Naturally, these are the first inhabitants of the villages to feel the
sharp pinch of adversity, the first to throw themselves upon a
wider-reaching charity. Indeed the Bengali word for famine,

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

*durbhikkha*, the "hard begging," gives us a wonderful picture of the
disaster from their point of view. It paints the beggars going forth in
all directions, and wandering far ere they find scant food. Economic
pauperism is a condition that only under very exceptional circumstances
tends to bring out the highest and finest elements in human character,
and these Indian beggars of the villages are neither better nor worse
than their kind in other countries. Pithy and smart of repartee they
sometimes are, and one cannot but be entertained when the grave
assurance is given that the speaker dined yesterday on "horse's eggs" (a
Bengali colloquialism for no food), in the very face of the person, it
may be, who provided her with rice. It is undoubtedly true also that the
beggar is spiritually twin-brother to the millionaire. For the minds of
both these are concentrated upon the acquisition of wealth, in a degree
impossible to any intermediate rank.

But the one lesson of my pilgrimage amidst the starving has been the
immensity of the gulf that divides the humblest of citizens from these
civic paupers. It takes a long series of scanty harvests to turn the
poorest Indian householder into a beggar. Unless this is understood, we
fail of the whole moral.

The next class to be reached by the rising

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

waters consists of the single women, respectable widows, and girls of
their blood as yet unmarried, who have no one to work for them, and must
make their own living by husking the rice of the farmers, and preparing
it for the city-markets. These are the gleaners of Asiatic village-life:
for they follow after the reapers at time of harvest, and by gathering
the grain that falls in their wake, provide themselves with food for
some one or two months out of every twelve. Theirs is thus the unbought
store. Indeed, it is difficult to see how money ever passes through
their hands, for the labour they give at rich farmhouses is paid in kind
rather than in coin, and probably a piece of cloth from the farmer's
wife on the great festivals meets their need of clothing for the year.

On the next level that the flood reaches are the homes of the peasants,
the farm-labourers. And last of the village group, but central, and
first probably to have seen afar off the rising of the waters, are the
larger farmers and small squires or zemindars.

Besides these, however, who depend directly for the year's food upon the
year's harvest, each in his degree, there are whole classes of others
who are indirectly but vitally affected. In the villages themselves
there are the fishermen and boatmen. Although actively engaged in the
supply of another

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

kind of food, these are as much concerned as their neighbours in the
question of the sufficiency of the year's crop of rice. Indeed, in many
cases they themselves rent and farm a patch of land.

Scattered up and down the districts, again, and in the small
market-towns of the countryside there is the sprinkling of
intellectuals. There are the Brahmins, or village priests; the
schoolmasters; the people who have been employed on railway staffs,
small stationmasters and others; clerks in village firms and shops,
letter-writers, doctors, and the like. To these people the directly
agricultural classes are as the very steps on which they stand, and
their support being withdrawn, the flood of hunger must needs swallow
them all up, the more hopelessly and inevitably since there are for them
no intermediate phases of social degradation to be passed through. The
peasant may perhaps, by a slow refinement of suffering, be transformed
first into a landless labourer. Then, on his death or desertion, his
women-folk may become gleaners, instead of proud mistresses of the
farmstead. And finally, one or all of the little household may
conceivably be brutalised into begging. But for a gentleman--and the
village schoolmaster or doctor or small squire is perhaps *more*
conscious of his pride of gentlehood than any proud belted earl in all
the West!--for a gentleman, when starvation comes, there is nothing for
it

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

but to hide his head and die. Thus, over the wide stretches of green
country, the river of death has risen to the height of its flood-tide,
and all the prosperity and joy of the little commonwealth are gone. The
hive is robbed of its honey, those spoils of hope and cheer that were
gathered in the sunshine and prosperity of the good years. And how shall
the spiritless bees set to work again to replace them?

#### III.--THE TRAGEDY OF JUTE

A few sociologists, notably Professor Patrick Geddes and his school,
have pointed out the necessity for studying the social significance of
various agricultural and industrial products. Thus, if these men are
correct, the change by a community from the manufacture of wool to that
of silk for example, is not by any means so simple as would appear to
the careless eye. Each different material imposes its different
conditions of labour, and has in a thousand ways its own characteristic
necessities. Each article produced or manufactured, therefore, will be
found, according to these thinkers, if we study closely enough, to
entail certain human adaptations peculiar to itself. And this we may
refer to as its *social value*.

To most of us, however, this point of view has

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

not yet come in sight. We do not dream that there is any other standard
of benefit to the worker or the consumer than the financial. And for
this reason I hope to make extremely clear the story I am about to tell
of Eastern Bengal.

Thirty years ago, in every cottage garden in Eastern Bengal, was found a
patch more or less large as the case might be, containing a tall dark
herb, botanically intermediate between a mallow and a flax, and known to
us as jute.

The plant was grown by the peasants mainly for the sake of its fibre.
This was very valuable in a country where rough string and bamboo are
the chief building materials. There was also the supply of lamp-wicks to
be thought of for the year. The leaves of the plant, moreover, when
dried, were medicinal. And finally, in the case of the Hindu at home at
any rate, it could not be dispensed with, since it was required in
certain of the year's religious festivals. Only last year I remember, on
the night of our beautiful Eastern Feast of Lamps as I went out through
the lanes of our neighbourhood, being suddenly startled by a quaint
little gathering of unknown objects lying on the roadway in the middle
of an awkward twist in a narrow street. A light, not yet out, and a
little smouldering straw, showed that I had come upon some altar of
worship, and I turned to my companion for an explanation. The lad who
was

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

with me smiled easily and said: "Oh this is the *A-lakkhi puja*. It is
written that on this night in 'some bad place,' with jute sticks and
these few things, we should worship the Power that shines through the
Unluck." Strange predestination surely: through these several centuries
has Hinduism been worshipping the Unluck under the symbol of jute
sticks!

The plant was open to the objection which applies also in the case of
Irish flax, namely, that the long sterns had to be cut down, placed in
water, and practically rotted, in order to get at the fibre, and this
must always have made it an aversion to the Hindu. Still its economic
value and the requirements of the faith were both imperative, and the
quantity grown by each cottager was only such as he and his family would
consume in the year.

About some twenty to twenty-five years ago, however--owing to what chain
of events I do not know, for I have not traced out the history of jute
as a commercial product--it seems to have been discovered by the outside
world, and its value as a fibre must have been rapidly recognised. It
has the advantage, as we all now know, of being easily woven into any
one of a number of attractive looking materials, some of which resemble
silk and others flannel. It has the further advantage, from the modern
shopkeeper's point of

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

view, that it will not wear long, and therefore necessitates that rapid
succession of garments which change of fashion is in itself only another
device for bringing about. And it is further said that Bengal is the
only country in the world in which it can be produced. Here then was the
tragedy incipient. Twenty years ago, it is said, the cultivation of jute
made its appearance on something of a commercial scale in these East
Bengal districts. At first, however, it spread slowly. But some seven or
eight years ago <span id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_4.md) it made a sudden
advance, and to-day the culture of the plant is going forward by leaps
and bounds. As one goes down the river from Khulna to Barisal, one sees
on all hands the fields of jute alternating with the fields of rice, and
this particular line of country is not as yet one of the worst infected.
As one watches the boats being loaded it is always with jute, and even
about Calcutta, hour after hour, day after day, the carts come pouring
in along the open country roads, laden with their bales of jute. In this
way the Granary of Bengal has been and is being transformed into one
vast jute plantation. The temptation to the peasant was, what it always
is everywhere, recklessness as to the future in the face of a large
financial reward, for jute at present brings him a good price. In the

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

same way, as we all know, the peasants of Norway have denuded their
beautiful mountains in many cases of their forests, careless always of
the interests of the future, in face of that crushing need of the
present which is the curse of the modern and especially of the poorer
world. And in East Bengal the discovery of jute coincided with that
other process by which the Commonwealth based upon Rice was being
transformed inevitably into the Commonwealth based upon Money.

Such was the temptation, but in fact the bribe was a delusive one. For
jute requires, for its successful culture, practically the same fields
which are most favourable to rice. Thus the two crops cannot well be
grown in rotation, since the soil will not afterwards produce such good
rice, if, indeed, any. Besides, as we know, though the peasant cannot,
the high prices will no longer be available when the growth is once
universally established.

This then is what has made the present situation so hopeless. It is not
only that there is no rice in the village. But far off, in lands from
which the village might have drawn a supply, or at least from which some
place accessible to it might have done so, there is no rice either. For
these last few years, with increasing speed, all alike have been
abandoning the old ideal of the conserving of rice in favour of the

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

new wealth-producer of the hour. Till to-day, even when relief was to be
brought, there was nowhere from which to bring it but distant Rangoon.

Thus the mysterious prescience of ancient faiths is justified. When the
Roman Empire was but young, it may be, the simple peasants of the
Gangetic Delta already worshipped the Power in the Unluck under the
strangely-chosen symbol of the jute-herb, and to-day an Arctic winter of
starvation has spread its mantle over them, largely through the agency
of this old-time acquaintance. But what are we to say, we others, who by
our greed and luxury have written so many chapters in the Martyrdom of
Man, as indigo, opium, india-rubber, and now jute?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3"></span>[174:1](seh26.htm#fr_3.md) A *maund* is about 80
lbs., *i.e.* about ¾ cwt. It represents, as food, about 160 days for one
person.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[186:1](seh26.htm#fr_4.md) This was written in 1906.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Northern Pilgrimage](seh27.md)
