[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hindusim](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](seh20)  [Next](seh22.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

### KING PARIKSHIT AND THE FROG MAIDEN

ONCE upon a time there reigned over the city of Ayodhya a king of royal
race, named Parikshit. And Parikshit on a certain day, being out hunting
and pursuing a deer, outstripped all his companions and wandered alone
in a dense dark forest, far away from human habitations. Now the king
was both weary and a-hungered, and seeing the cool shadows, and catching
sight of a beautiful pool, he pushed forward and plunged in, with the
idea of bathing and resting. And when both he and his horse were cool
and refreshed, he gathered lotus leaves and sterns and placed them
before the animal, and he himself lay down on the short grass beneath
the trees.

As he lay there, between sleeping and waking, he heard the sound of a
sweet voice singing. In his astonishment he sat up, to see who could be
in his neighbourhood, for nowhere had he seen the footprints of men, nor
had he supposed that he was near human dwellings. As he watched he saw,
through the bushes, a maiden gathering

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

flowers, and she was of a surpassing loveliness and sang as she plucked.
Presently, in her quest of flowers, she drew unwittingly near the king,
and he held his breath with sheer delight at the beauty of her voice and
features.

At last he resolved to speak. "Blessed one," he said gently, "who art
thou? and whose?"

"Whose?" said the girl, with a start, "I? I belong to none. I am unwed."

"Unwed?" said the king, "oh do then, I pray thee, grant thyself to me!"

"If I did," said the maiden slowly and pensively, "If I did, I should
require a promise--!"

"What promise couldst thou ask," cried the enamoured king, "that I could
not grant? Speak! What is it?"

"If I am to marry thee," said the damsel mysteriously, "thou must give
me a pledge that never wouldst thou ask me to look upon water. Unless I
had this promise, I could not wed." And as she spoke she cast upon the
king a look of such more than mortal sweetness that he felt as if he
would swoon away.

"Dear heart," cried Parikshit, "what a little thing were this to stand
between us! From the moment that thou art mine, I promise thee never to
ask thee to cast thine eyes on water."

And the maiden, hearing this, bowed her head, and they exchanged tokens
of marriage, and hand

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

in hand sat down on the grass together in silence. And as they remained
thus, the king's friends and escort came up, having searched for and
followed him. And finding him thus in the company of a newly-affianced
bride, a state carriage was brought, and the two entered it, and were
driven back to the capital together.

Now from this time forward, it was as if some strange enchantment had
been woven about the king. He was always in the private apartments with
his newly-wedded queen. And instead of his absorption in her growing
less, it seemed to become stronger and stronger, till none could obtain
access to him, and the royal ministers were refused audience.

When this was on the verge of becoming a public scandal, the chief
minister sent for one of the waiting-women about the palace, and
questioned her closely concerning the nature of her who had so
infatuated their sovereign. And the maid said: "Her beauty is undeniable
and unsurpassed. In charm and loveliness she is without a peer. But one
thing about her is very strange. The king was able to marry her only
after promising that he would never show her water."

Now when the prime minister heard this he went away and caused a royal
park to be laid out, well-planted with trees that were laden with

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

flowers and fruit. And in a hidden place within the park he dug a
beautiful bathing-pool, filled with water that was sweet as nectar, and
well covered with a net of pearls. And when it was finished he came
privately one day to the monarch and said, "Here is a delightful forest
without water. Let it be used for the royal pleasure." And, hearing
this, the king and his adored queen went out into the park and wandered
about its lawns and glades. And at last, being tired and spent, and not
altogether free from hunger and thirst, the king caught sight of a
charming bower, all festooned with the white and fragrant bells of
creeping plants.

"Come, beloved!" he said to the queen, "here is an arbour that was made
for rest. Let us enter." And they entered.

But when he was within, the king saw that the bower only covered the
bathing-stairs of a bathing pool, which was shaded by some sort of roof
that looked like cobweb, and being unspeakably attracted by all the
surroundings and the sparkling coolness of the waters, he turned to his
wife and said gently, "Surely no harm would happen to you if you bathed
here! Would you not like to do so?"

Scarcely were the words uttered than the queen stepped merrily to the
water-side and took a plunge. The waters closed over her as she dived,
and Parikshit waited, half doubtfully, for

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

her return. Alas, it was in vain. She did not reappear. The wife he
adored was lost to him, it seemed, for ever.

Mad with anxiety, the king ran hither and thither, searching for his
beloved. Nowhere could he recover any trace of her. He had the lake
dragged, but even her body was not to be found. Then he ordered that the
waters should be baled out. But when this had been done, nothing was
discovered, save a large frog sitting beside a hole.

At this sight the king leapt to the conclusion that his wife had been
devoured by frogs, and his wrath against the whole race was without
bounds. Wherefore he promulgated an order that throughout his dominions
they were to be slain, and that no one was to appear before him without
a tribute of dead frogs.

Soon in the world of frogs this state of things became evident. Not one
of them could appear above ground without the fear of instant death. And
the whole tribe was afflicted with unspeakable terror. In their
extremity they went in embassy, with the story of their wrongs, to their
own king, and he in the guise of a begging friar appeared before the
throne of Parikshit, and urged him in the name of religious gentleness
and mercy to rescind his cruel order for the destruction of the poor
frogs. But Parikshit, with his whole soul

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

filled with woe for the death of her who was so dear to him, replied
only with renewed protestations of anger and revenge. Had the frogs, he
said, not swallowed up one who was to him as the heart of his heart? Why
then should he ever forgive them? Rather than do so he would continue to
slay them with a continually renewed fury. It was surely very far from
fitting that a learned man should intercede on their behalf.

As the monarch spoke of the loss he had suffered the seeming beggar
before him looked pained and startled. It was clear that he suddenly
understood the situation. "Alas, alas!" he said, "thou art under a
fascination, O king! Look upon me. I am Ayu, the king of the frogs, and
she who was thy wife is my daughter Susobhana. She has cast a glamour
over thee, who art of the race of men and not of our kindred. She hath
indeed the power to cast enchantments. By this her conduct I am deeply
grieved!"

But when Parikshit heard that he had before him the father of his
beloved he said only, "Oh sir, if she is thy daughter, then bestow her
upon me! I desire nothing save her return."

Then the king of the frogs, standing before Parikshit, summoned his
daughter, and when she appeared before him he joined her hand to that of
the monarch, saying, "Serve and wait upon thy lord!" And Parikshit,
feeling out of his great

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

love for his wife that in her restoration he had obtained as it were the
sovereignty of the three worlds, bowed down before the king of the
frogs, and did him reverence in due form, as the father of his beloved,
and with voice choked by joy and tears, said, "Oh how fortunate I am!
How fortunate I am!" And the King of the Frogs, taking leave of his
daughter, left them, and returned to that place from which he had come.

Now the King of the Frogs had parted from his daughter in sorrow and
grave disapproval of the spell originally cast by her, whereby the
innocent king and all her own people suffered so deeply; and in the
moment of farewell, as is the wont of fathers, he had looked into the
future, and instead of blessing her, had sternly said, "The fruit of the
enchantment that thou so wrongfully hast practised will be seen as a
flaw in the kingly honour of thy children, until the magic spell shall
be redeemed." This, then, was the doom that hung over the dynasty of
Parikshit and the frog-maiden, till it should be redeemed. And they
lived happily together, and had three sons, whose names were Sala, Dala,
and Vala. And in fulness of time King Parikshit gave up the world, and,
placing his eldest son upon his throne, himself retired into the forest.

Now it happened that Sala, the new king, while out hunting one day, saw
a very fleet deer, and

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

urged his charioteer to drive quickly that he might catch it.

But the charioteer answered, a It is impossible. Only a pair of Vami
horses could have enabled us to overtake that deer!" Now these Vami
horses of which he spoke belonged to Vamadeva, a great Brahmin scholar,
who lived in the ashrama beside the Ganges.

And when the king heard of them he became possessed of a desire to be
driven by them, and, going to the ashrama of Vamadeva, he begged that he
would lend them to him that he might capture a fleet deer. And the holy
man consented to the king's using them, but exacted a promise that they
should be returned immediately. Alas, the Vami horses proved so
excellent that the king coveted them, and forgot his promise, but kept
them when his business of hunting was over and locked them up in secret
stables attached to his palace!

Now when Vamadeva saw that his horses were not returned he became very
sorrowful, for he felt that the king's plighted word could not be
trusted. After waiting for a month, he sent a disciple to the sovereign
to receive from him the Vami steeds. But the king told the young man
that these horses were fit only for the use of kings, and that he could
not understand why holy men and scholars should expect to possess them.

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> So the disciple
had to return to his master without the horses.

Then Vamadeva himself appeared before the monarch and pleaded with him
to render back his property, which he had promised, moreover, to return
when his need should be over.

But the king was obdurate, being unable, by reason of the blemish on his
birth, to perceive in their fulness the obligations of the royal honour.
He offered the rishi anything out of his own stables that he might
choose to take; he undertook to appoint Vamadeva the chief priest of the
kingdom; he promised anything and everything, only he would not give
back to their rightful owner the horses he coveted.

Then Vamadeva called upon four terrible demons to appear and slay the
impious king, and even as he was speaking they arose suddenly, armed
with lances, and, advancing from the four quarters, felled him to the
earth. Thus died Sala the king, and Dala his brother reigned in his
stead.

Now as soon as there was a convenient time, Vamadeva came before the new
king and asked that the pair of Vami horses now in the royal stables
should be bestowed upon him. But Dala, instead of answering, turned to
his charioteer and ordered him to bring one of his finest arrows,
tempered with poison, that he might kill Vamadeva. But when he raised
his arm to point the

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

arrow the Brahmin said quietly, "Thou are not aiming at me, O king!
Rather is thine arrow pointed against thine own son, Senajit; him art
thou about to slay."

As the words were spoken the king let fly his terrible arrow, and at the
selfsame moment, in the innermost apartments of the palace, the child
Senajit fell, pierced by the arrow from his father's hand.

Suddenly the wail of mourning was heard, and a panic-stricken messenger
arrived to give the king the news of the disaster to his line. But the
death of his son seemed only to drive Dala to a frenzy of anger.
Demanding another arrow, he called upon gods and men, his own subjects
and the denizens of the heaven, to be witnesses of the death he was
about to deal; and again he raised his arm to take the fatal aim. . . .

To the amazement of all present, except the Brahmin, who stood as he
was, with eyes fixed on the sovereign, without moving--the bow was not
twanged, nor was the arrow shot forth. A look of agony passed over the
king's face; his hands shook, and he stood still. At last with a groan
he said, "I am defeated. I am overcome. I am unable to bring about the
death of Vamadeva!" And his right hand fell nerveless to his side.

At this Vamadeva's aspect became all gentleness and kindness. "Send for
thy queen, O king!"

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

said he, "and let her touch this arrow that thou didst destine for
murder. Thus mayst thou be purified from the fruit of thy sin."

And the king did as he was bidden, sending for his queen. And when she
came she did reverence to the sage Vamadeva, and stretched out her hand
to take the poisoned arrow. And the holy man was much touched by the
nobility of her bearing and the grace of her salutation, and blessing
her, he said, "O thou that art without fault, ask thou of me an
incomparable boon. It is mine to grant thee whatever thou shalt ask!"

And the queen answered, "I pray that my husband may be freed from his
sin, and that I may be ever his helpmeet, to aid him in the growth of
happiness and virtue."

"O good as thou art beautiful!" cried the delighted rishi, "thou hast
saved this royal house! With thee is the curse departed that was spoken
by Ayu, the father of Susobhana. What woman doomed, a woman hath
redeemed. Rule thou, O princess, over the hearts of these thy kinsmen,
thy husband and thy son, and over this great kingdom of Ayodhya. Never,
while they honour thee, shall there be loss of kingly honour in the race
of Parikshit!"

And so saying, and taking back his horses, the rishi departed from the
court of Dala, the king of Ayodhya.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Gopaler-Ma: The Mother of the Christ-Child](seh22.md)
