[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bep04)  [Next](bep06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0913510017/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Book of Enoch the Prophet*, tr. by Richard Laurence, \[1883\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_LXI">LXI</span></span>

### CHAP. LXI.

1\. Thus the Lord commanded the kings, the princes, the exalted, and
those who dwell on earth, saying, Open your eyes, and lift up your
horns, if you are capable of comprehending the Elect One.

2\. The Lord of spirits sat upon the throne of his glory.

3\. And the spirit of righteousness was poured out over him.

4\. The word of his mouth shall destroy all the sinners and all the
ungodly, who shall perish at his presence.

5\. In that day shall all the kings, the princes, the exalted, and those
who possess the earth, stand up, behold, and perceive, that he is
sitting on the throne of his glory; that before him the saints shall be
judged in righteousness;

6\. And that nothing, which shall be spoken before him, shall be
*spoken* in vain.

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

7\. Trouble shall come upon them, as upon a woman in travail, whose
labour is severe, when her child comes to the mouth of the womb, and she
finds it difficult to bring forth.

8\. One portion of them shall look upon another. They shall be
astonished, and shall humble their countenance;

9.  And trouble shall seize them, when they shall behold this Son of
woman sitting upon the throne of his glory.

10\. Then shall the kings, the princes, and all who possess the earth,
glorify him who has dominion over all things, him who was concealed; for
from the beginning the Son of man existed in secret, <span
id="fr_131"></span>[1](#fn_129.md) whom the Most High preserved in the
presence of his power, and revealed to the elect.

11\. He shall sow the congregation of the saints, and of the elect; and
all the elect shall stand before him in that day.

12\. All the kings, the princes, the exalted, and those who rule over
the earth, shall fall down on their faces before him, and shall worship
him.

13\. They shall fix their hopes on this Son of man, shall pray to him,
and petition him for mercy.

14\. Then shall the Lord of spirits hasten to expel them from his
presence. Their faces shall be full of confusion, and their faces shall
darkness cover. <span id="fr_132"></span>[2](#fn_130.md)

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The angels shall
take them to punishment, that vengeance may be inflicted on those who
have oppressed his children and his elect. And they shall become an
example to the saints and to his elect. Through them shall these be made
joyful; for the anger of the Lord of spirits shall rest upon them.

15\. Then the sword of the Lord of spirits shall be drunk with their
blood; <span id="fr_133"></span>[1](#fn_131.md) but the saints and elect
shall be safe in that day; nor the face of the sinners and the ungodly
shall they thenceforwards behold.

16\. The Lord of spirits shall remain over them:

17\. And with this Son of man shall they dwell, eat, lie down, and rise
up, for ever and ever.

18\. The saints and the elect have arisen from the earth, have left off
to depress their countenances, and have been clothed with the garment of
life. That garment of life is with the Lord of spirits, in whose
presence your garment shall not wax old, nor shall your glory diminish.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_LXII">LXII</span></span>

### CHAP. LXII.

1\. In those days the kings who possess the earth shall be punished by
the angels of his wrath, <span id="fr_134"></span>[2](#fn_132.md)
wheresoever they shall be delivered up, that he may give rest for a
short period; and that they

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

may fall down and worship before the Lord of spirits, confessing their
sins before him.

2\. They shall bless and glorify the Lord of spirits, saying, Blessed is
the Lord of spirits, the Lord of kings, the Lord of princes, the Lord of
the rich, the Lord of glory, and the Lord of wisdom.

3\. He shall enlighten every secret thing.

4\. Thy power is from generation to generation; and thy glory for ever
and ever.

5\. Deep are all thy secrets, and numberless; and thy righteousness
cannot be computed.

6\. Now we know, that we should glorify and bless the Lord of kings, him
who is King over all things.

7\. They shall also say, Who has granted us rest to glorify, laud,
bless, and confess in the presence of his glory?

8\. And now small is the rest we desire; but we do not find *it;* we
reject, and do not possess it. Light has passed away from before us; and
darkness *has covered* our thrones for ever.

9\. For we have not confessed before him; we have not glorified the name
of the Lord of kings; we have not glorified the Lord in all his works;
but we have trusted in the sceptre of our dominion and of our glory.

10\. In the day of our suffering and of our trouble he will not save us,
neither shall we find rest. We

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

confess that our Lord is faithful in all his works, in all his
judgments, and in his righteousness.

11\. In his judgments he pays no respect to persons; and we must depart
from his presence, on account of our *evil* deeds.

12\. All our sins are truly without number.

13\. Then shall they say to themselves, Our souls are satiated with the
instruments of crime;

14\. But that prevents us not from descending to the flaming womb of
hell.

15\. Afterwards, their countenances shall be filled with darkness and
confusion before the Son of man; from whose presence they shall be
expelled, and before whom the sword shall remain to expel them.

16\. Thus saith the Lord of spirits, This is the decree and the judgment
against the princes, the kings, the exalted, and those who possess the
earth, in the presence of the Lord of spirits.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_LXIII">LXIII</span></span>

### CHAP. LXIII.

1\. I saw also other countenances in that secret place. I heard the
voice of an angel, saying, These are the angels who have descended from
heaven to earth, and have revealed secrets to the sons of men, and have
seduced the sons of men to the commission of sin.

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_LXIV">LXIV</span></span>

### CHAP. LXIV. \[SECT. XI. <span id="fr_135"></span>[1](#fn_133.md)\]

1\. In those days Noah saw that the earth became inclined, and that
destruction approached.

2\. Then he lifted up his feet, and went to the ends of the earth, to
the dwelling of his great-grandfather Enoch.

3\. And Noah cried with a bitter voice, Hear me; hear me; hear me: three
times. And he said, Tell me what is transacting upon earth; for the
earth labours, and is violently shaken. Surely I shall perish with it.

4\. After this there was a great perturbation on earth, and a voice was
heard from heaven. I fell down on my face, when my great-grandfather
Enoch came and stood by me.

5\. He said to me, Why hast thou cried out to me with a bitter cry and
lamentation?

6\. A commandment has gone forth from the Lord against those who dwell
on the earth, that they may be destroyed; <span
id="fr_136"></span>[2](#fn_134.md) for they know every secret of the
angels, every oppressive and secret power of the devils, <span
id="fr_137"></span>[3](#fn_135.md) and every power of those who commit
sorcery, as well as of those who make molten images in the whole earth.

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

7\. *They know* how silver is produced from the dust of the earth, and
how on the earth the *metallic* drop exists; for lead and tin are not
produced from earth, as the primary fountain of their production.

8\. There is an angel standing upon it, and that angel struggles to
prevail.

9\. Afterwards my great-grandfather Enoch seized me with his hand,
raising me up, and saying to me, Go, for I have asked the Lord of
spirits respecting this perturbation of the earth; who replied, On
account of their impiety have their innumerable judgments been
consummated before me. Respecting the moons have they inquired, and they
have known that the earth will perish with those who dwell upon it, and
that to these there will be no *place of* refuge for ever.

10\. They have discovered secrets, and *they are* those who have been
judged; but not thou, my son. The Lord of spirits knows that thou art
pure and good, *free* from the reproach of *discovering* secrets.

11\. He, the holy One, will establish thy name in the midst of the
saints, and will preserve thee from those who dwell upon the earth. He
will establish thy seed in righteousness, with dominion and great
glory; <span id="fr_138"></span>[1](#fn_136.md) and from thy seed shall
spring forth <span id="fr_139"></span>[2](#fn_137.md) righteous and holy
men without number for ever.

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_LXV">LXV</span></span>

### CHAP. LXV.

1\. After this he showed me the angels of punishment, who were prepared
to come, and to open all the mighty waters <span
id="fr_140"></span>[1](#fn_138.md) under the earth:

2\. That they may be for judgment, and for the destruction of all those
who remain and dwell upon the earth.

3\. And the Lord of spirits commanded the angels who went forth, not to
take up the men and preserve *them*.

4\. For those angels *presided* over all the mighty waters. Then I went
out from the presence of Enoch.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_LXVI">LXVI</span></span>

### CHAP. LXVI.

1\. In those days the word of God came to me, <span
id="fr_141"></span>[2](#fn_139.md) and said, Noah, behold, thy lot <span
id="fr_142"></span>[3](#fn_140.md) has ascended up to me, a lot void of
crime, <span id="fr_143"></span>[4](#fn_141.md) a lot beloved <span
id="fr_144"></span>[5](#fn_142.md) and upright.

2\. Now then shall the angels labour at the trees; but when they proceed
to this, I will put my hand upon it, and preserve it.

3\. The seed of life shall arise <span id="fr_145"></span>[6](#fn_143.md)
from it, and a change shall take place, <span
id="fr_146"></span>[7](#fn_144.md) that the dry land may not be left empty.
I will establish thy seed before me

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

for ever and ever, and the seed of those who dwell with thee on the
surface of the earth. It shall be blessed and multiplied in the presence
of the earth, in the name of the Lord.

4\. And they shall confine those angels who disclosed impiety. In that
burning valley *it is, that they shall be confined*, which at first my
great-grandfather Enoch showed me in the west, where there were
mountains of gold and silver, of iron, of fluid metal, and of tin.

5\. I beheld that valley in which there was great perturbation, and
*where* the waters were troubled.

6\. And when all this was effected, from the fluid mass of fire, and the
perturbation which prevailed <span id="fr_147"></span>[1](#fn_145.md) in
that place, there arose a strong smell of sulphur, which became mixed
with the waters; and the valley of the angels, who had been guilty of
seduction, burned underneath its soil.

7\. Through that valley also rivers of fire were flowing, <span
id="fr_148"></span>[2](#fn_146.md) to which those angels shall be
condemned, who seduced the inhabitants of the earth.

8\. And in those days shall these waters be to kings, to princes, to the
exalted, and to the inhabitants of the earth, for the healing of the
soul and body, and for the judgment of the spirit.

9\. Their spirits shall be full of revelry, <span
id="fr_149"></span>[3](#fn_147.md) that they may be judged in their bodies;
because they

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

have denied the Lord of spirits, and *although* they perceive their
condemnation day by day, they believe not in his name.

10\. And as the inflammation of their bodies shall be great, so shall
their spirits undergo a change for ever.

11\. For no word which is uttered before the Lord of spirits shall be in
vain.

12\. Judgment has come upon them, because they trusted in their carnal
revelry, <span id="fr_150"></span>[1](#fn_148.md) and denied the Lord of
spirits.

13\. In those days shall the waters of that valley <span
id="fr_151"></span>[2](#fn_149.md) be changed; for when the angels shall be
judged, then shall the heat of those springs of water experience an
alteration.

14\. And when the angels shall ascend, the water of the springs shall
*again* undergo a change, and be frozen. Then I heard holy Michael
answering and saying, This judgment, with which the angels shall be
judged, shall bear testimony against the kings, the princes, and those
who possess the earth.

15\. For these waters of judgment shall be for their healing, and for
the death of their bodies. But they shall not perceive and believe that
the waters will be changed, and become a fire, which shall blaze for
ever.

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_LXVII">LXVII</span></span>

### CHAP. LXVII.

1\. After this he gave me the characteristical marks <span
id="fr_152"></span>[1](#fn_150.md) of all the secret things in the book of
my great-grandfather Enoch, and in the parables which had been given to
him; inserting them for me among the words of the book of parables.

2\. At that time holy Michael answered and said to Raphael, The power of
the spirit hurries me away, and impels me on. <span
id="fr_153"></span>[2](#fn_151.md) The severity of the judgment, of the
secret judgment of the angels, who is capable *of beholding*—the
endurance of that severe judgment which has taken place and been made
permanent—without being melted at the sight of it? <span
id="fr_154"></span>[3](#fn_152.md) Again holy Michael answered and said to
holy Raphael, Who is there whose heart is not softened by it, and whose
reins are not troubled at this thing?

3\. Judgment has gone forth against them by those who have thus dragged
them away; and that was, when they stood in the presence of the Lord of
spirits.

4\. In like manner also holy Rakael said to Raphael, They shall not be
before the eye of the Lord; since the Lord of spirits has been offended

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

with them; for like Lords <span id="fr_155"></span>[1](#fn_153.md) have
they conducted themselves. Therefore will he bring upon them a secret
judgment for ever and ever.

5\. For neither shall angel nor man receive a portion of it; but they
alone shall receive their own judgment for ever and ever.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_LXVIII">LXVIII</span></span>

### CHAP. LXVIII.

1\. After this judgment they shall be astonished and irritated; for it
shall be exhibited to the inhabitants of the earth.

2\. Behold the names of those angels. These are their names. The first
of them is Samyaza; the second, Arstikapha: the third, Armen; the
fourth, Kakabael; the fifth, Turel; the sixth, Rumyel; the seventh,
Danyal; the eighth, Kael; the ninth, Barakel; the tenth, Azazel; the
eleventh, Armers; the twelfth, Bataryal; the thirteenth, Basasael; the
fourteenth, Ananel; the fifteenth, Turyal; the sixteenth, Simapiseel;
the seventeenth, Yetarel; the eighteenth, Tumael; the nineteenth, Tarel;
the twentieth, Rumel; the twenty-first, Azazyel.

3\. These are the chiefs of their angels, and the names of the leaders
of their hundreds, and the leaders of their fifties, and the leaders of
their tens.

4\. The name of the first is Yekun: he it was who seduced all the sons
of the holy angels; and causing

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

them to descend on earth, led astray the offspring of men.

5\. The name of the second is Kesabel, who pointed out evil counsel to
the sons of the holy angels, and induced them to corrupt their bodies by
generating mankind.

6\. The name of the third is Gadrel: he discovered every stroke of death
to the children of men.

7\. He seduced Eve; and discovered to the children of men the
instruments of death, the coat of mail, the shield, and the sword for
slaughter; every instrument of death to the children of men.

8\. From his hand were these things derived to them who dwell upon
earth, from that period for ever.

9\. The name of the fourth is Penemue: he discovered to the children of
men bitterness and sweetness;

10\. And pointed out to them every secret of their wisdom.

11\. He taught men to understand writing, and the use of f ink and
paper.

12\. Therefore numerous have been those who have gone astray from every
period of the world, even to this day.

13\. For men were not born for this, thus with pen and with ink to
confirm their faith;

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

14\. Since they were not created, except that, like the angels, they
might remain righteous and pure.

15\. Nor would death, which destroys everything, have affected them;

16\. But by this their knowledge they perish, and by this also *its*
power consumes <span id="fr_156"></span>[1](#fn_154.md) *them*.

17\. The name of the fifth is Kasyade: he discovered to the children of
men every wicked stroke of spirits and of demons:

18\. The stroke of the embryo in the womb, to diminish *it;* the stroke
of the spirit *by* the bite of the serpent, and the stroke which is
*given* in the mid-day *by* the offspring of the serpent, the name of
which is Tabaet. <span id="fr_157"></span>[2](#fn_155.md)

19\. This is the number of the Kesbel; the principal part of the oath
which the Most High, dwelling in glory, revealed to the holy ones.

20\. Its name is Beka. He spoke to holy Michael to discover to them the
sacred name, that they might understand that secret name, and thus
remember the oath; and that those who pointed out every secret thing to
the children of men might tremble at that name and oath.

21\. This is the power of that oath; for powerful it is, and strong.

22\. And he established this oath of Akae by the instrumentality <span
id="fr_158"></span>[3](#fn_156.md) of the holy Michael.

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

23\. These are the secrets of this oath, and by it were they confirmed.

24\. Heaven was suspended *by it* before the world was made, for ever.

25\. By it has the earth been founded upon the flood; while from the
concealed parts of the hills the agitated waters proceed forth from the
creation to the end of the world.

26\. By this oath the sea has been formed, and the foundation of it.

27\. During the period of *its* fury he has established the sand against
it, which continues unchanged for ever; and by this oath the abyss has
been made strong; nor is it removable from its station for ever and
ever.

28\. By this oath the sun and moon complete their progress, never
swerving from the command *given* to them for ever and ever.

29\. By this oath the stars complete their progress;

30\. And when their names are called, they return an answer, for ever
and ever.

31\. Thus *in* the heavens *take place* the blowings of the winds: all
of them have breathings, <span id="fr_159"></span>[1](#fn_157.md) and
*effect* a complete combination of breathings.

32\. There the treasures of thunder are kept, and the splendour of the
lightning.

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

33\. There are kept the treasures of hail and of frost, the treasures of
snow, the treasures of rain and of dew.

34\. All these confess and laud before the Lord of spirits.

35\. They glorify with all their power of praise; and he sustains them
in all that *act of* thanksgiving; while they laud, glorify, and exalt
the name of the Lord of spirits for ever and ever.

36\. And with them he establishes this oath, by which they and their
paths are preserved; nor does their progress perish.

37\. Great was their joy.

38\. They blessed, glorified, and exalted, because the name of the Son
of man was revealed to them.

39\. He sat upon the throne of his glory; and the principal part of the
judgment was assigned to him, the Son of man. Sinners shall disappear
and perish from the face of the earth, while those who seduced them
shall be bound with chains for ever.

40\. According to their ranks of corruption shall they be imprisoned,
and all their works shall disappear from the face of the earth; nor
thenceforward shall there be any to corrupt; for the Son of man has been
seen, sitting on the throne of his glory.

41\. Everything wicked shall disappear, and depart from before his face;
and the word of the Son

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

of man shall become powerful in the presence of the Lord of spirits.

42\. This is the third parable of Enoch.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_LXIX">LXIX</span></span>

### CHAP. LXIX. \[SECT. XII. <span id="fr_160"></span>[1](#fn_158.md)\]

1\. After this the name of the Son of man, living with the Lord of
spirits, <span id="fr_161"></span>[2](#fn_159.md) was exalted by the
inhabitants of the earth.

2\. It was exalted in the chariots of the Spirit; and the name went
forth in the midst of them.

3\. From that time I was not drawn in the midst of them; but he seated
me between two spirits, between the north and the west, where the angels
received their ropes, to measure out a place <span
id="fr_162"></span>[3](#fn_160.md) for the elect and the righteous.

4\. There I beheld the fathers of the first men, and the saints, who
dwell in that place for ever.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_LXX">LXX</span></span>

### CHAP. LXX.

1\. Afterwards my spirit was concealed, ascending into the heavens. I
beheld the sons of the holy angels treading on flaming fire, whose
garments and robes were white, and whose countenances were transparent
as crystal.

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

2\. I saw two rivers of fire glittering like the hyacinth,

3\. Then I fell on my face before the Lord of spirits.

4\. And Michael, one of the archangels, took me by my right hand, raised
me up, and brought me out *to* where was every secret *of* mercy and
secret *of* righteousness.

5\. He showed me all the hidden things of the extremities of heaven, all
the receptacles of the stars, and the splendours of all, from whence
they went forth before the face of the holy.

6\. And he concealed the spirit of Enoch in the heaven of heavens.

7\. There I beheld, in the midst of that light, a building raised with
stones of ice; <span id="fr_163"></span>[1](#fn_161.md)

8\. And in the midst of these stones vibrations <span
id="fr_164"></span>[2](#fn_162.md) of living fire. My spirit saw around the
circle of <span id="fr_165"></span>[3](#fn_163.md) this flaming habitation,
on one of its extremities, *that there were* rivers full of living fire,
which encompassed it.

9\. Then the Seraphim, the Cherubim, and Ophanin surrounded *it* these
are those who never sleep, but watch the throne of his glory.

10\. And I beheld angels innumerable, thousands of thousands, and
myriads of myriads, who surrounded that habitation.

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

11\. Michael, Raphael, Gabriel, Phanuel, and the holy angels who were in
the heavens above, went in and out of it. Michael, Raphael, and Gabriel
went out of that habitation, and holy angels innumerable.

12\. With them *was* the Ancient of days, whose head *was* white as
wool, and pure, and his robe was indescribable.

13\. Then I fell upon my face, while all my flesh was dissolved, and my
spirit became changed.

14\. I cried out with a loud voice, with a powerful spirit, blessing,
glorifying, and exalting.

15\. And those blessings, which proceeded from my mouth, became
acceptable in the presence of the Ancient of days.

16\. The Ancient of days came with Michael and Gabriel, Raphael and
Phanuel, with thousands of thousands, and myriads of myriads, which
could not be numbered.

17\. Then that angel came to me, and with his voice saluted me, saying,
Thou art the offspring of man, who art born for righteousness, and
righteousness has rested on thee.

18\. The righteousness of the Ancient of days shall not forsake thee.

19\. He said, On thee shall he confer peace <span
id="fr_166"></span>[1](#fn_164.md) in the name of the existing world; for
from thence has peace gone forth since the world was created.

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

20\. And thus shall it happen to thee for ever and ever.

21\. All who shall exist, and who shall walk in thy path of
righteousness, shall not forsake thee for ever.

22\. With thee shall be their habitations, with thee their lot; nor from
thee shall they be separated for ever and ever.

23\. And thus shall length of days be with the offspring of man.

24\. Peace shall be to the righteous; and the path of integrity shall
the righteous pursue, <span id="fr_167"></span>[1](#fn_165.md) in the name
of the Lord of spirits, for ever and ever.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_LXXI">LXXI</span></span>

### CHAP. LXXI. \[SECT. XIII. <span id="fr_168"></span>[2](#fn_166.md)\]

1\. The book of the revolutions of the luminaries of heaven, according
to their respective classes, their respective powers, their respective
periods, their respective names, the places where they commence their
progress, <span id="fr_169"></span>[3](#fn_167.md) and their respective
months, which Uriel, the holy angel who was with me, explained to me; he
who conducts them. The whole account of them, according to every year of
the world for ever, until a new work shall be effected, which will be
eternal.

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

2\. This is the first law of the luminaries. The sun *and* the light
arrive at the gates of heaven, which are on the east, and on the west of
it at the western gates of heaven.

3\. I beheld the gates whence the sun goes forth; and the gates where
the sun sets;

4\. In which gates also the moon rises and sets; and *I beheld* the
conductors of the stars, among those who precede them; six *gates were*
at the rising, and six at the setting of the sun.

5\. All these respectively, one after another, are on a level; and
numerous windows are on the right and on the left sides of those gates.

6\. First proceeds forth that great luminary, which is called the sun;
the orb of which is as the orb of heaven, the whole of it being replete
with splendid and flaming fire.

7\. Its chariot, where it ascends, the wind blows.

8\. The sun sets in heaven, and, returning by the north, to proceed
towards the east, is conducted so as to enter by that gate, and
illuminate the face of heaven.

9\. In the same manner it goes forth in the first month by a great gate.

10\. It goes forth through the fourth of those six gates, which are at
the rising of the sun.

11\. And in the fourth gate, through which the sun with the moon
proceeds, in the first part of it,

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

there are twelve open windows; from which issues out a flame, when they
are opened at their proper periods.

12\. When the sun rises in heaven, it goes forth through this fourth
gate thirty days, and by the fourth gate in the west of heaven on a
level with it descends.

13\. During that period the day is lengthened from the day, and the
night curtailed from the night for thirty days. And then the day is
longer by two parts than the night.

14\. The day is precisely ten parts, and the night is eight.

15\. The sun <span id="fr_170"></span>[1](#fn_168.md) goes forth through
this fourth gate, and sets in it, and turns to the fifth gate during
thirty days; after which it proceeds from, and sets in, the fifth gate.

16\. Then the day becomes lengthened by a second portion, so that it is
eleven parts: while the night becomes shortened, and is only seven
parts.

17\. The sun *now* returns to the east, entering into the sixth gate,
and rising and setting in the sixth gate thirty-one days, on account of
its signs.

18\. At that period the day is longer than the night, being twice *as
long as* the night; and becomes twelve parts;

19\. But the night is shortened, and becomes six

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

parts. Then the sun rises up, that the day may be shortened, and the
night lengthened.

20\. And the sun returns towards the east, entering into the sixth gate,
where it rises and sets for thirty days.

21\. When that period is completed, the day becomes shortened precisely
one part, so that it is eleven parts, while the night is seven parts.

22\. Then the sun goes from the west, from that sixth gate, and proceeds
eastwards, rising in the fifth gate for thirty days, and setting again
westwards in the fifth gate of the west.

23\. At that period the day becomes shortened two parts; and is ten
parts, while the night is eight parts.

24\. Then the sun goes from the fifth gate, as it sets in the fifth gate
of the west; and rises in the fourth gate for thirty-one days, on
account of its signs, setting in the west.

25\. At that period the day is made equal with the night; and, being
equal with it, the night becomes nine parts, and the day nine parts.

26\. Then the sun goes from that gate, as it sets in the west; and
returning to the east proceeds by the third gate for thirty days,
setting in the west at the third gate.

27\. At that period the night is lengthened from the day during thirty
mornings, and the day is curtailed

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

from the day during thirty days; the night being ten parts precisely,
and the day eight parts.

28\. The sun now goes from the third gate, as it sets in the third gate
in the west; but returning to the east, it proceeds by the second gate
of the east for thirty days.

29\. In like manner also it sets in the second gate in the west of
heaven.

30\. At that period the night is eleven parts, and the day seven parts.

31\. Then the sun goes at that time from the second gate, as it sets in
the second gate in the west; but returns to the east, *proceeding* by
the first gate, for thirty-one days.

32\. And sets in the west in the first <span
id="fr_171"></span>[1](#fn_169.md) gate.

33\. At that period the night is lengthened as much again as the day.

34\. It is twelve <span id="fr_172"></span>[2](#fn_170.md) parts precisely,
while the day is six parts.

35\. The sun has *thus* completed its beginnings, and a second time goes
round from these beginnings.

36\. Into that gate it enters for thirty days, and sets in the west, in
the opposite part *of heaven*.

37\. At that period the night is contracted in its

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

length a fourth part, that is, one portion, and becomes eleven parts.

38\. The day is seven parts.

39\. Then the sun returns, and enters into the second gate of the east.

40\. It returns by these beginnings thirty days, rising and setting.

41\. At that period the night is contracted in its length. It becomes
ten <span id="fr_173"></span>[1](#fn_171.md) parts, and the day eight
parts. Then the sun goes from that second gate, and sets in the west;
but returns to the east, and rises in the east, in the third gate,
thirty-one days, setting in the west of heaven.

42\. At that period the night becomes shortened. It is nine parts. And
the night is equal with the day. The year is precisely three hundred and
sixty-four days.

43\. The lengthening of the day and night, and the contraction of the
day and night, are made to differ from each other by the progress of the
sun.

44\. By means of this progress the day is daily lengthened, and the
night greatly shortened. <span id="fr_174"></span>[2](#fn_172.md)

45\. This is the law and progress of the sun, and its turning when it
turns back, turning during sixty days, <span
id="fr_175"></span>[3](#fn_173.md) and going forth. This is the great
everlasting

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

luminary, that which he names the sun for ever and ever.

46\. This also is that which goes forth a great luminary, and which is
named after its peculiar kind, as God commanded.

47\. And thus it goes in and out, neither slackening nor resting; but
running on in its chariot by day and by night. It shines with a seventh
portion of light from the moon; but the dimensions of both are equal.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_LXXII">LXXII</span></span>

### CHAP. LXXII. \[SECT. XIV. <span id="fr_176"></span>[1](#fn_174.md)\]

1\. After this law I beheld another law of an inferior luminary, the
name of which is the moon, and the orb of which is as the orb of heaven.

2\. Its chariot, *which* it secretly ascends, the wind blows; and light
is given to it by measure.

3\. Every month at its exit and entrance it becomes changed; and its
periods are as the periods of the sun. And when in like manner its light
is to exist, its light is a seventh portion from the light of the sun.

4\. Thus it rises, and at its commencement towards the east goes forth
for thirty days.

5\. At that time it appears, and becomes to you the beginning of the
month. Thirty days *it is* with the sun in the gate from which the sun
goes forth.

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

6\. Half of it is in extent seven portions, one *half;* and the whole of
its orb is void of light, except a seventh portion out of the fourteen
portions of its light. And in a day it receives a seventh portion, or
half *that portion*, of its light. Its light is by sevens, by one
portion, and by the half *of a portion*. It sets with the sun.

7\. And when the sun rises, the moon rises with it; receiving half a
portion of light.

8\. On that night, when it commences its period, <span
id="fr_177"></span>[1](#fn_175.md) previously to the day of the month, the
moon sets with the sun.

9\. And on that night it is dark *in* its fourteen portions, that is,
*in each* half; but it rises on that day with one seventh portion
precisely, and in its progress declines from the rising of the sun.

10\. During the remainder of its period <span
id="fr_178"></span>[2](#fn_176.md) its light increases to fourteen
portions.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_LXXIII">LXXIII</span></span>

### CHAP. LXXIII.

1\. Then I saw another progress and regulation which He effected in the
law of the moon. <span id="fr_179"></span>[3](#fn_177.md) The progress of
the moons, and everything *relating to them*, Uriel showed me, the holy
angel who conducted them all.

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

2\. Their stations I wrote down as he showed them to me.

3\. I wrote down their months, as they occur, and the appearance of
their light, until it is completed in fifteen days.

4\. In each of its two seven portions it completes all its light at
rising and at setting.

5\. On stated months it changes *its* settings; and on stated months it
makes its progress *through* each *gate*. In two *gates* the moon sets
with the sun, viz. in those two gates which are in the midst, in the
third and fourth gate. *From the third gate* it goes forth for seven
days, and makes its circuit.

6\. Again it returns to the gate whence the sun goes forth, and in that
completes the whole of its light. Then it declines from the sun, and
enters in eight days into the sixth gate, *and returns in seven days to
the third gate*, from which the sun goes forth.

7\. When the sun proceeds to the fourth gate, the *moon* goes forth for
seven days, until it passes from the fifth *gate*.

8\. Again it returns in seven days to the fourth gate, and completing
all its light, declines, and passes on by the first gate in eight days;

9\. And returns in seven days to the fourth gate, from which the sun
goes forth.

10\. Thus I beheld their stations, as according

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

to the fixed order of the months the sun rises and sets.

11\. At those times there is an excess of thirty days belonging to the
sun in five years; all the days belonging to each year of the five
years, when completed, amount to three hundred and sixty-four days; and
to the sun and stars belong six days; six days in each of the five
years; *thus* thirty days belong to them;

12\. So that the moon has thirty days less than the sun and stars.

13\. The moon brings on all the years exactly, that their stations may
come neither too forwards nor too backwards a single day; but that the
years may be changed with correct precision in three hundred and
sixty-four days. In three years the days are one thousand and
ninety-two; in five years they are one thousand eight hundred and
twenty; and in eight years two thousand nine hundred and twelve days.

14\. To the moon alone belong in three years one thousand and sixty-two
days; in five years it has fifty days less *than the sun*, for an
addition being made to the *one thousand and* sixty-two days, in five
years there are one thousand seven hundred and seventy days; and the
days of the moon in eight years are two thousand eight hundred and
thirty-two days.

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

15\. For its days in eight years are less *than those of the sun by*
eighty days, which eighty days are its diminution in eight years.

16\. The year then becomes truly complete according to the station of
the moons, and the station of the sun; which rise in the *different*
gates; which rise and set in them for thirty days.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_LXXIV">LXXIV</span></span>

### CHAP. LXXIV.

1\. *These are* the leaders of the chiefs of the thousands, *those*
which *preside* over all creation, and over all the stars; with the four
*days* which are added and never separated from the place allotted them,
according to the complete computation of the year.

2\. And these serve four days, which are not computed in the computation
of the year.

3\. Respecting them, men greatly err, for these luminaries truly serve,
in the mansion of the world, one *day* in the first gate, one in the
third gate, one in the fourth, and one in the sixth gate.

4\. And the harmony of the world becomes complete every three hundred
and sixty-fourth state of it. For the signs,

5\. The seasons,

6\. The years,

7\. And the days, Uriel showed me; the angel

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

whom the Lord of glory appointed over all the luminaries.

8\. Of heaven in heaven, and in the world; that they might rule in the
face of the sky, and appearing over the earth, become

9\. Conductors of the days and nights: the sun, the moon, the stars, and
all the ministers of heaven, which make their circuit with all the
chariots of heaven.

10\. Thus Uriel showed me twelve gates open for the circuit of the
chariots of the sun in heaven, from which the rays of the sun shoot
forth.

11\. From these proceed heat over the earth, when they are opened in
their stated seasons. They are for the winds, and the spirit of the dew,
when in their seasons they are opened; opened in heaven at *its*
extremities.

12\. Twelve gates I beheld in heaven, at the extremities of the earth,
through which the sun, moon, and stars, and all the works of heaven,
proceed at their rising and setting.

13\. Many windows also are open on the right and on the left.

14\. One window at a *certain* season grows extremely hot. So also are
there gates from which the stars go forth as they are commanded, and in
which they set according to their number.

15\. I saw likewise the chariots of heaven, running

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

in the world above to those gates in which the stars turn, which never
set. One of these is greater than all, which goes round the whole world.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_LXXV">LXXV</span></span>

### CHAP. LXXV. \[SECT. XV. <span id="fr_180"></span>[1](#fn_178.md)\]

1\. And at the extremities of the earth I beheld twelve gates open for
all the winds, from which they proceed and blow over the earth.

2\. Three of them are open in the front of heaven, three in the west,
three on the right side of heaven, and three on the left. The first
three are those which are towards the east, three are towards the north,
three behind those which are upon the left, towards the south, and three
on the west.

3\. From four of them proceed winds of blessing, and of health; and from
eight proceed winds of punishment; when they are sent to destroy the
earth, and the heaven above it, all its inhabitants, and all which are
in the waters, or on dry land.

4\. The first of these winds proceeds from the gate termed the eastern,
through the first gate on the east, which inclines southwards. From this
goes forth destruction, drought, heat, and perdition.

5\. From the second gate, the middle one, proceeds equity. There issue
from it rain, fruitfulness, health,

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

and dew; and from the third gate northwards, proceed cold and drought.

6\. After these proceed the south winds through three principal gates;
through their first gate, which inclines eastwards, proceeds a hot wind.

7\. But from the middle gate proceed grateful odour, dew, rain, health,
and life.

8\. From the third gate, which is westwards, proceed dew, rain, blight,
and destruction.

9\. After these are the winds to the north, which is called the sea.
*They proceed* from three gates. The first <span
id="fr_181"></span>[1](#fn_179.md) gate *is that* which is on the east,
inclining southwards; from this proceed dew, rain, blight, and
destruction. From the middle direct gate proceed rain, dew, life, and
health. And from the third gate, which is westwards, inclining towards
the south, <span id="fr_182"></span>[2](#fn_180.md) proceed mist, frost,
snow, rain, dew, and blight.

10\. After these *in the* fourth *quarter* are the winds to the west.
From the first gate, inclining northwards, proceed dew, rain, frost,
cold, snow, and chill; from the middle gate proceed rain, health, and
blessing;

11\. And from the last gate, which is southwards, proceed drought,
destruction, scorching, and perdition.

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

12\. The *account of the* twelve gates of the four quarters of heaven is
ended.

13\. All their laws, all their *infliction* of punishment, and the
health *produced* by them, have I explained to thee, my son Mathusala.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_LXXVI">LXXVI</span></span>

### CHAP. LXXVI.

1\. The first wind is called the eastern, because it is the first.

2\. The second is called the south, because the Most High there
descends, and frequently there descends *he who* is blessed for ever.

3\. The western wind has the name of diminution, because there all the
luminaries of heaven are diminished, and descend.

4\. The fourth wind, which is named the north, is divided into three
parts; one of which is for the habitation of man; another for seas of
water, with valleys, woods, rivers, shady places, and snow; and the
third part *contains* paradise.

5\. Seven high mountains I beheld, higher than all the mountains of the
earth, from which frost proceeds; while days, seasons, and years depart
and pass away.

6\. Seven rivers I beheld upon earth, greater than all rivers, one of
which takes its course from the west; into a great sea its water flows.

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

7\. Two come from the north to the sea, their waters flowing into the
Erythræan sea, on the east. And with respect to the remaining four, they
take their course in the cavity of the north, *two* to their sea, the
Erythræan sea, and two are poured into a great sea, where also it is
said *there is* a desert.

8\. Seven great islands I saw in the sea and on the earth. Seven in the
great sea.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_LXXVII">LXXVII</span></span>

### CHAP. LXXVII.

1\. The names of the sun are these: one Aryares, the other Tomas.

2\. The moon has four names. The first is Asonya; the second, Ebla; the
third, Benase; and the fourth, Erae.

3\. These are the two great luminaries, whose orbs are as the orbs of
heaven; and the dimensions of both are equal.

4\. In the orb of the sun *there is* a seventh portion of light, which
is added to it from the moon. By measure it is put in, until a seventh
portion of *the light of* the sun is departed. They set, enter into the
western gate, circuit by the north, and through the eastern gate go
forth over the face of heaven.

5\. When the moon rises, it appears in heaven; and the half of a seventh
portion of light is all *which is* in it.

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

6\. In fourteen *days* the whole of its light is completed.

7\. *By* three quintuples light is put into it, until *in* fifteen
*days* its light is completed, according to the signs of the year; it
has three quintuples.

8\. The moon has the half of a seventh portion.

9\. During its diminution on the first day its light decreases a
fourteenth part; on the second day it decreases a thirteenth part; on
the third day a twelfth part; on the fourth day an eleventh part; on the
fifth day a tenth part; on the sixth day a ninth part; on the seventh
day it decreases an eighth part; on the eighth day it decreases a
seventh part; on the ninth day it decreases a sixth part; on the tenth
day it decreases a fifth part; on the eleventh day it decreases a fourth
part; on the twelfth day it decreases a third part; on the thirteenth
day it decreases a second part; on the fourteenth day it decreases a
half of its seventh part; and on the fifteenth day the whole remainder
of its light is consumed.

10\. On stated months the moon has twenty-nine days.

11\. It also has a period of twenty-eight days.

12\. Uriel likewise showed me another regulation, when light is poured
into the moon, how it is poured into it from the sun.

13\. All the time that the moon is in progress

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

with its light, it is poured *into it* in the presence of the sun, until
*its* light is in fourteen days completed in heaven.

14\. And when it is wholly extinguished, its light is consumed in
heaven; and on the first day it is called the new moon, for on that day
light is received into it.

15\. It becomes precisely completed on the day that the sun descends
into the west, while the moon ascends at night from the east.

16\. The moon then shines all the night, until the sun rises before it;
when the moon disappears in turn before the sun.

17\. Where light comes to the moon, there again it decreases, until all
its light is extinguished, and the days of the moon pass away.

18\. Then its orb remains solitary without light.

19\. During three months it effects in thirty days *each month* its
period; and during three *more* months it effects it in twenty-nine days
each. *These are the times* in which it effects its decrease in its
first period, and in the first gate, *namely*, in one hundred and
seventy-seven days.

20\. And at the time of its going forth during three months it appears
thirty days each, and during three *more* months it appears twenty-nine
days each.

21\. In the night it appears for each twenty *days*

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

as *the face of* a man, and in the day as heaven; for it is nothing else
except its light.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_LXXVIII">LXXVIII</span></span>

### CHAP. LXXVIII.

1\. And now, my son Mathusala, I have shown thee everything; and *the
account of* every ordinance of the stars of heaven is finished.

2\. He showed me every ordinance respecting these, which *takes place*
at all times and in all seasons under every influence, in all years, at
the arrival and under the rule of each, during every month and every
week. *He showed me* also the decrease of the moon, which is effected in
the sixth gate; for in that sixth gate is its light consumed.

3\. From this is the beginning of the month; and its decrease is
effected in the sixth gate in its period, until a hundred and
seventy-seven days are completed; according to the mode of computation
by weeks, <span id="fr_183"></span>[1](#fn_181.md) twenty-five *weeks* and
two days.

4\. *Its period* is less than that of the sun, according to the
ordinance of the stars, by five days in one half year <span
id="fr_184"></span>[2](#fn_182.md) precisely.

5\. When that *their* visible situation is completed. Such is the
appearance and likeness of every luminary, which Thiel, the great angel
who conducts them, showed to me.

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_LXXIX">LXXIX</span></span>

### CHAP. LXXIX.

1\. In those days Uriel answered and said to me, Behold, I have showed
thee all things, O Enoch;

2\. And all things have I revealed to thee. Thou seest the sun, the
moon, and those which conduct the stars of heaven, which cause all their
operations, seasons, and arrivals to return.

3\. In the days of sinners the years shall be shortened.

4\. Their seed shall be backward in their prolific soil; and everything
done on earth shall be subverted, and disappear in its season. The rain
shall be restrained, and heaven shall stand still.

5\. In those days the fruits of the earth shall be late, and not
flourish in their season; and in their season the fruits of the trees
shall be withholden.

6\. The moon shall change its laws, and not be seen at its proper
period. But in those days shall heaven be seen; and barrenness shall
take place in the borders of the great chariots in the west. *Heaven*
shall shine more than *when illuminated by* the orders of light; while
many chiefs among the stars of authority shall err, perverting their
ways and works.

7\. Those shall not appear in their season, who command them, and all
the classes of the stars shall be shut up against sinners.

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

8\. The thoughts of those who dwell on earth shall transgress within
them; and they shall be perverted in all their ways.

9\. They shall transgress, and think themselves gods; while evil shall
be multiplied among them.

10\. And punishment shall come upon them, so that all of them shall be
destroyed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_LXXX">LXXX</span></span>

### CHAP. LXXX.

1\. He said, O Enoch, look on the book which heaven has gradually
dropped down; <span id="fr_185"></span>[1](#fn_183.md) and, reading that
which is written in it, understand every part of it.

2\. Then I looked on all which was written, and understood all, reading
the book and everything written in it, all the works of man;

3\. And of all the children of flesh upon earth, during the generations
of the world.

4\. Immediately after I blessed the Lord, the King of glory, who has
thus for ever formed the whole workmanship of the world.

5\. And I glorified the Lord, on account of his long-suffering and
blessing towards the children of the world.

6\. At that time I said, Blessed is the man, who shall die righteous and
good, against whom no catalogue

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

of crime has been written, and with whom iniquity is not found.

7\. Then those three holy ones caused me to approach, and placed me on
the earth, before the door of my house.

8\. And they said unto me, Explain everything to Mathusala thy son; and
inform all thy children, that no flesh shall be justified before the
Lord; for he is their Creator.

9\. During one year we will leave thee with thy children, until thou
shalt again recover thy strength, that thou mayest instruct thy family,
write these things, and explain them to all thy children. But in another
year they shall take thee from the midst of them, and thy heart shall be
strengthened; for the elect shall point out righteousness to the elect;
the righteous with the righteous shall rejoice, congratulating each
other; but sinners with sinners shall die,

10\. And the perverted with the perverted shall be drowned.

11\. Those likewise who act righteously shall die on account of the
works of man, and shall be gathered together on account of the works of
the wicked.

12\. In those days they finished conversing with me.

13\. And I returned to my fellow men, blessing the Lord of worlds.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_129"></span>[74:1](bep05.htm#fr_131.md) *was concealed*.

<span id="fn_130"></span>[74:2](bep05.htm#fr_132.md) *be added to their
faces*.

<span id="fn_131"></span>[75:1](bep05.htm#fr_133.md) *be drunk from them*.

<span id="fn_132"></span>[75:2](bep05.htm#fr_134.md) *punishment*.

<span id="fn_133"></span>[78:1](bep05.htm#fr_135.md) Chapters
[lxiv](bep05.htm#an_LXIV). [lxv](bep05.htm#an_LXV.md).
[lxvi](bep05.htm#an_LXVI.md). and the first verse of
[lxvii](bep05.htm#an_LXVII.md). evidently contain a vision of Noah, and not
of Enoch.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[78:2](bep05.htm#fr_136.md) *their end may be*.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[78:3](bep05.htm#fr_137.md) *the Satans*.

<span id="fn_136"></span>[79:1](bep05.htm#fr_138.md) *for kings, and for
great glory*.

<span id="fn_137"></span>[79:2](bep05.htm#fr_139.md) *shall go forth a
spring of*.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[80:1](bep05.htm#fr_140.md) *the power of water*.

<span id="fn_139"></span>[80:2](bep05.htm#fr_141.md) *was with me*.

<span id="fn_140"></span>[80:3](bep05.htm#fr_142.md) *portion*.

<span id="fn_141"></span>[80:4](bep05.htm#fr_143.md) *fault*.

<span id="fn_142"></span>[80:5](bep05.htm#fr_144.md) *of love*.

<span id="fn_143"></span>[80:6](bep05.htm#fr_145.md) *be*.

<span id="fn_144"></span>[80:7](bep05.htm#fr_146.md) *shall enter*.

<span id="fn_145"></span>[81:1](bep05.htm#fr_147.md) *troubled them*.

<span id="fn_146"></span>[81:2](bep05.htm#fr_148.md) *went*.

<span id="fn_147"></span>[81:3](bep05.htm#fr_149.md) *sport*.

<span id="fn_148"></span>[82:1](bep05.htm#fr_150.md) *sport of their
bodies*.

<span id="fn_149"></span>[82:2](bep05.htm#fr_151.md) *its waters*.

<span id="fn_150"></span>[83:1](bep05.htm#fr_152.md) *the signs*.

<span id="fn_151"></span>[83:2](bep05.htm#fr_153.md) *irritates* or
*excites me*.

<span id="fn_152"></span>[83:3](bep05.htm#fr_154.md) *and not be melted in
the presence of it*.

<span id="fn_153"></span>[84:1](bep05.htm#fr_155.md) *in the similitude of,
or, as the Lord*.

<span id="fn_154"></span>[86:1](bep05.htm#fr_156.md) *eats*, *feeds upon*,
*devours*.

<span id="fn_155"></span>[86:2](bep05.htm#fr_157.md) *male*.

<span id="fn_156"></span>[86:3](bep05.htm#fr_158.md) *by the hands*.

<span id="fn_157"></span>[87:1](bep05.htm#fr_159.md) or *spirits*.

<span id="fn_158"></span>[89:1](bep05.htm#fr_160.md) Paris MS.

<span id="fn_159"></span>[89:2](bep05.htm#fr_161.md) *the name of him
living with him, of this Son of man, living with the Lord of spirits*.

<span id="fn_160"></span>[89:3](bep05.htm#fr_162.md) *to measure me a
place*.

<span id="fn_161"></span>[90:1](bep05.htm#fr_163.md) *that in it* there was
*that which was built with stones of ice*.

<span id="fn_162"></span>[90:2](bep05.htm#fr_164.md) *tongues*.

<span id="fn_163"></span>[90:3](bep05.htm#fr_165.md) *around that which
encompassed*.

<span id="fn_164"></span>[91:1](bep05.htm#fr_166.md) *he shall call to thee
peace*.

<span id="fn_165"></span>[92:1](bep05.htm#fr_167.md) *his upright path
shall be to the righteous*.

<span id="fn_166"></span>[92:2](bep05.htm#fr_168.md) Paris MS.

<span id="fn_167"></span>[92:3](bep05.htm#fr_169.md) *the places of their
nativity*.

<span id="fn_168"></span>[94:1](bep05.htm#fr_170.md) *And he*.

<span id="fn_169"></span>[96:1](bep05.htm#fr_171.md) *second*. A manifest
error. The Paris MS. is correct.

<span id="fn_170"></span>[96:2](bep05.htm#fr_172.md) *eleven*. A mistake of
the transcriber. In the Paris MS. it is *twelve*.

<span id="fn_171"></span>[97:1](bep05.htm#fr_173.md) *seven*. Another
error.

<span id="fn_172"></span>[97:2](bep05.htm#fr_174.md) *approaches*.

<span id="fn_173"></span>[97:3](bep05.htm#fr_175.md) That is, it is sixty
days in the same gates, viz. thirty days twice every year.

<span id="fn_174"></span>[98:1](bep05.htm#fr_176.md) Paris MS.

<span id="fn_175"></span>[99:1](bep05.htm#fr_177.md) *at the beginning of
its morning, or day*.

<span id="fn_176"></span>[99:2](bep05.htm#fr_178.md) *of its day*.

<span id="fn_177"></span>[99:3](bep05.htm#fr_179.md) *in that law*.

<span id="fn_178"></span>[104:1](bep05.htm#fr_180.md) Paris MS.

<span id="fn_179"></span>[105:1](bep05.htm#fr_181.md) *seventh*. Perhaps
the seventh which had been enumerated.

<span id="fn_180"></span>[105:2](bep05.htm#fr_182.md) *the north*. An error
in both MSS.

<span id="fn_181"></span>[110:1](bep05.htm#fr_183.md) *according to the
ordinance of the week*.

<span id="fn_182"></span>[110:2](bep05.htm#fr_184.md) *in one time*.

<span id="fn_183"></span>[112:1](bep05.htm#fr_185.md) *has distilled*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapters LXXXI-C](bep06.md)
