[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bep00)  [Next](bep02.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0913510017/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Book of Enoch the Prophet*, tr. by Richard Laurence, \[1883\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_iii">p. iii</span>

### INTRODUCTION.

<span class="smallcaps">In</span> the Authorized Version of the Epistle
of Jude, we read the following words:—

"Enoch also, the seventh from Adam, prophesied of these, saying, Behold,
the Lord cometh with ten thousands, of his saints, to execute judgment
upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly among them of all their
ungodly deeds which they have ungodly committed, and of all their hard
speeches which ungodly sinners have spoken against Him." <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md)

Modern research sees in the Epistle of Jude a work of the second
century: but as orthodox theologians accept its contents as the inspired
utterance of an Apostle, let us diligently search the Hebrew Scriptures
for this important forecast of the second Advent of the Messiah. In vain
we turn over the pages of the sacred Canon; not even in the Apocrypha
can we trace one line from the pen of the marvellous being to whom
uninterrupted immortality

<span id="page_iv">p. iv</span>

is assigned by apostolic <span id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1.md)
interpretation of Genesis v. 24. Were the prophecies of Enoch,
therefore, accepted as a Divine revelation on that momentous day when
Jesus explained the Scriptures, after his resurrection, to Jude and his
apostolic brethren; and have we moderns betrayed our trust by excluding
an inspired record from the Bible?

Reverting to the second century of Christianity, we find Irenæus and
Clement of Alexandria citing the Book of Enoch without questioning its
sacred character. Thus, Irenæus, assigning to the Book of Enoch an
authenticity analogous to that of Mosaic literature, affirms that Enoch,
although a man, filled the office of God's messenger to the
angels. <span id="fr_2"></span>[2](#fn_2.md) Tertullian, who flourished at
the close of the first and at the beginning of the second century,
whilst admitting that the "Scripture of Enoch" is not received by some
because it is not included in the Hebrew Canon, speaks of the author as
"the most ancient prophet, Enoch," and of the book as the divinely
inspired autograph of that immortal patriarch, preserved by Noah in the
ark, or miraculously reproduced by him through the inspiration of the
Holy Spirit. Tertullian adds, "But as Enoch has spoken in the same
scripture of the Lord, and 'every scripture suitable for edification is
divinely

<span id="page_v">p. v</span>

inspired,' let us reject nothing which belongs to us. It may now seem to
have been disavowed by the Jews like all other scripture which speaks of
Christ—a fact which should cause us no surprise, as they were not to
receive him, even when personally addressed by himself." These views
Tertullian confirms by appealing to the testimony of the Apostle
Jude. <span id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3.md) The Book of Enoch was therefore
as sacred as the Psalms or Isaiah in the eyes of the famous theologian,
on whom modern orthodoxy relies as the chief canonist of New Testament
scripture.

Origen (A.D. 254), in quoting Hebrew literature, assigns to the Book of
Enoch the same authority as to the Psalms. In polemical discussion with
Celsus, he affirms that the work of the antediluvian patriarch was not
accepted in the Churches as Divine; and modern theologians have
accordingly assumed that he rejected its inspiration: but the extent to
which he adopts its language and ideas discloses personal conviction
that Enoch was one of the greatest of the prophets. Thus, in his
treatise on the angels, we read: "We are not to suppose that a special
office has been assigned by mere accident to a particular angel: as to
Raphael, the work of curing and healing; to Gabriel, the direction of
wars; to Michael, the duty of hearing the prayers and supplications of
men." <span id="fr_4"></span>[2](#fn_4.md) From what source

<span id="page_vi">p. vi</span>

but assumed revelation could Origen obtain and publish these
circumstantial details of ministerial administration in heaven?

Turning to the Book of Enoch we read: "After this I besought the angel
of peace, who proceeded with me, to explain all that was concealed. I
said to him, Who are those whom I have seen on the four sides, and whose
words I have heard and written down. He replied, The first is the
merciful, the patient, the holy Michael. The second is he who presides
over every suffering and every affliction of the sons of men, the holy
Raphael. The third, who presides over all that is powerful, is Gabriel.
And the fourth, who presides over repentance and the hope of those who
will inherit eternal life, is Phanuel." <span
id="fr_5"></span>[1](#fn_5.md) We thus discover the source of Origen's
apparently superhuman knowledge, and detect his implicit trust in the
Book of Enoch as a Divine revelation.

When primitive Christianity had freely appropriated the visions of Enoch
as the materials of constructive dogmas, this remarkable book gradually
sank into oblivion, disappeared out of Western Christendom, and was
eventually forgotten by a Church, which unconsciously perpetuated its
teaching as the miraculous revelations of Christianity.

The Book of Enoch, unknown to Europe for nearly a thousand years, except
through the fragments

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

preserved by Georgius Syncellus (circa 792, A.D.), was at length
discovered by Bruce in Abyssinia, who brought home three copies of the
Ethiopic version in 1773, respecting which he writes: "Amongst the
articles I consigned to the library at Paris was a very beautiful and
magnificent copy of the Prophecies of Enoch, in large quarto; another is
amongst the Books of Scripture which I brought home, standing
immediately before the Book of Job, which is its proper place in the
Abyssinian Canon; and a third copy I have presented to the Bodleian
Library at Oxford, by the hands of Dr. Douglas, the Bishop of Carlisle."

This priceless manuscript, destined, some day, to reveal the forgotten
source of many Christian dogmas and mysteries, rested in Bodleian
obscurity, until presented to the world through an English translation
by Dr. Laurence, Archbishop of Cashel, formerly Professor of Hebrew at
Oxford, who issued his first edition in 1821, in apparent
unconsciousness that he was giving to mankind the theological fossils
through which we, in the clearer light of our generation, may study the
"Evolution of Christianity."

The scarcity of Archbishop Laurence's translation, before the
publication of the second edition in 1833, produced an impression in
Germany that the work had been suppressed by its author; but this report

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

is contradicted in the preface to the third edition, issued in 1838, in
response to a large order from America.

The Book of Enoch excited more interest on the Continent than in
England. It was translated into German by Dr. Hoffman in 1838, into
Latin by Gfrörer in 1840, again into German by Dillmann in 1853, and has
been discussed by Weisse, Lücke, Hilgenfeld, and Kalisch, the latter of
whom uttered the prediction, that the book of Enoch "will one day be
employed as a most important witness in the history of religious
dogmas." The day and the hour have come, the clock has struck, and in
thus publishing an edition of Archbishop Laurence's translation of the
Book of Enoch, we place within the reach of all readers of the English
language, the means of studying the pre-Christian origin of Christian
mysteries.

Turning towards the "Preliminary Dissertation" of Archbishop Laurence,
in which he discusses, with impartial criticism and accomplished
scholarship, the origin of the Book of Enoch, we find him attaining the
important conclusions, that it was written by a Jew of the Dispersion in
his own language, whether Hebrew or the later Aramæan acquired in exile;
that the version in the hands of the author of the Epistle of Jude and
the Ante-Nicene Fathers was a Greek translation; and that

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

the Ethiopic edition, whether translated from Aramæan or Greek, is the
same work as that cited by the Apostle.

In attestation of the theory of an Aramaic or Syro-Chaldæan origin,
Archbishop Laurence refers to the "most ancient remains of the Cabbala
(Hebrew traditions) contained in the 'Zohar,' a species of philosophical
commentary upon the Law, combining theological opinions with the
allegorical subtleties of the mystical school. In this celebrated
compilation of what was long supposed to constitute the hidden wisdom of
the Jewish nation, occasional references are made to the Book of Enoch,
as a book carefully preserved from generation to generation." Archbishop
Laurence then gives extracts from the "Zohar," referring to important
passages in the Book of Enoch, and infers that "the authors of the
Cabbalistical remains wrote their recondite doctrines in Chaldee," and
possessed a copy of the Book of Enoch, written in that language or in
Hebrew, "which they regarded as the genuine work of him whose name it
bore, and not as the spurious production of a later age."

Archbishop Laurence then considers the probable date of the work, and
infers, from the quotation of Jude, that it must have been written
antecedent to the Christian era, but not before the Captivity of
Babylon, because it contains the language and

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

imagery of Daniel, "in the representation of the Ancient of Days coming
to judgment with the Son of man." But since Archbishop Laurence wrote,
modern criticism has disclosed how nebulous is the date of Daniel, so
that it becomes as reasonable to assume that the author or compiler
borrowed from the Book of Enoch, as to attribute plagiarism to the
pseudo-patriarch. The learned translator, however, discovered more
satisfactory proof, through internal evidence, that the book "was
written long subsequent to the commencement, and even to the conclusion,
of the Babylonian Captivity."

That section of the Book of Enoch, extending from chapter
[lxxxii](bep06.htm#an_LXXXII). to [xc](bep06.htm#an_XC.md)., contains an
allegorical narrative of the royal dynasties of Israel and Judah, from
which Archbishop Laurence constructs a history extending from Saul to
the beginning of the reign of Herod the Great, and infers that the Book
of Enoch was written " before the rise of Christianity; most probably at
an early period of the reign of Herod." The Archbishop adds: "That it
could not have been the production of a writer who lived after the
inspired authors of the New Testament, or who was even coeval with them,
must be manifest from the quotation of St. Jude—a quotation which proves
it to have been in his time a work ascribed to Enoch himself."

Archbishop Laurence, furthermore, attains probability

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

of date through another line of argument. In chapter
[liv](bep04.htm#an_LIV.md). 9, of the Book of Enoch we read, "The chiefs of
the East, among the Parthians and Medes, shall remove kings, in whom a
spirit of perturbation shall enter. They shall hurl them from their
thrones, springing as lions from their dens, and like famished wolves
into the midst of the flock." Commenting on this passage, Archbishop
Laurence says, "Now the Parthians were altogether unknown in history,
until the 250th year before Christ, when, under the guidance of Arsaces
(the family name of all their subsequent kings) they revolted from
Antiochus Theus, the then king of Syria. It was not, however, until the
year 230 B.C. that their empire became firmly established, when Arsaces
defeated and took prisoner Seleucus Callicinus, the Syrian monarch, and
first assumed the title of King of' Parthia. By degrees they expelled
the Syrian dominion from every province over which it extended east of
the Euphrates; so that from about the year 140 B.C. their vast empire
reached from the Ganges to the Euphrates, and from the Euphrates to the
Caucasus." These facts would therefore lead to the conclusion that the
Book of Enoch was written about the middle of the second century B.C.;
but as the author adds to the passage already cited, "They shall go up,
and tread upon the land of their elect, the land of their

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>

elect shall be before them. The threshing-floor, the path, and the city
of my righteous people shall impede the progress of their horses,"
Archbishop Laurence connects this language with the invasion of Syria by
the Parthians in the year 54 B.C., and their defeat of Anthony eighteen
years later, "when the credit of the Parthian arms was at the highest;
and it is probable that about the same period, or at least not long
after, the Book of Enoch was written."

The question now naturally arises, How was this work of fiction accepted
within so short a period, as the genuine production of the patriarch
Enoch? The Archbishop answers by showing, through internal evidence,
that the book was written by a Jew residing at a distance from
Palestine, and having been brought into Judæa in the name of the prophet
Enoch, the obscurity of its origin caused some to accept it as the
genuine production of the patriarch himself. In chapter lxxi.
Pseudo-Enoch divides the day and night into eighteen parts, and
represents the longest day in the year as consisting of twelve out of
these eighteen parts. "Now the proportion of twelve to eighteen is
precisely the same as sixteen to four and twenty, the present division
in hours of the period constituting day and night. If therefore we
consider in what latitude a country must be situated to have a day of
sixteen

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

hours long, we shall immediately perceive that Palestine could not be
such a country. We may then safely conclude that the region in which the
author lived must have been situated not lower than forty-five degrees
north latitude, where the longest day is fifteen hours and a half, nor
higher perhaps than forty-nine degrees, where the longest day is
precisely sixteen hours. This will bring the country where he wrote, as
high up at least as the northern districts of the Caspian and Euxine
seas; probably it was situated somewhere between the upper parts of both
these seas; and if the latter conjecture be well founded, the author of
the Book of Enoch was perhaps a member of one of the tribes which
Shalmaneser carried away, and placed 'in Halah and in Habor by the river
Goshen, and in the cities of the Medes,' and who never returned from
captivity."

Since Archbishop Laurence wrote his "Preliminary Dissertation," fresh
light has been thrown on the origin of the Book of Enoch through the
publication of Mr. Layard's "Nineveh and Babylon," recording the
discovery, in Babylonian ruins, of cups or bowls of terra cotta, covered
on the inner surface with inscriptions in ink, which have been
deciphered by Mr. Thomas Ellis of the Manuscript Department in the
British Museum, as amulets or charms against evil spirits, disease,
calamity, and sudden death,

<span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span>

composed in the Chaldean language mingled with Hebrew words, <span
id="fr_6"></span>[1](#fn_6.md) and written in characters which combine
Syriac and Palmyrene with the ancient Phoenician. These inscriptions are
undated; but Mr. Ellis attained the conclusion through internal
evidence, that these cups belonged to the descendants of the Jews who
were carried captive to Babylon and the surrounding cities.

But the most important revelation attained through these discoveries of
Mr. Layard lies in the interesting fact, mentioned in his work, that the
names of the angels inscribed on these cups, and those recorded in the
Book of Enoch, are, in many instances identical, so that no doubt
remains as to the Hebrew-Chaldee origin of that great Semitic work,
whether assignable to human genius or Divine revelation; and the exhumed
amulets of Jews of the Dispersion attest the accuracy of Archbishop
Laurence's conclusions respecting the nationality of Pseudo-Enoch.

Ignorance of the contents of the Apocrypha, as canonized by the Church
of Rome, is so general in England that many otherwise well-informed
people imagine that the Book of Enoch may be found in its pages, whereas
it has been lost to all

<span id="page_xv">p. xv</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> English readers,
except those who may possess or have access to copies of the English
translation last issued in 1838. On this aspect of the question
Archbishop Laurence writes:—

"The fate of the Apocryphal writings in general has been singular. On
one side, from the influence of theological opinion or theological
caprice, they have been sometimes injudiciously admitted into the Canon
of Scripture; while on the other side, from an over-anxiety to preserve
that Canon inviolate, they have been not simply rejected, but loaded
with every epithet of contempt and obloquy. The feelings perhaps of both
parties have on such occasions run away with their judgment. For
writings of this description, whatever may or may not be their claim to
inspiration, are at least of considerable utility, where they indicate
the theological opinions of the periods at which they were composed.
This I apprehend to be peculiarly [the](errata.htm#0.md) case of the Book
of Enoch; which, as having been manifestly written before the doctrines
of Christianity were promulgated to the world, must afford us, when it
refers to the nature and character of the Messiah, as it repeatedly does
so refer, credible proof of what were the Jewish opinions upon those
points before the birth of Christ; and consequently before the possible
predominance of the Christian creed."

<span id="page_xvi">p. xvi</span>

Archbishop Laurence thus clearly recognized that the visions of Enoch
preceded the teaching of Jesus; but it was not given to him, or to his
generation, to see how deeply his conclusions affected the supernatural
claims of Christianity.

Turning to the contents of the Book of Enoch, the [first six
chapters](bep02.htm#an_I.md) announce the condemnation of transgressors and
the blessings of the righteous, through the triumphal advent of the
Messiah, forecast in the famous prediction quoted by the author of the
Epistle attributed to Jude.

Chapters [vii](bep02.htm#an_VII). to [xvi](bep02.htm#an_XVI.md). record the
descent of two hundred angels on the earth, their selection of wives,
the birth of their gigantic offspring, and the instruction of mankind in
the manufacture of offensive and defensive weapons, the fabrication of
mirrors, the workmanship of jewellery, and the use of cosmetics and
dyes, combined with lessons in sorcery, astrology, divination, and
astronomy—all which Tertullian accepts as Divine revelation, when he
denounces woman as the "devil's gateway," <span
id="fr_7"></span>[1](#fn_7.md) and assures her, on the authority of the
inspired Enoch, that Tyrian dyes, Phrygian embroidery, Babylonian cloth,
golden bracelets, gleaming pearls, flashing onyx-stones, and brilliant
emeralds, with all the other adjuncts of an elegant toilette, are the
special gifts of fallen angels to

<span id="page_xvii">p. xvii</span>

female frailty. The advent of the angels multiplies transgressions on
earth, they are condemned to "the lowest depths of the fire in
torments," and Enoch, as the messenger of God, announces to them the
eternity of their punishment.

Chapters [xvii](bep02.htm#an_XVII). to [xxxvi](bep03.htm#an_XXXVII.md).
give a graphic description of the miraculous journeys of Enoch in the
company of an angel, from whom he learns the secrets of creation and the
mysteries of Infinity. From the top of a lofty mountain "which reached
to heaven," he beheld the receptacles of light, thunder, and lightning,
"the great darkness or mountains of gloom which constitute winter, the
mouths of rivers and of the deep, the stone which supports the corners
of the earth, and the four winds which bear up the earth, and constitute
the pillars of heaven." <span id="fr_8"></span>[1](#fn_8.md) Is not this
obviously the inspired cosmology, through which the author of the Book
of Enoch unconsciously condemned mediæval physicists to the stake for
impiously proclaiming the mobility of the earth? If an inspired prophet
saw the stone which supports the corners of the earth, how inexpiable
the guilt of men, who fostered scepticism through the heliocentric
theory of a world coursing swiftly round the sun!

But had not the Book of Enoch disappeared for centuries out of Europe,
before the persecution of

<span id="page_xviii">p. xviii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Galileo and the
martyrdom of Bruno? We answer that its teaching had survived, as
numerous other superstitions have passed from generation to generation
long after all knowledge of their origin has been lost to the
theologians who accept them as Divine.

In the "Evolution of Christianity" we cite the following passage from
Irenæus: "It is impossible that the Gospels can be more or less than
they are. For as there are four zones in the world which we inhabit, and
four principal winds, while the Church is spread abroad throughout the
earth, and the pillar and basis of the Church is the gospel and the
spirit of life, it is right that she should have four pillars exhaling
immortality on every side, and bestowing renewed vitality on men. From
which *fact* it follows that the Word has given us four versions of the
Gospel, united by one spirit." We now recognize that this fanciful
theory of a limited number of Evangelists is based on the cosmology of
Enoch; and if in the second century, Irenæus accepted the visions of an
antediluvian patriarch as facts, the traditional survival of the earth's
"corner stone" doubtless controlled the orthodox astronomy of mediaeval
theologians.

Proceeding on his journey with the angel Uriel, Enoch furthermore beheld
the prison of the fallen angels, in which struggling columns of fire
ascended

<span id="page_xix">p. xix</span>

from an appalling abyss. He saw the regions in which the spirits of the
dead await the day of judgment; he looked upon the trees of knowledge
and of life, exhaling fragrant odours from leaves which never withered,
and from fruit which ever bloomed; and he beheld the "great and glorious
wonder" of the celestial stars, coming forth through the "gates of
heaven."

Chapters [xxxvii](bep03.htm#an_XXXVII). to [lxxi](bep05.htm#an_LXXI.md).
record the second vision of wisdom, divided into three parables. The
first depicts the future happiness and glory of the elect, whom Enoch
beheld reclining on couches in the habitations of angels, or standing in
thousands of thousands and myriads of myriads before the throne of God,
blessing and glorifying Him with celestial song, as the Holy, Holy Lord
of spirits, before whom righteousness eternally dwells.

As Enoch uttered his prophecies respecting the elect, before the
existence of Christianity, it is important to learn in what sense he
understood the doctrine of election. The language of the first parable
happily leaves no room for doubt—"The righteous will be elected for
their . good works duly weighed by the Lord of Spirits." <span
id="fr_9"></span>[1](#fn_9.md) Election, therefore, traced to its original
source, means nothing more than Divine "selection of the fittest"—a
theory more consistent with the justice of God, than

<span id="page_xx">p. xx</span>

the capricious choice of the metamorphical potter, whose arbitrary
fashioning of plastic clay symbolized, in Pauline theology, the doctrine
of predestination.

The second parable ([xlv](bep04.htm#an_XLV).-[lv](bep04.htm#an_LV)..md)
demands the absorbed attention of modern Jews and Gentiles; for it is
either the inspired forecast of a great Hebrew prophet, predicting with
miraculous accuracy the future teaching of Jesus of Nazareth, or the
Semitic romance from which the latter borrowed His conceptions of the
triumphant return of the Son of man, to occupy a judicial throne in the
midst of rejoicing saints and trembling sinners, expectant of
everlasting happiness or eternal fire: and whether these celestial
visions be accepted as human or Divine, they have exercised so vast an
influence on the destinies of mankind for nearly two thousand years,
that candid and impartial seekers after religious truth can no longer
delay inquiry into the relationship of the Book of Enoch with the
revelation, or the evolution, of Christianity.

The third parable ([lvi](bep04.htm#an_LVI).-[lxx](bep05.htm#an_LXX)..md)
recurs, with glowing eloquence, to the inexhaustible theme of Messianic
glory, and again depicts the happy future of the righteous in contrast
with the appalling misery of the wicked. It also records the
supernatural control. of the elements, through the action of individual
angels presiding over the winds, the sea, hail, frost,

<span id="page_xxi">p. xxi</span>

dew, the lightning's flash, and reverberating thunder. The names of the
principal fallen angels are also given, among whom we recognize some of
the invisible powers named in the incantations inscribed on the terra
cotta cups of Hebrew-Chaldee conjuration.

Chapters [lxxi](bep05.htm#an_LXXI). to [lxxxi](bep06.htm#an_LXXXI.md).
contain the "book of the revolutions of the luminaries of heaven," the
sun, the moon, and the stars, controlled in their movements by the
administration of angels. In commenting on this section of the Book of
Enoch, Archbishop Laurence says, "This system of astronomy is precisely
that of an untutored, but accurate observer of the heavens. He describes
the eastern and western parts of heaven, where the sun and moon rise and
set, as divided each into six different gates, through which those orbs
of light pass at their respective periods. In the denomination of these
gates he begins with that through which the sun passes at the winter
solstice; and this he terms the *first* gate. It of course answers to
the sign of Capricornus; and is the southernmost point to which the sun
reaches, both at rising and setting. The next gate, at which the sun
arrives in its progress towards the east at rising, and towards the west
at setting, and which answers to the sign of Aquarius, he terms the
*second* gate. The next, in continuation of the same course of the sun,
which answers to the sign of Pisces, he

<span id="page_xxii">p. xxii</span>

terms the *third* gate. The *fourth* gate in his description is that
which is situated due east at sun-rising, and due west at sun-setting,
and which, answering to the sign of Aries, the sun enters at the vernal
equinox. With this *fourth* gate he commences his account of the sun's
annual circuit, and of the consequent change in the length of day and
night at the various seasons of the year. His *fifth* gate is now to be
found in the sun's progress northwards, and answers to the sign of
Taurus. And his *sixth* gate is situated still further north; which,
answering to the sign of Gemini, concludes at the most northern point of
heaven to which the sun arrives, and from which it turns at the summer
solstice, again to measure back its course southwards.

"Hence it happens, that the same gates which answers to the six signs
alluded to in the sun's passage from the winter to the summer solstice,
necessarily also answer to the remaining six of the twelve signs of the
Zodiac in its passage back again.

"The turning of the sun both at the winter and summer solstices, the
first at the most southern, the last at the most northern point of its
progress, must have always struck the eye of those who contemplated the
variety as well as the splendour of its daily appearance. The astronomy
of the apocryphal

<span id="page_xxiii">p. xxiii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Enoch was perhaps
formed in this respect upon the same principles as the astronomy of
Homer, who places the situation of the island Συρίη under the *turning
of the sun*, ὅθι τροπαὶ ἠελίοιο (Odyss. lib. xv. 404)."

Chapters [lxxxiii](bep06.htm#an_LXXXIII.md). to
[lxxxix](bep06.htm#an_LXXXIX.md). contain a vision of Enoch giving an
allegorical forecast of the history of the world up to the kingdom of
the Messiah.

Chapter [xcii](bep06.htm#an_XCII.md). records a series of prophecies
extending from Enoch's own time to about one thousand years beyond the
present generation. In the system of chronology adopted, a day stands
for hundred, and a week for seven hundred years. Reference is made to
the deluge, the call of Abraham, the Mosaic dispensation, the building
and the destruction of the Temple of Solomon—events which preceded the
date at which the Book of Enoch was probably written: but when the
author, in his character of a divinely inspired seer, extends his vision
beyond the horizon of his own age, he discloses the vanity of his
predictive pretensions, through prophecies which remain unfulfilled. If,
however, the Book of Enoch had reached us through the Western, as well
as the Ethiopic Canon, apologetic theologians would doubtless affirm
that centuries are but trifles in prophetic time; and that the
predictions of the great antediluvian prophet shall, sooner or later,
attain miraculous fulfilment.

<span id="page_xxiv">p. xxiv</span>

Chapters [xciii](bep06.htm#an_XCIII). to [civ](bep07.htm#an_CIV.md).
contain the eloquent exhortations of Enoch, addressed to his children,
in which he follows Buddha in commending the "Paths of Righteousness,"
and anticipates Jesus in pronouncing the doom of sinners and the joys of
saints, and gives utterance to the most emphatic assurance of
immortality which has ever flowed from human lips: "Fear not, ye souls
of the righteous, but wait with patient hope for the day of your death
in righteousness. Grieve not because your souls descend in trouble and
sorrow to the receptacle of the dead; for great joy shall be yours, like
that of the angels in heaven. And when you die, sinners say concerning
you, 'As we die the righteous die. What profit have they in their works?
Behold, like us, they expire in sorrow and in darkness. What advantage
have they over us? Henceforward are we equal; for behold they are dead,
and never will they again perceive the light.' But now I swear to you,
ye righteous . . . that I comprehend this mystery; that I have read the
tablet of heaven, have seen the writing of the holy ones, and have
discovered what is written and impressed on it concerning you. I have
seen that all goodness, joy, and glory have been prepared for you. . . .
The spirits of you who die in righteousness shall exist and rejoice; and
their remembrance shall be before the face of the Mighty One from

<span id="page_xxv">p. xxv</span>

generation to generation. <span id="fr_10"></span>[1](#fn_10.md) How
profound the impression necessarily produced on the Semitic imagination
by this impassioned language, uttered in an age of faith in inspired
dreams and celestial visions by a supposed visitant of the unseen world,
who had conversed with angels in the presence of the Lord of spirits!

The final chapter of the Book of Enoch records the birth of Noah, and
the further prophecies of Enoch, addressed to Methuselah on the subject
of the birth of Noah and the future deluge.

In attestation of the relationship between the Book of Enoch and
Christianity, we now collate its language and ideas with parallel
passages in New Testament scripture.

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0" width="100%">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p>En. <a href="bep05.htm#an_LXIV">lxiv</a>. 4. "And a voice was heard from heaven."<br />
<br />
</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="5%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p>Matt. iii. 17. "And lo, a voice from heaven, saying."<br />
<br />
</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p>En. <a href="bep02.htm#an_VI">vi</a>. 9. "The elect shall possess light, joy, and peace, and they shall inherit the earth."</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="5%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p>Matt. v. 5. "Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth."</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="5%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p> </p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p>En. <a href="bep04.htm#an_L">l</a>. 2, 4, 5. "He shall select the righteous and holy from among them; for the day of their salvation has approached . . . and they shall become angels in heaven. Their countenances shall</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="5%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p>Luke xxi. 28. " Your redemption draweth nigh."<br />
Matt. xxii. 30. "In the resurrection . . . they are as the angels of God in heaven."<br />
Matt. xiii. 43. "Then shall the righteous shine</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

<span id="page_xxvi">p. xxvi</span>

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0" width="100%">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p>be bright with joy. . . . The earth shall rejoice; and the elect possess it."</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="5%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p>forth as the sun in the kingdom of their Father."</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="5%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p> </p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p>En. <a href="bep06.htm#an_XCIII">xciii</a>. 7. "Those, too, who acquire gold and silver, shall justly and suddenly perish. Woe to you who are rich, for in your riches have you trusted; but from your riches you shall be removed."</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="5%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p>James v. 1. "Go to now, ye rich men, weep and howl for your miseries that shall come upon you."</p>
<p>Luke vi. 24. "Woe unto you that are rich! for ye have received your consolation."</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="5%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p> </p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p>En. <a href="bep06.htm#an_XCVI">xcvi</a>. 6, 7, 25. "Woe unto you, sinners, who say, 'We are rich, possess wealth, and have acquired everything which we can desire. Now then will we do whatsoever we are disposed to do; for we have amassed silver; our barns are full.' . . . They shall surely die suddenly."</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="5%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p>Luke xii. Compare the parable of the rich man whose barns were full, and who said to himself, "Soul, thou hast much goods laid up for many years, take thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry. But God said unto him, Thou fool, this night thy soul shall be required of thee."</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="5%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p> </p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p>En. <a href="bep07.htm#an_CV">cv</a>. 26. "And I will place each of them on a throne of glory, of glory peculiarly his own."</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="5%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p>Matt. xix. 28. "Ye also shall sit upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel."</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="5%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p> </p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p>En. <a href="bep05.htm#an_LXII">lxii</a>. 11. "In his judgments he pays no respect to persons."</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="5%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p>Rom. ii. 11. "For there is no respect of persons with God."</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="5%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p> </p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p>En. <a href="bep03.htm#an_XXXVIII">xxxviii</a>. 2. "Where will the habitation of sinners be . . . who have rejected the Lord of spirits. It would have been better for them, had they never been born."</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="5%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p>Matt. xxvi. 24. "Woe unto that man through whom the Son of man is betrayed! It would be good for that man if he had not been born."</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

<span id="page_xxvii">p. xxvii</span>

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0" width="100%">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p>En. <a href="bep02.htm#an_XIX">xix</a>. 2. "So that they sacrifice to devils as to Gods."</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="5%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p>1 Cor. x. 20. "The things which the Gentiles sacrifice, they sacrifice to devils, and not to God."</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="5%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p> </p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p>En. <a href="bep03.htm#an_XXII">xxii</a>. 10, 12. (The angel Raphael addressing Enoch in the region of the dead:) "Here their souls are separated . . . by a chasm."</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="5%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p>Luke xvi. 26 (Abraham addressing Dives from the region of the blessed:) "Between us and you there is a great gulf fixed."</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="5%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p> </p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p>En. <a href="bep03.htm#an_XXXIX">xxxix</a>. 3, 4, 7. "A cloud then snatched me up . . . placing me at the extremity of the heavens. There I saw another vision. I saw the habitations and couches of the saints . . . with the angels . . . under the wings of the Lord of spirits. All the holy and the elect sung before him, in appearance like a blaze of fire, their mouths being full of blessings, and their lips glorifying the name of the Lord of spirits."</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="5%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p>2 Cor. xii. "I will come to visions and revelations of the Lord. I knew a man in Christ . . . caught up to the third heaven, . . . whether in the body or out of the body I cannot tell: God knoweth. How that he was caught up into paradise, and heard unspeakable words, which it is not lawful for a man to utter."</p>
<p>Rev. xix. 1. "I heard a great voice of much people in heaven, saying, Alleluia, salvation, and glory, and honour, and power, unto the Lord our God."</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="5%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p> </p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p>En. <a href="bep04.htm#an_XLVI">xlvi</a>. 2. "This is the Son of man . . . who will reveal all the treasures of that which is concealed."</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="5%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p>Col. ii. 3. "In whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge."</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="5%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p> </p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p>En. <a href="bep02.htm#an_IX">ix</a>. 3, 4. "Then they said to their Lord, the King: Thou art Lord of lords, God of gods, King of kings. The</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="5%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p>Rev. xvii. 14; xix. 16. "King of kings, and Lord of lords."</p>
<p>Rev. iv. 11. "Thou art</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

<span id="page_xxviii">p. xxviii</span>

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0" width="100%">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p>throne of thy glory is for ever and ever, and for ever and ever is thy name sanctified and glorified. Thou art blessed and glorified. Thou hast made all things; thou possessest power over all things: and all things are open and manifest before thee. Thou beholdest all things, and nothing can be concealed from thee."</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="5%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p>worthy O Lord, to receive glory, and honour, and power; for thou hast created all things, and for thy pleasure they are, and were created."</p>
<p>Heb. iv. 13. " Neither is there any creature that is not manifest in his sight; but all things are naked and opened unto the eyes of him with whom we have to do."</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="5%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p> </p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p>En. <a href="bep03.htm#an_XXIV">xxiv</a>. 11, 10, "I blessed the Lord of glory, the everlasting King, because He has prepared this tree for the saints, formed it, and declared that he would give it to them. . . . The sweet odour shall enter into their bones; and they shall live a long life on the earth, as thy forefathers have lived; neither in their days shall sorrow, distress, and punishment afflict them."</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="5%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p>Rev. xxii. 2. "On either side of the river was a tree of life, which bare twelve manner of fruits, and yielded its fruit every month; and the leaves of the tree were for the healing of the nations."</p>
<p>Rev. ii. 7. "To him that overcometh will I give to eat of the tree of life, which is in the midst of the paradise of God."</p>
<p>Rev. xxii. 14. "Blessed are they that do his commandments, that they may have the right to the tree of life."</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="5%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p> </p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p>En. <a href="bep06.htm#an_LXXXV">lxxxv</a>. 2. "And behold a single star fell from heaven."</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="5%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p>Rev. ix. 1. "I saw a star fall from heaven unto the earth."</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="5%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p> </p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p>En. <a href="bep04.htm#an_LX">lx</a>. 13. "All the angels of power."</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="5%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p>2 Thess. i. "The angels of His power."</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="5%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p> </p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p>En. <a href="bep02.htm#an_X">x</a>. 15, 16. "To Michael</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="5%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p>Jude 6. "The angels which</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

<span id="page_xxix">p. xxix</span>

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0" width="100%">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p>also, the Lord said, Go and announce his crime to Samyaza and to the others who are with him who have been associated with women. . . . Bind them for seventy generations underneath the earth, even to the day of judgment, and of consummation, until the judgment, which shall last for ever, be completed. Then shall they be taken away into the lowest depths of the fire in torments, and in confinement shall they be shut up for ever."</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="5%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p>kept not their first estate, but left their own habitation, he hath reserved in everlasting chains under darkness, unto the judgment of the great day."</p>
<p>2 Pet. ii. 4. "God spared not the angels when they sinned, but cast them down to hell, and committed them to pits of darkness, to be reserved unto judgment."</p>
<p>Rev. xx. 10. "The devil that deceived them was cast into the lake of fire and brimstone, . . . and shall be tormented day and night for ever."</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="5%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p> </p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p>En. <a href="bep03.htm#an_XXI">xxi</a>. 56. "I beheld columns of fire struggling together to the end of the abyss, and deep was their descent. But neither its measurement nor magnitude was I able to discover. . . . Uriel, one of the holy angels . . . said, This is the prison of the angels, and here are they kept for ever."</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="5%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p>Rev. xx. 1-3. "And I saw an angel come down from heaven, having the key of the bottomless pit (abyss) and a great chain in his hand. And he laid hold on the devil and . . . cast him into the bottomless pit, and shut it, and sealed it over him."</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="5%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p> </p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p>En. <a href="bep05.htm#an_LXXIX">lxxix</a>. "In the days of sinners the years shall be shortened, . . . and every thing done on earth shall be subverted and disappear in its season. . . . In those days</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="5%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p>Matt. xxiv. 7, 21, 22, 29, 30. " There shall be famines and earthquakes in divers places . . . great tribulation, such as was not since the beginning of the world to this time, no,</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

<span id="page_xxx">p. xxx</span>

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0" width="100%">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p>the fruits of the earth shall not flourish in their season, . . . heaven shall stand still. The moon shall change its laws, and not be seen at its proper period; . . . and all the classes of the stars shall be shut up against sinners."</p>
<p>En. <a href="bep05.htm#an_LXI">lxi</a>. 9. "And trouble shall seize them when they shall behold this Son of woman sitting upon the throne of his glory."</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="5%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p>nor ever shall be. And except those days should be shortened, there should no flesh be saved. . . . Immediately after the tribulation of those days, the sun shall be darkened, and the moon shall not give her light, and the stars shall fall from heaven. . . . Then shall the tribes of the earth mourn; and they shall see the Son of man coming in the clouds of heaven, with power and great glory."</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="5%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p> </p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p>En. <a href="bep04.htm#an_XLVII">xlvii</a>. 3. "He sat upon the throne of his glory, while the book of the living was opened in his presence, and while all the powers which were above the heavens stood around and before him."</p>
<p>En. <a href="bep04.htm#an_L">l</a>. "In those days shall the earth deliver up from her womb, and hell deliver up from hers, that which it has received, and destruction shall restore that which it owes. He shall select the righteous and holy from among them."</p>
<p>En. <a href="bep04.htm#an_LIV">liv</a>. "In those days shall the mouth of hell be opened into which they shall he immerged; hell shall destroy</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="5%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p>Rev. xx. 11-13,15. "I saw a great white throne, and him that sat on it, . . . and I saw the dead, small and great, standing before the throne; and the books were opened, and another book was opened, which is the book of life, and the dead were judged out of those things what were written in the books, according to their works. And the sea gave up the dead which were in it, and death and hell delivered up the dead which were in them. . . . And whosoever was not found written in the book of life was cast into the lake of fire.</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

<span id="page_xxxi">p. xxxi</span>

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0" width="100%">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p>and swallow up sinners from the face of the elect."</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="5%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p> </p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="5%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p> </p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p>En. <a href="bep03.htm#an_XL">xl</a>. 1. "After this I beheld thousands of thousands, and ten thousand times ten thousand, and an infinite number of people, standing before the Lord of spirits."</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="5%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p>Rev. v. 11. "I beheld, and I heard the voice of many angels round about the throne, . . . and the number of them was ten thousand times ten thousand, and thousands of thousands."</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="5%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p> </p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p>En. <a href="bep04.htm#an_XLV">xlv</a>. 3. "In that day shall the Elect One sit upon a throne of glory, and shall choose their conditions and countless habitations."</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="5%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p>Matt. xxv. 31, 32. "Then shall he sit upon the throne of his glory; and before him shall be gathered all nations; and he shall separate them one from another."</p>
<p>John xiv. 2. " In my father's house are many habitations."</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="5%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p> </p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p>En. <a href="bep04.htm#an_XLV">xlv</a>. 4. "In that day I will cause my Elect One to dwell in the midst of them. I will change the face of the heaven: I will bless it and illuminate it for ever. I will also change the face of the earth: I will bless it, and cause those whom I have chosen to dwell upon it."</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="5%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p>Rev. vii. 15. "He that sitteth on the throne shall dwell among them."</p>
<p>2 Peter iii. 13. "Nevertheless, we, according to his promise, look for new heavens and a new earth, wherein dwelleth righteousness."</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="5%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p> </p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p>En. <a href="bep06.htm#an_XCII">xcii</a>. 17. "The former heaven shall depart and pass away, a new heaven shall appear."</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="5%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p>Rev. xxii. 1. "I saw a new heaven and a new earth, for the first heaven and the first earth were passed away."</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="5%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p> </p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p>En. <a href="bep05.htm#an_LXI">lxi</a>. 4-9. "The word of his mouth shall destroy all sinners, and all the ungodly</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="5%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p>2 Thess. i. 9. "Who shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

<span id="page_xxxii">p. xxxii</span>

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0" width="100%">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p>who shall perish at his presence. . . . Trouble shall come upon them, as upon a woman in travail. One portion of them shall look upon another; they shall be astonished, and shall abase their countenances; and trouble shall seize them, when they shall behold this Son of woman sitting upon the throne of His glory."</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="5%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p>of the Lord, and from the glory of his power."</p>
<p>1 Thess. v. 3. "Then sudden destruction cometh upon them as travail upon a woman with child, and they shall not escape."</p>
<p>2 Thess. ii. 8. "That wicked whom the Lord shall consume with the Spirit of his mouth."</p>
<p>Matt. xxv. 31. "When the Son of man shall come in his glory, then shall he sit upon the throne of his glory."</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="5%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p> </p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p>En. <a href="bep05.htm#an_LXVI">lxvi</a>. 5-8. "I beheld that valley in which . . . arose a strong smell of sulphur which became mixed with the waters; and the valley of the angels, who had been guilty of seduction, burned underneath its soil. Through that valley also rivers of fire were flowing, to which the angels shall be condemned, who seduced the inhabitants of the earth."</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="5%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p>Matt. xiii. 42. "And shall cast them into a furnace of fire."</p>
<p>Matt. xxv. 41. "Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels."</p>
<p>Rev. xx. 10. "And the devil that deceived them was cast into the lake of fire and brimstone."</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="5%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p> </p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p>En. <a href="bep07.htm#an_CIV">civ</a>. "Now will I point out a mystery. Many sinners shall turn and transgress against the word of uprightness. They shall speak evil things; they shall utter falsehood."</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="5%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p>1 Tim. iv. 12. "The Spirit saith expressly, that in later times some shall fall away from the faith, . . . through the hypocrisy of men that speak lies."</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

<span id="page_xxxiii">p. xxxiii</span>

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0" width="100%">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p>En. <a href="bep04.htm#an_XLVIII">xlviii</a>. 1-7. "In that place I beheld a fountain of righteousness which never failed, encircled by many springs of wisdom. Of these all the thirsty drank, and were filled with wisdom, having their habitation with the righteous, the elect, and the holy."</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="5%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p>John iv. 14. "But whosoever drinketh of the water that I shall give him shall never thirst: but the water that I shall give him shall be in him a well of water springing up into everlasting life."</p>
<p>Rev. xxi. 6. "I will give unto him that is athirst of the fountain of the water of life freely."</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="5%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p> </p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p>En. <a href="bep04.htm#an_XLVIII">xlviii</a>. "He has preserved the lot of the righteous, because they have hated and rejected this world of iniquity, and have detested all its works and ways in the name of the Lord of spirits."</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="5%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p>Gal. i. 4. "Who gave himself for our sins, that he might deliver us from this present evil world, according to the will of God and our Father."</p>
<p>1 John ii. 15. "Love not the world, neither the things that are in the world."</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="5%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p> </p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p>En. ii. <a href="bep03.htm#an_XXVI">xxvi</a>. 2. "Behold, he comes with ten thousands of his saints, to execute judgment upon them, and destroy the wicked, and reprove all the carnal for everything which the sinful and ungodly have done and committed against him. . . . [who utter with their mouths unbecoming language against God, and speak harsh things of his glory]."</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="5%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="47%"><p>Jude 14, 15. "Enoch also, the seventh from Adam, prophesied of these, saying, 'Behold, the Lord cometh with ten thousands of his saints, to execute judgment upon all, and to convict all the ungodly of all their ungodly deeds which they have ungodly committed, and of all the hard things which ungodly sinners have spoken against him."</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

<span id="page_xxxiv">p. xxxiv</span>

The bracketed words, in the last quotation from the Book of Enoch,
establish its complete identity with the parallel passage in the Epistle
of Jude—an identity of marvellous clearness when we consider that the
original version reaches us through translations and retranslations from
Aramæan, Greek, and Ethiopic, and now assumes the modern form of
Anglo-Saxon. Archbishop Laurence, although convinced that the apostle
cited the Greek version of the extant Ethiopic manuscripts, was not
aware that the last sentence of his quotation is present in the text. We
have discovered it in chapter xxvi. 2 of the Book of Enoch; and in thus
perfecting the parallelism between prophet and apostle, have placed
beyond controversy that, in the eyes of the author of an Epistle
accepted as Divine revelation, the Book of Enoch was the inspired
production of an antediluvian patriarch.

The attention of theologians has been concentrated on the passage in the
Epistle of Jude because the author specifically names the prophet; but
the cumulative coincidence of language and ideas in Enoch and the
authors of New Testament Scripture, as disclosed in the parallel
passages which we have collated, clearly indicates that the work of the
Semitic Milton was the inexhaustible source from which Evangelists and
Apostles, or the men who

<span id="page_xxxv">p. xxxv</span>

wrote in their names, borrowed their conceptions of the resurrection,
judgment, immortality, perdition, and of the universal reign of
righteousness under the eternal dominion of the Son of man. This
evangelical plagiarism culminates in the Revelation of John, which
adapts the visions of Enoch to Christianity with modifications in which
we miss the sublime simplicity of the great master of apocalyptic
prediction, who prophesied in the name of the antediluvian patriarch.

It is important to observe that it was not the practice of early
Christian writers to name the authors whose language and ideas they
borrowed. When we therefore detect the teaching and diction of Enoch in
Gospels and Epistles, our conclusions are analogous to those of the
orthodox theologians who identify passages of Scripture in the pages of
the ante-Nicene Fathers, although frequently cited from unnamed sources,
with an obscurity of expression more dubious in attestation of their
origin, than the remarkable clearness with which the language of Enoch
may be recognized in the New Testament. Biblical analysts may question
obscure traces of evangelical diction in apostolic Fathers; but what
candid and impartial inquirer can doubt the Enochian origin of the "Son
of man sitting upon the throne of his glory"—the "new heaven" and the
"new earth;" the "many habitations" of

<span id="page_xxxvi">p. xxxvi</span>

the elect, and "the everlasting fire prepared for the devil and his
angels "?

We have merely collated some of the most striking instances of parallel
passages in the Book of Enoch and in the New Testament. Our readers can
supplement our labours through their own research, in further
attestation of the controlling influence exercised by the uncanonical
author on the language and ideas of canonical works.

Some orthodox theologians, unwilling to admit that an apostle quoted an
apocryphal book, contend that Jude referred to a traditional utterance
of the ancient patriarch; but this obviously fanciful theory inevitably
vanishes in the presence of the numerous passages from the Book of
Enoch, which enter into the composition of New Testament Scripture.
Other pious apologists affirm the post-Christian authorship of the book,
a theory which involves the most improbable assumption that an author,
familiar with the story of a suffering and crucified Messiah, uttered
fictitious predictions in the name of an ancient prophet, which depicted
the career of the Son of man on earth as the triumphal march of a
victorious king. Again, theologians who shrink from the admission that
the language and ideas of evangelists and apostles were anticipated in
an apocryphal book, suggest that the Messianic passages contain
Christian interpolations. But if modern

<span id="page_xxxvii">p. xxxvii</span>

defenders of the faith thus accuse primitive saints and martyrs of
literary forgery, how can they accept an infallible New Testament at the
hands of men thus guilty of conspiring for the deception of posterity?
Convinced of the honesty of early Christians, we concur with the opinion
of Archbishop Laurence, confirmed by Hoffman, that the passages in
question are so intimately interwoven with the general context that they
cannot be removed without evidently destroying the texture of the whole.

The astronomical calculations on which Archbishop Laurence based his
theory of the residence of the author of the Book of Enoch have been
questioned; but, once his Hebrew nationality has been admitted, it
matters not whether he wrote in or out of Palestine, with this
exception, that if the work was not brought from a distant country into
Judaea, the facility with which a pseudonymous book was accepted in the
locality of its recent composition as the genuine production of an
antediluvian prophet, necessarily encourages scepticism as to the dates
and authorship of all ancient Hebrew literature. It cannot be said that
internal evidence attests the superiority of the Old Testament to the
Book of Enoch; for no Hebrew prophet is more eloquent than its author in
denouncing iniquity, commending righteousness, and inviting all men

<span id="page_xxxviii">p. xxxviii</span>

to place implicit trust in the final vindication of Divine justice.

Internal evidence indicates the presence of independent Tracts in the
Book of Enoch, possibly composed by different authors. Thus chapters
lxiv. to lxvii. <span id="fr_11"></span>[1](#fn_11.md) record a vision of
the Deluge, narrated as if by Noah instead of Enoch, and inserted in the
middle of another vision with which it has no connection. But if
Pseudo-Enoch borrowed from earlier writers, the presence of the language
and ideas of every section of his work in the pages of New Testament
Scripture inevitably indicates that the Book or Books of Enoch existed
in their present form before the Christian era.

Christianity obviously borrows the terrors of eternal fire from the Book
of Enoch. Evangelists and Apostles define the duration of Divine
retribution by æons of æons <span id="fr_12"></span>[1](#fn_11.md) (αἱ
αἰῶνες τῶν αἰώνων), or millions of millions of years, expressive of
eternity. It is true that the word æon can be used in the sense of
finite time, but when the authors of New Testament Scripture speak of
æonian fire (τὸ πῦρ τὸ αἰώνιον) they obviously mean eternal flames.
Modern humanity, shrinking from so merciless a view of Divine
retribution, suggests that when sinners have been

<span id="page_xxxix">p. xxxix</span>

tortured for æons of æons they may look forward hopefully to the future.
It is questionable whether final despair would not be preferable to this
form of "hope deferred;" but if modern believers adopt the terminable
theory of æonian fire, this commutation of sentence becomes equally
applicable to the devil and his angels, whose punishment has been
decreed of same duration as that of human sinners; <span
id="fr_13"></span>[1](#fn_12.md) and thus the traditional enemies of God
and man may hope for joyful restoration to fellowship with Gabriel,
Michael, and Raphael, and communion with the saints, whom they once
sought to betray by arts infernal. And as the righteous are also only
promised their rewards in heaven for æons of æons, <span
id="fr_14"></span>[2](#fn_13.md) if these words mean not eternity, saints
may fear, whilst sinners hope for, the vicissitudes of æonian futurity.
Again, as the dominion of the Messiah, <span
id="fr_15"></span>[3](#fn_14.md) and even the power of God, <span
id="fr_16"></span>[4](#fn_15.md) are depicted of æonian duration, any
limitation of the infinite in the sacred terminology—æons of
æons—imperils the eternal in Divinity.

Theologians who seek to vindicate Divine clemency through the dubious
expedient of substituting æonian for eternal retribution, overlook the
fact that their theory imputes to Divine wisdom the adoption of torture
as the most effectual means of transforming

<span id="page_xl">p. xl</span>

sinners into saints,—a theory which practically invites us to follow the
Divine example by torturing our criminals into reformation. How much
more consistent for those who cannot reconcile eternal fire with
infinite mercy, to take one step further in the paths of scepticism, by
rejecting everlasting torture as the nightmare of Enochian visions;
instead of assuming that revelation speaks in language so ambiguous that
primitive saints condemned unbaptized babes to eternal fire, whilst
modern piety would even rescue hardened sinners from the flames! If
inspired terminology encouraged spiritual ferocity in the age of St.
Augustine, and fosters theological humanity in the nineteenth century,
what may not be the future interpretation of words, now supposed to
convey an infallible meaning to students of Scripture?

The Book of Enoch teaches the pre-existence of the Son of Man, the Elect
One, the Messiah, who "from the beginning existed in secret," <span
id="fr_17"></span>[1](#fn_16.md) and whose "name was invoked in the
presence of the Lord of spirits, before the sun and the signs were
created." <span id="fr_18"></span>[2](#fn_17.md) The author also refers to
the "other Power who was upon earth over the water on that day," <span
id="fr_19"></span>[3](#fn_18.md)—an apparent reference to the language of
Gen. i. 2. We have thus the Lord of spirits, the Elect One, and a third
Power, seemingly foreshadowing the

<span id="page_xli">p. xli</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Trinity of
futurity; but although Enoch's ideal Messiah doubtless exercised an
important influence on primitive conceptions of the Divinity of the Son
of man, we fail to identify his obscure reference to another "Power"
with the Trinitarianism of the Alexandrine school; more especially as
"angels of power" abound in the visions of Enoch.

That remarkable passage in the Book of Enoch, which declares that the
heathen "sacrificed to devils as to gods," <span
id="fr_20"></span>[1](#fn_19.md) is the obvious source of that superstition
through which primitive Christianity saw in Olympian deities, not the
mere phantoms of man's imagination, but the fallen angels who, driven
forth from heaven, sought compensation in spiritual dominion on earth,—a
superstition still further confirmed by universal belief in miracles,
wrought, not merely by the Supreme, but by subordinate powers, whether
good or evil.

Thus far we learn that the Book of Enoch was published before the
Christian era by some great Unknown of Semitic race, who, believing
himself to be inspired in a post-prophetic age, borrowed the name of an
antediluvian patriarch to authenticate his own enthusiastic forecast of
the Messianic kingdom. And as the contents of his marvellous Book enter
freely into the composition of the New Testament, it follows that if the
author was not an

<span id="page_xlii">p. xlii</span>

inspired prophet, who predicted the teaching of Christianity, he was a
visionary enthusiast whose illusions were accepted by Evangelists and
Apostles as revelation—alternative conclusions which involve the Divine
or human origin of Christianity.

It may be said that if the author of the Book of Enoch was not the
patriarch in whose name he wrote, was he not obviously an impostor? In
treating of Hebrew divination in "The Evolution of Christianity," we
refer to the oracles of Urim and the predictions of Prophets. There was,
however, a third form of divination, known as Bath Kol, or the Daughter
of the Voice, through which the Israelites consulted the Deity by
accepting some preconceived sign in attestation of the Divine approval
of contemplated action. This method of artificial
(τεχνικη?&lt;Ι?&gt;?&lt;?/Ι?&gt;) divination is said to have succeeded
the revelation of prophets, but was practised by the Israelites at a
much earlier period of their history. Thus the servant of Abraham
predetermined the sign through which he would recognize the future wife
of Isaac as divinely chosen; and Jonathan, the son of Saul, preconcerted
the verbal omen through which the Israelites might know that Jehovah had
delivered the Philistines into their hands.

The practice of Bath Kol was doubtless familiar to the Semitic author of
the Book of Enoch; let us not therefore condemn him as an impostor,
knowing

<span id="page_xliii">p. xliii</span>

that through the accidental synchronism of some pre-arranged sign, he
may have personated Enoch in the conscientious conviction that he was
piously fulfilling the will of the Deity.

The recent death of Dr. Pusey recalls the fact, that the learned
translator of the Book of Enoch was his predecessor as Professor of
Hebrew in the University of Oxford. The friends and admirers of the
eminent theologian, who was one of the authors of the Tractarian
movement, propose to found a memorial Library in his name, with "two or
more clergymen, who shall act as librarians, and shall promote *in
whatever way* the interests of theological study and religious life
within the University"—a programme which seems to inaugurate the reign
of original research within the domains of ecclesiastical theology. But
if, as we are informed by the promoters of the proposed endowment, Dr.
Pusey was above all things "a Christian apologist, the advocate and
champion of the Church of eighteen centuries," how can the disciples,
who saw in him the "great pillar which once sustained the fortunes of
the Church of England," encourage a freedom of inquiry, in his name,
which may result in conclusions adverse to the ecclesiastical faith in
which their master lived and died?

Eminent theologians tell us that the future

<span id="page_xliv">p. xliv</span>

librarians "should be students of theology—the queen of sciences,—among
whom Dr. Pusey held a position in the first rank;" and yet that he was a
zealous supporter of "a movement which embodied truths included ages ago
in the formularies of the Church." But how can theology be enrolled
among the sciences if its professors reason in ecclesiastical fetters?
As well might a modern astronomer demand the assent of his pupils to the
mediæval theory of the earth's immobility, before proceeding to
investigate the laws of the solar system: and thus, doubtless, most
theologians seek Divine truth, weighted with a heritage of foregone
conclusions, adverse to the admission of unorthodox facts.

We all can sympathize with the desire of his disciples to do honour to
the memory of the Tractarian apostle, of many virtues, in whom they see
a "great man, raised up by God Almighty to live and labour for His
Church;" but men who take this transcendental view of a movement, in
which others simply see progress on the road to Rome, can scarcely
consider the prescriptive rights of primitive or mediæval dogmas, in
that impartial mood to which theologians must attain before theology
becomes the "Queen of Sciences."

Archbishop Laurence was an industrious worker in the scientific
laboratory of theology, when he translated the Bodleian manuscript of
the Book

<span id="page_xlv">p. xlv</span>

of Enoch, and thus unconsciously placed in our hands the Ethiopic key to
"the evolution of Christianity." It remains for future generations to
determine whether his labours, or those of his successor in the Semitic
chair of Oxford, shall prove more conducive to the religious
enlightenment of posterity.

Palæontologists who compare the organic fossils of distinctive epochs in
geologic time, and discover in the more recent formations, organisms
partially divergent in structure from pre-existent forms, attribute
variation, not to creative miracles, but to the continuous action of
natural causes fashioning species, throughout the ages, in harmony with
the natural law of " Survival of the Fittest." We also, having
identified the kindred fossils of Enochian and Evangelical epochs,
inevitably infer that modified versions of pre-existent ideas are
traceable, not to miraculous, but to natural sources,—conclusions which
inaugurate the science of theologic palæontology, and invite all learned
travellers to follow the example of Bruce, by searching the world for
ancient manuscripts which may disclose the merely human origin of dogmas
and mysteries, now accepted as Divine.

Archbishop Laurence, when Professor of Hebrew in the University of
Oxford, translated the Book of Enoch within the walls of the Bodleian
Library,

<span id="page_xlvi">p. xlvi</span>

and when appealed to by the Rev. I. M. Butt, in 1827, to publish the
Ethiopic original, answered, "I cannot, the manuscript not being my own,
but belonging to the University of Oxford." In his preface to the third
edition of his translation, the Archbishop adds, "If the University of
Oxford would oblige the literary world by publishing the original
Ethiopic from the manuscript in its possession, I am persuaded that
Ethiopic scholars would not be wanting to accomplish more than has been
hitherto done for this long regretted book, after its sleep of ages."
Since these words were written, great progress has been made in the
study of comparative philology; and there are now doubtless many eminent
linguists in England, on the Continent, and in the United States, who
could still further illumine the pages of the Book of Enoch, through
co-operative criticism of the Ethiopic text. Is not the time therefore
come for the University of Oxford to publish the original manuscript in
their possession, that learned Jews and Gentiles may study the inspired
predictions of a great Hebrew prophet, or admire the sublime imagery of
the Semitic Milton who ascended to the heavens to dramatize Divinity?

At the era of the Renaissance, when enfranchised thought turned from
Aristotle to Plato, it is said that Cardinal Bellarmine advised Pope
Clement

<span id="page_xlvii">p. xlvii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> VIII. to
discountenance a philosophy which approached so closely to the truths of
the gospel—obviously meaning that it would be inexpedient for the Church
to favour a merely human system which anticipated the Trinitarian
theosophy of alleged revelation: is it not possible that further delay
in presenting the world with the Ethiopic text of Enoch, may suggest to
adverse critics, that Oxford neglects the Hebrew patriarch for the same
reason that Rome slighted the Athenian philosopher?

Archbishop Laurence's translation, now however, places the Book of Enoch
within the reach of all English readers. Catholics may disregard its
contents, as it is not found in the sacred Canon of their infallible
Church; but Protestants, who adhere to the principles of the
Reformation, and whose tenure of Christianity is therefore contingent on
the appeal to reason, must inevitably enroll Enoch among the prophets,
or reconsider the supernatural in Christianity.

It is important for readers of the Book of Enoch to recollect that we
owe the Reformation to independent study of sacred literature,
previously withdrawn from the people through the oblivion of dead and
untranslated languages. The long neglected Book of Enoch now stands in
analogous relationship with modern seekers after religious truth; and it
remains for its readers to exercise that right of

<span id="page_xlviii">p. xlviii</span>

private judgment, to which Protestantism owes its existence, by
impartially considering the inevitable modifications of faith involved
in the discovery, that the language and ideas of alleged revelation are
found in a pre-existent work, accepted by Evangelists and Apostles as
inspired, but classed by modern theologians among apocryphal
productions.

 

\[In revising the proof-sheets of the Book of Enoch, we have been still
further impressed by its relationship with New Testament Scripture.
Thus, the parable of the sheep, rescued by the good Shepherd from
hireling guardians and ferocious wolves, is obviously borrowed by the
fourth Evangelist from Enoch [lxxxix](bep06.htm#an_LXXXIX.md)}., in which
the author depicts the shepherds as killing and destroying the sheep
before the advent of their Lord, and thus discloses the true meaning of
that hitherto mysterious passage in the Johannine parable—"All that ever
came before me are thieves and robbers"—language in which we now detect
an obvious reference to the allegorical shepherds of Enoch.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[iii:1](bep01.htm#fr_0.md) Compare Book of Enoch ii.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[iv:1](bep01.htm#fr_1.md) Heb. xi. 5.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[iv:2](bep01.htm#fr_2.md) "Against Heresies," iv.
16. Compare Book of Enoch xv.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[v:1](bep01.htm#fr_3.md) "On Female Dress," ii.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[v:2](bep01.htm#fr_4.md) "De Principiis," viii.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[vi:1](bep01.htm#fr_5.md) Book of Enoch xl. 8, 9.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[xiv:1](bep01.htm#fr_6.md) "Halleluiah" appears upon
the cups; and thus a word, with which ancient Syro-Chaldæans conjured,
has become, through the vicissitudes of language, the Shibboleth of
modern "Revivalists."

<span id="fn_7"></span>[xvi:1](bep01.htm#fr_7.md) "On Female Dress," bk. i.
chap. i.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[xvii:1](bep01.htm#fr_8.md) Chap. xviii.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[xix:1](bep01.htm#fr_9.md) Chap. xxxviii. 2.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[xxv:1](bep01.htm#fr_10.md) Chap. cii., ciii.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[xxxviii:1](bep01.htm#fr_12.md) In "The Evolution
of Christianity," page 355, we mention that "the Greek word αἰών (æon),
signifying an age, a generation, or time everlasting," was the title
adopted by Valentinus for Divine emanations.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[xxxix:1](bep01.htm#fr_13.md) Matt. xxv. 41; Rev.
xx. 10.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[xxxix:2](bep01.htm#fr_14.md) Rev. xxii. 5.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[xxxix:3](bep01.htm#fr_15.md) Rev. xi. 15.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[xxxix:4](bep01.htm#fr_16.md) Rev. vii. 12.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[xl:1](bep01.htm#fr_17.md) Chap.
[lxi](bep05.htm#an_LXI.md). 10.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[xl:2](bep01.htm#fr_18.md) Chap.
[xlviii](bep04.htm#an_XLVIII.md).

<span id="fn_18"></span>[xl:3](bep01.htm#fr_19.md) Chap.
[lx](bep04.htm#an_LX.md).

<span id="fn_19"></span>[xli:1](bep01.htm#fr_20.md) Chap. xix. 2.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I-XX](bep02.md)
