[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Thelema](../../index.md) 
[Frater Achad](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](inri00.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*I.N.R.I: De Mysteriis Rosæ Rubeæ et Aureæ Crucis*, by Frater Achad
(Charles Robert Stansfeld Jones), \[1924\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# I. N. R. I.

# DE MYSTERIIS ROSÆ RUBEÆ ET AUREÆ CRUCIS

MARK WELL, O my Son, and give heed unto this my counsel and advice, O
thou who hast for the first time this day beheld the Mysteries of the
Redde Rose whereon sparkleth<span class="margnote">Ros.</span> the Dew,
and of the Golden Cross from which cometh the Light of the World. Is not
this Symbol to be found upon the breast of all true Brethren of the
Rosie Cross? Hold fast to this Jewel and treasure it as thy Life itself,
for many and great are its virtues, and of these will I now discourse
unto you in part.

Know then, O my Son, that there be many Crosses and that the Symbolism
of these varieth according to the Art of the Wise which giveth them due
Proportion; so, too, are to be found Roses whose Petals signifie a
Five-fold, and a Twenty-two-fold, and a Forty-nine-fold Order. These,
again, may seem to be united or divided, in whole or in part; yet each
Symbol concealeth its aspect of the One Secret most perfectly, <span
class="margnote">The One Secret</span> according to the Understanding of
the true Seeker after L. V. X.

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

It would seem in these latter days that the true Light bath been much
darkened and obscured, so that even the most ignorant imposters, having
heard our motto "*Omnia ab Uno*,"<span class="margnote">Omnia ab
Uno.</span> which signifieth how All cometh from the One, have thought
that all Roses and all Crosses be alike and of equal virtue; yet herein
they err gravely, which error bath become apparent in the strange
confusion which at this time prevaileth, so that their words have become
as a Babel, even as it was of old time to the great hurt of the human
race.

And even though our Father, Christian Rosencreutz, and our Antient
Brethren his heirs and successors, did much to restore the Order of the
Universe and the Power of the Word therein, yet such is the Darkness in
which men live, and such the confusion that is now upon us, that it were
indeed time that the true<span class="margnote">L. V. X.</span> Brothers
should again extend the Light of the Cross, if-so-be a spark of the true
Fire yet burns brightly within them.

Unto you, O my Son, in whom that Fire burns, I would be as a bellows to
fan the Flame into a great burning which shall illume the Darkness
wherein thou walkest; so that from a flickering rushlight thou mayest
become as a Lamp of Pure Oil, and that thy Lamp may<span
class="margnote">Star.</span> shine forth as an Ever-burning Star of
Hope to thy fellow men.

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

For this reason will I discourse unto you, not of the Cross of Suffering
to which thou wert bound and upon which thou tookest thine Obligation on
behalf of the Universe—that<span class="margnote">Obligation.</span>
Obligation, every Clause of which contained a Secret reference to the
Holy Sephiroth, the Emanations of the One from Whom cometh All—but
rather of that great and complete Symbol of the Rose and Cross concealed
within thy breast, upon the back of which is engraved "*Magister Iesus
Christus—Deus est Homo—Benedictus Dominus Deus Noster qui dedit nobis
Signum*"<span class="margnote">Deus est Homo</span> and thy Mystic Name
as Fra ∴ R. R. et A. C.

But it is of the face of the Cross that I would chiefly discourse unto
thee, for, wearing it upon thy breast, thou art become as the Sun
who<span class="margnote">Sol.</span> seeth not His own Face, yet giveth
the Light of His Countenance to the Just and to the Unjust with equal
Love and Blessing.

What is it, then, that I see upon thy breast, O my Son?

In the Centre of All is a Single Point of Light whose Starry Brilliance
blinds these eyes, Secret Self for it is even as Hadit, Thy Secret Self
at the Centre of thy Being. It is Unique, Thy One Secret<span
class="margnote">Secret Self On the Centre.</span> which thou sharest
with the One, not with the Many. It is Thy True Name, the Word which
brought Thee into Being, whose<span class="margnote">Logos.</span> Echo
thou now art, and will be to the End. This I know, for such a Word and
such a Light

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

dwelleth in Me, and I in Him. It is also that <span
class="margnote">White Stone.</span>Word which is writ in the White
Cubic Stone, but for each it is different, and no man may know It but he
who possesses It.

Around, and Illumined by that Central <span
class="margnote">Pentagram.</span> Light, is a Rose of Five Petals. It
is the Star of Unconquered Will, the Will of the One Light and Word of
thy Being as it comes into Manifestation<span class="margnote">Signum
Homo.</span> in Matter. It is the Sign of Man, the Microcosm, who
mirrors through his Five Senses, the Great Rose of Creation. This Rose
lives indeed, and the Green barbs, which have opened to display it, are
still bright with colour as they extend in Four Directions, each
harmonizing and bringing to a point Two of the Elements from which thou
wast made.

This Rose sparkles upon a Cross of Gold, and though crucified thereon,
to it Glory and Suffering are identical. This Cross is of Six<span
class="margnote">Cube Unfolded.</span> Squares, an Unfolded Cube; it is
that same White Stone wherein the True Name was Concealed, yet *opened*
as a Cross in order that it may be known as a Living Stone, displaying
the Secret of Life Itself. With its Arms it showeth forth the L. V. X.
which is the Light of the Cross; its sacrifice discloseth the Rose of
Love, and this supreme act of revealment declareth its own essential
Liberty. Thus we find <span class="margnote">L. L. L. L.=120.</span>
Light, Life, Love and Liberty in the very Heart of Man, while concealed
behind all are the words: *Deus est Homo*.

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

This, O my Son, I behold On the Centre of<span class="margnote">ON=
120.</span> thy Jewel, but even as thou art but a tiny image of the All,
so is this but a tiny image concealed within the Heart of a Greater
Rose, wherein it flashes forth as a gleam of Red Gold.<span
class="margnote">Auro Ruben.</span>

Thou rememberest, O my Son, when thou wast within the Sacred Vault,
which is to be found within the Mountain of A ∴—that Vault<span
class="margnote">R. C.  Vault</span> of Seven Sides, each Side of which
showed forth the Colour of one of the Great Planetary Intelligences?
Never wilt thou forget that LIGHT which is the Great Mystery of the<span
class="margnote">L. V. X.</span> Ceiling of the Vault, even though, Ages
hence, the Darkness of the Floor may be obliterated<span
class="margnote">Tenebris.</span> from thy memory when the Light has
completed Its Work.

Dost thou remember how, touching with the Wand the Rose and Cross upon
the breast of the form in the Pastos, thou wert prompted<span
class="margnote">Pastos.</span> to say "Out of the darkness let the
light arise"? And how a Voice from the still figure within, replied:
"Buried with that LIGHT in a mystical Death, rising again in a mystical
resurrection,<span class="margnote">Vox Magister.</span>Cleansed and
Purified through him our MASTER, O Brother of the Cross of the Rose!
Like him, O Adepts of all ages, have ye toiled; like him have ye
suffered Tribulation. Poverty, Torture, and Death have ye passed
through. They have been but the purification of the Gold."

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

"In the Alembic of thine Heart,  
<span class="margnote">Lapis Philosophorum.</span> Through the Athanor
of Affliction,  
Seek thou the true stone of the Wise."

Hast thou not found such a Stone concealed in the Heart of the Rose of
Creation? Is not that Stone Thyself? Never again wilt thou be "Shut up"
for the Rose of Thy Being has opened, and Thy prison has been exchanged
for a Cross. But in this transition "That which is below has become like
unto that which is above" and that which is within seeth Itself <span
class="margnote">Tiphereth 5°=6° Adeptus Minor.</span> in that which is
without. Thus there is Beauty and Harmony in this Degree of Adeptship.

But though thou mayest know the Word of this Grade and the Formulæ
thereof, thou hast yet to Overcome many difficulties e’er thou <span
class="margnote">Nemo 5°=3°</span> art Master of the Temple of the
Universe. Around thee I see the First Three Petals of the Greater Rose,
forming an upright Triangle upon which are the Sacred Letters Aleph
(A),<span class="margnote">Air Water Fire.</span> Men (M) and Shin (Sh),
each shining upon a petal of a different Colour—Yellow, Blue, and Red.
As thou hast already been taught, these are the Three Mother Letters of
the Sacred Hebrew Alphabet, the Letters of the Three<span
class="margnote">Earth.</span> Elements, of which the Fourth, or Earth,
is the admixture. Thou must master the Elements, O my Son! These are to
be found in the Cross of thine own being, and thou hast

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

already learned to "Establish thyself firmly in the equilibrium of
forces, in the centre of the Cross of the Elements, that Cross from
whose Centre the Creative Word issued in the birth of<span
class="margnote">Spirit.</span> the dawning Universe." Thou has learned
to be "Prompt and active as the Sylphs, but to avoid frivolity and
caprice; to be energetic and strong like the Salamanders, but to avoid
[irritability](errata.htm#0.md) and ferocity; to be flexible and attentive
to<span class="margnote">Elementals.</span> images like the Undines, but
to avoid idleness and changeability; to be laborious and patient like
the Gnomes, but to avoid grossness and avarice." Thou must not forget
these early lessons in thy search after greater ones.

Seven other Petals encircle these Three, each again shines forth in its
true Colour, forming the Rainbow of Promise; but of Promise fulfilled,
since the Circle is Complete. Upon each Petal appears another Sacred
Letter, the Letters of the Seven Planets, those great Elementary
planetary Rulers whose Influence is ever-present and<span
class="margnote">7. Planetary Rulers.</span> whose Aid thou mayest
accept or reject at Will. If thou wouldst master the Elements thou wilt
do well to Invoke the Aid and Co-operation of the Great Celestial
Intelligences, Who, through thine own Holy Guardian Angel, are<span
class="margnote">H. G. A.</span> ever ready and willing to lend thee of
their Wisdom and Power. These are the Rulers of the Sephiroth below
Chokmah and above Malkuth, according to the Plan of the *Minutum*<span
class="margnote">10 Sephiroth.</span>

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Mundum* which
thou saw’st upon the small altar within the Vault of Initiation.

Yet again, surrounding these Seven, are<span class="margnote">12
Signs.</span> Twelve outermost Petals, engraved with the Simple Letters
of the Twelve Signs of the Zodiac, the Sphere of the Fixed Stars. Each
has its appropriate Colour, and all may be recomposed into the White
Light of the Centre. In the Outer these Colours mix and form the Grey of
the Sphere of Chokmah, which is ever the balance of Black and White; but
Within,<span class="margnote">One Central Light.</span> the Great Star
Universe is focused upon that Central Point, which is Everywhere, since
the circumference of the Infinite Rose is Nowhere. This Centre is the
Kether of the Whole Scheme, for "*Deus est Homo*."

<span class="margnote">22 Letters.</span> Thus, O my Son, have I drawn
for thee the Great Rose of Two-and-twenty Petals, the Two-and-twenty
Letters of the Holy Alphabet from which may be formed all Words, sacred
<span class="margnote">Angelic Sigils.</span> and profane. These are
united and bound together in such a manner that the Sigils of the Angels
may be drawn therefrom, but of this I may not speak more plainly, for it
is thy task to discover and use them. And the Influence of the Rose is
that MEZLA which is the Influence from the Crown, and this descendeth
like Dew upon the Rose, even as it Uniteth the Sephiroth <span
class="margnote">Crux Ansata.</span> of the Tree of Life. This Tree is
itself formed as an Ankh, which is but a form of the Rose

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

and Cross, used by our Brethren of Antient Egypt as a Sign of their Way
or Going; as such it is the Key of the ROTA. or Taro of<span
class="margnote">T. A. R. O.</span> Thoth.

When, O my Son, by means of thy Central Will, thou shalt have expanded
thy Rose of Five Petals so that it comprehends this Greater Rose whereof
the Petals are Two-and-twenty, thou mayest come to a further
understanding of the Cross which hath Four Arms, the sum of which from
One to Four, being Ten, as are<span class="margnote">l +2+3+4 =
10</span> the Holy Sephiroth.

This Great Cross, of which the cross of thy being is a reflection and
minute counterpart, is again formed of Six Squares, for it, too,
represents the Unfolded Cube. The Cube is matter; the Cube *unfolded*
displays the several Elements with their *Spiritual* Centre. So,
likewise, doth IHVH appear as God of the Elements until SHIN, the Holy
Spirit, descendeth into the midst and bursteth Him asunder as IHShVH,
which is the Name of the God-Man, the Redeemer.

So likewise is Man, the Pentagram of the<span class="margnote">The
Blazing Star.</span> Elements Crowned with Spirit, shown with
Unconquered Will on each Arm of the Cross. Thus is he Master of the Four
Worlds, through co-operation with the Macrocosmic or Divine World which
is found Symbolized by the Hexagram below the Great Rose on the lower
Arm

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

of the Cross, and which appears surrounded with the Planetary Symbols
with the Sign of the Sun in the midst.

The extremity of each Arm of the Cross is<span class="margnote">Sulphur,
Mercury, Salt.</span> Triple, and each triplicity is assigned to the
Three Alchemical Principles in their proper combinations. Thus again we
find the suggestion of Twelve Circles, corresponding to the Zodiac or
Star Universe, while the Thirteenth is concealed as a Point in their
midst, and is the UNITY thereof. Thirteen is One plus Three which is
Four; Four is the Number of Manifestation<span class="margnote">Rajas,
Sattva, Tamas.</span> in Matter; in Matter the Three Principles (or
Gunas) are ever operative, singly as forces united as Spirit.

Thou has, O my Son, the knowledge of the Invoking and Banishing Rituals
of the Pentagram, whereby thou mayest control the Elements and the
Astral Plane; therefore thou <span class="margnote">Pentagram.</span>
understandest how these Pentagrams should be traced with thy Wand and
Will, and how this formula is symbolically shown in the arrangement of
the Symbols of the Elements which are shown round the Pentagrams upon
the Arms of the Mighty Cross. Thou knowest, too, how the Planetary
Rulers, and even the Zodiacal Signs, are to be Invoked or Banished <span
class="margnote">Hexagram</span> by means of the Holy Hexagram, the true
arrangement of which is also shown in this Symbol. But what of the
Barbed Rose Leaves

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

which in the Microcosmic Rose were single, and here are shown as Triple
in each quarter? What of the Letters and Symbols thereon?

Here indeed is given the Formula whereby the L. V. X. may be drawn from
the Cross, and the Key-Word found, and the Word be subtly<span
class="margnote">I. N. R. I.</span> extracted therefrom. Without this
knowledge how cans’t thou give the true Signs of thy Grade? Let us
therefore analyse the Keyword, as did our Antient Brethren:

I.  
N.  
R.<span class="margnote">Roman.</span>  
I.

Yod.  
Nun.<span class="margnote">Hebrew.</span>  
Resh.  
Yod.

Virgo, Isis, Mighty Mother.  
Scorpio, Aphopis, Destroyer.<span class="margnote">Egyptian.</span>  
Sol, Osiris, Slain and Risen.  
Isis, Aphopis, Osiris..

I. A. O.<span class="margnote">Greek.</span>

Make now the Signs whereby the L. V. X.<span class="margnote">Signs of
5°=6°</span> which is the Light of the Cross, shines forth,

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

and thou hast the meaning of the Rose Leaves of thy Mystic Jewel; leaves
that are Ever-Green as Life Itself.

And now, O my Son, go thou and partake of the Mystic Eucharist, even as
thou hast been taught by Those who Know. Fortify thyself, for thou hast
yet a perilous journey before thee. Thou hast been led unto the Light;
bethink thee that there is yet another Rose and Cross, the Rose of
Nine-and-forty Petals---which is Seven by Seven—upon the Cross of Five
Squares. The Mysteries of these thou wilt <span class="margnote">N. O.
X. Night of Pan.</span> someday know, but not now; for these partake the
nature of that Great Darkness of N. O. X., the Darkness which is as the
Light which is Higher than Eyesight; the Pure Darkness of Understanding,
or of the Womb of the Lady Babalon, and the City of the Pyramids which
is the Abode of NEMO.

<span class="margnote">Benediction.</span> May thy Mind be open unto the
Higher,  
Thy Heart a Centre of Light,  
And thy Body the Temple of the Rosy Cross.

Vale Frater!

 

 

 

 
