[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Apollonius of Tyana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](laot18) 
[Next](laot20) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0674996135/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Life of Apollonius of Tyana*, by Philostratus, tr. F.C. Conybeare,
\[1912\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XI

Having purged the Ephesians of the plague, and having had enough of the
people of Ionia, he started for Hellas. Having made his way then to
Pergamun, and being pleased with the temple of Asclepius, he gave hints
to the supplicants of the god, what to do in order to obtain favorable
dreams; and having healed many of them he came to the land of Ilium. And
when his mind was glutted with all the traditions of their past, he went
to visit the tombs of the Achaeans, and he delivered himself of many
speeches over them, and he offered many sacrifices of a bloodless and
pure kind; and then he bade his companions go on board ship, for he
himself, he said, must spend a night on the mound of Achilles. Now his
companions tried to deter him—for in fact the sons of Dioscorus and the
Phaedimi, and a whole company of such already followed in the train of
Apollonius—alleging that Achilles was still dreadful as a phantom; for
such was the conviction about him of the inhabitants of Ilium.
"Nevertheless," said Apollonius, "I know Achilles well and that he
thoroughly delights in company; for he heartily welcomed Nestor when he
came from Pylos, because he always had something

<span id="page_1:368">p. 368</span> <span id="page_1:369">p. 369</span>

useful to tell him; and he used to honor Phoenix with the title of
foster-father and companion and so forth, because Phoenix entertained
him with his talk; and he looked most mildly upon Priam also, although
he was his bitterest enemy, so soon as he heard him talk; and when in
the course of a quarrel he had an interview with Odysseus, he made
himself so gracious that Odysseus thought him more handsome than
terrible.

For, I think that his shield and his plumes that wave so terribly, as
they say, are a menace to the Trojans, because he can never forget what
he suffered at their hands, when they played him false over the
marriage. But I have nothing in common with Ilium, and I shall talk to
him more pleasantly than his former companions; and if he slays me, as
you say he will, why then I shall repose with Memnon and Cycnus, and
perhaps Troy will bury me "in a hollow sepulcher" as they did Hector."
Such were his words to his companions, half playful and half serious, as
he went up alone to the barrow; but they went on board ship, for it was
already evening.

### CHAPTER XII

But Apollonius came about dawn to them and said: "Where is Antisthenes
of Paros"? And this person had joined their society seven days before in
Ilium. And when Antisthenes answered that he was there, he said: "Have
you, O young man, any Trojan blood in your veins?" "Certainly I have,"
he said, "for I am a Trojan by ancestry." "And a descendant of Priam as
well?" asked Apollonius.

<span id="page_1:370">p. 370</span> <span id="page_1:371">p. 371</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "Why yes, by
Zeus," answered the other, "and that is why I consider myself a good man
and of good stock." "That explains then," said the sage, "why Achilles
forbids me to associate with you; for after he bade me go as his deputy
to the Thessalians in the matter of a complaint which he has against
them, and I asked him whether there was anything else which I could do
to please him, 'yes', he said, 'you must take care not to initiate the
young man from Paros in your wisdom, for he is too much of a descendant
of Priam, and the praise of Hector is never out of his mouth.'"

### CHAPTER XIII

Accordingly, Antisthenes went off though against his will; and when the
day broke and the wind off shore increased in strength, and the ship was
ready to put to sea, it was invaded in spite of its small dimensions by
a number of other people who were anxious to share the voyage with
Apollonius; for it was already autumn and the sea was not much to be
trusted. They all then regarded Apollonius as one who was master of the
tempest and of fire and of perils of all sorts, and so wished to go on
board with him. But as the company was many times too great for the
ship, spying a larger ship—for there were many in the neighborhood of
the tomb of Ajax—he said: "Let us go on board this, for it is a good
thing to get home safely with as many as may be." He accordingly doubled
the promontory of Troy, and then commanded the pilot

<span id="page_1:372">p. 372</span> <span id="page_1:373">p. 373</span>

to shape his course towards the country of the Aeolians, which lies over
against Lesbos, and then to turn as close as he could to Methymna, and
there to cast anchor. For there it was, he said, that Achilles declared
Palamedes lay,, where also they would find his image a cubit high,
representing however a man older than was ever Palamedes. And at the
moment of disembarking from the ship, he said: "Let us show our respect,
O ye Greeks, for so good a man to whom we owe all wisdom. For we shall
anyhow prove ourselves better men than the Achaeans, if we pay tribute
to the excellence of one whom they so unjustly slew." They then had
hardly leapt of the ship, when he hit upon the tomb and found the statue
buried beside it. And there were inscribed on the base of the statue the
words: "To the divine Palamedes." He accordingly set it up again in its
place, as I myself saw; and he raised a shrine around it of the size
which the worshippers of the goddess of the crossways, called Enodia,
use; for it was large enough for ten persons at once to sit and drink
and keep good cheer in; and having done so he offered up the following
prayer: "O Palamedes, do thou forget the wrath, wherewith thou wast
wroth against the Achaeans, and grant that men may multiply in numbers
and wisdom. Yea, O Palamedes, author of all eloquence, author the Muses,
author of myself."

### CHAPTER XIV

He also visited in passing the shrine of Orpheus when he had put in at
Lesbos. And they tell that

<span id="page_1:374">p. 374</span> <span id="page_1:375">p. 375</span>

it was here that Orpheus once on a time loved to prophesy, before Apollo
had turned his attention to him. For when the latter found that men no
longer flocked to Gryneium for the sake of oracles nor to Clarus nor (to
Delphi) where is the tripod of Apollo, and that Orpheus was the only
oracle, his head having come from Thrace, he presented himself before
the giver of oracles and said: "Cease to meddle with my affairs, for I
have already put up long enough with your vaticinations."

### CHAPTER XV

After this they continued their voyage along the sea of Euboea, which
Homer considered to be one of the most dangerous and difficult to
traverse. However the sea was smooth and was much better than you
expected in that season; and their conversation turned upon the many and
famous islands they were visiting, and upon shipbuilding and pilotage
and other topics suitable to a voyage. But as Damis found fault with
some of the things they said, and cut short many of their remarks, and
would not allow some of their questions to be put, Apollonius realized
that he was anxious to discuss some other topic and said: "What ails
you, Damis, that you break in on the course of our questions in this
way? For I am sure that it is not because you are seasick or in any way
inconvenienced by the voyage, that you object to our conversation; for
you see how smoothly our ship is wafted over her bosom by the submissive
sea. Why then are you so uneasy?" "Because," replied the other, "when a

<span id="page_1:376">p. 376</span> <span id="page_1:377">p. 377</span>

great topic suggests itself, which we surely ought rather to be asking
about, we are asking questions about these threadbare and antiquated
subjects." "And what," said Apollonius, "may be this topic which makes
you regard all others as superfluous?" "You have," he answered, "had an
interview with Achilles, O Apollonius, and probably you have heard him
speak at length of many things so far unknown to ourselves; and yet you
tell us nothing about these, nor do you describe to us the figure of
Achilles, but you fill you conversation with talk of the islands we are
sailing round and of ship-building." "If you will not accuse me of
bragging," said Apollonius, "you shall ear everything."

### CHAPTER XVI

The rest of the company also besought him to tell them all about it, and
as they were in a mood to listen to him, he said: "Well, it was not by
digging a ditch like Odysseus, nor by tempting souls with the blood of
sheep, that I obtained a conversation with Achilles; but I offered up
the prayer which the Indians say they use in approaching their heroes.
'O Achilles,' I said, 'most of mankind declare that you are dead, but I
cannot agree with them, nor can Pythagoras, my spiritual ancestor. If
then we hold the truth, show to us your own form; for you would profit
not a little by showing yourself to my eyes, if you should be able to
use them to attest your existence.' Thereupon a slight earthquake shook
the neighborhood of the barrow, and a youth issued forth five cubits
high, wearing a cloak of

<span id="page_1:378">p. 378</span> <span id="page_1:379">p. 379</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Thessalian
fashion; but in appearance he was by no means the braggart figure which
some imagine Achilles to have been. Though he was stern to look upon, he
had never lost his bright look; and it seems to me that his beauty has
never received its meed of praise, even though Homer dwelt at length
upon it; for it was really beyond the power of words, and it is easier
for the singer to ruin his fame in this respect than to praise him as he
deserved. At first sight he was of the size which I have mentioned, but
he grew bigger, till he was twice as large and even more than that; at
any rate he appeared to me to be twelve cubits high just at that moment
when he reached his complete stature, and his beauty grew apace with his
length. He told me then that he had never at any time shorn off his
hair, bit preserved it to inviolate for the river Spercheus, for this
was the river of his first intimacy; but on his cheeks you saw the first
down.

And he addressed me and said: 'I am pleased to have met you, since I
have long wanted a man like yourself. For the Thessalians for a long
time past have failed to present their offerings to my tomb, and I do
not yet wish to show my wrath against them; for if I did so, they would
perish more thoroughly than ever the Hellenes did on this spot;
accordingly I resort to gentle advice, and would warn them not to
violate ancient custom, nor to prove themselves worse men than the
Trojans here, who though they were robbed of so many of their heroes by
myself, yet sacrifice publicly to me, and also give me the tithes of
their fruits of season, and olive branch in hand ask for a truce from my
hostility. But this I will not grant,

<span id="page_1:380">p. 380</span> <span id="page_1:381">p. 381</span>

for the perjuries which they committed against me will not suffer Ilium
ever to resume its pristine beauty, nor to regain the prosperity which
yet has favored many a city that was destroyed of old; nay, if they
rebuild it, things shall go as hard with them as if their city had been
captured only yesterday. In order then to save me from bringing the
Thessalian polity then to the same condition, you must go as my envoy to
their council in behalf of the object I have mentioned.' 'I will be your
envoy,' I replied, 'for the object of my embassy were to save them from
ruin. But, O Achilles, I would ask something of you.' 'I understand,'
said he, 'for it is plain you are going to ask about the Trojan war. So
ask me five questions about whatever you like, and that the Fates
approve of.' I accordingly asked him firstly, if he had obtained burial
in accordance with the story of the poets. 'I lie here,' he answered,
'as was most delightful to myself and Patroclus; for you know we met in
mere youth, and a single golden jar holds the remains of both of us, as
if we were one. But as for the dirges of the Muses and Nereids, which
they say are sung over me, the Muses, I may tell you, never once came
here at all, though the Nereids still resort to the spot.' Next I asked
him, if Polyxena was really slaughtered over his tomb; and he replied
that this was true, but that she was not slain by the Achaeans, but that
she came of her own free will to the sepulcher, and that so high was the
value she set on her passion for him and she for her, that she threw
herself upon an upright sword. The third questions was this: 'Did Helen,
O Achilles, really come to Troy or was it Homer that was

<span id="page_1:382">p. 382</span> <span id="page_1:383">p. 383</span>

pleased to make up the story?' 'For a long time,' he replied, 'we were
deceived and tricked into sending envoys to the Trojans and fighting
battles in her behalf, in the belief that she was in Ilium, whereas she
really was living in Egypt and in the house of Proteus, whither she had
been snatched away by Paris. But when we became convinced thereof, we
continued to fight to win Troy itself, so as not to disgrace ourselves
by retreat.' The fourth question which I ventured upon was this: 'I
wonder,' I said, 'that Greece ever produced at any one time so many and
such distinguished heroes as Homer says were gathered against Troy.' But
Achilles answered: 'Why even the barbarians did not fall far short of
us, so abundantly then did excellence flourish all over the earth.' And
my fifth question was this: 'Why was it that Homer knew nothing about
Palamedes, or if he knew him, then kept him out of your story?' 'If
Palamedes,' he answered, 'never came to Troy, then Troy never existed
either. But since this wisest and most warlike hero fell in obedience to
Odysseus' whim, Homer does not introduce him into his poems, lest he
should have to record the shame of Odysseus in his song.' And withal
Achilles raised a wail over him as over one who was the greatest and
most beautiful of men, the youngest and also the most warlike, one who
in sobriety surpassed all others, and had often foregathered with the
Muses. 'But you,' he added, 'O Apollonius, since sages have a tender
regard for one another, you must care for his tomb and restore the image
of Palamedes that has been so contemptuously cast aside; and it lies in
Aeolis close to Methymna

<span id="page_1:384">p. 384</span> <span id="page_1:385">p. 385</span>

in Lesbos.' Wit these words and with the closing remarks concerning the
youth from Paros, Achilles vanished with a flash of summer lightning,
for indeed the cocks were already beginning their chant."

### CHAPTER XVII

So much for the conversation on board; but having sailed into the
Piraeus at the season of the mysteries, when the Athenians keep the most
crowded of Hellenic festivals, he went post haste up from the ship into
the city; but as he went forward, he fell in with quite a number of
students of philosophy on their way down to Phaleron. Some of them were
stripped and enjoying the heat, for in autumn the sun is hot upon the
Athenians; and others were studying books, and some were rehearsing
their speeches, and others were disputing. But no one passed him by, for
they all guessed that it was Apollonius, and they turned and thronged
around him and welcomed him warmly; and ten youths in a body met him and
holding up their hands to the Acropolis, they cried: "By Athena yonder,
we were on the point of going down to the Piraeus there to take ship to
Ionia in order to visit you." And he welcomed them and said how much he
congratulated them on their study of philosophy.

### CHAPTER XVIII

It was then the day of the Epidaurian festival, at which it is still
customary for the Athenians to

<span id="page_1:386">p. 386</span> <span id="page_1:387">p. 387</span>

hold the initiation at a second sacrifice after both proclamation and
victims have been offered; and this custom was instituted in honor of
Asclepius, because they still initiated him when on one occasion he
arrived from Epidaurus too late for the mysteries. Now most people
neglected the initiation and hung around Apollonius, and thought more of
doing that than of being perfected in their religion before they went
home; but Apollonius said that he would join them later on, and urged
them to attend at once to the rites of the religion, for that he himself
would be initiated. But the hierophant was not disposed to admit him to
the rites, for he said that he would never initiate a wizard and
charlatan, nor open the Eleusinian rite to a man who dabbled in impure
rites. Thereupon Apollonius, fully equal to the occasion, said: "You
have not yet mentioned the chief of my offense, which is that knowing,
as I do, more about the initiatory rite than you do yourself, I have
nevertheless come for initiation to you, as if you were wiser than I
am." The bystanders applauded these words, and deemed that he had
answered with vigor and like himself; and thereupon the hierophant,
since he saw that his exclusion of Apollonius was not by any means
popular with the crowd, changed his tone and said: "Be thou initiated,
for thou seemest to be some wise man who has come here." But Apollonius
replied: "I will be initiated at another time, and it is so and so,"
mentioning a name, "who will initiate me." Herein he showed his gift of
prevision, for he glanced at the hierophant who succeeded the one he
addressed, and presided over the temple four years later.

<span id="page_1:388">p. 388</span> <span id="page_1:389">p. 389</span>

### CHAPTER XIX

Many were the discourses which according to Damis the sage delivered at
Athens; though he did not write down all of them, but only the more
indispensable ones in which he handled great subjects. He took for the
topic of his first discourse the matter of rite and ceremonies, and this
because he saw that the Athenians were much addicted to sacrifices; and
in it he explained how a religious man could best adapt his sacrifice,
his libations, or prayers to any particular divinity, and at what hours
of day and night he ought to offer them. And it is possible to obtain a
book of Apollonius, in which he gives instructions in his own words. But
Athens he discussed these topics with a view to improving his own wisdom
and that of others in the first place, and in the second of convincing
the hierophant of blasphemy and ignorance in the remarks he had made;
for who could continue to regard as one impure in his religion a man who
taught philosophically how the worship of the gods is to be conducted?

### CHAPTER XX

Now while he was discussing the question of libations, there chanced to
be present in his audience a young dandy who bore so evil a reputation
for licentiousness that his conduct had long been the subject of coarse
street-corner songs. His home was Corcyra, and he traced his pedigree to
Alcinous the Phaeacian who entertained Odysseus. Apollonius then

<span id="page_1:390">p. 390</span> <span id="page_1:391">p. 391</span>

was talking about libations, and was urging them not to drink out of a
particular cup, but to reserve it for the gods, without ever touching it
or drinking out of it. But when he also urged them to have handles on
the cup, and to pour the libation over the handle, because that is the
part at which men are least likely to drink, the youth burst out into
loud and coarse laughter, and quite drowned his voice. Then Apollonius
looked up and said: "It is not yourself that perpetrates this insult,
but the demon, who drives you without your knowing it." And in fact the
youth was, without knowing it, possessed by a devil; for he would laugh
at things that no one else laughed at, and then would fall to weeping
for no reason at all, and he would talk and sing to himself. Now most
people thought that it was boisterous humor of youth which led him into
excesses; but he was really the mouthpiece of a devil, though it only
seemed a drunken frolic in which on that occasion he was indulging. Now,
when Apollonius gazed on him, the ghost in him began to utter cries of
fear and rage, such as one hears from people who are being branded or
racked; and the ghost swore that he would leave the you man alone and
never take possession of any man again. But Apollonius addressed him
with anger, as a master might a shifty, rascally, and shameless slave
and so on, and he ordered him to quit the young man and show by a
visible sign that he had done so. "I will throw down yonder statue,"
said the devil, and pointed to one of the images which were there in the
king's portico, for there it was that the scene took place. But when the
statue began by moving gently, and then fell down, it would defy anyone
to describe

<span id="page_1:392">p. 392</span> <span id="page_1:393">p. 393</span>

the hubbub which arose thereat and the way they clapped their hand with
wonder. But the young man rubbed his eyes as if he had just woke up, and
he looked towards the rays of the sun, and assumed a modest aspect, as
all had their attention concentrated on him; for he no longer showed
himself licentious, nor did he stare madly about, but he had returned to
his own self, as thoroughly as if he had been treated with drugs; and he
gave up his dainty dress and summery garments and the rest of his
sybaritic way of life, and he fell in love with the austerity of
philosophers, and donned their cloak, and stripping off his old self
modeled his life and future upon that of Apollonius.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapters 21-30](laot20)
