[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Apollonius of Tyana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](laot04) 
[Next](laot06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0674996135/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Life of Apollonius of Tyana*, by Philostratus, tr. F.C. Conybeare,
\[1912\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1:58">p. 58</span> <span id="page_1:59">p. 59</span>

### CHAPTER XXI

HE left Ctesiphon behind, and passed on to the borders of Babylon; and
here was a frontier garrison belonging to the king, which one could not
pass by without being questioned who one was, and as to one's city, and
one's reason for coming there. And there was a satrap in command of this
post, a sort of "Eye of the King," I imagine; for the Mede had just
acceded to the throne, and instead of being content to live in security,
he worried himself about things real and imaginary and fell into fits of
fear and panic. Apollonius then and his party were brought before this
satrap, who had just set up the awning on his wagon and was driving out
to go somewhere else. When he saw a man so dried up and parched, he
began to bawl out like a cowardly woman and hid his face, and could
hardly be induced to look up at him. "Whence do you come to us," he
said, "and who sent you?" as if he was asking questions of a spirit. And
Apollonius replied: "I have sent myself, to see whether I can make men
of you, whether you like it or not." He asked a second time who he was
to come trespassing like that into the king's country, and Apollonius
said: "All the earth is mine, and I have a right to go all over it and
through it." Whereupon the other said: "I will torture you, if you don't
answer my questions." "And I hope," said the other, "that you will do it
with your own hands, so that you may be tested by the touchstone of a
true man." Now the eunuch was astonished to find that Apollonius needed
no interpreter, but understood what he said without the least trouble or
difficulty.

<span id="page_1:60">p. 60</span> <span id="page_1:61">p. 61</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "By the gods," he
said, "who are you?" this time altering his tone to a whine of entreaty.
And Apollonius replied: "Since you have asked me civilly this time and
not so rudely as before, listen, I will tell you who I am: I am
Apollonius of Tyana, and my road leads me to the king of India, because
I want to acquaint myself with the country there; and I shall be glad to
meet your king, for those who have associated with him say that he is no
bad fellow, and certainly he is not, if he is this Vardanes who has
lately recovered the empire which he had lost." "He is the same,"
replied the other, "O divine Apollonius; for we have heard of you a long
time ago, and in favor of so wise a man as you he would, I am sure, step
down off his golden throne and send your party to India, each of you
mounted on a camel. And I myself now invite you to be my guest, and I
beg to present you with these treasures." And at the moment he pointed
out a store of gold to him saying: "Take as may handfuls as you like,
fill your hands, not once, but ten times." And when Apollonius refused
the money he said: "Well, at any rate you will take some of the
Babylonian wine, which the king bestows on us, his ten satraps. Take a
jar of it, with some roast steaks of bacon and venison and some meal and
bread and anything else you like. For the road after this, for many
stades, leads through villages which are ill-stocked with provision."
And here the eunuch caught himself up and said: "Oh! ye gods, what have
I done? For I have heard that this man never eats the flesh of animals,
nor drinks wine, and here I am inviting him to dine in a gross and
ignorant manner." "Well," said Apollonius, "you

<span id="page_1:62">p. 62</span> <span id="page_1:63">p. 63</span>

can offer me a lighter repast and give me bread and dried fruits." "I
will give you," said the other, "leavened bread and palm dates, like
amber and of good size. And I will also supply you with vegetables, the
best which the gardens of the Tigris afford." "Well," said Apollonius,
"the wild herbs which grow free are nicer than those which are forced
and artificial." "They are nicer," said the satrap, "I admit, but our
land in the direction of Babylon is full of wormwood so that the herbs
which grow in it are disagreeably bitter." In the end Apollonius
accepted the satrap's offer, and as he was on the point of going away,
he said: "My excellent fellow, don't keep your good manners to the end
another time, but begin with them." This by way of rebuking him for
saying that he would torture him, and for the barbaric language which he
had heard to begin with.

### CHAPTER XXII

AFTER they had advanced twenty stades they chanced upon a lioness that
had been slain in a chase; and the brute was bigger than any they had
ever seen; and the villagers rushed and cried out, and to tell the
truth, so did the huntsmen, when they saw what an extraordinary thing
lay before them. And it really was a marvel; for when it was cur asunder
they found eight whelps within it. And the lioness becomes mother in
this way. They carry their young for six months, but they bring forth
young only three times; and the number of the whelps at the first birth
is three and at the second

<span id="page_1:64">p. 64</span> <span id="page_1:65">p. 65</span>

two, and if the mother makes a third attempt, it bears only one whelp,
but I believe a very big one and preternaturally fierce. For we must not
believe those who say that the whelps of a lioness make their way out
into the world by clawing through their mother's womb; for nature seems
to have created the relationship of offspring to mother for their
nourishment with a view to the continuance of the race. Apollonius then
eyed the animal for a long time, with attention, and then he said: "O
Damis, the length of our stay with the king will be a year and eight
months; for neither will he let us go sooner than that, nor will it be
to our advantage to quit him earlier. And you may guess the number of
months from that of the whelps, and that of the years from the lioness;
for you must compare wholes with wholes." And Damis replied: "But what
of the sparrows of Homer, what do they mean, the ones which the dragon
devoured in Aulis, which were eight in number, when he seized their
mother for a ninth? Calchas surely explained these to signify nine years
and predicted that the war with Troy would last so long; so take care
that Homer may not be right and Calchas, too, and that our stay may not
extend to nine years abroad." "Well," replied Apollonius, "Homer was
surely quite right in comparing the nestlings to years, for they are
already hatched out and in the world; but what I had in mind were
incomplete animals that were not yet born, and perhaps never would have
been born; how could I compare them to years? For things that violate
nature can hardly come to be; and they anyhow quickly pass to
destruction, even if they do come to existence. Follow my arguments, and
let us go, first praying to the gods who reveal thus much to us."

<span id="page_1:66">p. 66</span> <span id="page_1:67">p. 67</span>

### CHAPTER XXIII

AND as he advanced into the Cissian country and was already close to
Babylon, he was visited by a dream, and the god who revealed it to him
fashioned its imagery as follows: there were fishes which had been cast
up from the sea on to the land, and they were gasping, and uttering a
lament almost human, and bewailing that they had quitted their element;
and they were begging a dolphin that was swimming past the shore to help
them in their misery, just like human beings who are weeping in a
foreign land. Apollonius was not in the least frightened by his dream,
and proceeded to conjecture its meaning and drift; but he was determined
to give Damis a shock, for he found that he was the most nervous of men.
So he related his vision to him, and feigned as if it foreboded evil.
But Damis began to bellow as if he had seen the dream himself, and tried
to dissuade Apollonius from going any further, "Lest," he said, "we also
like fishes get thrown out of our element and perish, and have to weep
and wail in a foreign land. Nay, we may even be reduced to straits, and
have to go down on our knees to some potentate or king, who will flout
us as the dolphins did the fishes." Then Apollonius laughed and said:
"You've not become a philosopher yet, if you are afraid of this sort of
thing. But I will explain to you the real drift of the dream. For this
land of Cissia is habited by the Eretrians, who were brought up here
from Euboea by Darius five hundred years ago, and they are said to have
been treated at their capture like the fishes that we saw in the dream;
for they were netted in, so they say, and captured one

<span id="page_1:68">p. 68</span> <span id="page_1:69">p. 69</span>

and all. It would seem then that the gods are instructing me to visit
them and tend their needs, supposing I can do anything for them. And
perhaps also the souls of the Greeks whose lot was cast in this part of
the world are enlisting my aid for their land. Let us then go and
diverge from the highroad and ask only about the well, hard by where the
settlement is." Now this well is said to consist of a mixture of pitch
and oil and water, and if you draw up a bucket and pour it out, these
three elements divide and part themselves from one another. That he
really did visit Cissia, he himself acknowledges in a letter which he
wrote to the sophist of Clazomenae; for he was so kind an loyal, that
when he saw the Eretrians, he remembered the sophist and wrote to him an
account of what he had seen, and of what he had done for them; and all
through this letter he urges the sophist to take pity on the Eretrians,
and prays him, every time that he is declaiming a discourse about them,
not to deprecate even the shedding of tears over their fate.

### CHAPTER XXIV

AND the record which Damis left about the Eretrians is in harmony with
this. For they live in the country of the Medes, not far distant from
Babylon, a day's journey for a fleet traveler; but their country is
without cities; for the whole of Cissia consists of villages, except for
a race of nomads that also inhabits it, men who seldom dismount from
their horses. And the settlement of the Eretrians is in the center of
the rest, and the river is carried

<span id="page_1:70">p. 70</span> <span id="page_1:71">p. 71</span>

round it in a trench, for they say that they themselves diverted it
round the village in order to form a rampart of defense against the
barbarians of the country. But the soil is drenched with pitch, and is
bitter to plant in; and the inhabitants are very short lived, because
the pitch in the water forms a sediment in most of their bowels. And
they get their sustenance off a bit of rising ground on the confines of
their village, where the ground rises above the tainted country; on this
they sow their crops and regard it as their land. And they say that they
have heard from the natives that 780 of the Eretrians were captured, not
of course all of them fighting men; for there was a certain number of
women and old men among them; and there was, I imagine, a certain number
of children too, for the greater portion of the population of Eretria
had fled to Caphereus and to the loftiest peaks of Euboea. But anyhow
the men who were brought up numbered about 400, and there were ten women
perhaps; but the rest, who had started from Ionia and Lydia, perished as
they were marching up. And they managed to open a quarry on the hill;
and as some of them understood the art of cutting stone, they built
temples in the Greek style and a market-place large enough for their
purpose; and they dedicated various altars, two to Darius, and one to
Xerxes, and several to Daridaeus. But up to the time of Daridaeus, 88
years after their capture, they continued to write in the manner of the
Greeks, and what is more, their ancient graves are inscribed with the
legend: "So and so, the son of so and so." And though the letters are
Greek, they said that they never yet had seen the like. And there were
ships engraved on

<span id="page_1:72">p. 72</span> <span id="page_1:73">p. 73</span>

the tombstones, to show that the various individuals had lived in
Euboea, and engaged either in seafaring trade, or in that of purple, as
sailors or as dyers; and they say that they read an Elegiac inscription
written over the sepulcher of some sailors and seafarers, which ran
thus:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Here, we who once sailed over the deep-flowing billows of the Aegaean
sea  
Are lying in the midst of the plain of Ecbatana.  
Farewell, once-famed fatherland of Eretria, farewell Athens,  
Ye neighbor of Euboea, farewell thou darling sea.

</div>

Well, Damis says that Apollonius restored the tombs that had gone to
ruin and closed them up, and that he poured out libations and made
offering to their inmates, all that religion demands, except that he did
not slay or sacrifice any victim; then after weeping and in an access of
emotion, he delivered himself of the following apostrophe in their
midst:

"Ye Eretrians, who by the lot of fortune have been brought hither, ye,
even if ye are far from your own land, have at least received burial;
but those who cast you hither perished unburied round the shores of your
island ten years after yourself; for the gods brought about this
calamity in the Hollows of Euboea."

And Apollonius at the end of his letter to the sophist writes as
follows: "I also attended, O Scopelianus, to your Eretrians, while I was
still a young man; and I gave what help I could both to their dead and
their living." What attention then did he show to their living? This—the
barbarians in the neighborhood of the hill, when the Eretrians

<span id="page_1:74">p. 74</span> <span id="page_1:75">p. 75</span>

sowed their seed upon it, would come in summertime and plunder their
crops, so that they had to starve and see the fruits of their husbandry
go to others. When therefore he reached the king, he took pains to
secure for them the sole use of the hill.

### CHAPTER XXV

I FOUND the following to be an account of the sage's stay in Babylon,
and of all we need to know about Babylon. The fortifications of Babylon
extend 480 stadia and form a complete circle, and its wall is three half
*plethrons* high, but less than a *plethron* <span
id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1) in breadth. And it is cut asunder by the
river Euphrates, into halves of similar shape; and there passes
underneath the river an extraordinary bridge which joins together by an
unseen passage the palaces on either bank. For it is said that a woman,
Medea, was formerly queen of those parts, who spanned the river
underneath in a manner in which no river was ever bridged before; for
she got stones, it is said, and copper and pitch and all that men have
discovered for use in masonry under water, and she piled these up along
the banks of the river. Then she diverted the stream into lakes; and as
soon as the river was dry, she dug down two fathoms, and made a hollow
tunnel, which she caused to debouch into the palaces on either bank like
a subterranean grotto; and she roofed it on a level with the bed of the
stream. The foundations were thus made stable, and also the walls of the
tunnel; but as the pitch required water in order to set as hard as
stone, the Euphrates was let in again on the roof while still soft, and
so the junction

<span id="page_1:76">p. 76</span> <span id="page_1:77">p. 77</span>

stood solid. And the palaces are roofed with bronze, and a glitter goes
off from them; but the chambers of the women and of the men and the
porticos are adorned partly with silver, and partly with golden
tapestries or curtains, and partly with solid gold in the form of
pictures; but the subjects embroidered on the stuffs are taken by them
from Hellenic story, Andromedas being represented, and Amymonae, and you
see Perseus frequently. And they delight in Orpheus, perhaps out of
regard for his peaked cap and breeches, for it cannot be for his music
or the songs with which he charmed and soothed others. And woven into
the pattern you perceive Datis tearing up Naxos out of the sea, and
Artaphernes beleaguering Eretria, and such battles of Xerxes as he said
he won. For there is, of course, the occupation of Athens and
Thermopylae, and other pictures still more to the Median taste, such as
rivers drained from<span class="margnote">Juvenal X. 176</span> off the
land and a bridge over the sea and the piercing of Athos. But they say
that they also visited a man's apartment of which the roof had been
carried up in the form of a dome, to resemble in a manner the heavens,
and that it was roofed with lapis lazuli, a stone that is very blue and
like heaven to the eye; and there were images of the gods, which they
worship, fixed aloft, and looking like golden figures shining out of the
ether. And it is here that the king gives judgment, and golden wrynecks
are hung from the ceiling, to remind him of Adrastea, the goddess of
justice, and to engage him not to exalt himself above humanity. These
figures the Magi themselves say they arranged; for they have access to
the palace, and they call them the tongues of the gods.

<span id="page_1:78">p. 78</span> <span id="page_1:79">p. 79</span>

### CHAPTER XXVI

WITH respect to the Magi, Apollonius has said all there is to be said,
how he associated with them and learned some things from them, and
taught them others before he went away. But Damis is not acquainted with
the conversations which the sage held with the Magi, for the latter
forbade him to accompany him in his visits to them; so he tells us
merely that he visited the Magi at mid-day and about midnight, and he
says that he once asked his master: "What of the Magi?" and the latter
answered: "They are wise men, but not in all respects."

### CHAPTER XXVII

BUT of this later on. When then he arrived at Babylon, the satrap in
command the great gates, having learnt that he had come to see the
country, held out a golden image of the king, which everyone must kiss
before he is allowed to enter the city. Now an ambassador coming from
the Roman Emperor has not this ceremony imposed upon him, but anyone who
comes from the barbarians or just to look at the country, is arrested
with dishonor unless he has first paid his respect to this image. Such
are the silly duties committed to satraps among the barbarians. When
therefore Apollonius saw the image, he said: "Who is that?" And on being
told that it was the king, he said: "This king whom you worship would
acquire a great boon, if I merely recommended him as seeming honorable
and good to me." And with these words he passed through

<span id="page_1:80">p. 80</span> <span id="page_1:81">p. 81</span>

the gate. But the satrap was astonished, and followed him, and taking
hold of his hand, he asked him through an interpreter his name and his
family and what was his profession and why he came thither; and he wrote
down the answers in a book and also a description of his dress and
appearance, and ordered him to wait there.

### CHAPTER XXVIII

BUT he himself ran off to the persons whom they are pleased to call
"Ears of the King," and described Apollonius to them, after first
telling them both that he refused to do homage and that he was not the
least like other men. They bade him bring him along, and show him
respect without using any violence; and when he came the head of the
department asked him what induced him to flout the king, and he
answered: "I have not yet flouted him." "But would you flout him?" was
the next question. "Why, of course I will," said Apollonius, "if on
making his acquaintance I find him to be neither honorable nor good."
"Well, and what presents do you bring for him?" Apollonius answered
afresh that he brought courage and justice and so forth. "Do you mean,"
said the other, "to imply that the king lacks these qualities?" "No,
indeed," he answered, "but I would fain teach him to practice them, in
case he possesses them." "And surely it was by practicing these
qualities," said the other, "that he has recovered the kingdom, which
you behold, after he had lost it, and has restored his house,—no light
task this nor easy." "And how many years is it since he recovered his
kingdom?"

<span id="page_1:82">p. 82</span> <span id="page_1:83">p. 83</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "This is the third
year since," answered the other, "which year began about two months
ago." Apollonius, then as was his custom, upheld his opinion and went
on: "O bodyguard, or whatever I ought to call you, Darius the father of
Cyrus and Artaxerxes was master of these royal domains, I think, for
sixty years, and he is said, when he felt that his end was at hand, to
have offered a sacrifice to Justice and to have addressed her thus: 'O
lady mistress, or whosoever thou art.' This shows that he had long loved
justice and desired her, but as yet knew her not, nor deemed that he had
won her; he brought up his two sons so foolishly that they took up arms
against one another, and one was wounded and the other killed by his
fellow. Well, here is a king perhaps who does not even know how to keep
his seat on the throne, and you would have me believe that he combines
already all virtues, and you extol him, though, if he does turn out
fairly good, it is you and not I that will gain thereby."

The barbarian then glanced at his neighbor and said: "Here is a
windfall! ’tis one of the gods who has brought this man here; for as one
good man associating with another improves him, so he will much improve
our king, and render him more temperate and gracious; for these
qualities are conspicuous in this man." They accordingly ran into the
palace and told everybody the good news, that there stood at the king's
gates a man who was wise and a Hellene, and a good counselor.

<span id="page_1:84">p. 84</span> <span id="page_1:85">p. 85</span>

### CHAPTER XXIX

WHEN these tidings were brought to the king, he happened to be
sacrificing with the Magi, for religious rites are performed under their
supervision. And he called one of them and said: "The dream is come
true, which I narrated to you when you visited me in my bed."

Now the dream which the king had dreamed was as follows: he thought that
he was Artaxerxes, the son of Xerxes, and that he had altered and
assumed the latter's form; and he was very much afraid lest some change
should come over his affairs, for so he interpreted his change of
appeareance. But when he heard that it was a Hellene, and a wise man,
that had come, he remembered about Themistocles of Athens, who had once
come from Greece and had lived with Artaxerxes, and had not only derived
great benefit from the king, but had conferred great benefit himself. So
he held out his right hand and said: "Call him in, for it wake the best
of beginnings, if he will join with me in my sacrifice and prayer."

### CHAPTER XXX

ACCORDINGLY Apollonius entered escorted by a number of people, for they
had learnt that the king was pleased with the newcomer and though that
this would gratify him; but as he passed into the palace, he did not
glance at anything that others admired, but he passed them by as if he
was still traveling on the highroad, and calling Damis to him he said:
"You asked me yesterday what

<span id="page_1:86">p. 86</span> <span id="page_1:87">p. 87</span>

was the name of the Pamphylian woman who is said to have been intimate
with Sappho, and to have composed the hymns which they sing in honor of
Artemis of Perga, in the Aeolian and Pamphylian modes." "Yes, I did ask
you," said Damis, "but you did not tell me her name." "I did not tell
you it, my good fellow, but I explained to you about the keys in which
the hymns are written, and I told you about the names; and how the
Aeolian strains were altered into the highest key of all, that which is
peculiar to the Pamphylians. After that we turned to another subject,
for you did not ask me again about the name of the lady. Well, she is
called—this clever lady is—Damophyle, and she is said, like Sappho, to
have had girlfriends and to have composed poems, some of which were
love-songs and others hymns. The particular hymn to Artemis was
transposed by her, and the singing of it derives from Sapphic odes." How
far then he was from being astonished at the king and his pomp and
ceremony, he showed by the fact that he did not think such things worth
looking at, but went on talking about other things, as if he did not
think the palace worth a glance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1"></span>[1:75:1](laot05.htm#fr_1) A *plethron* was equal
to 101 English feet.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapters 31-40](laot06)
