[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Apollonius of Tyana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](laot26) 
[Next](laot28) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0674996135/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Life of Apollonius of Tyana*, by Philostratus, tr. F.C. Conybeare,
\[1912\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1:566">p. 566</span> <span id="page_1:567">p. 567</span>

### CHAPTER XLI

I must also explain how it came about that he never approached the
emperor again, nor visited him after their encounter in Egypt, although
the latter invited him and wrote often to him in that sense. The fact
is, Nero restored the liberties of Hellas with a wisdom and moderation
quite alien to his character; and the cities regained their Doric and
Attic characteristics, and a general rejuvenescence accompanied the
institution among them of a peace and harmony such as not even ancient
Hellas ever enjoyed. Vespasian, however, on his arrival in the country
took away her liberty, alleging their factiousness with other pretexts
hardly justifying such extreme severity.

This policy seemed not only to those who suffered by it, but to
Apollonius as well, of a harshness quite out of keeping with a royal
temper and character, and accordingly he addressed the following letters
to the Emperor:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

“Apollonius to the Emperor Vespasian, Greeting:

</div>

“You have, they say, enslaved Hellas, and you imagine you have excelled
Xerxes. You are mistaken. You have only fallen below Nero. For the
latter held our liberties in his hand and respected them. Farewell.”

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

“To the same.

</div>

“You have taken such a dislike to the Hellenes, that you have enslaved
them although they were free. What do you want with my company?
Farewell.”

<span id="page_1:568">p. 568</span> <span id="page_1:569">p. 569</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

“To the same.

</div>

“Nero freed the Hellenes in play, but you have imprisoned them in all
seriousness. Farewell.”

Such were the grounds of Apollonius’ taking a dislike to Vespasian.
However, when he heard of the excellence of his subsequent acts of
government he made no attempt to conceal his satisfaction, but looked at
it in the light of a benefaction conferred on himself.

### CHAPTER XLII

The following incident also of Apollonius’ stay in Egypt was thought
remarkable. There was a man led a tame lion about by a string, as if it
had been a dog; and the animal not only fawned upon him, but on anyone
who approached it. It went collecting alms all around the towns, and was
admitted even in the temples, being a pure animal; for it never licked
up the blood of the victims, nor pounced on them when they were being
flayed and cut up, but lived upon honeycakes and bread and dried fruits
and cooked meat; and you also came on it drinking wine without losing
its character. One day it came up to Apollonius when he was sitting in
the temple, and whined and fawned at his knees, and begged of him more
earnestly than it had ever done of anybody. The bystanders imagined it
wanted some solid reward, but Apollonius exclaimed: "This lion is
begging me to make you understand that a human soil is within him, the
soul namely of Amasis, the king of Egypt in the province of Sais." And
when the lion heard that, he gave a piteous and plaintive roar, and
crouching down began

<span id="page_1:570">p. 570</span> <span id="page_1:571">p. 571</span>

to lament, shedding tears. Thereupon Apollonius stroked him, and said:
"I think the lion ought to be sent to Leontopolis and dedicated to the
temple there, for I consider it wrong that a king who has been changed
into the most kingly of beasts should go begging, like any human
mendicant." In consequence the priests met and offered sacrifice to
Amasis; and having decorated the animal with a collar and ribbons, they
conveyed him up country into Egypt with pipings, hymns and songs
composed in his honor.

### CHAPTER XLIII

Having had enough of Alexandria the sage set out for Egypt an Ethiopia
to visit the naked sages. Menippus then, as he was by now a qualified
disputant and remarkably outspoken, he left behind to watch Euphrates:
and perceiving that Dioscorides had not a strong enough propensity for
foreign travel, he deprecated his undertaking the journey. The rest of
his company he mustered, for though some had left him at Aricia, many
others had subsequently joined him, and he explained to them about his
impending journey and began as follows:—

"I must needs preface in Olympic wise my address to you, my brave
friends; and the following is an Olympic exordium. When the Olympic
games are coming on, the people of Elis train the athletes for thirty
days in their own country. Likewise, when the Pythian games approach,
the natives of Delphi; and when the Isthmian, the Corinthians assemble
them and say: 'Go now into the arena and prove yourselves men worthy of
victory.' The

<span id="page_1:572">p. 572</span> <span id="page_1:573">p. 573</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Eleans however on
their way to Olympia address the athletes thus: 'If ye have labored so
hard as to be entitled to go to Olympia and have banished all sloth and
cowardice from your lives, then march boldly on; but as for those who
have not so trained themselves, let them depart whithersoever they
like'."

The companions of the sage understood his meaning, and about of twenty
of them remained with Menippus; but the rest, ten in number, I believe,
offered prayer to the gods, and having sacrificed such an offering as
men offer when they embark for a voyage, they departed straight for the
pyramids, mounted on camels and keeping the Nile on their right hand. In
several places they took boats across the river in order to visit every
sight on it; for there was not a city, fane or sacred site in Egypt,
that they passed by without discussion. For at each they either learned
or taught some holy story, so that any ship on which Apollonius embarked
resembled the sacred galley of a religious legation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Title Page](laot28)
