[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Apollonius of Tyana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](laot07) 
[Next](laot09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0674996135/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Life of Apollonius of Tyana*, by Philostratus, tr. F.C. Conybeare,
\[1912\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XI

AND as they made their way to the Indus they met a boy of about thirteen
years old mounted on an elephant and striking the animal. And when they
wondered at the sight, Apollonius said: "Damis, what is the business of
a good horseman?" "Why, what else," he replied, "than to sit firm upon
the horse, and then control it, and turn it with the bit, and punish it
when it is unruly, and to take care that the horse does not plunge into
a chasm or a ditch or a hole, especially when he is passing over a marsh
or a clay bog?" "And shall we require nothing else, Damis, of a good
horseman?" said Apollonius. "Why, yes," he said, "when the horse is
galloping up a hill he must slacken the bit; and when he is going down
hill he must not let the horse have his way, but hold him in; and he
must caress his ears and man; and in my opinion a clever rider is not
always whipping, and I should commend any one who rode in this way."
"And what is needful for a soldier who rides a charger?" "The same
things," he said, "O Apollonius, and in addition the ability to hurl and
avoid missiles and to pursue and to retire, and crowd the enemies
together without letting his horse be frightened by the rattling of

<span id="page_1:142">p. 142</span> <span id="page_1:143">p. 143</span>

shields or the flashing of the helmets, or by the noise made when the
men raise their war-cry and give a whoop; this, I think all belongs to
good horsemanship." "What then will you say of this boy who is riding on
the elephant?" "He is much more wonderful, Apollonius. For it seems to
me a superhuman feat for such a tiny mite to manage so huge an animal
and guide it with the crook, which you see him digging into the elephant
like an anchor, without fearing either the look of the brute or its
height, or its enormous strength; and I would not have believed it
possible, I swear by Athena, if I had heard another telling it, and had
not seen it." "Well then," said Apollonius, "if anyone wanted to sell us
this boy, would you buy him, Damis?" "Yes, by Zeus," he said, "and I
would give everything I have to possess him. For it seems to me the mark
of a liberal and splendid nature, to be able to capture like a citadel
the greatest animal which earth sustains, and then govern it as its
master." "What then would you do with the boy," said the other, "unless
you bought the elephant as well?" "I would set him," said Damis, "to
preside over my household and over my servants, and he would rule them
much better than I can." "And are you not able," said Apollonius, "to
rule your own servants?" "About as able to do so," replied Damis, "as
you are yourself, Apollonius. For I have abandoned my property, and am
going about, like yourself, eager to learn and to investigate things in
foreign countries." "But if you did actually buy the boy, and if you had
two horses, one of them a racer, and the other a charger, would you put
him, O Damis, on these horses?" "I would perhaps," he answered, "upon

<span id="page_1:144">p. 144</span> <span id="page_1:145">p. 145</span>

the racer, for I see others doing the same, but how could he ever mount
a war-horse accustomed to carry armor? For he could not either carry a
shield, as knights must do; or wear a breast-plate or helmet; and how
could he wield a javelin, when he cannot use the shaft of a bolt or of
an arrow, but he would in military matters be like a stammerer." "Then,"
said the other, "there is, Damis, something else which controls and
guides this elephant, and not the driver alone, whom you admire almost
to the point of almost worshipping." Damis replied: "What can that be,
Apollonius? For I see nothing else upon the animal except the boy."
"This animal," he answered, " is docile beyond all others; and when he
has once been broken in to serve man, he will put up with anything at
the hands of man, and he makes it his business to be tractable and
obedient to him, and he loves to eat out of his hands, in the way little
dogs do; and when his master approaches he fondles him with his trunk,
and he will allow him to thrust his head into his jaws, and he holds
them as wide open as his master likes, as we have seen among the nomads.
But of a night the elephant is said to lament his state of slavery, yes
by heaven, not by trumpeting in his ordinary way, but by wailing
mournfully and piteously. And if a man comes upon him when he is
lamenting in this way, the elephant stops his dirge at once as if he
were ashamed. Such control, O Damis, has he over himself, and it is his
instinctive obedience which actuates him rather than the man who sits
upon and directs him."

<span id="page_1:146">p. 146</span> <span id="page_1:147">p. 147</span>

### CHAPTER XII

AND when they came to the Indus, they saw a herd of elephants crossing
the river, and they say they heard this account of the animals. Some of
them are marsh elephants, others again mountain elephants, and there is
third kind which belong to the plain: and they are captured for use in
war. For indeed they go into battle, saddled with towers big enough to
accommodate ten or fifteen Indians all at once; and from these towers
the Indians shoot their bows and hurl their javelins, just as if they
were taking aim from gate towers. And the animal itself regards his
trunk as a hand and uses it to hurl weapons. And the Indian elephants
are as much bigger as those of Libya, as these are bigger than the
horses of Nisa. And other authorities have dwelt on the age of the
animals, and say that they are very long-lived; but our party too say
that they came on an elephant near Taxila, the greatest city in India,
who was anointed with myrrh by the natives and adorned with fillets.
For, they said, this elephant was one of those who fought on the side of
Porus against Alexander; and, as it had made a brave fight, Alexander
dedicated it to the Sun. And it had, they say, gold rings around its
tusks or horns, whichever you call them, and an inscription was on them
written in Greek, as follows: "Alexander the son of Zeus dedicates Ajax
to the Sun." For he had given this name to the elephant, thinking so
great an animal deserved a great name. And the natives reckoned that 350
years had elapsed since the battle, without taking into account how old
the elephant was when he went into battle.

<span id="page_1:148">p. 148</span> <span id="page_1:149">p. 149</span>

### CHAPTER XIII

AND Juba, who was once sovereign of the Libyan race, says that formerly
the knights of Libya fought with one another on elephants, and division
of these had a tower engraved upon their tusks, but the others nothing.
And when night interrupted the fray the animals which were so marked
had, he says, got the worst of it, and fled into Mount Atlas; but he
himself 400 years afterwards caught one of the fugitives and found the
cavity of the stamp still fresh on the tusk and not yet worn away by
time. This Juba is of opinion that the tusks are horns, because they
grow just where the temples are, and there is no grinding of one upon
another, and they remain as they grew and do not, like teeth, fall out
and then grow afresh. But I cannot accept this view; for horns, if not
all, at any rate those of stags, do fall out and grow afresh, but the
teeth, although in the case of men those which may fall out, will every
one of them grow again, on the other hand there is not a single animal
whose tusk or dog-tooth falls out naturally, nor in which, when it has
fallen out, it will come again. For nature implants these tusks in their
jaws for the sake of defense. And moreover, a circular ridge is formed
year by year at the base of the horns, as we see in the case of goats
and sheep and oxen; but a tusk grows out quite smooth, and unless
something breaks it, it always remains so, for it consists of a material
and substance as hard as stone. Moreover the carrying of horns is
confined to animals with cloven hoofs, but this animal has five nails
and the foot

<span id="page_1:150">p. 150</span> <span id="page_1:151">p. 151</span>

branches into more toes than two, and since these are not squeezed into
a hoof, the elephant has a pliable sole. And in the case of all animals
that have horns, nature supplies cavernous bones and causes the horn to
grow from outwards, whereas she makes the elephant tusk full and equally
massive throughout; and when in the lathe you lay bare the interior, you
find a very thin tube piercing the center of it, as is the case with
teeth. Now the tusks of the marsh elephants are dark in color and porous
and difficult to work, because they are hollowed out into many cavities,
and often knots are formed in them which oppose difficulties to the
craftsman's tool; but the tusks of the mountain kind, though smaller
than these, are pretty white and there is nothing about them difficult
to work; but best of all are the tusks of the elephants of the plain,
for these are very large and very white and so pleasant to turn and
carve that the hand can shape them into whatever it likes.

If I may also describe the characters of these elephants; those which
come from the marshes, and are taken there, are considered to be stupid
and flighty by the Indians; but those which come from the mountains they
regard as vicious and treacherous and, unless they want something, not
to be relied upon by man; but the elephants of the plain are said to be
good and tractable, and fond of learning tricks; for they will write and
dance, and will sway themselves to and fro and leap up and down from the
ground to the sound of the pipe.

<span id="page_1:152">p. 152</span> <span id="page_1:153">p. 153</span>

### CHAPTER XIV

AND Apollonius saw a herd, I think, of about thirty elephants crossing
over the River Indus, and they were following as their leader the
smallest among them; but the bigger ones had picked up their young ones
on their projecting tusks, where they held them fast by twining their
trunks around them. Said Apollonius: "No one, O Damis, has instructed
them to do this, but they act of their own instinctive wisdom and
cleverness; and you see how, like baggage-porters, they have picked up
their young, and have them bound fast on, and so carry them along." "I
see," he said, "Apollonius, how cleverly and with what sagacity they do
this. What then is the sense of this silly speculation indulged in by
those who idly dispute whether the affection that men feel for their
young is natural or not, when these very elephants, by their conduct,
proclaim that it is so, and that it comes to them by nature? For they
have certainly not learnt to do so from men, as have other creatures;
for these have never yet shared the life of men, but have been endowed
by nature with their love of their offspring, and this is why they
provide for them and feed their young." "And," said Apollonius, "you
need not, Damis, confine your remarks to elephants; for this animal is
only second to man, in my opinion, in understanding and foresight; but I
am thinking rather of bears, for they are the fiercest of all animals,
and yet they will do anything for their whelps; and also of wolves,
among which, although they are so addicted to plunder, yet the female
protects its young ones, and

<span id="page_1:154">p. 154</span> <span id="page_1:155">p. 155</span>

the male brings her food in order to save the life of the whelps. And I
also equally have in mind the panther, which, from the warmth of its
temperament, delights to become a mother, for that is the time when it
is determined to rule the male and be mistress of the household; and the
male puts up with anything and everything from her, subordinating
everything to the welfare of the offspring. And there is also told a
story of the lioness, how she will make a lover of the panther and
receive him in the lion's lair in the plain; but when she is going to
bring forth her young she flees into the mountains to the haunts of the
panthers; for she brings forth young ones that are spotted, and that is
why she hides her young and nurses them in winding thickets, pretending
that she is spending the day out hunting. For if the lion detected the
trick, he would tear the whelps in pieces and claw her offspring as
illegitimate. You have read not doubt, also, of one of Homer's lions,
and of how he made himself look terrible in behalf of his own whelps and
steeled himself to do battle for them. And they say the tigress,
although she is the cruelest animal, will in this country and also on
the Read Sea approach the ships, to demand back her whelps; and if she
gets them back, she goes off mightily delighted; but if the ships sail
away, they say that she howls along the sea-coast and sometimes dies
outright. And who does not know the ways of birds, how that the eagles
and the storks will not build their nests until they have fixed in them,
the one an eagle-stone, and other a stone of light, to help the hatching
out of the eggs and to drive away the snakes. And if we look at
creatures in the sea, we need not wonder at the dolphins loving their

<span id="page_1:156">p. 156</span> <span id="page_1:157">p. 157</span>

offspring, for they are superior creatures; but shall we not admire the
whales and seals and the viviparous species? For I once saw a seal that
was kept shut up at Aegae in the circus, and she mourned so deeply for
her whelp, which had died after being born in confinement, that she
refused food for three days together, although she is the most voracious
of animals. And the whale takes up its young ones into the cavities of
its throat, whenever it is fleeing from a creature stronger than itself.
And a viper has been seen licking the serpents which it had borne, and
caressing them with her tongue, which she shoots out for the purpose.
But we need not entertain, Damis, the silly story that the young of
vipers are brought into the world without mothers; for that is a thing
which is consistent neither with nature nor with experience."

Damis then resumed the conversation by saying: "You will allow me then
to praise Euripides, for this iambic line which he puts into the mouth
of Andromache:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

'And in the case of all men, then, their life lay in their children.'"

</div>

"I admit," said Apollonius, "that that is said cleverly and divinely;
but much cleverer and truer would have been the verse, if it had
included all animals." "Then you would like," said Damis, "O Apollonius,
to rewrite the line so that we might sing it as follows:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

'And in the case of all animals, then, their life lay in their
children.'

</div>

and I agree with you, for it is better so."

<span id="page_1:158">p. 158</span> <span id="page_1:159">p. 159</span>

### CHAPTER XV

"BUT tell me this: did we not, at the beginning our conversation,
declare that the elephants display wisdom and intelligence in what they
do?" "Why certainly," he replied, "we did say so, Damis; for if
intelligence did not govern this animal, neither would it subsist, nor
the populations among which it lived." "Why then," said Damis, "do they
conduct their passage over the river in a way so stupid and inconvenient
to themselves? For as you see, the smallest one is leading the way, and
he is followed by a slightly larger one, then comes another still larger
than he, and the biggest ones come last of all. But surely they ought to
travel in the opposite fashion, and make the biggest ones a wall and
rampart in front of themselves." "But," replied Apollonius, "in the
first place they appear to be running away from men who are pursuing
them, and whom we shall doubtless come across, as they follow the
animals' tracks; and they must and ought to use their best strength to
fortify their rear against attack, as is done in war; so that you may
regard this maneuver as tactically excellent on the part of the brutes.
Secondly, as they are crossing a river, if their biggest ones went
first, that would not enable the rest of the herd to judge whether the
water is shallow enough for all to pass; for the tallest ones would find
the passage practicable and easy, but the others would find it dangerous
and difficult, because they would not rise above the level of the
stream. But the fact that the smallest is able to get across is a sign
in itself to the rest that there is no difficulty. And

<span id="page_1:160">p. 160</span> <span id="page_1:161">p. 161</span>

moreover, if the bigger ones went in first, they would deepen the river
for the small ones, for the mud is forced to settle down into ruts and
trenches, owing to the heaviness of the animal and the thickness of his
feet; whereas the larger ones are in no way prejudiced by the smaller
ones, crossing in front, because they sink in less deeply."

### CHAPTER XVI

"AND I have read in the discourse of Juba that elephants assist one
another when they are being hunted, and that they will defend one that
is exhausted, and if they can remove him out of danger, they anoint his
wounds with the tears of the aloe tree, standing round him like
physicians." Many such learned discussions were suggested to them as one
occasion after another worth speaking of arose.

### CHAPTER XVII

AND the statements by Nearchus and Pythagoras, about the river Acesines,
to the effect that it debauches into the Indus, and that snakes breed in
it seventy cubits long, were, they say, fully verified by them; but I
will defer what I have to say till I come to speak about dragons, on
whose capture Damis gives an account. But when they reached the Indus
and were inclined to pass over the river, they asked the Babylonian
whether he knew anything of the river, and questioned him about how to
get across it.

<span id="page_1:162">p. 162</span> <span id="page_1:163">p. 163</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> But he said that
he had never navigated it, nor did he know whence he they could get a
boat on it. "Why then," said they, "did you not hire a guide?"
"Because," he said, "I have one who will direct us." And with that, he
showed them a letter, written to that effect, and this gave them
occasion to marvel afresh at the humanity and foresight of Vardanes. For
he had addressed the letter in question to the satrap of the Indus,
although he was not subject to his dominion; and in it he reminded him
of the good service he had done him, but declared that he would not ask
any recompense for the same, "for," he said, "it is not my habit to ask
for a return of favors." But he said he would be very grateful, if he
could give a welcome to Apollonius and send him on wherever he wished to
go. And he had given gold to the guide, so that in case he found
Apollonius in want thereof, he might give it him and save him from
looking to the generosity of anyone else. And when the Indian received
the letter, he declared that he was highly honored, and would interest
himself in the sage as much as if the king of India had written in his
behalf; and he lent his official boat for him to embark in and other
vessels on which the camels were ferried across, and he also sent a
guide to the whole of the country which is bordered by the Hydraotes,
and he wrote to his own king, begging him not to treat with less respect
than Vardanes a man who was a Greek and divine.

<span id="page_1:164">p. 164</span> <span id="page_1:165">p. 165</span>

### CHAPTER XVIII

THUS they crossed the Indus at a point where it was nearly 40 stades
broad, for such is the size of its navigable portion; and they write the
following account of this river. They say that the Indus arises in the
Caucasus and is bigger at its source than any of the other rivers of
Asia; and as it advances it absorbs into itself several navigable rivers
and, like the Nile, it floods the land of India and brings down soil
over it, and so provides the Indians with land to sow in the manner of
the Egyptians. Now it is said that there is snow on the hills in
Ethiopia and in the land of the Catadupi, and I do not choose to
contradict, out of respect for the authorities; nevertheless, I cannot
agree with them, when I consider how the Indus effects the same results
as the Nile, without any snow falling on the country that rises behind
and above it. And moreover I know that God has set the Ethiopian and the
Indian at the two extremes or horns of the entire earth, making black
the latter who dwell where the sun rises no less than the former who
dwell where it sets; now how should this be the case of the inhabitants,
unless they enjoyed summer heat even in the winter? But where the sun
warms the earth all over through the year, how can one suppose that it
ever snows? And how could it ever snow there so hard, as to supply the
rivers there with water, and make them rise above their normal levels?
But even if there were frequent snowfalls in regions so exposed to the
sun, how could the melted snow ever cover such an expanse as to resemble
a sea? And how could it ever supply a river which deluges the whole of
Egypt?

<span id="page_1:166">p. 166</span> <span id="page_1:167">p. 167</span>

### CHAPTER XIX

AND as they were being conveyed across the Indus, they say that they
came across many river-horses and many crocodiles; and they say that the
vegetation on the Indus resembles that which grows along the Nile, and
that the climate of India is sunny in winter, but suffocating in summer;
but to counteract this Providence has excellently contrived that it
should often rain in their country. And they also say that they learned
from the Indians that the king was in the habit of coming to this river
when it rose in the appropriate seasons, and would sacrifice to the
river black bulls and horses; for white is less esteemed by the Indians
than black, because, I imagine, the latter is their own color; and when
he has sacrificed, they say that he plunges into the river a measure of
gold made to resemble that which is used in measuring wheat. And why the
king does this, the Indians, they say, have no idea; but they themselves
conjectured that this measure was sunk in the river, either to secure
the plentiful harvest, whose yield the farmers use such a measure to
gauge, or to keep the river within its proper bounds and prevent it from
rising to such heights as that it would drown the land.

### CHAPTER XX

AND after they had crossed the river, they were conducted by the
satrap's guide direct to Taxila, where the Indian had his royal palace.
And they say that on that side of the Indus the dress of the

<span id="page_1:168">p. 168</span> <span id="page_1:169">p. 169</span>

people consists of native linen, with shoes of byblus and a hat when it
rains; but that the upper classes there are appareled in byssus; and
that the byssus grows upon a tree of which the stem resembles that of
the white poplar, and the leaves those of the willow. And Apollonius
says that he was delighted with the byssus, because it resembled his
sable philosopher's cloak. And the byssus is imported into Egypt from
India for many sacred uses. Taxila, they tell us, is about as big as
Nineveh, and was fortified fairly well after the manner of Greek cities;
and here was the royal residence of the personage who then ruled the
empire of Porus. And they saw a Temple, they saw, in front of the wall,
which was not far short of 100 feet in size, made of porphyry, and there
was constructed within it a shrine, somewhat small as compared with the
great size of the Temple which is surrounded with columns, but deserving
of notice. For bronze tablets were nailed into each of its walls on
which were engraved the exploits of Porus and Alexander. But the pattern
was wrought with orichalcus and silver and gold and black bronze, of
elephants, horses, soldiers, helmets, shields, but spears, and javelins
and swords, were all made of iron; and the composition was like the
subject of some famous painting by Zeuxis or Polygnotus and Euphranor,
who delighted in light and shade; and, they say, here also was an
appearance of real life, as well as depth and relief. And the metals
were blended in the design, melted in like so many colors; and the
character of the picture was also pleasing in itself, for Porus
dedicated these designs after the death of the Macedonian, who is
depicted in the hour of victory, restoring Porus who

<span id="page_1:170">p. 170</span> <span id="page_1:171">p. 171</span>

is wounded, and presenting him with India which was now his gift. And it
is said that Porus mourned over the death of Alexander, and that he
lamented him as generous and a good prince; and as long as Alexander was
alive after his departure from India, he never used the royal diction
and style, although he had license to do so, nor issued kingly edicts to
the Indians, but figured himself as satrap full of moderation, and
guided every action by the wish to please Alexander.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapters 21-30](laot09)
