[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Apollonius of Tyana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](laot43) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0674996135/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Life of Apollonius of Tyana*, by Philostratus, tr. F.C. Conybeare,
\[1912\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_2:384">p. 384</span> <span id="page_2:385">p. 385</span>

### CHAPTER XXI

From Ionia also there came to see him the band of companions who were
named in Hellas the company of Apollonius; and mixing with the people of
the place they formed a band of youths, remarkable for their number and
for their philosophical enthusiasm. For the science of rhetoric had been
left neglected and little attention was paid to the professors of the
art, on the ground that their tongue was their only teacher; but now
they were all impelled to study his philosophy. But he, like Gyges and
Croesus, who they left the door of their treasures unlocked, in order
that all who needed might fill their pockets from them, threw open the
treasures of his wisdom to those who loved it, and allowed them to ask
him questions upon every subject.

### CHAPTER XXII

But certain persons accused him of avoiding attendance on governors at
their visits, and of influencing his hearers rather to live in
retirement instead; and one of them uttered the jest that he drove away
his sheep as soon as he found any forensic orator approaching. "Yes, by
Zeus," said Apollonius, "lest these wolves should fall upon my flock."
What was the meaning of this sally? He saw these forensic orators looked
up to by the multitude as they made their way up from poverty to great
riches; and he saw that they so welcomed the feuds of others, that they
actually

<span id="page_2:386">p. 386</span> <span id="page_2:387">p. 387</span>

conducted a traffic in hatred and feud; accordingly he tried to dissuade
these young men from associating with them, and those that did so
associate with them he sharply reproved, as if to wash off them a
monstrous stain. For he had been long before on bad terms with them; and
his experience of the prisons in Rome, and of the persons who were
confined and perishing in them, so prejudiced him against the forensic
art, as that he believed all these evils were due to sycophants and
lawyers puffed up by their own cleverness, rather than to the despot
himself.

### CHAPTER XXIII

Just at the time when he was holding these conversations with the people
of Hellas, the following remarkable portent overspread the heavens. The
orb of the sun was surrounded by a wreath which resembled a rainbow, but
dimmed the sunlight. That the heavenly sign portended a revolution was
of course clear to all. However, when the governor of Hellas summoned
Apollonius from Athens to Boeotia, and said: "I hear that you have a
talent for understanding things divine," he replied: "Yes, and perhaps
you have heard that I have some understanding of human affairs." "I have
heard it," he replied, "and quite agree." "Since then," said Apollonius,
"you are of one opinion with me, I would advise you not to pry into the
intentions of the gods; for this is what human wisdom recommends you to
do." And when he besought Apollonius to tell him what he thought, for he
said he was afraid lest night should ensue and swallow up

<span id="page_2:388">p. 388</span> <span id="page_2:389">p. 389</span>

everything. "Be of good cheer," said Apollonius, "for there will be some
light following such a night as this."

### CHAPTER XXIV

After this, seeing that he had enough of the people of Hellas, after
living for two years among them, he set sail for Ionia, accompanied by
his society; and the greater part of his time he spent teaching
philosophy at Smyrna and Ephesus, though he also visited the rest of the
cities; and in none of them was he found to be an unwelcome guest,
indeed they all considered him to be worth their regret when he left
them, and to the better class of people he was a great boon.

### CHAPTER XXV

And now the gods were about to cast down Domitian from his presidency of
mankind. For it happened that he had just slain Clemens, a man of
consular rank, to whom he had lately given his own sister in marriage;
and he issued a command about the third or fourth day after the murder,
that she also should follow her husband and join him. Thereupon
Stephanus, a freed man of the lady, he who was signified by the form of
the late portent, whether because the latest victim's fate rankled in
his mind, or the fate of all others, made an attempt upon the tyrant's
life worthy of comparison with the feats of the champions of Athenian
liberty. For he concealed a dagger

<span id="page_2:390">p. 390</span> <span id="page_2:391">p. 391</span>

against his left fore-arm, and carrying his hand in a bandage, as if it
were broken, he approached the Emperor as he left the law-court, and
said: "I would have a private interview with you, my prince, for I have
important news to communicate to you." The latter did not refuse him the
audience, but took him apart into the men's apartment where he
transacted business of state. Whereupon the assassin said; "Your bitter
enemy, Clemens, is not dead, as you imagine, but he lives and I know
where he is; and he is making ready to attack you." When the emperor
uttered a loud cry over this information, before he could recover his
composure, Stephanus threw himself upon him and drawing the dagger from
the hand which he had trussed up, he stabbed him in the thigh,
inflicting a wound which was not immediately mortal, though it was
well-timed in view of the struggle that followed. The Emperor was still
strong and full of bodily vigor, although he was about five and forty
years of age; and in spite of the wound he closed with his assailant,
and throwing him down, kneeled upon him and dug out his eyes and crushed
his cheeks with the stand of a gold cup which lay thereby for use in
sacred ceremonies, at the same time calling upon Athena to assist him.
Thereupon his bodyguard, realizing that he was in distress, rushed into
the room pell-mell, and dispatched the tyrant, who had already swooned.

### CHAPTER XXVI

Although this deed was done in Rome, Apollonius was a spectator of it in
Ephesus. For about midday

<span id="page_2:392">p. 392</span> <span id="page_2:393">p. 393</span>

he was delivering an address in the groves of the colonnade, just at the
moment when it all happened in the palace at Rome; and first he dropped
his voice, as if he were terrified, and then, though with less vigor
than was usual with him, he continued his exposition, like one who
between his words caught glimpses of something foreign to his subject,
and at last he lapsed into silence, like one who has been interrupted in
his discourse. And with an awful glance at the ground, and stepping
forward three or four paces from his pulpit, he cried: "Smite the
tyrant, smite him"—not like one who derives from some looking glass a
faint image of the truth, but as one who sees things with his own eyes,
and is taking part in a tragedy. All Ephesus—for all Ephesus was at his
lecture—was struck dumb with astonishment; but he, pausing like those
who are trying to see and wait until their doubts are ended, said: "Take
heart, gentlemen, for the tyrant has been slain this day; and why do I
say today? Now it is, by Athena, even now at the moment I uttered my
words, and then lapsed into silence." The inhabitants of Ephesus thought
that this was a fit of madness on his part; and although they were
anxious that it should be true, yet they were anxious about the risk
they ran in giving ear to his words, whereupon he added: "I am not
surprised at those who do not yet accept my story, for not even all Rome
as yet is cognizant of it. But behold, Rome begins to know it: for the
rumor runs this way and that, and thousands now are convinced of it; and
they begin to leap for joy, twice as many as before, and twice as many
as they, and four times as many, yea the whole of the populace there.
And this

<span id="page_2:394">p. 394</span> <span id="page_2:395">p. 395</span>

news will travel hither also; and although I would have you defer your
sacrifices in honor thereof to the fitting season, when you will receive
this news, I shall proceed at once to pray to the gods for what I have
seen."

### CHAPTER XXVII

They were still skeptical, when swift runners arrived with the good
news, and bore testimony to the sage's wisdom; for the tyrant's murder,
and the day which brought the event to birth, the hour of midday and the
murderers to whom he addressed his exhortation, everything agreed with
the revelation which the gods had made to Apollonius in the midst of his
harangue.

And thirty days later Nerva sent a letter to him to say that he was
already in possession of the Empire of the Romans, thanks to the
goodwill of the gods and to his good counsels; and he added that he
would more easily retain it, if Apollonius would come to advise him.
Whereupon at the moment the latter wrote to him the following
enigmatically sentence: "We will, my prince, enjoy one another's company
for a very long time during which neither shall we govern others, nor
others us." Perhaps he realized, when he wrote thus, that it was not to
be long before he himself should quit this human world, and that Nerva
was only to retain the throne for a short time; for his reign lasted but
one year and four months, when he left behind him the reputation of
having been a sober and serious ruler.

<span id="page_2:396">p. 396</span> <span id="page_2:397">p. 397</span>

### CHAPTER XXVIII

But as he did not wish to seem to neglect so good a friend and ruler, he
composed later on for him a letter giving him advice about matters of
state; and calling Damis to him, he said: "You are wanted here, for this
letter which I have written to the king contains secrets, and though it
is written, they are of such a kind that they must be communicated
orally either by myself or through you." And Damis declares that he only
understood his master's device much later; for that the letter was
composed in admirable style, and though it treated of important
subjects, yet it might equally well have been sent through anyone else.
What then was the sage's device? All though his life, he is said often
to have exclaimed: "Live unobserved, and if that cannot be, slip
unobserved from life." His letter then, and Damis’ visit to Rome were of
the nature of an excuse for getting the latter out of the way, in order
that he might have not witness of his dissolution. Damis accordingly
says that, though he was much affected at leaving him, in spite of his
having no knowledge of what was coming, yet Apollonius, who knew full
well, said nothing of it to him, and far from addressing him after the
manner of those who are never to see one another again, so abundant was
his conviction that he would exist forever, merely pledged him in these
words: "O Damis, even if you have to philosophize by yourself, keep your
eyes upon me."

<span id="page_2:398">p. 398</span> <span id="page_2:399">p. 399</span>

### CHAPTER XXIX

The memoirs then of Apollonius of Tyana which Damis the Assyrian
composed, end with the above story; for with regard to the manner in
which he died, if he did actually die, there are many stories, though,
Damis has repeated none. But as for myself I ought not to omit even
this, for my story should, I think, have its natural ending. Neither has
Damis told us anything about the age of our hero; but there are some who
say that he was eighty, others that he was over ninety, others again who
say that his age far exceeded a hundred. He was fresh in all his body
and upright, when he died, and more agreeable to look at than in his
youth. For there is a certain beauty even in wrinkles, which was
especially conspicuous in his case, as is clear from the likenesses of
him which are preserved in the temple at Tyana, and from accounts which
praise the old age of Apollonius more than was once praised the youth of
Alcibiades.

### CHAPTER XXX

Now there are some who relate that he died in Ephesus, tended by two
maid servants; for the freedmen of whom I spoke at the beginning of my
story were already dead. One of these maids he emancipated, and was
blamed by the other one for not conferring the same privilege upon her,
but Apollonius told her that it was better for her to remain the other's
slave, for that would be the beginning of her well-being. Accordingly
after his death

<span id="page_2:400">p. 400</span> <span id="page_2:401">p. 401</span>

this one continued to be the slave of the other, who for some
insignificant reason sold her to a merchant, from whom she was
purchased. Her new master, although she was not good-looking,
nevertheless fell in love with her; and being a fairly rich man, made
her his legal wife and had legitimate children with her. Others again
say that he died in Lindus, where he entered the temple of Athena and
disappeared within it. Others again say that he died in Crete in a much
more remarkable manner than the people of Lindus relate. For they say
that he continued to live in Crete, where he became a greater center of
admiration than ever before, and that he came to the temple of Dictynna
late at night. Now this temple is guarded by dogs, whose duty it is to
watch over the wealth deposited in it, and the Cretans claim that they
are as good as bears or any other animals equally fierce. None the less,
when he came, instead of barking, they approached him and fawned upon
him, as they would not have done even with people they knew familiarly.
The guardians of the shrine arrested him in consequence, and threw him
in bonds as a wizard and a robber, accusing him of having thrown to the
dogs some charmed morsel. But about midnight he loosened his bonds, and
after calling those who had bound him, in order that they might witness
the spectacle, he ran to the doors of the temple, which opened wide to
receive him; and when he had passed within, they closed afresh, as they
had been shut, and there was heard a chorus of maidens singing from
within the temple, and their song was this. "Hasten thou from earth,
hasten thou to Heaven, hasten." In other words: "Do thou go upwards from
earth."

<span id="page_2:402">p. 402</span> <span id="page_2:403">p. 403</span>

### CHAPTER XXXI

And even after his death, he continued to preach that the soul is
immortal; but although he taught this account of it to be correct, he
discouraged men from meddling in such high subjects. For there came to
Tyana a youth who did not shrink from acrimonious discussions, and would
not accept truth in argument. Now Apollonius had already passed away
from among men, but people still wondered at his passing, and no one
ventured to dispute that he was immortal. This being so, the discussions
were mainly about the soul, for a band of youth were there passionately
addicted to wisdom. The young man in question, however, would on no
account allow the tenet of immortality of the soul, and said: "I myself,
gentlemen, have done nothing now for over nine months but pray to
Apollonius that he would reveal to me the truth about the soul; but he
is so utterly dead that he will not appear to me in response to my
entreaties, nor give me any reason to consider him immortal." Such were
the young man's words on that occasion, but on the fifth day following,
after discussing the same subject, he fell asleep where he was talking
with them, and of the young men who were studying with him, some were
reading books, and others were industriously drawing geometrical figures
on the ground, when on a sudden, like one possessed, he leapt up still
in a half sleep, streaming with perspiration, and cried out: "I believe
thee." And, when those who were present asked him what was the matter;
"Do you not see," said he, "Apollonius the sage, how that he is present

<span id="page_2:404">p. 404</span> <span id="page_2:405">p. 405</span>

with us and is listening to our discussion, and is reciting wondrous
verses about the soul?" "But where is he?" the others asked, "For we
cannot see him anywhere, although we would rather do so than possess all
the blessings of mankind." And the youth replied: "It would seem that he
is come to converse with myself alone concerning the tenets which I
would not believe. Listen therefore to the inspired argument which he is
delivering:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

“The soul is immortal, and ’tis no possession of thine own, but of
Providence,  
“And after the body is wasted away, like a swift horse freed from its
traces,  
“It lightly leaps forward and mingles itself with the light air,  
“Loathing the spell of harsh and painful servitude which it has
endured.  
“But for thee, what use is there in this? Some day, when thou art no
more, thou shalt believe it.  
“So why, as long as thou art among living beings, dost thou explore
these mysteries?”

</div>

Here we have a clear utterance of Apollonius, established like an
oracular tripod, to convince us of the mysteries of the soul, to the end
that cheerfully, and with due knowledge of our own true nature, we may
pursue our way to the goal appointed by the Fates. With any tomb,
however, or cenotaph of the sage I never met, that I know of, although I
have traversed most of the earth, and have listened everywhere to
stories of his divine quality. And his shrine in Tyana is singled out
and honored with royal officers: for neither have the Emperors denied to
him the honors of which they themselves were held worthy.

 
