[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ftft42)  [Next](ftft44) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Forty-four Turkish Fairy Tales \[1913\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_334">p. 334</span>

<span id="img_33400"></span> ![The Forlorn Princess](img/33400.jpg)

<span id="img_tinit"></span>

|                     |
|---------------------|
| ![T](img/tinit.jpg) |

HERE was once a Padishah who had a daughter. This being his only child,
the monarch lavished all his affection upon her and was never happy
unless she were at his side. One day, when the Princess was about
fifteen years old, the Padishah said: "My child, is there anything thou
desirest of me?" "Yes, father," she answered. "Let my mother hold the
basin when I wash my hands and face every morning, and do thou hold the
towels in readiness." Such a request was so unexpected that the Padishah
became very angry, and ordered the Princess to be executed instantly.
The executioners, however, took pity upon her, and instead of cutting
off her head they took her to the top of a mountain and left her
there.<span id="img_33401"></span>

|                    |
|--------------------|
| ![](img/33401.jpg) |

Thus abandoned, the maiden looked about everywhere, and finally set out
in a certain direction. She wandered long up hill and down dale and
across plains until she reached another mountain, whence she saw a
palace. When she came up to it she opened the gate, and entering, could
see no one about. Going into the kitchen, she noticed the carcass of a
sheep hanging from the wall. "Now,"

<span id="page_335">p. 335</span>

thought the maiden: "There must certainly be some one living here, as
the sheep is intended for food." She then cut up the sheep and put it
into the oven to cook; when cooked she set it in dishes and put it in
the cupboard. That done, she turned her attention to the room and set
everything in order; filling the mangal, preparing the coffee, and
laying the table.

Towards nightfall she heard approaching foot steps, and had just time to
hide herself before the door of the serai was opened and a being,
half-man, half-dew, entered.<span id="img_33500"></span>

|                                               |
|-----------------------------------------------|
| ![A half-man half-dew entered](img/33500.jpg) |

The maiden trembled with fright at sight of the creature, and could not
take her eyes off him. He went straight to the kitchen and observed that
the sheep had been cooked and put into the cupboard. He then looked in
his own room and saw the mangal filled with fire, and his chibouque and
coffee awaiting him. Everything was in its place; the most admirable
order prevailed. When the Dew, who was very old, saw all this, he was
most grateful and pronounced a blessing on the one who had done it,
whoever it might be. Sitting down comfortably he lit his chibouque,
drank his coffee, and thinking aloud, said: "Whoever it is that has been
here, if a male person shall be my son, and if a female my daughter. Let
him or her come forward, they shall suffer no harm."

<span id="page_336">p. 336</span>

At these words the maiden came from her hiding-place and timidly
approached the Dew, who seeing her, smiled and said: "My blessings on
thee, child! Who art thou? Whence comest and whither goest thou?" She
answered "I am alone in the world. Wandering about in the mountains I
chanced to find this place." Then said the Dew: "My child, thou shalt be
my daughter for ever; I am lonely and old. This serai shall be thine.
Have no fear, but go about thy daily work and spend the afternoon in
amusing thyself." They sat with each other for a while, and afterwards
retired to rest.<span id="img_33600"></span>

|                                                                  |
|------------------------------------------------------------------|
| ![The Arab returned with a bundle of clean linen](img/33600.jpg) |

Next morning the maiden rose betimes, and when the Dew had drunk his
coffee, smoked his chibouque, and eaten his meal, he said to her: "My
child, I am now going out. Here is a key; unlock the door of that room.
An Arab is in there; tell him thy clothing is dirty and he will give
thee clean linen. Put it on and be at peace." At these words he was
gone.

Opening the door of the room indicated she called "Dady!"

<span id="img_33601"></span>

[![](tn/33601.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/33601.jpg)

<span id="page_337">p. 337</span>

and an Arab instantly presented himself. Her wishes were hardly
expressed when the Arab disappeared and quickly returned with a bundle
of clean linen, which the maiden took and presently put on. Before
leaving her the Arab said: "When thou art weary, take a walk in the
garden." So when all her work was finished, the maiden went into the
garden. Here, floating on a pond, she saw a duck whose wings and head
were of diamonds. No sooner did the duck espy the maiden than it
shrieked aloud: "O thou shameless one! Art thou come to take away my
Shahzada?" Its wings flapped so furiously that one of them broke off.
Alarmed, the maiden cried: "O woe is me! Why did I come here? When the
Dew-father sees what has happened he will surely kill me!" and ran back
into the palace.

In the evening the Dew returned, and they both ate and drank together.
It was evident that the Dew was not aware of what had happened in .the
garden, so when bedtime came they retired to their respective apartments
without reference being made to the incident.

Next morning the Dew requested the maiden to go and obtain fresh linen
from the dady. This she did after the Dew's departure, and the Arab, as
before, advised her to go into the garden. As soon as the duck caught
sight of her it exclaimed angrily: "Hast thou decked thyself out with
thy finery to take away my Shahzada?" It quacked at such an astonishing
rate that its other wing broke off. Fearing the Dew-father's wrath, the
maiden ran back into the palace as fast as she could.

Night fell and the Dew came home as usual. They ate and drank together,
and as the Dew made no reference to the affair of the duck the maiden
retired peacefully to her chamber and slept well. Next day the Dew went
out again, while the maiden changed her clothing and repaired as usual
to the garden. This time, at seeing her, the duck set up a loud shriek
and its head fell off; thus it died.

Now this duck was the Dew's daughter, with whom a certain Padishah's son
had fallen violently in love. This Prince used to visit a kiosk, the

<span id="page_338">p. 338</span>

garden of which adjoined that of the Dew, and thus he first saw the
lady, who, for reasons of her own, not wishing to be seen again by the
Prince, changed herself into a duck and swam about on the pond. The
youth had been a witness of all that had happened and heard the words
spoken by the duck. When he saw that the maiden was more beautiful than
the Dew's daughter had been, he loved her with all his heart. The
maiden, on her part, knew not who the duck was; she thought merely that
it was the Dew's duck, and feared he would be so angry, when he knew
what had happened, that he would kill her without mercy. When she saw,
however, that the Dew made no reference whatever to the matter she
gathered courage. Yet every morning when the Dew went away the old fear
returned lest he should discover it and wreak his vengeance upon her.

<span id="img_minit"></span>

|                     |
|---------------------|
| ![M](img/minit.jpg) |

EANWHILE the Shahzada went to his father, saying: "Dear father and Shah!
A certain Dew has a lovely daughter with whom I am deeply in love.
Obtain her for my wife, or I cannot continue to live." Accordingly the
Padishah wrote a letter to the Dew and sent it by the hands of one of
his servants.

Having read the missive the Dew replied verbally: "Tell the Padishah
that my daughter is at his disposal; but I am very poor, so that more
than my daughter he must not expect. If he agrees, the betrothal may
take place next week. Tell him further, however, that as I am a very
poor man he must not bring a retinue exceeding a thousand persons, as
that number is all I could entertain." The King's servant departed and
delivered the Dew's message to his master.

On the morning of the appointed day the Dew gave the maiden a bunch of
keys, saying: "My child, take these keys; open such and such rooms, clap
your hands and many slaves will appear. Do not be afraid of them." She
did exactly as she was told, and in a short time had gathered around her
a host of slaves of all sorts, white and black, male and female, who
kissed the hem of her garment and made reverential

<span id="page_339">p. 339</span>

salaams. She led them all before the Dew, who apportioned to all their
duties.

The gates of the palace were thrown open and the Padishah and his
thousand followers entered for the solemnization of the betrothal. The
ceremony concluded, a rich banquet was served, after which the royal
guest and his gorgeous retinue took their departure. At leave-taking the
Dew observed to the Padishah: "When sending for the bride, O King, send
only five hundred carriages for her trousseau, for I am too poor to give
more." Then as a farewell gift he presented a magnificent garment to
each of the thousand men.

A week later five hundred carriages were sent to the Dew's palace for
the bride's trousseau, and with them came the Padishah's own state coach
for the accommodation of the bride herself. The vehicle, however, failed
to please the Dew, who ordered his slaves to bring out the least
splendid of his equipages for his adopted daughter's use. Such a superb
coach had never been seen before at the palace of the Padishah, where in
due course the maiden arrived. The wedding took place with great
ceremony, and was accompanied by forty days and forty nights of feasting
and revelry.

Time passed away quickly with the happy couple, who lived together in
unalloyed bliss. One day the Shahzada went on a long journey. During his
absence his wife was taken ill; slaves were dispatched in all haste for
the physicians. None of them, however, seemed able to do her any good,
and for three days and nights she suffered such pain that it was thought
advisable to send for the Dew-father.

Hastening to the maiden's side, the old man said: "Grasp my arm, child!"
As she did so, lo! the arm broke off as though it were made of
some-brittle substance, and the sufferer moaned: "Woe is me! my dear
father's arm is broken!" The Dew, however, consoled her, saying: "It
matters not, my child." Turning to one of the slaves he said: "Take it,
and set it in the corner." No sooner was this

<span id="page_340">p. 340</span>

done than the arm blossomed forth into a diamond-tree. As he turned his
other arm to his daughter she grasped it, with similar result--this arm
likewise broke off, fell to the floor, and was transformed immediately
into another diamond-tree.

<span id="img_34000"></span>

|                                                            |
|------------------------------------------------------------|
| ![''Take hold of this foot,'' said the Dew](img/34000.jpg) |

Now said the Dew, "Take hold of this foot." His daughter did so and it
broke off. It was put into a corner, where it became a golden stool. The
same fate befell the other foot, which became another golden stool.
Armless and footless the Dew now said: "Hold my head, my daughter," and
just as she grasped it, the Dew's head fell off. "dear father!"
exclaimed the young Princess, "thy head has fallen off!" "Never mind,"
said the old man, "throw it into the middle of the room." This was
accordingly done, and behold! in place of the severed head was a
magnificent bed whose like had never been seen before. Now the Dew's
body fell to the floor and became a carpet. The Princess was laid in the
bed, and news of the wonderful circumstances quickly spread. All the
people for miles around came to feast their eyes on the miraculous
scene.

Among them were the parents of the young woman, though they were unaware
that it was their

<span id="page_341">p. 341</span>

own daughter. Just as they arrived the Princess and the Shahzada were at
dinner in their room. The Princess recognized her parents immediately,
though they did not know her. As for the old Padishah, his eyes were
constantly on his daughter, whose appearance he could not help admiring.
Numerous slaves were standing round.

The old Padishah picked up a towel and a can of water. "Sultana," he
said to his wife, "let us get nearer to these slaves." "I will take this
towel and you pour the water; while doing so, we can get a closer view
of the Princess." The meal finished, the old couple approached the
Shahzada and the Princess and did the office of slaves in washing and
wiping the latter's hands. In the midst of this performance the Princess
exclaimed: "My dear father, when thou didst ask my desire, and I
answered that my mother should hold the basin and thou shouldst hold the
towel for me, thou wert angry and didst drive me from home. Now behold
what a great journey thou hast made with my mother to do those same
things. Thus it is clear that the wish I then expressed did not
originate from myself; consequently thou wast wrong in driving me away."

To this the Padishah replied: "I was wrong, my daughter. May Allah
pardon me my sin, and do thou also pardon me. Thy wish has now been
fulfilled." Thus parents and child became reconciled, and forty days and
forty nights of festivities celebrated the happy event.

<span id="img_34100"></span> ![](img/34100.jpg)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Beautiful Helwa Maiden](ftft44)
