[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ftft11)  [Next](ftft13.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Forty-four Turkish Fairy Tales \[1913\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

<span id="img_07000"></span> ![The Horse-Dew and the
Witch](img/07000.jpg.md)

<span id="img_07002"></span> ![](img/07002.jpg)

<span id="img_oinit"></span>

|                     |
|---------------------|
| ![O](img/oinit.jpg.md) |

NCE a Padishah had three daughters. Before setting out on a journey he
called his daughters before him and instructed them to feed his
favourite horse personally, and not to entrust that duty to any other,
as he would allow no stranger near it. The Padishah went away, and the
eldest daughter carried food to the stable: the horse, however, would
not permit her to approach him. The second daughter made the attempt,
with no better result. Then the youngest went to the horse, who was
perfectly quiet, and willingly received the food and drink from her
hands. The two eldest sisters were glad thus to be relieved of an
irksome and disagreeable duty.<span id="img_07001"></span>

|                    |
|--------------------|
| ![](img/07001.jpg) |

When the Padishah returned home his first inquiry was as to whether his
horse had been properly attended to during his absence. "He would not
allow us even to go near him," answered the two elder daughters, "but
our youngest sister has fed him."

On hearing this the monarch said that she should be wife to the horse,
his other

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

daughters being given in marriage to the Vezir and Sheik-ul-Islam
respectively, The triple wedding festivities lasted forty days, and the
youngest then went to her stable, while her sisters were taken to their
splendid palaces,

Only in the daytime, how ever, had the youngest sister a horse for a
husband and a stable for a dwelling. By night the stable was transformed
into a rose garden and the horse into a handsome youth. Thus they lived
in the utmost felicity, no one except themselves knowing their secret.

<span id="img_07100"></span> ![He unhorsed his
brother-in-law](img/07100.jpg.md)

It came to pass that the Padishah arranged a tournament in the court
yard of the palace, and the bravest of all the knights who took part
therein were the husbands of the monarch's eldest daughters, "Look!"
said they to their sister of the stable, "our husbands are like lions:
see how beautifully they throw their lances. Where is your
horse-husband?" At this the horse shook himself, changed into human
form, mounted a steed, and begging his wife not to reveal his identity,
he plunged into the fray. He overcame all the combatants, unhorsed his

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

brothers-in-law, then vanished as completely as though he had never been
there.

Next day the tournament was continued, and the elder sisters treated the
youngest with scorn and contempt; but again the unknown hero appeared,
struck down all his opponents, and vanished as before.

<span id="img_oinit"></span>

|                     |
|---------------------|
| ![O](img/oinit.jpg.md) |

N the third day the horse-knight said to his wife: "If at any time I am
in danger, or you are in need of help, burn these three hairs, and
wherever you may be, I will come to you.'' Then he hastened to the
tournament and fought again with his brothers-in-law. His prowess evoked
universal admiration even his sisters-in-law could not withhold their
tribute of praise; but in ill-natured raillery they said to their
youngest sister: "See how these knights understand the tournament; they
are not like your horse-husband."

The poor woman could no longer forbear to answer that the beautiful and
valiant knight was her husband; but even as she turned to point him out,
he vanished. This reminded her that he had warned her never to divulge
the secret. Overcome with remorse, she awaited eagerly his return to the
stable, but in vain; neither horse nor man came--neither roses nor
garden were to be hers that night.

"Woe is me!" she groaned, "I have betrayed my husband; I have broken my
promise; thus am I punished!" She did not close her eyes all night, but
wept until morning. When it was daylight she went to her father the
Padishah, and with tears told him what had happened, vowing that she
would go in search of her husband even if she journeyed to the ends of
the earth. In vain her father attempted to dissuade her. He reminded her
that her husband was a Dew and consequently she would never find him;
but all his arguments failed to shake her resolution.

Grief stricken she set out on her quest, and walked so long that at last
she sank exhausted at the foot of a mountain. Here, remembering the
three hairs, she burned one of them, and the next instant her husband
enfolded her in his arms. Both were almost speechless with joy.

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

"Did I not counsel you never to betray our secret to anyone?" gently
chided the youth. "If my mother sees us now she will separate us
immediately. This mountain is our abode; my mother will be here
directly, and woe to us if she catch sight of us."

The poor girl was terrified at these words, grieving bitterly that no
sooner had she found her husband than she must lose him again. The
Dew-son pitied her, gave her a light blow and changed her into an apple,
which he put upon a shelf. Shrieking loudly, the witch flew down from
the mountain, crying that she could smell human flesh and that human
flesh she must have. In vain her son denied it--she refused to believe
him.

"If you will swear on the egg to do it no harm, I will show you what I
have hidden," said the youth. The witch accordingly promised, whereon
the youth gave the apple a light blow and the beautiful maiden appeared.
"Behold my wife!" said he. The old woman said nothing, but set her
daughter-in-law some simple tasks, and went back to her work.

For a few days the husband and wife were allowed to live in peace, but
the old witch was only waiting till her son went away from home to wreak
her vengeance on his wife. At last she found an opportunity. "Sweep and
don't sweep," she commanded the maiden, and went away. The poor girl was
perplexed to know what she must "sweep" and what "not sweep."
Recollecting the hairs, she took one and burnt it. Instantly her husband
appeared, and she told him her difficulty. He explained that she must
"sweep" the room and "not sweep" the courtyard.

The maiden acted accordingly. Towards evening the witch came in and
asked whether the work was done. "I have swept and not swept," answered
the daughter-in-law. "You deceitful thing!" scolded the old woman, "you
have not thought that out for yourself; my son has certainly taught
you."

Next day the old witch came again and gave the maiden three bowls, which
she ordered her to fill with her tears. The maid wept and wept

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

continually, but failed to fill even one of the vessels. In her
difficulty she burnt the third hair, whereupon her husband appeared and
advised her to fill the bowls with water and add a quantity of salt
thereto. This the maiden did, and when the old woman came home in the
evening, she was shown the three vessels duly filled. "You cunning
creature!" stormed the witch, "that is not your own work; but you and my
son shall not cheat me again." <span id="img_07400"></span>

<table data-align="LEFT">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="CENTER"><img src="img/07400.jpg" alt="The witch scolded her again" /><br />
The witch scolded her again</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

On the following day she ordered her daughter-in-law to make a pancake.
But though the maiden sought everywhere, not a single ingredient for the
purpose could she find. This time she could expect no help, for her
husband was away, and the three magic hairs had all been burned. The
youth, however, suspecting his mother's wicked intentions, returned home
unexpectedly to his wife, and seeing her in such grief he suggested that
they should flee. "My mother will not rest until she has wrought your
ruin," he said. "Let us escape before she returns." So they went
together out into the wide world.

In the evening the witch came home, and saw that both her
daughter-in-law and son were missing. "The wretches have abandoned me!"
she shrieked, and calling her witch-sister to her, she sent her to
follow the fugitives and bring them back. The second witch got into a
bowl, made a whip out of snakes, and was off

<span id="img_07401"></span>

[![](tn/07401.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/07401.jpg.md)

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

like a lightning-flash. But the Dew-son, seeing his aunt behind them in
the distance, gave the maiden a light blow and changed her into a
swimming-bath. He transformed himself into a bath attendant, and stood
before the door. The witch came up, alighted from the bowl, and inquired
of him whether he had seen a youth and a maiden. "I am just warming the
bath," answered the youth; "there is no one in; if you do not believe
me, go in and see for yourself." The woman, perceiving she could do
nothing with him, reentered the bowl, went back to her sister, and
reported the failure of her errand.

The witch asked her whether she had met anyone on the way. "Oh yes,"
answered she, "I spoke to the attendant at the door of a swimming bath,
but he was either deaf or stupid, for I could get nothing out of him."
"you were even more stupid," scolded the witch, "not to recognize that
the bath and the attendant were my daughter-in-law and son." Now she
called another sister and sent her after the fugitives.

The Dew-son looking back, saw his other aunt coming towards them in a
bowl. He knocked his wife gently and she became a spring; he himself
stood beside and drew water. The witch came up and asked whether he had
seen anything of a youth and a maiden. "This spring has excellent
drinking-water," the fellow answered with an air of simplicity. The
woman, thinking he was too stupid to understand her questions, hurried
back to her sister with the intelligence that she could see nothing of
the missing couple. The witch inquired whether she had seen anyone on
the way. "Only an imbecile drawing water from a spring," was the answer.
"That imbecile was my son," exclaimed the witch in a great rage, "and
the spring was his wife. I see I shall have to go myself." So she
stepped into the bowl, made a whip out of snakes, and set off.

Looking back the youth now saw that his mother herself was coming.
Striking the maid gently he turned her into a tree, and himself into a
snake coiled round it. The witch knew them, and would have torn the tree
to pieces if she could have done so without harming her son. So she said
to

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

the snake, "My son, at least show me the little finger of the maid and
then I will leave you in peace."

The son saw that the only way to get rid of his mother was to do as she
asked. He therefore allowed one of the maid's fingers to become visible
this his mother immediately devoured, and then vanished.

At another gentle blow from her husband the maid again resumed her human
form; and the two went home to her father, the Padishah. His talisman
having been destroyed, the youth became a mortal, and as he was no
longer a Dew, his witch-mother had no more power over him. The Padishah
rejoiced in the return of his lost children, their marriage was again
celebrated with great pomp, and after the old monarch's decease they
reigned in his stead.

<span id="img_07600"></span> ![](img/07600.jpg)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Simpleton](ftft13.md)
