[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc02013)  [Next](cc02015) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 2: Genesis, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv"></span>

<span id="xv-p1"></span>CHAPTER 37.

<span id="xv.i"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p1"></span><span id="xv.i-p1.1"></span>[Genesis
37:1-36](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#001)<span id="xv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p2"></span>**1.** And Jacob dwelt in the land wherein his
father was a stranger, in the land of Canaan.

<span id="xv.i-p3"></span>**1.** Habitavit itaque Iahacob in terra
peregrinationum patris sui, in terra Chenaan.

<span id="xv.i-p4"></span>**2.** These *are* the generations of Jacob.
Joseph, *being* seventeen years old, was feeding the flock with his
brethren; and the lad *was* with the sons of Bilhah, and with the sons
of Zilpah, his father’s wives: and Joseph brought unto his father their
evil report.

<span id="xv.i-p5"></span>**2.** Istae sunt generationes Iahacob. Joseph
filius septendecim annorum pascebat cum fratribus suis pecudes, et erat
puer cum filiis Bilhah et cum filiis Zilpah uxorum patris sui: et
retulit Ioseph obloquutionem eorum malam patri eorum.

<span id="xv.i-p6"></span>**3.** Now Israel loved Joseph more than all
his children, because he *was* the son of his old age: and he made him a
coat of *many* colours.

<span id="xv.i-p7"></span>**3.** Porro Israel diligebat Joseph prae
cunctis filiis suis, quia filius senectutis erat ei: et fecerat ei
tunicam multicolorem.

<span id="xv.i-p8"></span>**4.** And when his brethren saw that their
father loved him more than all his brethren, they hated him, and could
not speak peaceably unto him.

<span id="xv.i-p9"></span>**4.** Et viderunt fratres ejus, quod eum
diligeret pater eorum prae cunctis fratribus ejus, et odio habebant eum,
et non poterant alloqui eum pacifice.

<span id="xv.i-p10"></span>**5.** And Joseph dreamed a dream, and he
told *it* his brethren: and they hated him yet the more.

<span id="xv.i-p11"></span>**5.** Somniavit autem Joseph somnium, et
nuntiavit fratribus suis: et addiderunt amplius odio habere eum.

<span id="xv.i-p12"></span>**6.** And he said unto them, Hear, I pray
you, this dream which I have dreamed:

<span id="xv.i-p13"></span>**6.** Dixit enim ad eos, Audite quaeso
somnium hoc quod somniavi.

<span id="xv.i-p14"></span>**7.** For, behold, we *were* binding sheaves
in the field, and, lo, my sheaf arose, and also stood upright; and,
behold, your sheaves stood round about, and made obeisance to my sheaf.

<span id="xv.i-p15"></span>**7.** Ecce enim ligabamus manipulos in medio
agri: et ecce surrexit manipulus meus, ac etiam stabat: et ecce
circumdabant manipuli vestri, et incurvabant se manipulo meo.

<span id="xv.i-p16"></span>**8.** And his brethren said to him, Shalt
thou indeed reign over us? or shalt thou indeed have dominion over us?
And they hated him yet the more for his dreams, and for his words.

<span id="xv.i-p17"></span>**8.** Et dixerunt ei fratres ejus, Num
regnando regnabis super nos? num dominando dominaberis nobis? Addiderunt
ergo adhuc odio habere eum propter somnium ejus, et propter verba ejus.

<span id="xv.i-p18"></span>**9.** And he dreamed yet another dream, and
told it his brethren, and said, Behold, I have dreamed a dream more;
and, behold, the sun and the moon and the eleven stars made obeisance to
me.

<span id="xv.i-p19"></span>**9.** Et somniavit adhuc somnium alterum, et
narrativ illud fratribus suis, et dixit, Ecce, somniavi somnium adhuc:
et ecce, sol et luna et undecim stellae incurvabant se mihi.

<span id="xv.i-p20"></span>**10.** And he told *it* to his father, and
to his brethren: and his father rebuked him, and said unto him, What
*is* this dream that thou hast dreamed? Shall I and thy mother and thy
brethren indeed come to bow down ourselves to thee to the earth?

<span id="xv.i-p21"></span>**10.** Et narravit patri suo et fratribus
suis: et increpavit eum pater ejus, et dixit ei, Quid est hoc comnium
quod somniasti? Num veniendo veniemus ego et mater tua, et fratres tui,
ut incurvemus nos tibi ad terram?

<span id="xv.i-p22"></span>**11.** And his brethren envied him; but his
father observed the saying.

<span id="xv.i-p23"></span>**11.** Et inviderunt ei fratres ejus: sed
pater ejus observabat rem.

<span id="xv.i-p24"></span>**12.** And his brethren went to feed their
father’s flock in Shechem.

<span id="xv.i-p25"></span>**12.** Profecti autem sunt fratres ejus, ut
pascerent pecudes patris sui in Sechem.

<span id="xv.i-p26"></span>**13.** And Israel said unto Joseph, Do not
thy brethren feed *the flock* in Shechem? come, and I will send thee
unto them. And he said to him, Here *am I*

<span id="xv.i-p27"></span>**13.** Et dixit Israel ad Hoseph, Nonne
fratres tui pascunt in Sechem? Veni, et mittam to ad eos. Et dixit ei,
Ecce adsum.

<span id="xv.i-p28"></span>**14.** And he said to him, Go, I pray thee,
see whether it be well with thy brethren, and well with the flocks; and
bring me word again. So he sent him out of the vale of Hebron, and he
came to Shechem.

<span id="xv.i-p29"></span>**14.** Et ait ei, Vade nune, vide
incolumitatem fratrum tuorum, et incolmitatem pecorum, et refer mihi
rem: et misit eum ex valle Hebron: et venit in Sechem.

<span id="xv.i-p30"></span>**15.** And a certain man found him, and,
behold, *he was* wandering in the field: and the man asked him, saying,
What seekest thou?

<span id="xv.i-p31"></span>**15.** Porro invenit eum vir, et ecce
errabat in agro: interrogavit autem eum vir ille, dicendo, Quid quaeris?

<span id="xv.i-p32"></span>**16.** And he said, I seek my brethren: tell
me, I pray thee, where they feed *their flocks*

<span id="xv.i-p33"></span>**16.** Et dixit, Fratres meos ego quaero,
nuntia, obsecro, mihi, ubi ipsi pascant.

<span id="xv.i-p34"></span>**17.** And the man said, They are departed
hence; for I heard them say, Let us go to Dothan. And Joseph went after
his brethren, and found them in Dothan.

<span id="xv.i-p35"></span>**17.** Et dixit vir ille, Profecti sunt
hinc: audivi enim eos dicentes, Eamus in Dothan. Et perrexit Joseph post
fratres suos, et invenit eos in Dothan.

<span id="xv.i-p36"></span>**18.** And when they saw him afar off, even
before he came near unto them, they conspired against him to slay him.

<span id="xv.i-p37"></span>**18.** Et viderunt eum e longinquo: et
antequam appropinquaret eis, machinati sunt contra eum ut interimerent
eum.

<span id="xv.i-p38"></span>**19.** And they said one to another, Behold,
this dreamer cometh.

<span id="xv.i-p39"></span>**19.** Ac dicebat alter alteri, Ecce,
magister ille somniorum venit.

<span id="xv.i-p40"></span>**20.** Come now therefore, and let us slay
him, and cast him into some pit, and we will say, Some evil beast hath
devoured him: and we shall see what will become of his dreams.

<span id="xv.i-p41"></span>**20.** Nune igitur venite, et occidamus
illum, et projiciamus eum in unam e cisternis: et dicemus, Bestia mala
devoravit eum: et videbinus quid erunt somnia ejus.

<span id="xv.i-p42"></span>**21.** And Reuben heard *it*, and he
delivered him out of their hands; and said, Let us not kill him.

<span id="xv.i-p43"></span>**21.** Et audivit Reuben, et eripuit eum e
manu eorum, et dixit, Ne percutiamus eum in anima.

<span id="xv.i-p44"></span>**22.** And Reuben said unto them, Shed no
blood, *but* cast him into this pit that *is* in the wilderness, and lay
no hand upon him; that he might rid him out of their hands, to deliver
him to his father again.

<span id="xv.i-p45"></span>**22.** Dixit ergo ad eos Ruben, Ne
effundatis sanguinem: projicite eum in cisternam hanc, quae est in
deserto, et manum ne mittatis in eum: ut erueret eum e manu eorum, ut
reduceret eum ad patrem suum.

<span id="xv.i-p46"></span>**23.** And it came to pass, when Joseph was
come unto his brethren, that they stript Joseph out of his coat, *his*
coat of *many* colours that *was* on him;

<span id="xv.i-p47"></span>**23.** Et fuit, ut venit Joseph ad fratres
suos, exuerunt Joseph tunica sua, tunica multicolore, quae erat super
eum.

<span id="xv.i-p48"></span>**24.** And they took him, and cast him into
a pit: and the pit *was* empty, *there was* no water in it.

<span id="xv.i-p49"></span>**24.** Et tulerunt eum, et projecerunt eum
in cisternam: et cisterna erat vacua, non erat in ea aqua.

<span id="xv.i-p50"></span>**25.** And they sat down to eat bread: and
they lifted up their eyes and looked, and, behold, a company of
Ishmeelites came from Gilead with their camels bearing spicery and balm
and myrrh, going to carry *it* down to Egypt.

<span id="xv.i-p51"></span>**25.** Postea sederunt ut comederent panem,
et levaverunt oculos suos, et viderunt, et ecce turba Ismaelitarum
veeniebat de Gilhad, et cameli eorum portabant aromata, et resinam, et
stacten, iter facientes ut deferrent in Aegyptum.

<span id="xv.i-p52"></span>**26.** And Judah said unto his brethren,
What profit *is it* if we slay our brother, and conceal his blood?

<span id="xv.i-p53"></span>**26.** Et dixit Jehudah fratribus suis, Quae
utilitas si occiderimus fratrem mostrum, et celaverimus sanguinem ejus?

<span id="xv.i-p54"></span>**27.** Come, and let us sell him to the
Ishmeelites, and let not our hand be upon him; for he *is* our brother
*and* our flesh. And his brethren were content.

<span id="xv.i-p55"></span>**27.** Venite, et vendamus eum Ismaelitis,
et manus nostra ne sit in eum, quia frater noster, caro nostra est: et
paruerunt ei fratres ejus.

<span id="xv.i-p56"></span>**28.** Then there passed by Midianites
merchantmen; and they drew and lifted up Joseph out of the pit, and sold
Joseph to the Ishmeelites for twenty *pieces* of silver: and they
brought Joseph into Egypt.

<span id="xv.i-p57"></span>**28.** Et transierunt viri Madianitae
mercatores, et extraxerunt et sustulerunt Joseph e cisterna: et
vendiderunt Joseph Ismaelitis viginti argenteis, qui abduxerunt Ioseph
in Aegyptum.

<span id="xv.i-p58"></span>**29.** And Reuben returned unto the pit;
and, behold, Joseph *was* not in the pit; and he rent his clothes.

<span id="xv.i-p59"></span>**29.** Deinde reversus est Reuben ad
cisternam, et ecce non erat Joseph in cisterna, et scidit vestimenta
sua.

<span id="xv.i-p60"></span>**30.** And he returned unto his brethren,
and said, The child *is* not; and I, whither shall I go?

<span id="xv.i-p61"></span>**30.** Et reversus est ad fratres suos, et
dixit, Puer non est, et ego quo, ego quo ibo?

<span id="xv.i-p62"></span>**31.** And they took Joseph’s coat, and
killed a kid of the goats, and dipped the coat in the blood;

<span id="xv.i-p63"></span>**31.** Et tulerunt tunicam Joseph, et
jugulaverunt hircum caprarum, et tinxerunt tunicam in sanguine.

<span id="xv.i-p64"></span>**32.** And they sent the coat of *many*
colours, and they brought *it* to their father; and said, This have we
found: know now whether it *be* thy son’s coat or no.

<span id="xv.i-p65"></span>**32.** et miserunt tunicam multicolorem, et
deferri fecerunt ad patrem suum, et dixerunt, Hanc invevenimus, agnosce
nunc utrum tunica filii tui sit, annon.

<span id="xv.i-p66"></span>**33.** And he knew it, and said, *It is* my
son’s coat; an evil beast hath devoured him; Joseph is without doubt
rent in pieces.

<span id="xv.i-p67"></span>**33.** Et agnovit eam, et dixit, Tunica
filii mei est: bestia mala devoravit eum, rapiendo raptus est Ioseph.

<span id="xv.i-p68"></span>**34.** And Jacob rent his clothes, and put
sackcloth upon his loins, and mourned for his son many days.

<span id="xv.i-p69"></span>**34.** Et scidit Iahacob vestimenta sua, et
posuit saccum in lumbis suis, et luxit super filio suo diebus multis.

<span id="xv.i-p70"></span>**35.** And all his sons and all his
daughters rose up to comfort him; but he refused to be comforted; and he
said, For I will go down into the grave unto my son mourning. Thus his
father wept for him.

<span id="xv.i-p71"></span>**35.** Et surrexerunt omnes filii ejus, et
omnes filiae ejus, ut consolarentur eum, sed noluit consolationem
admittere: et dixit, Certe descendam ad filium meum lugens ad sepulcrum:
et luxit eum pater ejus.

<span id="xv.i-p72"></span>**36.** And the Midianites sold him into
Egypt unto Potiphar, an officer of Pharaoh’s, *and* captain of the
guard.

<span id="xv.i-p73"></span>**36.** Madanitae autem vendiderunt eum in
Aegypto Potiphar satrapae Pharaonis, principi satellitum.

<span id="xv.i-p74"></span> 

<span id="xv.i-p75"></span><span id="xv.i-p75.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p76"></span>**1.** *And Jacob dwelt*. Moses confirms what
he had before declared, that, by the departure of Esau, the land was
left to holy Jacob as its sole possessor. Although in appearance he did
not obtain a single clod; yet, contented with the bare sight of the
land, he exercised his faith; and Moses expressly compares him with his
father, who had been a stranger in that land all his life. Therefore,
though by the removal of his brother to another abode, Jacob was no
little gainer; yet it was the Lord’s will that this advantage should be
hidden from his eyes, in order that he might depend entirely upon the
promise.

<span id="xv.i-p77"></span><span id="xv.i-p77.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p78"></span>**2.** *These are the generations of Jacob*.
By the word <span id="xv.i-p78.1"></span>תודלות *toledoth* we are not so
much to understand a genealogy, as a record of events, which appears
more clearly from the context. For Moses having thus commenced, does not
enumerate sons and grandsons, but explains the cause of the envy of
Joseph’s brethren, who formed a wicked conspiracy against him, and sold
him as a slave: as if he had said “Having briefly summed up the
genealogy of Esau, I now revert to the series of my history, as to what
happened to the family of Jacob.”  <span
id="fr_131"></span>[132](#fn_131) Moreover, Moses being about to speak
of the abominable wickedness of Jacob’s sons, begins with the statement,
that Joseph was dear beyond the rest to his father, because he had
begotten him in his old age: and as a token of tender love, had clothed
him with a coat woven of many colors. But it was not surprising that the
boy should be a great favorite with his aged father, for so it is wont
to happen: and no just ground is here given for envy; seeing that sons
of a more robust age, by the dictate of nature, might well concede such
a point. Moses, however, states this as the cause of odium, that the
mind of his father was more inclined to him than to the rest. The
brethren conceive enmity against the boy, whom they see to be more
tenderly loved by their father, as having been born in his old age.
 <span id="fr_132"></span>[133](#fn_132) If they did not choose to join
in this love to their brother, why did they not excuse it in their
father? Hence, then, we perceive their malignant and perverse
disposition. But, that a manycoloured coat and similar trifles inflamed
them to devise a scheme of slaughter, is a proof of their detestable
cruelty. Moses also says that their hatred increased, because Joseph
conveyed the evil speeches of his brethren to their father. Some expound
the word evil as meaning some intolerable crime; but others more
correctly suppose, that it was a complaint of the boy that his brothers
vexed him with their reproaches; for, what follows in Moses, I take to
have been added in explanation, that we may know the cause for which he
had been treated so ill and with such hostility. It may be asked, why
Moses here accuses only the sons of Bilhah and Zilpah, when, afterwards,
he does not exempt the sons of Leah from the same charge? One, indeed,
of her sons, Reuben, was milder than any of the rest; next to him was
Judah, who was his uterine brother. But what is to be said of Simon?
What of Levi? Certainly since they were older, it is probable that they
were leaders in the affair. The suspicion may, however, be entertained,
that because these were the sons of concubines and not of true wives,
their minds would be more quickly moved with envy; as if their servile
extraction, on the mother’s side, subjected them to contempt.

<span id="xv.i-p81"></span><span id="xv.i-p81.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p82"></span>**6.** *And Joseph dreamed a dream*. Moses
having stated what were the first seeds of this enmity, now ascends
higher, and shows that Joseph had been elected, by the wonderful purpose
of God, to great things; that this had been declared to him in a dream;
and that, therefore, the hatred of his brethren broke forth into
madness. God, however, revealed in dreams what he would do, that
afterwards it might be known that nothing had happened fortuitously: but
that what had been fixed by a celestial decree, was at length, in its
proper time, carried forward through circuitous windings to its
completion. It had been predicted to Abraham that his seed should be
wanderers from the land of Canaan. In order, then, that Jacob might pass
over into Egypt, this method was divinely appointed; namely, that
Joseph, being president over Egypt in a time of famine, might bring his
father thither with his whole family, and supply them with food. Now,
from the facts first related, no one could have conjectured such a
result. The sons of Jacob conspire to put the very person to death,
without whom they cannot be preserved; yea, he who was ordained to be
the minister of salvation to them, is thrown into a well, and with
difficulty rescued from the jaws of death. Driven about by various
misfortunes, he seems to be an alien from his father’s house.
Afterwards, he is cast into prison, as into another sepulcher, where,
for a long time, he languishes. Nothing, therefore, was less probable
than that the family of Jacob should be preserved by his means, when he
was cut off from it, and carried far away, and not even reckoned among
the living. Nor did any hope of his liberation remain, especially from
the time in which he was neglected by the chief butler; but being
condemned to perpetual imprisonment, he was left there to rot. God,
however, by such complicated methods, accomplishes what he had purposed.
Wherefore, in this history, we have not only a most beautiful example of
Divine Providence, but also two other points are added especially worthy
of notice: first, that the Lord performs his work by wonderful and
unusual modes; and, secondly, that he brings forth the salvation of his
Church, not from magnificent splendor, but from death and the grave.
Besides, in the person of Joseph, a lively image of Christ is presented,
as will more fully appear from the context. But since these subjects
will be often repeated, let us follow the thread of Moses’ discourse.
God, of his mere grace, conferred peculiar honor on the boy, who was the
last but one among twelve, in giving him the priority among his
brethren. For, by what merit or virtue shall we say that he attained the
lordship over his brethren? Afterwards he seemed, indeed, to acquire
this by his own great beneficence: but from the dream we learn, that it
was the free gift of God, which in no way depended upon Joseph’s
beneficence. Rather, he was ordained to be chief, by the mere good
pleasure of God, in order that he might show kindness to his brethren.
Now, since the Lord was, at that time, wont to reveal his secrets by two
methods — by visions and by dreams — one of these kinds is here noted.
For no doubt Joseph had often dreamed in the common manner: but Moses
shows that a dream was now divinely sent to him, which might have the
force and weight of an oracle. We know that dreams are often produced by
our daily thoughts: sometimes they are indications of an unhealthy state
of the body: but whenever God intends to make known his counsel by
dreams, he engraves on them certain marks, which distinguish them from
passing and frivolous imaginations, in order that their credibility and
authority may stand firm. Thus Joseph, being certainly persuaded that he
had not been deluded by an empty spectra, fearlessly announced his dream
as a celestial oracle. Now, although the dominion is promised to him
under a rural symbol, it is one which does not seem suitable for
instruction to the sons of Jacob; for we know that they were herdsman,
not ploughmen. Since they had no harvest which they could gather in, it
seems hardly congruous that homage should be paid to his *sheaf*: But
perhaps God designedly chose this similitude, to show that this prophecy
was not founded upon the present fortunes of Joseph, and that the
material of his dominion would not consist in those things which were at
hand, but that it should be a future benefit, the cause of which was to
be sought for elsewhere than at home.

<span id="xv.i-p83"></span><span id="xv.i-p83.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p84"></span>**8.** *Shalt thou indeed reign over us?*
Here it is plainly shown to us that the paternal favor of God towards
the elect, is like a fan to excite against them the enmity of the world.
When the sons of Jacob heard that they were fighting in vain against
God, their unjust hatred ought, by such means, to have been corrected.
For it was as if God, setting himself in the midst, would repress their
fury by these words, “Your impious conspiring will be fruitless; for
although you boast, I have constituted as your chief, the man whose ruin
your wicked envy hurries you to seek.” Perhaps, also, by this
consolatory dream, he intended to alleviate the trouble of the holy
youth. Yet their obstinacy caused it to be the more increased. Let us
then learn not to be grieved if, at any time, the shining of the grace
of God upon us should cause us to be envied. The sons of Jacob, however,
were but too acute interpreters of the dream: yet they deride it as a
fable, because it was repugnant to their wishes. Thus it often happens
that they who are ill-disposed, quickly perceive what is the will of
God: but, because they feel no reverence, they despise it. To this
contumacy, however, succeeds a stupor which destroys their former
quick-sightedness.

<span id="xv.i-p85"></span><span id="xv.i-p85.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p86"></span>**9.** *And he dreamed yet another dream*.
The scope of this dream is the same. The only difference is, that God,
to inspire greater confidence in the oracle, presents him with a figure
from heaven. The brethren of Joseph had despised what was said
concerning the sheaves; the Lord now calls upon them to look towards
heaven, where his august Majesty shines forth. It may, however, be
asked, how it can be reconciled with fact, that his mother, who was now
dead, could come and bow down to him. The interpretation of certain
Hebrews, who refer it to Bilhah, is frigid, and the sense appears plain
without such subterfuges: for the sun and moon designate the head of the
family on each side: thus, in this figure, Joseph sees himself
reverenced by the whole house of his father.

<span id="xv.i-p87"></span><span id="xv.i-p87.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p88"></span>**10.** *And his father rebuked him*. If
Jacob suspected that the dream originated in vain ambition, he rightly
rebuked his son; but if he knew that God was the author of the dream, he
ought not to have expostulated with him. But that he did know it, may be
hence inferred, because he is afterwards said seriously to have
considered it. For Moses, making a distinction between him and his sons,
says that *they* breathed nothing but the virus of envy; while *he*
revolved in his own mind what this might mean; which could not have
happened, unless he had been affected with reverence. But seeing that a
certain religious impression on the subject rested on his mind, how was
it that he rebuked his son? This truly was not giving honor to God and
to his word. For it ought to have occurred to the mind of Jacob that,
although Joseph was under his authority, he yet sustained a prophetic
character. It is probable, when he saw his sons so malevolent, that he
wished to meet the danger by feigning what he did not feel: for he was
not offended at the dream, but he was unwilling to exasperate the minds
of those who, on account of their pride, would not bear to be in
subjection. Therefore I do not doubt that he feignedly reproved his son,
from a desire to appease contention. Nevertheless, this method of
pretending to be adverse to the truth, when we are endeavoring to
appease the anger of those who rage against it, is by no means approved
by God. He ought rather ingenuously to have exhorted his sons not to
“kick against the pricks.” Or at least he should have used this moderate
address, “If this is a common dream, let it be treated with ridicule
rather than with anger; but if it has proceeded from God, it is wicked
to speak against it.” It is even possible that the unsuitableness of the
dream had struck the mind of the old man. For we know how difficult it
is entirely to throw off all sense of superiority. Certainly, though
Jacob declines slightly from the right course, yet his piety appears to
be of no common order; because his reverence for the oracle so easily
prevailed over every other feeling. But the most wicked obstinacy
betrays itself in his sons, seeing they break out into greater enmity.
For though they despise the dream, yet they are not made angry about
nothing. Gladly would they have had their brother as a laughing-stock;
but a certain secret sense of the Deity constrains them, so that, with
or against their will, they are compelled to feel that there is
something authentic in the dream. Meanwhile, a blind ferocity impels
them to an unintentional resistance against God. Therefore, that we may
be held in obedience to God, let us learn to bring down our high
spirits; because the beginning of docility is for men to submit to be
brought into order. This obstinacy in the sons of Jacob was most
censurable, because they not only rejected the oracle of God through
their hatred of subjection, but were hostile to his messenger and
herald. How much less excusable, then, will be our hardness, if we do
not meekly submit our necks to the yoke of God; since the doctrine of
humility, which subdues and even mortifies us, is not only more clearly
revealed, but also confirmed by the precious blood of Christ? If,
however, we see many refractory persons at this day, who refuse to
embrace the gospel, and who perversely rise up against it, let us not be
disturbed as by some new thing, seeing that the whole human race is
infected with the disease of pride; for by the gospel all the glory of
the flesh is reduced to nothing; rather let us know that all remain
obstinate, except those who are rendered meek by the subduing influence
of the Spirit.

<span id="xv.i-p89"></span><span id="xv.i-p89.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p90"></span>**12.** *And his brethren went*. Before Moses
treats of the horrible design of fratricide, he describes the journey of
Joseph, and amplifies, by many circumstances, the atrocity of the crime.
Their brother approaches them in the discharge of a duty, to make a
fraternal inquiry after their state. He comes by the command of his
father; and obeys it without reluctance, as appears from his answer. He
searches them out anxiously; and though they had changed their place, he
spares neither labor nor trouble till he finds them. Therefore their
cruelty was something more than madness, seeing they did not shrink with
horror from contriving the death of a brother so pious and humane. We
now see that Moses does not relate, without a purpose, that a man met
Joseph in his wanderings, and told him that his brethren had departed to
Dothan. For the greater was his diligence in his indefatigable pursuit,
so much the less excusable were they by whom such an unworthy recompense
was repaid.

<span id="xv.i-p91"></span><span id="xv.i-p91.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p92"></span>**18.** *And when they saw him afar off*.
Here again Moses, so far from sparing the fame of his own family by
adulation, brands its chiefs with a mark of eternal infamy, and exposes
them to the hatred and execration of all nations. If, at any time, among
heathens, a brother murdered his brother, such impiety was treated with
the utmost severity in tragedies, that it might not pass into an example
for imitation. But in profane history no such thing is found, as that
nine brethren should conspire together for the destruction of an
innocent youth, and, like wild beasts, should pounce upon him with
bloody hands. Therefore a horrible, and even diabolical fury, took
possession of the sons of Jacob, when, having cast aside the sense of
nature, they were thus prepared cruelly to rage against their own blood.

<span id="xv.i-p93"></span>But, in addition to this wickedness, Moses
condemns their impious contempt of God, *Behold this master of dreams*.
For why do they insult the unhappy youth, except because he had been
called by the celestial oracle to an unexpected dignity? Besides, in
this manner, they themselves proclaim their own baseness more publicly
than any one could do, who should purposely undertake severely to
chastise them. They confess that the cause why they persecuted their
brother was his having dreamed; as if truly this ass an inexpiable
offense; but if they are indignant at his dreams, why do they not rather
wage war with God? For Joseph deemed it necessary to receive, as a
precious deposit, what had been divinely revealed unto him. But because
they did not dare directly to assail God, they wrap themselves in
clouds, that, losing sight of God, they may vent their fury against
their brother. If such blindness seized upon the patriarchs, what shall
become of the reprobates, whom obstinate malice drives along, so that
they do not hesitate to resist God even to the last? And we see that
they willingly disturb and excite themselves, as often as they are
offended with the threatenings and chastisements of God, and rise up
against his ministers for the sake of taking vengeance. The same thing,
indeed, would at times happen to us all, unless God should put on his
bridle to render us submissive. With respect to Joseph, the special
favor of God was manifested to him, and he was raised to the highest
dignity; but only in a dream, which is ridiculed by the wicked scorn of
his brethren. To this is also added a conspiracy, so that he narrowly
escaped death. Thus the promise of God, which had exalted him to honor,
almost plunges him into the grave. We, also, who have received the
gratuitous adoption of God amidst many sorrows, experience the same
thing. For, from the time that Christ gathers us into his flock, God
permits us to be cast down in various ways, so that we seem nearer hell
than heaven. Therefore, let the example of Joseph be fixed in our minds,
that we be not disquieted when many crosses spring forth to us from the
root of God’s favor. For I have before showed, and the thing itself
clearly testifies, that in Joseph was adumbrated, what was afterwards
more fully exhibited in Christ, the Head of the Church, in order that
each member may form itself to the imitation of his example.

<span id="xv.i-p94"></span><span id="xv.i-p94.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p95"></span>**20.** *And cast him into some pit*. Before
they perpetrate the murder, they seek a pretext whereby they may conceal
their crime from men. Meanwhile, it never enters into their mind, that
what is hidden from men cannot escape the eyes of God. But so stupid is
hypocrisy, that while it flees from the disgrace of the world, it is
careless about the judgment of God. But it is a disease deeply rooted in
the human mind, to put some specious color on every extreme act of
iniquity. For although an inward judge convicts the guilty, they yet
confirm themselves in impudence, that their disgrace may not appear unto
others.

<span id="xv.i-p96"></span>*And we shall see what will become of his
dreams.* As if the truth of God could be subverted by the death of one
man, they boast that they shall have attained their wish when they have
killed their brother; namely, that his dreams will come to nothing. This
is not, indeed, their avowed purpose, but turbulent envy drives them
headlong to fight against God. But whatever they design in thus
contending with God in the dark, their attempts will, at length, prove
vain. For God will always find a way through the most profound abyss, to
the accomplishment of what he has decreed. If, then, unbelievers provoke
us by their reproaches, and proudly boast that our faith will profit us
nothing; let not their insolence discourage or weaken us, but let us
confidently proceed.

<span id="xv.i-p97"></span><span id="xv.i-p97.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p98"></span>**21.** *And Reuben heard it*. It may be well
to observe, while others were hastening to shed his blood, by whose care
Joseph was preserved. Reuben doubtless, in one affair, was the most
wicked of them all, when he defiled his father’s couch; and that
unbridled lust, involving other vices, was the sign of a depraved
nature: now suddenly, he alone, having a regard to piety, and being
mindful of fraternal duty, dissolves the impious conspiracy. It is
uncertain whether he was now seeking the means of making some
compensation, for the sake of which he might be restored to his father’s
favor. Moses declares that it was his intention to restore the boy in
safety to his father: whence the conjecture which I have stated is
probable, that he thought the life of his brother would be a sufficient
price by which he might reconcile his father’s mind to himself. However
this may be, yet the humanity which he showed in attempting to liberate
his brother, is a proof that he was not abandoned to every kind of
wickedness. And perhaps God, by this testimony of his penitence,
designed in some degree to lessen his former disgrace. Whence we are
taught that the characters of men are not to be estimated by a single
act, however atrocious, so as to cause us to despair of their salvation.

<span id="xv.i-p99"></span><span id="xv.i-p99.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p100"></span>**22.** *Cast him into this pit*. The pious
fallacy to which Reuben descended, sufficiently proves with what
vehemence the rage of his brethren was burning. For he neither dares
openly to oppose them, nor to dissuade them from their crime; because he
saw that no reasons would avail to soften them. Nor does it extenuate
their cruelty, that they consent to his proposal, as if they were
disposed to clemency; for if either one course or the other were
necessary, it would have been better for him immediately to die by their
hands, than to perish by slow hunger in the pit, which is the most cruel
kind of punishment. Their gross hypocrisy is rather to be noticed;
because they think that they shall be free from crime, if only they do
not stain their hands with their brother’s blood. As if, indeed, it made
any difference, whether they ran their brother through with a sword, or
put him to death by suffocation. For the Lord, when he accuses the Jews
by Isaiah, of having hands full of blood, does not mean that they were
assassins, but he calls them bloody, because they did not spare their
suffering brethren. Therefore, the sons of Jacob are nothing better, in
casting their brother alive under ground, that, as one buried, he might
in vain contend with death, and perish after protracted torments; and in
choosing a pit in the desert, from which no mortal could hear his dying
cry, though his sighing would ascend even to heaven. It was a barbarous
thought, that they should not touch his life, if they did not imbrue
their hands in his blood; since it was a kind of death, not less
violent, which they wished to inflict by hunger. Reuben, however,
accommodating his language to their brutal conceptions, deemed it
sufficient to repress, by any kind of artifice, their impetuosity for
the present.

<span id="xv.i-p101"></span><span id="xv.i-p101.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p102"></span>**23.** *They stripped Joseph out of his
coat*  <span id="fr_133"></span>[134](#fn_133) We see that these men are
full of fictions and lies. They carelessly strip their brother; they
feel no dread at casting him with their own hands into the pit, where
hunger worse than ten swords might consume him; because they hope their
crime will be concealed; and in taking home his clothes, no suspicion of
his murder would be excited; because, truly, their father would believe
that he had been torn by a wild beast. Thus Satan infatuates wicked
minds, so that they entangle themselves by frivolous evasions.
Conscience is indeed the fountain of modesty; but Satan so soothes by
his allurements those whom he has entangled in his snares, that
conscience itself, which ought to have cited them as guilty before the
bar of God, only hardens them the more. For, having found out
subterfuges, they break forth far more audaciously into sin, as if they
might commit with impunity whatever escapes the eyes of men. Surely it
is a reprobate sense, a spirit of frenzy and of stupor, which is
withheld from any daring attempt, only by a fear of the shame of men;
while the fear of divine judgment is trodden under foot. And although
all are not carried thus far, yet the fault of paying more honor to men
than to God, is too common. The repetition of the word *coat* in the
sentence of Moses is emphatical, showing that this mark of the father’s
love could not mollify their minds.

<span id="xv.i-p104"></span><span id="xv.i-p104.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p105"></span>**25.** *And they sat down to eat bread*.
This was an astonishing barbarity, that they could quietly feast, while,
in intention, they were guilty of their brother’s death: for, had there
been one drop of humanity in their souls, they would at least have felt
some inward compunctions; yea, commonly, the very worst men are afraid
after the commission of a crime. Since the patriarchs fell into such a
state of insensibility, let us learn, from their example, to fear lest,
by the righteous anger of God, the same lethargy should seize upon our
senses. Meanwhile, it is proper to consider the admirable progress of
God’s counsel. Joseph had already passed through a double death: and
now, as if by a third death, he is, beyond all expectation, rescued from
the grave. For what was it less than death, to be sold as a slave to
foreigners? Indeed his condition was rendered worse by the chance;
because Reuben, secretly drawing him out of the pit, would have brought
him back to his father: whereas now he is dragged to a distant part of
the earth, without hope of return. But this was a secret turn, by which
God had determined to raise him on high. And at length, he shows by the
event, how much better it was that Joseph should be led far away from
his own family, than that he should remain in safety at home. Moreover,
the speech of Judah, by which he persuades his brethren to *sell*
Joseph, has somewhat more reason. For he ingenuously confesses that they
would be guilty of homicide, if they suffered him to perish in the pit.
What gain shall we make, he says, if his blood be covered; for our hands
will nevertheless be polluted with blood. By this time their fury was in
some degree abated, so that they listened to more humane counsel; for
though it was outrageous perfidy to sell their brother to strangers; yet
it was something to send him away alive, that, at least, he might be
nourished as a slave. We see, therefore, that the diabolical flame of
madness, with which they had all burned, was abating, when they
acknowledged that they could profit nothing by hiding their crime from
the eyes of men; because homicide must of necessity come into view
before God. For at first, they absolved themselves from guilt, as if no
Judge sat in heaven. But now the sense of nature, which the cruelty of
hatred had before benumbed, begins to exert its power. And certainly,
even in the reprobate, who seem entirely to have cast off humanity, time
shows that some residue of it remains. When wicked and violent
affections rage, their tumultuous fervor hinders nature from acting its
part. But no minds are so stupid, that a consideration of their own
wickedness will not sometimes fill them with remorse: for, in order that
men may come inexcusable to the judgment-seat of God, it is necessary
that they should first be condemned by themselves. They who are capable
of cure, and whom the Lord leads to repentance, differ from the
reprobates in this, that while the latter obstinately conceal the
knowledge of their crimes, the former gradually return from the
indulgence of sin, to obey the voice of reason. Moreover, what Judah
here declares concerning his brother, the Lord, by the prophet, extends
to the whole human race. Whenever, therefore, depraved lust impels to
unjust violence, or any other injury, let us remember this sacred bond
by which the whole of society is bound together, in order that it may
restrain us from evil doings. For man cannot injure men, but he becomes
an enemy to his own flesh, and violates and perverts the whole order of
nature.

<span id="xv.i-p106"></span><span id="xv.i-p106.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p107"></span>**28.** *Then there passed by Midianites*.
Some think that Joseph was twice sold in the same place. For it is
certain, since Median was the son of Abraham and Keturah, that his sons
were distinct from the sons of Ishmael: and Moses has not thoughtlessly
put down these different names.  <span id="fr_134"></span>[135](#fn_134)
But I thus interpret the passage: that Joseph was exposed for sale to
any one who chose, and seeing the purchase of him was declined by the
Midianites, he was sold to the Ishmaelites. Moreover, though they might
justly suspect the sellers of having stolen him, yet the desire of gain
prevents them from making inquiry. We may also add, what is probable,
that, on the journey, they inquired who Joseph was. But they did not set
such a value on their common origin as to prevent them from eagerly
making gain. This passage, however, teaches us how far the sons of
Abraham, after the flesh, were preferred to the elect offspring, in
which, nevertheless, the hope of the future Church was included. We see
that, of the two sons of Abraham, a posterity so great was propagated,
that from both proceeded merchants in various places: while that part of
his seed which the Lord had chosen to himself was yet small. But so the
children of this world, like premature fruit, quickly arrive at the
greatest wealth and at the summit of happiness; whereas the Church,
slowly creeping through the greatest difficulties, scarcely attains,
during a long period, to the condition of mediocrity.

<span id="xv.i-p109"></span><span id="xv.i-p109.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p110"></span>**30.** *And he returned*. We may hence
gather that Reuben, under pretense of some other business, stole away
from his brethren, that, unknown to them all, he might restore his
brother, drawn out of the pit, to his father; and that therefore he was
absent at the time when Joseph was sold. And there is no wonder that he
was anticipated, when he had taken his course in a different direction
from theirs, intending to reach the pit by a circuitous path. But now at
length Reuben having lost all hope, unfolds to his brethren the
intention which before he dared not confess, lest the boy should be
immediately murdered.

<span id="xv.i-p111"></span><span id="xv.i-p111.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p112"></span>**31.** *And they took Joseph’s coat*. They
now return to their first scheme. In order that their father may have no
suspicion of their crime, they send the bloody coat, from which he might
conjecture that Joseph had been torn by some wild beast. Although Moses
alludes to this briefly, I yet think that they rather sent some of their
servants, who were not accessory to the crime, than any of their number.
For he says soon afterwards, that his sons and daughters came to offer
some consolation to him in his grief. And although in the words they
use, there lurks some appearance of insult, it seems to me more probable
that they gave this command to avert suspicion from themselves. For they
feign themselves to be of confused mind, as is usual in affairs of
perplexity. Yet whatever they intend, their wickedness drives them to
this point, that they inflict a deadly wound upon the mind of their
father. This is the profit which hypocrites gain by their disguises,
that in wishing to escape the consequences of one fault, they add sin to
sin. With respect to Jacob, it is a wonder that after he had been tried
in so many ways, and always come forth a conqueror, he should now sink
under grief. Certainly it was very absurd that the death of his son
should occasion him greater sorrow than the incestuous pollution of his
wife, the slaughter of the Shechemites, and the defilement of his
daughter. Where was that invincible strength, by which he had even
prevailed over the angel? Where the many lessons of patience with which
God had exercised him, in order that he might never fail? This
disposition to mourn, teaches us that no one is endued with such heroic
virtues, as to be exempt from that infirmity of the flesh, which betrays
itself sometimes even in little things; whence also it happens, that
they who have long been accustomed to the cross, and who like veteran
soldiers ought bravely to bear up against every kind of attack, fall
like young recruits in some slight skirmish. Who then among us may not
fear for himself, when we see holy Jacob faint, after having given so
many proofs of patience?

<span id="xv.i-p113"></span><span id="xv.i-p113.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p114"></span>**35.** *And all his sons and daughters rose
up*. The burden of his grief is more clearly expressed by the
circumstance that all his sons and daughters meet together to comfort
him. For by the term “rose up,” is implied a common deliberation, they
having agreed to come together, because necessity urged them. But hence
it appears how vast is the innate dissimulation of men. The sons of
Jacob assume a character by no means suitable to them; and perform an
office of piety, from which their minds are most alien. If they had had
respect unto God, they would have acknowledged their fault, and though
no remedy might have been found for their evil, yet repentance would
have brought forth some fruit; but now they are satisfied with a vanity
as empty as the wind. By this example we are taught how carefully we
ought to avoid dissimulation, which continually implicates men in new
snares.

<span id="xv.i-p115"></span>*But he refused to be comforted*. It may be
asked, whether Jacob had entirely cast off the virtue of patience: for
so much the language seems to mean. Besides, he sins more grievously,
because he, knowingly and voluntarily, indulges in grief: for this is as
if he would purposely augment his sorrow, which is to rebel against God.
But I suppose his refusal to be restricted to that alleviation of grief
which man might offer. For nothing is more unreasonable than that a holy
man, who, all his life had borne the yoke of God with such meekness of
disposition, should now, like an unbroken horse, bite his bridle; in
order that, by nourishing his grief, he might confirm himself in
unsubdued impetuosity. I therefore do not doubt that he was willing now
to submit himself unto the Lord, though he rejects human consolations.
He seems also angrily to chide his sons, whose envy and malevolence
towards Joseph he knew, as if he would upbraid them by declaring that he
esteemed this one son more than all the rest: since he rather desires to
be with him, dead in the grave, than to enjoy the society of ten living
sons whom he had yet remaining; for I except little Benjamin. I do not,
however, here excuse that excess of grief which I have lately condemned.
And certainly heproves himself to be overwhelmed with sadness, in
speaking of the grave, as if the sons of God did not pass through death
to a better life. And hence we learn the blindness of immoderate grief,
which almost quenches the light of faith in the saints; so much the more
diligent, then, ought we to be in our endeavor to restrain it. Job
greatly excelled in piety; yet we see, after he had been oppressed by
the magnitude of his grief, in what a profane manner he mixes men with
beasts in death. If the angelic minds of holy men were thus darkened by
sadness, how much deeper gloom will rest upon us, unless God, by the
shining of his word and Spirit, should scatter it, and we also, with
suitable anxiety, meet the temptation, before it overwhelms us? The
principal mitigation of sorrow is the consolation of the future life; to
which whosoever applies himself, need not fear lest he should be
absorbed by excess of grief. Now though the immoderate sorrow of Jacob
is not to be approved; yet the special design of Moses was, to set a
mark of infamy on that iron hardness which cruelly reigned in the hearts
of his sons. They saw that, if their father should miserably perish,
consumed with grief, they would be the cause of it; in short, they saw
that he was already dying through their wickedness. If they are not able
to heal the wound, why, at least, do they not attempt to alleviate his
pain? Therefore they are exceedingly cruel, seeing that they have not
sufficient care of their father’s life, to cause them to drop a single
word in mitigation of his sorrow, when it was in their power to do so.

<span id="xv.i-p116"></span><span id="xv.i-p116.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p117"></span>**36.** *And the Midianites sold him into
Egypt* It was a sad spectacle, that Joseph should be thus driven from
one hand to another. For it added no small indignity to his former
suffering, that he is set to sale as a slave. The Lord, however, ceased
not to care for him. He even suffered him to be transferred from hand to
hand, in order that, at length, it might indeed appear, that he had
come, by celestial guidance, to that very dominion which had been
promised him in his dreams. Potiphar is called a eunuch, not because he
was one really; but because, among the Orientals, it was usual to denote
the satraps and princes of the court by that name. The Hebrews are not
agreed respecting the dignity which Moses ascribes to him; for some
explain it as the “chief of the slaughterers,”  <span
id="fr_135"></span>[136](#fn_135) whom the Greek interpreters follow.
But I rather agree with others, who say that he was “the prefect of the
soldiers;” not that he had the command of the whole army, but because he
had the royal troops under his hand and authority: such are now the
captains of the guard, if you join with it another office which the
prefects of the prison exercise. For this may be gathered from <span
id="xv.i-p118.1"></span>[Ge 39:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen039.htm#001)<span
id="xv.i-p118.1"></span>  <span id="fr_136"></span>[137](#fn_136)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_131"></span>[132](cc02014.htm#fr_131) <span
id="xv.i-p78.2"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p79"></span> The second verse is rendered by *Professor*
*Bush* in a manner different from that of any other commentator whom the
Editor has had the opportunity of consulting. His view of the passage
is, at least, worthy of consideration. “The correct translation,” he
says, “is doubtless the following: ‘Joseph, being seventeen years old,
was tending his brethren among the flocks, and he a (mere) lad, (even)
the sons of Bilhah, etc.’ The mention of his youth is brought in
parenthetically, as something peculiarly worthy of notice; while the
clause, ‘the sons of Bilhah, etc.,’ is designed to limit and specify the
term ‘brethren’ going before.” This interpretation he proceeds to
vindicate by reference to passages of similar construction, which we
have not room to quote. The point which it would establish is, that
Jacob assigned to his boy, of seventeen years of age, the
superintendence or oversight of the sons of Bilhah among the flocks; so
that he was rather an overlooker of the shepherds than of the sheep.
This would show more clearly the propriety of Joseph’s conduct, in
carrying an ill report of his brethren to their father; and would also
account for the hostility they felt towards him. But it may be doubted
whether this interpretation can stand. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_132"></span>[133](cc02014.htm#fr_132) <span
id="xv.i-p79.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p80"></span> “Son of his old age.” The Chaldee renders
it, “a wise son;” as if he were a man in intellect, while a boy in
years. This would avoid a difficulty; for Benjamin was far more properly
the son of Jacob’s old age than Joseph. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_133"></span>[134](cc02014.htm#fr_133) <span
id="xv.i-p102.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p103"></span> The coat of many colors was supposed by
some to be the garment belonging of right to the first-born;
consequently, Reuben would be entitled to it, till he forfeited it by
his misconduct. Jacob, therefore, is understood to have transferred this
coat, together with the rank of primogeniture, from Reuben to the eldest
son of Rachel, his most beloved wife. If this were so, it would make the
conduct of Reuben, on this occasion, still more generous than it appears
on the ordinary supposition. There is, however, this objection to such
an interpretation, that Jacob is said to have made it for Joseph, (see
<span id="xv.i-p103.1"></span>[Ge
37:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#003)<span id="xv.i-p103.1"></span>,)
and not merely to have given it to him. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[135](cc02014.htm#fr_134) <span
id="xv.i-p107.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p108"></span> Perhaps, however, the passage may be better
explained by supposing the caravan which was passing, to be made up of
Ishmaelites and Midianites. The Ishmaelites might form the larger and
more conspicuous part of the company, and thus give the name to the
whole; but the actual purchasers of Joseph might be the Midianitish
merchants among them. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[136](cc02014.htm#fr_135) <span
id="xv.i-p117.2"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p118"></span> The term applies primarily to butchers, who
slaughter animals for food; then to persons who slaughter animals for
sacrifice; and then to executioners who put men to the slaughter under
the authority of the monarch or the state. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_136"></span>[137](cc02014.htm#fr_136) <span
id="xv.i-p118.2"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p119"></span> See <span id="xv.i-p119.1"></span>[Ge
37:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#020)<span id="xv.i-p119.1"></span>
The words rendered “prefects of the prison,” are <span
id="xv.i-p119.2"></span>praefecti hospitii — and in the French, <span
id="xv.i-p119.3"></span>Prevosts de l’hostel — perhaps, prefects of the
town-house, or town-hall, would have been more correct. The expression
in the original, <span id="xv.i-p119.4"></span>םיחבטה-רש,
*sar-hatabachim*, means the captain of the executioners; that is, of the
king’s body guard, whose office it was to inflict capital punishments;
as in the Turkish court at present. — See *Gesenius’* Lexicon. — *Ed*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 38](cc02015)
