[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc02009)  [Next](cc02011) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 2: Genesis, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xi"></span>

<span id="xi-p1"></span>chapter 33.

<span id="xi.i"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p1"></span><span id="xi.i-p1.1"></span>[Genesis
33:1-20](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#001)<span id="xi.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p2"></span>**1.** And Jacob lifted up his eyes, and
looked, and, behold, Esau came, and with him four hundred men. And he
divided the children unto Leah, and unto Rachel, and unto the two
handmaids.

<span id="xi.i-p3"></span>**1.** Levavit autem Iahacob oculos suos, et
vidit, et ecce Esau veniebat, et cum eo erant quadringenti viri: et
divisit liberos cum Leah et cum Rachel, et cum ambabus ancillis.

<span id="xi.i-p4"></span>**2.** And he put the handmaids and their
children foremost, and Leah and her children after, and Rachel and
Joseph hindermost.

<span id="xi.i-p5"></span>**2.** Tunc posuit ancillas et liberos earum
prius, et Leah et liberos ejus posteriores, Rachel autem et Ioseph
postremos.

<span id="xi.i-p6"></span>**3.** And he passed over before them, and
bowed himself to the ground seven times, until he came near to his
brother.

<span id="xi.i-p7"></span>**3.** Et ipse transivit ante eos, et
incurvavit se super terram septem vicibus, donec appropinquaret fratri
suo.

<span id="xi.i-p8"></span>**4.** And Esau ran to meet him, and embraced
him, and fell on his neck, and kissed him: and they wept.

<span id="xi.i-p9"></span>**4.** Cucurrit vero Esau in occursum ejus, et
complexus est eum, et jactavit se super collum ejus, et dixit, Qui isti
tibi? Et dixit, Liberi sunt, quos donavit Deus servo tuo.

<span id="xi.i-p10"></span>**5.** And he lifted up his eyes, and saw the
women and the children; and said, Who *are* those with thee? And he
said, The children which God hath graciously given thy servant.

<span id="xi.i-p11"></span>**5.** Postea levavit oculos suos, et vidit
uxores et liberos, et dixit, Qui isti tibi? Et dixit, Liberi sunt, quos
donavit Deus servo tuo.

<span id="xi.i-p12"></span>**6.** Then the handmaidens came near, they
and their children, and they bowed themselves.

<span id="xi.i-p13"></span>**6.** Et appropinquaverunt ancillae ipsae,
et liberi earum, et incurvaverunt se.

<span id="xi.i-p14"></span>**7.** And Leah also with her children came
near, and bowed themselves: and after came Joseph near and Rachel, and
they bowed themselves.

<span id="xi.i-p15"></span>**7.** Et appropinquavit etiam Leah, et
liberi ejus, et incurvaverunt se: et subinde appropinquavit Ioseph et
Rachel, et incurvaverunt se.

<span id="xi.i-p16"></span>**8.** And he said, What *meanest* thou by
all this drove which I met? And he said, *These are* to find grace in
the sight of my lord.

<span id="xi.i-p17"></span>**8.** Et dixit, Qui isti? tuane omnis turma
illa, quam obviam habui? Et dixit, Ut invenirem gratiam in oculis domini
mei.

<span id="xi.i-p18"></span>**9.** And Esau said, I have enough, my
brother; keep that thou hast unto thyself.

<span id="xi.i-p19"></span>**9.** Et dixit Esau, Est mihi multum, frater
mi, sit tuum quod tuum est.

<span id="xi.i-p20"></span>**10.** And Jacob said, Nay, I pray thee, if
now I have found grace in thy sight, then receive my present at my hand:
for therefore I have seen thy face, as though I had seen the face of
God, and thou wast pleased with me.

<span id="xi.i-p21"></span>**10.** Ait autem Iahacob, Ne quaeso: si nunc
inveni gratiam in oculis tuis, accipe munus meum e manu mea: quia
idcirco vidi faciem tuam, acsi viderem faciem Angeli: et propitius eris
erga me.

<span id="xi.i-p22"></span>**11.** Take, I pray thee, my blessing that
is brought to thee; because God hath dealt graciously with me, and
because I have enough. And he urged him, and he took *it*

<span id="xi.i-p23"></span>**11.** Cape quaeso benedictionem meam, quae
allata est tibi: quia donavit mihi Deus, et quia sunt mihi omnia. Et
coegit eum, et accepit.

<span id="xi.i-p24"></span>**12.** And he said, Let us take our journey,
and let us go, and I will go before thee.

<span id="xi.i-p25"></span>**12.** Tunc dixit, Proficiscamur, et
ambulemus, et ambulabo ante to.

<span id="xi.i-p26"></span>**13.** And he said unto him, My lord knoweth
that the children *are* tender, and the flocks and herds with young
*are* with me: and if men should overdrive them one day, all the flock
will die.

<span id="xi.i-p27"></span>**13.** Sed dixit ad eum, Dominus meus scit,
quod pueri teneri sunt: et pecudes, et boves foetae sunt mihi: et si
pulsaverint eas die una, morientur omnes pecudes.

<span id="xi.i-p28"></span>**14.** Let my lord, I pray thee, pass over
before his servant: and I will lead on softly, according as the cattle
that goeth before me and the children be able to endure, until I come
unto my lord unto Seir.

<span id="xi.i-p29"></span>**14.** Transeat quaeso dominus meus ante
servum suum, et ego ducam me pedetentim ad pedem gregis, qui est ante
me, et ad pedem puerorum, donec veniam ad dominum meum in Sehir.

<span id="xi.i-p30"></span>**15.** And Esau said, Let me now leave with
thee *some* of the folk that *are* with me. And he said, What needeth
it? let me find grace in the sight of my lord.

<span id="xi.i-p31"></span>**15.** Et dixit Esau, Stare faciam nunc
tecum de populo, qui est mecum. Et dixit, Utquid hoc? inveniam gratiam
in oculis domini mei.

<span id="xi.i-p32"></span>**16.** So Esau returned that day on his way
unto Seir.

<span id="xi.i-p33"></span>**16.** Reversus est itaque in die ipsa Esau
per viam suam in Sehir.

<span id="xi.i-p34"></span>**17.** And Jacob journeyed to Succoth, and
built him an house, and made booths for his cattle: therefore the name
of the place is called Succoth.

<span id="xi.i-p35"></span>**17.** Iahacob autem profectus est in
Suchoth, et aedificavit sibi domum, et pecudibus suis fecit tabernacula:
idcirco vocavit nomen loci Suchoth.

<span id="xi.i-p36"></span>**18.** And Jacob came to Shalem, a city of
Shechem, which *is* in the land of Canaan, when he came from Padanaram;
and pitched his tent before the city.

<span id="xi.i-p37"></span>**18.** Et venit Iahacob incolumis in
civitatem Sechem, quae erat in terra Chenaan, quando venit ipse de Padan
Aram, et mansit ante urbem.

<span id="xi.i-p38"></span>**19.** And he bought a parcel of a field,
where he had spread his tent, at the hand of the children of Hamor,
Shechem’s father, for an hundred pieces of money.

<span id="xi.i-p39"></span>**19.** Et emit partem agri, in quo tetendit
tabernaculum suum, de manu filiorum Hamor patris Sechem, centum nummis.

<span id="xi.i-p40"></span>**20.** And he erected there an altar, and
called it Elelohe-Israel.

<span id="xi.i-p41"></span>**20.** Et statuit ibi altare: et vocavit
illud, Fortis Deus Israel.

<span id="xi.i-p42"></span> 

<span id="xi.i-p43"></span><span id="xi.i-p43.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p44"></span>**1.** *And Jacob lifted up his eyes*. We
have said how greatly Jacob feared for himself from his brother; but now
when Esau himself approaches, his terror is not only renewed, but
increased. For although he goes forth like a courageous and spirited
combatant to this contest, he is still not exempt from a sense of
danger; whence it follows, that he is not free, either from anxiety or
fear. For his cruel brother had still the same cause of hatred against
him as before. And it was not probable, that, after he had left his
father’s house, and had been living as he pleased, he had become more
mild. Therefore, as in a doubtful affair, and one of great danger, Jacob
placed his wives and children in the order described; that, if Esau
should attempt anything hostile, the whole seed might not perish, but
part might have time for flight. The only thing which appears to be done
by him out of order is, that he prefers Rachel and her son Joseph to all
the rest; whereas the substance of the benediction is really in Judah.
But his excuse in reference to Judah is, that the oracle had not yet
been revealed; nor, in fact, was made known till shortly before his
death, in order that he might become at once its witness and its herald.
Meanwhile, it is not to be denied, that he was excessively indulgent to
Rachel. It is, indeed, a proof of distinguished courage, that, from a
desire to preserve a part of his seed, he precedes his companies, and
offers himself as a victim, if necessity demanded it. For there is no
doubt that the promise of God was his authority and his guide in this
design; nor would he have been able, unless sustained by the contident
expectation of celestial life, thus bravely to meet death. It happens,
indeed, sometimes, that a father, regardless of himself, will expose his
life to danger for his children: but holy Jacob’s reason was different;
for the promise of God was so deeply fixed in his mind, that he,
disregarding the earth, looked up towards heaven. But while he follows
the word of God, yet by the affection of the flesh, he is slightly drawn
aside from the right way. For the faith of the holy fathers was not so
pure, in all respects, but that they were liable to swerve to one side
or the other. Nevertheless, the Spirit always so far prevailed, that the
infirmity of the flesh might not divert them from their aim, but that
they might hold on their course. So much the more ought every one of us
to be suspicious of himself, lest he should deem himself perfectly pure,
because he intends to act rightly; for the flesh ever mingles itself
with our holy purpose, and many faults and corruptions steal in upon us.
But God deals kindly with us, and does not impute faults of this kind to
us.

<span id="xi.i-p45"></span><span id="xi.i-p45.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p46"></span>**3.** *And bowed himself to the ground seven
times*. This, indeed, he might do for the sake of giving honor: for we
know that the people of the east are addicted to far more ceremonies
than are in use with us. To me, however, it seems more probable, that
Jacob did not pay this honor simply to his brother, but that he
worshipped God, partly to give him thanks, and partly to implore him to
render his brother propitious; for he is said to have bowed down seven
times before he approached his brother. Therefore, before he came in
sight of his brother, he had already given the token of reverence or
worship. Hence we may conjecture, as I have said, that this homage was
paid to God and not to man: yet this is not at variance with the fact,
that he also approached as a suppliant, for the purpose of assuaging his
brother’s ferocity by his humiliation.  <span
id="fr_111"></span>[112](#fn_111) If any one object, that in this manner
he depreciated his right of primogeniture; the answer is easy, that the
holy man, by the eyes of faith, was looking higher; for he knew that the
effect of the benediction was deferred to its proper season, and was,
therefore, now like the decaying seed under the earth. Therefore,
although he was despoiled of his patrimony, and lay contemptible at his
brother’s feet; yet since he knew that his birthright was secured to
him, he was contented with this latent right, counted honors and riches
as nothing, and did not shrink from being regarded as an inferior in the
presence of his brother.

<span id="xi.i-p48"></span><span id="xi.i-p48.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p49"></span>**4.** *And Esau ran to meet him*. That Esau
meets his brother with unexpected benevolence and kindness, is the
effect of the special favor of God. Therefore, by this method, God
proved that he has the hearts of men in his hand, to soften their
hardness, and to mitigate their cruelty as often as he pleases: in
short, that he tames them as wild beasts are wont to be tamed; and then,
that he hearkened to the prayers of his servant Jacob. Wherefore, if at
any time the threats of enemies alarm us, let us learn to resort to this
sacred anchor. God, indeed, works in various ways, and does not always
incline cruel minds to humanity; but, while they rage, he restrains them
from doing harm by his own power: but if it is right, he can as easily
render them placable towards us; and we here see that Esau became so
towards his brother Jacob. It is also possible, that even while cruelty
was pent up within, the feeling of humanity may have had a temporary
ascendancy. And as we see that the Egyptians were constrained, for a
moment, to the exercise of humanity, although they were rendered nothing
better than before, as their madness, which soon afterwards broke out,
bears witness: so it is credible that the malice of Esau was now under
constraint; and not only so, but that his mind was divinely moved to put
on fraternal affection. For even in the reprobate, God’s established
order of nature prevails, not indeed in an even tenor, but as far as he
restrains them, to the end that they may not mingle all things in one
common slaughter. And this is most necessary for the preservation of the
human race. For few are so governed by the spirit of adoption, as
sincerely to cultivate mutual charity among themselves, as brethren.
Therefore, that men spare each other, and do not furiously rush on each
other’s destruction, arises from no other cause than the secret
providence of God, which watches for the protection of mankind. But to
God the life of his own faithful people is still more precious, so that
he vouchsafes to them peculiar care. Wherefore it is no wonder, that for
the sake of his servant Jacob, he should have composed the fierce mind
of Esau to gentleness.

<span id="xi.i-p50"></span><span id="xi.i-p50.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p51"></span>**5.** *And he lifted up his eyes*. Moses
relates the conversation held between the brothers. And as Esau had
testified his fraternal affection by tears and embraces, there is no
doubt that he inquires after the children in a spirit of congratulation.
The answer of Jacob breathes piety as well as modesty; for when he
replies, that his numerous seed had been given him by God, he
acknowledges and confesses that children are not so produced by nature
as to subvert the truth of the declaration, that the fruit of the womb
is a reward and gift of God. And truly, since the fecundity of brute
animals is the gift of God, how much more is this the case with men, who
are created after his own image. Let parents then learn to consider, and
to celebrate the singular kindness of God, in their offspring. It is the
language of modesty, when Jacob calls himself the servant of his
brother. Here again it is proper to recall to memory what I have lately
touched upon, that the holy man caught at nothing either of earthly
advantage or honor in the birthright; because the hidden grace of God
was abundantly sufficient for him, until the appointed time of
manifestation. And it becomes us also, according to his example, while
we sojourn in this world, to depend upon the word of the Lord; that we
may not deem it wearisome, to be held wrapped in the shadow of death,
until our real life be manifested. For although apparently our condition
is miserable and accursed, yet the Lord blesses us with his word; and,
on this account only, pronounces us happy, because he owns us as sons.

<span id="xi.i-p52"></span><span id="xi.i-p52.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p53"></span>**6.** *Then the handmaidens came near*. The
wives of Jacob, having left their country, had come as exiles into a
distant land. Now, at their first entrance, the terror of death meets
them; and when they prostrate themselves in the presence of Esau, they
do not know whether they are not doing homage to their executioner. This
trial was very severe to them, and grievously tormented the mind of the
holy man: but it was right that his obedience should be thus tried, that
he might become an example to us all. Moreover, the Holy Spirit here
places a mirror before us, in which we may contemplate the state of the
Church as it appears in the world. For though many tokens of the divine
favor are manifest in the family of Jacob; nevertheless we perceive no
dignity in him while lying with unmerited contempt in the presence of a
profane man. Jacob also himself thinks that he is well treated, if he
may be permitted by his brother, as a matter of favor, to dwell in the
land of which he was the heir and lord. Therefore let us bear it
patiently, if, at this day also, the glory of the Church, being covered
with a sordid veil, is an object of derision to the wicked.

<span id="xi.i-p54"></span><span id="xi.i-p54.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p55"></span>**8.** *What meanest thou by all this drove*?
He does not inquire as if he were altogether ignorant; seeing he had
heard from the servants, that oxen and camels and asses and other cattle
were sent him as a present; but for the purpose of refusing the gift
offered to him: for when anything does not please us, we are wont to
make inquiry as concerning a thing unknown to us. Jacob, however; is
urgent; nor does he cease to ask, till he induces his brother to receive
the gift: for this was as a pledge of reconciliation. Besides, for the
purpose of persuading his brother, he declares, that it would be taken
as a great kindness not to refuse what was given. For we do not
willingly receive anything but what we certainly know to be offered to
us freely and with a ready mind. And because it is not possible that we
should willingly honor any but those we love, Jacob says that he
rejoiced in the sigh of his brother as if he had seen God or an angel:
by which words he means, not only that he truly loved his brother, but
also that he held him in esteem. But it may seem, that he does wrong to
God, in comparing Him with a reprobate man; and that he speaks falsely,
because had the choice been given him, he would have desired nothing
more earnestly than to avoid this meeting with his brother. Both these
knots are easily untied. It is an accustomed form of speaking among the
Hebrews, to call whatever is excellent, divine. And certainly Esau being
thus changed, was no obscure figure of the favor of God: so that Jacob
might properly say, that he had been exhilarated by that friendly and
fraternal reception, as if he had seen God or an angel; that is, as if
God had given some sign of his presence. And, indeed, he does not speak
feignedly, nor pretend something different from what he has in his mind.
For, being himself perfectly free from all hatred, it was his chief
wish, to discharge whatever duty he could towards his brother; provided
that Esau, in return, would show himself a brother to him.

<span id="xi.i-p56"></span><span id="xi.i-p56.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p57"></span>**10.** *Receive my present at my hand*. This
noun may be taken passively as well as actively. If understood actively,
the sense will be, “Accept the present by which I desire to testify my
goodwill towards thee.” If understood passively, it may be referred to
God, as if Jacob had said, “Those things which the Lord has bestowed
upon me by his grace, I liberally impart to thee, that thou mayest be,
in some measure, a partaker with me of that divine blessing which I have
received.” But not to insist upon a word, Jacob immediately afterwards
clearly avows that whatever he possesses, is not the fruit of his labor
or industry, but has been received by him through the grace of God, and
by this reasoning he attempts to induce his brother to accept the gift;
as if he had said, “The Lord has poured upon me an abundance, of which
some part, without any loss to me, may overflow to thee.” And though
Jacob thus speaks under the impulse of present circumstances, he yet
makes an ingenuous confession by which he celebrates the grace of God.
Nearly the same words are on the tongues of all; but there are few who
truly ascribe to God what they possess: the greater part sacrifice to
their own industry. Scarcely one in a hundred is convinced, that
whatever is good flows from the gratuitous favor of God; and yet by
nature this sense is engraven upon our minds, but we obliterate it by
our ingratitude. It has appeared already, how labourious was the life of
Jacob: nevertheless, though he had suffered the greatest annoyances, he
celebrates only the mercy of God.

<span id="xi.i-p58"></span><span id="xi.i-p58.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p59"></span>**12.** *Let us take our journey*. Although
Esau was inclined to benevolence, Jacob still distrusts him: not that he
fears to be ensnared, or that he suspects perfidy to lie hidden under
the garb of friendship; but that he cautiously avoids new occasions of
offense: for a proud and ferocious man might easily be exasperated again
by light causes. Now, though just reason for fear was not wanting to the
holy man, yet I dare not deny that his anxiety was excessive. He
suspected the liberality of Esau; but did he not know that a God was
standing between them, who, as he was convinced by clear and undoubted
experience, watched for his salvation? For, whence such an incredible
change of mind in Esau, unless he had been divinely transformed from a
wolf into a lamb? Let us then learn, from this example, to restrain our
anxieties, lest when God has provided for us, we tremble, as in an
affair of doubt.

<span id="xi.i-p60"></span><span id="xi.i-p60.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p61"></span>**13.** *My lord knoweth*. The things which
Jacob alleges, as grounds of excuse, are true; nevertheless he
introduces them under false pretexts; except, perhaps, as regards the
statement, that he was unwilling to be burdensome and troublesome to his
brother. But since he afterwards turns his journey in another direction,
it appears that he feigned something foreign to what was really in his
mind. He says that he brings with him many encumbrances, and therefore
requests his brother to precede him. “*I will follow*” (he says) “*at
the feet of the children*;” that is, I will proceed gently as the pace
of the children will bear; and thus I will follow at my leisure, until I
come to thee in Mount Seir. In these words he promises what he was not
intending to do; for, leaving his brother, he journeyed to a different
place.  <span id="fr_112"></span>[113](#fn_112) But truth is so precious
to God, that he will not allow us to lie or deceive, even when no injury
follows. Wherefore, we must take care, when any fear of danger occupies
our minds, that we do not turn aside to these subterfuges.

<span id="xi.i-p63"></span><span id="xi.i-p63.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p64"></span>**17.** *And Jacob journeyed to Succoth*. In
the word Succoth, as Moses shortly afterwards shows, there is a
prolepsis. It is probable that Jacob rested there for some days, that he
might refresh his family and his flock after the toil of a long journey;
for he had found no quiet resting-place till he came thither. And
therefore he gave to that place the name of Succoth, or “Tents,” because
he had not dared firmly to plant his foot elsewhere. For though he had
pitched tents in many other places; yet on this alone he fixes the
memorial of divine grace, because now at length it was granted to him
that he might remain in some abode. But since it was not commodious as a
dwelling-place, Jacob proceeded farther till he came to Sichem. Now,
whereas the city has its recent name from the son of Hamor, its former
name is also mentioned, (<span id="xi.i-p64.1"></span>[Ge
32:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#018)<span id="xi.i-p64.1"></span>;)
for I agree with the interpreters who think Salem to be a proper name.
Although I do not contend, if any one prefers a different
interpretation; namely, that Jacob came *in safety* to Sichem.  <span
id="fr_113"></span>[114](#fn_113) But though this city may have been
called Salem, we must nevertheless observe, that it was different from
the city afterwards called Jerusalem; as there were also two cities
which bore the name of Succoth. As respects the subject in hand, the
purchase of land which Moses records in the nineteenth verse, may seem
to have been absurd. For Abraham would buy nothing all his life but a
sepulcher; and Isaac his son, waiving all immediate possession of lands,
was contented with that paternal inheritance; for God had constituted
them lords and heirs of the land, with this condition, that they should
be strangers in it unto death. Jacob therefore may seem to have done
wrong in buying a field for himself with money, instead of waiting the
proper time. I answer, that Moses has not expressed all that ought to
come freely into the mind of the reader. Certainly from the price we may
readily gather that the holy man was not covetous. He pays a hundred
pieces of money; could he acquire for himself large estates at so small
a price, or anything more shall some nook in which he might live without
molestation? Besides, Moses expressly relates that he bought that part
on which he had pitched his tent opposite the city. Therefore he
possessed neither meadows, nor vineyards, nor stable land. But since the
inhabitants did not grant him an abode near the city, he made an
agreement with them, and purchased peace at a small price.  <span
id="fr_114"></span>[115](#fn_114) This necessity was his excuse; so that
no one might say, that he had bought from man what he ought to have
expected as the free gift of God: or that, when he ought to have
embraced, by hope, the dominion of the promised land, he had been in too
great haste to enjoy it.

<span id="xi.i-p67"></span><span id="xi.i-p67.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p68"></span>**20.** *And he erected there an altar*.
Jacob having obtained a place in which he might provide for his family,
set up the solemn service of God; as Moses before testified concerning
Abraham and Isaac. For although, in every place, they gave themselves up
to the pure worship of God in prayers and other acts of devotion;
nevertheless they did not neglect the external confession of piety,
whenever the Lord granted them any fixed place in which they might
remain. For (as I have elsewhere stated) whenever we read that an altar
was built by them, we must consider its design and use: namely, that
they might offer victims, and might invoke the name of God with a pure
rite; so that, by this method, their religion and faith might be made
known. I say this, lest any one should think that they rashly trifled
with the worship of God; for it was their care to direct their actions
according to the divinely prescribed rule which was handed down to them
from Noah and Shem. Wherefore, under the word “altar,” let the reader
understand, by *synecdoche*, the external testimony of piety. Moreover,
it may hence be clearly perceived how greatly the love of divine worship
prevailed in the holy man; because though broken down by various
troubles, he nevertheless was not forgetful of the altar. And not only
does he privately worship God in the secret feeling of his mind; but he
exercises himself in ceremonies which are useful and commanded by God.
For he knew that men want helps, as long as they are in the flesh, and
that sacrifices were not instituted without reason. He had also another
purpose; namely, that his whole family should worship God with the same
sense of piety. For it behaves a pious father of a family diligently to
take care that he has no profane house, but rather that God should reign
there as in a sanctuary. Besides, since the inhabitants of that region
had fallen into many superstitions, and had corrupted the true worship
of God, Jacob wished to make a distinction between himself and them. The
Shechemites and other neighboring nations had certainly altars of their
own. Therefore Jacob, by establishing a different method of worship for
his household, thus declares theft he has a God peculiar to himself, and
has not degenerated from the holy fathers, from whom the perfect and
genuine religion had proceeded. This course could not but subject him to
reproach, because the Shechemites and other inhabitants would feel that
they were despised: but the holy man deemed anything preferable to
mixing himself with idolaters.

<span id="xi.i-p69"></span>**21.**  <span
id="fr_115"></span>[116](#fn_115) *And he called it El-eloh-Israel*
 <span id="fr_116"></span>[117](#fn_116) This name appears little
suitable to the altar; for it sounds as if a heap of stones or turf
formed a visible statue of God. But the meaning of the holy man was
different. For, because the altar was a memorial and pledge of all the
visions and promises of God, he honors it with this title, to the end
that, as often he beheld the altar, he should call God to rememberance.
That inscription of Moses, “The Lord is my help.” Has the same
signification; and also that Ezekiel inscribes on the forms of speaking
thereis a want of strict propiety of metaphor; yet this is not without
reason. For as superstitious men foolishly and wickedly attach God to
symbols, andm as it were, draw him down from his heavenly throne to
render him subject to their gross inventions; so the faithful, piously
and rightly, ascend from carthly signs that he worshipped no other God
than him who had been manifested by certain oracles, in order tha he
might distinguish Him from all idols. And we must observe it as a rule
of modesty, not to speak carelessly concerning the mysteries and the
glory of the Lord, but from a sense of faith, so far indeed, as he is
made known to us in his word. Moreover Jacob had respect to his to his
prosperity; for since the Lord had appeared to him, on the express
condition, that he would make with him the covenant of salvaation, Jacob
leaves his monument, from which, after his death, his descendants might
ascertain, ttat his religion had not flowed from a dark or obscure well,
or from a turbid pool, but from a clear and pure fountain; as if he had
engraved the oracles and visions, by which he had been taught, upon the
altar.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_111"></span>[112](cc02010.htm#fr_111) <span
id="xi.i-p46.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p47"></span> *Rivetus* judiciously observes on this
passage: “There are those who think that by this ceremony Jacob
worshipped God; but by what argument they prove this I do not see; for
whatever precedes or follows indicates that he wished to show reverence
to his brother; and for this reason, he went before his family; so also
the handmaidens and their sons bowed themselves; likewise Leah and her
sons, and lastly, Rachel with Joesph; in each case the same word is
used, which the Vulgate renders ‘adored.’ This verse also proves the
same thing; for after he saw his brother approaching, he bowed seven
times, till his brother drew near... This, therefore, was civil
reverence, (<span id="xi.i-p47.1"></span>reverentia civillis,) which did
not derogate from the spiritual right and prerogative of the covenant
entered into with Jehovah.” This account seems much more probable than
that given by Calvin. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_112"></span>[113](cc02010.htm#fr_112) <span
id="xi.i-p61.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p62"></span> *Peter* *Martyr* inclines to the opinion of
Calvin, though he expresses himself with greater caution. There appears
no reason to doubt that Jacob said what he meant. It is true he might
have other reasons besides those he gave, for not accompanying his
brother; reasons sufficient to deter a pious mind from too close and
frequent intercourse with persons uninfluenced by true religion. But it
is by no means certain that Jacob did not go to Seir; though he would
probably go unaccompanied by his wives and children, his flocks and
herds. The omission of the sacred writers to mention it, affords no
proof that he did not take the journey. Still less, is there any proof
that he did not intend to take it; which is all that a regard to truth
and sincerity required of him. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_113"></span>[114](cc02010.htm#fr_113) <span
id="xi.i-p64.2"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p65"></span> To understand the above passage the English
reader will require to be informed that the word <span
id="xi.i-p65.1"></span>םלש, (*Shalem*,) which our translators, with
Calvin, regarded as a proper name, means also “peace,” or “safety;” and
therefore the 18th verse may be read “Jacob came in safety to the city
of Sichem.” And this is the translation given in Calvin’s own version,
<span id="xi.i-p65.2"></span>Et venit Iahacob incolumis in civitatem
Sechem Thus his own text is, singularly enough, at variance with his
Commentary. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_114"></span>[115](cc02010.htm#fr_114) <span
id="xi.i-p65.3"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p66"></span> “For a hundred pieces of money.” The word
rendered pieces of money, <span id="xi.i-p66.1"></span>הטישק,
(*Kisitah*,) means also lambs; and the price given might have been one
hundred lambs; the probability, however, is, that the coin itself was
called a lamb, as we have a coin called a sovereign. It is supposed that
the coin bore the image of a lamb, perhaps because it was the
conventional price at which lambs were generally valued. The testimony
of St. Stephen (<span id="xi.i-p66.2"></span>[Ac
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#016)<span id="xi.i-p66.2"></span>) is
decisive as to the fact that money was in use. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_115"></span>[116](cc02010.htm#fr_115) <span
id="xi.i-p69.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p70"></span> This verse number appears in the Calvin
Translation Society edition. It actually is part of verse 20.

<span id="fn_116"></span>[117](cc02010.htm#fr_116) <span
id="xi.i-p70.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p71"></span> <span id="xi.i-p71.1"></span>Et vocavit
illud, Fortis Deus Israel; “the strong God of Israel.” The margin of the
English translation is more literal, “God, the God of Israel.” — *Ed*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 34](cc02011)
