[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc02004)  [Next](cc02006.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 2: Genesis, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi"></span>

<span id="vi-p1"></span>CHAPTER 28.

<span id="vi.i"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p1"></span><span id="vi.i-p1.1"></span>[Genesis
28:1-22](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#001.md)<span id="vi.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p2"></span>**1.** And Isaac called Jacob, and blessed
him, and charged him, and said unto him, Thou shalt not take a wife of
the daughters of Canaan.

<span id="vi.i-p3"></span>**1.** Vocavit ergo Ishac Iahacob, et
benedixit ei: praecepitque, et dixit ei, Non capies uxorem de filiabus
Chenaan.

<span id="vi.i-p4"></span>**2.** Arise, go to Padanaram, to the house of
Bethuel thy mother’s father; and take thee a wife from thence of the
daughters of Laban thy mother’s brother.

<span id="vi.i-p5"></span>**2.** Surge, vade in Padan Aram, ad domum
Bethuel patris matris tuae, et cape tibi inde uxorem de filiabus Laban
fratris matris tuae.

<span id="vi.i-p6"></span>**3.** And God Almighty bless thee, and make
thee fruitful, and multiply thee, that thou mayest be a multitude of
people;

<span id="vi.i-p7"></span>**3.** Deus autem omnipotens benedicat tibi,
et crescere faciat to, et multiplicare faciat to, et sis in coetum
populorum.

<span id="vi.i-p8"></span>**4.** And give thee the blessing of Abraham,
to thee, and to thy seed with thee; that thou mayest inherit the land
wherein thou art a stranger, which God gave unto Abraham.

<span id="vi.i-p9"></span>**4.** Et det tibi benedictionem Abraham, tibi
et semini tuo tecum, ut haereditate accipias terram peregrinationum
tuarum, quam dedit Deus ipsi Abraham.

<span id="vi.i-p10"></span>**5.** And Isaac sent away Jacob: and he went
to Padanaram unto Laban, son of Bethuel the Syrian, the brother of
Rebekah, Jacob’s and Esau’s mother.

<span id="vi.i-p11"></span>**5.** Et misit Ishac Iahacob, et profectus
est in Padan Aram ad Laban filium Bethuel Aramaei fratris Ribcae, matris
Iahacob et Esau.

<span id="vi.i-p12"></span>**6.** When Esau saw that Isaac had blessed
Jacob, and sent him away to Padanaram, to take him a wife from thence;
and that as he blessed him he gave him a charge, saying, Thou shalt not
take a wife of the daughters of Canaan;

<span id="vi.i-p13"></span>**6.** Et vidit Esau quod benedixisset Ishac
Iahacob, et misisset eum in Padan Aram, ut caperet sibi inde uxorem: et
benedicendo ei, praecepisset ei, dicendo, Non accipies uxorem de
filiabus Chenaan:

<span id="vi.i-p14"></span>**7.** And that Jacob obeyed his father and
his mother, and was gone to Padanaram;

<span id="vi.i-p15"></span>**7.** Et obedivisset Iahacob patri suo et
matri suae, et ivisset in Padan Aram.

<span id="vi.i-p16"></span>**8.** And Esau seeing that the daughters of
Canaan pleased not Isaac his father;

<span id="vi.i-p17"></span>**8.** Videns praeterea Esau quod malae
filiae Chenaan in oculis Ishac patris sui:

<span id="vi.i-p18"></span>**9.** Then went Esau unto Ishmael, and took
unto the wives which he had Mahalath the daughter of Ishmael Abraham’s
son, the sister of Nebajoth, to be his wife.

<span id="vi.i-p19"></span>**9.** Tunc abiit Esau ad Ismael, et accepit
Mahalath filiam Ismael filii Abraham sororem Nebajoth, super uxores
suas, sibi in uxorem.

<span id="vi.i-p20"></span>**10.** And Jacob went out from Beersheba,
and went toward Haran.

<span id="vi.i-p21"></span>**10.** Iahacob vero egressus est e
Beer-sebah, et perrexit in Aram:

<span id="vi.i-p22"></span>**11.** And he lighted upon a certain place,
and tarried there all night, because the sun was set; and he took of the
stones of that place, and put *them for* his pillows, and lay down in
that place to sleep.

<span id="vi.i-p23"></span>**11.** Et occurrit in locum, et pernoctavit
ibi, quia occubuerat sol: et tulit de lapidibus loci, et posuit sub
capite suo, et dormivit in loco eodem.

<span id="vi.i-p24"></span>**12.** And he dreamed, and behold a ladder
set up on the earth, and the top of it reached to heaven: and behold the
angels of God ascending and descending on it.

<span id="vi.i-p25"></span>**12.** Et somniavit, et ecce scala erecta
erat super terram, et caput ejus tangebat coelum; et ecce, Angeli Dei
ascendebant per eam.

<span id="vi.i-p26"></span>**13.** And, behold, the LORD stood above it,
and said, I *am* the LORD God of Abraham thy father, and the God of
Isaac: the land whereon thou liest, to thee will I give it, and to thy
seed;

<span id="vi.i-p27"></span>**13.** Et ecce, Iehova stabat super eam, et
dixit, Ego Iehova Deus Abraham patris tui, et Deus Ishac: terram, super
quam tu dormis, tibi dabo et semini tuo.

<span id="vi.i-p28"></span>**14.** And thy seed shall be as the dust of
the earth, and thou shalt spread abroad to the west, and to the east,
and to the north, and to the south: and in thee and in thy seed shall
all the families of the earth be blessed.

<span id="vi.i-p29"></span>**14.** Et erit semen tuum sicut pulvis
terrae, et multiplicaberis ad Occidentem, et ad Orientem, et ad
Aquilonem, et ad Meridiem: et benedicentur in to omnes familiae terrae,
et in semine tuo.

<span id="vi.i-p30"></span>**15.** And, behold, I *am* with thee, and
will keep thee in all *places* whither thou goest, and will bring thee
again into this land; for I will not leave thee, until I have done
*that* which I have spoken to thee of.

<span id="vi.i-p31"></span>**15.** Et ecce sum tecum, et custodiam to
quocunque profectus fueris, et redire faciam to ad terram hanc: quia non
derelinquam to, donec faciam quod loquutus sum tibi.

<span id="vi.i-p32"></span>**16.** And Jacob awaked out of his sleep,
and he said, Surely the LORD is in this place; and I knew *it* not.

<span id="vi.i-p33"></span>**16.** Deinde expergefactus est Iahacob a
somno suo, et dixit, Vere est Iehova in loco isto, et ego nesciebam.

<span id="vi.i-p34"></span>**17.** And he was afraid, and said, How
dreadful *is* this place! this *is* none other but the house of God, and
this *is* the gate of heaven.

<span id="vi.i-p35"></span>**17.** Timuit ergo, et dixit, Quam
terribilis est locus iste! non est hic nisi domus Dei, et hic est porta
coeli.

<span id="vi.i-p36"></span>**18.** And Jacob rose up early in the
morning, and took the stone that he had put *for* his pillows, and set
it up *for* a pillar, and poured oil upon the top of it.

<span id="vi.i-p37"></span>**18.** Surrexit autem Iahacob mane, et tulit
lapidem, quem posuerat sub capite suo, et posuit eum in statuam, et
effudit oleum supra summitatem ejus.

<span id="vi.i-p38"></span>**19.** And he called the name of that place
Bethel: but the name of that city *was called* Luz at the first.

<span id="vi.i-p39"></span>**19.** Et vocavit nomen loci ipsius Beth-el,
et posuit eum in statuam, et effudit oleum supra summitatem ejus.

<span id="vi.i-p40"></span>**20.** And Jacob vowed a vow, saying, If God
will be with me, and will keep me in this way that I go, and will give
me bread to eat, and raiment to put on,

<span id="vi.i-p41"></span>**20.** Adhaec vovit Iahacob votum, dicendo,
Si fuerit Iehova Deus mecum, et custodierit me in via ista, quam ego
ingredior, et dederit mihi panem ad vescendum, et vestimentum ad
operiendum:

<span id="vi.i-p42"></span>**21.** So that I come again to my father’s
house in peace; then shall the LORD be my God:

<span id="vi.i-p43"></span>**21.** Et reversus fuero in pace ad domum
patris mei, erit Iehova mihi in Deum.

<span id="vi.i-p44"></span>**22.** And this stone, which I have set
*for* a pillar, shall be God’s house: and of all that thou shalt give me
I will surely give the tenth unto thee.

<span id="vi.i-p45"></span>**22.** Et lapis iste, quem posui in statuam,
erit domus Dei: et omne quod dederis mihi, decimando decimabo illud
tibi.

<span id="vi.i-p46"></span> 

<span id="vi.i-p47"></span><span id="vi.i-p47.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p48"></span>**1.** *And Isaac called Jacob, and blessed
him*. It may be asked, whether the reason why Isaac repeats anew the
benediction which he had before pronounced, was that the former one had
been of no force; whereas, if he was a prophet and interpreter of the
will of God, what had once proceeded from his mouth ought to have been
firm and perpetual. I answer, although the benedictions was in itself
efficacious, yet the faith of Jacob required support of this kind: just
as the Lord, in reiterating, frequently the same promises, derogates
nothing either from himself or from his word, but rather confirms the
certainty of that word to his servants, lest, at any time, their
confidence should be shaken through the infirmity of the flesh. What I
have said must also be kept in mind, that Isaac prayed, not as a private
person, but as one furnished with a special command of God, to transmit
the covenant deposited with himself to his son Jacob. It was also of the
greatest importance that now, at length, Jacob should be blessed by his
father, knowingly and willingly; lest at a future time a doubt, arising
from the recollection of his father’s mistake and of his own fraud,
might steal over his mind. Therefore Isaac, now purposely directing his
words to his son Jacob, pronounces the blessing to be due to him by
right, lest it should be thought that, having been before deceived, he
had uttered words in vain, under a false character.

<span id="vi.i-p49"></span><span id="vi.i-p49.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p50"></span>**2.** *Arise, go to Padan-aram*. In the
first place, he commands him to take a wife from his maternal race. He
might have sent for her by some one of his servants, as Rebekah had been
brought to him; but perhaps he took this course to avoid the envy of
Esau, who might regard it as a reproach if more solicitude were
manifested about his brother’s marriage than about his own.

<span id="vi.i-p51"></span><span id="vi.i-p51.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p52"></span>**3.** *And God Almighty bless thee*. Here
follows the form of benediction, which slightly differs in words from
the former, but nevertheless tends to the same end. First, he desires
that Jacob should be blessed by God; that is, that he should be so
increased and amplified in his own offspring, as to grow into a
multitude of nations; or, in other words, that he should produce many
people who might combine into one body under the same head; as if he had
said, Let there arise from thee many tribes, who shall constitute one
people. And this truly was, in some measure, fulfilled when Moses
distributed the people into thirteen divisions. Nevertheless, Isaac
looked for a further result, namely, that many were at length to be
gathered together out of various nations, to the family of his son,
that, in this manner, from a vast and previously scattered multitude,
might be formed one assembly. For it is not to be doubted, that he
wished to hand down what he had received; seeing that he immediately
afterwards celebrates the memory of the original covenant, deriving his
present benediction from thence as its source: as if he had said, that
he transferred whatever right he had from his father; to his son Jacob,
in order that the inheritance of life might remain with him, according
to the covenant of God made with Abraham. They who expound this as being
said in the way of comparison, as if Isaac  <span
id="fr_52"></span>[53](#fn_52.md) wished those benefits which God had
before conferred on Abraham to be in the same manner granted to his son,
attenuate the meaning of the words. For since God, in making his
covenant with Abraham, had annexed this condition, that it should
descend to his posterity, it was necessary to trace its commencement to
his person as its root. Therefore, Isaac constitutes his son Jacob the
heir of Abraham, as successor to the benediction deposited with him, and
promised to his seed. This also appears more clearly from the context
following, where he assigns to him the dominion over the land, because
it had been given to Abraham. Moreover, we perceive, in this member of
the sentence, with what consistency of faith the holy fathers rested on
the word of the Lord; for otherwise, they would have found it no small
temptation to be driven about as strangers and pilgrims in the very
land, the possession of which had been divinely assigned them a hundred
years before. But we see, that in their wanderings and their unsettled
mode of life, they no less highly estimated what God had promised them,
than if they had already been in the full enjoyment of it. And this is
the true trial of faith; when relying on the word of God alone, although
tossed on the waves of the world, we stand as firmly as if our abode
were already fixed in heaven. Isaac expressly fortifies his son against
this temptation, when he calls the land of which he constitutes him
lord, the land of his wanderings. For by these words he teaches him that
it was possible he might be a wanderer all the days of his life: but
this did not hinder the promise of God from being so ratified, that he,
contented with that alone, might patiently wait for the time of
revelation. Even the plural number  <span id="fr_53"></span>[54](#fn_53.md)
seems to express something significant, namely, that Jacob would be a
wanderer not once only, but in various ways and perpetually. Since,
however, the Hebrew plural has not always such emphasis, I do not insist
on this interpretation. It is more worthy of notice, that the faith of
Jacob was proved by a severe and rigid trial, seeing, that for this very
reason, the land is promised to him in *word* only, while in *fact*, he
is cast far away from it. For he seems to be the object of ridicule,
when he is commanded to possess the dominion of the land, and yet to
leave it and to bid it farewell, and to depart into distant exile.

<span id="vi.i-p55"></span><span id="vi.i-p55.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p56"></span>**6.** *When Esau saw*. A brief narration
concerning Esau is here inserted, which it is useful to know; because we
learn from it that the wicked, though they exalt themselves against God,
and though, in contempt of his grace, they please themselves in
obtaining their desires, are yet not able to despise that grace
altogether. So now, Esau is penetrated with a desire of the blessing;
not that he aspires to it sincerely and from his heart; but perceiving
it to be something valuable, he is impelled to seek after it, though
with reluctance. A further fault is, that he does not seek it as he
ought: for he devises a new and strange method of reconciling God and
his father to himself; and therefore all his diligence is without
profit. At the same time he does not seem to be careful about pleasing
God, so that he may but propitiate his father. Before all things, it was
his duty to cast aside his profane disposition, his perverse manners,
and his corrupt affections of the flesh, and then to bear with meekness
the chastisement inflicted upon him: for genuine repentance would have
dictated to him this sentiment, Seeing I have hitherto rendered myself
unworthy of the birthright, my brother is deservedly preferred before
me. Nothing, therefore, remains for me but to humble myself, and since I
am deprived of the honor of being the head, let it suffice me to be at
least one of the members of the Church. And, certainly, it would have
been more desirable for him to remain in some obscure corner of the
Church, than, as one cut off and torn away from the elect people, to
shine with a proud preeminence on earth. He aims, however, at nothing of
this kind, but attempts, by I know not what prevarications, to appease
his father in whatever way he may be able. Moses, in this example,
depicts all hypocrites to the life. For as often as the judgment of God
urges them, though they are wounded with the pain of their punishment,
they yet do not seek a true remedy; for having aimed at offering one
kind of satisfaction only, they entirely neglect a simple and real
conversion: and even in the satisfaction offered, they only make a
pretense. Whereas Esau ought thoroughly to have repented, he only tried
to correct the single fault of his marriage; and this too in a most
absurd manner. Yet another defect follows: for while he retains the
wives who were so hateful to his parents, he supposes he has discharged
his duty by marrying a third. But by this method, neither was the
trouble of his parents alleviated, nor his house cleansed from guilt.
And now truly, whence does he marry his third wife? From the race of
Ishmael, whom we know to have been himself degenerate, and whose
posterity had departed from the pure worship of God. A remarkable proof
of this is discernible at the present day, in the pretended and
perfidious intermeddlers, who imagine they can admirably adjust
religious differences by simply adorning their too gross corruptions
with attractive colors.  <span id="fr_54"></span>[55](#fn_54.md) The actual
state of things compels them to confess that the vile errors and abuses
of Popery have so far prevailed as to render a Reformation absolutely
necessary: but they are unwilling that the filth of this Camarine marsh
be stirred;  <span id="fr_55"></span>[56](#fn_55.md) they only desire to
conceal its impurities, and even that they do by compulsion. For they
had previously called their abominations the sacred worship of God; but
since these are now dragged to light by the word of God, they therefore
descend to novel artifices. They flatter themselves, however; in vain,
seeing they are here condemned by Moses, in the person of Esau. Away,
then, with their impure pretended reformation, which has nothing simple
nor sincere. Moreover, since it is a disease inherent in the human race,
willingly to attempt to deceive God by some fictitious pretext, let us
know that we do nothing effectually, until we tear up our sins by the
roots, and thoroughly devote ourselves to God.

<span id="vi.i-p59"></span><span id="vi.i-p59.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p60"></span>**10.** *And Jacob went out*. In the course
of this history we must especially observe, how the Lord preserved his
own Church in the person of one man. For Isaac, on account of his age,
lay like a dry trunk; and although the living root of piety was
concealed within his breast, yet no hope of further offspring remained
in his exhausted and barren old age. Esau, like a green and flourishing
branch, had much of show and splendor, but his vigor was only momentary.
Jacob, as a severed twig, was removed into a far distant land; not that,
being ingrafted or planted there, he should acquire strength and
greatness, but that, being moistened with the dew of heaven, he might
put forth his shoots as into the air itself. For the Lord wonderfully
nourishes him, and supplies him with strength, until he shall bring him
back again to his father’s house. Meanwhile, let the reader diligently
observe, that while he who was blessed by God is cast into exile;
occasion of glorying was given to the reprobate Esau, who was left in
the possession of everything, so that he might securely reign without a
rival. Let us not, then, be disturbed, if at any time the wicked sound
their triumphs, as having gained their wishes, while we are oppressed.
Moses mentions the name of Beersheba, because, as it formed one of the
boundaries of the land of Canaan, and lay towards the great desert and
the south, it was the more remote from the eastern region towards which
Jacob was going. He afterwards adds Charran, (<span
id="vi.i-p60.1"></span>[Ge 29:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#001.md)<span
id="vi.i-p60.1"></span>,) where Abraham, when he left his own country,
dwelt for some time. Now, it appears that not only the pious old man
Terah, when he followed his son, or accompanied him on his journey, came
to Charran where he died; but that his other son Nahor, with his family,
also came to the same place. For we read in the eleventh chapter (<span
id="vi.i-p60.2"></span>[Ge 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#001.md)<span
id="vi.i-p60.2"></span>,) that Terah took his son Abraham, and Lot his
grandson, and Sarai his daughter-in-law. Whence we infer that Nahor, at
that time, remained in Chaldea, his native country. But now, since Moses
says, that Laban dwelt at Charran, we may hence conjecture, that Nahor,
in order that he might not appear guilty of the inhumanity of deserting
his father, afterwards gathered together his goods and came to him.

<span id="vi.i-p61"></span>Moses here, in a few words, declares what a
severe and arduous journey the holy man (Jacob) had, on account of its
great length: to which also another circumstance is added; namely, that
he lay on the ground, under the open sky, without a companion, and
without a habitation. But as Moses only briefly alludes to these facts,
so will I also avoid prolixity, as the thing speaks for itself.
Wherefore, if, at any time, we think ourselves to be roughly treated,
let us remember the example of the holy man, as a reproof to our
fastidiousness.

<span id="vi.i-p62"></span><span id="vi.i-p62.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p63"></span>**12.** *And he dreamed*. Moses here teaches
how opportunely, and (as we may say) in the critical moment, the Lord
succoured his servant. For who would not have said that holy Jacob was
neglected by God, since he was exposed to the incursion of wild beasts,
and obnoxious to every kind of injury from earth and heaven, and found
nowhere any help or solace? But when he was thus reduced to the last
necessity, the Lord suddenly stretches out his hand to him, and
wonderfully alleviates his trouble by a remarkable oracle. As,
therefore, Jacob’s invincible perseverance had before shone forth, so
now the Lord gives a memorable example of his paternal care towards the
faithful. Three things are here to be noticed in their order; first,
that the Lord appeared unto Jacob in a dream; secondly, the nature of
the vision as described by Moses; thirdly, the words of the oracle. When
mention is made of a dream, no doubt that mode of revelation is
signified, which the Lord formerly was wont to adopt towards his
servants. (<span id="vi.i-p63.1"></span>[Nu
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#006)<span id="vi.i-p63.1"></span>..md)
Jacob, therefore, knew that this dream was divinely sent to him, as one
differing from common dreams; and this is intimated in the words of
Moses, when he says that God appeared to him in a dream. For Jacob could
not see God, nor perceive him present, unless his majesty had been
distinguishable by certain marks.

<span id="vi.i-p64"></span>*And behold a ladder*. Here the *form* of the
vision is related, which is very pertinent to the subject of it; namely,
that God manifested himself as seated upon a ladder, the extreme parts
of which touched heaven and earth, and which was the vehicle of angels,
who descended from heaven upon earth. The interpretation of some of the
Hebrews, that the ladder is a figure of the Divine Providence, cannot be
admitted: for the Lord has given another sign more suitable.  <span
id="fr_56"></span>[57](#fn_56.md) But to us, who hold to this principle,
that the covenant of God was founded in Christ, and that Christ himself
was the eternal image of the Father, in which he manifested himself to
the holy patriarchs, there is nothing in this vision intricate or
ambiguous. For since men are alienated from God by sin, though he fills
and sustains all things by his power; yet that communication by which he
would draw us to himself is not perceived by us; but, on the other hand,
so greatly are we at variance with him, that, regarding him as adverse
to us, we, in our turn, flee from his presence. Moreover the angels, to
whom is committed the guardianship of the human race, while strenuously
applying themselves to their office, yet do not communicate with us in
such a way that we become conscious of their presence. It is Christ
alone, therefore, who connects heaven and earth: he is the only Mediator
who reaches from heaven down to earth: he is the medium through which
the fullness of all celestial blessings flows down to us, and through
which we, in turn, ascend to God. He it is who, being the head over
angels, causes them to minister to his earthly members. Therefore, (as
we read in <span id="vi.i-p65.1"></span>[Joh
1:51](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#051)<span id="vi.i-p65.1"></span>,.md) he
properly claims for himself this honor, that after he shall have been
manifested in the world, angels shall ascend and descend. If, then, we
say that the ladder is a figure of Christ, the exposition will not be
forced. For the similitude of a ladder well suits the Mediator, through
whom ministering angels, righteousness and life, with all the graces of
the Holy Spirit, descend to us step by step. We also, who were not only
fixed to the earth, but plunged into the depths of the curse, and into
hell itself, ascend even unto God. Also, the God of hosts is seated on
the ladder; because the fullness of the Deity dwells in Christ; and
hence also it is, that it reaches unto heaven. For although all power is
committed even to his human nature by the Father, he still would not
truly sustain our faith, unless he were God manifested in the flesh. And
the fact that the body of Christ is finite, does not prevent him from
filling heaven and earth, because his grace and power are everywhere
diffused. Whence also, Paul being witness, he ascended into heaven that
he might fill all things. They who translate the particle <span
id="vi.i-p65.2"></span>לע (*al*) by the word “near,” entirely destroy
the sense of the passage. For Moses wishes to state that the fullness of
the Godhead dwelt in the person of the Mediator. Christ not only
approached unto us, but clothed himself in our nature, that he might
make us one with himself. That the ladder was a symbol of Christ, is
also confirmed by this consideration, that nothing was more suitable
than that God should ratify his covenant of eternal salvation in his Son
to his servant Jacob. And hence we feel unspeakable joy, when we hear
that Christ, who so far excels all creatures, is nevertheless joined
with us. The majesty, indeed, of God, which here presents itself
conspicuously to view, ought to inspire terror; so that every knee
should bow to Christ, that all creatures should look up to him and adore
him, and that all flesh should keep silence in his presence. But his
friendly and lovely image is at the same time depicted; that we may know
by his descent, that heaven is opened to us, and the angels of God are
rendered familiar to us. For hence we have fraternal society with them,
since the common Head both of them and us has his station on earth.

<span id="vi.i-p66"></span><span id="vi.i-p66.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p67"></span>**13.** *I am the Lord God of Abraham*. This
is the third point which, I said, was to be noticed: for mute visions
are cold; therefore the word of the Lord is as the soul which quickens
them. The figure, therefore, of the ladder was the inferior appendage of
this promise; just as God illustrates and adorns his word by external
symbols, that both greater clearness and authority may be added to it.
Whence also we prove that sacraments in the Papacy are frivolous,
because no voice is heard in them which may edify the soul. We may
therefore observe, that whenever God manifested himself to the fathers,
he also spoke, lest a mute vision should have held them in suspense.
Under the name <span id="vi.i-p67.1"></span>הוהי *Jehovah* God teaches
that he is the only Creator of the world, that Jacob might not seek
after other gods. But since his majesty is in itself incomprehensible,
he accommodates himself to the capacity of his servant, by immediately
adding, that he is the God of Abraham and Isaac. For though it is
necessary to maintain that the God whom we worship is the only God; yet
because when our senses would aspire to the comprehension of his
greatness, they fail at the first attempt; we must diligently cultivate
that sobriety which teaches us not to desire to know more concerning him
than he reveals unto us; and then he, accommodating himself to our
weakness, according to his infinite goodness, sill omit nothing which
tends to promote our salvation. And whereas he made a special covenant
with Abraham and Isaac, proclaiming himself their God, he recalls his
servant Jacob to the true source of faith, and retains him also in his
perpetual covenant. This is the sacred bond of religion, by which all
the sons of God are united among themselves, when from the first to the
last they hear the same promise of salvation, and agree together in one
common hope. And this is the effect of that benediction which Jacob had
lately received from his father; because God with his own mouth
pronounces him to be the heir of the covenant, lest the mere testimony
of man should be thought illusive.

<span id="vi.i-p68"></span>*The land whereon thou liest*. We read that
the land was given to his posterity; yet he himself was not only a
stranger in it to the last, but was not permitted even to die there.
Whence we infer, that under the pledge or earnest of the land, something
better and more excellent was given, seeing that Abraham was a spiritual
possessor of the land, and contented with the mere beholding of it,
fixed his chief regard on heaven. We, may observe, however, that the
seed of Jacob is here placed in opposition to the other sons of Abraham,
who, according to the flesh, traced their origin to him, but were cut
off from the holy people: yet, from the time when the sons of Jacob
entered the land of Canaan, they had the perpetual inheritance unto the
coming of Christ, by whose advent the world was renewed.

<span id="vi.i-p69"></span><span id="vi.i-p69.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p70"></span>**14.** *And thy seed shall be as the dust of
the earth*. The sum of the whole is this, Whatever the Lord had promised
to Abraham, Jacob transmitted to his sons. Meanwhile it behoved the holy
man, in reliance on this divine testimony, to hope against hope; for
though the promise was vast and magnificent, yet, wherever Jacob turned
himself, no ray of good hope shone upon him. He saw himself a solitary
man; no condition better than that of exile presented itself; his return
was uncertain and full of danger; but it was profitable for him to be
thus left destitute of all means of help, that he might learn to depend
on the word of God alone. Thus, at the present time, if God freely
promises to give us all things, and yet seems to approach us
empty-handed, it is still proper that we should pay such honor and
reverence to his word, that we may be enriched and filled with faith. At
length, indeed, after the death of Jacob, the event declared how
efficacious had been this promise: by which example we are taught that
the Lord by no means disappoints his people, even when he defers the
granting of those good things which he has promised, till after their
death.

<span id="vi.i-p71"></span>*And in thee, and in thy seed, shall all the
families of the earth be blessed*  <span id="fr_57"></span>[58](#fn_57.md)
This clause has the greater weight, because in Jacob and in his seed the
blessing is to be restored from which the whole human race had been cut
off in their first parent. But what this expression means, I have
explained above; namely, that Jacob will not only be an exemplar, or
*formula* of blessing, but its fountain, cause, or foundation; for
though a certain exquisite degree of happiness is often signified by an
expression of this kind; yet, in many passages of Scripture, it means
the same as to desire from any one his blessing, and to acknowledge it
as his gift. Thus men are said to bless themselves in God, when they
acknowledge him as the author of all good. So here God promises that in
Jacob and his seed all nations shall bless themselves, because no
happiness will ever be found except what proceeds from this source.
That, however, which is peculiar to Christ, is without impropriety
transferred to Jacob, in whose loins Christ then was. Therefore,
inasmuch as Jacob, at that time, represented the person of Christ, it is
said that all nations are to be blessed in him; but, seeing that the
manifestation of a benefit so great depended on another, the expression
*in thy seed* is immediately added in the way of explanation. That the
word seed is a collective noun, forms no objection to this
interpretation, (as I have elsewhere said,) for since all unbelievers
deprive themselves of honor and of grace, and are thus accounted
strangers; it is necessary to refer to the Head, in order that the unity
of the seed may appear. Whoever will reverently ponder this, will easily
see that, in this interpretation, which is that of Paul, there is
nothing tortuous or constrained.

<span id="vi.i-p73"></span><span id="vi.i-p73.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p74"></span>**15.** *I am with thee, and will keep thee*.
God now promptly anticipates the temptation which might steal over the
mind of holy Jacob; for though he is, for a time, thrust out into a
foreign land, God declares that he will be his keeper until he shall
have brought him back again. He then extends his promise still further;
saying, that he will never desert him till all things are fulfilled.
There was a twofold use of this promise: first, it retained his mind in
the faith of the divine covenant; and, secondly, it taught him that it
could not be well with him unless he were a partaker of the promised
inheritance.

<span id="vi.i-p75"></span><span id="vi.i-p75.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p76"></span>**16.** *And Jacob awaked*. Moses again
affirms that this was no common dream; for when any one awakes he
immediately perceives that he had been under a delusions in dreaming.
But God impressed a sign on the mind of his servant, by which, when he
awoke, he might recognize the heavenly oracle which he had heard in his
sleep. Moreover, Jacob, in express terms, accuses himself, and extols
the goodness of God, who deigned to present himself to one who sought
him not; for Jacob thought that he was there alone: but now, after the
Lord appeared, he wonders, and exclaims that he had obtained more than
he could have dared to hope for. It is not, however, to be doubted that
Jacob had called upon God, and had trusted that he would be the guide of
his journey; but, because his faith had not availed to persuade him that
God was thus near unto him, he justly extols this act of grace. So,
whenever God anticipates our wishes, and grants us more than our minds
have conceived; let us learn, after the example of this patriarch, to
wonder that God should have been present with us. Now, if each of us
would reflect how feeble his faith is, this mode of speaking would
appear always proper for us all; for who can comprehend, in his scanty
measure, the immense multitude of gifts which God is perpetually heaping
upon us?

<span id="vi.i-p77"></span><span id="vi.i-p77.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p78"></span>**17.** *And he was afraid, and said*. It
seems surprising that Jacob should fear, when God spoke so graciously to
him; or that he should call that place “dreadful,” where he had been
filled with incredible joy. I answer, although God exhilarates his
servants, he at the same time inspires them with fear, in order that
they may learn, with true humility and self-denial, to embrace his
mercy. We are not therefore to understand that Jacob was struck with
terror, as reprobates are, as soon as God shows himself; but he was
inspired with a fear which produces pious submission. He also properly
calls that place the *gate of heaven*, on account of the manifestation
of God: for, because God is placed in heaven as on his royal throne,
Jacob truly declares that, in seeing God, he had penetrated into heaven.
In this sense the preaching of the gospel is called the kingdom of
heaven, and the sacraments may be called the gate of heaven, because
they admit us into the presence of God. The Papists, however, foolishly
misapply this passage to their temples, as if God dwelt in filthy
places.  <span id="fr_58"></span>[59](#fn_58.md) But if we concede, that
the places which they designate by this title, are not polluted with
impious superstitions, yet this honor belongs to no peculiar place,
since Christ has filled the whole world with the presence of his Deity.
Those helps to faith only, (as I have before taught,) by which God
raises us to himself, can be called the gates of heaven.

<span id="vi.i-p80"></span><span id="vi.i-p80.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p81"></span>**18.** *And Jacob rose up early*. Moses
relates that the holy father was not satisfied with merely giving thanks
at the time, but would also transmit a memorial of his gratitude to
posterity. Therefore he raised a monument, and gave a name to the place,
which implied that he thought such a signal benefit of God worthy to be
celebrated in all ages. For this reason, the Scripture not only commands
the faithful to sing the praises of God among their brethren; but also
enjoins them to train their children to religious duties, and to
propagate the worship of God among their descendants.

<span id="vi.i-p82"></span>*And set it up for a pillar*. Moses does not
mean that the stone was made an idol, but that it should be a special
memorial. God indeed uses this word <span id="vi.i-p82.1"></span>הבצמ
(*matsbah*,) when he forbids statues to be erected to himself, (<span
id="vi.i-p82.2"></span>[Le 26:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#001.md)<span
id="vi.i-p82.2"></span>,) because almost all statues were objects of
veneration, as if they were likenesses of God. But the design of Jacob
was different; namely, that he might leave a testimony of the vision
which had appeared unto him, not that he might represent God by that
symbol or figure. Therefore the stone was not there placed by him, for
the purpose of depressing the minds of men into any gross superstition,
but rather of raising them upward. He used oil as a sign of
consecration, and not without reason; for as, in the world, everything
is profane which is destitute of the Spirit of God, so there is no pure
religion except that which the heavenly unction sanctifies. And to this
point the solemn right of consecration, which God commanded in his law,
tends, in order that the faithful may learn to bring in nothing of their
own, lest they should pollute the temple and worship of God. And though,
in the times of Jacob, no teaching had yet been committed to writing; it
is, nevertheless, certain that he had been imbued with that principle of
piety which God from the beginning had infused into the hearts of the
devout: wherefore, it is not to be ascribed to superstition that he
poured oil upon the stone; but he rather testified, as I have said, that
no worship can be acceptable to God, or pure, without the sanctification
of the Spirit. Other commentators argue, with more subtlety, that the
stone was a symbol of Christ, on whom all the graces of the Spirit were
poured out, that all might draw out of his fullness; but I do not know
that any such thing entered the mind of Moses or of Jacob. I am
satisfied with what I have before stated, that a stone was erected to be
a witness or a memorial (so to speak) of a vision, the benefit of which
reaches to all ages. It may be asked, Whence did the holy man obtain oil
in the desert? They who answer that it had been brought from a
neighboring city are, in my opinion, greatly deceived; for this place
was then void of inhabitants, as I shall soon show. I therefore rather
conjecture, that on account of the necessity of the times, seeing that
suitable accommodations could not always be had, he had taken some
portion of food for his journey along with him; and as we know that
great use was made of oil in those parts, it is no wonder if he carried
a flagon of oil with his bread.

<span id="vi.i-p83"></span><span id="vi.i-p83.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p84"></span>**19.** *And he called the name of that place
Beth-el*. It may appear absurd that Moses should speak of that place as
a city, respecting which he had a little while before said that Jacob
had slept there in the open air; for why did not he seek an abode, or
hide himself in some corner of a house? But the difficulty is easily
solved, because the city was not yet built; neither did the place
immediately take the name which Jacob had assigned, but lay long
concealed. Even when a town was afterwards built on the spot, no mention
is made of Beth-el, as if Jacob had never passed that way; for the
inhabitants did not know what had been done there, and therefore they
called the city Luz,  <span id="fr_59"></span>[60](#fn_59.md) according to
their own imagination; which name it retained until the Israelites,
having taken possession of the land, recalled into common use, as by an
act of restoration, the former name which had been abolished. And it is
to be observed, that when posterity, by a foolish emulation, worshipped
God in Beth-el, seeing that it was done without a divine command, the
prophets severely inveighed against that worship, calling the name of
the place Bethaven, that is, the house of iniquity: whence we infer how
unsafe it is to rely upon the examples of the fathers without the word
of God. The greatest care, therefore, must be taken, in treating of the
worship of God, that what has been once done by men, should not be drawn
into a precedent; but that what God himself has prescribed in his word
should remain an inflexible rule.

<span id="vi.i-p86"></span><span id="vi.i-p86.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p87"></span>**20.** *And Jacob vowed a vow*. The design
of this vow was, that Jacob would manifest his gratitude, if God should
prove favorable unto him. Thus they offered peace-offerings under the
law, to testify their gratitude; and since thanksgiving is a sacrifice
of a sweet odour, the Lord declares vows of this nature to be acceptable
to him; and therefore we must also have respect to this point, when we
are asked *what* and *how* it is lawful to vow to God; for some are too
fastidious, who would utterly condemn all vows rather than open the door
to superstitions. But if the rashness of those persons is perverse, who
indiscriminately pour forth their vows, we must also beware lest we
become like those on the opposite side, who disallow all vows without
exception. Now, in order that a vow may be lawful and pleasing to God,
it is first necessary that it should tend to a right end; and next, that
men should devote nothing by a vow but what is in itself approved by
God, and what he has placed within their own power. When the separate
parts of this vow are examined, we shall see holy Jacob so regulating
his conduct as to omit none of these things which I have mentioned. In
the first place, he has nothing else in his mind than to testify his
gratitude. Secondly, he confines whatever he is about to do, to the
lawful worship of God. Inthe third place, he does not proudly promise
what he had not the power to perform, but devotes the tithe of his goods
as a sacred oblation. Wherefore, the folly of the Papists is easily
refuted; who, in order to justify their own confused farrago of vows,
catch at one or another vow, soberly conceived, as a precedent, when in
the meantime their own license exceeds all bounds. Whatever comes
uppermost they are not ashamed to obtrude upon God. One man makes his
worship to consist in abstinence from flesh, another in pilgrimages, a
third in sanctifyingcertain days by the use of sackcloth, or by other
things of the same kind; and not to God only do they make their vows,
but also admit any dead person they please into a participation of this
honor. They arrogate to themselves the choice of perpetual celibacy.
What do they find in the example of Jacob which has any similitude or
affinity to such rashness, that they should hence catch at such a
covering for themselves? But, for the purpose of bringing all these
things clearly to light, we must first enter upon an explanation of the
words. It may seem absurd that Jacob here makes a covenant with God, to
be his worshipper, if he will give him what he desires; as if truly he
did not intend to worship God for nothing. I answer, that, by
interposing this condition, Jacob did not by any means act from
distrust, as if he doubted of God’s continual protection; but that in
this manner made provision against his own infirmity, in preparing
himself to celebrate the divine goodness by a vow previously made.
 <span id="fr_60"></span>[61](#fn_60.md) The superstitious deal with God
just as they do with mortal man; they try to soothe him with their
allurements. The design of Jacob was far different; namely, that he
might the more effectually stimulate himself to the duties of religion.
He had often heard from the mouth of God, I will be always with thee;
and he annexes his vow as an appendage to that promise. He seems indeed,
at first sight, like a mercenary, acting in a servile manner; but since
he depends entirely upon the promises given unto him, and forms both his
language and his affections in accordance with them, he aims at nothing
but the confirmation of his faith, and gathers together those aids which
he knows to be suitable to his infirmity. When, therefore, he speaks of
food and clothing, we must not, on that account, accuse him of
solicitude respecting this earthly life alone; whereas he rather
contends, like a valiant champion, against violent temptations. He found
himself in want of all things; hunger and nakedness were continually
threatening him with death, not to mention his other innumerable
dangers: therefore he arms himself with confidence, that he might
proceed through all difficulties and obstacles, being fully assured that
every kind of assistance was laid up for him in the grace of God: for he
confesses himself to be in extreme destitution, when he says, If the
Lord will supply me with food and raiment. It may nevertheless be asked,
since his grandfather Abraham had sent his servant with a splendid
retinue, with camels and precious ornaments; why does Isaac now send
away his son without a single companion, and almost without provisions?
It is possible that he was thus dismissed, that the mind of cruel Esau
might be moved to tenderness by a spectacle so miserable. Yet, in my
judgment, another reason was of greater weight; for Abraham, fearing
lest his son Isaac should remain with his relatives, took an oath from
his servant that he would not suffer his son to go into Mesopotamia. But
now, since necessity compels holy Isaac to determine differently for his
son Jacob; he, at least, takes care not to do anything which might
retard his return. He therefore supplies him with no wealth, and with no
delicacies which might ensnare his mind, but purposely sends him away
poor and empty, that he might be the more ready to return. Thus we see
that Jacob preferred his father’s house to all kingdoms, and had no
desire of settled repose elsewhere.

<span id="vi.i-p89"></span><span id="vi.i-p89.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p90"></span>**21.** *Then shall the Lord be my God*. In
these words Jacob binds himself never to apostatize from the pure
worship of the One God; for there is no doubt that he here comprises the
sum of piety. But he may seem to promise what far exceeds his strength;
for newness of life, spiritual righteousness, integrity of heart, and a
holy regulation of the whole life, were not in his own power. I answer,
when holy men vow those things which God requires of them, and which are
due from them as acts of piety; they, at the same time, embrace what God
promises concerning the remission of sins by the help of his Holy
Spirit. Hence it follows that they ascribe nothing to their own
strength; and also, that whatever falls short of entire perfection does
not vitiate their worship, because God, mercifully and with paternal
indulgence, pardons them.

<span id="vi.i-p91"></span><span id="vi.i-p91.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p92"></span>**22.** *And this stone which I have set for
a pillar*. This ceremony was an appendage to divine worship; for
external rites do not make men true worshippers of God, but are only
aids to piety. But because the holy fathers were then at liberty to
erect altars wherever they pleased, Jacob poured a libation upon the
stone, because he had then no other sacrifice to offer; not that he
worshipped God according to his own will, (for the direction of the
Spirit was instead of the written law,) but he erected in that place a
stone — as he was permitted to do by the kindness and permission of God,
which should be a testimony of the vision. Moreover, this form of
speech, that the stone shall be Beth-el, is *metonymical*; as we are
sanctioned, by common usage, to transfer to external signs what properly
belongs to the things represented. I have lately shown how ignorantly
posterity has abused this holy exercise of piety. What next follows
respecting the offering of tithes, is not a simple ceremony, but has a
duty of charity annexed; for Jacob enumerates, in a threefold order,
first, the spiritual worship of God; then the external rite, by which he
both assists his own piety, and makes profession of it before men; in
the third place, an oblation, by which he exercises himself in giving
friendly aid to his brethren; for there is no doubt that tithes were
applied to that use.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_52"></span>[53](cc02005.htm#fr_52.md) <span
id="vi.i-p52.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p53"></span> In the editions of Amsterdam and Berlin, the
name Jacob is here inserted; and the old English version has it too. The
mistake is obvious, and stands corrected in the French translation. —
*Ed*.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[54](cc02005.htm#fr_53.md) <span
id="vi.i-p53.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p54"></span> <span id="vi.i-p54.1"></span>Terram
peregrinationum — the land of wanderings.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[55](cc02005.htm#fr_54.md) <span
id="vi.i-p56.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p57"></span> The Council of Trent is here obviously
referred to, which held its sessions from the year 1545 to the year
1563. This council was the Romanist reaction upon the Protestant
reformation. Father Paul gives a singular and graphic description of the
persons, the characters, and the arguments, by which this last council
of the Church of Rome was distinguished. It will be remembered that
Calvin’s Commentary on Genesis was published about the middle of this
protracted period. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[56](cc02005.htm#fr_55.md) <span
id="vi.i-p57.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p58"></span> Camarina was a city on the south of Sicily,
placed near the mouths of two rivers, close to which was a march or
lake, called the Camarine lake, injurious to health, and often producing
pestilence. It is reported that the inhabitants consulted Apollo whether
or not they should drain it. The answer was, that it would be better
undrained. This answer they disregarded, and in consequence the enemy
found it easy to attack and plunder the city. Hence the proverb, “<span
id="vi.i-p58.1"></span>Ne moveas Camarinam;” that is, “Do not get rid of
one evil to bring on you a greater.” — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[57](cc02005.htm#fr_56.md) <span
id="vi.i-p64.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p65"></span> Whatever force and truth, as well as beauty,
there may be in the exposition of Calvin which follows, he appears to
have dismissed too hastily the opinion of the Jews, that the vision was
symbolical of Divine Providence. The circumstances of Jacob seemed to
require some such intimations of Divine protection and care during his
journey, as this interpretation of the vision presents. And in every way
the passage thus understood is both useful and encouraging. There is,
however, no need to question, that the higher mystical interpretation,
on which Calvin exclusively insists, is the legitimately applicable, as
conveying the ultimate and, in short, the most important meaning of the
vision. The reader may consult the 123d Exercitation of Rivetus on this
subject. — *Rivetus* in Gen., p. 602.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[58](cc02005.htm#fr_57.md) <span
id="vi.i-p71.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p72"></span> <span id="vi.i-p72.1"></span>Et benedicent
se in to omnes fines terrae. “And all the ends of the earth shall bless
themselves in thee.” The reader will perceive that Calvin’s remarks turn
chiefly on the expression “bless themselves,” which does not appear in
our version. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[59](cc02005.htm#fr_58.md) <span
id="vi.i-p78.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p79"></span> <span id="vi.i-p79.1"></span>In foetidis
lupanaribus.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[60](cc02005.htm#fr_59.md) <span
id="vi.i-p84.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p85"></span> The word <span id="vi.i-p85.1"></span>זול
(*Luz*) signifies an almond-tree, and the town may have derived this
name from the fact that almond-trees abounded in the neighborhood. Yet
the verb from which it is taken means “to turn away, to depart, to go
back;” also “to be perverse, or wicked;” and it is not impossible that
this name may have been assigned to it on account of the wickedness of
its inhabitants. See the Lexicons of *Schindler*, *Gesenius*, etc. —
*Ed*

<span id="fn_60"></span>[61](cc02005.htm#fr_60.md) <span
id="vi.i-p87.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p88"></span> <span id="vi.i-p88.1"></span>See desposant a
celebrer la bonnet de Dieu, en se vouant expressement a luy. Preparing
himself to celebrate the goodness of God, in devoting himself expressly
to him. — *Fr*. *Tr*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 29](cc02006.md)
