[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc02018)  [Next](cc02020) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 2: Genesis, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xx"></span>

<span id="xx-p1"></span>CHAPTER 42.

<span id="xx.i"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p1"></span><span id="xx.i-p1.1"></span>[Genesis
42:1-38](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#001)<span id="xx.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p2"></span>**1.** Now when Jacob saw that there was corn
in Egypt, Jacob said unto his sons, Why do ye look one upon another?

<span id="xx.i-p3"></span>**1.** Quum autem videret Jahacob quod esset
frumentum in Aegypto, dixit Jahacob filiis suis, Utquid aspicitis vos?

<span id="xx.i-p4"></span>**2.** And he said, Behold, I have heard that
there is corn in Egypt: get you down thither, and buy for us from
thence; that we may live, and not die.

<span id="xx.i-p5"></span>**2.** Et dixit, Ecce, audivi quod est
frumentum in Aegypto: descendite illuc, et emite nobis inde, et vivemus,
nec moriemur.

<span id="xx.i-p6"></span>**3.** And Joseph’s ten brethren went down to
buy corn in Egypt.

<span id="xx.i-p7"></span>**3.** Descenderunt ergo fratres Joseph decem,
ut emerent frumentum in Aegypto.

<span id="xx.i-p8"></span>**4.** But Benjamin, Joseph’s brother, Jacob
sent not with his brethren; for he said, Lest peradventure mischief
befall him.

<span id="xx.i-p9"></span>**4.** (Nam Benjamin fratrem Joseph non misit
Jahacob cum fratrbus suit: quia dixit, Ne forte accidat ei mors.)

<span id="xx.i-p10"></span>**5.** And the sons of Israel came to buy
*corn* among those that came: for the famine was in the land of Canaan.

<span id="xx.i-p11"></span>**5.** Et venerunt filii Israel, ut emerent
in medio venientium: erat enim fames in terra Chenan.

<span id="xx.i-p12"></span>**6.** And Joseph *was* the governor over the
land, *and* he *it was* that sold to all the people of the land: and
Joseph’s brethren came, and bowed down themselves before him *with*
their faces to the earth.

<span id="xx.i-p13"></span>**6.** Joseph autem erat dominus super
terram: ipse vendebat toti populo terrae: venerunt, inquam, fratres
Joseph, et incurvaverunt se ei in faciem super terram.

<span id="xx.i-p14"></span>**7.** And Joseph saw his brethren, and he
knew them, but made himself strange unto them, and spake roughly unto
them; and he said unto them, Whence come ye? And they said, From the
land of Canaan to buy food.

<span id="xx.i-p15"></span>**7.** Et vidit Joseph fratres suos, et
agnovit eos, et alienum se ostendit eis: locutusque est cum eis dura, et
dixit eis, Unde venistis? Et dixerunt, De terra Chenaan ad emendum
cibum.

<span id="xx.i-p16"></span>**8.** And Joseph knew his brethren, but they
knew not him.

<span id="xx.i-p17"></span>**8.** Agnovit Joseph fratres suos: ipsi
autem non agnoverunt eum.

<span id="xx.i-p18"></span>**9.** And Joseph remembered the dreams which
he dreamed of them, and said unto them, Ye *are* spies; to see the
nakedness of the land ye are come.

<span id="xx.i-p19"></span>**9.** Et recordatus est Joseph somniorum,
quae somniaverat de eis, dixitque, Exploratores estis, ad videndum
nuditatem terrae venistis.

<span id="xx.i-p20"></span>**10.** And they said unto him, Nay, my lord,
but to buy food are thy servants come.

<span id="xx.i-p21"></span>**10.** Et dixerunt ad eum, Nequaquam, domine
mi: sed servi tui venerunt ad emendum cibum.

<span id="xx.i-p22"></span>**11.** We *are* all one man’s sons; we *are*
true *men*, thy servants are no spies.

<span id="xx.i-p23"></span>**11.** Omnes nos filii ejusdem viri sumus:
veraces sumus, non sunt servi tui exploratores.

<span id="xx.i-p24"></span>**12.** And he said unto them, Nay, but to
see the nakedness of the land ye are come.

<span id="xx.i-p25"></span>**12.** Et dixit illis, Nequaquam: sed
nuditatem terrae venistis ad videndum.

<span id="xx.i-p26"></span>**13.** And they said, Thy servants *are*
twelve brethren, the sons of one man in the land of Canaan; and, behold,
the youngest *is* this day with our father, and one *is* not.

<span id="xx.i-p27"></span>**13.** Et dixerunt, Duodecim servi tui
fratres, sumus, filii viri ejusdem in terra Chenaan: et ecce, minimum
est cum patre nostro hodie, et unus non est.

<span id="xx.i-p28"></span>**14.** And Joseph said unto them, That *is
it* that I spake unto you, saying, Ye *are* spies:

<span id="xx.i-p29"></span>**14.** Tune dixit ad eos Joseph, Hoc est
quod locutus sum ad vos, dicendo, Exploratores estis.

<span id="xx.i-p30"></span>**15.** Hereby ye shall be proved: By the
life of Pharaoh ye shall not go forth hence, except your youngest
brother come hither.

<span id="xx.i-p31"></span>**15.** In hoc probabimini: per vitam
Pharaonis, si egressi fueritis hinc, nisi quum venerit frater vester
minimus hue.

<span id="xx.i-p32"></span>**16.** Send one of you, and let him fetch
your brother, and ye shall be kept in prison, that your words may be
proved, whether *there be any* truth in you: or else by the life of
Pharaoh surely ye *are* spies.

<span id="xx.i-p33"></span>**16.** Mittie ex vobis unum, et accipiat
fratrem vestrum, vos autem vincti eritis, et probabuntur verba vestra,
anveritas sit pennes vos: sin minus, per vitam Pharaonis certe
exploratores estis.

<span id="xx.i-p34"></span>**17.** And he put them all together into
ward three days.

<span id="xx.i-p35"></span>**17.** Et congregavit eos in custodiam
tribus diebus.

<span id="xx.i-p36"></span>**18.** And Joseph said unto them the third
day, This do, and live; *for* I fear God:

<span id="xx.i-p37"></span>**18.** Dixit autem eis Joseph die tertio,
Hoc facite, et vivetis: Deum ego timeo.

<span id="xx.i-p38"></span>**19.** If ye *be* true *men*, let one of
your brethren be bound in the house of your prison: go ye, carry corn
for the famine of your houses:

<span id="xx.i-p39"></span>**19.** Si veraces estis, frater vester unus
ligetur in domo custodiae vestrae: vos autem ite, auferte alimentum ad
abigendam famem e domibus vestris.

<span id="xx.i-p40"></span>**20.** But bring your youngest brother unto
me; so shall your words be verified, and ye shall not die. And they did
so.

<span id="xx.i-p41"></span>**20.** Tunc fratrem vestrum minimum
adducetis ad me, et vera cognoscentur (Hebrews Verificabuntur) verba
vestra, et non moriemini: et fecerunt ita.

<span id="xx.i-p42"></span>**21.** And they said one to another, We
*are* verily guilty concerning our brother, in that we saw the anguish
of his soul, when he besought us, and we would not hear; therefore is
this distress come upon us.

<span id="xx.i-p43"></span>**21.** Dicebat autem alter alteri, Vere
deliquimus contra fratrem nostrum: quia vidimus angustiam animae ejus
dum deprecaretur nos, et non audivimus: idcirco venit super nos angustia
haec.

<span id="xx.i-p44"></span>**22.** And Reuben answered them, saying,
Spake I not unto you, saying, Do not sin against the child; and ye would
not hear? therefore, behold, also his blood is required.

<span id="xx.i-p45"></span>**22.** Et respondit Reuben ad eos, dicendo,
Nonne dixi vobis, dicendo, Ne peccetis in puerum, et non audistis? Et
etiam sanguis ejus, ecce, requiritur.

<span id="xx.i-p46"></span>**23,** And they knew not that Joseph
understood *them*; for he spake unto them by an interpreter.

<span id="xx.i-p47"></span>**23.** Ipsi autem ignorabant, quod audiret
Joseph: quia interpres erat inter eos.

<span id="xx.i-p48"></span>**24.** And he turned himself about from
them, and wept; and returned to them again, and communed with them, and
took from them Simeon, and bound him before their eyes.

<span id="xx.i-p49"></span>**24.** Et vertit se ab eis, et flevit:
postea reversus est ad eos, loquutusque est eis: et accepit ab eis
Simhon, ligavitque eum in oculis eorum.

<span id="xx.i-p50"></span>**25.** Then Joseph commanded to fill their
sacks with corn, and to restore every man’s money into his sack, and to
give them provision for the way: and thus did he unto them.

<span id="xx.i-p51"></span>**25.** Tunc praecepit Joseph, et impleverunt
vasa eorum frumento: praecepit etiam ut restituerent argentum eorum,
uniuscujusque in sacco suo, et darent eis escam ad iter: et fecit eis
sic.

<span id="xx.i-p52"></span>**26.** And they laded their asses with the
corn, and departed thence.

<span id="xx.i-p53"></span>**26.** Et tulerunt frumentum suum super
asinos suos, et abierunt inde.

<span id="xx.i-p54"></span>**27.** And as one of them opened his sack to
give his ass provender in the inn, he espied his money; for, behold, it
*was* in his sack’s mouth.

<span id="xx.i-p55"></span>**27.** Aperuit autem unus saccum suum, ut
daret pabulum asino suo, in hospitio: et vidit pecuniam suam, et ecce,
erat in ore sacci sui.

<span id="xx.i-p56"></span>**28.** And he said unto his brethren, My
money is restored; and, lo, *it is* even in my sack: and their heart
failed *them*, and they were afraid, saying one to another, What *is*
this *that* God hath done unto us?

<span id="xx.i-p57"></span>**28.** Et dixit fratribus suis, Reddita est
pecunia mea, et etiam ecce, est in sacco meo. Et egressum est cor eorum,
et obstupuerunt alter ad alterum, dicendo, Utquid hoc fecit Deus nobis?

<span id="xx.i-p58"></span>**29.** And they came unto Jacob their father
unto the land of Canaan, and told him all that befell unto them; saying,

<span id="xx.i-p59"></span>**29.** Et venerunt ad Jahacob patrem suum in
terram Chenaan, et annuntiaverunt ei omnia quae acciderant eis, dicendo,

<span id="xx.i-p60"></span>**30.** The man, *who is* the lord of the
land, spake roughly to us, and took us for spies of the country.

<span id="xx.i-p61"></span>**30.** Loquutus est vir dominus terrae
nobiscum dura, et constituit nos tanquam exploratores terrae.

<span id="xx.i-p62"></span>**31.** And we said unto him, We *are* true
*men*; we are no spies:

<span id="xx.i-p63"></span>**31.** Nos vero diximus ad eum, Veraces
sumus, non sumus exploratores.

<span id="xx.i-p64"></span>**32.** We *be* twelve brethren, sons of our
father; one *is* not, and the youngest *is* this day with our father in
the land of Canaan.

<span id="xx.i-p65"></span>**32.** Duodecim sumus fratres filii patris
nostri: unus non est, et minimus hodie est cum patre nostro in terra
Chenaan.

<span id="xx.i-p66"></span>**33.** And the man, the lord of the country,
said unto us, Hereby shall I know that ye *are* true *men*; leave one of
your brethren *here* with me, and take *food for* the famine of your
households, and be gone:

<span id="xx.i-p67"></span>**33.** Tunc dixit nobis vir dominus terrae,
In hoc cognoscam quod veraces estis, Fratrem vestrum unum relinquite
mecum, et ad expellendam famem domorum vestrarum capite, et ite:

<span id="xx.i-p68"></span>**34.** And bring your youngest brother unto
me: then shall I know that ye *are* no spies, but *that* ye *are* true
*men*: *so* will I deliver you your brother, and ye shall traffick in
the land.

<span id="xx.i-p69"></span>**34.** Et adducite fratrem vestrum minimum
ad me, tunc cognoscam quod non estis exploratores, sed veraces: fratrem
vestrum dabo vobis, et in terra negotiabimini.

<span id="xx.i-p70"></span>**35.** And it came to pass as they emptied
their sacks, that, behold, every man’s bundle of money *was* in his
sack: and when *both* they and their father saw the bundles of money,
they were afraid.

<span id="xx.i-p71"></span>**35.** Porro fuit, ipsis evacuantibus saccos
suos, ecce, uniuscujusque ligatura pecuniae suae erat in sacco suo: et
viderunt ligaturas pecuniarum suarum, ipsi, et pater eorum, et
timuerunt.

<span id="xx.i-p72"></span>**36.** And Jacob their father said unto
them, Me have ye bereaved *of my children*: Joseph *is* not, and Simeon
*is* not, and ye will take Benjamin *away*: all these things are against
me.

<span id="xx.i-p73"></span>**36.** Tune dixit Reuben ad patrem suum,
dicendo, Duos filios meos mori facias, nisi reduxero eum ad to: da eum
in manum meam, et ego reducam eum ad to.

<span id="xx.i-p74"></span>**37.** And Reuben spake unto his father,
saying, Slay my two sons, if I bring him not to thee: deliver him into
my hand, and I will bring him to thee again.

<span id="xx.i-p75"></span>**37.** And Reuban spapke unto his father,
saying, Slay my two sons, if I bring him not to thee: deliver him into
my hand, and I will bring him to thee again.

<span id="xx.i-p76"></span>**38.** And he said, My son shall not go down
with you; for his brother is dead, and he is left alone: if mischief
befall him by the way in the which ye go, then shall ye bring down my
gray hairs with sorrow to the grave.

<span id="xx.i-p77"></span>**38.** Et dixit, Non descendet filius meus
vobiscum, quia frater ejus mortuus est, et ipse solus remansit: et
accidet ei mors in via per quam ibitis: et descendere facietis canitiem
meam cum moerore ad sepulcrum.

<span id="xx.i-p78"></span> 

<span id="xx.i-p79"></span><span id="xx.i-p79.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p80"></span>**1.** *Now when Jacob saw*. Moses begins, in
this chapter, to treat of the occasion which drew Jacob with his whole
family into Egypt; and thus leaves it to us to consider by what hidden
and unexpected methods God may perform whatever he has decreed. Though,
therefore, the providence of God is in itself a labyrinth; yet when we
connect the issue of things with their beginnings, that admirable method
of operation shines clearly in our view, which is not generally
acknowledged, only because it is far removed from our observation. Also
our own indolence hinders us from perceiving God, with the eyes of
faith, as holding the government of the world; because we either imagine
fortune to be the mistress of events, or else, adhering to near and
natural causes, we weave them together, and spread them as veils before
our eyes. Whereas, therefore, scarcely any more illustrious
representation of Divine Providence is to be found than this history
furnishes; let pious readers carefully exercise themselves in meditation
upon it, in order that they may acknowledge those things which, in
appearance, are fortuitous, to be directed by the hand of God.

<span id="xx.i-p81"></span>*Why do ye look one upon another?* Why do ye
Men are said to look one upon another, when each is waiting for the
other, and, for want of counsel, no one dares to attempt anything.
Jacob, therefore, censures this inactivity of his sons, because none of
them endeavors to provide for the present necessity. Moses also says
that they went into Egypt at the command of their father, and even
without Benjamin; by which he intimates that filial reverence at that
time was great; because envy of their brother did not prevent them from
leaving their wives and children, and undertaking a long journey. He
also adds, that they came in the midst of a great crowd of people; which
enhances the fame of Joseph; who, while supplying food for all Egypt,
and dispensing it by measure, till the end of the drought, could also
afford assistance to neighboring nations.

<span id="xx.i-p82"></span><span id="xx.i-p82.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p83"></span>**6.** *And Joseph was the governor*  <span
id="fr_163"></span>[164](#fn_163) *over the land*. Moses connects the
honor of Joseph with his fidelity and diligence. For although he was
possessed of supreme authority, he nevertheless submitted to every
possible laborious service, just as if he had been a hired servant. From
which example we must learn, that as any one excels in honor, he is
bound to be the more fully occupied in business; but that they who
desire to combine leisure with dignity, utterly pervert the sacred order
of God. Let it be, moreover, understood, that the corn was sold by
Joseph, not as if he measured it out with his own hands, or himself
received the money for it, seeing that it was set to sale in many parts
of the kingdom, and he could scarcely have attended to one single
storehouse: but that the whole of the stores were under his power.

<span id="xx.i-p85"></span><span id="xx.i-p85.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p86"></span>**7.** *He made himself strange unto them*.
It may be asked for what purpose Joseph thus tormented his brethren with
threats and with terror. For if he was actuated by a sense of the injury
received from them, he cannot be acquitted of the desire of revenge. It
is, however, probable, that he was impelled neither by anger nor a
thirst of vengeance, but that he was induced by two just causes to act
as he did. For he both desired to regain his brother Benjamin, and
wished to ascertain, — as if by putting them to the torture, — what was
in their mind, whether they repented or not; and, in short, what had
been their course of life since he had seen them last. For, had he made
himself known at the first interview, it was to be feared lest they,
keeping their father out of sight, and wishing to cast a vail over the
detestable wickedness which they had committed, should only increase it
by a new crime. There lurked, also, a not unreasonable suspicion
concerning his brother Benjamin, lest they should attempt something
perfidious and cruel against him. It was therefore important that they
should be more thoroughly sifted; so that Joseph, being fully informed
of the state of his father’s house, might take his measures according to
circumstances; and also, that previous to pardon, some punishment might
be inflicted which would lead them more carefully to reflect upon the
atrocity of their crime. For whereas he afterwards showed himself to be
placable and humane; this did not arise from the fact, that his anger
being assuaged, he became, by degrees, inclined to compassion; but
rather, as Moses elsewhere subjoins, that he sought retirement, because
he could no longer refrain himself; herein intimating at the same time,
that Joseph had *forcibly* repressed his tears so long as he retained a
severe aspect; and, therefore, that he had felt throughout the same
affection of pity towards them. And it appears that a special impulse
moved him to this whole course of action. For it was no common thing,
that Joseph, beholding so many authors of his calamities, was neither
angry nor changed in his manner, nor broke out into reproaches; but was
composed both in his countenance and his speech, as if he had long
meditated at leisure, respecting the course he would pursue. But it may
be inquired again, whether his dissimulation, which was joined with a
falsehood, is not to be blamed; for we know how pleasing integrity is to
God, and how strictly he prohibits his own people from deceit and
falsehoods. Whether God governed his servant by some special movement,
to depart without fault, from the common rule of action, I know not;
seeing that the faithful may sometimes piously do things which cannot
lawfully be drawn into a precedent. Of this, however, in considering the
acts of the holy fathers, we must always beware; lest they should lead
us away from that law which the Lord prescribes to all in common. By the
general command of God, we must all cultivate sincerity. That Joseph
feigned something different from the truth, affords no pretext to excuse
us if we attempt anything of the same kind. For, though a liberty
granted by privilege would be pardoned, yet if any one, relying on a
private example, does not scruple to subvert the law of God, so as to
give himself license to do what is therein forbidden, he shall justly
suffer the punishment of his audacity. And yet I do not think that we
ought to be very anxious to excuse Joseph, because it is probable that
he suffered something from human infirmity, which God forgave him; for
by Divine mercy alone could that dissimulation, which in itself was not
without fault, escape condemnation.

<span id="xx.i-p87"></span><span id="xx.i-p87.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p88"></span>**9.** *And Joseph remembered the dreams*.
When the boy Joseph had spoken of receiving obeisance, the absurdity of
the thing impelled his brethren wickedly to devise his death. Now,
although they bow down to him without knowing him, there is yet nothing
better for them. Indeed, their only means of safety, is to prostrate
themselves at his feet, and to be received by him as suppliants.
Meanwhile, their conspiracy, by which they attempted to subvert the
celestial decree, lest they should have to bear the yoke, was rendered
fruitless. So the Lord forcibly restrains the obstinate, just as wild
and refractory horses are wont to be more severely treated, the more
they kick and are restive. Wherefore, there is nothing better than
meekly to compose the mind to gentleness, that each may take his own lot
contentedly, though it be not very splendid. It may, however, seem
absurd, that Joseph should, at this time, have recalled his dream to
mind, as if it had been forgotten through the lapse of years; which,
indeed, could not be, unless he had lost sight of the promises of God. I
answer, nothing is here recorded but what frequently happens to
ourselves: for although the word of God may be dwelling in our hearts,
yet it does not continually occur to us, but rather is sometimes so
smothered that it may seem to be extinct, especially when faith is
oppressed by the darkness of affliction. Besides, it is nothing
wonderful, if a long series of evils should have buried, in a kind of
oblivion, his dreams which indicated prosperity. God had exalted him, by
these dreams, to the hope of great and distinguished authority. He is,
however, cast into a well not unlike a grave. He is taken hence to be
sold as a slave; he is carried to a distant land; and, as if slavery
would not prove sufficiently severe, he is shut up in prison. And though
his misery is in some degree mitigated, when he is released from his
iron fetters, yet there was little, if any, prospect of deliverance. I
do not, however, think that the hope entertained by him was entirely
destroyed, but that a cloud passed over it, which deprived him of the
light of comfort. A different kind of temptation followed; because
nothing is more common than for great and unexpected felicity to
intoxicate its possessors. And thus it happened, as we have recently
read, that a forgetfulness of his father’s house stole over the mind of
the holy man. He was not, therefore, so mindful of his dreams as he
ought to have been. Another excuse may probably be alleged; that he, at
the moment, compared his dreams with the event. And truly it was no
common virtue to apply what was passing, thus immediately for the
confirmation of the Divine oracle. For we readily perceive, that those
dreams which so quickly recur to the memory, had not been obliterated
through length of time. So the disciples remembered the words of the
Lord after he had risen from the dead; because, by the sight of the fact
predicted, their knowledge became more clear; whereas, before, nothing
but transient sparks of it had shined in their hearts.

<span id="xx.i-p89"></span><span id="xx.i-p89.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p90"></span>**15.** *By the life of Pharaoh*. From this
formula of swearing a new question is raised; for that which is
commanded in the law, that we should swear only by the name of God, had
already been engraven on the hearts of the pious; since nature dictates
that this honor is to be given to God alone, that men should defer to
his judgment, and should make him the supreme arbiter and vindicator of
faith and truth. If we should say that this was not simply an oath, but
a kind of obtestation, the holy man will be, in some degree, excusable.
He who swears by God wishes him to interpose in order to inflict
punishment on perjury. They who swear by their life or by their hand,
deposit, as it were, what they deem most valuable, as a pledge of their
faithfulness. By this method the majesty of God is not transferred to
mortal man; because it is a very different thing to cite him as witness
who has the right of taking vengeance, and to assert by something most
dear to us, that what we say is true. So Moses, when he calls heaven and
earth to witness, does not ascribe deity to them, and thus fabricate a
new idol; but, in order that higher authority may be given to the law,
he declares that there is no part of the world which will not cry out
before the tribunal of God, against the ingratitude of the people, if
they reject the doctrine of salvation. Notwithstanding, there is, I
confess, in this form of swearing which Joseph uses, something deserving
of censure; for it was a profane adulation, among the Egyptians, to
swear by the life of the king. Just as the Romans swore by the genius of
their prince, after they had been reduced to such bondage that they made
their Caesar equal to gods. Certainly this mode of swearing is abhorrent
to true piety. Whence it may be perceived that nothing is more difficult
to the holy servants of God than to keep themselves so pure, while
conversant with the filth of the world, as to contract no spots of
defilement from it. Joseph, indeed, was never so infected with the
corruptions of the court, but that he remained a pure worshipped of God:
nevertheless we see, that in accommodating himself to this depraved
custom of speaking, he had received some stain. His repetition of the
expression shows, that when any one has once become accustomed to evil,
he becomes exceedingly prone to sin again and again. We observe, that
they who have once rashly assumed the license of swearing, pour forth an
oath every third word, even when speaking of the most frivolous things.
So much the greater caution ought we to use, lest any such indulgence
should harden us in this wicked custom.

<span id="xx.i-p91"></span><span id="xx.i-p91.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p92"></span>**17.** *And he put them altogether into
ward*. Here, not by words only, as before, but by the act itself, Joseph
shows himself severe towards his brethren, when he shuts them all up in
prison, as if about to bring them to punishment: and during three days
torments them with fear. We said a little while ago, that from this act
no rule for acting severely and rigidly is to be drawn; because it is
doubtful whether he acted rightly or otherwise. Again, it is to be
feared lest they who plead his example should be far removed from his
mildness, and that they should prove to be rather his apes than his true
imitators. Meanwhile, it plainly appears what he was aiming at; for he
does not mitigate their punishment, as if at the end of three days he
was appeased; but he renders them more anxious about the redemption of
their brother, whom he retains as a hostage. Lest, however, immoderate
fear should deter them from returning, he promises to act with good
faith towards them: and to convince them of that, he declares that he
fears God, which expression is worthy of observation. Doubtless he
speaks from the inward feeling of his heart, when he declares that he
will deal well and truly with them, because he fears God. Therefore the
commencement and the fountain of that good and honest conscience,
whereby we cultivate fidelity and justice towards men, is the fear of
God. There appears indeed some probity in the despisers of God; but it
soon goes off in smoke, unless the depraved affections of the flesh are
restrained as with a bridle, by the thought that God is to be feared,
because he will be the Judge of the world. For whoever does not think
that he must render an account, will never so cultivate integrity as to
refrain from pursuing what he supposes will be useful to himself.
Wherefore, if we wish to be free from perfidy, craft, cruelty, and all
wicked desire of doing injure, we must labor earnestly that religion may
flourish among us. For whenever we act with want of sincerity or
humanity towards each other, impiety openly betrays itself. For whatever
there is of rectitude or justice in the world, Joseph comprised in this
short sentence, when he said, that he feared God.

<span id="xx.i-p93"></span><span id="xx.i-p93.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p94"></span>**21.** *And they said one to another*. This
is a remarkable passage, showing that the sons of Jacob, when reduced to
the greatest straits, recall to memory a fratricide committed thirteen
years previously. Before affliction pressed upon them, they were in a
state of torpor. Moses relates that, even lately, they had spoken
without agitation of Joseph’s death, as if conscious to themselves of no
evil. But now they are compelled (so to speak) to enter into their own
consciences. We see then, how in adversity, God searches and tries men;
and how, while dissipating all their flattering illusions, he not only
pierces their minds with secret fear, but extorts a confession which
they would gladly avoid. And this kind of examination is very necessary
for us. Wonderful is the hypocrisy of men in covering their evils; and
if impunity be allowed, their negligence will be increased twofold.
Wherefore no remedy remains, except that they who give themselves up to
slumber when the Lord deals gently with them, should be awakened by
afflictions and punishments. Joseph therefore produced some good effect,
when he extorted from his brethren the acknowledgment of their sin, in
which they had securely pleased themselves. And the Lord had compassion
on them, in taking away the covering with which they had been too long
deceived. In the same manner, while he daily chastises us by the hand of
man, he draws us, as guilty, to his tribunal. Nevertheless it would
profit but little to be tried by adversity, unless he inwardly touched
the heart; for we see how few reflect on their sins, although admonished
by most severe punishments; certainly no one comes to this state of mind
but with reluctance. Wherefore, there is no doubt that God, in order to
lead the sons of Jacob to repentance, impelled them, as well by the
secret instinct of his Spirit as by outward chastisement, to become
sensible of that sin which had been too long concealed. Let the reader
also observe, that the sons of Jacob did not only fix their minds on
something which was close at hand, but considered that divine
punishments were inflicted in various ways upon sinners. And doubtless,
in order to apprehend the divine judgments, we must extend our views
afar. Sometimes indeed God, by inflicting present punishment on sinners,
holds them up for observation as on a theater; but often, as if aiming
at another object, he takes vengeance on our sins unexpectedly, and from
an unseen quarter. If the sons of Jacob had merely looked for some
present cause of their sufferings, they could have done nothing but
loudly complain that they had been injured; and at length despair would
have followed. But while considering how far and wide the providence of
God extends, looking beyond the occasion immediately before their eyes,
they ascend to a remote cause. It is, however, doubtful, whether they
say that they shall be *held guilty* on account of their brother, or for
their brother’s sake, or that they will themselves *confess* that they
have sinned: for the Hebrew noun, <span id="xx.i-p94.1"></span>םימשא
(*ashaimim*) is ambiguous because it sometimes refers to the crime
committed, and sometimes to the punishment, as in Latin, piaculum
signifies both the crime and the expiation. On the whole, it is of
little consequence which meaning is preferred, for they acknowledge
their sin either in its guilt or its punishment. But the latter sense
appears to me the more simple and genuine, that they are deservedly
punished because they had been so cruel to their brother.

<span id="xx.i-p95"></span>*In that we saw the anguish of his soul*.
They acknowledge that it is by the just judgment of God, that they
obtained nothing by their suppliant entreaties, because they themselves
had acted so cruelly towards their brother. Christ had not yet uttered
the sentence,

<span id="xx.i-p96"></span>“With what measure ye mete, it shall be
measured unto you again,” (<span id="xx.i-p96.1"></span>[Mt
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#002)<span id="xx.i-p96.1"></span>,)

<span id="xx.i-p97"></span>but it was a dictate of nature, that they who
had been cruel to others, were unworthy of commiseration. The more heed
ought we to take, that we prove not deaf to so many threatening of
Scripture. Dreadful is that denunciation,

<span id="xx.i-p98"></span>“Whoso stoppeth his ears at the cry of the
poor, he also shall cry himself, and shall not be heard.” (<span
id="xx.i-p98.1"></span>[Pr 21:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro021.htm#013)<span
id="xx.i-p98.1"></span>.)

<span id="xx.i-p99"></span>Therefore while we have time, let us learn to
exercise humanity, to sympathize with the miserable, and to stretch out
our hand for the sake of giving assistance. But if at any time it
happens that we are treated roughly by men, and our prayers are proudly
rejected; then, at least, let the question occur to us, whether we
ourselves have in anything acted unkindly towards others; for although
it were better to be wise beforehand; it is, nevertheless, some
advantage, whenever others proudly despise us, to reflect whether they
with whom we have had to deal, have not experienced similar hardships
from us. “Our brother,” they say, “entreated us when he was in the last
extremity: we rejected his prayers: therefore it is by divine
retribution that we can obtain nothing.” By these words they bear
witness that the hearts of men are so under Divine government, that they
can be inclined to equity, or hardened in inflexible rigor. Moreover,
their cruelty was hateful to God, because, since his goodness is
diffused through heaven and earth, and his beneficence is extended not
only to men, but even to brute animals, nothing is more contrary to his
nature, than that we should cruelly reject those who implore our
protection.

<span id="xx.i-p100"></span><span id="xx.i-p100.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p101"></span>**22.** *And Reuben answered them*. Because
he had attempted to deliver Joseph out of the hands of his brethren, in
order to restore him in safety to his father, he magnifies their fault,
in not having, at that time, listened to any prudent counsel: and I
understand his words as conveying a reproof for their too late
repentance. Whereas Joseph was not yet satisfied with this confession,
but retained Simeon in bonds,  <span id="fr_164"></span>[165](#fn_164)
and dismissed the rest in suspense and perplexity, this was not done
from malevolence, but because he was not certain about the safety of his
brother Benjamin, and the state of his father’s house. For he might
justly fear lest, when they found that their wicked contrivance of
putting their brother to death, was discovered, they might again attempt
some horrible crime, as desperate men are wont to do; or, at least,
might desert their father, and flee to some other country. Nevertheless
the act of Joseph is not to be drawn into a precedent: because it is not
always right to be thus austere. We ought also to beware lest the
offender be swallowed up by grief, if we are not mild, and disposed to
forgiveness. Therefore we must seek the spirit of discretion from
heaven, which shall so govern us that we may do nothing by rash
impetuosity, or immoderate severity. This, indeed, is to be remembered,
that under the stern countenance of Joseph was concealed not only a mild
and placid disposition, but the most tender affection.

<span id="xx.i-p103"></span><span id="xx.i-p103.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p104"></span>**27.** *And as one of them opened his
sack*. With what intention Joseph had commanded the price paid for the
corn to be secretly deposited in the sacks of his brethren, may easily
be conjectured; for he feared lest his father being already
impoverished, would not be able again to buy provisions. The brethren,
having found their money, knew not where to seek the cause; except that,
being terrified, they perceived that the hand of God was against them.
That they were greatly astonished appears from their not voluntarily
returning to Joseph, in order to prove their own innocence: for the
remedy of the evil was at hand, if they had not been utterly blinded.
Wherefore we must ask God to supply us, in doubtful and troubled
affairs, not only with fortitude, but also with prudence. We see also
how little can be effected even by a great multitude, unless the Lord
preside among them. The sons of Jacob ought mutually to have exhorted
each other, and to have consulted together what was necessary to be
done: but there is an end to all deliberation; no solace nor remedy is
suggested. Even while each sees the rest agitated, they mutually
increase each other’s trepidation. Therefore, the society and
countenance of men will profit us nothing, unless the Lord strengthen us
from heaven.

<span id="xx.i-p105"></span><span id="xx.i-p105.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p106"></span>**28.** *What is this that God has done unto
us?* They do not expostulate with God, as if they thought this danger
had come upon them without cause: but, perceiving that God was angry
with them in many ways, they deplore their wretchedness. But why do they
not rather turn their thoughts to Joseph? For the suspicion was natural,
that this had been done by fraud, because he wished to lay new snares
for them. How does it happen, then, that losing sight of man, they set
God as an avenger directly before them? Truly, because this single
thought possessed their minds, that a just reward, and such as their
sins deserved, would be given them; and, from that time, they referred
whatever evils happened to the same cause. Before (as we have said) they
were asleep: but from the time that they began to be affected by the
lively fear of God’s judgment, his providence always presented itself to
their view. So David, when, by the inward suggestion of the Spirit, he
has learned that the rod with which he was chastised had been sent from
heaven, is not distracted or perplexed, though he sees plainly that the
evils have proceeded from another quarter; but prays to God to heal the
wounds which He had made. It is no common act of prudence, and is at the
same time profitable, whenever any adversity overtakes us, to accustom
ourselves to the consideration of the judgments of God. We see how
unbelievers, while they imagine their misfortunes to be accidental, or
while they are bent on accusing their enemies, only exasperate their
grief by fretting and raging, and thus cause the anger of God to burn
the more against them. But he who, in his affliction, exercises himself
in reflecting on his own sins, and sets God before him as his Judge,
will humble himself in the divine presence, and will compose his mind to
patience by the hope of pardon. Let us, however, remember that the
providence of God is not truly acknowledged, except in connection with
his justice. Forthough the men by whose hand he chastises us are often
unjust, yet, in an incomprehensible manner, he executes his judgments
through them, against which judgments it is not lawful for us either to
reply or to murmur. For sometimes even the reprobate, though they
acknowledge themselves to be stricken by the hand of God, yet do not
cease to complain against him, as Moses teaches us by the example of
Cain. I do not, however, understand that this complaint was made by the
sons of Jacob, for the purpose of charging God with tyrannical violence;
but because they, being overcome with fear, inferred from this double
punishment that God was highly displeased with them.

<span id="xx.i-p107"></span><span id="xx.i-p107.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p108"></span>**29.** *And they came unto Jacob their
father*. Here is a long repetition of the former history, but it is not
superfluous; because Moses wished to show how anxiously they made their
excuse to their father for having left Simon in chains, and how
strenuously they pleaded with him, that, for the sake of obtaining
Simeon’s liberty, he should allow them to take their brother Benjamin:
for this was greatly to the purpose. We know what a sharp dart is
hunger: and yet, though the only method of relieving their want was to
fetch corn out of Egypt, Jacob would rather that he and his family
should perish, than allow Benjamin to accompany the rest. What can he
mean by thus peremptorily refusing what his sons were compelled by
necessity to ask, except to show that he was suspicious of them? This
also more clearly appears from his own words, when he imputes his
bereavement to them. For, though their declaration, that Joseph had been
torn by a wild beast, had some color of probability, there still
remained in the heart of the holy patriarch a secret wound, arising from
suspicion; because he was fully aware of their fierce and cruel hatred
of the innocent youth. Moreover, it is useful for us to know this; for
it appears hence how miserable was the condition of the holy man, whose
mind, during thirteen successive years, had been tortured with dire
anxiety. Besides, his very silence added greatly to his torment, because
he was compelled to conceal the grief he felt. But the chief burden of
the evil was the temptation which oppressed him, that the promise of God
might prove illusory and vain. For he had no hope except from the
promised seed; but he seemed to be bringing up devils at home, from whom
a blessing was no more to be expected than life from death. He thought
Joseph to be dead, Benjamin alone remained to him uncorrupted: how could
the salvation of the world proceed from such a vicious offspring? He
must, therefore, have been endowed with great constancy, seeing he did
not cease to rely upon God; and being certainly persuaded that he
cherished in his house the Church, of which scarcely any appearance was
left, he bore with his sons till they should repent. Let the faithful
now apply this example to themselves, lest their minds should give way
at the horrible devastation which is almost everywhere perceived.

<span id="xx.i-p109"></span><span id="xx.i-p109.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p110"></span>**35.** *As they emptied their sacks.* Here,
again, it appears how greatly they had been alarmed in their journey,
seeing that each had not at least examined his sack, after money had
been found in one. But these things are written to show that, as soon as
men are smitten with fear, they have no particle of wisdom and of
soundness of mind, until God tranquilizes them. Moreover, Joseph did not
act with sufficient consideration, in that he occasioned very great
grief to his father, whose poverty he really intended to relieve. Whence
we learn that even the most prudent are not always so careful, but that
something may flow from their acts which they do not wish.

<span id="xx.i-p111"></span><span id="xx.i-p111.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p112"></span>**36.** *Me have ye bereaved*. Jacob does
not, indeed, openly accuse his sons of the crime of their brother’s
murder; yet he is angry as if, two of his sons being already taken away,
they were hastening to destroy the third. For he says that all these
evils were falling on himself alone; because he does not think that they
were affected as they ought to be, nor shared his grief with him, but
were carelessly making light of the destruction of their brethren, as if
they had no interest in their lives. It seems, however, exceedingly
barbarous that Reuben should offer his two sons to his father to be
slain, if he did not bring Benjamin back. Jacob might, indeed, slay his
own grandchildren: what comfort, then, could he take in acting cruelly
to his own bowels? But this is what I before alluded to, that they were
suspected of having dealt perfidiously towards Joseph; for which reason
Reuben deemed it necessary to assuage his father’s fear, by such a
vehement protestation; and to give this pledge, that he and his brethren
were designing nothing wicked against Benjamin.

<span id="xx.i-p113"></span><span id="xx.i-p113.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p114"></span>**38.** *My son shall not go down with you*.
Again we see, as in a lively picture, with what sorrow holy Jacob had
been oppressed. He sees his whole family famishing: he would rather be
torn away from life than from his son: whence we gather that he was not
iron-hearted: but his patience is the more deserving of praise, because
he contended with the infirmity of the flesh, and did not sink under it.
And although Moses does not give a rhetorical amplification to his
language, we nevertheless easily perceive that he was overcome with
excessive grief, when he thus complained to his sons, You are too cruel
to your father, in taking away from me a third son, after I have been
plundered of first one and then another.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_163"></span>[164](cc02019.htm#fr_163) <span
id="xx.i-p83.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p84"></span> <span id="xx.i-p84.1"></span>טילשה
(*Hashalit*) “Of the Hebrew Shallet and Shilton, is made in Arabic the
name Sultan, a title whereby the chief rulers of Egypt and Babylon are
still called.” — *Ainsworth*. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_164"></span>[165](cc02019.htm#fr_164) <span
id="xx.i-p101.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p102"></span> *Ainsworth* says of Simeon, “He seemeth by
this, to have been the chief procurer of Joseph’s trouble. He was by
nature bold and fierce, as his fact against the Shechemites doth
manifest.” IF so, this act of Joseph would appear to him, and perhaps to
the rest of the brethren, as a special Divine retribution for his
cruelty towards Joseph. — *Ed*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 43](cc02020)
