[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc02020)  [Next](cc02022.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 2: Genesis, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxii"></span>

<span id="xxii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 44.

<span id="xxii.i"></span>

<span id="xxii.i-p1"></span><span id="xxii.i-p1.1"></span>[Genesis
44:1-34](../../../bib/kjv/gen044.htm#001.md)<span id="xxii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.i-p2"></span>**1.** And he commanded the steward of his
house, saying, Fill the men’s sacks *with* food, as much as they can
carry, and put every man’s money in his sack’s mouth.

<span id="xxii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Et praecepit praefecto domus suae,
dicendo, Imple saccos virorum esca, quantum potuerint ferre, et pone
pecuniam uniuscujusque in ore sacci sui,

<span id="xxii.i-p4"></span>**2.** And put my cup, the silver cup, in
the sack’s mouth of the youngest, and his corn money. And he did
according to the word that Joseph had spoken.

<span id="xxii.i-p5"></span>**2.** Et scyphum meum, scyphum argenteum,
pone in ore saccijunioris, et pecuniam alimenti ejus: et fecit secundum
verbum Joseph, quod loquutus fuerat.

<span id="xxii.i-p6"></span>**3.** As soon as the morning was light, the
men were sent away, they and their asses.

<span id="xxii.i-p7"></span>**3.** Mane illuxit, et viri dimissi sunt,
ipsi et asini eorum.

<span id="xxii.i-p8"></span>**4.** *And* when they were gone out of the
city, *and* not *yet* far off, Joseph said unto his steward, Up, follow
after the men; and when thou dost overtake them, say unto them,
Wherefore have ye rewarded evil for good?

<span id="xxii.i-p9"></span>**4.** Ipsi egressi erant urbem, nec long
abierant, quum Joseph dixit praefecto domus suae, Surge, persequere
viros, et apprehende eos, et dices eis, Utquid reddidistis malum pro
bono?

<span id="xxii.i-p10"></span>**5.** *Is* not this *it* in which my lord
drinketh, and whereby indeed he divineth? ye have done evil in so doing.

<span id="xxii.i-p11"></span>**5.** Nonne hic est, in quo bibit dominus
meus: et ipse augurando auguratur in eo? Male fecistis quod fecistis.

<span id="xxii.i-p12"></span>**6.** And he overtook them, and he spake
unto them these same words.

<span id="xxii.i-p13"></span>**6.** Et apprehendit eos, et loquutus est
ad eos verba ista.

<span id="xxii.i-p14"></span>**7.** And they said unto him, Wherefore
saith my lord these words? God forbid that thy servants should do
according to this thing:

<span id="xxii.i-p15"></span>**7.** Et dixerunt ad eum, Utquid loquitur
dominus meus secundum verba ista? Absit a servis tuis, ut faciant
secundum verbum hoc.

<span id="xxii.i-p16"></span>**8.** Behold, the money, which we found in
our sacks’ mouths, we brought again unto thee out of the land of Canaan:
how then should we steal out of thy lord’s house silver or gold?

<span id="xxii.i-p17"></span>**8.** Ecce, pecuniam, quam invenimus in
ore saccorum nostrorum, retulimus ad tee terra Chenaan: et quomodo
furati essemus e domo domini tui argentum vel aurum.

<span id="xxii.i-p18"></span>**9.** With whomsoever of thy servants it
be found, both let him die, and we also will be my lord’s bondmen.

<span id="xxii.i-p19"></span>**9.** Is penes quem inventus fuerit e
servis tuis, moriatur: et etiam nos erimus domino meo servi.

<span id="xxii.i-p20"></span>**10.** And he said, Now also *let* it *be*
according unto your words: he with whom it is found shall be my servant;
and ye shall be blameless.

<span id="xxii.i-p21"></span>**10.** Et dixit, Etiam nunc secundum verba
vestra ita sit: is penes quem inventus fuerit, erit mihi servus, et vos
critis innocentes.

<span id="xxii.i-p22"></span>**11.** Then they speedily took down every
man his sack to the ground, and opened every man his sack.

<span id="xxii.i-p23"></span>**11.** Et festinaverunt, et deposuerunt
unusquisque saccum suum super terram: et aperuerunt singuli saccum suum.

<span id="xxii.i-p24"></span>**12.** And he searched, *and* began at the
eldest, and left at the youngest: and the cup was found in Benjamin’s
sack.

<span id="xxii.i-p25"></span>**12.** Scrutatus est autem: a maximo
incepit, et in minimo finivit: et inventus est scyphus in sacco
Benjamin.

<span id="xxii.i-p26"></span>**13.** Then they rent their clothes, and
laded every man his ass, and returned to the city.

<span id="xxii.i-p27"></span>**13.** Et sciderunt vestimenta sua, et
oneravit unusquique asinum suum, et reversi sunt in urbem.

<span id="xxii.i-p28"></span>**14.** And Judah and his brethren came to
Joseph’s house; for he *was* yet there: and they fell before him on the
ground.

<span id="xxii.i-p29"></span>**14.** Veneruntque Jehudah et fratres ejus
ad domum Joseph, et erat adhuc ipse ibi: et prostraverunt se coram eo
super terram.

<span id="xxii.i-p30"></span>**15.** And Joseph said unto them, What
deed *is* this that ye have done? wot ye not that such a man as I can
certainly divine?

<span id="xxii.i-p31"></span>**15.** Et dixit ad eos Joseph, Quod
facinus est hoc quod fecistis? Nonne notis quod augurando auguratur vir,
qui est sicut ego?

<span id="xxii.i-p32"></span>**16.** And Judah said, What shall we say
unto my lord? what shall we speak? or how shall we clear ourselves? God
hath found out the iniquity of thy servants: behold, we *are* my lord’s
servants, both we, and *he* also with whom the cup is found.

<span id="xxii.i-p33"></span>**16.** Respondit Jehudah, Quid dicemus
domino meo? Quid loquemur, et in quo justificabimus nos? Deus invenit
iniquitatem servorum tuorum: ecce, sumus servi domini mei, etiam nos,
etiam ille in cujus manu inventus est scyphus.

<span id="xxii.i-p34"></span>**17.** And he said, God forbid that I
should do so: *but* the man in whose hand the cup is found, he shall be
my servant; and as for you, get you up in peace unto your father.

<span id="xxii.i-p35"></span>**17.** Ille autem dixit, Absit a me ut
faciam hoc: vir in cujus manu inventus est scyphus, ipse erit mini
servus: et vos ascendite in pace ad patrem vestrum.

<span id="xxii.i-p36"></span>**18.** Then Judah came near unto him, and
said, Oh my lord, let thy servant, I pray thee, speak a word in my
lord’s ears, and let not thine anger burn against thy servant: for thou
*art* even as Pharaoh.

<span id="xxii.i-p37"></span>**18.** Et accessit ad eum Jehudah, et
dixit, Quaeso, domine mi: loquatur quaeso servus tuus verbum in auribus
domini mei, et ne irascatur furor tuus in servum tuum: quia tu sicut
Pharao.

<span id="xxii.i-p38"></span>**19.** My lord asked his servants, saying,
Have ye a father, or a brother?

<span id="xxii.i-p39"></span>**19.** Dominus meus interrogavit servos
suos, dicendo, Numquid est vobis pater vel frater?

<span id="xxii.i-p40"></span>**20.** And we said unto my lord, We have a
father, an old man, and a child of his old age, a little one; and his
brother is dead, and he alone is left of his mother, and his father
loveth him.

<span id="xxii.i-p41"></span>**20.** Et diximus domino meo, Est nobis
pater senex, et puer senectutum parvus, frater autem ejus mortuus est:
et remansit ipse tantum matri suae, itaque pater ejus diligit eum.

<span id="xxii.i-p42"></span>**21.** And thou saidst unto thy servants,
Bring him down unto me, that I may set mine eyes upon him.

<span id="xxii.i-p43"></span>**21.** Et dixisti servis tuis, Descendere
facite eum ad me, et ponam oculum meum super eum.

<span id="xxii.i-p44"></span>**22.** And we said unto my lord, The lad
cannot leave his father: for *if* he should leave his father, *his
father* would die.

<span id="xxii.i-p45"></span>**22.** Respondimus vero domino meo, Non
potest puer relinquere patrem suum, et si reliquerit patrem suum,
morietur.

<span id="xxii.i-p46"></span>**23.** And thou saidst unto thy servants,
Except your youngest brother come down with you, ye shall see my face no
more.

<span id="xxii.i-p47"></span>**23.** Tu autem dixisti servis tuis, Nisi
descendat frater vester minimus vobiscum, ne addatis ut videatis faciem
meam.

<span id="xxii.i-p48"></span>**24.** And it came to pass when we came up
unto thy servant my father, we told him the words of my lord.

<span id="xxii.i-p49"></span>**24.** Fuit igitur, quando ascendimus ad
servum tuum patrem meum, et narravimus ei verba domini mei.

<span id="xxii.i-p50"></span>**25.** And our father said, Go again,
*and* buy us a little food.

<span id="xxii.i-p51"></span>**25.** Dixit pater noster, Revertimini,
emite nobis pusillum escae.

<span id="xxii.i-p52"></span>**26.** And we said, We cannot go down: if
our youngest brother be with us, then will we go down: for we may not
see the man’s face, except our youngest brother *be* with us.

<span id="xxii.i-p53"></span>**26.** Et diximus, non possumus
descendere: si fuerit frater noster minimus nobiscum, descendemus: quia
non possumus videre faciem viri illus, fratre nostro minimo non
existente nobiscum.

<span id="xxii.i-p54"></span>**27.** And thy servant my father said unto
us, Ye know that my wife bare me two *sons*:

<span id="xxii.i-p55"></span>**27.** Tune dixit servus tuus pater meus
nobis, Vos nostis quod duos peperit mihi uxor mea.

<span id="xxii.i-p56"></span>**28.** And the one went out from me, and I
said, Surely he is torn in pieces; and I saw him not since:

<span id="xxii.i-p57"></span>**28.** Egressus est unus a me, et dixi,
Certe rapiendo raptus est: et non vidi eum hactenus.

<span id="xxii.i-p58"></span>**29.** And if ye take this also from me,
and mischief befall him, ye shall bring down my gray hairs with sorrow
to the grave.

<span id="xxii.i-p59"></span>**29.** Et capietis etiam hunc a facie mea,
et accidet ei mors, descendereque facietis canitiem meam in malo ad
sepulcrum.

<span id="xxii.i-p60"></span>**30.** Now therefore when I come to thy
servant my father, and the lad *be* not with us; seeing that his life is
bound up in the lad’s life;

<span id="xxii.i-p61"></span>**30.** Nune ergo quum venero ad servum
tuum patrem meum, et puer non fuerit nobiscum, (et anima ejus ligata est
cum anima ipsius):

<span id="xxii.i-p62"></span>**31.** It shall come to pass, when he
seeth that the lad *is* not *with us*, that he will die: and thy
servants shall bring down the gray hairs of thy servant our father with
sorrow to the grave.

<span id="xxii.i-p63"></span>**31.** Erit sane, quum viderit ipse quod
non sit puer, morietur, et descendere facient servi tui canitiem servi
tui patris nostri cum colore ad sepulcrum.

<span id="xxii.i-p64"></span>**32.** For thy servant became surety for
the lad unto my father, saying, If I bring him not unto thee, then I
shall bear the blame to my father for ever.

<span id="xxii.i-p65"></span>**32.** Servus enim tuus fidejussit pro
puero patri meo, dicendo, Si non reduxero eum ad to, obnoxius ero poenae
patri meo omnibus diebus.

<span id="xxii.i-p66"></span>**33.** Now therefore, I pray thee, let thy
servant abide instead of the lad a bondman to my lord; and let the lad
go up with his brethren.

<span id="xxii.i-p67"></span>**33.** Et nunc maneat quaeso servus tuus
pro puero servus domino meo, puer autem ascendat cum fratribus suis.

<span id="xxii.i-p68"></span>**34.** For how shall I go up to my father,
and the lad *be* not with me? lest peradventure I see the evil that
shall come on my father

<span id="xxii.i-p69"></span>**34.** Quomodo enim ascendam ad patrem
meum, si puer non fuerit mecum? Ne forte videam malum quod inveniet
patrem meum.

<span id="xxii.i-p70"></span> 

<span id="xxii.i-p71"></span><span id="xxii.i-p71.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.i-p72"></span>**1.** *And he commanded the steward of his
house*. Here Moses relates how skillfully Joseph had contrived to try
the dispositions of his brethren. We have said elsewhere that, whereas
God has commanded us to cultivate simplicity, we are not to take this,
and similar examples, as affording license to turn aside to indirect and
crafty arts. For it may have been that Joseph was impelled by a special
influence of the Spirit to this course. He had also a reason, of no
common kind, for inquiring very strictly in what manner his brethren
were affected. Charity is not suspicious. Why, then, does he so distrust
his brethren; and why cannot he suppose that they have anything good,
unless he shall first have subjected them to the most rigid examination?
Truly, since he had found them to be exceedingly cruel and perfidious,
it is but an excusable suspicion, if he does not believe them to be
changed for the better, until he has obtained a thorough perception and
conviction of their penitence. But since, in this respect, it is a rare
and very difficult virtue to observe a proper medium, we must beware of
imitating the example of Joseph, in an austere course of acting, unless
we have laid all vindictive feelings aside, and are pure and free from
all enmity. For love, when it is pure, and exempt from all turbid
influence, will best decide how far it is right to proceed. It may,
however, be asked, “If the sons of Jacob had been easily induced to
betray the safety of Benjamin, what would Joseph himself have done?” We
may readily conjecture, that he examined their fidelity, in order that,
if he should find them dishonest, he might retain Benjamin, and drive
them with shame from his presence. But, by pursuing this method, his
father would have been deserted, and the Church of God ruined. And
certainly, it is not without hazard to himself that he thus terrifies
them: because he could scarcely have avoided the necessity of denouncing
some more grievous and severe punishment against them, if they had again
relapsed. It was, therefore, due to the special favor of God, that they
proved themselves different from what he had feared. In the meantime,
the advantage of his examination was twofold; first, because the clearly
ascertained integrity of his brethren rendered his mind more placable
towards them; and secondly, because it lightened, at least in some
degree, the former infamy, which they had contracted by their
wickedness.

<span id="xxii.i-p73"></span><span id="xxii.i-p73.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.i-p74"></span>**2.** *And put my cup, the silver cup*. It
may seem wonderful that, considering his great opulence, Joseph had not
rather drunk out of a golden cup. Doubtless, either the moderation of
that age was still greater than has since prevailed, and the splendor of
it less sumptuous; or else this conduct must be attributed to the
moderation of the man, who, in the midst of universal license, yet was
contented with a plain and decent, rather than with a magnificent style
of living. Unless, perhaps, on account of the excellence of the
workmanship, the silver was more valuable than gold: as it is manifest
from secular history, that the workmanship has often been more expensive
than the material itself. It is, however, probable, that Joseph was
sparing in domestic splendor, for the sake of avoiding envy. For unless
he had been prudently on his guard, a contention would have arisen
between him and the courtiers, resulting from a spirit of emulation.
Moreover, he commands the cup to be enclosed in Benjamin’s sack, in
order that he might claim him as his own, when convicted of the theft,
and might send the rest away: however, he accuses all alike, as if he
knew not who among them had committed the crime. And first, he reproves
their ingratitude, because, when they had been so kindly received, they
made the worst possible return; next, he contends that the crime was
inexpiable, because they had stolen what was most valuable to him;
namely, the cup in which he was accustomed both to drink and to divine.
And he does this through his steward, whom he had not trained to acts of
tyranny and violence. Whence I infer, that the steward was not
altogether ignorant of his master’s design.

<span id="xxii.i-p75"></span><span id="xxii.i-p75.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.i-p76"></span>**5.** *Whereby indeed, he divineth*  <span
id="fr_170"></span>[171](#fn_170.md) This clause is variously expounded.
For some take it as if Joseph pretended that he consulted soothsayers in
order to find out the thief. Others translate it, “by which he has tried
you, or searched you out;” others, that the stolen cup had given Joseph
an unfavorable omen. The genuine sense seems to me to be this: that he
had used the cup for divinations and for magical arts; which, however,
we have said, he feigned, for the sake of aggravating the charge brought
against them. But the question arises, how does Joseph allow himself to
resort to such an expedient? For besides that it was sinful for him to
profess augury; he vainly and unworthily transfers to imaginary deities
the honor due only to divine grace. On a former occasion, he had
declared that he was unable to interpret dreams, except so far as God
should suggest the truth to him; now he obscures this entire ascription
of praise to divine grace; and what is worse, by boasting that he is a
magician rather than proclaiming himself a prophet of God, he impiously
profanes the gift of the Holy Spirit. Doubtless, in this dissimulation,
it is not to be denied, that he sinned grievously. Yet I think that, at
the first, he had endeavored, by all means in his power, to give unto
God his due honor; and it was not his fault that the whole kingdom of
Egypt was ignorant of the fact that he excelled in skill, not by magical
arts, but by a celestial gift. But since the Egyptians were accustomed
to the illusions of the magicians, this ancient error so prevailed, that
they believed Joseph to be one of them; and I do not doubt that this
rumor was spread abroad among the people, although contrary to his
desire and intention. Now Joseph, in feigning himself to be a stranger
to his brethren, combines many falsehoods in one, and takes advantage of
the prevailing vulgar opinion that he used auguries. Whence we gather,
that when any one swerves from the right line, he is prone to fall into
various sins. Wherefore, being warned by this example, let us learn to
allow ourselves in nothing except what we know is approved by God. But
especially must we avoid all dissimulation, which either produces or
confirms mischievous impostures. Besides, we are warned, that it is not
sufficient for any one to oppose a prevailing vice for a time; unless he
add constancy of resistance, even though the evil may become excessive.
For he discharges his duty very defectively, who, having once testified
that he is displeased with what is evil, afterwards, by his silence or
connivance, gives it a kind of assent.

<span id="xxii.i-p78"></span><span id="xxii.i-p78.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.i-p79"></span>**7.** *And they said unto him*. The sons
of Jacob boldly excuse themselves, because a good conscience gives them
confidence. They also argue from the greater to the less: for they
contend, that their having voluntarily brought back the money, which
they might with impunity have applied to their own use, was such a proof
of their honesty, as to make it incredible that they should have been so
blinded by a little gain, as to bring upon themselves the greatest
disgrace, together with immediate danger of their lives. They,
therefore, declared themselves ready to submit to any punishment, if
they were found guilty of the theft. When the cup was discovered in
Benjamin’s sack, Moses does not relate any of their complaints; but only
declares, that they testified the most bitter grief by rending their
garments. I do not doubt that they were struck dumb by the unexpected
result; for they were confounded, not only by the magnitude of their
grief, but by perceiving themselves to be obnoxious to punishment, for
that of which their conscience did not accuse them. Therefore, when they
come into the presence of Joseph, they confess the injury, not because
they acknowledge that the crime has been committed by them, but because
excuse would be of no avail; as if they would say, “It is of no use to
deny a thing which is manifest in itself.” In this sense, they say that
their iniquity has been found out by God; because, although they had
some secret suspicion of fraud, thinking that this had been a
contrivance for the purpose of bringing an unjust charge against them,
they choose rather to trace the cause of their punishment to the secret
judgment of God.  <span id="fr_171"></span>[172](#fn_171.md) Some
interpreters believe that they here confessed their crime committed
against Joseph; but that opinion is easily refuted, because they
constantly affirm that he had been torn by a wild beast, or had perished
by some accident. Therefore, the more simple meaning is that which I
have adduced; that although the truth of the fact is not apparent, yet
they are punished by God as guilty persons. They do not, however, speak
hypocritically; but being troubled and astonished in their perplexed
affairs, there is nothing left for them but the consciousness that this
punishment is inflicted by the secret judgment of God. And I wish that
they who, when smitten by the rod of God, do not immediately perceive
the cause, would adopt the same course; and when they find that men are
unjustly incensed against them, would recall to mind the secret
judgments of God, by which it becomes us to be humbled. Moreover,
whereas Judah speaks in the name of them all, we may hence infer, that
he had already obtained precedence among his brethren. And Moses
exhibits him as their head and chief, when he expressly states that he
and the rest came. For though the dignity of primogeniture had not yet
been conferred upon him, by the solemn judgment of his father, yet it
was intended for him. Certainly, in taking the post of speaker for the
rest, his authority appears in his language. Again, it is necessary to
recall to memory, in reference to the language of Joseph, what I have
before said, that although at first he had endeavored to ascribe the
glory to God, he now sins in pretending that he is a soothsayer or
diviner. Some, to extenuate the fault, say that the allusion is, not to
the art of augury, but to his skill in judging; there is, however, no
need to resort to forced expositions for the sake of excusing the man;
for he speaks according to the common understanding of the multitude,
and thus foolishly countenances the received opinion.

<span id="xxii.i-p81"></span><span id="xxii.i-p81.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.i-p82"></span>**16.** *Behold, we are my lord’s
servants*. They had before called themselves servants through modesty;
now they consign themselves over to him as slaves. But in the case of
Benjamin they plead for a mitigation of the severity of the punishment;
and this is a kind of entreaty, that he might not be capitally punished,
as they had agreed to, at the first.  <span
id="fr_172"></span>[173](#fn_172.md)

<span id="xxii.i-p84"></span><span id="xxii.i-p84.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.i-p85"></span>**17.** *God forbid that I should do so*
 <span id="fr_173"></span>[174](#fn_173.md) If Joseph intended to retain
Benjamin alone, and to dismiss the others, he would have done his
utmost, to rend the Church of God by the worst possible dissension. But
I have previously shown (what may also be elicited from the context)
that his design was nothing else than to pierce their hearts more
deeply. He must have anticipated great mischief, if he had perceived
that they did not care for their brother: but the Lord provided against
this danger, by causing the earnest apology of Judah not only to soften
his mind, but even to draw forth tears and weeping in profusion.

<span id="xxii.i-p87"></span><span id="xxii.i-p87.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.i-p88"></span>**18.** *Let thy servant, I pray thee,
speak a word*. Judah suppliantly asks that leave may be given him to
speak, because his narrative was about to be prolix. And whereas nobles
are offended, and take it angrily, if any address them with too great
familiarity, Judas begins by declaring that he is not ignorant of the
great honor which Joseph had received in Egypt, for the purpose of
showing that he was becoming bold, not through impertinence, but through
necessity. Afterwards he recites in what manner he and his brethren had
departed from their father. There are two principal heads of his
discourse; first, that they should be the means of bringing a sorrow
upon their father which would prove fatal; and secondly, that he had
bound himself individually, by covenant, to bring the youth back. With
respect to the grief of his father, it is a sign of no common filial
piety, that he wished himself to be put in Benjamin’s place, and to
undergo perpetual exile and servitude, rather than convey to the
miserable old man tidings which would be the cause of his destruction.
He proves his sincerity by offering himself as a surety, in order that
he may liberate his brother. Because <span id="xxii.i-p88.1"></span>אטח
(*chata*) among the Hebrews, sometimes signifies to be in fault, and
sometimes to be under penalty; some translate the passage, “I shall have
sinned against my father;” or, “I shall be accused of sin;” while others
render it, “I shall be deemed guilty, because he will complain of having
been deceived by my promise.” The latter sense is the more appropriate,
because, truly, he would not escape disgrace and censure from his
father, as having cruelly betrayed a youth committed to his care.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_170"></span>[171](cc02021.htm#fr_170.md) <span
id="xxii.i-p76.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.i-p77"></span> “*Jamblichus*, in his book on Egyptian
mysteries, mentions the practice of divining by cups. That this
superstition, as well as many others, has continued even to modern
times, is shown by a remarkable passage in Norden’s Travels. When the
author, with his companions, had arrived at Dorri, the most remote
extremity of Egypt, or rather in Nubia, were they were able to deliver
themselves from a perilous condition, only through great presence of
mind, they sent one of their company to a malicious and powerful Arab,
to threaten him. He answered them, ‘I know what sort of people you are.
I have consulted my cup, and found in it, that you are from a people of
whom one of our prophets has said, There will come Franks under every
kind of pretense to spy out the land. They will bring with them a great
multitude of their countrymen, to conquer the country and to destroy all
the people.’” — Egypt and the Books of Moses. p. 40. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_171"></span>[172](cc02021.htm#fr_171.md) <span
id="xxii.i-p79.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.i-p80"></span> See <span id="xxii.i-p80.1"></span>[Ge
44:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen044.htm#016.md)<span id="xxii.i-p80.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_172"></span>[173](cc02021.htm#fr_172.md) <span
id="xxii.i-p82.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.i-p83"></span> On the whole of this verse, *Dr. A.
Clarke* remarks, “No words can more strongly mark confusion and
peturbation of mind. They no doubt all thought that Benjamin had
actually stolen the cup.” He also thinks it probable that this very cup
had been used by Benjamin at the dinner. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_173"></span>[174](cc02021.htm#fr_173.md) <span
id="xxii.i-p85.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.i-p86"></span> “God forbid” is an expression frequently
used by our translators, both in the Old and New Testament, where the
name of God does not occur in the original. The term here used as the
same meaning as <span id="xxii.i-p86.1"></span>Absit in Latin, and <span
id="xxii.i-p86.2"></span>Μὴ γένοιτο in Greek. Literally this passage
would read, “Far be it from me to do so.” See also <span
id="xxii.i-p86.3"></span>[Ge 44:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen044.htm#007.md)<span
id="xxii.i-p86.3"></span>. — *Ed*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 45](cc02022.md)
