[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc02010)  [Next](cc02012.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 2: Genesis, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xii"></span>

<span id="xii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 34.

<span id="xii.i"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p1"></span><span id="xii.i-p1.1"></span>[Genesis
34:1-31](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#001.md)<span id="xii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p2"></span>**1.** And Dinah the daughter of Leah, which
she bare unto Jacob, went out to see the daughters of the land.

<span id="xii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Et egressa est Dinah filia Leah, quam
pepererat ipsi Iahacob, ut viderat filias regionis.

<span id="xii.i-p4"></span>**2.** And when Shechem the son of Hamor the
Hivite, prince of the country, saw her, he took her, and lay with her,
and defiled her.

<span id="xii.i-p5"></span>**2.** Et vidit eam Sechem filius Hamor
Hivvaei principis terrae, et tulit eam, et concubuit cum ea, et
humiliavit eam.

<span id="xii.i-p6"></span>**3.** And his soul clave unto Dinah the
daughter of Jacob, and he loved the damsel, and spake kindly unto the
damsel.

<span id="xii.i-p7"></span>**3.** Et adhaesit anima ejus ipsi Dinah
filiae Iahacob, et dilexit puellam: et loquutus est ad cor puellae.

<span id="xii.i-p8"></span>**4.** And Shechem spake unto his father
Hamor, saying, Get me this damsel to wife.

<span id="xii.i-p9"></span>**4.** Et dixit Sechem ad Hamor patrem suum,
dicendo, Cape mihi puellam hanc in uxorem.

<span id="xii.i-p10"></span>**5.** And Jacob heard that he had defiled
Dinah his daughter: now his sons were with his cattle in the field: and
Jacob held his peace until they were come.

<span id="xii.i-p11"></span>**5.** Audivit autem Iahacob, quod violasset
Dinah filiam suam: et filii ejus erant cum pecudibus ejus in agro, et
siluit Iahacob, donec venirent ipsi

<span id="xii.i-p12"></span>**6.** And Hamor the father of Shechem went
out unto Jacob to commune with him.

<span id="xii.i-p13"></span>**6.** Egressus est autem Hamor pater Sechem
ad Iahacob, ut loqueretur cum eo.

<span id="xii.i-p14"></span>**7.** And the sons of Jacob came out of the
field when they heard *it*: and the men were grieved, and they were very
wroth, because he had wrought folly in Israel in lying with Jacob’s
daughter; which thing ought not to be done.

<span id="xii.i-p15"></span>**7.** Porro filii Iahacob venerunt de agro:
qui quum audierunt ipsi, dolore affecti sunt viri, iratique sunt valde:
quia flagitium designasset in Israel, ut coiret cum filia Iahacob: et
sic non fiet.

<span id="xii.i-p16"></span>**8.** And Hamor communed with them, saying,
The soul of my son Shechem longeth for your daughter: I pray you give
her him to wife.

<span id="xii.i-p17"></span>**8.** Et loquutus est Hamor cum eis,
dicendo, Sechem filii mei complacuit anima in filia vestra: date quaeso
eam illi in uxorem.

<span id="xii.i-p18"></span>**9.** And make ye marriages with us, *and*
give your daughters unto us, and take our daughters unto you.

<span id="xii.i-p19"></span>**9.** Et affinitatem contrahite nobiscum:
filias vestras dabitis nobis, et filias nostras accipietis vobis.

<span id="xii.i-p20"></span>**10.** And ye shall dwell with us: and the
land shall be before you; dwell and trade ye therein, and get you
possessions therein.

<span id="xii.i-p21"></span>**10.** Et nobiscum habitabitis, et terra
erit coram vibis, habitate, et negotiamini in ea, et possessiones
acquirite in ea.

<span id="xii.i-p22"></span>**11.** And Shechem said unto her father and
unto her brethren, Let me find grace in your eyes, and what ye shall say
unto me I will give.

<span id="xii.i-p23"></span>**11.** Adhaec dixit Sechem ad patrem ejus,
et ad fratres ejus, Inveniam gratiam in oculis vestris: et quod
dixeritis mihi, dabo.

<span id="xii.i-p24"></span>**12.** Ask me never so much dowry and gift,
and I will give according as ye shall say unto me: but give me the
damsel to wife.

<span id="xii.i-p25"></span>**12.** Augete mihi valde dotem, et donum:
et dabo quemadmodum dixeritis mihi, et date mihi puellam in uxorem.

<span id="xii.i-p26"></span>**13.** And the sons of Jacob answered
Shechem and Hamor his father deceitfully, and said, because he had
defiled Dinah their sister:

<span id="xii.i-p27"></span>**13.** Et responderunt filii Iahacob ad
Sechem et Hamor patrem ejus in dolo, et loquuti sunt, (quia violaverat
Dinah sororem suam,)

<span id="xii.i-p28"></span>**14.** And they said unto them, We cannot
do this thing, to give our sister to one that is uncircumcised; for that
*were* a reproach unto us:

<span id="xii.i-p29"></span>**14.** Et dixerunt ad eos, Non possumus
facere hoc, ut demus sorerem nostram viro, cui est praeputium: quia
opprobrium esset nobis.

<span id="xii.i-p30"></span>**15.** But in this will we consent unto
you: If ye will be as we *be*, that every male of you be circumcised;

<span id="xii.i-p31"></span>**15.** Veruntamen in hoc acquiescemus
vobis, si fueritis sicut nos, ut circumcidatur in vobis omnis masculus.

<span id="xii.i-p32"></span>**16.** Then will we give our daughters unto
you, and we will take your daughters to us, and we will dwell with you,
and we will become one people.

<span id="xii.i-p33"></span>**16.** Et dabimus filias nostras vobis, et
filias vestras capiemus nobis: et habitabimus vobiscum, et erimus in
populum unum.

<span id="xii.i-p34"></span>**17.** But if ye will not hearken unto us,
to be circumcised; then will we take our daughter, and we will be gone.

<span id="xii.i-p35"></span>**17.** Quodsi non obedieritis nobis, ut
circumcidamini: capiemus filiam nostram et recedemus.

<span id="xii.i-p36"></span>**18.** And their words pleased Hamor, and
Shechem Hamor’s son.

<span id="xii.i-p37"></span>**18.** Et placuerunt verba eorum in oculis
Hamor, et in oculis Sechem filii Hamor.

<span id="xii.i-p38"></span>**19.** And the young man deferred not to do
the thing, because he had delight in Jacob’s daughter: and he *was* more
honourable than all the house of his father.

<span id="xii.i-p39"></span>**19.** Nec tardavit juvenis ad perficiendum
negotium, quia complacuerat ei in filia Iahacob: et ipse erat
honorabilis prae tota domo patris sui.

<span id="xii.i-p40"></span>**20.** And Hamor and Shechem his son came
unto the gate of their city, and communed with the men of their city,
saying,

<span id="xii.i-p41"></span>**20.** Et venit Hamor et Sechem filius ejus
ad portam civitatis suae, et loquuti sunt ad viros civitatis suae,
dicendo,

<span id="xii.i-p42"></span>**21.** These men *are* peaceable with us;
therefore let them dwell in the land, and trade therein; for the land,
behold, *it is* large enough for them; let us take their daughters to us
for wives, and let us give them our daughters.

<span id="xii.i-p43"></span>**21.** Viri isti pacati sunt nobiscum, et
habitabunt in terra, et negotiabuntur in ea (et terra ecce, lata est
spatiis ante eos) filias eorum accipiemus nobis in uxores, et filias
nostras dabimus eis.

<span id="xii.i-p44"></span>**22.** Only herein will the men consent
unto us for to dwell with us, to be one people, if every male among us
be circumcised, as they *are* circumcised.

<span id="xii.i-p45"></span>**22.** Veruntamen in hoc acquiescent nobis
viri, ut habitent nobiscum, ut sint populus unus, quando circumcisus
erit in nobis omnis masculus, quemadmodum ipsi sunt circumcisi.

<span id="xii.i-p46"></span>**23.** *Shall* not their cattle and their
substance and every beast of theirs *be* ours? only let us consent unto
them, and they will dwell with us.

<span id="xii.i-p47"></span>**23.** Greges eorum, et substantia eorum et
omnia jumenta eorum, nonne nostra erunt? tantum acquiescamus eis, et
habitabunt nobiscum.

<span id="xii.i-p48"></span>**24.** And unto Hamor and unto Shechem his
son hearkened all that went out of the gate of his city; and every male
was circumcised, all that went out of the gate of his city.

<span id="xii.i-p49"></span>**24.** Et assensi sunt Hamor et Sechem
filio ejus, omnes qui egrediebantur per portam civitatis ejus: et
circumciderunt se omnis masculus, omnes egredientes per portam civitatis
ejus.

<span id="xii.i-p50"></span>**25.** And it came to pass on the third
day, when they were sore, that two of the sons of Jacob, Simeon and
Levi, Dinah’s brethren, took each man his sword, and came upon the city
boldly, and slew all the males.

<span id="xii.i-p51"></span>**25.** Et fuit in die tertia, quum essent
ipsi dolore affecti, acceperunt duo filii Iahacob Simhon et Levi fratres
Dinah, quisque gladium suum, et venerunt ad civitatem confidenter, et
occiderunt omnem masculum.

<span id="xii.i-p52"></span>**26.** And they slew Hamor and Shechem his
son with the edge of the sword, and took Dinah out of Shechem’s house,
and went out.

<span id="xii.i-p53"></span>**26.** Et Hamor et Sechem filium ejus
occiderunt acie gladii, et tulerunt Dinah e domo Sechem et egressi sunt.

<span id="xii.i-p54"></span>**27.** The sons of Jacob came upon the
slain, and spoiled the city, because they had defiled their sister.

<span id="xii.i-p55"></span>**27.** Filii Iahacob progressi sunt super
occisos, et praedati sunt urbem, quia violaverant sororem suam.

<span id="xii.i-p56"></span>**28.** They took their sheep, and their
oxen, and their asses, and that which *was* in the city, and that which
*was* in the field,

<span id="xii.i-p57"></span>**28.** Pecudes eorum, et boves eorum, et
asinos eorum, et quae erant in urbe, et quae in agro, acceperunt.

<span id="xii.i-p58"></span>**29.** And all their wealth, and all their
little ones, and their wives took they captive, and spoiled even all
that *was* in the house.

<span id="xii.i-p59"></span>**29.** Et omnem substantiam eorum, et omnes
parvulos eorum, et uxores eorum captivas duxerunt, et praedati sunt
omnia, quae erant in domo.

<span id="xii.i-p60"></span>**30.** And Jacob said to Simeon and Levi,
Ye have troubled me to make me to stink among the inhabitants of the
land, among the Canaanites and the Perizzites: and I *being* few in
number, they shall gather themselves together against me, and slay me;
and I shall be destroyed, I and my house.

<span id="xii.i-p61"></span>**30.** Et dixit Iahacob ad Simhon et ad
Levi, Turbastis me, ut foetere feceritis me habitatoribus terrae,
Chenanaeo, et Perizaeo: et ego paucos mecum habeo, et congregabunt se
adversum me, et percutient me, et disperdar ego, et domus mea.

<span id="xii.i-p62"></span>**31.** And they said, Should he deal with
our sister as with an harlot?

<span id="xii.i-p63"></span>**31.** At dixerunt, Numquid ut cum
meretrice aget cum sorore nostra?

<span id="xii.i-p64"></span> 

<span id="xii.i-p65"></span><span id="xii.i-p65.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p66"></span>**1.** *And Dinah... went out*. This chapter
records a severe contest, with which God again exercised his servant.
How precious the chastity of his daughter would be to him, we may
readily conjecture from the probity of his whole life. When therefore he
heard that she was violated, this disgrace would inflict the deepest
wound of grief upon his mind: yet soon his grief is trebled, when he
hears that his sons, from the desire of revenge, have committed a most
dreadful crime. But let us examine everything in order. Dinah is
ravished, because, having left her father’s house, she wandered about
more freely than was proper. She ought to have remained quietly at home,
as both the Apostle teaches and nature itself dictates; for to girls the
virtue is suitable, which the proverb applies to women, that they should
be (<span id="xii.i-p66.1"></span>οἰκουροὶ,) or keepers of the house.
Therefore fathers of families are taught to keep their daughters under
strict discipline, if they desire to preserve them free from all
dishonor; for if a vain curiosity was so heavily punished in the
daughter of holy Jacob, not less danger hangs over weak virgins at this
day, if they go too boldly and eagerly into public assemblies, and
excite the passions of youth towards themselves. For it is not to be
doubted that Moses in part casts the blame of the offense upon Dinah
herself, when he says, “she went out to see the daughters of the land;”
whereas she ought to have remained under her mother’s eyes in the tent.

<span id="xii.i-p67"></span><span id="xii.i-p67.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p68"></span>**3.** *And his soul clave unto Dinah*.
Moses intimates that she was not so forcibly violated, that Shechem
having once abused her, treated her with contempt, as is usual with
harlots; for he loved her as a wife; and did not even object to be
circumcised that he might have her; but the fervor of lust had so
prevailed, that he first subjected her to disgrace. And therefore
although he embraced Dinah with real and sincere attachment, yet, in
this want of self-government, he grievously sinned. Shechem “spoke to
the heart” of the maid, that is, he addressed her courteously, to allure
her to himself by his bland speeches: whence it follows, that when she
was unwilling and resisted, he used violence towards her.

<span id="xii.i-p69"></span><span id="xii.i-p69.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p70"></span>**4.** *And Shechem said to his father
Hamor*. In this place it is more clearly expressed, that Shechem desired
to have Dinah for his wife; for his lust was not so unbridled, that when
he had defiled, he despised her. Besides, a laudable modesty is shown,
since he pays deference to the will of his father; for he does not
attempt to form a contract of marriage of his own mind, but leaves this
to his father’s authority. For though he had basely fallen through the
precipitate ardor of lust; yet now returning to himself, he follows the
guidance of nature. So much the more ought young men to take heed to
themselves, lest in the slippery period of their age, the lusts of the
flesh should impel them to many crimes. For, at this day, greater
license everywhere prevails, so that no moderation restrains youths from
shameful conduct. Since, however, Shechem, under the rule and direction
of nature, desired his father to be the procurer of his marriage, we
hence infer that the right which parents have over their children is
inviolable; so that they who attempt to overthrow it, confound heaven
and earth. Wherefore, since the Pope, in honor of marriage, has dared to
break this sacred bond of nature; this fornicator Shechem alone, will
prove a judge sufficient, and more than sufficient, to condemn that
barbarous conduct.

<span id="xii.i-p71"></span><span id="xii.i-p71.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p72"></span>**5.** *And Jacob heard*. Moses inserts a
single verse concerning the silent sorrow of Jacob. We know that they
who have not been accustomed to reproaches, are the more grievously
affected when any dishonor happens to them. Therefore the more this
prudent man had endeavored to keep his family pure from every stain,
chaste and well-ordered, the more deeply is he wounded. But since he is
at home alone, he dissembles, and keeps his grief to himself, till his
sons return from the field. Moreover, by this word, Moses does not mean
that Jacob deferred vengeance till their return; but that, being alone
and devoid of counsel and of consolation, he lay prostrate as one
disheartened. The sense then is, that he was so oppressed with
insupportable grief, that he held his peace.  <span
id="fr_117"></span>[118](#fn_117.md) By using the word “defiled,” Moses
teaches us what is the true purity of man; namely, when chastity is
religiously cultivated, and every one possesses his vessel in honor. But
whoever prostitutes his body to fornication, filthily defiles himself.
If then Dinah is said to have been polluted, whom Shechem had forcibly
violated, what must be said of voluntary adulterers and fornicators?

<span id="xii.i-p74"></span><span id="xii.i-p74.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p75"></span>**7.** *And the sons of Jacob came out of
the field*. Moses begins to relate the tragic issue of this history.
Shechem, indeed, had acted wickedly and impiously; but it was far more
atrocious and wicked that the sons of Jacob should murder a whole
people, to avenge themselves of the private fault of one man. It was by
no means fitting to seek a cruel compensation for the levity and
rashness of one youth, by the slaughter of so many men. Again, who had
constituted them judges, that they should dare, with their own hands, to
execute vengeance for an injury inflicted upon them? Perfidy was also
superadded, because they proceeded, under the pretext of a covenant, to
perpetrate this enormous crime. In Jacob, moreover, we have an admirable
example of patient endurance; who, though afflicted with so many evils,
yet did not faint under them. But chiefly we must consider the mercy of
God, by which it came to pass, that the covenant of grace remained with
the posterity of Jacob. For what seemed less suitable, than that a few
men in whom such furious rage and such implacable malice reigned, should
be reckoned among the people and the sons of God, to the exclusion of
all the world besides? We see certainly that it was not through any
power of their own that they had not altogether declined from the
kingdom of God. Whence it appears that the favor which God had
vouchsafed unto them was gratuitous, and not founded upon their merits.
We also require to be treated by Him with the same indulgence, seeing
that we should utterly fall away, if God did not pardon our sins. The
sons of Jacob have, indeed, a just cause of offense, because not only
are they affected with their own private ignominy, but they are
tormented with the indignity of the crime, because their sister had been
dragged forth from the house of Jacob, as from a sanctuary, to be
violated. For this they chiefly urge, that it would have been wickedness
to allow such disgrace in the elect and holy people:  <span
id="fr_118"></span>[119](#fn_118.md) but they themselves, through the
hatred of one sin, rush furiously forward to greater and more
intolerable crimes. Therefore we must beware, lest, after we have become
severe judges in condemning the faults of others, we hasten
inconsiderately into evil. But chiefly we must abstain from violent
remedies which surpass the evil we desire to correct.

<span id="xii.i-p77"></span>*Which thing ought not to be done*  <span
id="fr_119"></span>[120](#fn_119.md) Interpreters commonly explain the
passage as meaning, “it is not becoming that such a thing should be
done;” but, in my judgment, it applies more properly to the sons of
Jacob, who had determined with themselves that the injury was not to be
borne. Yet they wrongfully appropriate to themselves the right of taking
revenge: why do they not rather reflect thus; “God, who has received us
under his care and protection, will not suffer this injury to pass
unavenged; in the meantime, it is our part to be silent, and to leave
the act of punishing, which is not placed in our hands, entirely to his
sovereign will.” Hence we may learn, when we are angry at the sins of
other men, not to attempt anything which is beyond our own duty.

<span id="xii.i-p79"></span><span id="xii.i-p79.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p80"></span>**8.** *And Hamor communed with them*.
Though the sons of Jacob were justly incensed, yet their indignation
ought to have been appeased, or at least somewhat mitigated, by the
great courteousness of Hamor. And if the humanity of Hamor could not
reconcile the sons of Jacob to Shechem, the old man himself was indeed
worthy of a benignant reception. We see what equitable conditions he
offers; he himself was the prince of the city, the sons of Jacob were
strangers. Therefore their minds must have been savage beyond measure,
not to be inclined to levity. Besides, the suppliant entreaty of Shechem
himself deserved this, that they should have granted forgiveness to his
fervent love. Therefore, that they remained implacable, is a sign of
most cruel pride. What would they have done to enemies who had purposely
injured them, when they are not moved by the prayers of him, who, being
deceived by blind love, and by the error of incontinence, has injured
them without any malicious intention?

<span id="xii.i-p81"></span><span id="xii.i-p81.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p82"></span>**13.** *And the sons of Jacob answered*.
The commencement of their perfidious course is here related: for they,
being outrageous rather than simply angry, wish to overthrow the whole
city, and not being sufficiently strong to contend against so great a
number of people, they contrive a new fraud, in order that they may
suddenly rise upon the inhabitants weakened by wounds. Therefore, since
the Shechemites had no strength to resist, it became a cruel butchery
rather than a conquest, which increased the atrocity of wickedness in
Jacob’s sons, who cared for nothing so that they might but gratify their
rage. They allege in excuse, that, whereas they were separated from
other nations, it was not lawful for them to give wives of their own
family to the uncircumcised. Which indeed was true if they said it
sincerely; but they falsely use the sacred name of God as a pretext;
yea, their double profanation of that name proves them to be doubly
sacrilegious; for they cared nothing about circumcision, but were intent
on this one thing, how they might crush the miserable men in a state of
weakness. Besides, they wickedly sever the sign from the truth which it
represents; as if any one, by laying aside his uncircumcision, might
suddenly pass over into the Church of God. And in this mode they pollute
the spiritual symbol of life, by admitting foreigners, promiscuously and
without discrimination, into its society. But since their pretense has
some color of probability, we must observe what they say, that it would
be disgraceful to them to give their sister to a man uncircumcised. This
also is true, if they who used the words were sincere; for since they
bore the mark of God in their flesh, it was wicked in them to contract
marriages with unbelievers. So also, at the present time, our baptism
separates us from the profane, so that whoever mixes himself with them,
fixes a mark of infamy upon himself.

<span id="xii.i-p83"></span><span id="xii.i-p83.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p84"></span>**18.** *And their words pleased Hamor*.
Moses prosecutes the history until he comes to the slaughter of the
Shechemites. Hamor had, no doubt, been induced by the entreaties of his
son, to show himself thus tractable. Whence appears the excessive
indulgence of the kind old man. He ought, in the beginning, severely to
have corrected the fault of his son; but he not only covers it as much
as possible, but yields to all his wishes. This moderation and equity
would have been commendable, if what his son had required was just; but
that the old man, for the sake of his son, should adopt a new religion,
and suffer a wound to be inflicted on his own flesh, cannot be deemed
free from folly. The youth is said not to have delayed, because he
vehemently loved the maid, and excelled in dignity among his own
citizens; and on account of the honor of his rank he easily obtained
what he wished: for the fervor of his love would have availed nothing,
unless he had possessed the power of accomplishing his object.

<span id="xii.i-p85"></span><span id="xii.i-p85.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p86"></span>**21.** *These men are peaceable*. Moses
describes the mode of acting, whereby they persuaded the Shechemites to
accept the conditions which the sons of Jacob had imposed. It was
difficult to induce a whole people to submit in an affair of such
magnitude to a few foreigners. For we know what displeasure a change of
religion produces: but Hamor and Shechem reason from utility; and this
is natural rhetoric. For although honor has a more plausible appearance,
it is yet for the most part cold in persuasion. But among the vulgar,
utility carries almost every point; because the major part eagerly
pursues what it deems expedient for itself. With this design, Hamor and
Shechem extol the family of Jacob for their honesty and tranquil habits,
in order that the Shechemites may deem it useful to themselves to
receive such guests. They add that the land is sufficiently large, so
that no loss is to be feared on the part of the original inhabitants.
They then enumerate other advantages; meanwhile, they cunningly conceal
the private and real cause of their request. Whence it follows that all
these pretexts were fallacious. But it is a very common disease, that
men of rank who have great authority, while making all things
subservient to their own private ends, feign themselves to be
considerate for the common good, and pretend to a desire for the public
advantage. And, truly, it may be believed, that the persons here spoken
of were the best among all the people, and were endowed with singular
superiority; for the Shechemites had chosen Hamor for their prince, as
one who was preeminent in excellent gifts. Yet we see how he and his son
lie and deceive, under the appearance of rectitude. Whence also we
perceive hypocrisy to be so deeply rooted in human minds, that it is a
miracle to find any one entirely free from it; especially where private
advantage is concerned. From this example let all who govern, learn to
cultivate sincerity in public designs, without any sinister regard to
their own interests. On the other hand; let the people exercise
self-government, lest they too earnestly seek their own advantage;
because it will often happen that they are caught by a specious
appearance of good, as fishes by the hook. For as self-love is blind, we
are drawn without judgment to the hope of gain. And the Lord also justly
chastises this cupidity, to which he sees us to be unduly prone, when he
suffers us to be deceived by it. Moses says that this discourse took
place in the gate of the city, where public assemblies were then wont to
be held and judgment administered.

<span id="xii.i-p87"></span><span id="xii.i-p87.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p88"></span>**24.** *And unto Hamor and unto Shechem his
son hearkened, etc* Apparently this consent may be ascribed to modesty
and humanity; for, by readily obeying their princes, and kindly
admitting the strangers to an equality of rights in the city, they show
themselves, in both respects, modest and humane. But if we reflect on
the true import of circumcision, it will easily appear that they were
too much addicted to their own selfish interests. They knew that, by a
new sacrament, they would be committed to a different worship of God.
They had not yet been taught that the ablutions and sacrifices, to which
they had been all their life accustomed, were unprofitable trifles.
Therefore, to change their religion so carelessly betrays, on their
part, a gross contempt of God; for never do they who seriously worship
God, so suddenly cast aside their superstitions, unless they are
convinced by sound doctrine and arguments. But the Shechemites, blinded
by an evil conscience, and by the hope of gain, pass over, like men half
brutalized, to an unknown God. Search the isles, (saith the Prophet,) is
there any nation which deserts its, gods, who yet are not gods?  <span
id="fr_120"></span>[121](#fn_120.md) Yet this was done at Shechem, when no
defect had been shown to exist in the received superstitions; wherefore
none ought to wonder that a sad result followed this levity of mind.
nevertheless, Simian and Levi were not, on that account, excusable for
the indulgence of their own cruelty: yea, their impiety appears the more
detestable, because they not only rush impetuously upon men, but, in a
sense, trample upon the sacred covenant of God, of which alone they make
their boast. Certainly, if they had no feeling for the men themselves,
yet reverence for God ought to have restrained their ferocity, when they
reflected from what cause the weakness of the Shechemites proceeded.

<span id="xii.i-p90"></span><span id="xii.i-p90.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p91"></span>**25.** *Simian and Levi, Dinah’s brethren*.
Because Moses says that the slaughter took place on the third day, the
Hebrews think that, at that time, the pain of the wound was most severe.
The proof, however, is not valid; nor is it of much moment. Although
Moses names only two authors of the slaughter, it does not appear to me
probable that they came alone, but that they were the leaders of the
troop: for Jacob had a large family, and it might be that they called
some of their brothers to join them; yet, because the affair was
conducted by their counsel and direction, it is ascribed to them, as
Cartage is said to have been destroyed by Scipio. Moses also calls them
the brothers of Dinah, because they were by the same mother. We have
seen that Dinah was the daughter of Leah; for which reason Simon and
Levi, whose own sister she was by both parents, were the more enraged at
the violation of her chastity: they were therefore impelled, not so much
by the common reproach brought upon the holy and elect race, (according
to their recent boast,) as by a sense of the infamy brought upon
themselves. However, there is no reader who does not readily perceive
how dreadful and execrable was this crime. One man only had sinned, and
he endeavored to compensate for the injury, by many acts of kindness;
but the cruelty of Simon and Levi could only be satiated by the
destruction of the whole city; and, under the pretext of a covenant,
they form a design against friends and hospitable persons, in a time of
peace, which would have been deemed intolerable against enemies in open
war. Hence we perceive how mercifully God dealt with that people; seeing
that, from the posterity of a sanguinary man, and even of a wicked
robber, he raised up a priesthood for himself. Let the Jews now go and
be proud of their noble origin. But the Lord declared his gratuitous
mercy by too many proofs for the ingratitude of man to be able to
obscure it. Moreover, we hence learn that Moses did not speak from
carnal sense; but was the instrument of the Holy Spirit, and the herald
of the celestial Judge; for though he was a Levite, he yet is so far
from sparing his own race, that he does not hesitate to brand the father
of his tribe with perpetual infamy. And it is not to be doubted that the
Lord purposely intended to stop the mouths of impure and profane men,
such as the Lucianists, who confess that Moses was a very great man, and
of rare excellence; but that he procured for himself, by craft and
subtlety, authority over a great people, as if, indeed, an acute and
intelligent man would not have known that, by this single act of
wickedness, the honor of his race would be greatly tarnished. He had,
however, no other design than to extol the goodness of God towards his
people; and truly there was nothing which he less desired than to
exercise dominion, as appears clearly from the fact, that he transferred
the office of priesthood to another family, and commanded his sons to be
only ministers. With respect to the Shechemites, although in the sight
of God they were not innocent; seeing they preferred their own advantage
to a religion which they thought lawful, yet it was not the Lord’s will
that they should be so grievously punished for their fault; but he
suffered this signal punishment to follow the violation of one maid,
that he might testify to all ages his great abhorrence of lust. Besides,
seeing that the iniquity had arisen from a prince of the city, the
punishment is rightly extended to the whole body of the people: for
since God never commits the government to evil and vicious princes,
except in righteous judgment, there is no wonder that, when they sin,
they involve their subjects with them in the same condemnation.
Moreover, from this example let us learn, that if, at any time,
fornication prevail with impunity, God will, at length, exact
punishments so much the more severe: for if the violation of one maid
was avenged by the horrible massacre of a whole city; he will not sleep
nor be quiet, if a whole people indulge in a common license of
fornication, and, on all sides, connive at each other’s iniquity. The
sons of Jacob acted indeed wickedly; but we must observe that
fornication was, in this manner, divinely condemned.

<span id="xii.i-p92"></span><span id="xii.i-p92.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p93"></span>**27.** *The sons of Jacob came*. Moses
shows that, not content with simple revenge, they fly together to the
spoil. As it respects the words, they are said to have come upon the
slain, either because they made themselves a way over the slaughtered
bodies; or because, in addition to the slaughter, they rushed to the
plunder. In whichever way it is taken, Moses teaches that, not satisfied
with their former wickedness, they made this addition to it. Be it, that
they were blinded with anger in shedding blood; yet by what right do
they sack the city? This certainly cannot be ascribed to anger. But
these are the ordinary fruits of human intemperance, that he who gives
himself the rein in perpetrating one wickedness, soon breaks out into
another. Thus the sons of Jacob, from being murderers, become also
robbers, and the guilt of avarice is added to that of cruelty. The more
anxious then should be our endeavors to bridle our desires; lest they
should mutually fan each other, so that at length, by their combined
action, a dreadful conflagration should arise; but especially, we must
beware of using force of arms, which brings with it many perverse and
brutal assaults. Moses says that the sons of Jacob did this, because the
Shechemites had defiled their sister; but the whole city was not guilty.
Moses, however, only states in what way the authors of the slaughter are
affected: for although they wish to appear just avengers of the injury,
yet they pay no respect to what it was lawful for them to do, and make
no attempt to control their depraved affections, and consequently set no
bounds to their wickedness. Should any one prefer taking the expression
in a higher sense, it may be referred to the judgment of God, by which
the whole city was involved in guilt, because no one had opposed the
lust of the prince: perhaps many had consented to it, as not being very
much concerned about the unjust dishonor done to their guests; but the
former sense is what I most approve.

<span id="xii.i-p94"></span><span id="xii.i-p94.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p95"></span>**30.** *And Jacob said*. Moses declares
that the crime was condemned by the holy man, lest any one should think
that he had participated in their counsel. He also expostulates with his
sons, because they had caused him to stink among the inhabitants of the
land; that is, they had rendered him so odious, that no one would be
able to bear him. If then the neighboring nations should conspire among
themselves, he would be unable to resist them, seeing he had so small a
band, in comparison with their great number. He also expressly names the
Canaanites and Perizzites, who, though they had received no wrong, were
yet by nature exceedingly prone to inflict injury. But Jacob may seem to
act preposterously, in overlooking the offense committed against God,
and in considering only his own danger. Why is he not rather angry at
their cruelty? why is he not offended at their perfidy? why does he not
reprove their rapaciousness? It is however probable, that when he saw
them terror — stricken at their recent crime, he suited miswords to
their state of mind. For he acts as if he were complaining that he,
rather than the Shechemites, was slain by them. We know that men are
seldom if ever drawn to repentance, except by the fear of punishment:
especially when they have any specious pretext as a covering for their
fault. Besides, we know not whether Moses may not have selected this as
a part out of a long expostulation, to cause his readers to understand
that the fury of Simon and Levi was so outrageous, that they were more
insensible than brute beasts to their own destruction and that of their
whole family. This is clear from their own answer, which not only
breathes a barbarous ferocity, but shows that they had no feeling. It
was barbarous, first, because they excuse themselves for having
destroyed a whole people and plundered their city, on account of the
injury done by one man; secondly, because they answer their father so
shortly and contumaciously; thirdly, because they obstinately defend the
revenge which they had rashly taken. Moreover, their insensibility was
prodigious, because they were not affected by the thought of their own
death, and that of their parents, wives, and children, which seemed just
at hand. Thus we are taught, how intemperate anger deprives men of their
senses. We are also admonished, that it is not enough for us to be able
to lay blame on our opponents; but we must always see how far it is
lawful for us to proceed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_117"></span>[118](cc02011.htm#fr_117.md) <span
id="xii.i-p72.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p73"></span> Or, he might be restrained by prudence from
imparting his feelings to others, lest by making them public, he should
expose himself to danger, before he was prepared to meet it. At all
events, it was wise to restrain the expression of his indignation, till
he was surrounded by those who might help him with their counsel, or
attempt the rescue of his daughter from the hands of her violator. —
*Ed*.

<span id="fn_118"></span>[119](cc02011.htm#fr_118.md) <span
id="xii.i-p75.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p76"></span> “He had wrought folly in Israel.”
*Ainsworth* says, “Or against Israel.” “Israel being put for the
posterity of Israel.” *Professor* *Bush* says, “Rather, ‘Because folly
had been wrought in Israel,’ (the active for the passive).” But perhaps
Ainsworth’s translation is to be preferred. “This is the first instance
on record where the family of Jacob is designated by the distinguished
patronymic title of ‘Israel,’ which afterwards became the dominant
appellation of his posterity.” — *Bush* in loc. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_119"></span>[120](cc02011.htm#fr_119.md) <span
id="xii.i-p77.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p78"></span> <span id="xii.i-p78.1"></span>Et sic non
fiet. “And so it may not, or shall not be done.” The sense given in the
English translation is that which Calvin rejects, though he allows it to
be the common meaning attached by commentators to the expression. —
*Ed*.

<span id="fn_120"></span>[121](cc02011.htm#fr_120.md) <span
id="xii.i-p88.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p89"></span> <span id="xii.i-p89.1"></span>[Jer.
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#010.md),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#011.md)<span id="xii.i-p89.1"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 35](cc02012.md)
