[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc02024)  [Next](cc02026.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 2: Genesis, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxvi"></span>

<span id="xxvi-p1"></span>CHAPTER 48.

<span id="xxvi.i"></span>

<span id="xxvi.i-p1"></span><span id="xxvi.i-p1.1"></span>[Genesis
48:1-22](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#001.md)<span id="xxvi.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.i-p2"></span>**1** And it came to pass after these
things, that *one* told Joseph, Behold, thy father *is* sick: and he
took with him his two sons, Manasseh and Ephraim.

<span id="xxvi.i-p3"></span>**1.** Et fuit post haec dictum fuit ipsi
Joseph, Ecce, pater tuus aegrotat: tunc accepit duos filios suos secum,
Menasseh et Ephriam.

<span id="xxvi.i-p4"></span>**2** And *one* told Jacob, and said,
Behold, thy son Joseph cometh unto thee: and Israel strengthened
himself, and sat upon the bed.

<span id="xxvi.i-p5"></span>**2.** Et nuntiavit ipsi Jahacob, et dixit,
Ecce, filius tuus Joseph venit ad to. Et roboravit se Israel, et sedit
super lectum.

<span id="xxvi.i-p6"></span>**3** And Jacob said unto Joseph, God
Almighty appeared unto me at Luz in the land of Canaan, and blessed me,

<span id="xxvi.i-p7"></span>**3.** Et dixit Jahacob ipsi Joseph, Deus
omnipotens apparuit mihi in Luz in terra Chenaan, et benedixit mihi.

<span id="xxvi.i-p8"></span>**4** And said unto me, Behold, I will make
thee fruitful, and multiply thee, and I will make of thee a multitude of
people; and will give this land to thy seed after thee *for* an
everlasting possession.

<span id="xxvi.i-p9"></span>**4.** Et dixit ad me, Ecce, ego crescere
facio to, et multiplicabo to, et ponam to in coetum populorum, et dabo
terram hanc semini tuo post to in haereditatem perpetuam.

<span id="xxvi.i-p10"></span>**5** And now thy two sons, Ephraim and
Manasseh, which were born unto thee in the land of Egypt before I came
unto thee into Egypt, *are* mine; as Reuben and Simeon, they shall be
mine.

<span id="xxvi.i-p11"></span>**5.** Et nune duo filii tui, qui nati sunt
tibi in terra Aegypti, antequam venirem ad to in Aegyptum, mei sunt
Ephraim et Menasseh, sicut Reuben et Simhon erunt mei.

<span id="xxvi.i-p12"></span>**6** And thy issue, which thou begettest
after them, shall be thine, *and* shall be called after the name of
their brethren in their inheritance.

<span id="xxvi.i-p13"></span>**6.** Verum liberi tui, quos generabis
post eos, tui erunt: secundum nomen fratrum suorum vocabuntur in
haereditate sua.

<span id="xxvi.i-p14"></span>**7** And as for me, when I came from
Padan, Rachel died by me in the land of Canaan in the way, when yet
*there was* but a little way to come unto Ephrath: and I buried her
there in the way of Ephrath; the same *is* Bethlehem.

<span id="xxvi.i-p15"></span>**7.** Porro me veniente e Padan, mortua
est mihi Rachel in terra Chenaan in via, quum adhuc esset milliare
terrae ad veniendum in Ephrath: et sepelivi eam in via Ephrath, ipsa est
Bethlehem.

<span id="xxvi.i-p16"></span>**8** And Israel beheld Joseph’s sons, and
said, Who *are* these?

<span id="xxvi.i-p17"></span>**8.** Et vidit Israel filios Joseph, et
dixit, Cujus sunt isti?

<span id="xxvi.i-p18"></span>**9** And Joseph said unto his father, They
*are* my sons, whom God hath given me in this *place*. And he said,
Bring them, I pray thee, unto me, and I will bless them.

<span id="xxvi.i-p19"></span>**9.** Et dixit Joseph patri suo, Filii mei
sunt quos dedit mihi Deus hic. Et dixit, Duc eos quaeso ad me, et
benedicam eis.

<span id="xxvi.i-p20"></span>**10** Now the eyes of Israel were dim for
age, *so that* he could not see. And he brought them near unto him; and
he kissed them, and embraced them.

<span id="xxvi.i-p21"></span>**10.** (Oculi enim Israel graves erant
propter senectutem, nec poterat videre) et accedere fecit eos ad illum,
et osculatus est eos, et amplexatus est eos.

<span id="xxvi.i-p22"></span>**11** And Israel said unto Joseph, I had
not thought to see thy face: and, lo, God hath shewed me also thy seed.

<span id="xxvi.i-p23"></span>**11.** Et dixit Israel ad Joseph, Videre
faciem tuam non putabam, et ecce, videre fecit me Deus etiam semen tuum.

<span id="xxvi.i-p24"></span>**12** And Joseph brought them out from
between his knees, and he bowed himself with his face to the earth.

<span id="xxvi.i-p25"></span>**12.** Eduxit itaque Joseph eos a genibus
suis, et incurvavit se in faciem suam super terram.

<span id="xxvi.i-p26"></span>**13** And Joseph took them both, Ephraim
in his right hand toward Israel’s left hand, and Manasseh in his left
hand toward Israel’s right hand, and brought *them* near unto him.

<span id="xxvi.i-p27"></span>**13.** Et tulit Joseph ambos ipsos,
Ephriam ad dexteram suam, a sinistra Israel, et Menasseh ad sinistram
suam, a dextra israel: accedere in quam fecit ad eum.

<span id="xxvi.i-p28"></span>**14** And Israel stretched out his right
hand, and laid *it* upon Ephraim’s head, who *was* the younger, and his
left hand upon Manasseh’s head, guiding his hands wittingly; for
Manasseh *was* the firstborn.

<span id="xxvi.i-p29"></span>**14.** Et extendit Israel dexteram suam,
et posuit super caput Ephraim, qui erat minor: et sinistram suam super
caput Menasseh: consulto dirigens manus suas, quum Menasseh esset
primogenitus.

<span id="xxvi.i-p30"></span>**15** And he blessed Joseph, and said,
God, before whom my fathers Abraham and Isaac did walk, the God which
fed me all my life long unto this day,

<span id="xxvi.i-p31"></span>**15.** Et benedixit ipsi Joseph, et dixit,
Deus, in cujus conspectu ambulaverunt patres mei Abraham et Ishac, Deus
qui pascit me ab aetate mea usque ad diem hanc,

<span id="xxvi.i-p32"></span>**16** The Angel which redeemed me from all
evil, bless the lads; and let my name be named on them, and the name of
my fathers Abraham and Isaac; and let them grow into a multitude in the
midst of the earth.

<span id="xxvi.i-p33"></span>**16.** Angelus qui redemit me ab omni
malo, benedicat pueris: et vocetur in eis nomen meum, et nomen patrum
meorum Abraham et Ishac, et instar piscium sint in multitudinem in medio
terrae.

<span id="xxvi.i-p34"></span>**17** And when Joseph saw that his father
laid his right hand upon the head of Ephraim, it displeased him: and he
held up his father’s hand, to remove it from Ephraim’s head unto
Manasseh’s head.

<span id="xxvi.i-p35"></span>**17.** Vidit autem Joseph, quod poneret
pater suus manum dexteram suam super caput Ephraim, et displicuit in
oculis ejus, et sustentavit manum patris sui, ut removeret eam a capite
Ephraim, super caput Menasseh.

<span id="xxvi.i-p36"></span>**18** And Joseph said unto his father, Not
so, my father: for this *is* the firstborn; put thy right hand upon his
head.

<span id="xxvi.i-p37"></span>**18.** Et dixit Joseph patri suo, Non sic,
pater mi: quia iste est primogenitus, pone dexteram tuam super caput
ejus.

<span id="xxvi.i-p38"></span>**19** And his father refused, and said, I
know *it*, my son, I know *it*: he also shall become a people, and he
also shall be great: but truly his younger brother shall be greater than
he, and his seed shall become a multitude of nations.

<span id="xxvi.i-p39"></span>**19.** Verum renuit pater ejus, et dixit,
Novi, fili mi, novi, etiam ipse erit in populum, et etiam ipse crescet:
et tamen frater ejus minor crescet magis quam ipse, et semen ejus erit
plenitudo Gentium.

<span id="xxvi.i-p40"></span>**20** And he blessed them that day,
saying, In thee shall Israel bless, saying, God make thee as Ephraim and
as Manasseh: and he set Ephraim before Manasseh.

<span id="xxvi.i-p41"></span>**20.** Et benedixit eis in die ipsa,
dicendo, In to benedicet Israel, dicendo, Ponat to Deus sicut Ephriam et
Menasseh: et posuit Ephraim ante Menasseh.

<span id="xxvi.i-p42"></span>**21** And Israel said unto Joseph, Behold,
I die: but God shall be with you, and bring you again unto the land of
your fathers.

<span id="xxvi.i-p43"></span>**21.** Et dixit Israel ad Joseph, Ecce,
ego morior: et erit Deus vobiscum, et redire faciet vos ad terram patrum
vestorum.

<span id="xxvi.i-p44"></span>**22** Moreover I have given to thee one
portion above thy brethren, which I took out of the hand of the Amorite
with my sword and with my bow.

<span id="xxvi.i-p45"></span>**22.** Ego autem dedi tibi partem unam
super fratres tuos, quam cepi e manu Emoraei gladio meo, et arcu meo.

<span id="xxvi.i-p46"></span> 

<span id="xxvi.i-p47"></span><span id="xxvi.i-p47.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.i-p48"></span>**1.** *After these things*. Moses now
passes to the last act of Jacob’s life, which, as we shall see, was
especially worthy of remembrance. For, since he knew that he was
invested by God with no common character, in being made the father of
the fathers of the Church, he fulfilled, in the immediate prospect of
death, the prophetic office, respecting the future state of the Church,
which had been enjoined upon him. Private persons arrange their domestic
affairs by their last wills; but very different was the method pursued
by this holy man, with whom God had established his covenant, with this
annexed condition, that the succession of grace should flow down to his
posterity. But before I enter fully on the consideration of this
subject, these two things are to be observed, to which Moses briefly
alludes: first, that Joseph, being informed of his father’s sickness,
immediately went to see him; and, secondly, that Jacob, having heard of
his arrival, attempted to raise his feeble and trembling body, for the
sake of doing him honor. Certainly, the reason why Joseph was so
desirous of seeing his father, and so prompt to discharge all the other
duties of filial piety, was, that he regarded it as a greater privilege
to be a son of Jacob, than to preside over a hundred kingdoms. For, in
bringing his sons with him, he acted as if he would emancipate them from
the country in which they had been born, and restore them to their own
stock. For they could not be reckoned among the progeny of Abraham,
without rendering themselves detested by the Egyptians. Nevertheless,
Joseph prefers that reproach for them, to every kind of wealth and
glory, if they may but become one with the sacred body of the Church.
His father, however, rising before him, pays him becoming honor, for the
kindness received at his hand. Meanwhile, by so doing, he fulfils his
part in the prediction, which before had inflamed his sons with rage;
lest his constituting Ephraim and Manasseh the heads of two tribes,
should seem grievous and offensive to his sons.

<span id="xxvi.i-p49"></span><span id="xxvi.i-p49.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.i-p50"></span>**3.** *And Jacob said unto Joseph*. The
design of the holy man was to withdraw his son from the wealth and
honors of Egypt, and to reunite him to the holy race, from which he had
been, for a little while, separated. Moreover, he neither proudly boasts
of his own excellence, nor of his present riches, nor of his power, for
the sake of inducing his son to comply with his wishes; but simply sets
before him the covenant of God. So also it is right, that the grace of
adoption, as soon as it is offered to us, should, by filling our
thoughts, extinguish our desire for everything splendid and costly in
the world. This passage is, doubtless, remarkable. Joseph was possessed
of the most exalted dignity; he foresees that the most excellent
nobility would pass, through the memory of his name, to his posterity:
he is able to leave them an ample patrimony: nor would it be difficult
so to advance them in royal favor, that they might obtain rank among the
nobles of the kingdom. Too many examples show how easy it is not only to
be caught, but altogether fascinated, by such allurements. Yea, the
greater part know, by their own experience, that, as soon as the least
ray of hope beams upon us, from the world, we are torn away from the
Lord, and alienated from the pursuit of the heavenly life. If a very few
drops thus inebriate our flesh, how dangerous is it to drink from the
full bowl? But to all the riches and honors of Egypt, Jacob opposes the
vision in which God had adopted himself and his race, as his own people.
Whenever, therefore, Satan shall try to entangle us with the allurements
of the world, that he may draw us away from heaven, let us remember for
what end we are called; in order that, in comparison with the
inestimable treasure of eternal life, all that the flesh would otherwise
prefer, may become loathsome. For, if holy Joseph formerly held an
obscure vision in such esteem, that, for this sole object, forgetting
Egypt, he gladly passed over to the despised flock of the Church; how
shameful, at this day, is our folly, how vile our stupor, how detestable
our ingratitude, if, at least, we are not equally affected, when our
heavenly Father, having opened the gate of his kingdom, with unutterable
sweetness invites us to himself? At the same time, however, we must
observe, that holy Jacob does not obtrude vain imaginations, for the
purpose of alluring his son; but places before him the sure promise of
God, on which he may safely rely. Whence we are taught, that our faith
is not rightly founded on anything except the sole word of God; and
also, that this is a sufficiently firm support of faith, to prevent it
from ever being shaken or overthrown by any devices whatever. Wherefore,
whenever Satan attempts to draw us hither and thither by his
enticements, let us learn to turn our minds to the word of God, and so
firmly to rely upon its hidden blessings, that, with a lofty spirit, we
may spurn those things which the flesh now sees and touches. Jacob says
that God appeared to him in the land of Canaan, in order that Joseph,
aspiring after that land, might become alienated in the affection of his
heart from the kingdom of Egypt.

<span id="xxvi.i-p51"></span>*And blessed me*. In this place the word
blessed does not signify the present effect or manifestation of a happy
life, in the way in which the Lord is sometimes said to bless his
people, when he indeed declares, by the favor with which he follows
them, that he openly makes them happy, because they are received under
his protection. But Jacob regards himself as blessed, because he, having
embraced the grace promised to him, does not doubt of its effect. And,
therefore, I take what immediately follows; namely, *I will make thee
fruitful, etc*., as explanatory of what precedes. Now the Lord promised
that he would cause an assembly of nations to descend from him: because
thirteen tribes, of which the whole body of the nation consisted, were,
in a sense, so many nations. But since this was nothing more than a
prelude to that greatness which should afterwards follow, when God,
having scattered seed over the whole world, should gather together a
church for himself, out of all nations; we may, while we recognize the
accomplishment of the benediction under the old dispensation, yet allow
that it refers to something greater. When therefore the people increased
to so great a multitude, and thirteen populous tribes flowed from the
twelve patriarchs, Jacob began already to grow to an assembly of
nations. But from the time that the spiritual Israel was diffused
through all quarters of the world, and various nations were congregated
into one Church, this multiplication tended towards its completion.
Wherefore, it is no wonder that holy Jacob should so highly estimate
this most distinguished mark of divine favor, though, indeed, it was
deeply hidden from carnal perception. But inasmuch as the Lord had held
him long in suspense, profane men have said, that the old man was in his
dotage. Few indeed are to be found, in this age, like Joseph, who
disregarding the enjoyment of pleasures which are at hand, yield entire
submission to the plain declaration of God’s word. But as Jacob, relying
in confidence on invisible grace, had overcome every kind of temptation:
so now his son, and the true heir of his faith, regards with reverence
the oracles of the Lord; esteeming more highly the promise which he was
persuaded had come down from heaven, though it was in the form of a
dream, than all the riches of Egypt which he enjoyed.

<span id="xxvi.i-p52"></span>*For an everlasting possession*. We have
elsewhere shown the meaning of this expression: namely, that the
Israelites should be perpetual heirs of the land until the coming of
Christ, by which the world was renewed. The Hebrew word <span
id="xxvi.i-p52.1"></span>םלוע (*olam*) is by some taken merely for *a
long time*, by others for *eternity*: but seeing that Christ prolongs,
to the end of time, the grace which was previously shadowed forth to the
patriarchs; the phrase, in my judgment, refers to eternity. For that
portion of land was promised to the ancient people of God, until the
renovation introduced by Christ: and now, ever since the Lord has
assigned the whole world to his people, a fuller fruition of the
inheritance belongs to us.

<span id="xxvi.i-p53"></span><span id="xxvi.i-p53.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.i-p54"></span>**5.** *And now thy two sons*. Jacob
confers on his son the special privilege, that he, being one, should
constitute two chiefs; that is, that his two sons should succeed to an
equal right with their uncles, as if they had been heirs in the first
degree. But what is this! that a decrepit old man assigns to his
grandchildren, as a royal patrimony, a sixth part of the land in which
he had entered as a stranger, and from which now again he is an exile!
Who would not have said that he was dealing in fables? It is a common
proverb, that no one can give what he has not. What, therefore, did it
profit Joseph to be constituted, by an imaginary title, lord of that
land, in which the donor of it was scarcely permitted to drink the very
water he had dug for with great labour, and from which, at length,
famine expelled him? But it hence appears with what firm faith the holy
fathers relied upon the word of the Lord, seeing they chose rather to
depend upon his lips, than to possess a fixed habitation in the land.
Jacob is dying an exile in Egypt; and meanwhile, calls away the governor
of Egypt from his dignity into exile, that he may be well and happy.
Joseph, because he acknowledges his father as a prophet of God, who
utters no inventions of his own, esteems as highly the dominion offered
to him, which has never yet become apparent, as if it were already in
his possession. Moreover, that Jacob commands the other sons of Joseph,
(if there should be any,) to be reckoned in the families of these two
brothers, is as if he directed them to be adopted by the two whom he
adopts to himself.

<span id="xxvi.i-p55"></span><span id="xxvi.i-p55.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.i-p56"></span>**7.** *And as for me, when I came from
Padan*. He mentions the death and burial of his wife Rachel, in order
that the name of his mother might prove a stimulus to the mind of
Joseph. For since all the sons of Jacob had sprung from Syria, it was
not a little to the purpose, that they should be thoroughly acquainted
with the history which we have before considered, namely, that their
father, returning into the land of Canaan, by the command and under the
protection of God, brought his wives with him. For if it was not
grievous to women, to leave their father, and to journey into a distant
land, their example ought to be no slight inducement to their sons to
bid farewell to Egypt; and at the command of the same God, strenuously
prepare themselves for taking possession of the land of Canaan.

<span id="xxvi.i-p57"></span><span id="xxvi.i-p57.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.i-p58"></span>**8.** *And Israel beheld Joseph’s sons*. I
have no doubt that he had inquired concerning the youths, before he
called them his heirs. But in the narration of Moses there is a <span
id="xxvi.i-p58.1"></span>*hysteron proteron*. And in the answer of
Joseph we observe, what we have elsewhere alluded to, that the fruit of
the womb is not born by chance, but is to be reckoned among the precious
gifts of God. This confession indeed finds a ready utterance from the
tongues of all; but there are few who heartily acknowledge that their
seed has been given them by God. And hence a large proportion of man’s
offspring becomes continually more and more degenerate: because the
ingratitude of the world renders it unable to perceive the effect of the
blessings of God. We must now briefly consider the design of Moses:
which was to show that a solemn symbol was interposed, by which the
adoption might be ratified. Jacob puts his hands upon his grandsons; for
what end? Truly to prove that he gave them a place among his sons: and
thus constitutes Joseph who was *one*, into two *chiefs*. For this was
not his wish as a private person; according to the manner in which
fathers and grandfathers are wont to pray for prosperity to their
descendants: but a divine authority suggested it, as was afterwards
proved by the event. Therefore he commands them to be brought near to
him, that he might confer on them a new honor, as if he had been
appointed the dispenser of it by the Lord; and Joseph, on the other
hand, begins with adoration, giving thanks to God.

<span id="xxvi.i-p59"></span><span id="xxvi.i-p59.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.i-p60"></span>**12.** *And Joseph brought them out*.
Moses explains more fully what he had touched upon in a single word.
Joseph brings forth his sons from his own lap to his father’s knees, not
only for the sake of honor, but that he may present them to receive a
blessing from the prophet of God; for he was certainly persuaded, that
holy Jacob did not desire to embrace his grandsons after the common
manner of men; but inasmuch as he was the interpreter of God, he wished
to impart to them the blessing deposited with himself. And although, in
dividing the land of Canaan, he assigned them equal portions with his
sons, yet the imposition of his hands had respect to something higher;
namely, that they should be two of the patriarchs of the Church, and
should hold an honorable preeminence in the spiritual kingdom of God.

<span id="xxvi.i-p61"></span><span id="xxvi.i-p61.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.i-p62"></span>**14.** *And Israel stretched out his right
hand*. Seeing his eyes were dim with age, so that he could not, by
looking, discern which was the elder, he yet intentionally placed his
hands across. And therefore Moses says that he *guided his hands
wittingly*, because he did not rashly put them forth, nor transfer them
from one youth to the other for the sake of feeling them: but using
judgment, he purposely directed his right hand to Ephraim who was the
younger: but placed his left hand on the first-born. Whence we gather
that the Holy Spirit was the director of this act, who irradiated the
mind of the holy man, and caused him to see more correctly, than those
who were the most clear-sighted, into the nature of this symbolical act.
I shall avoid saying more, because we shall be able to inquire into it
from other passages.

<span id="xxvi.i-p63"></span><span id="xxvi.i-p63.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.i-p64"></span>**15.** *God before whom*. Although Jacob
knew that a dispensation of the grace of God was committed to him, in
order that he might effectually bless his grandchildren; yet he
arrogates nothing to himself, but suppliantly resorts to prayer, lest he
should, in the least degree, detract from the glory of God. For as he
was the legitimate administrator of the blessing, so it behaved him to
acknowledge God as its sole Author. And hence a common rule is to be
deduced for all the ministers and pastors of the Church. For though they
are not only called witnesses of celestial grace, but are also entrusted
with the dispensation of spiritual gifts; yet when they are compared
with God, they are nothing; because he alone contains all things within
himself. Wherefore let them learn willingly to keep their own place,
lest they should obscure the name of God. And truly, since the Lord, by
no means, appoints his ministers, with the intention of derogating from
his own power; therefore, mortal man cannot, without sacrilege, desire
to seem anything separate from God. In the words of Jacob we must note,
first, that he invokes God, in whose sight his fathers Abraham and Isaac
had walked: for since the blessing depended upon the covenant entered
into with them, it was necessary that their faith should be an
intervening link between them and their descendants. God had chosen them
and their posterity for a people unto himself: but the promise was
efficacious for this reason, because, being apprehended by faith, it had
taken a lively root. And thus it came to pass, that they transmitted the
light of succession to Jacob himself. We now see that he does not bring
forward, in vain, or unseasonably, that faith of the fathers, without
which he would not have been a legitimate successor of grace, by the
covenant of God: not that Abraham and Isaac had acquired so great an
honor for themselves, and their posterity; or were, in themselves, so
excellent; but because the Lord seals and sanctions by faith, those
benefits which he promises us, so that they shall not fail.

<span id="xxvi.i-p65"></span>*The God which fed me*. Jacob now descends
to his own feelings, and states that from his youth he had constantly
experienced, in various ways, the divine favor towards him. He had
before made the knowledge of God received through his word, and the
faith of his fathers, the basis of the blessing he pronounces; he now
adds another confirmation from experience itself; as if he would say,
that he was not pronouncing a blessing which consisted in an empty sound
of words, but one of which he had himself enjoyed the fruit, all his
life long. Now though God causes his sun to shine indiscriminately on
the good and evil, and feeds unbelievers as well as believers: yet
because he affords, only to the latter, the peculiar sense of his
paternal love in the use of his gifts, Jacob rightly uses this as a
reason for the confirmation of his faith, that he had always been
protected by the help of God. Unbelievers are fed, even to the full, by
the liberality of God: but they gorge themselves, like swine, which,
while acorns are falling for them from the trees, yet have their snouts
fixed to the earth. But in God’s benefits this is the principal thing,
that they are pledges or tokens of his paternal love towards us. Jacob,
therefore, from the sense of piety, with which the children of God are
endued, rightly adduces, as proof of the promised grace, whatever good
things God had bestowed upon him; as if he would say, that he himself
was a decisive example to show how truly and faithfully the Lord had
engaged by covenant to be a father to the children of Abraham. Let us
also learn hence, carefully to consider and meditate upon whatever
benefits we receive from the hand of God, that they may prove so many
supports for the confirmation of our faith. The best method of seeking
God is to begin at his word; after this, (if I may so speak,)
experimental knowledge is added. Now whereas, in this place, the
singular gratitude of the holy man is conspicuous; yet this circumstance
adds to his honor, that, while involved in manifold sufferings, by which
he was almost borne down, he celebrates the continual goodness of God.
For although, by the rare and wonderful power of God, he had been, in an
extraordinary manner, delivered from many dangers; yet it was a mark of
an exalted and courageous mind, to be able to surmount so many and so
great obstacles, to fly on the wings of faith to the goodness of God,
and instead of being overwhelmed by a mass of evils, to perceive the
same goodness in the thickest darkness.

<span id="xxvi.i-p66"></span><span id="xxvi.i-p66.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.i-p67"></span>**16.** *The Angel which redeemed me*. He
so joins the Angel to God as to make him his equal. Truly he offers him
divine worship, and asks the same things from him as from God. If this
be understood indifferently of any angel what ever, the sentence is
absurd. Nay, rather, as Jacob himself sustains the name and character of
God, in blessing his son,  <span id="fr_190"></span>[191](#fn_190.md) he is
superior, in this respect, to the angels. Wherefore it is necessary that
Christ should be here meant, who does not bear in vain the title of
Angel, because he had become the perpetual Mediator. And Paul testifies
that he was the Leader and Guide of the journey of his ancient people.
(<span id="xxvi.i-p68.2"></span>[1Co
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#004)<span id="xxvi.i-p68.2"></span>..md)
He had not yet indeed been sent by the Father, to approach more nearly
to us by taking our flesh, but because he was always the bond of
connection between God and man, and because God formally manifested
himself in no other way than through him, he is properly called the
Angel. To which may be added, that the faith of the fathers was always
fixed on his future mission. He was therefore the Angel, because even
then he poured forth his rays, that the saints might approach God,
through him, as Mediator. For there was always so wide a distance
between God and men, that, without a mediator; there could be no
communication. Nevertheless though Christ appeared in the form of an
angel, we must remember what the Apostle says to the Hebrews, (<span
id="xxvi.i-p68.3"></span>[Heb
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#016)<span id="xxvi.i-p68.3"></span>,.md)
that “he took not on him the nature of angels,” so as to become one of
*them*, in the manner in which he truly became *man*; for even when
angels put on human bodies, they did not, on that account, become men.
Now since we are taught, in these words, that the peculiar office of
Christ is to defend us and to deliver us from all evil, let us take heed
not to bury this grace in impious oblivion: yea, seeing that now it is
more clearly exhibited to us, than formerly to the saints under the law,
since Christ openly declares that the faithful are committed to his
care, that not one of them might perish, (<span
id="xxvi.i-p68.4"></span>[Joh
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#012)<span id="xxvi.i-p68.4"></span>,.md)
so much the more ought it to flourish in our hearts, both that it may be
highly celebrated by us with suitable praise, and that it may stir us up
to seek this guardianship of our best Protector. And this is exceedingly
necessary for us; for if we reflect how many dangers surround us, that
we scarcely pass a day without being delivered from a thousand deaths;
whence does this arise, except from that care which is taken of us, by
the Son of God, who has received us under his protection, from the hand
of his Father.

<span id="xxvi.i-p69"></span>*And let my name be named on them*. This is
a mark of the adoption before mentioned: for he puts his name upon them,
that they may obtain a place among the patriarchs. Indeed the Hebrew
phrase signifies nothing else than to be reckoned among the family of
Jacob. Thus the name of the husband is said to be called upon the wife,
(<span id="xxvi.i-p69.1"></span>[Isa
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#001)<span id="xxvi.i-p69.1"></span>,.md)
because the wife borrows the name from the head to which she is subject.
So much the more ridiculous is the ignorance of the Papists, who would
prove hence that the dead are to be invoked in prayers. Jacob, say they,
desired after his death to be invoked by his posterity. What! that being
prayed to, he might bring them succor; and not — according to the plain
intention of the speaker — that Ephraim and Manasseh might be added to
the society of the patriarchs, to constitute two tribes of the holy
people! Moreover it is wonderful, that the Papists, leaving under this
pretext framed for themselves innumerable patrons, should have passed
over Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, as unworthy of the office. But the Lord,
by this brutish stupor, has avenged their impious profanation of his
name. What Jacob adds in the next clause, namely, that they should *grow
into a multitude*,  <span id="fr_191"></span>[192](#fn_191.md) refers also
to the same promise. The sum amounts to this, that the Lord would
complete in them, what he had promised to the patriarchs.

<span id="xxvi.i-p71"></span><span id="xxvi.i-p71.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.i-p72"></span>**17.** *And when Joseph saw*. Because by
crossing his arms, Jacob had so placed his hands as to put his left hand
upon the head of the first-born, Joseph wished to correct this
proceeding, as if it had been a mistake. He thought that the error arose
from dimness of vision; but his father followed the Spirit of God as his
secret guide, in order that he might transfer the title of honor, which
nature had conferred upon the elder to the younger. For, as he did not
rashly assume to himself the office of conveying the blessing; so was it
not lawful for him to attempt anything according to his own will. And at
length it was evident by the event, that whatever he had done had been
dictated to him from heaven. Whereas Joseph took it amiss, that
Manasseh, who by the right of nature was first, should be cast down to
the second place, this feeling arose from faith and from holy reverence
for the prophetic office. For he would easily have borne to see him make
a mistake in the order of embracing the youths; if he had not known that
his father; as a minister of divine grace, so far from acting a futile
part, was but pronouncing on earth what God would ratify in heaven. Yet
he errs in binding the grace of God to the accustomed order of nature:
as if the Lord did not often purposely change the law of nature, to
teach us that what he freely confers upon us, is entirely the result of
his own will. If God were rendering to every one his due, a certain rule
might properly be applied to the distribution of his favors; but since
he owes no one anything, he is free to confer gifts at his own pleasure.
More especially, lest any one should glory in the flesh, he designedly
illustrates his own free mercy, in choosing those who had no worthiness
of their own. What shall we say was the cause, why he raised Ephraim
above his own brother, to whom, according to usage, he was inferior? If
any one should suppose that Ephraim had some hidden seed of excellence,
he not only vainly trifles, but impiously perverts the counsel of God.
For since God derives from himself and from his own liberality, the
cause, why he prefers one of the two to the other: he confers the honor
upon the younger, for the purpose of showing that he is bound by no
claims of human merit; but that he distributes his gifts freely, as it
seems good unto him. And while this liberty of God is extended to every
kind of good, it yet shines the most clearly in the first adoption,
whereby he predestinates to himself, those whom he sees fit, out of the
ruined mass. Wherefore, be it our part to leave to God his whole power
untouched, and if at any time, our carnal sense rebels, let us know that
none are more truly wise than they who are willing to account themselves
blind, when contemplating the wonderful dealings of God, in order that
they may trace the cause of any difference he makes, to *himself* alone.
We have seen above, that the eyes of Jacob were dim: but in crossing his
arms, with apparent negligence, in order to comply with God’s purpose of
election, he is more clear-sighted than his son Joseph, who, according
to the sense of the flesh, inquires with too much acuteness. They who
insanely imagine that this judgment was formed from a view of their
works, sufficiently declare, by this one thing, that they do not hold
the first rudiments of faith. For either the adoption common both to
Manasseh and to Ephraim, was a free gift, or a reward of debt.
Concerning this second supposition all ambiguity is removed, by many
passages of Scripture, in which the Lord makes known his goodness, in
having freely loved and chosen his people. Now no one is so ignorant; as
not to perceive that the first place is not assigned to one or the
other, according to merit; but is given gratuitously, since it so
pleases the Lord. With regard to the posture of the hands, the subtlety
of certain persons, who conjecture that the mystery of the cross was
included in it, is absurd; for the Lord intended nothing more than that
the crossing of the right hand and the left should indicate a change in
the accustomed order of nature.

<span id="xxvi.i-p73"></span><span id="xxvi.i-p73.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.i-p74"></span>**19.** *He also shall become a people*.
Jacob does not dispute which of the youths shall be the more worthy; but
only pronounces what God had decreed with himself, concerning each, and,
what would take place after a long succession of time. He seeks,
therefore, no causes elsewhere; but contents himself with this one
statement, that Ephraim will be more greatly multiplied than Manasseh.
And truly our dignity is hidden in the counsel of God alone, until, by
his vocation, he makes it manifest what he wills to do with us.
Meanwhile, sinful emulation is forbidden, when he commands Manasseh to
be contented with his lot. They are therefore altogether insane, who hew
out dry and perforated cisterns, in seeking causes of divine adoption;
whereas, everywhere, the Scripture defines in one word, that they are
called to salvation whom God has chosen, (<span
id="xxvi.i-p74.1"></span>[Ro 8:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#029.md)<span
id="xxvi.i-p74.1"></span>,) and that the primary source of election is
his free good pleasure. The form of the benediction, which is shortly
afterwards related, more fully confirms what I have alluded to, that the
grace of God towards both is commended, in order that Manasseh,
considering that more was given to him than he deserved, might not envy
his brother. Moreover, this blessing pronounced on Ephraim and Manasseh
is not to be taken in the same sense as the former, in which it is said,
*In thy seed shall all nations be blessed*: but the simple meaning is,
that the grace of God should be so conspicuous towards the two sons of
Joseph, as to furnish the people of Israel with a form by which to
express their good wishes.

<span id="xxvi.i-p75"></span><span id="xxvi.i-p75.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.i-p76"></span>**21.** *And Israel said unto Joseph*.
Jacob repeats what he had said. And truly all his sons, and especially
Joseph and his sons, required something more than one simple
confirmation, in order that they might not fix their abode in Egypt, but
might dwell, in their minds, in the land of Canaan. He mentions his own
death, for the purpose of teaching them that the eternal truth of God by
no means depended on the life of men: as if he had said, my life, seeing
it is short and fading, passes away; but the promise of God, which has
no limit, will flourish when I also am dead. No vision had appeared unto
his sons, but God had ordained the holy old man as the intermediate
sponsor of his covenant. He therefore sedulously fulfills the office
enjoined upon him, taking timely precaution that their faith should not
be shaken by his death. So when the Lord delivers his word to the world
by mortal men, although they die, having finished their course of life
according to the flesh; yet the voice of God is not extinguished with
them, but quickens us even at the present day. Therefore Peter writes,
that he will endeavor, that after his decease, the Church may be mindful
of the doctrine committed unto him. (<span id="xxvi.i-p76.1"></span>[2Pe
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#015)<span id="xxvi.i-p76.1"></span>..md)

<span id="xxvi.i-p77"></span>*Unto the land of your fathers*. It is not
without reason that he claims for himself and his fathers, the dominion
over that land in which they had always wandered as strangers; for
whereas it might seem that the promise of God had failed, he excites his
sons to a good hope, and pronounces, with a courageous spirit, that land
to be his own, in which, at length, he scarcely obtained a sepulcher,
and that only by favor. Whence then was this great confidence, except
that he would accustom his sons, by his example, to have faith in the
word of God? Now this doctrine is also common to us; because we never
rely with sufficient firmness on the word of God, so long as we are led
by our own feelings. Nay, until our faith rises to lay hold on those
things which are removed afar off, we know not what it is to set our
seal to the word of God.

<span id="xxvi.i-p78"></span><span id="xxvi.i-p78.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.i-p79"></span>**22.** *I have given to thee one portion*.
In order to increase the confidence of his son Joseph, Jacob here
assigns him a portion beyondhis proper lot. Some expound the passage
otherwise; as if he called him a double heir in his two sons, thus
honoring him with one portion more than the rest. But there is no doubt
that he means a certain territory. And John, (<span
id="xxvi.i-p79.1"></span>[Joh 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#005.md)<span
id="xxvi.i-p79.1"></span>,) removes all controversy; for, speaking of
the field adjoining Sychar, which before was called Shechem, says, it
was that which Jacob gave to his son Joseph. And, in the last chapter of
Joshua, (<span id="xxvi.i-p79.2"></span>[Jos
24:32](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#032)<span id="xxvi.i-p79.2"></span>,.md)
it is said to have come into the possession of the sons of Joseph. But
in the word <span id="xxvi.i-p79.3"></span>םכש (*shechem*,) which among
the Hebrews signifies a *part*, allusion is made to the proper name of
the place. But here a question arises; how can he say that he had
obtained the field by his sword and by his bow, which he had purchased
with money, as is stated before, (<span id="xxvi.i-p79.4"></span>[Ge
33:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#019)<span id="xxvi.i-p79.4"></span>,.md)
and is again recorded in the above mentioned chapter of Joshua? Seeing,
however, that only a small portion of the field, where he might pitch
his tents, was bought, I do not doubt that here he comprised a much
greater space. For we may easily calculate, from the price, how small a
portion of land he possessed, before the destruction of the city. He
gives, therefore, now to his son Joseph, not only the place of his tent,
which had cost a hundred pieces of silver, but the field which had been
the common of the city of Sychar. But it remains to inquire how he may
be said to have obtained it by his sword, whereas the inhabitants had
been wickedly and cruelly slain by Simon and Levi. How then could it be
acquired by the right of conquest, from those against whom war had been
unjustly brought; or rather, against whom, without any war, the most
cruel perfidy had been practiced? Jerome resorts to allegory, saying
that the field was obtained by money, which is called strength, or
justice. Others suppose a prolepsis, as if Jacob was speaking of a
future acquisition of the land: a meaning which, though I do not reject,
seems yet somewhat forced. I rather incline to this interpretation:
first, that he wished to testify that he had taken nothing by means of
his two sons Simon and Levi; who, having raged like robbers, were not
lawful conquerors, and had never obtained a single foot of land, after
the perpetration of the slaughter. For, so far were they from gaining
anything, that they compelled their father to fly; nor would escape have
been possible, unless they had been delivered by miracle. When, however,
Jacob strips them of their empty title, he transfers this right of
victory to himself, as being divinely granted to him. For though he
always held their wickedness in abhorrence, and will show his
detestation of it in the next chapter <span id="xxvi.i-p79.5"></span>[Ge
49:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#001.md)<span id="xxvi.i-p79.5"></span>;
yet, because they had armed his whole household, they fought as under
his auspices. Gladly would he have preserved the citizens of Shechem, a
design which he was not able to accomplish; yet he appropriates to
himself the land left empty and deserted by their destruction, because,
for his sake, God had spared the murderers.  <span
id="fr_192"></span>[193](#fn_192.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_190"></span>[191](cc02025.htm#fr_190.md) <span
id="xxvi.i-p67.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.i-p68"></span> <span id="xxvi.i-p68.1"></span>In
denedicendo filio. It appears that thought the singular number is used,
yet reference is made to the two grandsons of Jacob. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_191"></span>[192](cc02025.htm#fr_191.md) <span
id="xxvi.i-p69.2"></span>

<span id="xxvi.i-p70"></span> <span id="xxvi.i-p70.1"></span>וגדי,
(*yedegu*,) *Ainsworth* translates the passage, “let them increase like
fish into a multitude.” The Hebrew word for fish is from the above root,
because of their prolific property; and consequently the use of such a
term naturally suggests the notion of an extraordinary increase. Thus
the Chaldee paraphrase adds, “like the fishes of the sea.” Hence, in the
time of Moses there were 85,200 men of war descended from Joseph, a
greater number than from any other of Jacob’s sons. See *Ainsworth*. —
*Ed*

<span id="fn_192"></span>[193](cc02025.htm#fr_192.md) <span
id="xxvi.i-p79.6"></span>

<span id="xxvi.i-p80"></span> Perhaps this interpretation of a
confessedly obscure passage, will be deemed rather ingenious than solid.
It is supposed by many, that Jacob refers to some transaction of which
no record is preserved. He may, like Abraham, on some occasion, have
armed his household to recover from the hands of the Amorites the field
of Sheehem, which he had previously purchased. But the whole must be
left in hopeless obscurity. *Ainsworth* thinks that Jacob is speaking
proleptically, and representing the future conduct of his children under
Joshua, whose sword and bow he here calls his own. But this seems
far-fetched. The Chaldee interpretation, that the sword and bow are
figuratively used for prayer and supplication, is still more improbable.
— *Ed*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 49](cc02026.md)
