[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc02023)  [Next](cc02025) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 2: Genesis, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxv"></span>

<span id="xxv-p1"></span>CHAPTER 47.

<span id="xxv.i"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p1"></span><span id="xxv.i-p1.1"></span>[Genesis
47:1-31](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#001)<span id="xxv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p2"></span>**1** Then Joseph came and told Pharaoh, and
said, My father and my brethren, and their flocks, and their herds, and
all that they have, are come out of the land of Canaan; and, behold,
they *are* in the land of Goshen.

<span id="xxv.i-p3"></span>**1.** Et venit Joseph, et nuntiavit
Pharaoni, et dixit, Pater meus, et fratres mei, et pecudes eorum, et
boves eorum, et omnia quae erant eis, venerunt e terra Chenaan: et ecce,
sunt in terra Gosen.

<span id="xxv.i-p4"></span>**2** And he took some of his brethren,
*even* five men, and presented them unto Pharaoh.

<span id="xxv.i-p5"></span>**2.** Et de extremis fratribus suis cepit
quinque viros, et statuit eos ante Pharaonem.

<span id="xxv.i-p6"></span>**3** And Pharaoh said unto his brethren,
What *is* your occupation? And they said unto Pharaoh, Thy servants
*are* shepherds, both we, *and* also our fathers.

<span id="xxv.i-p7"></span>**3.** Tune dixit Pharao ad fratres ejus,
Quae sunt opera vestra? Et dixerunt ad Pharaonem, Pastores ovium sunt
servi tui, etiam nos, etiam patres, nostri.

<span id="xxv.i-p8"></span>**4** They said moreover unto Pharaoh, For to
sojourn in the land are we come; for thy servants have no pasture for
their flocks; for the famine *is* sore in the land of Canaan: now
therefore, we pray thee, let thy servants dwell in the land of Goshen.

<span id="xxv.i-p9"></span>**4.** Et dixerunt ad Pharaonem, Ut
peregrinaremur in hac terra, venimus, quia non est pascuum pecudibus,
quae sunt servis tuis: gravis enim fames est in terra Chenaan: nunc
igitur habitent quaeso servi tui in terra Gosen.

<span id="xxv.i-p10"></span>**5** And Pharaoh spake unto Joseph, saying,
Thy father and thy brethren are come unto thee:

<span id="xxv.i-p11"></span>**5.** Et dixit Pharao ad Joseph, dicendo,
Pater tuus et fratres tui venerunt ad to.

<span id="xxv.i-p12"></span>**6** The land of Egypt *is* before thee; in
the best of the land make thy father and brethren to dwell; in the land
of Goshen let them dwell: and if thou knowest *any* men of activity
among them, then make them rulers over my cattle.

<span id="xxv.i-p13"></span>**6.** Terra Aegypti coram to est, in optimo
terrae hujus habitare fac patrem tuum, et fratres tuos, habitent in
terra Gosen. Et si cognoveris quod sint inter eos viri robusti, pones
eos praefectos pecorum super ea quae sunt mihi.

<span id="xxv.i-p14"></span>**7** And Joseph brought in Jacob his
father, and set him before Pharaoh: and Jacob blessed Pharaoh.

<span id="xxv.i-p15"></span>**7.** Postea adduxit Joseph ipsum Jahacob
patrem suum, et statuit eum coram Pharaone, et salutavit Jahacob ipsum
Pharaonem.

<span id="xxv.i-p16"></span>**8** And Pharaoh said unto Jacob, How old
*art* thou?

<span id="xxv.i-p17"></span>**8.** Et dixit Pharao ad Jahacob, Quot sunt
dies annorum vitae tuae?

<span id="xxv.i-p18"></span>**9** And Jacob said unto Pharaoh, The days
of the years of my pilgrimage *are* an hundred and thirty years: few and
evil have the days of the years of my life been, and have not attained
unto the days of the years of the life of my fathers in the days of
their pilgrimage.

<span id="xxv.i-p19"></span>**9.** Et dixit Jahacob ad Pharaonem, Dies
annorum peregrinationum mearum sunt triginta et centum anni: pauci et
mali fuerunt dies annorum vitae meae, et non attigerunt dies annorum
vitae patrum meorum in diebus peregrinationum suarum.

<span id="xxv.i-p20"></span>**10** And Jacob blessed Pharaoh, and went
out from before Pharaoh.

<span id="xxv.i-p21"></span>**10.** Et salutavit Jahacob ipsum
Pharaonem, et egressus est a facie Pharaonis.

<span id="xxv.i-p22"></span>**11** And Joseph placed his father and his
brethren, and gave them a possession in the land of Egypt, in the best
of the land, in the land of Rameses, as Pharaoh had commanded.

<span id="xxv.i-p23"></span>**11.** Et habitare fecit Joseph patrem suum
et fratres suos, et dedit eis possessionem in terra Aegypti, in optimo
terrae, in terra Rahameses, quemadmodum praeceperat Pharao.

<span id="xxv.i-p24"></span>**12** And Joseph nourished his father, and
his brethren, and all his father’s household, with bread, according to
*their* families.

<span id="xxv.i-p25"></span>**12.** Et aluit Joseph patrem suum, et
fratres suos, et omnem domum patris sui pane, usque ad os parvuli.

<span id="xxv.i-p26"></span>**13** And *there was* no bread in all the
land; for the famine *was* very sore, so that the land of Egypt and
*all* the land of Canaan fainted by reason of the famine.

<span id="xxv.i-p27"></span>**13.** At panis non erat in omni terra:
gravis enim fames erat valde, et elanguit terra Aegypti et terra Chenaan
propter famem.

<span id="xxv.i-p28"></span>**14** And Joseph gathered up all the money
that was found in the land of Egypt, and in the land of Canaan, for the
corn which they bought: and Joseph brought the money into Pharaoh’s
house.

<span id="xxv.i-p29"></span>**14.** Et collegit Joseph omnem peeuniam,
quae inventa est in terra Chenaan pro alimento quod ipsi emebant; et
intulit Joseph pecuniam in domum Pharaonis.

<span id="xxv.i-p30"></span>**15** And when money failed in the land of
Egypt, and in the land of Canaan, all the Egyptians came unto Joseph,
and said, Give us bread: for why should we die in thy presence? for the
money faileth.

<span id="xxv.i-p31"></span>**15.** Et consumpta est pecunia e terra
Aegypti, et e terra Chenaan: et venit omnis Aegyptus ad Joseph, dicendo,
Da nobis panem: et utquid moriemur coram to? Defecit enim pecunia.

<span id="xxv.i-p32"></span>**16** And Joseph said, Give your cattle;
and I will give you for your cattle, if money fail.

<span id="xxv.i-p33"></span>**16.** Tune dixit Joseph, Date pecudes
vestras, et dabo vobis pro pecudibus vestris, si defecit pecunia.

<span id="xxv.i-p34"></span>**17** And they brought their cattle unto
Joseph: and Joseph gave them bread *in exchange* for horses, and for the
flocks, and for the cattle of the herds, and for the asses: and he fed
them with bread for all their cattle for that year.

<span id="xxv.i-p35"></span>**17.** Et adduxerunt pecudes suas ad
Joseph, et dedit eis Joseph panem pro equis, et pro grege pecudum, et
pro armento boum, et pro asinis: et sustentavit eos pane pro omnibus
gregibus illorum anno ipso.

<span id="xxv.i-p36"></span>**18** When that year was ended, they came
unto him the second year, and said unto him, We will not hide *it* from
my lord, how that our money is spent; my lord also hath our herds of
cattle; there is not ought left in the sight of my lord, but our bodies,
and our lands:

<span id="xxv.i-p37"></span>**18.** Finitus vero est annus ipse, et
venerunt ad eum anno secundo, et dixerunt ei, Non abscondemus a domino
meo, quod integra pecunia, et grex jumentorum apud dominum meum: non
remansit coram domino meo praeterquam corpus nostrum, et terra nostra.

<span id="xxv.i-p38"></span>**19** Wherefore shall we die before thine
eyes, both we and our land? buy us and our land for bread, and we and
our land will be servants unto Pharaoh: and give *us* seed, that we may
live, and not die, that the land be not desolate.

<span id="xxv.i-p39"></span>**19.** Utquid moriemur in oculis tuis,
etiam nos, etiam terra nostra? Eme nos, et terram nostram pro pane, et
vivemus nos et terra nostra servi Pharanois: da semen, et vivemus, et
non moriemur, et terra non desolabitur.

<span id="xxv.i-p40"></span>**20** And Joseph bought all the land of
Egypt for Pharaoh; for the Egyptians sold every man his field, because
the famine prevailed over them: so the land became Pharaoh’s.

<span id="xxv.i-p41"></span>**20.** Et emit Joseph omnem terram Aegypti
pro Pharaone: vendiderunt enim Aegyptii unusquisque agrum suum, quia
invaluerat super eos fames: et fuit terra ipsi Pharaoni.

<span id="xxv.i-p42"></span>**21** And as for the people, he removed
them to cities from *one* end of the borders of Egypt even to the
*other* end thereof.

<span id="xxv.i-p43"></span>**21.** Et populum transire fecit ad urbes
ab extremitate termini Aegypti usque ad extremitatem ejus.

<span id="xxv.i-p44"></span>**22** Only the land of the priests bought
he not; for the priests had a portion *assigned them* of Pharaoh, and
did eat their portion which Pharaoh gave them: wherefore they sold not
their lands.

<span id="xxv.i-p45"></span>**22.** Tantummodo terram sacerdotum non
emit, quia pars sacerdotibus erat a Pharaone, et comedebant partem suam,
quam dederat eis Pharao: idcirco non vendiderunt terram suam.

<span id="xxv.i-p46"></span>**23** Then Joseph said unto the people,
Behold, I have bought you this day and your land for Pharaoh: lo, *here
is* seed for you, and ye shall sow the land.

<span id="xxv.i-p47"></span>**23.** Tunc dixit Joseph ad populum, Ecce,
emi vos hodie, et terram vestram Pharaoni: ecce, vobis semen, et seretis
terram.

<span id="xxv.i-p48"></span>**24** And it shall come to pass in the
increase, that ye shall give the fifth *part* unto Pharaoh, and four
parts shall be your own, for seed of the field, and for your food, and
for them of your households, and for food for your little ones.

<span id="xxv.i-p49"></span>**24.** Et erit, e frugibus dabitis quintam
partem Pharaoni, et quatuor partes erunt vobis pro semine agri, et pro
cibo vestro, et eorum qui sunt in domibus vestris, et ad comedendum pro
parvulis vestris.

<span id="xxv.i-p50"></span>**25** And they said, Thou hast saved our
lives: let us find grace in the sight of my lord, and we will be
Pharaoh’s servants.

<span id="xxv.i-p51"></span>**25.** Et dixerunt, Vivificasti nos:
inveniamus gratiam in oculis domini mei, et erimus servi Pharaonis.

<span id="xxv.i-p52"></span>**26** And Joseph made it a law over the
land of Egypt unto this day, *that* Pharaoh should have the fifth
*part*; except the land of the priests only, *which* became not
Pharaoh’s.

<span id="xxv.i-p53"></span>**26.** Et posuit illud Joseph in statutum
usque ad diem hanc super terram Aegypti Pharaoni pro quinta parte, terra
tamen sacerdotum duntaxat non fuit Pharaoni.

<span id="xxv.i-p54"></span>**27** And Israel dwelt in the land of
Egypt, in the country of Goshen; and they had possessions therein, and
grew, and multiplied exceedingly.

<span id="xxv.i-p55"></span>**27.** Et habitavit Israel in terra
Aegypti, in terra Gosen: et stationem habuerunt in ea, et creverunt, et
multiplicati sunt valde.

<span id="xxv.i-p56"></span>**28** And Jacob lived in the land of Egypt
seventeen years: so the whole age of Jacob was an hundred forty and
seven years.

<span id="xxv.i-p57"></span>**28.** Et vixit Jahacob in terra AEGypti
septendecim annos: et fuerunt dies Jahacob anni vitae ejus, septem anni
et quadraginta et centum anni.

<span id="xxv.i-p58"></span>**29** And the time drew nigh that Israel
must die: and he called his son Joseph, and said unto him, If now I have
found grace in thy sight, put, I pray thee, thy hand under my thigh, and
deal kindly and truly with me; bury me not, I pray thee, in Egypt:

<span id="xxv.i-p59"></span>**29.** Appropinquaverunt autem dies Israel
ut moreretur, et vocavit filium suum Joseph, et dixit ei, Si quaeso
inveni gratiam in oculis tuis, pone quaeso manum tuam sub femore meo, et
facies medum misericordiam et veritatem, Ne quaeso sepelias me in
Aegypto.

<span id="xxv.i-p60"></span>**30** But I will lie with my fathers, and
thou shalt carry me out of Egypt, and bury me in their buryingplace. And
he said, I will do as thou hast said.

<span id="xxv.i-p61"></span>**30.** Et dormiam cum patribus meis; et
tolles me ex Aegypto, et sepelies me in sepulcro eorum. Et dixit, Ego
faciam secundum verbum tuum.

<span id="xxv.i-p62"></span>**31** And he said, Swear unto me. And he
sware unto him. And Israel bowed himself upon the bed’s head.

<span id="xxv.i-p63"></span>**31.** Et dixit, Jura mihi et juravit ei,
et incurvavit se Israel ad caput lecti.

<span id="xxv.i-p64"></span> 

<span id="xxv.i-p65"></span><span id="xxv.i-p65.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p66"></span>**1.** *Then Joseph came*. Joseph indirectly
intimates to the king, his desire to obtain a habitation for his
brethren in the land of Goshen. Yet this modesty was (as we have said)
free from cunning. For Pharaoh both immediately recognizes his wish, and
liberally grants it to him; declaring beforehand that the land of Goshen
was most excellent. Whence we gather, that what he gave, he gave in the
exercise of his own judgment, not in ignorance; and that he was not
unacquainted with the wish of Joseph, who yet did not dare to ask for
what was the best. Joseph may be easily excused for having commanded his
father, with the greater part of his brethren, to remain in that region.
For neither was it possible for them to bring their cattle along with
them, nor yet to leave their cattle in order to come and salute the
king; until some settled abode was assigned them, where, having pitched
their tents, they might arrange their affairs. For it would have shown a
want of respect, to take possession of a place, as if it had been
granted to them; when they had not yet received the permission of the
king. They, therefore, remain in that district, in a state of suspense,
until, having ascertained the will of the king, they may, with greater
certainty, fix their abode there. That Joseph “brought five from the
extreme limits of his brethren,”  <span
id="fr_182"></span>[183](#fn_182) is commonly thus explained, that they
who were of least stature were brought into the presence of the king:
because it was to be feared lest he might take the stronger into his
army. But since the Hebrew word <span id="xxv.i-p67.4"></span>הצק
(*qatsah*) signifies the two extremities, the beginning and the end; I
think they were chosen from the first and the last, in order that the
king, by looking at them might form his judgment concerning the age of
the whole.

<span id="xxv.i-p68"></span><span id="xxv.i-p68.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p69"></span>**3.** *Thy servants are shepherds*. This
confession was humiliating to the sons of Jacob, and especially to
Joseph himself, whose high, and almost regal dignity, was thus marked
with a spot of disgrace: for among the Egyptians (as we have said) this
kind of life was disgraceful and infamous. Why, then, did not Joseph
adopt the course, which he might easily have done, of describing his
brethren as persons engaged in agriculture, or any other honest and
creditable method of living? They were not so addicted to the feeding of
cattle as to be altogether ignorant of agriculture, or incapable of
accustoming themselves to other modes of gaining a livelihood: and
although they would not immediately have found it productive, we see how
ready the liberality of the king was to help them. Indeed it would not
have been difficult for them to become invested with offices at court.
How then does it happen that Joseph, knowingly and purposely, exposes
his brethren to an ignominy, which must bring dishonor also on himself,
except because he was not very anxious to escape from worldly contempt?
To live in splendor among the Egyptians would have had, at first, a
plausible appearance; but his family would have been placed in a
dangerous position. Now, however, their mean and contemptible mode of
life proves a wall of separation between them and the Egyptians: yea,
Joseph seems purposely to labor to cast off, in a moment, the nobility
he had acquired, that his own posterity might not be swallowed up in the
population of Egypt, but might rather merge in the body of his ancestral
family. If, however, this consideration did not enter their minds, there
is no doubt that the Lord directed their tongues, so as to prevent the
noxious admixture, and to keep the body of the Church pure and distinct.
This passage also teaches us, how much better it is to possess a remote
corner in the courts of the Lord, than to dwell in the midst of palaces,
beyond the precincts of the Church. Therefore, let us not think it
grievous to secure a sacred union with the sons of God, by enduring the
contempt and reproaches of the world; even as Joseph preferred this
union to all the luxuries of Egypt. But if any one thinks that he cannot
otherwise serve God in purity, than by rendering himself disgusting to
the world; away with all this folly! The design of God was this, to keep
the sons of Jacob in a degraded position, until he should restore them
to the land of Canaan: for the purpose, then, of preserving themselves
in unity till the promised deliverance should take place, they did not
conceal the fact that they were shepherds. We must beware, therefore,
lest the desire of empty honor should elate us: whereas the Lord reveals
no other way of salvation, than that of bringing us under discipline.
Wherefore let us willingly be without honor, for a time, that,
hereafter, angels may receive us to a participation of their eternal
glory. By this example also, they who are brought up in humble
employments, are taught that they have no need to be ashamed of their
lot. It ought to be enough, and more than enough, for them, that the
mode of living which they pursue is lawful, and acceptable to God. The
remaining confession of the brethren (<span id="xxv.i-p69.1"></span>[Ge
47:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#004)<span id="xxv.i-p69.1"></span>)
was not unattended with a sense of shame; in which they say, that they
had come to sojourn there, compelled by hunger; but hence arose
advantage not to be despised. For as they came down few, and perishing
with hunger, and so branded with infamy that scarcely any one would
deign to speak with them; the glory of God afterwards shone so much the
more illustriously out of this darkness, when, in the third century from
that time, he wonderfully led them forth, a mighty nation.

<span id="xxv.i-p70"></span><span id="xxv.i-p70.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p71"></span>**5.** *And Pharaoh spake unto Joseph*. It
is to be ascribed to the favor of God that Pharaoh was not offended when
they desired that a separate dwelling-place might be granted to them;
for we know that nothing is more indignantly borne by kings, than that
their favors should be rejected. Pharaoh offers them a perpetual home,
but they rather wish to depart from him. Should any one ascribe this to
modesty, on the ground that it would have been proud to ask for the
right of citizenship, in order that they might enjoy the same privilege
as natives; the suggestion is indeed plausible. It is, however,
fallacious, for in asking to be admitted as guests and strangers, they
took timely precaution that Pharaoh should not hold them bound in the
chains of servitude. The passage of Sophocles is known: —

<span id="xxv.i-p72"></span><span id="xxv.i-p72.1"></span>%Os tiv de&lt;
pro&lt;v tu&gt;rannon ejmporeu&gt;etai,  
Kei&gt;nou ojti&lt; dou&gt;lov, ka}n ejleu&gt;qerov mo&gt;lh\|  <span
id="fr_183"></span>[184](#fn_183)

<span id="xxv.i-p74"></span>*Who refuge seeks within a tyrant’s door,  
When once he enters there, is free no more.  
*Langhorne’s Plutarch

<span id="xxv.i-p75"></span>It was therefore of importance to the sons
of Jacob to declare, <span id="xxv.i-p75.1"></span>*in limine*, on what
condition they wished to live in Egypt. And so much the more inexcusable
was the cruelty exercised towards them, when, in violation of this
compact, they were most severely oppressed, and were denied that
opportunity of departure, for which they had stipulated. Isaiah indeed
says that the king of Egypt had some pretext for his conduct, because
the sons of Jacob had voluntarily placed themselves under his authority,
(<span id="xxv.i-p75.2"></span>[Isa
52:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#004)<span id="xxv.i-p75.2"></span>;)
but he is speaking comparatively, in order that he may the more
grievously accuse the Assyrians, who had invaded the posterity of Jacob,
when they were quiet in their own country, and expelled them thence by
unjust violence. Therefore the law of hospitality was wickedly violated
when the Israelites were oppressed as slaves, and when the return into
their own country, for which they had silently covenanted, was denied
them; though they had professed that they had come thither as guests;
for fidelity and humanity ought to have been exercised towards them, by
the king, when once they were received under his protection. It appears,
therefore, that the children of Israel so guarded themselves, as in the
presence of God, that they had just ground of complaint against the
Egyptians. But seeing that the pledge given them by the king proved of
no advantage to them according to the flesh; let the faithful learn,
from their example, to train themselves to patience. For it commonly
happens, that he who enters the court of a tyrant, is under the
necessity of laying down his liberty at the door.

<span id="xxv.i-p76"></span><span id="xxv.i-p76.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p77"></span>**6.** *The land of Egypt*. This is recorded
not only to show that Jacob was courteously received, but also, that
nothing was given him by Joseph but at the command of the king. For the
greater was his power, the more strictly was he bound to take care,
lest, being liberal with the king’s property, he might defraud both him
and his people. And I would that this moderation so prevailed among the
nobles of the world, that they would conduct themselves, in their
private affairs, no otherwise than if they were plebeians: but now, they
seem to themselves to have no power, unless they may prove it by their
license to sin. And although Joseph, by the king’s permission, places
his family amidst the best pastures; yet he does not avail himself of
the other portion of the royal beneficence, to make his brethren keepers
of the king’s cattle; not only because this privilege would have excited
the envy of many against them, but because he was unwilling to be
entangled in such a snare.

<span id="xxv.i-p78"></span><span id="xxv.i-p78.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p79"></span>**7.** *And Joseph brought in Jacob his
father*. Although Moses relates, in a continuous narrative, that Jacob
was brought to the king, yet I do not doubt that some time had
intervened; at least, till he had obtained a place wherein he might
dwell; and where he might leave his family more safely, and with a more
tranquil mind; and also, where he might refresh himself, for a little
while, after the fatigue of his journey. And whereas he is said to have
blessed Pharaoh, by this term Moses does not mean a common and profane
salutation, but the pious and holy prayer of a servant of God. For the
children of this world salute kings and princes for the sake of honor,
but, by no means, raise their thoughts to God. Jacob acts otherwise; for
he adjoins to civil reverence that pious affection which causes him to
commend the safety of the king to God. And Jeremiah prescribes this rule
to the Jews, that they should pray for the peace of Babylon as long as
they were to live in exile; because in the peace of that land and empire
their own peace would be involved. (<span id="xxv.i-p79.1"></span>[Jer
29:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#007)<span id="xxv.i-p79.1"></span>.)
If this duty was enjoined on miserable captives, forcibly deprived of
their liberty, and torn from their own country; how much more did Jacob
owe it to a king so humane and beneficent? But of whatever character
they may be who rule over us, we are commanded to offer up public
prayers for them. (<span id="xxv.i-p79.2"></span>[1Ti
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#001)<span id="xxv.i-p79.2"></span>.)
Therefore the same subjection to authority is required severally from
each of us.

<span id="xxv.i-p80"></span><span id="xxv.i-p80.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p81"></span>**8.** *How old art thou?* This familiar
question proves that Jacob was received courteously and without
ceremony. But the answer is of far greater moment, in which Jacob
declares that the time of his pilgrimage was a hundred and thirty years.
For the Apostle, in his epistle to the Hebrews, (<span
id="xxv.i-p81.1"></span>[Heb
11:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#013)<span
id="xxv.i-p81.1"></span>,) gathers hence the memorable doctrine, that
God was not ashamed to be called the God of the patriarchs, because they
had confessed themselves to be strangers and pilgrims on the earth. Of
one man only this is mentioned; but because he had been instructed by
his forefathers, and had handed down the same instruction to his son,
the Apostle honors them all with the same eulogy. Therefore, as they
were not ashamed to wander during the whole course of their life, and to
be opprobriously called foreigners and strangers wherever they came; so
God vouchsafed to them the incomparable dignity, that they should be
heirs of heaven. But (as it has been said before) no persons ever had a
more peculiar and hereditary possession in the world, than the holy
fathers had in the land of Canaan. The Lord is said to have cast his
line, in order that he might assign to each nation its bounds: but an
eternal possession, through a continual succession of ages, was never
promised to any nation, as it was to the posterity of Abraham. In what
spirit, then, ought we to dwell in a world, where no certain repose, or
fixed abode is promised us? Moreover, this is described by Paul as the
common condition of all pious persons under the reign of Christ, that
they should “have no certain dwelling-place;” (<span
id="xxv.i-p81.2"></span>[1Co 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#011)<span
id="xxv.i-p81.2"></span>;) not that all should be alike cast out as
exiles, but because the Lord calls all his people, as by the sound of
the trumpet, to be wanderers, lest they should become fixed in their
nests on earth. Therefore, whether any one remains in his own country,
or is compelled continually to change his place, let him diligently
exercise himself in the meditation, that he is sojourning, for a short
time, upon earth, till, having completed his course, he shall depart to
the heavenly country.

<span id="xxv.i-p82"></span><span id="xxv.i-p82.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p83"></span>**9.** *Few and evil have the days of the
years of my life been*. Jacob may here seem to complain that he had
lived but a little while, and that, in this short space of time, he had
endured many and grievous afflictions. Why does he not rather recount
the great and manifold favors of God which formed an abundant
compensation for every kind of evil? Besides, his complaint respecting
the shortness of life seems unworthy of him; for why did he not deem a
whole century and a third part of another sufficient for him? But if any
one will rightly weigh his words, he rather expresses his own gratitude,
in celebrating the goodness of God towards his fathers. For he does not
so much deplore his own decrepitude, as he extols the vigor divinely
afforded to his fathers. Certainly it was no new and unwonted thing to
see a man, at his age, broken down and failing, and already near to the
grave. Wherefore, this comparison (as I have said) was only intended to
ascribe glory to God, whose blessing towards Abraham and Isaac had been
greater than to himself. But he does not compare himself with his
fathers in sufferings, as if they had been treated with greater
indulgence; for we know that they had been tried to the utmost with all
kinds of temptations: he merely states that he had not attained their
age; as if he had said, “I, indeed, have arrived at those years which,
by others, is deemed a mature old age, and which complete the proper
term of life; but the Lord so prolonged the life of my fathers, that
they far exceeded this limit.” He makes mention of evil days, in order
to show that he was not so much broken down and consumed by years, as by
labors and troubles; as if he had said, “My senses might yet have
flourished in their vigor, if my strength had not been exhausted by
continual labors, by excessive cares, and by most grievous sufferings.”
We now see that nothing was less in the mind of the holy man than to
expostulate with God. Yet it may seem absurd that he speaks of his life
as being shorter than that of his fathers. For, whence does he
conjecture that so little time should still remain for him, as to
prevent him from attaining their age? Should any one answer, that he
formed this conjecture from the weakness of his body, which was half
dead; the solution will not prove satisfactory. For Isaac had dimness of
sight and trembling limbs thirty years before his death. But it is not
absurd to suppose that Jacob was every moment giving himself over to
death, as if the sepulcher were before his eyes. He was, however,
uncertain what length of time was decreed for him in the secret counsel
of God. Wherefore, being unconcerned about the remainder of his life, he
speaks just as if he were about to die on the next day.

<span id="xxv.i-p84"></span><span id="xxv.i-p84.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p85"></span>**12.** *And Joseph nourished his father,
etc., according to their families*  <span
id="fr_184"></span>[185](#fn_184) Some explain the expression, “the
mouth of the little one,” as if Joseph nourished his father and his
whole family, in the manner in which food is conveyed to the mouths of
children. These interpreters regard the form of speech as emphatical,
because, during the famine, Jacob and his family had no more anxiety
about the providing of food than children, who cannot even stretch out
their hand to receive it. Others translate it “youth,” but I know not
with what meaning.  <span id="fr_185"></span>[186](#fn_185) Others take
it, simply, according to the proportion and number of the little
children. To me the genuine sense seems to be that he fed all, from the
greatest to the least. Therefore, there was sufficient bread for the
whole family of Jacob, because, by the care of Joseph, provision was
made to supply nourishment even to the little ones. In this manner Moses
commemorates both the clemency of God, and the piety of Joseph; for it
was an instance of uncommon attention, that these hungry husband men,
who had not a grain of corn, were entirely fed at his expense.

<span id="xxv.i-p88"></span><span id="xxv.i-p88.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p89"></span>**13.** *And all the land of Canaan
fainted*. It was a memorable judgment of God, that the most fertile
regions, which were accustomed to supply provisions for distant and
transmarine nations, were reduced to such poverty that they were almost
consumed. The word <span id="xxv.i-p89.1"></span>ההל (*lahah*,) which
Moses uses, is explained in two ways. Some say that they were driven to
madness on account of the famine; others, that they were so destitute of
food that they fainted; but whichever method of interpretation be
approved, we see that they who had been accustomed to supply others with
food, were themselves famishing. Therefore it is not for those who
cultivate fertile lands to trust in their abundance; rather let them
acknowledge that a large supply of provision does not so much spring
from the bowels of the earth, as it distills, or rather flows down from
heaven, by the secret blessing of God. For there is no luxuriance so
great, that it is not soon exchanged for barrenness, when God sprinkles
it with salt instead of rain. Meanwhile, it is right to turn our eyes to
that special kindness of God by which he nourishes his own people in the
midst of famine, as it is said in <span id="xxv.i-p89.2"></span>[Ps
37:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#019)<span id="xxv.i-p89.2"></span>.
If, however, God is pleased to try us with famine, we must pray that he
would prepare us to endure hunger with a meek and equal mind, lest we
should rage, like fierce, and even ravenous wild beasts. And although it
is possible that grievous commotions were raised during the protracted
scarcity, (as it is said in the old proverb that the belly has no ears,)
yet the more simple sense of the passage seems to me to be, that the
Egyptians and Canaanites had sunk under the famine, and were lying
prostrate, as if at the point of death. Moreover, Moses pursues the
history of the famine, with the intention of showing that the prediction
of Joseph was verified by the event; and that, by his skill and
industry, the greatest dangers were so well and dexterously provided
against, that Egypt ought justly to acknowledge him as the author of its
deliverance.

<span id="xxv.i-p90"></span><span id="xxv.i-p90.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p91"></span>**14.** *And Joseph gathered up all the
money*. Moses first declares that the Egyptian king had acted well and
wisely, in committing the work of providing corn to the sole care and
authority of Joseph. He then commends the sincere and faithful
administration of Joseph himself. We know how few persons can touch the
money of kings without defiling themselves by peculation. Amid such vast
heaps of money, the opportunity of plundering was not less than the
difficulty of self-restraint. But Moses says, that whatever money Joseph
collected, he brought into the house of the king. It was a rare and
unparalleled integrity, to keep the hands pure amidst such heaps of
gold. And he would not have been able to conduct himself with such
moderation, unless his divine calling had proved as a bridle to hold him
in; for they who are restrained from thefts and rapaciousness by worldly
motives alone, would immediately put forth their hand to the prey,
unless they feared the eyes and the judgments of men. But inasmuch as
Joseph might have sinned without a witness of his fault; it follows that
the true fear of God flourished in his breast. Plausible and well
coloured pretexts, in excuse of the theft, would doubtless present
themselves. “When you are serving a tyrant, why may it not be lawful for
you to apply some part of the gain to your own advantage?” So much the
more does it appear that he was fortified by downright honesty; since he
repelled all temptations, lest he should desire fraudulently to enrich
himself at the expense of another.

<span id="xxv.i-p92"></span><span id="xxv.i-p92.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p93"></span>**15.** *And when money failed*. Moses does
not mean that all the money in Egypt had been brought into the royal
treasury; for there were many of the nobles of the court free from the
effects of the famine; but the simple meaning of the expression is that
nearly all had been exhausted; that now the common people had not money
enough to buy corn; and that, at length, extreme necessity had driven
the Egyptians to the second remedy of which he is about to speak.
Moreover, although, like persons driven to desperation, they might seem
arrogantly to rise up against Joseph; yet the context shows that nothing
was farther from their minds than to terrify, by their boldness, the man
whose compassion they suppliantly implore. Wherefore the question*, Why
should we die in thy presence?* has no other signification than that
they felt themselves ruined, unless his clemency should afford them
relief. But it may be asked how the Canaanites supported their lives.
There is indeed no doubt that a grievous pestilence, the attendant on
famine, would carry off many, unless they received assistance from other
regions, or were miserally fed on herbs and roots. And perhaps the
barrenness was not there so great, but that they might gather half, or a
third part of their food, from the fields,

<span id="xxv.i-p94"></span><span id="xxv.i-p94.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p95"></span>**16.** *Give your cattle*. It was a
miserable spectacle, and one which might have softened hearts of iron,
to see rich farmers, who previously had kept provision stored in their
granaries for others, now begging food. Therefore, Joseph might be
deemed cruel, because he does not give bread gratuitously to those who
are poor and exhausted, but robs them of all their cattle, sheep, and
asses. Seeing, however, that Joseph is transacting the business of
another, I dare not charge his strictness with cruelty. If, during the
seven fruitful years, he had extorted corn by force from an unwilling
people, he would now have acted tyrannically in seizing their flocks and
herds. But seeing that they had been at liberty to lay up, in their
private stores, what they had sold to the king, they now pay the just
penalty of their negligence. Joseph also perceived that they were
deprived of their possessions by a divine interposition, in order that
the king alone might be enriched by the spoils of all. Besides, since it
was lawful for him to offer corn for sale, it was also lawful for him to
exchange it for cattle. Truly, the corn belonged to the king; why then
should he not demand a price from the purchasers? But they were poor,
and therefore it was but just to succor them in their want. Were this
rule to prevail, the greater part of sales would be unlawful. For no one
freely parts with what he possesses. Wherefore, if his valuation of the
cattle was fair, I do not see what was deserving of reprehension in the
conduct of Joseph; especially as he was not dealing with his own
property, but had been appointed prefect over the corn, with this
condition, that he should acquire gain, not for himself, but for the
king. If any one should object that he ought at least to have exhorted
the lying to content himself with the abundant pecuniary wealth which he
had obtained; I answer, that Moses relates, by the way, but a few things
out of many. Any one, therefore, may easily conjecture, that a business
of such great consequence, was not transacted by Joseph, without the
cognizance and judgment of the king. But what, if it appeared to the
king’s counselors, an equitable arrangement, that the farmers should
receive, in return for their cattle, food for the whole year? Lastly,
seeing that we stand or fall by the judgment of God alone, it is not for
us to condemn what his law has left undecided.

<span id="xxv.i-p96"></span><span id="xxv.i-p96.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p97"></span>**18.** *They came to him the second year*.
Moses does not reckon the second year from the date of the famine, but
from the time when the money had failed. But since they knew, from the
oracle, that the termination of the dearth was drawing near, they
desired not only that corn should be given them for food, but also for
seed. Whence it appears that they had become wise too late, and had
neglected the useful admonition of God, at the time when they ought to
have made provision for the future. Moreover, when they declare that
their money and cattle had failed, they do it, not for the purpose of
expostulating with Joseph, as if they had been unjustly deprived of
these things by him; but for the purpose of showing that the only thing
remaining for them was to purchase food and seed at the price of their
lands, and that they could not otherwise be preserved, unless Joseph
would enter into this compact. For it would have been the part of
impudence to offer no price or compensation. They begin by saying, that
they had nothing at hand, and that, therefore, their lives would be
lost, unless Joseph were willing to buy their lands; and in order to
excite his compassion, they ask again, why he would suffer them to die,
and their very land to perish? For this is the death of the earth, when
the cultivation of it is neglected, and when, being reduced to a desert,
it can bring forth nothing more.

<span id="xxv.i-p98"></span><span id="xxv.i-p98.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p99"></span>**20.** *And Joseph bought all the land*.
Any one might suppose it to be the height of cruel and inexplicable
avarice, that Joseph should take away from the miserable husband men,
the very fields, by the produce of which they nourished the kingdom. But
I have before showed, that unless every kind of purchase is to be
condemned, there is no reason why Joseph should be blamed. If any one
should say that he abused their penury; this alone would suffice for his
excuse, that no wiles of his, no circumvention, no force, no threats,
had reduced the Egyptians to this necessity. He transacted the king’s
business with equal fidelity and industry; and fulfilled the duties of
his office, without resorting to violent edicts. When the famine became
urgent, it was lawful to expose wheat to sale, as well to the rich as to
the poor: afterwards it was not less lawful to buy the cattle; and now,
at last, why should it not be lawful to acquire the land for the king,
at a just price? To this may be added, that he extorted nothing, but
entered into treaty with them, at their own request. I confess, indeed,
that it is not right to take whatever may be offered without
discrimination: for if severe necessity presses, then he who wishes, by
all means, to escape it, will submit to hard conditions. Therefore, when
any one thus invites us, to defraud him, we are not, by his necessities,
rendered excusable. But I do not defend Joseph, on this sole ground,
that the Egyptians voluntarily offered him their lands, as men who were
ready to purchase life, at any price; but I say, this ought also to be
considered, that he acted with equity, even though he left them nothing.
The terms would have been more severe, if they themselves had been
consigned to perpetual slavery; but he now concedes to them personal
liberty, and only covenants for their fields, which, perhaps, the
greater part of the people had bought from the poor. If he had stripped
of their clothing those whom he was feeding with corn, this would have
been to put them indirectly and slowly to death. For what difference
does it make, whether I compel a man to die by hunger or by cold? But
Joseph so succors the Egyptians, that in future they should be free, and
should be able to obtain a moderate subsistence by their labor. For
though they might have to change their abode, yet they are all made
stewards of the king: and Joseph restores to them, not only the lands,
but the implements which he had bought. Whence it appears that he had
used what clemency he was able, in order to relieve them. Meanwhile, let
those who are too intent on wealth beware lest they should falsely
employ Joseph’s example as a pretext: because it is certain that all
contracts, which are not formed according to the rule of charity, are
vicious in the sight of God; and that we ought, according to that equity
which is inwardly dictated to us by a secret instinct of nature, so to
act towards others, as we wish to be dealt with ourselves.

<span id="xxv.i-p100"></span><span id="xxv.i-p100.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p101"></span>**21.** *And as for the people, he removed
them to cities*. This removal was, indeed, severe; but if we reflect how
much better it was to depart to another place; in order that they might
be free cultivators of the land, than to be attached to the soil, and
employed as slaves in servile work; no one will deny that this was a
tolerable, and even a humane exercise of authority. Had each person
cultivated his field, as he had been accustomed to do, the exaction of
tribute would have seemed to be grievous. Joseph, therefore, contrived a
middle course, which might mitigate the new and unwonted burden, by
assigning new lands to each, with a tribute attached to them. The
passage may, however, be differently expounded; namely, that Joseph
caused all the farmers to go to the cities to receive the provisions,
and to settle their public accounts. If this sense is approved, the fact
that Egypt was divided into provinces, afterwards called *nomes*, may
probably hence have received its origin. This removing from place to
place would, however, have been alike injurious to the king and to the
people at large, because they would not be able to make their skill and
practice applicable to new situations. Yet, since the matter is not of
great moment, and the signification of the word is ambiguous, I leave
the question undecided.

<span id="xxv.i-p102"></span><span id="xxv.i-p102.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p103"></span>**22.** *Only the land of the priests*. The
priests were exempted from the common law, because the king granted them
a maintenance. It is, indeed, doubtful, whether this was a supply for
their present necessity, or whether he was accustomed to nourish them at
his own expense. But seeing that Moses makes mention of their lands, I
rattler incline to the conjecture, that, whereas they had before been
rich, and this dearth had deprived them of their income, the king
conferred this privilege upon them; and hence it arose that their lands
remained unto them free.  <span id="fr_186"></span>[187](#fn_186) The
ancient historians, however, injudiciously invent many fables concerning
the state of that land. I know not whether the statement that the
farmers, content with small wages, sow and reap for the king and the
priests, is to be traced to this regulation of Joseph or not. But,
passing by these things, it is more to the purpose to observe, what
Moses wished distinctly to testify; namely, that a heathen king paid
particular attention to Divine worship, in supporting the priests
gratuitously, for the purpose of sparing their lands and their property.
Truly this is placed before our eyes, as a mirror, in which we may
discern that a sentiment of piety which they cannot wholly efface, is
implanted in the minds of men. It was the part of foolish, as well as of
wicked superstition, that Pharaoh nourished such priests as these, who
infatuated the people by their impostures: yet this was, in itself, a
design worthy of commendation, that he did not suffer the worship of God
to fall into decay; which, in a short time, must have happened, if the
priests had perished in the famine. Whence we infer how sedulously we
ought to be on our guard, that we undertake nothing with an indiscreet
zeal; because nothing is more easy, in so great a corruption of human
nature, than for religion to degenerate into frivolous trifles.
Nevertheless, because this inconsiderate devotion (as it may be called)
flowed from a right principle, what should be the conduct of our
princes, who desire to be deemed Christians? If Pharaoh was so
solicitous about his priests, that he nourished them to his own
destruction, and that of his whole kingdom, in order that he might not
be guilty of impiety against false gods; what sacrilege is it, in
Christian princes, that the lawful and sincere ministers of holy things
should be neglected, whose work they know to be approved by God, and
salutary to themselves? But it may be asked, whether it was lawful for
holy Joseph to undertake this office, for by so doing, he employed his
labor in cherishing impious superstitions? But though I can readily
grant that in such great, and arduous, and manifold offices of trust, it
was easy for him to slide into various faults; yet I dare not absolutely
condemn this act; nor can I, however, deny that he may have erred, in
not resisting these superstitions with sufficient boldness. But since he
was required by no law, to destroy the priests by hunger, and was not
altogether allowed to dispense the king’s corn at his own pleasure; if
the king wished that food should be gratuitously supplied to the
priests, he was no more at liberty to deny it to them than to the nobles
at court. Therefore, though he did not willingly take charge of such
dependents, yet when the king imposed the duty upon him, he could not
refuse it, though he knew them to be unworthy to be fed on the dirt of
oxen.

<span id="xxv.i-p105"></span><span id="xxv.i-p105.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p106"></span>**23.** *Then Joseph said unto the people*.
Here Moses describes the singular humanity of Joseph, which, as it then
repressed all complaints, so, at this time, it justly dispels and
refutes the calumnies with which he is assailed. The men, who were
entirely destitute, and, in a sense, exiles, he reinstates in their
possessions, on the most equitable condition, that they should pay a
fifth part of the produce to the king. It is well known that formerly,
in various places, kings have demanded by law the payment of tenths; but
that, in the time of war, they doubled this tax. Therefore, what injury,
can we say, was done to the Egyptians, when Joseph burdened the land,
bought for the king, with a fifth part of its income; especially seeing
that country is so much richer than others, that with less labor than
elsewhere, it brings forth fruit for the maintenance of its cultivators?
Should any one object that the king would have acted more frankly had he
taken the fifth part of the land; the answer is obvious, that this was
useful not only as an example, but also, for the purpose of quieting the
people, by shutting the mouths of the captious. And certainly this
indirect method, by which Joseph introduced the tax of a fifth part, had
no other object than that of inducing the Egyptians to cultivate their
lands with more alacrity, when they were convinced that, by such a
compact, they were treated with clemency. And to this effect was their
confession, which is recorded by Moses, expressed. For, first, they
acknowledge that they owe their lives to him; secondly, they do not
refuse to be the servants of the king. Whence we gather, that the holy
man so conducted himself between the two parties, as greatly to enrich
the king, without oppressing the people by tyranny. And I wish that all
governors would practice this moderation, that they would only so far
study the advantage of kings, as could be done without injury to the
people. There is a celebrated saying of Tiberius Caesar, which savored
little of tyranny, though he appears to have been a sanguinary and
insatiable tyrant, that it is the part of a shepherd to shear the flock,
but not to tear off the skin. At this day, however, kings do not believe
that they rule freely, unless they not only flay their subjects, but
entirely devour them. For they do not generally invest any with
authority, except those who are sworn to the practice of slaughter. So
much the more does the clemency of Joseph deserve praise, who so
administered the affairs of Egypt, as to render the immense gains of the
king compatible with a tolerable condition of the people.

<span id="xxv.i-p107"></span><span id="xxv.i-p107.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p108"></span>**27.** *And Israel dwelt in the land*.
Moses does not mean that Jacob and his sons were proprietors of that
land which Pharaoh had granted them as a dwelling-place, in the same
manner in which the other parts of Egypt were given to the inhabitants
for a perpetual possession: but that they dwelt there commodiously for a
time, and thus were in possession by favor, provided they continued to
be peaceable. Hence the cause that they so greatly increased, in a very
short space of time. Therefore, what is here related by Moses belongs to
the history of the following period; and he now returns to the proper
thread of his narrative, in which he purposed to show how God protected
his Church from many deaths; and not that only, but wonderfully exalted
it by his own secret power.

<span id="xxv.i-p109"></span><span id="xxv.i-p109.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p110"></span>**28.** *And Jacob lived*. It was no common
source of temptation to the holy old man, to be an exile from the land
of Canaan, for so many years. Be it so, that on account of the famine,
he was compelled to go to Egypt; why could he not return when the fifth
year was passed? For he did not stupidly lie there in a state of torpor,
but he remained quiet, because free egress was not allowed him.
Wherefore, also, in this respect, God did not lightly exercise his
patience. For, however sweet might be the delights of Egypt, yet he was
more than miserable to be deprived of the sight of that land which was
the lively figure of his celestial country. With the men of this world,
indeed, earthly advantage would have prevailed: but such was the piety
of the holy man, that the profit of the flesh weighed nothing against
the loss of spiritual good. But he was more deeply wounded, when he saw
his death approaching: because, not only was he himself deprived of the
inheritance promised to him, but he was leaving his sons, of doubtful,
or at least of feeble, faith, buried in Egypt as in a sepulcher.
Moreover, his example is proposed to us, that our minds may not languish
or become enfeebled by the weariness of a protracted warfare: yea, the
more Satan attempts to depress them to the earth, the more fervently let
them look and soar towards heaven.

<span id="xxv.i-p111"></span><span id="xxv.i-p111.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p112"></span>**29.** *And he called his son Joseph*.
Hence we infer, not only the anxiety of Jacob, but his invincible
magnanimity. It is a proof of great courage, that none of the wealth or
the pleasures of Egypt could so allure him, as to prevent him from
sighing for the land of Canaan, in which he had always passed a painful
and laborious life. But the constancy of his faith appeared still more
excellent, when he, commanding his dead body to be carried back to
Canaan, encouraged his sons to hope for deliverance. Thus it happened
that he, being dead, animated those who were alive and remained, as with
the sound of a trumpet. For, to what purpose was this great care
respecting his sepulture, except that the promise of God might be
confirmed to his posterity? Therefore, though his faith was tossed as
upon the waves, yet it was so far from suffering shipwreck, that it
conducted others into the haven. Moreover, he demands an oath from his
son Joseph, not so much on account of distrust, as to show that a matter
of the greatest consequence was in hand. Certainly he would not, by
lightly swearing, profane the name of God: but the more sacred and
solemn the promise was, the more ought all his sons to remember, that it
was of great importance that his body should be carried to the sepulcher
of his fathers. It is also probable that he prudently thought of
alleviating any enmity which might be excited against his son Joseph.
For he knew that this choice of his sepulcher would be, by no means,
gratifying to the Egyptians; seeing it seemed like casting a reproach on
their whole kingdom. This stranger, forsooth, as if he could find no fit
place for his body in this splendid and noble country, wishes to be
buried in the land of Canaan. Therefore, in order that Joseph might more
freely dare to ask, and might more easily obtain, this favor from the
king, Jacob binds him by an oath. And certainly Joseph afterwards makes
use of this pretext, to avoid giving offense. This also was the reason
why he required Joseph to do for him that last office, which was a duty
devolving on the brothers in common; for such a favor would scarcely
have been granted to the rest; and they would not have ventured on the
act, unless permission had been obtained. But, as strangers and mean
men, they had neither favor nor authority. Besides, it was especially
necessary for Joseph to be on his guard, lest becoming ensnared by the
allurements of Egypt, he should gradually forsake his own kindred. It
must, however, be known, that the solemnity of an oath was designedly
interposed by Jacob, to show that he did not, in vain, desire for
himself, a sepulcher in the land where he had met with an unfavorable
reception; where he had endured many sufferings; and from which, at
length, being expelled by hunger, he had become an exile. As to his
commanding the hand to be put under his thigh, we have explained what
this symbol means in <span id="xxv.i-p112.1"></span>[Ge
24:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#002)<span id="xxv.i-p112.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p113"></span><span id="xxv.i-p113.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p114"></span>**30.** *But I will lie with my fathers*
 <span id="fr_187"></span>[188](#fn_187) It appears from this passage,
that the word “sleep,” whenever it is put for “die,” does not refer to
the soul, but to the body. For, what did it concern him, to be buried
with his fathers in the double cave,  <span
id="fr_188"></span>[189](#fn_188) unless to testify that he was
associated with them after death? And by what bond were he and they
joined together, except this, that not even death itself could
extinguish the power of their faith; which would seem to utter this
voice from the same sepulcher, Now also we have a common inheritance.

<span id="xxv.i-p117"></span><span id="xxv.i-p117.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p118"></span>**31.** *And Israel bowed himself upon the
bed’s head*. By this expression, Moses again affirms that Jacob esteemed
it a singular kindness, that his son should have promised to do what he
had required respecting his burial. For he exerts his weak body as much
as he is able, in order to give thanks unto God, as if he had obtained
something most desirable. He is said to have worshipped towards the head
of his bed: because, seeing he was quite unable to rise from the bed on
which he lay, he yet composed himself with a solemn air in the attitude
of one who was praying. The same is recorded of David (<span
id="xxv.i-p118.1"></span>[1Ki
1:47](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#047)<span id="xxv.i-p118.1"></span>)
when, having obtained his last wish, he celebrates the grace of God. The
Greeks have translated it, at the top of his staff: which the Apostle
has followed in the Epistle to the Hebrews, (<span
id="xxv.i-p118.2"></span>[Heb
11:21](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#021)<span id="xxv.i-p118.2"></span>.)
And though the interpreters seem to have been deceived by the similitude
of words; because, with the Hebrews, <span id="xxv.i-p118.3"></span>הטומ
(*mitah*) signifies “bed,” <span id="xxv.i-p118.4"></span>הטומ
(*motah*,) “a staff;” yet the Apostle allows himself to cite the passage
as it was then commonly used, lest he might offend unskillful readers,
without necessity.  <span id="fr_189"></span>[190](#fn_189) Moreover,
they who expound the words to mean that Jacob worshipped the scepter of
his son, absurdly trifle. The exposition of others, that he bowed his
head, leaning on the top of his staff, is, to say the least, tolerable.
But since there is no ambiguity in the words of Moses, let it suffice to
keep in memory what I have said, that, by this ceremony, he openly
manifested the greatness of his joy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_182"></span>[183](cc02024.htm#fr_182) <span
id="xxv.i-p66.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p67"></span> <span id="xxv.i-p67.1"></span>Quod Joseph
quinque ex fratrum extremitate adduxit In the text Calvin has it, “<span
id="xxv.i-p67.2"></span>Et de extremis fratribus suis cepit quinque
viros.” The English version renders the passage, “some of his brethren.”
Other interpreters, a “definite part.” *Gesenius*, however, translates
the term <span id="xxv.i-p67.3"></span>הצקמ, “from the whole;” which
perhaps gives the best sense. “And he took from the whole number of his
brethren, five men, and presented them unto Pharaoh.” — *Ed*

<span id="fn_183"></span>[184](cc02024.htm#fr_183) <span
id="xxv.i-p72.3"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p73"></span> The passage does not occur in any of the
tragedies of *Sophocles* extant; but it is found among the fragments of
lost plays, selected from different authors of antiquity by whom they
had been quoted. The words here introduced are taken from *Plutarch’s*
Life of Pompey. It may be observed, that the word <span
id="xxv.i-p73.1"></span>τύραννος is not necessarily to be understood in
a bad sense. It sometimes merely means a king; but the idea of arbitrary
power, whether well or ill used, is always involved in it. For the
passage itself, see “<span id="xxv.i-p73.2"></span>Sophoclis Tragaediae
Septem.” Tom. Ii. Fragmenta, p. 95. Oxon., 1826. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_184"></span>[185](cc02024.htm#fr_184) <span
id="xxv.i-p85.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p86"></span> <span id="xxv.i-p86.1"></span>Usque ad os
parvuli Even to the mount of the little one. <span
id="xxv.i-p86.2"></span>Ãטח יפל, (*Lephi* *chataph*.)

<span id="fn_185"></span>[186](cc02024.htm#fr_185) <span
id="xxv.i-p86.3"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p87"></span> <span id="xxv.i-p87.1"></span>Alii vertunt
pubem; sed nescio quo sensu.

<span id="fn_186"></span>[187](cc02024.htm#fr_186) <span
id="xxv.i-p103.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p104"></span> The following passage from *Sir J. G.
Wilkinson’s* Manners and Customs of the Ancient Egyptians, will be read
with interest. The priests “enjoyed important privileges, which extended
to their whole family. They were exempt from taxes; they consumed no
part of their own income in any of their necessary expenses; and they
had one of the three portions into which the land of Egypt was divided,
free from all duties. They were provided for, from the public stores,
out of which they received a stated allowance of corn, and all the other
necessaries of life; and we find that when Pharaoh, by the advice of
Joseph, took all the land of the Egyptians in lieu of corn, the priests
were not obliged to make the same sacrifice of their landed property,
nor was the tax of the fifth part entailed upon it, as on that of other
people.” — Vol. 1, p. 262 — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_187"></span>[188](cc02024.htm#fr_187) <span
id="xxv.i-p114.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p115"></span> Dormaim, “I will sleep.”

<span id="fn_188"></span>[189](cc02024.htm#fr_188) <span
id="xxv.i-p115.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p116"></span> The cave of Machpelah. See above, on <span
id="xxv.i-p116.1"></span>[Ge 23:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#009)<span
id="xxv.i-p116.1"></span>. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_189"></span>[190](cc02024.htm#fr_189) <span
id="xxv.i-p118.5"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p119"></span> The reasoning of Calvin, besides being in
every respect unsatisfactory, is founded on a misquotation of the
original. He appears to have put down the words from memory, or else his
transcriber has made the mistake for him. The only difference between
the words rendered “a bed” and a “staff” lies in the Masoretic
punctuation; of which, it is well known, the authority is disputed.
Perhaps one of the strongest arguments on the side of those opposed to
the points, is derived from this passage and the Apostle’s
interpretation of it. If the word is not pointed, then it may mean
either a bed or a staff; if, on the other hand, the present points are
of equal authority with the text, the Apostle has quoted it wrong. The
latter supposition is not to be endured. It seems to follow, then, that
the original was either not pointed, or the copy used by St. Paul was
pointed differently from the present text, or he knew that the points
were not to be relied upon, for giving the precise meaning of the Holy
Spirit in the word. — *Ed*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 48](cc02025)
