[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc02021)  [Next](cc02023) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 2: Genesis, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxiii"></span>

<span id="xxiii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 45.

<span id="xxiii.i"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p1"></span><span id="xxiii.i-p1.1"></span>[Genesis
45:1-28](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#001)<span id="xxiii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p2"></span>**1.** Then Joseph could not refrain
himself before all them that stood by him; and he cried, Cause every man
to go out from me. And there stood no man with him, while Joseph made
himself known unto his brethren.

<span id="xxiii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Tunc non potuit Joseph se comprimere
coram omnibus, qui stabant juxta se, et clamavit, Educite omnem virum a
me: et non stetit quisquam cum eo, quando patefecit se Joseph fratribus
suis.

<span id="xxiii.i-p4"></span>**2.** And he wept aloud: and the Egyptians
and the house of Pharaoh heard.

<span id="xxiii.i-p5"></span>**2.** Et emisit vocem suam cum fletu: et
audierunt Aegyptii, audivit et domus Pharaonis.

<span id="xxiii.i-p6"></span>**3.** And Joseph said unto his brethren, I
*am* Joseph; doth my father yet live? And his brethren could not answer
him; for they were troubled at his presence.

<span id="xxiii.i-p7"></span>**3.** Dixit autem Joseph fratribus suis,
Ego sum Joseph, num adhue vivit pater meus? Et non potuerunt fratres
ejus respondere ei: quia territi erant a facie ejus.

<span id="xxiii.i-p8"></span>**4.** And Joseph said unto his brethren,
Come near to me, I pray you. And they came near. And he said, I *am*
Joseph your brother, whom ye sold into Egypt.

<span id="xxiii.i-p9"></span>**4.** Et dixit Joseph fratribus suis,
Accedite quaeso ad me. Et accesserunt. Et dixit, Ego sum Joseph frater
vester, quem vendidistis in Aegyptum.

<span id="xxiii.i-p10"></span>**5.** Now therefore be not grieved, nor
angry with yourselves, that ye sold me hither: for God did send me
before you to preserve life.

<span id="xxiii.i-p11"></span>**5.** Et nune ne dolore afficiamini, et
ne sit ira in oculis vestris quod vendideritis me hue: nam propter vitam
misit me Deus ante vos.

<span id="xxiii.i-p12"></span>**6.** For these two years *hath* the
famine *been* in the land: and yet *there are* five years, in the which
*there shall* neither *be* earing nor harvest.

<span id="xxiii.i-p13"></span>**6.** Jam enim duo anni famis fuerunt in
medio terrae, et adhuc quinque anni sunt, in quibus non erit aratio et
messis.

<span id="xxiii.i-p14"></span>**7.** And God sent me before you to
preserve you a posterity in the earth, and to save your lives by a great
deliverance.

<span id="xxiii.i-p15"></span>**7.** Et misit me Deus ante vos, ut ponam
vobis reliquias in terra: et ut vivificem vos evasione vagna.

<span id="xxiii.i-p16"></span>**8.** So now *it was* not you *that* sent
me hither, but God: and he hath made me a father to Pharaoh, and lord of
all his house, and a ruler throughout all the land of Egypt.

<span id="xxiii.i-p17"></span>**8.** Nune itaque non vos misistis me
huc, sed Deus: et posuit me in patrem Pharaoni, et in dominum toti domui
ejus, et dominatorem in tota terra Aegypti.

<span id="xxiii.i-p18"></span>**9.** Haste ye, and go up to my father,
and say unto him, Thus saith thy son Joseph, God hath made me lord of
all Egypt: come down unto me, tarry not:

<span id="xxiii.i-p19"></span>**9.** Festinate, et ascendite ad patrem
meum, et dicite ei, Sic dicit filius tuus Joseph, Posuit me Deus in
dominum toti Aegypto, descende ad me, ne stes.

<span id="xxiii.i-p20"></span>**10.** And thou shalt dwell in the land
of Goshen, and thou shalt be near unto me, thou, and thy children, and
thy children’s children, and thy flocks, and thy herds, and all that
thou hast:

<span id="xxiii.i-p21"></span>**10.** Et habitabis in terra Gosen, et
eris propinquus mihi, tu et filii tui, et filii filorum tuorum, et
pecudes tuae, et boves tui, et omnia quae sunt tibi.

<span id="xxiii.i-p22"></span>**11.** And there will I nourish thee; for
yet *there are* five years of famine; lest thou, and thy household, and
all that thou hast, come to poverty.

<span id="xxiii.i-p23"></span>**11.** Et alam to ibi, quia adhuc quinque
anni famis sunt: ne forte inopia vel egestate conficiaris tu et domus
tua, et omne quod est tibi.

<span id="xxiii.i-p24"></span>**12.** And, behold, your eyes see, and
the eyes of my brother Benjamin, that *it is* my mouth that speaketh
unto you.

<span id="xxiii.i-p25"></span>**12.** Et ecce, oculi vestri vident et
oculi fratris mei Benjamin, quod os meum loquitur ad vos.

<span id="xxiii.i-p26"></span>**13.** And ye shall tell my father of all
my glory in Egypt, and of all that ye have seen; and ye shall haste and
bring down my father hither.

<span id="xxiii.i-p27"></span>**13.** Nuntiate autem patri meo omnem
gloriam meam in Aegypto, et omnia quae vidistis: et festinate, et
descendere facite patrem meum huc.

<span id="xxiii.i-p28"></span>**14.** And he fell upon his brother
Benjamin’s neck, and wept; and Benjamin wept upon his neck.

<span id="xxiii.i-p29"></span>**14.** Et jactavit se super collum
Benjamin fratris sui, et flevit: Benjamin quoque flevit super collum
ejus.

<span id="xxiii.i-p30"></span>**15.** Moreover he kissed all his
brethren, and wept upon them: and after that his brethren talked with
him.

<span id="xxiii.i-p31"></span>**15.** Et osculatus est omnes fratres
suos, et flevit super eos, et postea loquuti sunt fratres ejus cum eo.

<span id="xxiii.i-p32"></span>**16.** And the fame thereof was heard in
Pharaoh’s house, saying, Joseph’s brethren are come: and it pleased
Pharaoh well, and his servants.

<span id="xxiii.i-p33"></span>**16.** Et vox audita est in domo
Pharaonis, dicendo, Venerunt fratres Joseph, et placuit in oculis
Pharaonis, et in oculis servorum ejus.

<span id="xxiii.i-p34"></span>**17.** And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, Say
unto thy brethren, This do ye; lade your beasts, and go, get you unto
the land of Canaan;

<span id="xxiii.i-p35"></span>**17.** Et dixit Pharao ad Joseph, Die
fratribus tuis, Hoc facite, onerate jumenta vestra, et ite, ingredimini
terram Chenaan.

<span id="xxiii.i-p36"></span>**18.** And take your father and your
households, and come unto me: and I will give you the good of the land
of Egypt, and ye shall eat the fat of the land.

<span id="xxiii.i-p37"></span>**18.** Et capite patrem vestrum, et
familias vestras, et venite ad me: et dabo vobis bonum terrae Aegypti,
et comedetis pinguedinem terrae.

<span id="xxiii.i-p38"></span>**19.** Now thou art commanded, this do
ye; take you wagons out of the land of Egypt for your little ones, and
for your wives, and bring your father, and come.

<span id="xxiii.i-p39"></span>**19.** Et tu jussus es, Hoc facite,
capite vobis de terra Aegypti currus pro parvulis vestris, et pro
uxoribus vestris: et tollite patrem vestrum, et venite.

<span id="xxiii.i-p40"></span>**20.** Also regard not your stuff; for
the good of all the land of Egypt *is* yours.

<span id="xxiii.i-p41"></span>**20.** Et oculus vester ne parcat
supellectili vestrae: quia bonum omnis terrae Aegypti vestrum erit.

<span id="xxiii.i-p42"></span>**21.** And the children of Israel did so:
and Joseph gave them wagons, according to the commandment of Pharaoh,
and gave them provision for the way.

<span id="xxiii.i-p43"></span>**21.** Fecerunt ergo sic filii Israel, et
dedit eis Joseph currus juxta sermonem Pharaonis, et dedit eis escam pro
itinere.

<span id="xxiii.i-p44"></span>**22.** To all of them he gave each man
changes of raiment; but to Benjamin he gave three hundred *pieces* of
silver, and five changes of raiment.

<span id="xxiii.i-p45"></span>**22.** Omnibus ipsis dedit unicuique
mutatorias vestes, et ipsi Benjamin dedit trecentos argenteos, et
quinque mutatorias vestes.

<span id="xxiii.i-p46"></span>**23.** And to his father he sent after
this *manner*; ten asses laden with the good things of Egypt, and ten
she asses laden with corn and bread and meat for his father by the way.

<span id="xxiii.i-p47"></span>**23.** Patri autem suo misit secundum
hoc, decem asinos ferentes de bono Aegypti, et decem asinas ferentes
frumentum, et panem, et escam patri suo pro itinere.

<span id="xxiii.i-p48"></span>**24.** So he sent his brethren away, and
they departed: and he said unto them, See that ye fall not out by the
way.

<span id="xxiii.i-p49"></span>**24.** et dimisit fratres suos, et
abierunt, et dixit ad eos, Ne tumultuemini in via.

<span id="xxiii.i-p50"></span>**25.** And they went up out of Egypt, and
came into the land of Canaan unto Jacob their father,

<span id="xxiii.i-p51"></span>**25.** At ascenderunt ex Aegypto, et
venerunt in terram Chenaan, ad Jahacob patrem suum.

<span id="xxiii.i-p52"></span>**26.** And told him, saying, Joseph *is*
yet alive, and he *is* governor over all the land of Egypt. And Jacob’s
heart fainted, for he believed them not.

<span id="xxiii.i-p53"></span>**26.** Et nuntiaverunt ei, dicendo, Adhuc
Joseph vivit: et quod ipse dominaretur in omni terra Aegypti: et
dissolutum est cor ejus, euia non credebat eis.

<span id="xxiii.i-p54"></span>**27.** And they told him all the words of
Joseph, which he had said unto them: and when he saw the wagons which
Joseph had sent to carry him, the spirit of Jacob their father revived:

<span id="xxiii.i-p55"></span>**27.** Et retulerunt ei omnia verba
Joseph, quae loquutus fuerat ad eos: et vidit currus, quos miserat
Joseph ut ferrent eum, et revixit spiritus Jahacob patris eorum.

<span id="xxiii.i-p56"></span>**28.** And Israel said, *It is* enough;
Joseph my son *is* yet alive: I will go and see him before I die.

<span id="xxiii.i-p57"></span>**28.** Et dixit Israel, Sufficit, adhuc
Joseph filius meus vivit: ibo, et videbo eum, antequam moriar.

<span id="xxiii.i-p58"></span> 

<span id="xxiii.i-p59"></span><span id="xxiii.i-p59.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p60"></span>**1.** *Then Joseph could not refrain
himself*  <span id="fr_174"></span>[175](#fn_174) Moses relates in this
chapter the manner in which Joseph made himself known to his brethren.
In the first place, he declares, that Joseph had done violence to his
feelings, as long as he presented to them an austere and harsh
countenance. At length the strong fraternal affection, which he had
suppressed during the time that he was breathing severe threatening,
poured itself forth with more abundant force: whence it appears that
nothing severe or cruel had before been harbored in his mind. And
whereas it thus bursts forth in tears, this softness or tenderness is
more deserving of praise than if he had maintained an equable temper.
Therefore the stoics speak foolishly when they say, that it is an heroic
virtue not to be touched with compassion. Had Joseph stood inflexible,
who would not have pronounced him to be a stupid, or iron-hearted man?
But now, by the vehemence of his feelings, he manifests a noble
magnanimity, as well as a divine moderation; because he was so superior
both to anger and to hatred, that he ardently loved those who had
wickedly conspired to effect his ruin, though they had received no
injury from him. He commands all men to depart, not because he was
ashamed of his kindred, (for he does not afterwards dissemble the fact
that they were his brethren, and he freely permits the report of it to
be carried to the king’s palace,) but because he is considerate for
their feelings, that he might not make known their detestable crime to
many witnesses. And it was not the smallest part of his clemency, to
desire that their disgrace should be wholly buried in oblivion. We see,
therefore, that witnesses were removed, for no other reason than that he
might more freely comfort his brethren; for he not only spared them, by
not exposing their crime; but when shut up alone with them, he abstained
from all bitterness of language, and gladly administered to them
friendly consolation.

<span id="xxiii.i-p62"></span><span id="xxiii.i-p62.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p63"></span>**3.** *I am Joseph*. Although he had
given them the clearest token of his mildness and his love, yet, when he
told them his name, they were terrified, as if he had thundered against
them: for while they revolve in their minds what they have deserved, the
power of Joseph seems so formidable to them, that they anticipate
nothing for themselves but death. When, however, he sees them overcome
with fear, he utters no reproach, but only labors to calm their
perturbation. Nay, he continues gently to soothe them, until he has
rendered them composed and cheerful. By this example we are taught to
take heed lest sadness should overwhelm those who are truly and
seriously humbled under a sense of shame. So long as the offender is
deaf to reproofs, or securely flatters himself, or wickedly and
obstinately repels admonitions, or excuses himself by hypocrisy, greater
severity is to be used towards him. But rigor should have its bounds,
and as soon as the offender lies prostrate, and trembles under the sense
of his sin, let that moderation immediately follow which may raise him
who is cast down, by the hope of pardon. Therefore, in order that our
severity may be rightly and duly attempered, we must cultivate this
inward affection of Joseph, which will show itself at the proper time.

<span id="xxiii.i-p64"></span><span id="xxiii.i-p64.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p65"></span>**4.** *Come near to me, I pray you*. This
is more efficacious than any mere words, that he kindly invites them to
his embrace. Yet he also tries to remove their care and fear by the most
courteous language he can use. He so attempers his speech, indeed, that
he mildly accuses, and again consoles them; nevertheless, the
consolation greatly predominates, because he sees that they are on the
point of desperation, unless he affords them timely relief. Moreover, in
relating that he had been sold, he does not renew the memory of their
guilt, with the intention of expostulating with them; but only because
it is always profitable that the sense of sin should remain, provided
that immoderate terror does not absorb the unhappy man, after he has
acknowledged his fault. And whereas the brethren of Joseph were more
than sufficiently terrified, he insists the more fully on the second
part of his purpose; namely, that he may heal the wound. This is the
reason why he repeats, that God had sent him for their preservation;
that by the counsel of God himself he had been sent beforehand into
Egypt to preserve them alive; and that, in short, he had not been sent
into Egypt by them, but had been led thither by the hand of God.  <span
id="fr_175"></span>[176](#fn_175)

<span id="xxiii.i-p67"></span><span id="xxiii.i-p67.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p68"></span>**8.** *So now, it was not you that sent
me hither*. This is a remarkable passage, in which we are taught that
the right course of events is never so disturbed by the depravity and
wickedness of men, but that God can direct them to a good end. We are
also instructed in what manner and for what purpose we must consider the
providence of God. When men of inquisitive minds dispute concerning it,
they not only mingle and pervert all things without regard to the end
designed, but invent every absurdity in their power, in order to sully
the justice of God. And this rashness causes some pious and moderate men
to wish this portion of doctrine to be concealed from view; for as soon
as it is publicly declared that God holds the government of the whole
world, and that nothing is done but by his will and authority, they who
think with little reverence of the mysteries of God, break forth into
various questions, not only frivolous but injurious. But, as this
profane intemperance of mind is to be restrained, so a just measure is
to be observed on the other hand, lest we should encourage a gross
ignorance of those things which are not only made plain in the word of
God, but are exceedingly useful to be known. Good men are ashamed to
confess, that what men undertake cannot be accomplished except by the
will of God; fearing lest unbridled tongues should cry out immediately,
either that God is the author of sin, or that wicked men are not to be
accused of crime, seeing they fulfill the counsel of God. But although
this sacrilegious fury cannot be effectually rebutted, it may suffice
that we hold it in detestation. Meanwhile, it is right to maintain, what
is declared by the clear testimonies of Scripture, that whatever men may
contrive, yet, amidst all their tumult, God from heaven overrules their
counsels and attempts; and, in short, does, by their hands, what he has
himself decreed. Good men, who fear to expose the justice of God to the
calumnies of the impious, resort to this distinction, that God *wills*
some things, but *permits* others to be done. As if, truly, any degree
of liberty of action, were he to cease from governing, would be left to
men. If he had only *permitted* Joseph to be carried into Egypt, he had
not *ordained* him to be the minister of deliverance to his father Jacob
and his sons; which he is now expressly declared to have done. Away,
then, with that vain figment, that, by the *permission* of God only, and
not by his *counsel* or *will*, those evils are committed which he
afterwards turns to a good account. I speak of evils with respect to
men, who propose nothing else to themselves but to act perversely. And
as the vice dwells in them, so ought the whole blame also to be laid
upon them. But God works wonderfully through their means, in order that,
from their impurity, he may bring forth his perfect righteousness. This
method of acting is secret, and far above our understanding. Therefore
it is not wonderful that the licentiousness of our flesh should rise
against it. But so much the more diligently must we be on our guard,
that we do not attempt to reduce this lofty standard to the measure of
our own littleness. Let this sentiment remain fixed with us, that while
the lust of men exults, and intemperately hurries them hither and
thither, God is the ruler, and, by his secret rein, directs their
motions whithersoever he pleases. At the same time, however, it must
also be maintained, that God acts so far distinctly from them, that no
vice can attach itself to his providence, and that his decrees have no
affinity with the crimes of men. Of which mode of procedure a most
illustrious example is placed before our eyes in this history. Joseph
was sold by his brethren; for what reason, but because they wished, by
any means whatever, to ruin and annihilate him? The same work is
ascribed to God, but for a very different end; namely, that in a time of
famine the family of Jacob might have an unexpected supply of food.
Therefore he willed that Joseph should be as one dead, for a short time,
in order that he might suddenly bring him forth from the grave, as the
preserver of life. Whence it appears, that although he seems, at the
commencement, to do the same thing as the wicked; yet there is a wide
distance between their wickedness and his admirable judgment. Let us now
examine the words of Joseph. For the consolation of his brethren he
seems to draw the veil of oblivion over their fault. But we know that
men are not exempt from guilt, although God may, beyond expectation,
bring what they wickedly attempt, to a good and happy issue. For what
advantage was it to Judas that the redemption of the world proceeded
from his wicked treachery? Joseph, however, though he withdraws, in some
degree, the minds of his brethren from a consideration of their own
guilt, until they can breathe again after their immoderate terror,
neither traces their fault to God as its cause, nor really absolves them
from it; as we shall see more clearly in the last chapter (<span
id="xxiii.i-p68.1"></span>[Ge
44:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen044.htm#001)<span id="xxiii.i-p68.1"></span>.)
And doubtless, it must be maintained, that the deeds of men are not to
be estimated according to the event, but according to the measure in
which they may have failed in their duty, or may have attempted
something contrary to the Divine command, and may have gone beyond the
bounds of their calling. Someone, for instance, has neglected his wife
or children, and has not diligently attended to their necessities; and
though they do not die, unless God wills it, yet the inhumanity of the
father, who wickedly deserted them when he ought to have relieved them,
is not screened or excused by this pretext. Therefore, they whose
consciences accuse them of evil, derive no advantage from the pretense
that the providence of God exonerates them from blame. But on the other
hand, whenever the Lord interposes to prevent the evil of those who
desire to injure us, and not that only, but turns even their wicked
designs to our good; he subdues, by this method, our carnal affections,
and renders us more just and placable. Thus we see that Joseph was a
skillful interpreter of the providence of God, when he borrowed from it
an argument for granting forgiveness to his brethren. The magnitude of
the crime committed against him might so have incensed him as to cause
him to burn with the desire of revenge: but when he reflects that their
wickedness had been overruled by the wonderful and unwonted goodness of
God, forgetting the injury received, he kindly embraces the men whose
dishonor God had covered with his grace. And truly charity is ingenious
in hiding the faults of brethren, and therefore she freely applies to
this use anything which may tend to appease anger, and to set enmities
at rest. Joseph also is carried forward to another view of the case;
namely, that he had been divinely chosen to help his brethren. Whence it
happens, that he not only remits their offense, but that, from an
earnest desire to discharge the duty enjoined upon him, he delivers them
from fear and anxiety as well as from want. This is the reason why he
asserts that he was ordained to “put for them a remnant,”  <span
id="fr_176"></span>[177](#fn_176) that is, to preserve a remaining seed,
or rather to preserve them alive, and that by an excellent and wonderful
deliverance. In saying that he is a father to Pharaoh, he is not carried
away with empty boasting as vain men are wont to be; nor does he make an
ostentatious display of his wealth; but he proves, from an event so
great and incredible, that he had not obtained the post he occupied by
accident, nor by human means; but rather that, by the wonderful counsel
of God, a lofty throne had been raised for him, from which he might
succor his father and his whole family.

<span id="xxiii.i-p70"></span><span id="xxiii.i-p70.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p71"></span>**9.** *Thus saith thy son Joseph*. In
giving this command, he shows that he spoke of his power in order to
inspire his father with stronger confidence. We know how dilatory old
men are; and, besides, it was difficult to tear holy Jacob away from the
inheritance which was divinely promised to him. Therefore Joseph, having
pointed out the necessity for the step, declares what a desirable relief
the Lord had offered. It may, however, be asked, why the oracle did not
occur to their minds, concerning which they had been instructed by their
fathers, namely, that they should be strangers and servants in a strange
land. (<span id="xxiii.i-p71.1"></span>[Ge
15:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#013)<span
id="xxiii.i-p71.1"></span>.) For it seems that Joseph here promises
nothing but mere pleasures, as if no future adversity was to be
apprehended. But though nothing is expressly declared on this point by
Moses, yet I am induced, by a probable conjecture, to believe that Jacob
was not forgetful of the oracle. For, unless he had been retained by
some celestial chain, he never could have remained in Egypt after the
expiration of the time of scarcity. For by remaining there voluntarily,
he would have appeared to cast away the hope of the inheritance promised
him by God. Seeing, then, that he does not provide for his return into
the land of Canaan, but only commands his corpse to be carried thither;
nor yet exhorts his sons to a speedy return, but suffers them to settle
in Egypt; he does this, not from indolence, or because he is allured by
the attractions of Egypt, or has become weary of the land of Canaan; but
because he is preparing himself and his offspring to bear that tyranny,
concerning which he had been forewarned by his father Isaac. Therefore
he regards it as an advantage that, at his first coming, he is
hospitably received; but, in the meantime, he revolves in his mind what
had been spoken to Abraham.

<span id="xxiii.i-p72"></span><span id="xxiii.i-p72.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p73"></span>**16.** *And the fame thereof was heard in
Pharaoh’s house*. What Moses now relates, was prior in the order of
events. For before Joseph sent for his father, the report of the coming
of his brethren had reached the palace. And Joseph would not have
promised so confidently a home to his brethren in Egypt, except by the
king’s permission. What, therefore, Moses had before briefly alluded to,
he now more fully explains; namely, that the king, with a ready and
cheerful mind, declared his high esteem for Joseph, in freely offering
to his father and brethren, the most fertile part of Egypt for their
dwelling. And from another statement of Moses it appears that, as long
as he lived, the Israelites were treated with clemency and kindness.
For, in <span id="xxiii.i-p73.1"></span>[Ex
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#008)<span id="xxiii.i-p73.1"></span>,
the commencement of the tyranny and cruelty is said to have been made by
his successor, to whom Joseph was unknown.

<span id="xxiii.i-p74"></span><span id="xxiii.i-p74.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p75"></span>**22.** *And to all of them he gave each
man changes of raiment*. That he furnishes his brethren with supplies
for their journey is not wonderful: but to what purpose was it that he
loaded them with money and garments, seeing they would so soon return?
I, indeed, do not doubt that he did it on account of his father and the
wives of his brethren, in order that they might have less reluctance to
leave the land of Canaan. For he knew that his message would scarcely be
believed, unless some manifest tokens of its truth were presented. It
might also be, that he not only endeavored to allure those who were
absent, but that he also wished to testify, more and more, his love
towards his brethren. But the former consideration has more weight with
me, because he took greater care in furnishing Benjamin than the rest.
Jerome has translated the expression, “changes of raiment,” by “two
robes,” and other interpreters, following him, expound it as meaning
“different kinds of garments.” I know not whether this be solid. I
rather suppose they were elegant garments, such as were used at nuptials
and on festal days; for I think that constant custom was silently
opposed to this variety of dress.

<span id="xxiii.i-p76"></span><span id="xxiii.i-p76.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p77"></span>**24.** *See that ye fall not out by the
way*. Some explain the passage as meaning, that Joseph asks his brethren
to be of tranquil mind, and not to disturb themselves with needless
fear; he rather exhorts them, however, to mutual peace. For, since the
word <span id="xxiii.i-p77.1"></span>זגר (*ragaz*) sometimes signifies
to tremble or be afraid, and sometimes, to make a tumult, the latter
sense is the more appropriate: for we know that the children of God are
not only easily appeased, if any one has injured them, but that they
also desire others should live together in concord. Joseph was pacified
towards his brethren; but at the same time he admonishes them not to
stir up any strife among themselves. For there was reason to fear lest
each, in attempting to excuse himself, should try to lay the blame on
others, and thus contention would arise. We ought to imitate this
kindness of Joseph; that we may prevent, as much as possible, quarrels
and strifes of words; for Christ requires of his disciples, not only
that they should be lovers of peace, but also that they should be
peace-makers. Wherefore, it is our duty to remove, in time, all matter
and occasion of strife. Besides, we must know, that what Joseph taught
his brethren, is the command of the Spirit of God to us all; namely,
that we should not be angry with each other. And because it generally
happens that, in faults common to different parties, one maliciously
accuses another; let each of us learn to acknowledge and confess his own
fault, lest altercations should end in combats.

<span id="xxiii.i-p78"></span><span id="xxiii.i-p78.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p79"></span>**26.** *And Jacob’s heart fainted*. We
know that some persons have fainted with sudden and unexpected joy.
Therefore, certain interpreters suppose that the heart of Jacob was, in
a sense, suffocated, as if seized by a kind of ecstatic stupor. But
Moses assigns a different cause; namely, that not having confidence in
his sons, he was agitated between hope and fear. And we know, that they
who are held in suspense, by hearing some incredible message, are struck
with torpor, as if they were lifeless. It was not, therefore, a simple
affection of joy, but a certain mingled perturbation which shook the
mind of Jacob. Therefore, Moses shortly after says, that his spirit
revived; when he, having returned to himself, and being composed in
mind, believed that which he had heard to be true. And he shows that his
love towards Joseph had not languished through length of time, inasmuch
as he set no value upon his own life, except so far as it would permit
him to enjoy a sight of Joseph. He had before assigned to himself
continual sorrow, even to the grave; but now he declares that he shall
have a joyful death.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_174"></span>[175](cc02022.htm#fr_174) <span
id="xxiii.i-p60.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p61"></span> The division of chapters in this place is
singularly unhappy. It interrupts one of the most touching scenes
recorded in the sacred volume, just in the middle. It separates the
irrestible appeal of Judah to the feelings of Joseph from its immediate
and happy effect. In the Hebrew Bible, the section commences with
Judah’s address, and no break is made where this chapter commences; so
that the whole is given as one continuous narrative. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_175"></span>[176](cc02022.htm#fr_175) <span
id="xxiii.i-p65.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p66"></span> Only two years of the famine had now
elapsed, and there were yet five years in which there should be “neither
earing nor harvest,” so that this was indeed but the commencement of the
grievous suffering to which Jacob’s family would have been exposed, but
for the extraordinary interposition of Divine providence in their favor.
The word earing is an obsolete Saxon term by which our translators have
rendered the Hebrew word <span id="xxiii.i-p66.1"></span>שירח,
(*charish*,) which means ploughing, or preparing the ground for seed. —
*Ed*

<span id="fn_176"></span>[177](cc02022.htm#fr_176) <span
id="xxiii.i-p68.2"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p69"></span> Ver. 7. <span
id="xxiii.i-p69.1"></span>Ut ponam vobis reliquias in terra. “To
preserve you a posterity,” (or, as in the margin,) “to put for you a
remnant” in the earth. — English translation. — *Ed*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 46](cc02023)
