[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc02011)  [Next](cc02013.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 2: Genesis, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiii"></span>

<span id="xiii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 35

<span id="xiii.i"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p1"></span><span id="xiii.i-p1.1"></span>[Genesis
35:1-29](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#001.md)<span id="xiii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p2"></span>**1.** And God said unto Jacob, Arise, go up
to Bethel, and dwell there: and make there an altar unto God, that
appeared unto thee when thou fleddest from the face of Esau thy brother.

<span id="xiii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Dixit autem Deus ad Iabacob, Surge,
ascende in Beth-el, et mane ibi: et fac ibi altare Deo, qui visus est
tibi, dum fugeres a facie Esau fratris tui

<span id="xiii.i-p4"></span>**2.** Then Jacob said unto his household,
and to all that *were* with him, Put away the strange gods that *are*
among you, and be clean, and change your garments:

<span id="xiii.i-p5"></span>**2.** Et dixit Iahacob familiae suae, et
omnibus qui erant secum, Removete deos alienos, qui sunt in medio
vestri, et mundate vos, vestimentaque vestra mundate

<span id="xiii.i-p6"></span>**3.** And let us arise, and go up to
Bethel; and I will make there an altar unto God, who answered me in the
day of my distress, and was with me in the way which I went.

<span id="xiii.i-p7"></span>**3.** Et surgamus, et ascendamus in
Beth-el, et faciam illic altare Deo, qui exaudivit me in die angustiae
meae, et fuit mecum in via, qua ambulavi.

<span id="xiii.i-p8"></span>**4.** And they gave unto Jacob all the
strange gods which *were* in their hand, and *all their* earrings which
*were* in their ears; and Jacob hid them under the oak which *was* by
Shechem.

<span id="xiii.i-p9"></span>**4.** Dederunt ergo ipsi Iahacob omnes deos
alienos, qui erant in manu sua, et inaures quae erant in auribus suis,
et abscondit eos Iahacob subter quercum, quae erat apud Sechem.

<span id="xiii.i-p10"></span>**5.** And they journeyed: and the terror
of God was upon the cities that *were* round about them, and they did
not pursue after the sons of Jacob

<span id="xiii.i-p11"></span>**5.** Tune profecti sunt, et fuit terror
Dei super urbes, quae erant in circuitibus eorum, et non persequuti sunt
filios Iahacob

<span id="xiii.i-p12"></span>**6.** So Jacob came to Luz, which *is* in
the land of Canaan, that *is*, Bethel, he and all the people that *were*
with him.

<span id="xiii.i-p13"></span>**6.** Et venit Iahacob in Luz, quae est in
terra Chenaan, haec est Bethel, ipse et omnis populus qui erat cum eo.

<span id="xiii.i-p14"></span>**7.** And he built there an altar, and
called the place Elbethel: because there God appeared unto him, when he
fled from the face of his brother.

<span id="xiii.i-p15"></span>**7.** Et aedificavit ibi altare, et
vocavit locum El Beth-el: quia apparuerant ei Angeli, dum fugeret a
facie fratris sui.

<span id="xiii.i-p16"></span>**8.** But Deborah Rebecca’s nurse died,
and she was buried beneath Bethel under an oak: and the name of it was
called Allonbachuth.

<span id="xiii.i-p17"></span>**8.** Mortua est autem Deborah nutrix
Ribcah, et sepulta est subter Beth-el sub quercu: et vocavit nomen ejus
Allon Bachuth.

<span id="xiii.i-p18"></span>**9.** And God appeared unto Jacob again,
when he came out of Padanaram, and blessed him.

<span id="xiii.i-p19"></span>**9.** Porro visus fuerat Deus ipsi Iahacob
adhue, dum veniret de Padan Aram, et benedixerat ei.

<span id="xiii.i-p20"></span>**10.** And God said unto him, Thy name
*is* Jacob: thy name shall not be called any more Jacob, but Israel
shall be thy name: and he called his name Israel.

<span id="xiii.i-p21"></span>**10.** Atque dixerat ei ipse Deus, Nomen
tuum est Iahacob: non vocabitur nomen tuum ultra Iahacob, sed Israel
erit nomen tuum, et vocavit nomen ejus Israel.

<span id="xiii.i-p22"></span>**11.** And God said unto him, I *am* God
Almighty: be fruitful and multiply; a nation and a company of nations
shall be of thee, and kings shall come out of thy loins;

<span id="xiii.i-p23"></span>**11.** Et dixit ei Deus, Ego sum Deus
omnipotens, cresce, et multiplicare: gens, et coetus Gentium erit ex to,
et reges e lumbis tuis egredientur.

<span id="xiii.i-p24"></span>**12.** And the land which I gave Abraham
and Isaac, to thee I will give it, and to thy seed after thee will I
give the land.

<span id="xiii.i-p25"></span>**12.** Et terram, quam dedi Abraham et
Isaac, tibi dabo, et semini tuo post to dabo terram istam.

<span id="xiii.i-p26"></span>**13.** And God went up from him in the
place where he talked with him.

<span id="xiii.i-p27"></span>**13.** Et ascendit ab eo Deus e loco, in
quo loquutus est cum eo.

<span id="xiii.i-p28"></span>**14.** And Jacob set up a pillar in the
place where he talked with him, *even* a pillar of stone: and he poured
a drink offering thereon, and he poured oil thereon.

<span id="xiii.i-p29"></span>**14.** Tunc statuit Iahacob statuam in
loco, in quo loquutus est cum eo, statuam lapindeam: et libavit super
illam libamen, et effudit super illam oleum.

<span id="xiii.i-p30"></span>**15.** And Jacob called the name of the
place where God spake with him, Bethel.

<span id="xiii.i-p31"></span>**15.** Et vocavit Iahacob nomen loci, in
quo loquutus est cum ipso Deus, Beth-el.

<span id="xiii.i-p32"></span>**16.** And they journeyed from Bethel; and
there was but a little way to come to Ephrath: and Rachel travailed, and
she had hard labour.

<span id="xiii.i-p33"></span>**16.** Profecti vero sunt de Beth-el: erat
autem adhuc ferme milliare terrae ad veniendum in Ephrath, et peperit
Rachel, et difficultatem passa est, dum pareret.

<span id="xiii.i-p34"></span>**17.** And it came to pass, when she was
in hard labour, that the midwife said unto her, Fear not; thou shalt
have this son also.

<span id="xiii.i-p35"></span>**17.** Guit autem, ea difficultatem
patiente dum pareret, dixit ei obstetrix, Ne timeas, wuia etiam iste
tibi filius.

<span id="xiii.i-p36"></span>**18.** And it came to pass, as her soul
was in departing, (for she died) that she called his name Benoni: but
his father called him Benjamin.

<span id="xiii.i-p37"></span>**18.** Et fuit, egrediente anima ejus dum
moreretur, vocavit nomen ejus Benoni: at pater ejus vocavit eum
Benjamin.

<span id="xiii.i-p38"></span>**19.** And Rachel died, and was buried in
the way to Ephrath, which *is* Bethlehem.

<span id="xiii.i-p39"></span>**19.** Mortua est itaque Rachel, et
sepulta est in via Ephrath, haec est Bethlehem.

<span id="xiii.i-p40"></span>**20.** And Jacob set a pillar upon her
grave: that *is* the pillar of Rachel’s grave unto this day.

<span id="xiii.i-p41"></span>**20.** Et statuit Iahacob titulum super
sepulcrum ejus: hic est titulus sepulcri Rachel usque ad diem hanc.

<span id="xiii.i-p42"></span>**21.** And Israel journeyed, and spread
his tent beyond the tower of Edar.

<span id="xiii.i-p43"></span>**21.** Et profectus est Israel, et
tetendit tabernaculum suum trans turrim Eder.

<span id="xiii.i-p44"></span>**22.** And it came to pass, when Israel
dwelt in that land, that Reuben went and lay with Bilhah his father’s
concubine: and Israel heard *it*. Now the sons of Jacob were twelve:

<span id="xiii.i-p45"></span>**22.** Et fuit quum habitaret Israel in
terra ipsa, profectus est Reuben, et concubuit cum Bilhah concubina
patris sui: et audivit Israel. Fuerunt autem filii Iahacob duodecim.

<span id="xiii.i-p46"></span>**23.** The sons of Leah; Reuben, Jacob’s
firstborn, and Simeon, and Levi, and Judah, and Issachar, and Zebulun:

<span id="xiii.i-p47"></span>**23.** Filii Leah, primogenitus Iahacob,
Reuben, et Simhon, et Levi, et Iehudah, et Issachar, et Zebulun.

<span id="xiii.i-p48"></span>**24.** The sons of Rachel; Joseph, and
Benjamin:

<span id="xiii.i-p49"></span>**24.** Filii Rachel, Ioseph et Benjamin.

<span id="xiii.i-p50"></span>**25.** And the sons of Bilhah, Rachel’s
handmaid; Dan, and Naphtali:

<span id="xiii.i-p51"></span>**25.** Et filii Bilhah ancillae Rachel,
Dan et Nephthali.

<span id="xiii.i-p52"></span>**26.** And the sons of Zilpah, Leah’s
handmaid; Gad, and Asher: these *are* the sons of Jacob, which were born
to him in Padanaram.

<span id="xiii.i-p53"></span>**26.** Et filii Zilpah ancillae Leah, Gad
et Aser. Isti sunt filii Iahacob, qui nati sunt in Padan Aram.

<span id="xiii.i-p54"></span>**27.** And Jacob came unto Isaac his
father unto Mamre, unto the city of Arbah, which *is* Hebron, where
Abraham and Isaac sojourned.

<span id="xiii.i-p55"></span>**27.** Et venit Iahacob ad Ishac patrem
suum in Mamre civitatem Arbah: haec est Hebron, in qua habitavit Abraham
et Ishac.

<span id="xiii.i-p56"></span>**28.** And the days of Isaac were an
hundred and fourscore years.

<span id="xiii.i-p57"></span>**28.** Et fuerunt dies Ishac, centum anni
et octoginta anni.

<span id="xiii.i-p58"></span>**29.** And Isaac gave up the ghost, and
died, and was gathered unto his people, *being* old and full of days:
and his sons Esau and Jacob buried him.

<span id="xiii.i-p59"></span>**29.** Et obiit Ishac, et mortuus est, et
collectus est ad populos suos, senex et satur dierum: et sepelierunt eum
Esau et Iahacob filii ejus.

<span id="xiii.i-p60"></span> 

<span id="xiii.i-p61"></span><span id="xiii.i-p61.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p62"></span>**1.** *And God said unto Jacob*. Moses
relates that when Jacob had been reduced to the last extremity, God came
to his help in the right time, and as at the critical juncture. And thus
he shows, in the person of one man, that God never deserts his Church
which he has once embraced, but will procure its salvation. We must,
however, observe the order of his procedure; for God did not immediately
appear to his servant, but suffered him first to be tormented by grief
and excessive cares, that he might learn patience, deferring his
consolation to the time of extreme necessity. Certainly the condition of
Jacob was then most miserable. For all, on every side, might be so
incensed against him that he would be surrounded with as many deaths as
there were neighboring nations: and he was not so stupid as to be
insensible of his danger. God suffered the holy man to be thus tossed
with cares and tormented with troubles, until, by a kind of
resurrection, he restored him, as one half-dead. Whenever we read this
and similar passages, let us reflect that the providence of God watches
for our salvation, even when it most seems to sleep. Moses does not say
how long Jacob was kept in anxiety, but we may infer from the context,
that he had been very greatly perplexed, when the Lord thus revived him.
Moreover, we must observe that the principal medicine by which he was
restored, was contained in the expression, The Lord spoke. Why did not
God by a miracle translate him to some other place, and thus immediately
remove him from all danger? Why did he not even, without a word, stretch
out the hand over him, and repress the ferocity of all, so that no one
should attempt to hurt him? But Moses does not insist upon this point in
vain. For hereby we are taught whence our greatest consolation in our
afflictions is to be sought; and also, that it is the principal business
of our life, to depend upon the word of God, as those who are certainly
persuaded that, when he has promised salvation, he will deal well with
us, so that we need not hesitate to walk through the midst of deaths.
Another reason for the vision was, that Jacob might not only truly
perceive that God was his deliverer; but, being forewarned by his word,
might learn to ascribe to God whatever afterwards followed. For seeing
that we are slow and dull, bare experience by no means suffices to
attest the favor of God towards us, unless faith arising from the word
be added.

<span id="xiii.i-p63"></span>*Go up to Beth-el*. Though it is God’s
design to raise his servant from death to life, he may yet have appeared
to hold him up to derision; for the objection was ready, Thou indeed, O
Lord, commandest me to go up, but all the ways are closed; for my sons
have raised such a flame against me, that I cannot remain safe in any
hiding-place. I dare scarcely move a finger: what therefore will become
of me, if with a great multitude, I now begin to move my camp? shall I
not provoke new enmities against me by my movements? But by this mode
the faith of Jacob was most fully proved; because, knowing God to be the
leader and guardian of his journey, he girded himself to it, relying on
the divine favor. Moreover, the Lord does not simply command what it is
his will to have done, but he encourages his servant, by adding the
promise. For, in reminding him that he is the same God who had before
appeared unto him as he was fleeing in alarm from his brother, a promise
is included in these words. The altar also refers to the same point; for
since it is the divinely appointed token of thanksgiving, it follows
that Jacob would come thither in safety, in order that he might duly
celebrate the grace of God. God chooses and assigns Bethel, rather than
any other place, for his sanctuary; because the very sight of it would
greatly avail to take away terror, when he should remember that there
the glory of the Lord had been seen by him. Further, since God exhorts
his servant to gratitude, he shows that he is kind to the faithful, in
order that they, in return, may own themselves to be indebted for
everything to his grace, and may exercise themselves in the celebration
of it.

<span id="xiii.i-p64"></span><span id="xiii.i-p64.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p65"></span>**2.** *Then Jacob said unto his
household*. The prompt obedience of Jacob is here described. For when he
heard the voice of God, he neither doubted nor disputed with himself
respecting what was necessary to be done: but, as he was commanded, he
quickly prepared himself for his journey. But to show that he obeyed
God, he not only collected his goods, but also purified his house from
idols. For if we desire that God should be propitious to us, all
hindrances are to be removed, which in any way separate him from us.
Hence also we perceive to what point the theft of Rachel tended. For,
(as we have said,) she neither wished to draw her father away from
superstition, but rather followed him in his fault; nor did she keep
this poison to herself, but spread it through the whole family. Thus was
that sacred house infected with the worst contagion. Whence also it
appears, how great is the propensity of mankind to impious and vicious
worship; since the domestics of Jacob, to whom the pure religion had
been handed down, thus eagerly laid hold on the idols offered to them.
And Jacob was not entirely ignorant of the evil: but it is probable that
he was so far under the influence of his wife, that, by connivance, he
silently cherished this plague of his family. And truly, in one word, he
convicts and condemns both himself and the rest, by calling idols
“strange gods.” For whence arose the distinction here made, unless from
his knowing that he ought to be devoted to one God only? For there is a
tacit comparison between the God of Abraham and all other gods which the
world had wickedly invented for itself: not because it was in the power
of Abraham to determine who should be the true God: but because God had
manifested himself to Abraham, he also wished to assume His name. Jacob
therefore confesses his own negligence, in having admitted to his house
idols, against which the door had been closed by God. For wherever the
knowledge of the true God shines, it is necessary to drive far away
whatever men fabricate to themselves which is contrary to the true
knowledge of him. But whereas Jacob had been lulled to sleep either by
the blandishments of his wife, or had neglected to do his duty, through
the carelessness of the flesh, he is now aroused by the fear of danger,
to become more earnest in the pure worship of God. If this happened to
the holy patriarch, how much more ought carnal security to be dreaded by
us, in the season of prosperity? If, however, at any time such torpor
and neglect shall have stolen upon us, may the paternal chastisement of
God excite and stimulate us diligently to purge ourselves from whatever
faults we, by our negligence, may have contracted. The infinite goodness
of God is here conspicuous; seeing that he still deigned to regard the
house of Jacob, though polluted with idols, as his sanctuary. For
although Jacob mingled with idolaters, and even his wife, — a patroness
of idolatry, — slept in his bosom, his sacrifices were always acceptable
to God. Yet this great benignity of God in granting pardon, neither
lessens the fault of the holy man, nor ought to be used by us as an
occasion for negligence. For though Jacob did not approve of these
superstitions, yet it was not owing to him that the pure worship of God
was not gradually subverted. For the corruption which originated with
Rachel was now beginning to spread more widely. And the example of all
ages teaches the same thing. For scarcely ever does the truth of God so
prevail among men, however strenuously pious teachers may labor in
maintaining it, but that some superstitions will remain among the common
people. If dissimulation be added to them, the mischief soon creeps
onward, until it takes possession of the whole body. By being thus
cherished, the mass of superstitions which at this day pervades the
Papacy, has gained its influence. Wherefore we must boldly resist those
beginnings of evil, lest the true religion should be injured by the
sloth and silence of the pastors.

<span id="xiii.i-p66"></span>*And be clean, and change your garments*.
This is an exhortation to the external profession of penitence. For
Jacob wishes that his domestics, who before had polluted themselves,
should testify their renewed purification by a change of garments. With
the same design and end, the people, after they had made the golden
calves, were commanded by Moses to put off their ornaments. Only in that
instance a different method was observed; namely, that the people having
laid aside their ornaments, simply confessed their guilt by mournful and
mean apparel: but in the house of Jacob the garments were changed, in
order that they who had been defiled might come forth as new men: yet
the end (as I have said) was the same, that by this external rite,
idolaters might learn how great was the atrocity of their wickedness.
For although, repentance is an inward virtue, and has its seat in the
heart, yet this ceremony was by no means superfluous; for we know how
little disposed men are to be displeased with themselves on account of
their sins, unless they are pierced with many goads. Again, the glory of
God is also concerned in this, that men should not only inwardly reflect
upon their guilt, but at the same time openly declare it. This then is
the sum; although God had given no express command concerning the
purifying of his house, yet because he had commanded an altar to be
raised, Jacob, in order that he might yield pure obedience to God, took
care that all impediments should be removed; and he did this when
necessity compelled him to seek help from God.

<span id="xiii.i-p67"></span><span id="xiii.i-p67.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p68"></span>**4.** *And they gave unto Jacob*. Though
the holy man had his house in suitable subordination; yet as all yielded
such prompt obedience to his command by casting away their idols, I
doubt not that they were influenced by the fear of danger. Whence also
we infer how important it is for us to be aroused from slumber by
suffering. For we know how pertinacious and rebellious is superstition.
If, in a peaceful and joyous state of affairs, Jacob had given any such
command, the greater part of his family would have fraudulently
concealed their idols: some, perhaps, would have obstinately refused to
surrender them; but now the hand of God urges them, and with ready minds
they quickly repent. It is also probable, that, according to the
circumstances of the time, Jacob preached to them concerning the
righteous judgment of God, to inspire them with fear. When he commands
them to cleanse themselves, it is as if he had said, Hitherto ye have
been defiled before the Lord; now, seeing that he has regarded us so
mercifully, wash out this filth, lest he should again avert his face
from us. It seems, however, absurd, that Jacob should have buried the
idols under an oak, and not rather have broken them in pieces and
consumed them in the fire, as we read that Moses did with the golden
calves, (<span id="xiii.i-p68.1"></span>[Ex
32:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#020)<span id="xiii.i-p68.1"></span>,.md)
and Hezekiah with the brazen serpent, (<span
id="xiii.i-p68.2"></span>[2Ki
18:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#004)<span id="xiii.i-p68.2"></span>..md)
The fact is not thus related without reason: but the infirmity of Jacob
is touched upon, because he had not been sufficiently provident against
the future. And perhaps the Lord punished his previous excessive
connivance and want of firmness, by depriving him of prudence or
courage. Yet God accepted his obedience, although it had some remainder
of defect, knowing that it was the design of the holy man to remove
idols from his family, and, in token of his detestation, to bury them in
the earth. The earrings were doubtless badges of superstition; as at
this day innumerable trifles are seen in the Papacy, by which impiety
displays itself.

<span id="xiii.i-p69"></span><span id="xiii.i-p69.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p70"></span>**5.** *And the terror of God was upon the
cities*. It now manifestly appears that deliverance was not in vain
promised to the holy man by God; since, amidst so many hostile swords,
he goes forth not only in safety but undisturbed. By the destruction of
the Shechemites all the neighboring people were inflamed with enmity
against a single family; yet no one moves to take vengeance. The reason
is explained by Moses, that the terror of God had fallen upon them,
which repressed their violent assaults. Hence we may learn that the
hearts of men are in the hands of God; that he can inspire those with
fortitude who in themselves are weak; and, on the other hand, soften
their iron-hardness whenever he pleases. Sometimes, indeed, he suffers
many to cast up the foam of their pride, against whom he afterwards
opposes his power: but he often weakens those with fear who were
naturally bold as lions: thus we find these giants, who were able to
devour Jacob a hundred times, so struck with terror that they faint
away. Wherefore, whenever we see the wicked furiously bent on our
destruction, lest our hearts should fail with fear and be broken by
desperation, let us call to mind this terror of God, by which the rage,
however furious, of the whole world may be easily subdued.

<span id="xiii.i-p71"></span><span id="xiii.i-p71.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p72"></span>**7.** *And he built there an altar*. It
has been already stated why it behaved the holy fathers, wherever they
came, to have an altar of their own, distinct from those of other
nations; namely, to make it manifest that they did not worship gods of
various kinds, a practice to which the world was then everywhere
addicted, but that they had a God peculiar to themselves. For although
God is worshipped with the mind, yet an external confession is the
inseparable companion of faith. Besides, all acknowledge how very useful
it is to us to be stirred up by outward helps to the worship of God. If
any one object that these altars differed nothing from other altars in
appearance; I answer, that whereas others rashly, and with inconsiderate
zeal, built altars to unknown gods, Jacob always adhered to the word of
God. And there is no lawful altar but that which is consecrated by the
word; nor indeed did the worship of Jacob excel by any other mark than
this, that he attempted nothing beyond the command of God. In calling
the name of the place “The God of Beth-el,”  <span
id="fr_121"></span>[122](#fn_121.md) he is thought to be too familiar; and
yet this very title commends the faith of the holy man, and that
rightly, since he confines himself within the divinely prescribed
bounds. The Papists act foolishly in affecting the praise of humility by
a modesty which is most degrading. But the humility of faith is
praiseworthy, seeing it does not desire to know more than God permits.
And as when God descends to us, he, in a certain sense, abases himself,
and stammers with us, so he allows us to stammer with him. And this is
to be truly wise, when we embrace God in the manner in which he
accommodates himself to our capacity. For in this way, Jacob does not
keenly dispute concerning the essence of God, but renders God familiar
to himself by the oracle which he has received. And because he applies
his senses to the revelation, this stammering and simplicity (as I have
said) is acceptable to God. Now, though at this day, the knowledge of
God has shined more clearly, yet since God, in the gospel, takes upon
him the character of a nursing father, let us learn to subject our minds
to him; only let us remember that he descends to us in order to raise us
up to himself. For he does not speak to us in this earthly manner, to
keep us at a distance from heaven, but rather by this vehicle, to draw
us up thither. Meanwhile this rule must be observed, that since the name
of the altar was given by a celestial oracle, the building of it was a
proof of faith. For where the living voice of God does not sound,
whatever pomps may be introduced will be like shadowy spectres; as in
the Papacy nothing can be seen except bladders filled with wind. It may
be added that Jacob shows the constant tenor of his faith, from the time
that God began to manifest himself to him; because he keeps in view the
fact, that the angels had appeared unto him.  <span
id="fr_122"></span>[123](#fn_122.md) For since the word is in the plural
number, I willingly interpret it of angels; and this is not contrary to
the former doctrine; for although the majesty of God was then
conspicuous, so far as he could comprehend it, yet Moses does not
without reason mention the angels whom Jacob saw ascending and
descending on the steps of the ladder. For he then beheld the glory of
God in the angels, as we see the splendor of the sun flowing to us
through his rays.

<span id="xiii.i-p76"></span><span id="xiii.i-p76.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p77"></span>**8.** *But Deborah, Rebecca’s nurse,
died*. Here is inserted a short narration of the death of Deborah, whom
we may conclude to have been a holy matron, and whom the family of Jacob
venerated as a mother; for the name given in perpetuity to the place,
testifies that she was buried with peculiar honor, and with no common
mourning. Shortly afterwards the death and burial of Rachel are to be
recorded: yet Moses does not say that any sign of mourning for Deborah
was transmitted to posterity;  <span id="fr_123"></span>[124](#fn_123.md)
therefore it is probable that she was held by all in the place of a
grandmother: But it may be asked, how she then happened to be in Jacob’s
company, seeing that he had not yet come to his father; and the age of a
decrepit old woman rendered her unfit for so long a journey.  <span
id="fr_124"></span>[125](#fn_124.md) Some interpreters imagine that she had
been sent by Rebecca to meet her son Jacob; but I do not see what
probability there is in the conjecture; nor yet have I anything certain
to affirm, except that, perhaps, she had loved Jacob from a boy, because
she had nursed him; and when she knew the cause of his exile, she
followed him from her regard for religion. Certainly Moses does not in
vain celebrate her death with an eulogy so remarkable.

<span id="xiii.i-p80"></span><span id="xiii.i-p80.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p81"></span>**9.** *And God appeared unto Jacob*.
Moses, having introduced a few words on the death of Deborah, recites a
second vision, by which Jacob was confirmed, after his return to Bethel.
Once, in this place, God had appeared unto him, when he was on his way
into Mesopotamia. In the meantime God had testified in various methods,
as need required, that he would be present with him everywhere through
his whole journey; but now he is brought back again to that very place
where a more illustrious and memorable oracle had been given him, in
order that he may receive again a new confirmation of his faith. The
blessing of God here means nothing else than his promise; for though men
pray for blessings on each other; God declares himself to be the sole
Dispenser of perfect happiness. Now Jacob heard at this time nothing
new; but the same promise is repeated to him, that he, as one who had
returned from captivity to his own country, and had gathered new
strength to his faith, might accomplish with greater courage the
remaining course of his life.

<span id="xiii.i-p82"></span><span id="xiii.i-p82.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p83"></span>**10.** *Thy name shall not be called any
more Jacob*. We have before given the meaning of these words. The former
name is not abolished, but the dignity of the other, which was
afterwards put upon him, is preferred: for he was called Jacob from the
womb, because he had strongly wrestled with his brother; but he was
afterwards called Israel, because he entered into contest with God, and
obtained the victory; not that he had prevailed by his own power, (for
he had borrowed courage and strength and arms from God alone,) but
because it was the Lord’s will freely to confer upon him this honor. He
therefore speaks comparatively, showing that the name Jacob is obscure
and ignoble when compared with the name Israel. Some understand it thus,
“Not only shalt thou be called Jacob, but the surname of Israel shall be
added;” yet the former exposition seems to me the more simple; namely,
that the old name, having in it less of splendor, should give place to
the second. What Augustine adduces is specious rather than solid;
namely, that he was called Jacob in reference to his present life, but
Israel in reference to his future life. Let this, however, be regarded
as settled, that a double name was given to the holy man, of which one
was by far the most excellent; for we see that the prophets often
combine them both, thus marking the constancy of God’s grace from the
beginning to the end.

<span id="xiii.i-p84"></span><span id="xiii.i-p84.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p85"></span>**11.** *I am God Almighty*. God here, as
elsewhere, proclaims his own might, in order that Jacob may the more
certainly rely on his faithfulness. He then promises that he will cause
Jacob to increase and multiply, not only into one nation, but into a
multitude of nations. When he speaks of “a nation,” he no doubt means
that the offspring of Jacob should become sufficiently numerous to
acquire the body and the name of one great people. But that follows
concerning “nations” may appear absurd; for if we wish it to refer to
the nations which, by gratuitous adoption, are inserted into the race of
Abraham, the form of expression is improper: but if it be understood of
sons by naturals descent, then it would be a curse rather shall a
blessing, that the Church, the safety of which depends on its unity,
should be divided into many distinct nations. But to me it appears that
the Lord, in these words, comprehended both these benefits; for when,
under Joshua, the people was apportioned into tribes, as if the seed of
Abraham was propagated into so many distinct nations; yet the body was
not thereby divided; it is called an assembly of nations, for this
reason, because in connection with that distinction a sacred unity yet
flourished. The language also is not improperly extended to the
Gentiles, who, having been before dispersed, are collected into one
congregation by the bond of faith; and although they were not born of
Jacob according to the flesh; yet, because faith was to them the
commencement of a new birth, and the covenant of salvation, which is the
seed of spiritual birth, flowed from Jacob, all believers are rightly
reckoned among his sons, according to the declaration, I have
constituted thee a father of many nations.

<span id="xiii.i-p86"></span>*And kings shall come out of thy loins*.
This, in my judgment, ought properly to be referred to David and his
posterity; for God did not approve of the kingdom of Saul, and therefore
it was not established; and the kingdom of Israel was but a corruption
of the legitimate kingdom. I acknowledge truly that, sometimes, those
things which have sprung from evil sources are numbered among God’s
benefits; but because here the simple and pure benediction of God is
spoken of, I willingly understand it of David’s successors only.
Finally; Jacob is constituted the lord of the land, as the sole heir of
his grandfather Abraham, and of his father Isaac; for the Lord
manifestly excludes Esau from the holy family, when he transfers the
dominion of the land, by hereditary right, to the posterity of Jacob
alone.

<span id="xiii.i-p87"></span><span id="xiii.i-p87.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p88"></span>**13.** *And God went up from him*. This
ascent of God is analogous to his descent; for God, who fills heaven and
earth, is yet said to descend to us, though he changes not his place,
whenever he gives us any token of his presence; a mode of expression
adopted in accommodation to our littleness. He went up, therefore, from
Jacob, when he disappeared from his sight, or when the vision ended. By
the use of such language, God shows us the value of his word, because,
indeed, he is near to us in the testimony of his grace; for, seeing that
there is a great distance between us and his heavenly glory, he descends
to us by his word. This, at length, was fully accomplished in the person
of Christ; who while, by his own ascension to heaven, he raised our
faith thither; nevertheless dwells always with us by the power of his
Spirit.

<span id="xiii.i-p89"></span><span id="xiii.i-p89.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p90"></span>**14.** *And Jacob set up a pillar*. Though
it is possible that he may again have erected a sacred monument, in
memory of the second vision; yet I readily subscribe to the opinion of
those who think that reference is made to what had been done before; as
if Moses should say, that was the ancient temple of God, in which Jacob
had poured forth his libation: for he had not been commanded to come
thither for the sake of dwelling there; but in order that a fresh view
of the place might renew his faith in the ancient oracle, and more fully
confirm it. We read elsewhere that altars were built by the holy
fathers, where they intended to remain longer; but their reason for
doing so was different: for whereas Jacob had made a solemn vow in
Beth-el, on condition that he should be brought back by the Lord in
safety; thanksgiving is now required of him, after he has become bound
by his vow,  <span id="fr_125"></span>[126](#fn_125.md) that, being
strengthened, he may pass onward on his journey.

<span id="xiii.i-p92"></span><span id="xiii.i-p92.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p93"></span>**16.** *And they journeyed from Beth-el*.
We have seen how severe a wound the defilement of his daughter inflicted
on holy Jacob, and with what terror the cruel deed of his two sons had
inspired him. Various trials are now blended together, by which he is
heavily afflicted throughout his old age; until, on his departure into
Egypt, he receives new joy at the sight of his son Joseph. But even this
was a most grievous temptation, to be exiled from the promised land even
to his death. The death of his beloved wife is next related; and soon
after follows the incestuous intercourse of his firstborn with his wife
Bilhah. A little later, Isaac his father dies; then his son Joseph is
snatched away, whom he supposes to have been torn in pieces by wild
beasts. While he is almost consumed with perpetual mourning, a famine
arises, so that he is compelled to seek food from Egypt. There another
of his sons is kept in chains; and, at length, he is deprived of his own
most beloved Benjamin, whom he sends away as if his own bowels were torn
from him. We see, therefore, by what a severe conflict, and by what a
continued succession of evils, he was trained to the hope of a better
life. And whereas Rachel died in childbirth, through the fatigue of the
journey, before they reached a resting-place; this would prove no small
accession to his grief. But, as to his being bereaved of his most
beloved wife, this was probably the cause, that the Lord intended to
correct the exorbitance of his affection for her. The Holy Spirit fixes
no mark of infamy upon Leah, seeing that she was a holy woman, and
endowed with greater virtue; but Jacob more highly appreciated Rachel’s
beauty. This fault in the holy man was cured by a bitter medicine, when
his wife was taken array from him: and the Lord often deprives the
faithful of his own gifts, to correct their perverse abuse of them. The
wicked, indeed, more audaciously profane the gifts of God; but if God
connives longer at their misconduct, a more severe condemnation remains
to them on account of his forbearance. But in taking away from his own
people the occasion of sinning, he promotes their salvation. Whoever,
therefore, desires the continued use of God’s gifts, let him learn not
to abuse them, but to enjoy them with purity and sobriety.

<span id="xiii.i-p94"></span><span id="xiii.i-p94.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p95"></span>**17.** *The midwife said unto her*. We
know that the ancients were very desirous of offspring, especially of
male offspring. Since Rachel therefore does not accept this kind of
consolation when offered, we infer that she was completely oppressed
with pain. She therefore died in agonies, thinking of nothing but her
sad childbirth and her own sorrows: from the feeling of which she gave a
name to her son; but Jacob afterwards corrected the error. For the
chance of the name sufficiently shows, that, in his judgment, the excess
of sorrow in his wife was wrong; seeing that she had branded his son
with a sinister and opprobrious name;  <span
id="fr_126"></span>[127](#fn_126.md) for that sadness is not free from
ingratitude, which so occupies our minds in adversity that the kindness
of God does not exhilarate them; or, at least, does not infuse some
portion of sweetness to mitigate our grief. Then her burial is
mentioned; to which the holy fathers could not have attended with such
religious care, except on account of their hope of the future
resurrection. Whenever, therefore, we read concerning their burying the
dead, as if they were anxious about the performance of some
extraordinary duty, let us think of that end of which I have spoken; for
it was no foolish ceremony, but a lively symbol of the future
resurrection. I acknowledge, indeed, that profane and degenerate men at
that time, in various places, vainly incurred much expense and toil in
burying their dead, only as an empty solace of their grief. But although
they had declined from the original institution into gross errors, yet
the Lord caused that this rite should remain entire among his own
people. Moreover, he designed that a testimony should exist among
unbelievers, by which they might be rendered inexcusable. For since,
independently of instruction, this sentiment was innate in all men, that
to bury the dead was one of the offices of piety, nature has clearly
dictated to them that the human body is formed for immortality; and,
therefore, that, by sinking into death, it does not utterly perish. The
statue or monument, erected by him, signifies the same thing. He reared
no citadel which might stand as a token of his glory among his
posterity: but he took care to raise the memorial of a sepulcher, which
might be a witness to all ages that he was more devoted to the life to
come; and, by the providence of God, this memorial remained standing,
till the people returned out of Egypt.

<span id="xiii.i-p97"></span><span id="xiii.i-p97.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p98"></span>**22.** *Reuben went and lay with Bilhah*.
A sad and even tragic history is now related concerning the incestuous
intercourse of Reuben with his mother-in-law. Moses, indeed, calls
Bilhah Jacob’s concubine: but though she had not come into the hands of
her husband, as the mistress of the family and a partaker of his goods;
yet, as it respected the bed, she was his lawful wife, as we have before
seen. If even a stranger had defiled the wife of the holy man, it would
have been a great disgrace; it was, however, far more atrocious that he
should suffer such an indignity from his own son. But how great and how
detestable was the dishonor, that the mother of two tribes should not
only contaminate herself with adultery, but even with incest; which
crime is so abhorrent to nature, that, not even among the Gentiles, has
it ever been held tolerable? And truly, by the wonderful artifice of
Satan, this great obscenity penetrated into the holy house, in order
that the election of God might seem to be of no effect. Satan endeavors,
by whatever means he can, to pervert the grace of God in the elect; and
since he cannot effect that, he either covers it with infamy, or at
least obscures it. Hence it happens that disgraceful examples often
steal into the Church. And the Lord, in this manner, suffers his own
people to be humbled, that they may be more attentively careful of
themselves, that they may more earnestly watch unto prayer, and may
learn entirely to depend on his mercy. Moses only relates that Jacob was
informed of this crime; but he conceals his grief, not because he was
unfeeling, (for he was not so stupid as to be insensible to sorrow,) but
because his grief was too great to be expressed. For here Moses seems to
have acted as the painter did who, in representing the sacrifice of
Iphigenia, put a veil over her father’s face, because he could not
sufficiently express the grief of his countenance. In addition to this
eternal disgrace of the family, there were other causes of anxiety which
transfixed the breast of the holy man. The sum of his happiness was in
his offspring, from which the salvation of the whole world was to
proceed. Whereas, already, two of his sons had been perfidious and
sanguinary robbers; the first-born, now, exceeds them both in
wickedness. But here the gratuitous election of God has appeared the
more illustrious, because it was not on account of their worthiness that
he preferred the sons of Jacob to all the world; and also because, when
they had fallen so basely, this election nevertheless remained firm and
efficacious. Warned by such examples, let us learn to fortify ourselves
against those dreadful scandals by which Satan strives to disturb us.
Let every one also privately apply this to the strengthening of his own
faith. For sometimes even good men slide, as if they had fallen from
grace. Desperation would necessarily be the consequence of such ruin,
unless the Lord, on the other hand, held out the hope of pardon. A
remarkable instance of this is set before us in Reuben; who, after this
extreme act of iniquity, yet retained his rank of a patriarch in the
Church. We must, however, remain under the custody of fear and
watchfulness, lest temptation should seize upon us unawares, and thus
the snares of Satan should envelop us. For the holy Spirit did not
design to set before us an example of vile lust, in order that every one
might rush into incestuous connections; but would rather expose to
infamy the baseness of this crime, in an honorable person, that all, on
that account, might more vehemently abhor it. This passage also refutes
the error of Novatus. Reuben had been properly instructed; he bore in
his flesh, from early infancy, the symbol of the divine covenant; he was
even born again by the Spirit of God; we see, therefore, what was the
deep abyss from which he was raised by the incredible mercy of God. The
Novatians, therefore, and similar fanatics, have no right to cut off the
hope of pardon from the lapsed: for it is no slight injury to Christ, if
we suppose the grace of God to be more restricted by his advent.

<span id="xiii.i-p99"></span>*Now the sons of Jacob were twelve*. Moses
again recounts the sons of Jacob in a regular series. Reuben is put the
first among them, not for the sake of honor, but that he may be loaded
with the greater opprobrium: for the greater the honor which any one
receives from the Lord, the more severely is he to be blamed, if he
afterwards makes himself the slave of Satan, and deserts his post. Moses
seems to insert this catalogue before the account of the death of Isaac,
for the purpose of discriminating between the progeny of Jacob and the
Idumeans, of whom he is about to make mention in <span
id="xiii.i-p99.1"></span>[Ge 36:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#001.md)<span
id="xiii.i-p99.1"></span>. For on the death of Isaac the fountain of the
holy race became divided, as into two streams; but since the adoption of
God restrained itself to one branch only, it was necessary to
distinguish it from the other.

<span id="xiii.i-p100"></span><span id="xiii.i-p100.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p101"></span>**28.** *And the days of Isaac*. The death
of Isaac is not related in its proper order, as will soon appear from
the connection of the history: but, as we have elsewhere seen, the
figure *hysteron proteron* was familiar to Moses.  <span
id="fr_127"></span>[128](#fn_127.md) When it is said, *that he died old,
and full of days*, the meaning is, that, having fulfilled the course of
his life, he departed by a mature death; this, therefore, is ascribed to
the blessing of God. Nevertheless, I refer these words not merely to the
duration of his life, but also to the state of his feelings; implying
that Isaac, being satisfied with life, willingly and placidly departed
out of the world. For we may see certain decrepit old men, who are not
less desirous of life then they were in the flower of their age; and
with one foot in the grave, they still have a horror of death.
Therefore, though long life is reckoned among the blessings of God; yet
it is not enough for men to be able to count up a great number of years;
unless they feel that they have lived long, and, being satisfied with
the favor of God and with their own age, prepare themselves for their
departure. Now, in order that old men may leave their minds formed to
this kind of moderation, it behaves them to have a good conscience, to
the end, that they may not flee from the presence of God; for an evil
conscience pursues and agitates the wicked with terror. Moses adds, that
Isaac was buried by his two sons. For since, at that time, the
resurrection was not clearly revealed, and its first fruits had not yet
appeared, it behaved the holy fathers to be so much the more diligently
trained in significant ceremonies, in order that they might correct the
impression produced by the semblance of destruction which is presented
in death. By the fact that Esau is put first, we are taught again, that
the fruit of the paternal benediction was not received by Jacob in this
life; for he who was the first-born by right, is still subjected to the
other, after his father’s death.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_121"></span>[122](cc02012.htm#fr_121.md) <span
id="xiii.i-p72.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p73"></span> As the word Beth-el means the House of
God, the farther addition of El, the name of God, seems to be a
tautology; and this is made by Calvin the basis of an objection which he
proceeds to answer. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_122"></span>[123](cc02012.htm#fr_122.md) <span
id="xiii.i-p73.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p74"></span> <span id="xiii.i-p74.1"></span>Quia
apparuerunt ei Angeli dum fugeret a facie fratris sui In the English
translation the name of God is put instead of angels, and no doubt
rightly. The reason given for Calvin’s translation of the word <span
id="xiii.i-p74.2"></span>םיהלא (*Elohim*,) by angels is, that, contrary
to the usual custom, when the word means God, it is accompanied by a
verb in the plural number. But this is not conclusive. See note 2, vol.
1., p. 531, on chap. 20, ver. 13.

<span id="xiii.i-p75"></span>Yet there is some difficulty in the
passage, arising from the apparent harshness of the repetition of El,
the name of God, in this title. *Bush* thinks that the first EL does not
belong to the name of the place. *Rivetus* reads the first El as the
genitive, supposing the word place to be understood. “And he called the
place, ‘the place of the God of Beth-el.’ This *Dathe* thinks harsh, and
he follows *Michaelis* in connecting <span
id="xiii.i-p75.1"></span>םוקמל with the first <span
id="xiii.i-p75.2"></span>לא And he called the place of God, Beth-el.” —
*Ed*

<span id="fn_123"></span>[124](cc02012.htm#fr_123.md) <span
id="xiii.i-p77.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p78"></span> The meaning, perhaps, is, that no
monumental pillar was raised to Deborah, as was done to Rachel; the
probable reason given for the fact, namely, that she was regarded as a
grandmother, does not seem very intelligible. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_124"></span>[125](cc02012.htm#fr_124.md) <span
id="xiii.i-p78.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p79"></span> It appears, from a calculation of the ages
of Rebekah, of Jacob, and of Rachel, that Deborah must, at this time,
have lived far beyond the common term of human life. “Jacob was then
about one hundred and seven years of age. Isaac had been sixty years old
when Jacob was born; he married Rebekah when he was at the age of forty,
and she could not be less than twenty at the time of her marriage; it
will follow that she bore twins in, or after, the fortieth year of her
age. If these forty years be added to the one hundred and seven of
Jacob’s life, this will make one hundred and forty-seven. Supposing
Deborah to have been twenty-five when she was given as a nurse to
Rebekah, she could not now be less than one hundred and seventy years
old” — See *Rivetus*, p. 701. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_125"></span>[126](cc02012.htm#fr_125.md) <span
id="xiii.i-p90.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p91"></span> <span id="xiii.i-p91.1"></span>Nune
gratiarum actio ab eo exigitur, postquam reus voti factus est, ut
confirmatus alio transeat. The French translation of “<span
id="xiii.i-p91.2"></span>postquam reus voti factus est” is, “<span
id="xiii.i-p91.3"></span>apres qu’il a eu jouissance de son souhait,”
“after he had obtained the enjoyment of his wish;” and this would read
more smoothly than the translation given above; but is “<span
id="xiii.i-p91.4"></span>reus voti” capable of such a version? — <span
id="xiii.i-p91.5"></span>Vide Lexicon Facciolati, sub voce reus. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_126"></span>[127](cc02012.htm#fr_126.md) <span
id="xiii.i-p95.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p96"></span> Rachel, in the act of dying, called her
son Benoni, the son of my sorrow; Jacob called him Benjamin, the son of
my right hand. It is worthy of remark that Benjamin was the only son of
Jacob born in the land of Canaan. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_127"></span>[128](cc02012.htm#fr_127.md) <span
id="xiii.i-p101.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p102"></span> The death of Isaac is mentioned here, out
of place, to prevent the subsequent interruption of the history. The
events of the thirty-seventh and thirty-eighth chapters preceded it; for
Isaac lived about fifteen years after the removal of Joseph into Egypt.
— *Ed*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 36](cc02013.md)
