[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc02001)  [Next](cc02003.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 2: Genesis, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii"></span>

<span id="iii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 25.

<span id="iii.i"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p1"></span><span id="iii.i-p1.1"></span>[Genesis
25:1-34](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#001.md)<span id="iii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p2"></span>**1.** Then again Abraham took a wife, and
her name *was* Keturah.

<span id="iii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Et addidit Abraham, et accepit uxorem,
cujus nomen erat Cetura.

<span id="iii.i-p4"></span>**2.** And she bare him Zimran, and Jokshan,
and Medan, and Midian, and Ishbak, and Shuah.

<span id="iii.i-p5"></span>2. Et peperit ei Zimram, et Iocsan, et Medan,
et Midian, et Isbah, et Suah

<span id="iii.i-p6"></span>**3.** And Jokshan begat Sheba, and Dedan.
And the sons of Dedan were Asshurim, and Letushim, and Leummim.

<span id="iii.i-p7"></span>**3.** Et Iocsan genuit Seba, et Dedan. Filii
autem Dedan fuerunt Assurim, et Letusim, et Leummin.

<span id="iii.i-p8"></span>**4.** And the sons of Midian; Ephah, and
Epher, and Hanoch, and Abida, and Eldaah. All these *were* the children
of Keturah.

<span id="iii.i-p9"></span>**4.** Filii vero Midian, Hephah, et Hepher,
et Hanoch, et Abidah, et Eldaah: omnes isti, filii Ceturae.

<span id="iii.i-p10"></span>**5.** And Abraham gave all that he had unto
Isaac.

<span id="iii.i-p11"></span>**5.** Porro dedit Abraham omnia, quae sua
erant, ipsi Ishac.

<span id="iii.i-p12"></span>**6.** But unto the sons of the concubines,
which Abraham had, Abraham gave gifts, and sent them away from Isaac his
son, while he yet lived, eastward, unto the east country.

<span id="iii.i-p13"></span>**6.** Et filiis concubinarum quas habebat
Abraham, dedit Abraham dona; et emisit eos ab Ishac filio suo, quum
adhuc viveret, ad Orientem, ad terram Orientalem.

<span id="iii.i-p14"></span>**7.** And these *are* the days of the years
of Abraham’s life which he lived, an hundred threescore and fifteen
years.

<span id="iii.i-p15"></span>**7.** Porro isti sunt dies annorum vitae
Abraham quos vixit, centum anni et septuaginta anni et quinque anni.

<span id="iii.i-p16"></span>**8.** Then Abraham gave up the ghost, and
died in a good old age, an old man, and full *of years*; and was
gathered to his people.

<span id="iii.i-p17"></span>**8.** Et obiit, et mortuus est Abraham in
senectute bona, senex et satur: et congregatus est ad populos suos.

<span id="iii.i-p18"></span>**9.** And his sons Isaac and Ishmael buried
him in the cave of Machpelah, in the field of Ephron the son of Zohar
the Hittite, which *is* before Mamre;

<span id="iii.i-p19"></span>**9.** Et sepelierunt eum Ishac et Ismael
filii ejus in spelunca duplici, in agro Ephron filii Sohar Hittaei, quae
est ante Mamre,

<span id="iii.i-p20"></span>**10.** The field which Abraham purchased of
the sons of Heth: there was Abraham buried, and Sarah his wife.

<span id="iii.i-p21"></span>**10.** In agro quem emit Abraham a filiis
Heth: ibi sepultus est Abraham et Sarah uxor ejus.

<span id="iii.i-p22"></span>**11.** And it came to pass after the death
of Abraham, that God blessed his son Isaac; and Isaac dwelt by the well
Lahairoi.

<span id="iii.i-p23"></span>**11.** Et fuit, postquam mortuus est
Abraham, benedixit Deus Ishac filio ejus; et habitavit Ishac apud Puteum
viventis videntis me.

<span id="iii.i-p24"></span>**12.** Now these *are* the generations of
Ishmael, Abraham’s son, whom Hagar the Egyptian, Sarah’s handmaid, bare
unto Abraham:

<span id="iii.i-p25"></span>**12.** Istae autem generationes Ismael
filii Abraham, quem peperit Hagar AEgyptia ancilla Sarah ipsi Abraham.

<span id="iii.i-p26"></span>**13.** And these *are* the names of the
sons of Ishmael, by their names, according to their generations: the
firstborn of Ishmael, Nebajoth; and Kedar, and Adbeel, and Mibsam,

<span id="iii.i-p27"></span>**13.** Et haec nomina filiorum Ismael per
nomina sua, per generationes suas: primogenitus Ismael, Nebajoth, et
Cedar, et Abdeel, et Mibsam,

<span id="iii.i-p28"></span>**14.** And Mishma, and Dumah, and Massa,

<span id="iii.i-p29"></span>**14.** Et Mismah, et Dumah, et Masa,

<span id="iii.i-p30"></span>**15.** Hadar, and Tema, Jetur, Naphish, and
Kedemah:

<span id="iii.i-p31"></span>**15.** Hadar, et Thema, Jetur, Naphis, et
Cedmah.

<span id="iii.i-p32"></span>**16.** These *are* the sons of Ishmael, and
these *are* their names, by their towns, and by their castles; twelve
princes according to their nations.

<span id="iii.i-p33"></span>**16.** Isti sunt filii Ismael, et ista
nomina eorum per villas suas, et per castella sua, duodecim principes
per familias suas.

<span id="iii.i-p34"></span>**17.** And these *are* the years of the
life of Ishmael, an hundred and thirty and seven years: and he gave up
the ghost and died; and was gathered unto his people.

<span id="iii.i-p35"></span>**17.** Et isti sunt anni vitae Ismael,
centum anni, et triginta anni, et septem anni: et obiit, et mortuus est,
et congregatus est ad populos suos.

<span id="iii.i-p36"></span>**18.** And they dwelt from Havilah unto
Shur, that *is* before Egypt, as thou goest toward Assyria: *and* he
died in the presence of all his brethren.

<span id="iii.i-p37"></span>**18.** Et habitaverunt ab Havilah usque ad
Sur, quae est ante AEgyptum, dum pergis in Assur: coram omnibus
fratribus suis habitavit.

<span id="iii.i-p38"></span>**19.** And these *are* the generations of
Isaac, Abraham’s son: Abraham begat Isaac:

<span id="iii.i-p39"></span>**19.** Istae vero sunt generationes Ishac
filii Abraham: Abraham genuit Ishac.

<span id="iii.i-p40"></span>**20.** And Isaac was forty years old when
he took Rebekah to wife, the daughter of Bethuel the Syrian of
Padanaram, the sister to Laban the Syrian.

<span id="iii.i-p41"></span>**20.** Et erat Ishac quadragenarius, quando
accepit Ribcam filiam Bethuel Aramaei de Padan Aram, sororem Laban
Aramaei, sibi in uxorem.

<span id="iii.i-p42"></span>**21.** And Isaac intreated the LORD for his
wife, because she *was* barren: and the LORD was intreated of him, and
Rebekah his wife conceived.

<span id="iii.i-p43"></span>**21.** Et oravit Ishac Iehovam respectu
uxoris suae, quia sterilis erat: et exoratus est ab ipso Iehova, et
concepit Ribca uxor ejus.

<span id="iii.i-p44"></span>**22.** And the children struggled together
within her; and she said, If *it be* so, why *am* I thus? And she went
to enquire of the LORD.

<span id="iii.i-p45"></span>**22.** Et collidebant se filii in utero
ejus, et dixit, Si ita, ut quid ego?

<span id="iii.i-p46"></span>**23.** And the LORD said unto her, Two
nations *are* in thy womb, and two manner of people shall be separated
from thy bowels; and *the one* people shall be stronger than *the other*
people; and the elder shall serve the younger.

<span id="iii.i-p47"></span>**23.** Tune dixit Iehova ad eam, Duae
gentes sunt in utero tuo, et duo populi a visceribus tuis separabunt se:
et populus populo robustior erit, et major serviet minori.

<span id="iii.i-p48"></span>**24.** And when her days to be delivered
were fulfilled, behold, *there were* twins in her womb.

<span id="iii.i-p49"></span>**24.** Et impleti sunt dies ejus ut
pareret, et ecce gemini erant in utero ejus.

<span id="iii.i-p50"></span>**25.** And the first came out red, all over
like an hairy garment; and they called his name Esau.

<span id="iii.i-p51"></span>**25.** Egressus est autem prior rufus,
totus ipse sicut pallium pilosum: et vocaverunt nomen ejus Esau.

<span id="iii.i-p52"></span>**26.** And after that came his brother out,
and his hand took hold on Esau’s heel; and his name was called Jacob:
and Isaac *was* threescore years old when she bare them.

<span id="iii.i-p53"></span>**26.** Et postea egressus est frater ejus,
et manus ejus tenebat calcaneum Esau, et vocarunt nomen Iahacob. Ishac
autem erat sexagenarius, quando peperit eos.

<span id="iii.i-p54"></span>**27.** And the boys grew: and Esau was a
cunning hunter, a man of the field; and Jacob *was* a plain man,
dwelling in tents.

<span id="iii.i-p55"></span>**27.** Et creverunt pueri: et fuit Esau vir
peritus venationis, vir agricola: sed Iahacob erat vir integer, manens
in tabernaculis.

<span id="iii.i-p56"></span>**28.** And Isaac loved Esau, because he did
eat of *his* venison: but Rebekah loved Jacob.

<span id="iii.i-p57"></span>**28.** Et dilexit Ishac Esau, quia venatio
erat in ore ejus, et Ribca diligebat Iahacob.

<span id="iii.i-p58"></span>**29.** And Jacob sod pottage: and Esau came
from the field, and he *was* faint:

<span id="iii.i-p59"></span>**29.** Coxit autem Iahacob coctionem: et
venit Esau ex agro, et erat lassus.

<span id="iii.i-p60"></span>**30.** And Esau said to Jacob, Feed me, I
pray thee, with that same red *pottage*; for I *am* faint: therefore was
his name called Edom.

<span id="iii.i-p61"></span>**30.** Et dixit Esau ad Iahacob, Fac me
comedere nunc de rufo, rufo isto: quia lassus sum: idcirco vocarunt
nomen ejus Edom.

<span id="iii.i-p62"></span>**31.** And Jacob said, Sell me this day thy
birthright.

<span id="iii.i-p63"></span>**31.** Tunc dixit Iahacob, Vende hoc
tempore primogenituram tuam mihi.

<span id="iii.i-p64"></span>**32.** And Esau said, Behold, I *am* at the
point to die: and what profit shall this birthright do to me?

<span id="iii.i-p65"></span>**32.** Et dixit Esau, Ecce ego vado ut
moriar, et utquid mihi primogenitura?

<span id="iii.i-p66"></span>**33.** And Jacob said, Swear to me this
day; and he sware unto him: and he sold his birthright unto Jacob.

<span id="iii.i-p67"></span>**33.** Dixit itaque Iahacob, Iura mihi hoc
tempore. Et juravit ei: et vendidit primogenituram suam ipsi Iahacob.

<span id="iii.i-p68"></span>**34.** Then Jacob gave Esau bread and
pottage of lentiles; and he did eat and drink, and rose up, and went his
way: thus Esau despised *his* birthright.

<span id="iii.i-p69"></span>**34.** Et Iahacob dedit Esau panem et
coctionem lenticularum, et comedit, atque bibit: et surrexit, et abiit,
contempsitque Esau primogenituram.

<span id="iii.i-p70"></span> 

<span id="iii.i-p71"></span><span id="iii.i-p71.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p72"></span>**1.** *Then again Abraham took a wife*
 <span id="fr_14"></span>[15](#fn_14.md) It seems very absurd that Abraham,
who is said to have been dead in his own body thirty-eight years before
the decease of Sarah, should, after her death, marry another wife. such
an act was, certainly, unworthy of his gravity. Besides, when Paul
commends his faith, (<span id="iii.i-p73.2"></span>[Ro
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#019)<span id="iii.i-p73.2"></span>,.md)
he not only asserts that the womb of Sarah was dead, when Isaac was
about to be born, but also that the body of the father himself was dead.
Therefore Abraham acted most foolishly, if, after the loss of his wife,
he, in the decrepitude of old age, contracted another marriage. Further,
it is at variance with the language of Paul, that he, who in his
hundredth year was cold and impotent,  <span
id="fr_15"></span>[16](#fn_15.md) should, forty years afterwards, have many
sons. Many commentators, to avoid this absurdity, suppose Keturah to
have been the same person as Hagar. But their conjecture is immediately
refuted in the context; where Moses says, Abraham gave gifts to the sons
of his concubines. The same point is clearly established from <span
id="iii.i-p74.2"></span>[1Ch 1:32](../../../bib/kjv/ch1001.htm#032.md)<span
id="iii.i-p74.2"></span>. Others conjecture that, while Sarah was yet
living, he took another wife. This, although worthy of grave censure, is
however not altogether incredible. We know it to be not uncommon for men
to be rendered bold by excessive license. Thus Abraham having once
transgressed the law of marriage, perhaps, after the dispute respecting
Hagar, did not desist from the practice of polygamy. It is also probable
that his mind had been wounded, by the divorce which Sarah had compelled
him to make with Hagar. Such conduct indeed was disgraceful, or, at
least, unbecoming in the holy patriarch. Nevertheless no other, of all
the conjectures which have been made, seems to me more probable. If it
be admitted, the narrative belongs to another place; but Moses is
frequently accustomed to place those things which have precedence in
time, in a different order. And though this reason should not be deemed
conclusive, yet the fact itself shows an inverted order in the history.
 <span id="fr_16"></span>[17](#fn_16.md) Sarah had passed her ninetieth
year, when she brought forth her son Isaac; she died in the hundred and
twenty-seventh year of her age; and Isaac married when he was forty
years old. Therefore, nearly four years intervened between the death of
his mother and his nuptials. If Abraham took a wife after this, what was
he thinking of, seeing that he had been during so many years accustomed
to a single life? It is therefore lawful to conjecture that Moses, in
writing the life of Abraham, when he approached the closing scene,
inserted what he had before omitted. The difficulty, however, is not yet
solved. For whence proceeded Abraham’s renovated vigor,  <span
id="fr_17"></span>[18](#fn_17.md) since Paul testifies that his body had
long ago been withered by age? Augustine supposes not only that strength
was imparted to him for a short space of time, which might suffice for
Isaac’s birth; but that by a divine restoration, it flourished again
during the remaining term of his life. Which opinion, both because it
amplifies the glory of the miracle, and for other reasons, I willingly
embrace.  <span id="fr_18"></span>[19](#fn_18.md) And what I have before
said, namely, that Isaac was miraculously born, as being a spiritual
seed, is not opposed to this view; for it was especially on his account
that the failing body of Abraham was restored to vigor. That others were
afterwards born was, so to speak, adventitious. Thus the blessing of God
pronounced in the words, “Increase and multiply,” which was annexed
expressly to marriage, is also extended to unlawful connexions.
Certainly, if Abraham married a wife while Sarah was yet alive, (as I
think most probable,) his adulterous connection was unworthy of the
divine benediction. But although we know not why this addition was made
to the just measure of favor granted to Abraham, yet the wonderful
providence of God appears in this, that while many nations of
considerable importance descended from his other sons, the spiritual
covenant, of which the rest also bore the sign in their flesh, remained
in the exclusive possession of Isaac.

<span id="iii.i-p78"></span><span id="iii.i-p78.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p79"></span>**6.** *But unto the sons of the
concubines*. Moses relates, that when Abraham was about to die, he
formed the design of removing all cause of strife among his sons after
his death, by constituting Isaac his sole heir, and dismissing the rest
with suitable gifts. This dismissal was, indeed, apparently harsh and
cruel; but it was agreeable to the appointment and decree of God, in
order that the entire possession of the land might remain for the
posterity of Isaac. For it was not lawful for Abraham to divide, at his
own pleasure, that inheritance which had been granted entire to Isaac.
Wherefore, no course was left to him but to provide for the rest of his
sons in the manner here described. If any person should now select one
of his sons as his heir, to the exclusion of the others, he would do
them an injury; and, by applying the torch of injustice, in
disinheriting a part of his children, he would light up the flame of
pernicious strifes in his family. Wherefore, we must note the special
reason by which Abraham was not only induced, but compelled, to deprive
his sons of the inheritance, and to remove them to a distance; namely,
lest by their intervention, the grant which had been divinely made to
Isaac should, of necessity, be disturbed. We have elsewhere said that,
among the Hebrews, she who is a partaker of the bed, but not of all the
goods, is styled a concubine. The same distinction has been adopted into
the customs, and sanctioned by the laws of all nations. So, we shall
afterwards see, that Leah and Rachel were principal wives, but that
Bilhah and Zilpah were in the second rank; so that their condition
remained servile, although they were admitted to the conjugal bed. Since
Abraham had made Hagar and Keturah his wives on this condition, it seems
that he might lawfully bestow on their sons, only a small portion of his
goods; to have transferred, however, from his only heir to them, equal
portions of his property, would have been neither just nor right. It is
probable that no subsequent strife or contention took place respecting
the succession; but by sending the sons of the concubines far away, he
provides against the danger of which I have spoken, lest they should
occupy a part of the land which God had assigned to the posterity of
Isaac alone.

<span id="iii.i-p80"></span><span id="iii.i-p80.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p81"></span>**7.** *And these are the days*. Moses now
brings us down to the death of Abraham; and the first thing to be
noticed concerning his age is the number of years during which he lived
as a pilgrim; for he deserves the praise of wonderful and incomparable
patience, for having wandered through the space of a hundred years,
while God led him about in various directions, contented, both in life
and death, with the bare promise of God. Let those be ashamed who find
it difficult to bear the disquietude of one, or of a few years, since
Abraham, the father of the faithful, was not merely a stranger during a
hundred years, but was also often cast forth into exile. Meanwhile,
however, Moses expressly shows that the Lord had fulfilled his promise,
Thou shalt die in a good old age: for although he fought a hard and
severe battle, yet his consolation was neither light nor small; because
he knew that, amidst so many sufferings, his life was the object of
Divine care. But if this sole looking unto God sustained him through his
whole life, amidst the most boisterous waves, amidst many bitter griefs,
amidst tormenting cares, and in short an accumulated mass of evils; let
us also learn — that we may not become weary in our course — to rely on
this support, that the Lord has promised us a happy issue of life, and
one truly far more glorious than that of our father Abraham.

<span id="iii.i-p82"></span><span id="iii.i-p82.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p83"></span>**8.** *Then Abraham gave up the ghost*
 <span id="fr_19"></span>[20](#fn_19.md) They are mistaken who suppose that
this expression denotes sudden death, as intimating that he had not been
worn out by long disease, but expired without pain. Moses rather means
to say that the father of the faithful was not exempt from the common
lot of men, in order that our minds may not languish when the outward
man is perishing; but that, by meditating on that renovation which is
laid up as the object of our hope, we may, with tranquil minds, suffer
this frail tabernacle to be dissolved. There is therefore no reason why
a feeble, emaciated body, failing eyes, tremulous hands, and the lost
use of all our members, should so dishearten us, that we should not
hasten, after the example of our father, with joy and alacrity to our
death. But although Abraham had this in common with the human race, that
he grew old and died; yet Moses, shortly afterwards, puts a difference
between him and the promiscuous multitude of men as to manner of dying;
namely, that he should die in a good old age, and satisfied with life.
Unbelievers, indeed, often seem to participate in the same blessing;
yea, David complains that they excelled in this kind of privilege; and a
similar complaint occurs in the book of Job, namely, that they fill up
their time happily, till in a moment they descend into the grave.  <span
id="fr_20"></span>[21](#fn_20.md) But what I said before must be
remembered, that the chief part of a good old age consists in a good
conscience and in a serene and tranquil mind. Whence it follows, that
what God promises to Abraham, can only apply to those who truly
cultivate righteousness: for Plato says, with equal truth and wisdom,
that a good hope is the nutriment of old age; and therefore old men who
have a guilty conscience are miserably tormented, and are inwardly
racked as by a perpetual torture. But to this we must add, what Plato
knew not, that it is godliness which causes a good old age to attend us
even to the grave, because faith is the preserver of a tranquil mind. To
the same point belongs what is immediately added, he was full of days,
so that he did not desire a prolongation of life. We see how many are in
bondage to the desire of life; yea, nearly the whole world languishes
between a weariness of the present life and an inexplicable desire for
its continuance. That satiety of life, therefore, which shall cause us
to be ready to leave it, is a singular favor from God.

<span id="iii.i-p86"></span>*And was gathered to his people*. I gladly
embrace the opinion of those who believe the state of our future life to
be pointed out in this form of expression; provided we do not restrict
it, as these expositors do, to the faithful only; but understand by it
that mankind are associated together in *death* as well as in life.
 <span id="fr_21"></span>[22](#fn_21.md) It may seem absurd to profane men,
for David to say, that the reprobate are gathered together like sheep
into the grave; but if we examine the expression more closely, this
gathering together will have no existence if their souls are
annihilated.  <span id="fr_22"></span>[23](#fn_22.md) The mention of
Abraham’s burial will presently follow. Now he is said to be gathered to
his fathers, which would be inconsistent with fact if human life
vanished, and men were reduced to annihilation: wherefore the Scripture,
in speaking thus, shows that another state of life remains after death,
so that a departure out of the world is not the destruction of the whole
man.

<span id="iii.i-p89"></span><span id="iii.i-p89.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p90"></span>**9.** *And his sons Isaac and Ishmael
buried him*. Hence it appears, that although Ishmael had long ago been
dismissed, he was not utterly alienated from his father, because he
performed the office of a son in celebrating the obsequies of his
deceased parent. Ishmael, rather than the other sons did this, as being
nearer.

<span id="iii.i-p91"></span><span id="iii.i-p91.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p92"></span>**12.** *Now these are the generations of
Ishmael*. This narration is not superfluous. In the commencement of the
chapter, Moses alludes to what was done for the sons of Keturah. Here he
speaks designedly more at large, for the purpose of showing that the
promise of God, given in the seventeenth chapter (<span
id="iii.i-p92.1"></span>[Ge
17:1-22](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#001.md)<span
id="iii.i-p92.1"></span>,) was confirmed by its manifest accomplishment.
In the first place, it was no common gift of God that Ishmael should
have twelve sons who should possess rank and authority over as many
tribes; but inasmuch as the event corresponded with the promise, we must
chiefly consider the veracity of God, as well as the singular
benevolence and honor which he manifested towards his servant Abraham,
when, even in those benefits which were merely adventitious, he dealt so
kindly and liberally with him; for that may rightly be regarded as
adventitious which was superadded to the spiritual covenant: therefore
Moses, after he has enumerated the towns in which the posterity of
Ishmael was distributed, buries that whole race in oblivion, that
substantial perpetuity may remain only in the Church, according to the
declaration in <span id="iii.i-p92.2"></span>[Ps
102:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#028.md)<span id="iii.i-p92.2"></span>,
“the sons of sons shall inhabit.”  <span id="fr_23"></span>[24](#fn_23.md)
Further, Moses, as with his finger, shows the wonderful counsel of God,
because, in assigning a region distinct from the land of Canaan to the
sons of Ishmael, he has both provided for them in future, and kept the
inheritance vacant for the sons of Isaac.

<span id="iii.i-p94"></span><span id="iii.i-p94.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p95"></span>**18.** *He died in the presence of all his
brethren*  <span id="fr_24"></span>[25](#fn_24.md) The major part of
commentators understand this of his *death*; as if Moses had said that
the life of Ishmael was shorter than that of his brethren, who long
survived him: but because the word <span id="iii.i-p96.2"></span>לפנ
(*naphal*) is applied to a violent death, and Moses testifies that
Ishmael died a natural death, this exposition cannot be approved. The
Chaldean Paraphrast supposes the word “*lot*” to be understood, and
elicits this sense, that the *lot fell* to him, so as to assign him a
habitation not far from his brethren. Although I do not greatly differ
in this matter, I yet think that the words are not to be thus distorted.
 <span id="fr_25"></span>[26](#fn_25.md) The word <span
id="iii.i-p97.1"></span>לפנ (*naphal*) sometimes signifies to lie down,
or to rest, and also to dwell. The simple assertion therefore of Moses
is, that a habitation was given to Ishmael opposite his brethren, so
that he should indeed be a neighbor to them, and yet should have his
distinct boundaries:  <span id="fr_26"></span>[27](#fn_26.md) for I do not
doubt that he referred to the oracle contained in the sixteenth chapter
(<span id="iii.i-p98.1"></span>[Ge
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#001)<span id="iii.i-p98.1"></span>.md)
where, among other things, the angel said to his mother Hagar, He shall
remain, or pitch his tents in the *presence of his brethren*. Why does
he rather speak thus of Ishmael than of the others, except for this
reason, that whereas they migrated towards the eastern region, Ishmael,
although the head of a nation, separated from the sons of Abraham, yet
retained his dwelling in their neighborhood? Meanwhile the intention of
God is also to be observed, namely, that Ishmael, though living near his
brethren, was yet placed apart in an abode of his own, that he might not
become mingled with them, but might dwell in their presence, or opposite
to them. Moreover, it is sufficiently obvious that the prediction is not
to be restricted *personally* to Ishmael.

<span id="iii.i-p99"></span><span id="iii.i-p99.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p100"></span>**19.** *These are the generations of
Isaac*. Because what Moses has said concerning the Ishmaelites was
incidental, he now returns to the principal subject of the history, for
the purpose of describing the progress of the Church. And in the first
place, he repeats that Isaac’s wife was taken from Mesopotamia. He
expressly calls her the sister of Laban the Syrian, who was hereafter to
become the father-in-law of Jacob, and concerning whom he had many
things to relate. But it is chiefly worthy of observation that he
declares Rebekah to have been barren during the early years of her
marriage. And we shall afterwards see that her barrenness continued, not
for three or four, but for twenty years, in order that her very despair
of offspring might give greater lustre to the sudden granting of the
blessing. But nothing seems less accordant with reason, than that the
propagation of the Church should be thus small and slow. Abraham, in his
extreme old age, received (as it seems) a slender solace for his long
privation of offspring, in having all his hope centred in one
individual. Isaac also, already advanced in years, and bordering on old
age, was not yet a father. Where, then, was the seed which should equal
the stars of heaven in number? Who would not suppose that God was
dealing deceitfully in leaving those houses empty and solitary, which,
according to his own word, ought to be replenished with teeming
population? But that which is recorded in the psalm must be accomplished
in reference to the Church, that

<span id="iii.i-p101"></span>“he maketh her who had been barren to keep
house, and to be a joyful mother of many children.” (<span
id="iii.i-p101.1"></span>[Ps
113:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa113.htm#009)<span id="iii.i-p101.1"></span>..md)

<span id="iii.i-p102"></span>For this small and contemptible origin,
these slow and feeble advances, render more illustrious that increase,
which afterwards follows, beyond all hope and expectation, to teach us
that the Church was produced and increased by divine power and grace,
and not by merely natural means. It is indeed possible, that God
designed to correct or moderate any excess of attachment in Isaac. But
this is to be observed as the chief reason for God’s conduct, that as
the holy seed was given from heaven, it must not be produced according
to the common order of nature, to the end, that we learn that the Church
did not originate in the industry of man, but flowed from the grace of
God alone.

<span id="iii.i-p103"></span><span id="iii.i-p103.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p104"></span>**21.** *And Isaac entreated the Lord for
his wife*. Some translate the passage, Isaac entreated the *Lord in the
presence of his wife*; and understand this to have been done, that she
also might add her prayers, and they might jointly supplicate God. But
the version here given is more simple. Moreover, this resort to prayer
testifies that Isaac knew that he was deprived of children, because God
had not blessed him. He also knew that fruitfulness was a special gift
of God. For although the favor of obtaining offspring was widely
diffused over the whole human race, when God uttered the words “increase
and multiply;” yet to show that men are not born fortuitously, he
distributes this power of production in various degrees. Isaac,
therefore, acknowledges, that the blessing, which was not at man’s
disposal, must be sought for by prayer from God. It now truly appears,
that he was endued with no ordinary constancy of faith. Forasmuch as the
covenant of God was known to him, he earnestly (if ever any did) desired
seed. It, therefore, had not now, for the first time, entered into his
mind to pray, seeing that for more than twenty years he had been
disappointed of his hope. Hence, although Moses, only in a single word,
says that he had obtained offspring by his prayers to God; yet reason
dictates that these prayers had continued through many years. The
patience of the holy man is herein conspicuous, that while he seems in
vain to pour forth his wishes into the air, he still does not remit the
ardor of his devotion. And as Isaac teaches us, by his example, to
persevere in prayer; so God also shows that he never turns a deaf ear to
the wishes of his faithful people, although he may long defer the
answer.

<span id="iii.i-p105"></span><span id="iii.i-p105.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p106"></span>**22.** *And the children struggled
together*. Here a new temptation suddenly arises, namely, that the
infants struggle together in their mother’s womb. This conflict
occasions the mother such grief that she wishes for death. And no
wonder; for she thinks that it would be a hundred times better for her
to die, than that she have within her the horrible prodigy of twin —
brothers, shut up in her womb, carrying on intestine war. They,
therefore, are mistaken, who attribute this complaint to female
impatience, since it was not so much extorted by pain or torture, as by
abhorrence of the prodigy. For she doubtless perceived that this
conflict did not arise from natural causes, but was a prodigy portending
some dreadful and tragic end. She also necessarily felt some fear of the
divine anger stealing over her: as it is usual with the faithful not to
confine their thoughts to the evil immediately present with them, but to
trace it to its cause; and hence they tremble through the apprehension
of divine judgment. But though in the beginning she was more grievously
disturbed than she ought to have been, and, breaking out into
murmurings, preserved neither moderation nor temper; yet she soon
afterwards receives a remedy and solace to her grief. We are thus taught
by her example to take care that we do not give excessive indulgence to
sorrow in affairs of perplexity, nor inflame our minds by inwardly
cherishing secret causes of distress. It is, indeed, difficult to
restrain the first emotions of our minds; but before they become
ungovernable, we must bridle them, and bring them into subjection. And
chiefly we must pray to the Lord for moderation; as Moses here relates
that Rebekah went to ask counsel from the Lord; because, indeed, she
perceived that nothing would be more effectual in tranquilizing her
mind, than to aim at obedience to the will of God, under the conviction
that she was directed by him. For although the response given might be
adverse, or, at least, not such as she would desire, she yet hoped for
some alleviation from a gracious God, with which she might be satisfied.
A question here arises respecting the way in which Rebekah asked counsel
of God. It is the commonly received opinion that she inquired of some
prophet what was the nature of this prodigy: and Moses seems to intimate
that she had gone to some place to hear the oracle. But since that
conjecture has no probability, I rather incline to a different
interpretation; namely, that she, having sought retirement, prayed more
earnestly that she might receive a revelation from heaven. For, at that
time, what prophets, except her husband and her father-in-law, would she
have found in the world, still less in that neighborhood? Moreover, I
perceive that God then commonly made known his will by oracles. Once
more, if we consider the magnitude of the affair, it was more fitting
that the secret should be revealed by the mouth of God, than manifested
by the testimony of man. In our times a different method prevails. For
God does not, at this day, reveal things future by such miracles; and
the teaching of the Law, the Prophets, and the Gospel, which comprises
the perfection of wisdom, is abundantly sufficient for the regulation of
our course of life.

<span id="iii.i-p107"></span><span id="iii.i-p107.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p108"></span>**23.** *Two nations*. In the first place,
God answers that the contention between the twin-brothers had reference
to something far beyond their own persons; for in this way he shows that
there would be discord between their posterities. When he says, there
are two nations, the expression is emphatical; for since they were
brothers and twins, and therefore of one blood, the mother did not
suppose that they would be so far disjoined as to become the heads of
distinct nations; yet God declares that dissension should take place
between those who were by nature joined together. Secondly, he describes
their different conditions, namely, that victory would belong to one of
these nations, forasmuch as this was the cause of the contest, that they
could not be equal, but one was chosen and the other rejected. For since
the reprobate give way reluctantly, it follows of necessity that the
children of God have to undergo many troubles and contests on account of
their adoption. Thirdly, the Lord affirms that the order of nature being
inverted, the younger, who was inferior, should be the victor.

<span id="iii.i-p109"></span>We must now see what this victory implies.
They who restrict it to earthly riches and wealth coldly trifle.
Undoubtedly by this oracle Isaac and Rebekah were taught that the
covenant of salvation would not be common to the two people, but would
be reserved only for the posterity of Jacob. In the beginning, the
promise was apparently general, as comprehending the whole seed: now, it
is restricted to one part of the seed. This is the reason of the
conflict, that God divides the seed of Jacob (of which the condition
appeared to be one and the same) in such a manner that he adopts one
part and rejects the other: that one part obtains the name and privilege
of the Church, the rest are reckoned strangers; with one part resides
the blessing of which the other is deprived; as it afterwards actually
occurred: for we know that the Idumaeans were cut off from the body of
the Church; but the covenant of grace was deposited in the family of
Jacob. If we seek the cause of this distinction, it will not be found in
nature; for the origin of both nations was the same. It will not be
found in merit; because the heads of both nations were yet enclosed in
their mother’s womb when the contention began. Moreover God, in order to
humble the pride of the flesh, determined to take away from men all
occasion of confidence and of boasting. He might have brought forth
Jacob first from the womb; but he made the other the firstborn, who, at
length, was to become the inferior. Why does he thus, designedly, invert
the order appointed by himself, except to teach us that, without regard
to dignity, Jacob, who was to be the heir of the promised benediction,
was gratuitously elected? The sum of the whole, then, is, that the
preference which God gave to Jacob over his brother Esau, by making him
the father of the Church, was not granted as a reward for his merits,
neither was obtained by his own industry, but proceeded from the mere
grace of God himself. But when an entire people is the subject of
discourse, reference is made not to the secret election, which is
confirmed to few, but the common adoption, which spreads as widely as
the external preaching of the word. Since this subject, thus briefly
stated, may be somewhat obscure, the readers may recall to memory what I
have said above in expounding the seventeenth chapter (<span
id="iii.i-p109.2"></span>[Genesis
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#001)<span id="iii.i-p109.2"></span>.md)
namely, that God embraced, by the grace of his adoption, all the sons of
Abraham, because he made a covenant with all; and that it was not in
vain that he appointed the promise of salvation to be offered
promiscuously to all, and to be attested by the sign of circumcision in
their flesh; but that there was a special chosen seed from the whole
people, and these should at length be accounted the legitimate sons of
Abraham, who by the secret counsel of God are ordained unto salvation.
Faith, indeed, is that which distinguishes the spiritual from the carnal
seed; but the question now under consideration is the *principle* on
which the distinction is made, not the symbol or mark by which it is
attested. God, therefore, chose the whole seed of Jacob without
exception, as the Scripture in many places testifies; because he has
conferred on all alike the same testimonies of his grace, namely, in the
word and sacraments. But another and peculiar election has always
flourished, which comprehended a certain definite number of men, in
order that, in the common destruction, God might save those whom he
would.

<span id="iii.i-p110"></span>A question is here suggested for our
consideration. Whereas Moses here treats of the former kind of election,
 <span id="fr_27"></span>[28](#fn_27.md) Paul turns his words to the
latter.  <span id="fr_28"></span>[29](#fn_28.md) For while he attempts to
prove, that not all who are Jews by natural descent are heirs of life;
and not all who are descended from Jacob according to the flesh are to
be accounted true Israelites; but that God chooses whom he will,
according to his own good pleasure, he adduces this testimony, the elder
shall serve the younger. (<span id="iii.i-p112.1"></span>[Rom.
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#007.md),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#008.md),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#012)<span id="iii.i-p112.1"></span>..md)
They who endeavor to extinguish the doctrine of gratuitous election,
desire to persuade their readers that the words of Paul also are to be
understood only of external vocation; but his whole discourse is
manifestly repugnant to their interpretation; and they prove themselves
to be not only infatuated, but impudent in their attempt to bring
darkness or smoke over this light which shines so clearly. They allege
that the dignity of Esau is transferred to his younger brother, lest he
should glory in the flesh; inasmuch as a new promise is here given to
the latter. I confess there is some force in what they say; but I
contend that they omit the principal point in the case, by explaining
the difference here stated, of the external vocation. But unless they
intend to make the covenant of God of none effect, they must concede
that Esau and Jacob were alike partakers of the external calling; whence
it appears, that they to whom a common vocation had been granted, were
separated by the secret counsel of God. The nature and object of Paul’s
argument is well known. For when the Jews, inflated with the title of
the Church, rejected the Gospel, the faith of the simple was shaken, by
the consideration that it was improbable that Christ, and the salvation
promised through him, could possibly be rejected by an elect people, a
holy nation, and the genuine sons of God. Here, therefore, Paul contends
that not all who descend from Jacob, according to the flesh, are true
Israelites, because God, of his own good pleasure, may choose whom he
will, as heirs of eternal salvation. Who does not see that Paul descends
from a general to a particular adoption, in order to teach us, that not
all who occupy a place in the Church are to be accounted as true members
of the Church? It is certain that he openly excludes from the rank of
children those to whom (he elsewhere says) pertaineth the adoption;
whence it is assuredly gathered, that in proof of this position, he
adduces the testimony of Moses, who declares that God chose certain from
among the sons of Abraham to himself, in whom he might render the grace
of adoption firm and efficacious. How, therefore, shall we reconcile
Paul with Moses? I answer, although the Lord separates the whole seed of
Jacob from the race of Esau, it was done with a view to the Church,
which was included in the posterity of Jacob. And, doubtless, the
general election of the people had reference to this end, that God might
have a Church separated from the rest of the world. What absurdity,
then, is there in supposing that Paul applies to special election the
words of Moses, by which it is predicted that the Church shall spring
from the seed of Jacob? And an instance in point was exhibited in the
condition of the heads themselves of these two nations. For Jacob was
not only called by the external voice of the Lord, but, while his
brother was passed by, he was chosen an heir of life. That good pleasure
of God, which Moses commends in the person of Jacob alone, Paul properly
extends further: and lest any one should suppose, that after the two
nations had been rendered distinct by this oracle, the election should
pertain indiscriminately to all the sons of Jacob, Paul brings, on the
opposite side, another oracle, I will have mercy on whom I will have
mercy; where we see a certain number severed from the promiscuous race
of Jacob’s sons, in the salvation of whom the special election of God
might triumph. Whence it appears that Paul wisely considered the counsel
of God, which was, in truth, that he had transferred the honor of
primogeniture from the elder to the younger, in order that he might
choose to himself a Church, according to his own will, out of the seed
of Jacob; not on account of the merits of men, but as a matter of meres
grace. And although God designed that the means by which the Church was
to be collected should be common to the whole people, yet the end which
Paul had in view is chiefly to be regarded; namely, that there might
always be a body of men in the world which should call upon God with a
pure faith, and should be kept even to the end. Let it therefore remain
as a settled point of doctrine, that among men some perish, some obtain
salvation; but the cause of this depends on the secret will of God. For
whence does it arise that they who are born of Abraham are not all
possessed of the same privilege? The disparity of condition certainly
cannot be ascribed either to the virtue of the one, or to the vice of
the other, seeing they were not yet born. Since the common feeling of
mankind rejects this doctrine, there have been found, in all ages, acute
men, who have fiercely disputed against the election of God. It is not
my present purpose to refute or to weaken their calumnies: let it
suffice us to hold fast what we gather from Paul’s interpretation; that
whereas the whole human race deserves the same destruction, and is bound
under the same sentence of condemnation, some are delivered by
gratuitous mercy, others are justly left in their own destruction: and
that those whom God has chosen are not preferred to others, because God
foresaw they *would* be holy, but in order that they *might* be holy.
But if the first origin of holiness is the election of God, we seek in
vain for that difference in men, which rests solely in the will of God.
If any one desires a mystical interpretation of the subject,  <span
id="fr_29"></span>[30](#fn_29.md) we may give the following:  <span
id="fr_30"></span>[31](#fn_30.md) whereas many hypocrites, who are for a
time enclosed in the womb of the Church, pride themselves upon an empty
title, and, with insolent boastings, exult over the true sons of God;
internal conflicts will hence arise, which will grievously torment the
mother herself.

<span id="iii.i-p115"></span><span id="iii.i-p115.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p116"></span>**24.** *And when her days to be delivered
were fulfilled*. Moses shows that the intestine strife in her womb
continued to the time of bringing forth; for it was not by mere accident
that Jacob seized his brother by the heel and attempted to get out
before him. The Lord testified by this sign that the effect of his
election does not immediately appear; but rather that the intervening
path was strewed with troubles and conflicts. Therefore Esau’s name was
allotted to him on account of his asperity; which even from earliest
infancy assumed a manly form; but the name Jacob signifies that this
giant, vainly striving in his boasted strength, had still been
vanquished.  <span id="fr_31"></span>[32](#fn_31.md)

<span id="iii.i-p118"></span><span id="iii.i-p118.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p119"></span>**27.** *And the boys grew*. Moses now
briefly describes the manners of them both. He does not, indeed, commend
Jacob on account of those rare and excellent qualities, which are
especially worthy of praise and of remembrance, but only says that he
was *simple*. The word <span id="iii.i-p119.1"></span>םת (*tam*,)
although generally taken for *upright* and *sincere*, is here put
antithetically. After the sacred writer has stated that Esau was robust,
and addicted to hunting, he places on the opposite side the mild
disposition of Jacob, who loved the quiet of home so much, that he might
seem to be indolent; just as the Greeks call those persons <span
id="iii.i-p119.2"></span>οἰκόσιτους *oikositous*, who, dwelling at home,
give no evidence of their industry. In short, the comparison implies
that Moses praises Esau on account of his vigor, but speaks of Jacob as
being addicted to domestic leisure; and that he describes the
disposition of the former as giving promise that he would be a
courageous man, while the disposition of the latter had nothing worthy
of commendation. Seeing that, by a decree of heaven, the honor of
primogeniture would be transferred to Jacob, why did God suffer him to
lie down in his tent, and to slumber among ashes; unless it be, that he
sometimes intends his election to be concealed for a time, lest men
should attribute something to their own preparatory acts?

<span id="iii.i-p120"></span><span id="iii.i-p120.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p121"></span>**28.** *And Isaac loved Esau*. That God
might more clearly show his own election to be sufficiently firm, to
need no assistance elsewhere, and even powerful enough to overcome any
obstacle whatever, he permitted Esau to be so preferred to his brother,
in the affection and good opinion of his father, that Jacob appeared in
the light of a rejected person. Since, therefore, Moses clearly
demonstrates, by so many circumstances, that the adoption of Jacob was
founded on the sole good pleasure of God, it is an intolerable
presumption to suppose it to depend upon the will of man; or to ascribe
it, in part, to means, (as they are called,) and to human preparations.
 <span id="fr_32"></span>[33](#fn_32.md) But how was it possible for the
father, who was not ignorant of the oracle, to be thus predisposed in
favor of the firstborn, whom he knew to be divinely rejected?. It would
rather have been the part of piety and of modesty to subdue his own
private affection, that he might yield obedience to God. The firstborn
prefers a natural claim to the chief place in the parent’s affection;
but the father was not at liberty to exalt *him* above his brother, who
had been placed in subjection by the oracle of God. That also is still
more shameful and more unworthy of the holy patriarch, which Moses adds;
namely, that he had been induced to give this preference to Esau, by the
taste of his venison. Was he so enslaved to the indulgence of the
palate, that, forgetting the oracle, he despised the grace of God in
Jacob, while he preposterously set his affection on him whom God had
rejected? Let the Jews now go and glory in the flesh; since Isaac,
preferring food to the inheritance destined for his son, would pervert
(as far as he had the power) the gratuitous covenant of God! For there
is no room here for excuse; since with a blind, or, at least, a most
inconsiderate love to his firstborn, he undervalued the younger. It is
uncertain whether the mother was chargeable with a fault of the opposite
kind. For we commonly find the affections of parents so divided, that if
the wife sees any one of the sons preferred by her husband, she
inclines, by a contrary spirit of emulation, more towards another.
Rebekah loved her son Jacob more than Esau. If, in so doing, she was
obeying the oracle, she acted rightly; but it is possible that her love
was ill regulated. And on this point the corruption of nature too much
betrays itself. There is no bond of mutual concord more sacred than that
of marriage: children form still further links of connection; and yet
they often prove the occasion of dissension. But since we soon after see
Rebekah chiefly in earnest respecting the blessing of God, the
conjecture is probable, that she had been induced, by divine authority,
to prefer the younger to the firstborn. Meanwhile, the foolish affection
of the father only the more fully illustrates the grace of the divine
adoption.

<span id="iii.i-p123"></span><span id="iii.i-p123.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p124"></span>**29.** *And Jacob sod pottage*. This
narration differs little from the sport of children. Jacob is cooking
pottage; his brother returns from hunting weary and famishing, and
barters his birthright for food. What kind of bargain, I pray, was this?
Jacob ought of his own accord to have satisfied the hunger of his
brother. When being asked, he refuses to do so: who would not condemn
him for his inhumanity? In compelling Esau to surrender his right of
primogeniture, he seems to make an illicit and frivolous compact. God,
however, put the disposition of Esau to the proof in a matter of small
moment; and still farther, designed to present an instance of Jacob’s
piety, or, (to speak more properly,) he brought to light what lay hid in
both. Many indeed are mistaken in suspending the cause of Jacob’s
election on the fact, that God foresaw some worthiness in him; and in
thinking that Esau was reprobated, because his future impiety had
rendered him unworthy of the divine adoption before he was born. Paul,
however, having declared election to be gratuitous, denies that the
distinction is to be looked for in the persons of men; and, indeed,
first assumes it as an axiom, that since mankind is ruined from its
origin, and devoted to destruction, whosoever are saved are in no other
way freed from destruction than by the mere grace of God. And,
therefore, that some are preferred to others, is not on account of their
own merits; but seeing that all are alike unworthy of grace, they are
saved whom God, of his own good pleasure, has chosen. He then ascends
still higher, and reasons thus: Since God is the Creator of the world,
he is, by his own right, in such a sense, the arbiter of life and death,
that he cannot be called to account; but his own will is (so to speak)
the *cause of causes*. And yet Paul does not, by thus reasoning, impute
tyranny to God, as the sophists triflingly allege in speaking of his
absolute power. But whereas He dwells in inaccessible light, and his
judgments are deeper than the lowest abyss, Paul prudently enjoins
acquiescence in God’s sole purpose; lest, if men seek to be too
inquisitive, this immense chaos should absorb all their senses. It is
therefore foolishly inferred by some, from this place, that whereas God
chose one of the two brothers, and passed by the other, the merits of
both had been foreseen. For it was necessary that God should have
decreed that Jacob should differ from Esau, otherwise he would not have
been unlike his brother. And we must always remember the doctrine of
Paul, that no one excels another by means of his own industry or virtue,
but by the grace of God alone. Although, however, both the brothers were
by nature equal, yet Moses represents to us, in the person of Esau, as
in a mirror, what kind of men all the reprobate are, who, being left to
their own disposition, are not governed by the spirit of God. While, in
the person of Jacob, he shows that the grace of adoption is not idle in
the elect, because the Lord effectually attests it by his vocation.
Whence then does it arise that Esau sets his birthright to sale, but
from this cause, that he, being deprived of the Spirit of God, relishes
only the things of the earth? And whence does it happen that his brother
Jacob, denying himself his own food, patiently endures hunger, except
that under the guidance of the Holy Spirit, he raises himself above the
world and aspires to a heavenly life? Hence, let us learn, that they to
whom God does not vouchsafe the grace of his Spirit, are carnal and
brutal; and are so addicted to this fading life, that they think not of
the spiritual kingdom of God; but them whom God has undertaken to
govern, are not so far entangled in the snares of the flesh as to
prevent them from being intent upon their high vocation. Whence it
follows, that all the reprobate remain immersed in the corruptions of
the flesh; but that the elect are renewed by the Holy Spirit, that they
may be the workmanship of God, created unto good works. If any one
should raise the objection, that part of the blame may be ascribed to
God, because he does not correct the stupor and the depraved desires
inherent in the reprobate, the solution is ready, that God is exonerated
by the testimony of their own conscience, which compels them to condemn
themselves. Wherefore, nothing remains but that all flesh should keep
silence before God, and that the whole world, confessing itself to be
obnoxious to his judgment, should rather be humbled than proudly
contend.

<span id="iii.i-p125"></span><span id="iii.i-p125.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p126"></span>**30.** *Feed me, I pray thee, with that
same red pottage*  <span id="fr_33"></span>[34](#fn_33.md) Although Esau
declares in these words that he by no means desires delicacies, but is
content with food of any kind, (seeing that he contemptuously designates
the pottage from its color only, without regard to its taste,) we may
yet lawfully conjecture that the affair was viewed in a serious light by
his parents; for his own name had not been given him on account of any
ludicrous matter. In desiring and asking food he commits nothing worthy
of reprehension; but when he says, Behold I am at the point to die, and
what profit shall this birthright do to me? he betrays a profane desire
entirely addicted to the earth and to the flesh. It is not, indeed, to
be doubted that he spake sincerely, when he declared that he was
impelled by a sense of the approach of death. For they are under a
misapprehension who understand him to use the words, “Behold I die,” as
if he meant merely to say, that his life would not be long, because, by
hunting daily among wild beasts, his life was in constant danger.
Therefore, in order to escape immediate death, he exchanges his
birthright for food; notwithstanding, he grievously sins in so doing,
because he regards his birthright as of no value, unless it may be made
profitable in the present life. For, hence it happens, that he barters a
spiritual for an earthly and fading good. On this account the Apostle
calls him a “profane person,” (<span id="iii.i-p127.1"></span>[Heb
12:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#016)<span id="iii.i-p127.1"></span>,.md)
as one who settles in the present life, and will not aspire higher. But
it would have been his true wisdom rather to undergo a thousand deaths
than to renounce his birthright; which, so far from being confined
within the narrow limits of one age alone, was capable of transmitting
the perpetuity of a heavenly life to his posterity also.  <span
id="fr_34"></span>[35](#fn_34.md) Now, let each of us look well to himself;
for since the disposition of us all is earthly, if we follow nature as
our leader, we shall easily renounce the celestial inheritance.
Therefore, we should frequently recall to mind the Apostle’s
exhortation, “Let us not be profane persons as Esau was.”

<span id="iii.i-p129"></span><span id="iii.i-p129.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p130"></span>**33.** *And Jacob said, Swear to me*.
Jacob did not act cruelly towards his brother, for he took nothing from
him, but only desired a confirmation of that right which had been
divinely granted to him; and he does this with a pious intention, that
he may hereby the more fully establish the certainty of his own
election. Meanwhile the infatuation of Esau is to be observed, who, in
the name and presence of God, does not hesitate to set his birthright to
sale. Although he had before rushed inconsiderately upon the food under
the maddening impulse of hunger; now, at least, when an oath is exacted
from him, some sense of religion should have stolen over him to correct
his brutal cupidity. But he is so addicted to gluttony that he makes God
himself a witness of his ingratitude.

<span id="iii.i-p131"></span><span id="iii.i-p131.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p132"></span>**34.** *Then Jacob gave*. Although, at
first sight, this statement seems to be cold and superfluous, it is
nevertheless of great weight. For, in the first place, Moses commends
the piety of holy Jacob, who in aspiring to a heavenly life, was able to
bridle the appetite for food. Certainly he was not a log of wood; in
preparing the food for the satisfying of his hunger, he would the more
sharpen his appetite. Wherefore he must of necessity do violence to
himself in order to bear his hunger. But he would never have been able
in this manner to subdue his flesh, unless a spiritual desire of a
better life had flourished within him. On the other side, the remarkable
indifference of his brother Esau is emphatically described in few words,
he did eat and drink, and rose up and went his way. For what reason are
these four things stated? Truly, that we may know what is declared
immediately after, that he accounted the incomparable benefit of which
he was deprived as nothing. The complaint of the Lacedemonian captive is
celebrated by the historians. The army, which had long sustained a
siege, surrendered to the enemy for want of water. After they had drunk
out of the river, O comrades, (he exclaimed,) for what a little pleasure
have we lost an incomparable good! He, miserable man, having quenched
his thirst, returned to his senses, and mourned over his lost liberty.
But Esau having satisfied his appetite, did not consider that he had
sacrificed a blessing far more valuable than a hundred lives, to
purchase a repast which would be ended in half an hour. Thus are all
profane persons accustomed to act: alienated from the celestial life,
they do not perceive that they have lost anything, till God thunders
upon them out of heaven. As long as they enjoy their carnal wishes, they
cast the anger of God behind them; and hence it happens that they go
stupidly forward to their own destruction. Wherefore let us learn, if,
at any time, we, being deceived by the allurements of the world, swerve
from the right way, quickly to rouse ourselves from our slumber.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_14"></span>[15](cc02002.htm#fr_14.md) <span
id="iii.i-p72.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p73"></span> “<span id="iii.i-p73.1"></span>Et addidit
Abraham et accepit uxorem.” The Geneva version of our own Bible has it:
“Nov Abraham had taken him another wife called Keturah;” and adds in the
margin, “while Sarah was yet alive,” which agrees, as will appear in
what follows, with the opinion of Calvin, expressed in this Commentary.
— *Ed*.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[16](cc02002.htm#fr_15.md) <span
id="iii.i-p73.3"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p74"></span> “<span id="iii.i-p74.1"></span>Frigidus, et
ad generandum impotens.”

<span id="fn_16"></span>[17](cc02002.htm#fr_16.md) <span
id="iii.i-p74.3"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p75"></span> “<span id="iii.i-p75.1"></span>Atque ut
haec ratio non urgeat, res tamen ipsa ostendit esse in hac historia,
“<span id="iii.i-p75.2"></span>ὕστερον προτερον.” “<span
id="iii.i-p75.3"></span>Et encore que ceste raison ne presse point,
toutefois le faict monstre, qu’en ceste histoire il y a des choses mises
devant derriere.” — *French Tr* The old English translator has it: “And
though this reason serve not; yet nevertheless the matter itself
declareth, that there is in this history a <span
id="iii.i-p75.4"></span>Hysteron proteron, that is, a setting of the
cart before the horse.” — *Ed*

<span id="fn_17"></span>[18](cc02002.htm#fr_17.md) <span
id="iii.i-p75.5"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p76"></span> “<span id="iii.i-p76.1"></span>Unde enim
novus illi ad muliebrem concubitum vigor.”

<span id="fn_18"></span>[19](cc02002.htm#fr_18.md) <span
id="iii.i-p76.2"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p77"></span> On the question, whether Abraham married
Keturah during Sarah’s life, or not till after her death, authorities
are much divided. Whichever side is taken the difficulties are great,
yet perhaps on neither side insuperable. So far as merely human
probabilities are concerned, the evidence would turn in favor of
Calvin’s hypothesis, which is supported by Dr. A. Clarke and Professor
Bush; the arguments of the latter writer, which seem to be mainly drawn
from Calvin, are very forcibly put. On the other hand, great
consideration is due to the authority of such men as Patrick, Le Clerc,
Kidder, and Scott, who would preserve the present order of the sacred
narrative; and would account for the events related on the ground of a
miraculous renewal and continuance of strength, which Calvin himself
allows to have taken place. It is in favor of this latter mode of
interpretation, that it certainly better accords with the general
character of Abraham, and is more consistent with the testimony which
the Scriptures bear to his faith, than the other hypothesis; besides
which the order of the narrative remains undisturbed. See this question
treated at length in Exercitationes Andreae Riveti in Genesin, p 548.
Lugd. 1633. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[20](cc02002.htm#fr_19.md) <span
id="iii.i-p83.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p84"></span> “<span id="iii.i-p84.1"></span>Et obiit
Abraham.” And Abraham died. The expression “gave up the ghost” is not a
literal rendering of the original. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[21](cc02002.htm#fr_20.md) <span
id="iii.i-p84.2"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p85"></span> See <span id="iii.i-p85.1"></span>[Ps
73:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#004.md)<span id="iii.i-p85.1"></span>.
“There are no bands in their death; but their strength is firm;” and
<span id="iii.i-p85.2"></span>[Job
21:13](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#013.md)<span id="iii.i-p85.2"></span>,
“They spend their days in wealth, and in a moment go down to the grave.”
— *Ed*.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[22](cc02002.htm#fr_21.md) <span
id="iii.i-p86.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p87"></span> *Rivetus* speaks in similar language on
this clause. “This is never said concerning beasts when they die; and,
therefore, from this form of speech, it is to be observed, that men by
death are not reduced to nothing, nor does the whole of man die.... The
Scripture, in speaking thus, points out some other state; so that
departure out of the world is not the destruction of the whole man.” —
Exercitatio cxiii. p. 553.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[23](cc02002.htm#fr_22.md) <span
id="iii.i-p87.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p88"></span> See <span id="iii.i-p88.1"></span>[Ps
49](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#000.md)<span id="iii.i-p88.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[24](cc02002.htm#fr_23.md) <span
id="iii.i-p92.3"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p93"></span> “<span id="iii.i-p93.1"></span>Filii
filiorum habitabunt.” In the English it is, “The children of thy
servants shall continue.” — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[25](cc02002.htm#fr_24.md) <span
id="iii.i-p95.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p96"></span> “<span id="iii.i-p96.1"></span>Coram
omnibus fratribus suis habitavit.” He dwelt in the presence of all his
brethren.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[26](cc02002.htm#fr_25.md) <span
id="iii.i-p96.3"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p97"></span> This is the interpretation of Vatablus,
favored by Professor Bush, who says, “As Ishmael’s death has already
been mentioned, and as the term ‘fall’ is seldom used in the Scriptures
in reference to ‘dying,’ except in cases of sudden and violent death, as
when one ‘falls’ in battle, the probability is, that it here signifies
that his territory or possessions ‘fell’ to him in the presence of his
brethren, or immediately contiguous to their borders.” — *Bush*.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[27](cc02002.htm#fr_26.md) <span
id="iii.i-p97.2"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p98"></span> Calvin’s interpretation, though opposed to
the Vulgate and to our own version, is supported by the Septuagint, the
Targum Onkelos, the Syriac, and Arabic versions. See Walton’s Polyglott.
— *Ed*.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[28](cc02002.htm#fr_27.md) <span
id="iii.i-p110.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p111"></span> Namely, that which is general or national.
— *Ed*.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[29](cc02002.htm#fr_28.md) <span
id="iii.i-p111.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p112"></span> Namely, that which is particular or
individual. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[30](cc02002.htm#fr_29.md) <span
id="iii.i-p112.2"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p113"></span> <span id="iii.i-p113.1"></span>Si quis
anagogen desideret.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[31](cc02002.htm#fr_30.md) <span
id="iii.i-p113.2"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p114"></span> <span id="iii.i-p114.1"></span>Nous
pourrons dire. — *French Tr*. The original has no corresponding
expression; but one to the same effect is obviously understood. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[32](cc02002.htm#fr_31.md) <span
id="iii.i-p116.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p117"></span> The names of the two brothers was
significant of their character. Esau is called Edom, which signifies
red, because he was of sanguinary temperament. He is said to have been
hairy or shaggy, “<span id="iii.i-p117.1"></span>רעש,” from which word
the mountainous country he inhabited was called Seir. The name Jacob,
“<span id="iii.i-p117.2"></span>בקעי,” means to supplant, or trip up the
heels. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_32"></span>[33](cc02002.htm#fr_32.md) <span
id="iii.i-p121.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p122"></span> <span id="iii.i-p122.1"></span>Cest une
outrecuidance insupportable de la vouloir faire dependre de la volonte
de l’homme, ou transporter une partie d’icelle aux moyens et preparatifs
humain. — *French Tr*.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[34](cc02002.htm#fr_33.md) <span
id="iii.i-p126.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p127"></span> Literally the passage would run, “Feed me,
I pray thee, with that red, that read,” the word pottage being
understood. “the repetition of the epithet, and the omission of the
substantive, indicated the extreme haste and eagerness of the asker. His
eye was caught by the color of the dish; and being faint with hunger and
fatigue, he gave way to the solicitations of appetite, regardless of
consequences.” — *Bush*.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[35](cc02002.htm#fr_34.md) <span
id="iii.i-p127.2"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p128"></span> It is to be remembered that the birthright
included not merely earthly advantages, but those also which were
spiritual. Till the tribe of Levi was accepted by God, in lieu of all
the first-born of Israel, the eldest son was the priest of the family as
well as its natural head. And this was probably the part of the
birthright which Esau treated with peculiar contempt, and for which the
Apostle Paul styles him a “profane person.” — *Ed*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 26](cc02003.md)
