[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc02025)  [Next](cc02027.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 2: Genesis, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxvii"></span>

<span id="xxvii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 49.

<span id="xxvii.i"></span>

<span id="xxvii.i-p1"></span><span id="xxvii.i-p1.1"></span>[Genesis
49:1-33](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#001.md)<span id="xxvii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.i-p2"></span>**1** And Jacob called unto his sons, and
said, Gather yourselves together, that I may tell you *that* which shall
befall you in the last days.

<span id="xxvii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Postea vocavit Jahacob filios suos,
et dixit, Congregate vos, et annuntiabo bovis quod eventurum est vobis
in novissino dierum.

<span id="xxvii.i-p4"></span>**2** Gather yourselves together, and hear,
ye sons of Jacob; and hearken unto Israel your father.

<span id="xxvii.i-p5"></span>**2.** Congregate vos, et audite filii
Jahacob, audite inquam Israel patrem vestrum.

<span id="xxvii.i-p6"></span>**3** Reuben, thou *art* my firstborn, my
might, and the beginning of my strength, the excellency of dignity, and
the excellency of power:

<span id="xxvii.i-p7"></span>**3.** Ruben primogenitus meus, tu
fortitudo mea, et principium roboris mei: excellentia dignitatis et
excellentia roboris.

<span id="xxvii.i-p8"></span>**4** Unstable as water, thou shalt not
excel; because thou wentest up to thy father’s bed; then defiledst thou
*it*: he went up to my couch.

<span id="xxvii.i-p9"></span>**4.** Velocitas fuit tibi instar aquae,
non excelles: quia ascendisti cubile patris tui, tune polluisti stratum
meum, evanuit.

<span id="xxvii.i-p10"></span>**5** Simeon and Levi *are* brethren;
instruments of cruelty *are in* their habitations.

<span id="xxvii.i-p11"></span>**5.** Simhon et Levi fratres, arma
iniquitatis in habitationibus eorum.

<span id="xxvii.i-p12"></span>**6** O my soul, come not thou into their
secret; unto their assembly, mine honour, be not thou united: for in
their anger they slew a man, and in their selfwill they digged down a
wall.

<span id="xxvii.i-p13"></span>**6.** In secretum eorum non veniat anima
mea, in coetu eorum non uniaris lingua mea: quia in furore suo
occiderunt virum, et voluntate sua eradicaverunt murum.

<span id="xxvii.i-p14"></span>**7** Cursed *be* their anger, for *it
was* fierce; and their wrath, for it was cruel: I will divide them in
Jacob, and scatter them in Israel.

<span id="xxvii.i-p15"></span>**7.** Maledictus furor eorum, quia
robustus, et ira eorum, quia dura est: dividam eos in Jahacob et
dispergam eos in Israel.

<span id="xxvii.i-p16"></span>**8** Judah, thou *art he* whom thy
brethren shall praise: thy hand *shall be* in the neck of thine enemies;
thy father’s children shall bow down before thee.

<span id="xxvii.i-p17"></span>**8.** Jehudah es to, laudabunt to fratres
tui: manus tua erit in cervice inimicorum tuorum, incurvabunt se tibi
filii patris tui.

<span id="xxvii.i-p18"></span>**9** Judah *is* a lion’s whelp: from the
prey, my son, thou art gone up: he stooped down, he couched as a lion,
and as an old lion; who shall rouse him up?

<span id="xxvii.i-p19"></span>**9.** Ut catulus leonis Jehudah: e
praeda, fili mi, ascendisti: incurvavit se, cubuit sicut leo, sicut leo
major, quis suscitabit eum?

<span id="xxvii.i-p20"></span>**10** The sceptre shall not depart from
Judah, nor a lawgiver from between his feet, until Shiloh come; and unto
him *shall* the gathering of the people *be*

<span id="xxvii.i-p21"></span>**10.** Non recedet secptrum ex Jehudah,
et Legislator e medio pedum ejus, donec veniat Messias: et ei erit
aggregatio populorum.

<span id="xxvii.i-p22"></span>**11** Binding his foal unto the vine, and
his ass’s colt unto the choice vine; he washed his garments in wine, and
his clothes in the blood of grapes:

<span id="xxvii.i-p23"></span>**11.** Ligans ad vitem pullum suum, et ad
ramum filium asinae suae: lavit in vino vestimentum suum, et in sanguine
uvarum operimentum suum.

<span id="xxvii.i-p24"></span>**12** His eyes *shall be* red with wine,
and his teeth white with milk.

<span id="xxvii.i-p25"></span>**12.** Rubicundus oculis a vino, et
dcandidus dentibus a lacte.

<span id="xxvii.i-p26"></span>**13** Zebulun shall dwell at the haven of
the sea; and he *shall be* for an haven of ships; and his border *shall
be* unto Zidon.

<span id="xxvii.i-p27"></span>**13.** Zebulon in portu marium habitabit,
et erit in portum navium, et terminus ejus usque ad Sidon.

<span id="xxvii.i-p28"></span>**14** Issachar *is* a strong ass couching
down between two burdens:

<span id="xxvii.i-p29"></span>**14.** Issachar ut asinus osseus, cubans
inter duas sarcinas.

<span id="xxvii.i-p30"></span>**15** And he saw that rest *was* good,
and the land that *it was* pleasant; and bowed his shoulder to bear, and
became a servant unto tribute.

<span id="xxvii.i-p31"></span>**15.** Ed vidit requiem, quod esset
bonum: et terram quod esset pulchra, et inclinavit humerum suum ad
portandum, et fuit tributo serviens.

<span id="xxvii.i-p32"></span>**16** Dan shall judge his people, as one
of the tribes of Israel.

<span id="xxvii.i-p33"></span>**16.** Dan judicabit populum suum sicut
unus e tribubus Israel.

<span id="xxvii.i-p34"></span>**17** Dan shall be a serpent by the way,
an adder in the path, that biteth the horse heels, so that his rider
shall fall backward.

<span id="xxvii.i-p35"></span>**17.** Erit Dan ut serpens juxta viam, ut
cerastes juxta semitam, mordens calcaneos equi, et cecidit equitans
retrosum.

<span id="xxvii.i-p36"></span>**18** I have waited for thy salvation, O
LORD.

<span id="xxvii.i-p37"></span>**18.** Salutem tuam exspectavi Jehova.

<span id="xxvii.i-p38"></span>**19** Gad, a troop shall overcome him:
but he shall overcome at the last.

<span id="xxvii.i-p39"></span>**19.** Gad, exercitus succidet eum, et
ipse succidet ad extremum.

<span id="xxvii.i-p40"></span>**20** Out of Asher his bread *shall be*
fat, and he shall yield royal dainties.

<span id="xxvii.i-p41"></span>**20.** Aser, erit pinguis panis ejus, et
ipse dabit delicias regis.

<span id="xxvii.i-p42"></span>**21** Naphtali *is* a hind let loose: he
giveth goodly words.

<span id="xxvii.i-p43"></span>**21.** Naphthali ut cerva dimissa, dans
eloquia pulchritudinis.

<span id="xxvii.i-p44"></span>**22** Joseph *is* a fruitful bough,
*even* a fruitful bough by a well; *whose* branches run over the wall:

<span id="xxvii.i-p45"></span>**22.** Ut arbor fructificans Joseph, ut
ramus crescens juxta fontem, rami incedent super murum.

<span id="xxvii.i-p46"></span>**23** The archers have sorely grieved
him, and shot *at him*, and hated him:

<span id="xxvii.i-p47"></span>**23.** Et amaritudine affecerunt eum, et
jaculati sunt, et odio habuerunt eum sagittarii.

<span id="xxvii.i-p48"></span>**24** But his bow abode in strength, and
the arms of his hands were made strong by the hands of the mighty *God*
of Jacob; (from thence *is* the shepherd, the stone of Israel:)

<span id="xxvii.i-p49"></span>**24.** Et mansit in fortitudine arcus
ejus, et roboraverunt se brachia manuum ejus a manibus potentis Jahacob,
inde pastor lapidis Israel.

<span id="xxvii.i-p50"></span>**25** *Even* by the God of thy father,
who shall help thee; and by the Almighty, who shall bless thee with
blessings of heaven above, blessings of the deep that lieth under,
blessings of the breasts, and of the womb:

<span id="xxvii.i-p51"></span>**25.** A Deo patris tui, et adjuvabit to:
et ab Omnipotente, et benedicet tibi benedictionibus coeli sursum,
benedictionibus abyssi cubantis deorsum, benedictionibus uberum et
vulvae.

<span id="xxvii.i-p52"></span>**26** The blessings of thy father have
prevailed above the blessings of my progenitors unto the utmost bound of
the everlasting hills: they shall be on the head of Joseph, and on the
crown of the head of him that was separate from his brethren.

<span id="xxvii.i-p53"></span>**26.** Benedictiones patris tui fortiores
fuerunt benedictionibus genitorum meorum, usque ad terminum collium
perpetuorum erunt super caput Joseph, et super verticem Nazaraei inter
fratres suos.

<span id="xxvii.i-p54"></span>**27.** Benjamin shall ravin *as* a wolf:
in the morning he shall devour the prey, and at night he shall divide
the spoil.

<span id="xxvii.i-p55"></span>**27.** Benjamin ut lupus rapiet, mane
comedet praedam, et vesperi dividet spolia.

<span id="xxvii.i-p56"></span>**28.** All these *are* the twelve tribes
of Israel: and this *is it* that their father spake unto them, and
blessed them; every one according to his blessing he blessed them.

<span id="xxvii.i-p57"></span>**28.** Omnes istae tribus Israel
duodecim. Et hoc est quod loquutus est eis pater eorum, et benedixit
eis, unicuique secundum benedictionem suam, benedixit eis.

<span id="xxvii.i-p58"></span>**29.** And he charged them, and said unto
them, I am to be gathered unto my people: bury me with my fathers in the
cave that *is* in the field of Ephron the Hittite.

<span id="xxvii.i-p59"></span>**29.** Et praecepti eis, et dixit ad eos,
Ego congregor ad populum meum: sepelite me cum patribus meis in
spelunca, quae est in agro Hephron Hittaei.

<span id="xxvii.i-p60"></span>**30.** In the cave that *is* in the field
of Machpelah, which *is* before Mamre, in the land of Canaan, which
Abraham bought with the field of Ephron the Hittite for a possession of
a buryingplace.

<span id="xxvii.i-p61"></span>**30.** In spelunca, quae est in agro
duplici, quae est ante Mamre: in terra Chenaan, quam emit Abraham cum
agro ab Hephron Hittaeo in possessionem sepulcri.

<span id="xxvii.i-p62"></span>**31.** There they buried Abraham and
Sarah his wife; there they bried Isaac and Rebekah his wife; and there I
buried Leah.

<span id="xxvii.i-p63"></span>**31.** Ibi sepelierunt Abraham et Sarah
uxorem ejus: ibi sepelicrunt Ishac et Ribcah uxorem ejus, et ibi
sepelivi Leah.

<span id="xxvii.i-p64"></span>**32.** The purchase of the field, and of
the cave that is therein, *was* from the children of Heth.

<span id="xxvii.i-p65"></span>**32.** Emptio agri et speluncae, quae est
in eo, fuit a filiis Heth.

<span id="xxvii.i-p66"></span>**33.** And when Jacob had made an end of
commanding his sons, he gathered up his feet into the bed, and yielded
up the ghost, and was gathererrd unto his people.

<span id="xxvii.i-p67"></span>**33.** Et finem fecit Iahacob
praecipiendi filiis suis: et collegit pedes suos in lecto et obiit, et
aggregatus est ad populos suos.

<span id="xxvii.i-p68"></span> 

<span id="xxvii.i-p69"></span><span id="xxvii.i-p69.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.i-p70"></span>**1.** *And Jacob called*. In the former
chapter, the blessing on Ephraim and Manasseh was related <span
id="xxvii.i-p70.1"></span>[Ge
48:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#001.md)<span id="xxvii.i-p70.1"></span>,
because, before Jacob should treat of the state of the whole nation
about to spring from him, it was right that these two grandsons should
be inserted into the body of his sons. Now, as if carried above the
heavens, he announces, not in the character of a man, but as from the
mouth of God, what shall be the condition of them all, for a long time
to come. And it will be proper first to remark, that as he had then
thirteen sons, he sets before his view, in each of their persons, the
same number of nations or tribes: in which act the admirable lustre of
his faith is conspicuous. For since he had often heard from the Lord,
that his seed should be increased to a multitude of people, this oracle
is to him like a sublime mirror, in which he may perceive things deeply
hidden from human sense. Moreover, this is not a simple confession of
faith, by which Jacob testifies that he hopes for whatever had been
promised him by the Lord; but he rises superior to men, at the
interpreter and ambassador of God, to regulate the future state of the
Church. Now, since some interpreters perceived this prophecy to be noble
and magnificent, they have thought that it would not be adorned with its
proper dignity, unless they should extract from it certain new
mysteries. Thus it has happened, that in striving earnestly to elicit
profound allegories, they have departed from the genuine sense of the
words, and have corrupted, by their own inventions, what is here
delivered for the solid edification of the pious. But lest we should
depreciate the literal sense, as if it did not contain speculations
sufficiently profound, let us mark the design of the holy Spirit. In the
first place, the sons of Jacob are informed beforehand, of their future
fortune, that they may know themselves to be objects of the special care
of God; and that, although the whole world is governed by his
providence, they, notwithstanding, are preferred to other nations, as
members of his own household. It seems apparently a mean and
contemptible thing, that a region productive of vines, which should
yield abundance of choice wine, and one rich in pasturers, which should
supply milk, is promised to the tribe of Judah. But if any one will
consider that the Lord is hereby giving an illustrious proof of his own
election, in descending, like the father of a family, to the care of
food, and also showing, in minute things, that he is united by the
sacred bond of a covenant to the children of Abraham, he will look for
no deeper mystery. In the second place; the hope of the promised
inheritance is again renewed unto them. And, therefore, Jacob, as if he
would put them in possession of the land by his own hand, expounds
familiarly, and as in an affair actually present, what kind of
habitation should belong to each of them. Can the confirmation of a
matter so serious, appear contemptible to sane and prudent readers? It
is, however, the principal design of Jacob more correctly to point out
from whence a king should arise among them, who should bring them
complete felicity. And in this manner he explains what had been promised
obscurely, concerning the blessed seed. In these things there is so
great weight, that the simple treating of them, if only we were skillful
interpreters, ought justly to transport us with admiration. But
(omitting all things else) an advantage of no common kind consists in
this single point, that the mouth of impure and profane men, who freely
detract from the credibility of Moses, is shut, so that they no longer
dare to contend that he did not speak by a celestial impulse. Let us
imagine that Moses does not relate what Jacob had before prophesied, but
speaks in his own person; whence, then, could he divine what did not
happen till many ages afterwards? Such, for instance, is the prophecy
concerning the kingdom of David. And there is no doubt that God
commanded the land to be divided by lot, lest any suspicion should arise
that Joshua had divided it among the tribes, by compact, and as he had
been instructed by his master. After the Israelites had obtained
possession of the land, the division of it was not made by the will of
men. Whence was it that a dwelling near the sea-shore was given to the
tribe of Zebulun; a fruitful plain to the tribe of Asher; and to the
others, by lot, what is here recorded; except that the Lord would ratify
his oracles by the result, and would show openly, that nothing then
occurred which he had not, a long time before, declared should take
place? I now return to the words of Moses, in which holy Jacob is
introduced, relating what he had been taught by the Holy Spirit
concerning events still very remote. But some, with canine rage, demand,
 <span id="fr_193"></span>[194](#fn_193.md) Whence did Moses derive his
knowledge of a conversation, held in an obscure hut, two hundred years
before his time? I ask in return, before I give an answer, Whence had he
his knowledge of the places in the land of Canaan, which he assigns,
like a skillful surveyor, to each tribe? If this was a knowledge derived
from heaven, (which must be granted,) why will these impious babblers
deny that the things which Jacob has predicted, were divinely revealed
to Moses? Besides, among many other things which the holy fathers had
handed down by tradition, this prediction might then be generally known.
Whence was it that the people, when tyrannically oppressed, implored the
assistance of God as their deliverer? Whence was it, that at the simple
hearing of a promise formerly given, they raised their minds to a good
hope, unless that some remembrance of the divine adoption still
flourished among them? If there was a general acquaintance with the
covenant of the Lord among the people; what impudence will it be to deny
that the heavenly servants of God more accurately investigated whatever
was important to be known respecting the promised inheritance? For the
Lord did not utter oracles by the mouth of Jacob which, after his death,
a sudden oblivion should destroy; as if he had breathed, I know not what
sounds, into the air. But rather he delivered instructions common to
many ages; that his posterity might know from what source their
redemption, as well as the hereditary title of the land, flowed down to
them. We know how tardily, and even timidly, Moses undertook the
province assigned him, when he was called to deliver his own people:
because he was aware that he should have to deal with an intractable and
perverse nation. It was, therefore, necessary, that he should come
prepared with certain credentials which might give proof of his
vocation. And, hence, he put forth these predictions, as public
documents from the sacred archives of God, that no one might suppose him
to have intruded rashly into his office.

<span id="xxvii.i-p72"></span>*Gather yourselves together*  <span
id="fr_194"></span>[195](#fn_194.md) Jacob begins with inviting their
attention. For he gravely enters on his subject, and claims for himself
the authority of a prophet, in order to teach his sons that he is by no
means making a private testamentary disposition of his domestic affairs;
but that he is expressing in words, those oracles which are deposited
with him, until the event shall follow in due time. For he does not
command them simply to listen to his wishes, but gathers them into an
assembly by a solemn rite, that they may hear what shall occur to them
in the succession of time. Moreover, I do not doubt, that he places this
future period of which he speaks, in opposition to their exile in Egypt,
that, when their minds were in suspense, they might look forward to that
promised state. Now, from the above remarks, it may be easily inferred,
that, in this prophecy is comprised the whole period from the departure
out of Egypt to the reign of Christ: not that Jacob enumerates every
event, but that, in the summary of things on which he briefly touches,
he arranges a settled order and course, until Christ should appear.

<span id="xxvii.i-p74"></span><span id="xxvii.i-p74.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.i-p75"></span>**3.** *Reuben, thou art my first-born* He
begins with the first-born, not for the sake of honor, to confirm him in
his rank; but that he may the more completely cover him with shame, and
humble him by just reproaches. For Reuben is here cast down from his
primogeniture; because he had polluted his father’s bed by incestuous
intercourse with his mother-in-law. The meaning of his words is this:
Thou, indeed, by nature the first-born, oughtest to have excelled,
seeing thou art my strength, and the beginning of my manly vigor; but
since thou best flowed away like water, there is no more any ground for
arrogating anything to thyself. For, from the day of thy incest, that
dignity which thou receivedst on thy birth-day, from thy mother’s womb,
is gone and vanished away. The noun (<span
id="xxvii.i-p75.2"></span>ןוא,) some translate *seed*, others *grief*;
and turn the passage thus: “Thou my strength, and the beginning of my
grief or seed.” They who prefer the word *grief*, assign as a reason,
that children bring care and anxiety to their parents. But if this were
the true meaning, there would rather have been an antithesis between
strength and sorrow. Since, however, Jacob is reciting, in continuity,
the declaration of the dignity which belongs to the first-born, I doubt
not that he here mentions the beginning of his manhood. For as men, in a
certain sense, live again in their children, the first-born is properly
called the “beginning of strength.” To the same point belongs what
immediately follows, that he had been the excellency of dignity and of
strength, until he had deservedly deprived himself of both. For Jacob
places before the eyes of his son Reuben his former honor, because it
was for his profit to be made thoroughly conscious whence he had fallen.
So Paul says, that he set before the Corinthians the sins by which they
were defiled, in order to make them ashamed. (<span
id="xxvii.i-p75.3"></span>[1Co
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#005)<span id="xxvii.i-p75.3"></span>..md)
For whereas we are disposed to flatter ourselves in our vices, scarcely
any one of us is brought back to a sane mind, after he has fallen,
unless he is touched with a sense of his vileness. Moreover, nothing is
better adapted to wound us, than when a comparison is made between those
favors which God bestows upon us, and the punishments we bring upon
ourselves by our own fault. After Adam had been stripped of all good
things, God reproaches him sharply, and not without ridicule, “Behold
Adam is as one of us.” What end is this designed to answer, except that
Adam, reflecting with himself how far he is changed from that man, who
had lately been created according to the image of God, and had been
endowed with so many excellent gifts, might be confounded and fall
prostrate, deploring his present misery? We see, then, that reproofs are
necessary for us, in order that we may be touched to the quick by the
anger of the Lord. For so it happens, not only that we become displeased
with the sins of which we are now bearing the punishment, but also, that
we take greater care diligently to guard those gifts of God which dwell
within us, lest they perish through our negligence. They who refer the
“excellency of dignity” to the priesthood, and the “excellency of power”
to the kingly office, are, in my judgment, too subtle interpreters. I
take the more simple meaning of the passage to be; that if Reuben had
stood firmly in his own rank, the chief place of all excellency would
have belonged to him.

<span id="xxvii.i-p76"></span><span id="xxvii.i-p76.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.i-p77"></span>**4.** *Unstable as water*. He shows that
the honor which had not a good conscience for its keeper, was not firm
but evanescent; and thus he rejects Reuben from the primogeniture. He
declares the cause, lest Reuben should complain that he was punished
when innocent: for it was also of great consequence, in this affair,
that he should be convinced of his fault, lest his punishment should not
be attended with profit. We now see Jacob, having laid carnal affection
aside, executing the office of a prophet with vigor and magnanimity. For
this judgment is not to be ascribed to anger, as if the father desired
to take private vengeance of his son: but it proceeded from the Spirit
of God; because Jacob kept fully in mind the burden imposed upon him.
The word <span id="xxvii.i-p77.1"></span>חלע (*alach*) the close of the
sentence signifies to depart, or to be blown away like the ascending
smoke, which is dispersed.  <span id="fr_195"></span>[196](#fn_195.md)
Therefore the sense is, that the excellency of Reuben, from the time
that he had defiled his father’s bed, had flowed away and become
extinct. For to expound the expression concerning the bed, to mean that
it ceased to be Jacob’s conjugal bed, because Bilhah had been divorced,
is too frigid.

<span id="xxvii.i-p79"></span><span id="xxvii.i-p79.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.i-p80"></span>**5.** *Simeon and Levi are brethren*. He
condemns the massacre of the city of Shechem by his two sons Simon and
Levi, and denounces the punishment of so great a crime. Whence we learn
how hateful cruelty is to God, seeing that the blood of man is precious
in his sight. For it is as if he would cite to his own tribunal those
two men, and would demand vengeance on them, when they thought they had
already escaped. It may, however, be asked, whether pardon had not been
granted to them long ago; and if God had already forgiven them, why does
he recall them again to punishment? I answer, it was both privately
useful to themselves, and was also necessary as an example, that this
slaughter should not remain unpunished, although they might have
obtained previous forgiveness. For we have seen before, when they were
admonished by their father, how far they were from that sorrow which is
the commencement of true repentance; and it may be believed that
afterwards they became stupefied more and more, with a kind of brutish
torpor, in their wickedness; or at least, that they had not been
seriously affected with bitter grief for their sin. It was also to be
feared lest their posterity might become addicted to the same brutality,
unless divinely impressed with horror at the deed. Therefore the Lord,
partly for the purpose of humbling them, partly for that of making them
an example to all ages, inflicted on them the punishment of perpetual
ignominy. Moreover, by thus acting, he did not retain the punishment
while remitting the guilt, as the Papists foolishly dream: but though
truly and perfectly appeased, he administered a correction suitable for
future times. The Papists imagine that sins are only half remitted by
God; because he is not willing to absolve sinners gratuitously. But
Scripture speaks far otherwise. It teaches us that God does not exact
punishments which shall compensate for offenses; but such as shall purge
hearts from hypocrisy, and shall invite the elect — the allurements of
the world being gradually shaken off — to repentance, shall stir them up
to vigilant solicitude, and shall keep them under restraint by the
bridle of fear and reverence. Whence it follows that nothing is more
preposterous, than that the punishments which we have deserved, should
be redeemed by satisfactions, as if God, after the manner of men, would
have what was owing paid to him; nay, rather there is the best possible
agreement between the gratuitous remission of punishments and those
chastening of the rod, which rather prevent future evils, than follow
such as have been already committed.

<span id="xxvii.i-p81"></span>*To return to Simeon and Levi*. How is it
that God, by inflicting a punishment which had been long deferred,
should drag them back as guilty fugitives to judgment; unless because
impunity would have been hurtful to them? And yet he fulfills the office
of a physician rather than of a judge, who refuses to *spare*, because
he intends to *heal*; and who not only heals two who are sick, but, by
an antidote, anticipates the diseases of others, in order that they may
beware of cruelty. This also is highly worthy to be remembered, that
Moses, in publishing the infamy of his own people, acts as the herald of
God: and not only does he proclaim a disgrace common to the whole
nation, but brands with infamy, the special tribe from which he sprung.
Whence it plainly appears, that he paid no respect to his own flesh and
blood; nor was he to be induced, by favor or hatred, to give a false
color to anything, or to decline from historical fidelity: but, as a
chosen minister and witness of the Lord, he was mindful of his calling,
which was that he should declare the truth of God sincerely and
confidently. A comparison is here made not only between the sons of
Jacob personally; but also between the tribes which descended from them.
This certainly was a specially opportune occasion for Moses to defend
the nobility of his own people. But so far is he from heaping encomiums
upon them, that he frankly stamps the progenitor of his own tribe with
an everlasting dishonor, which should redound to his whole family. Those
Lucianist dogs, who carp at the doctrine of Moses, pretend that he was a
vain man who wished to acquire for himself the command over the rude
common people. But had this been his project, why did he not also make
provision for his own family? Those sons whom ambition would have
persuaded him to endeavor to place in the highest rank, he puts aside
from the honor of the priesthood, and consigns them to a lowly and
common service. Who does not see that these impious calumnies have been
anticipated by a divine counsel rather than by merely human prudence,
and that the heirs of this great and extraordinary man were deprived of
honor, for this reason, that no sinister suspicion might adhere to him?
But to say nothing of his children and grandchildren, we may perceive
that, by censuring his whole tribe in the person of Levi, he acted not
as a man, but as an angel speaking under the impulse of the Holy Spirit,
and free from all carnal affection. Moreover, in the former clause, he
announces the crime: afterwards, he subjoins the punishment. The crime
is, that the arms of violence are in their tabernacles; and therefore he
declares, both by his tongue and in his heart, that he holds their
counsel in abhorrence,  <span id="fr_196"></span>[197](#fn_196.md) because,
in their desire of revenge, they cut off a city with its inhabitants.
Respecting the meaning of the words commentators differ. For some take
the word <span id="xxvii.i-p82.1"></span>תורכמ (*makroth*) to mean
*swords*; as if Jacob had said, that their swords had been wickedly
polluted with innocent blood. But they think more correctly, who
translate the word *habitations*; as if he had said, that unjust
violence dwelt among them, because they had been so sanguinary. I do not
doubt that the word <span id="xxvii.i-p82.2"></span>דבכ (*chabod*) is
put for the tongue, as in other places;  <span
id="fr_197"></span>[198](#fn_197.md) and thus the sense is clear, that
Jacob, from his heart, so detests the crime perpetrated by his sons,
that his tongue shall not give any assent to it whatever. Which he does,
for this end, that they may begin to be dissatisfied with themselves,
and that all others may learn to abhor perfidy combined with cruelty.
*Fury*, beyond doubt, signifies a perverse and blind impulse of anger:
 <span id="fr_198"></span>[199](#fn_198.md) and *lust* is opposed to
rational moderation;  <span id="fr_199"></span>[200](#fn_199.md) because
they are governed by no law. Interpreters also differ respecting the
meaning of the word <span id="xxvii.i-p85.3"></span>רוש (*shor*.)  <span
id="fr_200"></span>[201](#fn_200.md) Some translate it “bullock,” and think
that the Shechemites are allegorically denoted by it, seeing they were
sufficiently robust and powerful to defend their lives, had not Simon
and Levi enervated them by fraud and perfidy. But a different exposition
is far preferable, namely, that they “overturned a wall.” For Jacob
magnifies the atrociousness of their crime, from the fact, that they did
not even spare *buildings* in their rage.

<span id="xxvii.i-p91"></span><span id="xxvii.i-p91.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.i-p92"></span>**7.** *Cursed be their anger*. What I
have said must be kept in mind; namely, that we are divinely admonished
by the mouth of the holy prophet, to keep at a distance from all wicked
counsels. Jacob pronounces a woe upon their fury. Why is this, unless
that others may learn to put a restraint upon themselves, and to be on
their guard against such cruelty? However, (as I have already observed,)
it will not suffice to preserve our hands pure, unless we are far
removed from all association with crime. For though it may not always be
in our power to repress unjust violence; yet that concealment of it is
culpable, which approaches to the appearance of consent. Here even the
ties of kindred, and whatever else would bias a sound judgment, must be
dismissed from the mind: since we see a holy father, at the command of
God, so severely thundering against his own sons. He pronounces the
anger of Simon and Levi to be so much the more hateful, because, in its
commencement, it was violent, and even to the end, it was implacable.

<span id="xxvii.i-p93"></span>*I will divide them in Jacob*. It may seem
a strange method of proceeding, that Jacob, while designating his sons
patriarchs of the Church, and calling them heirs of the divine covenant,
should pronounce a malediction upon them instead of a blessing.
Nevertheless it was necessary for him to begin with the chastisement,
which should prepare the way for the manifestation of God’s grace, as
will be made to appear at the close of the chapter: but God mitigates
the punishment, by giving them an honorable name in the Church, and
leaving them their right unimpaired: yea, his incredible goodness
unexpectedly shone forth, when that which was the punishment of Levi,
became changed into the reward of the priesthood. The dispersion of the
Levitical tribe had its origin in the crime of their father, lest he
should congratulate himself on account of his perverse and lawless
spirit of revenge. But God, who in the beginning had produced light out
of darkness, found another reason why the Levites should be dispersed
abroad among the people, — a reason not only free from disgrace, but
highly honorable, — namely, that no corner of the land might be
destitute of competent instructors. Lastly, he constituted them
overseers and governors, in his name, over every part of the land, as if
he would scatter everywhere the seed of eternal salvation, or would send
forth ministers of his grace. Whence we conclude, how much better it was
for Levi to be chastised at the time, for his own good, than to be left
to perish, in consequence of present impunity in sin. And it is not to
be deemed strange, that, when the land was distributed, and cities were
given to the Levites, far apart from each other, this reason was
suppressed,  <span id="fr_201"></span>[202](#fn_201.md) and one entirely
different was adduced; namely, that the Lord was their inheritance. For
this, as I have lately said, is one of the miracles of God, to brine
light out of darkness. Had Levi been sentenced to distant exile, he
would have been most worthy of the punishment: but now, God in a measure
spares him, by assigning him a wandering life in his paternal
inheritance. Afterwards, the mark of infamy being removed, God sends his
posterity into different parts, under the title of a distinguished
embassy. In Simon there remained a certain, though obscure trace of the
curse: because a distinct territory did not fall to his sons by lot; but
they were mixed with the tribe of Judah, as is stated in <span
id="xxvii.i-p94.1"></span>[Jos
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#001.md)<span id="xxvii.i-p94.1"></span>.
Afterwards they went to Mount Seir, having expelled the Amalekites and
taken possession of their land, as it is written, (<span
id="xxvii.i-p94.2"></span>[1Ch
4:40-43](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#040.md)<span
id="xxvii.i-p94.2"></span>.) Here, also, we perceive the manly fortitude
of holy Jacob’s breast, who, though a decrepit old man and an exile,
lying on his private and lowly couch, nevertheless assigns provinces to
his sons, as from the lofty throne of a great king. He also does this in
his own right, knowing that the covenant of God was deposited with him,
by which he had been called the heir and lord of the land: and at the
same time he claims for himself authority as sustaining the character of
a prophet of God. For it greatly concerns us, when the word of God
sounds in our ears, to apprehend by faith the thing proclaimed, as if
his ministers had been commanded to carry into effect what they
pronounce. Therefore it was said to Jeremiah,

<span id="xxvii.i-p95"></span>“See I have this day set thee over the
nations and over the kingdoms, to root out, and to pull down, and to
destroy, and to throw down, and to build, and to plant.” (<span
id="xxvii.i-p95.1"></span>[Jer
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#010)<span id="xxvii.i-p95.1"></span>..md)

<span id="xxvii.i-p96"></span>And the prophets are generally commanded
to set their faces against the countries which they threaten, as if they
were furnished with a large army to make the attack.

<span id="xxvii.i-p97"></span><span id="xxvii.i-p97.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.i-p98"></span>**8.** *Judah, thou art he whom thy
brethren shall praise*. In the word praise there is an allusion to the
name of Judah; for so he had been called by his mother, because his
birth had given occasion for praising God. The father adduces a new
etymology, because his name shall be so celebrated and illustrious among
his brethren, that he should be honored by them all equally with the
first-born.  <span id="fr_202"></span>[203](#fn_202.md) The *double
portion*, indeed, which he recently assigned to his son Joseph, depended
on the right of primogeniture: but because the *kingdom* was transferred
to the tribe of Judah, Jacob properly pronounces that his name should be
held worthy of praise. For the honor of Joseph was temporary; but here a
stable and durable kingdom is treated of, which should be under the
authority of the sons of Judah. Hence we gather, that when God would
institute a perfect state of government among his people, the
monarchical form was chosen by him. And whereas the appointment of a
king under the law, was partly to be attributed to the will of man, and
partly to the divine decree; this combination of human with divine
agency must be referred to the commencement of the monarchy, which was
inauspicious, because the people had tumultuously desired a king to be
given them, before the proper time had arrived. Hence their unseemly
haste was the cause why the kingdom was not immediately set up in the
tribe of Judah, but was brought forth, as an abortive offspring, in the
person of Saul. Yet at length, by the favor and in the legitimate order
of God, the preeminence of the tribe of Judah was established in the
person of David.

<span id="xxvii.i-p100"></span>*Thy hand shall be in the neck of thine
enemies*. In these words he shows that Judah should not be free from
enemies; but although many would give him trouble, and would endeavor to
deprive him of his right, Jacob promises him victory; not that the sons
of David should always prevail against their enemies, (for their
ingratitude interfered with the constant and equable course of the grace
of God,) but in this respect, at least, Judah had the superiority, that
in his tribe stood the royal throne which God approved, and which was
founded on his word. For though the kingdom of Israel was more
flourishing in wealth and in number of inhabitants, yet because it was
spurious, it was not the object of God’s favor: nor indeed was it right,
that, by its tinselled splendor, it should eclipse the glory of the
Divine election which was engraven upon the tribe of Judah. In David,
therefore, the force and effect of this prophecy plainly appeared; then
again in Solomon; afterwards, although the kingdom was mutilated, yet
was it wonderfully preserved by the hand of God; otherwise, in a short
space, it would have perished a hundred times. Thus it came to pass,
that the children of Judah imposed their yoke upon their enemies.
Whereas defection carried away ten tribes, which would not bow their
knees to the sons of David; the legitimate government was in this way
disturbed, and lawless confusion introduced; yet nothing could violate
the decree of God, by which the right to govern remained with the tribe
of Judah.

<span id="xxvii.i-p101"></span><span id="xxvii.i-p101.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.i-p102"></span>**9.** *Judah is a lion’s whelp*. This
similitude confirms the preceding sentence, that Judah would be
formidable to his enemies. Yet Jacob seems to allude to that diminution
which took place, when the greater part of the people revolted to
Jeroboam. For then the king of Judah began to be like a sleeping lion,
for he did not shake his mane to diffuse his terror far and wide, but,
as it were, laid him down in his den. Yet a certain secret power of God
lay hidden under that torpor, and they who most desired his destruction,
and who were most able to do him injury, did not dare to disturb him.
Therefore, after Jacob has transferred the supreme authority over his
brethren to Judah alone; he now adds, by way of correction, that, though
his power should happen to be diminished, he would nevertheless remain
terrible to his enemies, like a lion who lies down in his lair.  <span
id="fr_203"></span>[204](#fn_203.md)

<span id="xxvii.i-p106"></span><span id="xxvii.i-p106.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.i-p107"></span>**10.** *The scepter shall not depart*.
Though this passage is obscure, it would not have been very difficult to
elicit its genuine sense, if the Jews, with their accustomed malignity,
had not endeavored to envelop it in clouds. It is certain that the
Messiah, who was to spring from the tribe of Judah, is here promised.
But whereas they ought willingly to run to embrace him, they purposely
catch at every possible subterfuge, by which they may lead themselves
and others far astray in tortuous by-paths. It is no wonder, then, if
the spirit of bitterness and obstinacy, and the lust of contention have
so blinded them, that, in the clearest light, they should have
perpetually stumbled. Christians, also, with a pious diligence to set
forth the glory of Christ, have, nevertheless, betrayed some excess of
fervor. For while they lay too much stress on certain words, they
produce no other effect than that of giving an occasion of ridicule to
the Jews, whom it is necessary to surround with firm and powerful
barriers, from which they shall be unable to escape. Admonished,
therefore, by such examples, let us seek, without contention, the true
meaning of the passage. In the first place, we must keep in mind the
true design of the Holy Spirit, which, hitherto, has not been
sufficiently considered or expounded with sufficient distinctness. After
he has invested the tribe of Judah with supreme authority, he
immediately declares that God would show his care for the people, by
preserving the state of the kingdom, till the promised felicity should
attain its highest point. For the dignity of Judah is so maintained as
to show that its proposed end was the common salvation of the whole
people. The blessing promised to the seed of Abraham (as we have before
seen) could not be firm, unless it flowed from one head. Jacob now
testifies the same thing, namely, that a King should come, under whom
that promised happiness should be complete in all its parts. Even the
Jews will not deny, that while a lower blessing rested on the tribe of
Judah, the hope of a better and more excellent condition was herein held
forth. They also freely grant another point, that the Messiah is the
sole Author of full and solid happiness and glory. We now add a third
point, which we may also do, without any opposition from them; namely,
that the kingdom which began from David, was a kind of prelude, and
shadowy representation of that greater grace which was delayed, and held
in suspense, until the advent of the Messiah. They have indeed no relish
for a spiritual kingdom; and therefore they rather imagine for
themselves wealth and power, and propose to themselves sweet repose and
earthly pleasures, than righteousness, and newness of life, with free
forgiveness of sins. They acknowledge, nevertheless, that the felicity
which was to be expected under the Messiah, was adumbrated by their
ancient kingdom. I now return to the words of Jacob.

<span id="xxvii.i-p108"></span>*Until Shiloh come*, he says, the
scepter, or the dominion, *shall remain in Judah*. We must first see
what the word <span id="xxvii.i-p108.1"></span>הוליש (*shiloh*)
signifies. Because Jerome interprets it, “He who is to be sent,” some
think that the place has been fraudulently corrupted, by the letter
<span id="xxvii.i-p108.2"></span>ה (*he*) substituted for the letter
<span id="xxvii.i-p108.3"></span>ח (*cheth*;) which objection, though
not firm, is plausible. That which some of the Jews suppose, namely,
that it denotes the place (*Shiloh*) where the ark of the covenant had
been long deposited, because, a little before the commencement of
David’s reign, it had been laid waste, is entirely destitute of reason.
For Jacob does not here predict the time when David was to be appointed
king; but declares that the kingdom should be established in his family,
until God should fulfill what he had promised concerning the special
benediction of the seed of Abraham. Besides the form of speech, “until
Shiloh come,” for “until Shiloh come to an end,” would be harsh and
constrained. Far more correctly and consistently do other interpreters
take this expression to mean “his son,” for among the Hebrews a son is
called <span id="xxvii.i-p108.4"></span>ליש (*shil*.) They say also that
<span id="xxvii.i-p108.5"></span>ה (*he*) is put in the place of the
relative <span id="xxvii.i-p108.6"></span>ו (*waw*;) and the greater
part assent to this signification.  <span
id="fr_204"></span>[205](#fn_204.md) But again, the Jews dissent entirely
from the meaning of the patriarch, by referring this to David. For (as I
have just hinted) the origin of the kingdom in David is not here
promised, but its absolute perfection in the Messiah. And truly an
absurdity so gross, does not require a lengthened refutation. For what
can this mean, that the kingdom should not come to an end in the tribe
of Judah, till it should have been erected? Certainly the word *depart*
means nothing else than to *cease*. Further, Jacob points to a continued
series, when he says the scribe  <span id="fr_205"></span>[206](#fn_205.md)
shall not depart from between his feet. For it behaves a king so to be
placed upon his throne that a lawgiver may sit between his feet. A
kingdom is therefore described to us, which after it has been
constituted, will not cease to exist till a more perfect state shall
succeed; or, which comes to the same point; Jacob honors the future
kingdom of David with this title, because it was to be the token and
pledge of that happy glory which had been before ordained for the race
of Abraham. In short, the kingdom which he transfers to the tribe of
Judah, he declares shall be no common kingdom, because from it, at
length, shall proceed the fullness of the promised benediction. But here
the Jews haughtily object, that the event convicts us of error. For it
appears that the kingdom by no means endured until the coming of Christ;
but rather that the scepter was broken, from the time that the people
were carried into captivity. But if they give credit to the prophecies,
I wish, before I solve their objection, that they would tell me in what
manner Jacob here assigns the kingdom to his son Judah. For we know,
that when it had scarcely become his fixed possession, it was suddenly
rent asunder, and nearly its whole power was possessed by the tribe of
Ephraim. Has God, according to these men, here promised, by the mouth of
Jacob, some evanescent kingdom? If they reply, the scepter was not then
broken, though Rehoboam was deprived of a great part of his people; they
can by no means escape by this cavil; because the authority of Judah is
expressly extended over all the tribes, by these words, “Thy mother’s
sons shall bow their knee before thee.” They bring, therefore, nothing
against us, which we cannot immediately, in turn, retort upon
*themselves*

<span id="xxvii.i-p111"></span>Yet I confess the question is not yet
solved; but I wished to premise this, in order that the Jews, laying
aside their disposition to calumniate, may learn calmly to examine the
matter itself, with us. Christians are commonly wont to connect
perpetual government with the tribe of Judah, in the following manner.
When the people returned from banishment, they say, that, in the place
of the royal scepter, was the government which lasted to the time of the
Maccabees. That afterwards, a third mode of government succeeded,
because the chief power of judging rested with the Seventy, who, it
appears by history, were chosen out of the regal race. Now, so far was
this authority of the royal race from having fallen into decay, that
Herod, having been cited before it, with difficulty escaped capital
punishment, because he contumaciously withdrew from it. Our
commentators, therefore, conclude that, although the royal majesty did
not shine brightly from David until Christ, yet some preeminence
remained in the tribe of Judah, and thus the oracle was fulfilled.
Although these things are true, still more skill must be used in rightly
discussing this passage. And, in the first place, it must be kept in
mind, that the tribe of Judah was already constituted chief among the
rest, as preeminent in dignity, though it had not yet obtained the
dominion. And, truly, Moses elsewhere testifies, that supremacy was
voluntarily conceded to it by the remaining tribes, from the time that
the people were redeemed out of Egypt. In the second place, we must
remember, that a more illustrious example of this dignity was set forth
in that kingdom which God had commenced in David. And although defection
followed soon after, so that but a small portion of authority remained
in the tribe of Judah; yet the right divinely conferred upon it, could
by no means be taken away. Therefore, at the time when the kingdom of
Israel was replenished with abundant opulence, and was swelling with
lofty pride, it was said, that the lamp of the Lord was lighted in
Jerusalem. Let us proceed further: when Ezekiel predicts the destruction
of the kingdom, (<span id="xxvii.i-p111.1"></span>[Eze
21:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#026.md)<span
id="xxvii.i-p111.1"></span>,) he clearly shows how the scepter was to be
preserved by the Lord, until it should come into the hands of Christ:
“Remove the diadem, and take off the crown; this shall not be the same:
I will overturn, overturn, overturn it, until he come whose right it
is.” It may seem at first sight that the prophecy of Jacob had failed
when the tribe of Judah was stripped of its royal ornament. But we
conclude hence, that God was not bound always to exhibit the visible
glory of the kingdom on high. Otherwise, those other promises which
predict the restoration of the throne, which was cast down and broken,
were false. Behold the days come in which I will

<span id="xxvii.i-p112"></span>“raise up the tabernacle of David that is
fallen, and close up the breaches thereof, and I will raise up his
ruins.” (<span id="xxvii.i-p112.1"></span>[Am
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#011.md)<span
id="xxvii.i-p112.1"></span>.)

<span id="xxvii.i-p113"></span>It would be absurd, however, to cite more
passages, seeing this doctrine occurs frequently in the prophets. Whence
we infer, that the kingdom was not so confirmed as always to shine with
equal brightness; but that, though, for a time, it might lie fallen and
defaced, it should afterwards recover its lost splendor. The prophets,
indeed, seem to make the return from the Babylonian exile the
termination of that ruin; but since they predict the restoration of the
kingdom no otherwise than they do that of the temple and the priesthood,
it is necessary that the whole period, from that liberation to the
advent of Christ, should be comprehended. The crown, therefore, was cast
down, not for one day only, or from one single head, but for a long
time, and in various methods, until God placed it on Christ, his own
lawful king. And truly Isaiah describes the origin of Christ, as being
very remote from all regal splendor:

<span id="xxvii.i-p114"></span>“There shall come forth a rod out of the
stem of Jesse, and a branch shall grow out of his roots.” (<span
id="xxvii.i-p114.1"></span>[Isa
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001.md)<span
id="xxvii.i-p114.1"></span>.)

<span id="xxvii.i-p115"></span>Why does he mention Jesse rather than
David, except because Messiah was about to proceed from the rustic hut
of a private man, rather than from a splendid palace? Why from a tree
cut down, having nothing left but the root and the trunk, except because
the majesty of the kingdom was to be almost trodden under foot till the
manifestation of Christ? If any one object, that the words of Jacob seem
to have a different signification; I answer, that whatever God has
promised at any time concerning the external condition of the Church,
was so to be restricted, that, in the mean time, he might execute his
judgments in punishing men, and might try the faith of his own people.
It was, indeed, no light trial, that the tribe of Judah, in its third
successor to the throne, should be deprived of the greater portion of
the kingdom. Even a still more severe trial followed, when the sons of
the king were put to death in the sight of their father, when he, with
his eyes thrust out, was dragged to Babylon, and the whole royal family
was at length given over to slavery and captivity. But this was the most
grievous trial of all; that when the people returned to their own land,
they could in no way perceive the accomplishment of their hope, but were
compelled to lie in sorrowful dejection. Nevertheless, even then, the
saints, contemplating, with the eyes of faith, the scepter hidden under
the earth, did not fail, or become broken in spirit, so as to desist
from their course. I shall, perhaps, seem to grant too much to the Jews,
because I do not assign what they call a real dominion, in uninterrupted
succession, to the tribe of Judah. For our interpreters, to prove that
the Jews are still kept bound by a foolish expectation of the Messiah,
insist on this point, that the dominion of which Jacob had prophesied,
ceased from the time of Herod; as if, indeed, they had not been
tributaries five hundred years previously; as if, also, the dignity of
the royal race had not been extinct as long as the tyranny of Antiochus
prevailed; as if, lastly, the Asmonean race had not usurped to itself
both the rank and power of princes, until the Jews became subject to the
Romans. And that is not a sufficient solution which is proposed; namely,
that either the regal dominion, or some lower kind of government, are
disjunctively promised; and that from the time when the kingdom was
destroyed, the scribes remained in authority. For I, in order to mark
the distinction between a lawful government and tyranny, acknowledge
that counselors were joined with the king, who should administer public
affairs rightly and in order. Whereas some of the Jews explain, that the
*right* of government was given to the tribe of Judah, because it was
unlawful for it to be transferred elsewhere, but that it was not
necessary that the *glory* of the crown once given should be
perpetuated, I deem it right to subscribe in part to this opinion. I
say, in part, because the Jews gain nothing by this cavil, who, in order
to support their fiction of a Messiah yet to come, postpone that
subversion of the regal dignity which, in fact, long ago occurred.
 <span id="fr_206"></span>[207](#fn_206.md) For we must keep in memory what
I have said before, that while Jacob wished to sustain the minds of his
descendants until the coming of the Messiah; lest they should faint
through the weariness of long delay, he set before them an example in
their temporal kingdom: as if he had said, that there was no reason why
the Israelites, when the kingdom of David fell, should allow their hope
to waver; seeing that no other change should follow, which could answer
to the blessing promised by God, until the Redeemer should appear. That
the nation was grievously harassed, and was under servile oppression
some years before the coming of Christ happened, through the wonderful
counsel of God, in order that they might be urged by continual
chastisements to wish for redemption. Meanwhile, it was necessary that
some collective body of the nation should remain, in which the promise
might receive its fulfillment. But now, when, through nearly fifteen
centuries, they have been scattered and banished from their country,
having no polity, by what pretext can they fancy, from the prophecy of
Jacob, that a Redeemer will come to them? Truly, as I would not
willingly glory over their calamity; so, unless they, being subdued by
it, open their eyes, I freely pronounce that they are worthy to perish a
thousand times without remedy. It was also a most suitable method for
retaining them in the faith, that the Lord would have the sons of Jacob
turn their eyes upon one particular tribe, that they might not seek
salvation elsewhere; and that no vague imagination might mislead them.
For which end, also, the election of this family is celebrated, when it
is frequently compared with, and preferred to Ephraim and the rest, in
the Psalms. To us, also, it is not less useful, for the confirmation of
our faith, to know that Christ had been not only promised, but that his
origin had been pointed out, as with a finger, two thousand years before
he appeared.  <span id="fr_207"></span>[208](#fn_207.md)

<span id="xxvii.i-p118"></span>*And unto him shall the gathering of the
people be*. Here truly he declares that Christ should be a king, not
over one people only, but that under his authority various nations shall
be gathered, that they might coalesce together. I know, indeed, that the
word rendered “gathering” is differently expounded by different
commentators; but they who derive it from the root (<span
id="xxvii.i-p118.1"></span>ההק,) to make it signify the *weakening* of
the people, rashly and absurdly misapply what is said of the saving
dominion of Christ, to the sanguinary pride with which they puffed up.
If the word *obedience* is preferred, (as it is by others,) the sense
will remain the same with that which I have followed. For this is the
mode in which the gathering together will be effected; namely, that they
who before were carried away to different objects of pursuit, will
consent together in obedience to one common Head. Now, although Jacob
had previously called the tribes about to spring from him by the name of
*peoples*, for the sake of amplification, yet this gathering is of still
wider extent. For, whereas he had included the whole body of the nation
by their families, when he spoke of the ordinary dominion of Judah, he
now extends the boundaries of a new king: as if he would say, “There
shall be kings of the tribe of Judah, who shall be preeminent among
their brethren, and to whom the sons of the same mother shall bow down:
but at length He shall follow in succession, who shall subject other
*peoples* unto himself.” But this, we know, is fulfilled in Christ; to
whom was promised the inheritance of the world; under whose yoke the
nations are brought; and at whose will they, who before were scattered,
are gathered together. Moreover, a memorable testimony is here borne to
the vocation of the Gentiles, because they were to be introduced into
the joint participation of the covenant, in order that they might become
one people with the natural descendants of Abraham, under one Head.

<span id="xxvii.i-p119"></span><span id="xxvii.i-p119.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.i-p120"></span>**11.** *Binding his fole unto the vine,
and his ass’s colt, etc* He now speaks of the situation of the territory
which fell by lot to the sons of Judah; and intimates, that so great
would be the abundance of vines there, that they would everywhere
present themselves as readily as brambles, or unfruitful shrubs, in
other places. For since asses are wont to be bound to the hedges, he
here reduces vines to this contemptible use. The hyperbolical forms of
speech which follow are to be applied to the same purpose; namely, that
Judah shall wash his garments in wine, and his eyes be red there-with.
He means that the abundance of wine shall be so great, that it may be
poured out to wash with, like water, at no great expense; but that, by
constant copious drinking, the eyes would contract redness. But it seems
by no means proper, that a profuse intemperance or extravagance should
be accounted a blessing. I answer, although fertility and affluence are
here described, still the abuse of them is not sanctioned. If the Lord
deals very bountifully with us, yet he frequently prescribes the rule of
using his gifts with purity and frugality, lest they should stimulate
the incontinence of the flesh. But in this place Jacob, omitting to
state what is lawful, extols that abundance which would suffice for
luxury, and even for vicious and perverse excesses, unless the sons of
Judah should voluntarily use self-government. I abstain from those
allegories which to some appear plausible; because, as I said at the
beginning of the chapter, I do not choose to sport with such great
mysteries of God. To these lofty speculators the partition of the land
which God prescribed, for the purpose of accrediting his servant Moses,
seems a mean and abject thing. But unless our ingratitude has attained a
senseless stupor, we ought to be wholly transported with admiration at
the thought, that Moses, who had never seen the land of Canaan, should
treat of its separate parts as correctly as he could have done, of a few
acres cultivated by his own hand. Now, supposing he had heard a general
report of the existence of vines in the land; yet he could not have
assigned to Judah abundant vineyards, nor could he have assigned to him
rich pastures, by saying that his teeth should be white with drinking
milk, unless he had been guided by the Spirit.

<span id="xxvii.i-p121"></span><span id="xxvii.i-p121.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.i-p122"></span>**13.** *Zebulun shall dwell at the
havens of the sea*. Although this blessing contains nothing rare or
precious, (as neither do some of those which follow,) yet we ought to
deem this fact as sufficiently worthy of notice, that it was just as if
God was stretching out his hand from heaven, for the deliverance of the
children of Israel, and for the purpose of distributing to each his own
dwelling-place. Before mention is made of the lost itself, a maritime
region is given to the tribe of Zebulun, which it obtained by lot two
hundred years afterwards. And we know of how great importance that
hereditary gift was, which, like an earnest, rendered the adoption of
the ancient people secure. Therefore, by this prophecy, not only one
tribe, but the whole people, ought to have been encouraged to lay hold,
with alacrity, of the offered blessing which was certainly in store for
them. But it is said that the portion of Zebulun should not only be on
the sea-shore, but should also have havens; for Jacob joins its boundary
with the country of Zion; in which tract, we know, there were commodious
and noble havens. For God, by this prophecy, would not only excite the
sons of Zebulun more strenuously to prepare themselves to enter upon the
land; but would also assure them, when they obtained possession of the
desired portion, that it was the home which had been distinctly proposed
and ordained for them by the will of God.

<span id="xxvii.i-p123"></span><span id="xxvii.i-p123.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.i-p124"></span>**14.** *Issachar*. Here mention is
partly made of the inheritance, and an indication is partly given of the
future condition of this tribe. Although he is called a bony ass on
account of his strength,  <span id="fr_208"></span>[209](#fn_208.md) which
would enable him to endure labors, especially such as were rustic, yet
at the same time his sloth is indicated: for it is added a little
afterwards, that he should be of servile disposition. Wherefore the
meaning is, that the sons of Issachar, though possessed of strength,
were yet quiet rather than courageous, and were as ready to bear the
burden of servitude as mules are to submit their backs to the packsaddle
and the load. The reason given is, that, being content with their
fertile and pleasant country, they do not refuse to pay tribute to their
neighbors, provided they may enjoy repose. And although this
submissiveness is not publicly mentioned either to their praise or their
condemnation, it is yet probable that their indolence is censured,
because their want of energy hindered them from remaining in possession
of that liberty which had been divinely granted unto them.

<span id="xxvii.i-p126"></span><span id="xxvii.i-p126.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.i-p127"></span>**16.** *Dan shall judge his people.* In
the word *judge* there is an allusion to his name: for since, among the
Hebrews, <span id="xxvii.i-p127.1"></span>ןוד (*din*) signifies to
judge, Rachel, when she returned thanks to God, gave this name to the
son born to her by her handmaid, as if God had been the vindicator of
her cause and right. Jacob now gives a new turn to the meaning of the
name; namely, that the sons of Dan shall have no mean part in the
government of the people. For the Jews foolishly restrict it to Samson,
because he alone presided over the whole people, whereas the language
rather applies to the perpetual condition of the tribe. Jacob therefore
means, that though Dan was born from a concubine, he shall still be one
of the judges of Israel: because not only shall his offspring possess a
share of the government and command, in the common polity, so that this
tribe may constitute one head; but it shall be appointed the bearer of a
standard to lead the fourth division of the camp of Israel.  <span
id="fr_209"></span>[210](#fn_209.md) In the second place, his subtle
disposition is described. For Jacob compares this people to serpents,
who rise out of their lurking-places, by stealth, against the unwary
whom they wish to injure. The sense then is, that he shall not be so
courageous as earnestly and boldly to engage in open conflict; but that
he will fight with cunning, and will make use of snares. Yet, in the
meantime, he shows that he will be superior to his enemies, whom he does
not dare to approach with collected forces, just as serpents who, by
their secret bite, cast down the horse and his rider. In this place also
no judgment is expressly passed, whether this subtlety of Dan is to be
deemed worthy of praise or of censure: but conjecture rather inclines us
to place it among his faults, or at least his disadvantages, that
instead of opposing himself in open conflict with his enemies, he will
fight them only with secret frauds.  <span
id="fr_210"></span>[211](#fn_210.md)

<span id="xxvii.i-p132"></span><span id="xxvii.i-p132.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.i-p133"></span>**18.** *I have waited for thy salvation,
O Lord*. It may be asked, in the first place, what occasion induced the
holy man to break the connection of his discourse, and suddenly to burst
forth in this expression; for whereas he had recently predicted the
coming of the Messiah, the mention of salvation would have been more
appropriate in that place. I think, indeed, that when he perceived, as
from a lofty watchtower, the condition of his offspring continually
exposed to various changes, and even to be tossed by storms which would
almost overwhelm them, he was moved with solicitude and fear; for he had
not so put off all paternal affection, as to be entirely without care
for those who were of his own blood. He, therefore, foreseeing many
troubles, many dangers, many assaults, and even many slaughters, which
threatened his seed with as many destructions, could not but condole
with them, and, as a man, be troubled at the sight. But in order that he
might rise against every kind of temptation with victorious constancy of
mind, he commits himself unto the Lord, who had promised that he would
be the guardian of his people. Unless this circumstance be observed, I
do not see why Jacob exclaims here, rather than at the beginning or the
end of his discourse, that he waited for the salvation of the Lord. But
when this sad confusion of things presented itself to him, which was not
only sufficiently violent to shake his faith, but was more than
sufficiently burdensome entirely to overwhelm his mind, his best remedy
was to oppose to it this shield. I doubt not also, that he would advise
his sons to rise with him to the exercise of the same confidence.
Moreover, because he could not be the author of his own salvation, it
was necessary for him to repose upon the promise of God. In the same
manner, also, must we, at this day, hope for the salvation of the
Church: for although it seems to be tossed on a turbulent sea, and
almost sunk in the waves, and though still greater storms are to be
feared in future; yet amidst manifold destructions, salvation is to be
hoped for, in that deliverance which the Lord has promised. It is even
possible that Jacob, foreseeing by the Spirit, how great would be the
ingratitude, perfidy, and wickedness of his posterity, by which the
grace of God might be smothered, was contending against these
temptations. But although he expected salvation not for himself alone,
but for all his posterity, this, however, deserves to be specially
noted, that he exhibits the life-giving covenant of God to many
generations, so as to prove his own confidence that, after his death,
God would be faithful to his promise. Whence also it follows, that, with
his last breath, and as if in the midst of death, he laid hold on
eternal life. But if he, amidst obscure shadows, relying on a redemption
seen afar off, boldly went forth to meet death; what ought we to do, on
whom the clear day has shined; or what excuse remains for us, if our
minds fail amidst similar agitations?  <span
id="fr_211"></span>[212](#fn_211.md)

<span id="xxvii.i-p135"></span><span id="xxvii.i-p135.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.i-p136"></span>**19.** *Gad, a troop*. Jacob also makes
allusion to the name of Gad. He had been so called, because Jacob had
obtained a numerous offspring by his mother Leah. His fattier now
admonishes him, that though his name implied a *multitude*, he should
yet have to do with a great number of enemies, by whom, for a time, he
would be oppressed: and he predicts this event, not that his posterity
might confide in their own strength, and become proud; but that they
might prepare themselves to endure the suffering by which the Lord
intended, and now decreed to humble them. Yet, as he here exhorts them
to patient endurance, so he presently raises and animates them by the
superadded consolation, that, at length, they should emerge from
oppression, and should triumph over those enemies by whom they had been
vanquished and routed; but this only at the last. Moreover, this
prophecy may be applied to the whole Church, which is assailed not for
one day only, but is perpetually crushed by fresh attacks, until at
length God shall exalt it to honor.

<span id="xxvii.i-p137"></span><span id="xxvii.i-p137.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.i-p138"></span>**20.** *Out of Asher*. The inheritance
of Asher is but just alluded to, which he declares shall be fruitful in
the best and finest wheat, so that it shall need no foreign supply of
food, having abundance at home. By *royal dainties*, he means such as
are exquisite. Should any one object, that it is no great thing to be
fed with nutritious and pleasant bread; I answer; we must consider the
end designed; namely, that they might hereby know that they were fed by
the paternal care of God.

<span id="xxvii.i-p139"></span><span id="xxvii.i-p139.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.i-p140"></span>**21.** *Naphtali*. Some think that in
the tribe of Naphtali fleetness is commended; I rather approve another
meaning, namely, that it will guard and defend itself by eloquence and
suavity of words, rather than by force of arms. It is, however, no
despicable virtue to soothe ferocious minds, and to appease excited
anger, by bland and gentle discourse; or if any offense has been stirred
up, to allay it by a similar artifice. He therefore assigns this praise
to the sons of Naphtali, that they shall rather study to fortify
themselves by humanity, by sweet words, and by the arts of peace, then
by the defense of arms. He compares them to a hind let loose, which
having been taken in hunting, is not put to death, but is rather
cherished with delicacies.  <span id="fr_212"></span>[213](#fn_212.md)

<span id="xxvii.i-p146"></span><span id="xxvii.i-p146.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.i-p147"></span>**22.** *Joseph is a fruitful bough*.
Others translate it, “a son of honor,”  <span
id="fr_213"></span>[214](#fn_213.md) and both are suitable; but I rather
incline to the former sense, because it seems to me that it refers to
the name Joseph, by which *addition* or *increase* is signified;
although I have no objection to the similitude taken from a tree,
vehicle, being planted near a fountain, draws from the watered earth the
moisture and sap by which it grows the faster. The sum of the figure is,
that he is born to grow like a tree situated near a fountain, so that,
by its beauty and lofty stature, it may surmount the obstacles around
it. For I do not interpret the words which follow to mean that there
will be an assemblage of *virgins* upon the walls, whom the sight of the
tree shall have attracted; but, by a continued metaphor, I suppose the
tender and smaller branches to be called daughters.  <span
id="fr_214"></span>[215](#fn_214.md) And they are said “to run over the
wall” when they spread themselves far and wide. Besides, Jacob’s
discourse does not relate simply to the whole tribe, nor is it a mere
prophecy of future times; but the personal history of Joseph is blended
with that of his descendants. Thus some things are peculiar to himself,
and others belong to the two tribes of Ephraim and Manasseh. So when
Joseph is said to have been “grieved,” this is wont to be referred
especially to himself. And whereas Jacob has compared him to a tree; so
he calls both his brethren and Potiphar, with his wife, “archers.”
 <span id="fr_215"></span>[216](#fn_215.md) Afterwards, however, he changes
the figure by making Joseph himself like a strenuous archer, whose bow
abides in strength, and whose arms are not relaxed, nor have lost, in
any degree, their vigor; by which expressions he predicts the invincible
fortitude of Joseph, because he has yielded to no blows however hard and
severe. At the same time we are taught that he stood, not by the power
of his own arm, but as being strengthened by the hand of God, whom he
distinguishes by the peculiar title of “the mighty God of Jacob,”
because he designed his power to be chiefly conspicuous, and to shine
most brightly in the Church. Meanwhile, he declares that the help by
which Joseph was assisted, arose from hence, that God had chosen that
family for himself For the holy fathers were extremely solicitous that
the gratuitous covenant of God should be remembered by themselves and by
their children, whenever any benefit was granted unto them. And truly it
is a mark of shameful negligence, not to inquire from what fountain we
drink water. In the mean time he tacitly censures the impious and
ungodly fury of his ten sons; because, by attempting the murder of their
brother, they, like the giants, had carried on war against God. He also
admonishes them for the future, that they should rather choose to be
protected by the guardianship of God, than to make him their enemy,
seeing that he is alike willing to give help to all. And hence arises a
consideration consolatory to all the pious, when they hear that the
power of God resides in the midst of the Church, if they do but glory in
him alone; as the Psalm teaches,

<span id="xxvii.i-p153"></span>“Some trust in chariots, and some in
horses; but we will invoke the name of the Lord our God.” (<span
id="xxvii.i-p153.1"></span>[Ps
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#007.md)<span
id="xxvii.i-p153.1"></span>.)

<span id="xxvii.i-p154"></span>The sons of Jacob, therefore, must take
care lest they, by confiding in their own strength, precipitate
themselves into ruin; but must rather bear themselves nobly and
triumphantly in the Lord.

<span id="xxvii.i-p155"></span>What follows admits of various
interpretations. Some translate it, “From thence is the shepherd, the
stone of Israel;” as if Jacob would say, that Joseph had been the
nourisher and rock, or stay of his house. Others read, “the shepherd of
the stone,” in the genitive case, which I approve, except that they
mistake the sense, by taking “stone” to mean family. I refer it to God,
who assigned the office of shepherd to his servant Joseph, in the manner
in which any one uses the service of a hireling to feed his flock. For
whence did it arise that he nourished his own people, except that he was
the dispenser of the Divine beneficence? Moreover, under this type, the
image of Christ is depicted to us, who, before he should come forth as
the conqueror of death and the author of life, was set as a mark of
contradiction, (<span id="xxvii.i-p155.1"></span>[Heb
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#003.md)<span
id="xxvii.i-p155.1"></span>,) against whom all cast their darts; as now
also, after his example, the Church also must be transfixed with many
arrows, that she may be kept by the wonderful help of God. Moreover,
lest the brethren should maliciously envy Joseph, Jacob sets his victory
in an amiable point of view to them, by saying that he had been
liberated in order that he might become their nourisher or shepherd.

<span id="xxvii.i-p156"></span><span id="xxvii.i-p156.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.i-p157"></span>**25.** *Even by the God of thy father*.
Again, he more fully affirms that Joseph had been delivered from death,
and exalted to such great dignity, not by his own industry, but by the
favor of God: and there is not the least doubt that he commends to all
the pious, the mere goodness of God, lest they should arrogate anything
to themselves, whether they may have escaped from dangers, or whether
they may have risen to any rank of honor. *By the God of thy father*. In
designating God by this title, he again traces whatever good Joseph has
received, to the covenant, and to the fountain of gratuitous adoption;
as if he had said, “Whereas thou hast proved the paternal care of God in
helping thee, I desire that thou wouldst ascribe this to the covenant
which God has made with me.” Meanwhile, (as we have said before,) he
separates from all fictitious idols the God whom he transmits to his
descendants to worship.

<span id="xxvii.i-p158"></span>After he has declared, that Joseph should
be blessed in every way, both as it respects his own life, and the
number and preservation of his posterity; he affirms that the effect of
this benediction is near and almost present, by saying, that he blessed
Joseph more efficaciously than he himself had been blessed by his
fathers. For although, from the beginning, God had been true to his
promises, yet he frequently postponed the effect of them, as if he had
been feeding Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob with nothing but words. For, to
what extent were the patriarchs multiplied in Egypt? Where was that
immense seed which should equal the sands of the seashore and the stars
of heaven? Therefore, not without reason, Jacob declares that the full
time had arrived in which the result of his benediction, which had lain
concealed, should emerge as from the deep. Now, this comparison ought to
inspire us with much greater alacrity at the present time; for the
abundant riches of the grace of God which have flowed to us in Christ,
exceeds a hundredfold, any blessings which Joseph received and felt.

<span id="xxvii.i-p159"></span>What is added *respecting the utmost
bounds of the everlasting hills*, some wish to refer to distance of
place, some to perpetuity of time. Both senses suit very well; either
that the felicity of Joseph should diffuse itself far and wide to the
farthest mountains of the world; or that it should endure as long as the
everlasting hills, which are the firmest portions of the earth, shall
stand. The more certain and genuine sense, however, is to be gathered
from the other passage, where Moses repeats this benediction; namely,
that the fertility of the land would extend to the tops of the
mountains; and these mountains are called perpetual, because they are
most celebrated. He also declares that this blessing should be *upon his
head*, lest Joseph might think that his good wishes were scattered to
the winds; for by this word he intends to show, if I may so speak, that
the blessing was substantial. At length he calls Joseph <span
id="xxvii.i-p159.2"></span>ריזנ (*nazir*) among his brethren, either
because he was their *crown*, on account of the common glory which
redounds from him to them all, or because, on account of the dignity by
which he excels, he was *separated* from them all.  <span
id="fr_216"></span>[217](#fn_216.md) It may be understood in both senses.
Yet we must know that this excellency was temporal, because Joseph,
together with the others, was required to take his proper place, and to
submit himself to the scepter of Judah.

<span id="xxvii.i-p163"></span><span id="xxvii.i-p163.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.i-p164"></span>**27.** *Benjamin shall ravin as a wolf*.
Some of the Jews think the Benjamites are here condemned; because, when
they had suffered lusts to prevail, like lawless robbers, among them,
they were at length cut down and almost destroyed by a terrible
slaughter, for having defiled the Levite’s wife. Others regard it as an
honorable encomium, by which Saul, or Mordecai was adorned, who were
both of the tribe of Benjamin. The interpreters of our own age most
inaptly apply it to the apostle Paul, who was changed from a wolf into a
preacher of the Gospel. Nothing seems to me more probable than that the
disposition and habits of the whole tribe is here delineated; namely,
that they would live by plunder. *In the morning they would seize and
devour the prey,* in the evening they would divide the spoil; by which
words he describes their diligence in plundering.

<span id="xxvii.i-p165"></span><span id="xxvii.i-p165.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.i-p166"></span>**28.** *All these are the twelve tribes
of Israel*. Moses would teach us by these words, that his predictions
did not apply only to the sons of Jacob, but extended to their whole
race. We have, indeed, shown already, with sufficient clearness, that
the expressions relate not to their persons only; but this verse was to
be added, in order that the readers might more clearly perceive the
celestial majesty of the Spirit. Jacob beholds his twelve sons. Let us
grant that, at that time, the number of his offspring, down to his great
grandchildren, had increased a hundredfold. He does not, however, merely
declare what is to be the condition of six hundred or a thousand men,
but subjects regions and nations to his sentence; nor does he put
himself rashly forward, since it is found afterwards, by the event, that
God had certainly made known to him, what he had himself decreed to
execute. Moreover, seeing that Jacob beheld, with the eyes of faith,
things which were not only very remote, but altogether hidden from human
sense; woe be unto our depravity, if we shut our eyes against the very
accomplishment of the prediction in which the truth conspicuously
appears.

<span id="xxvii.i-p167"></span>But it may seem little consonant to
reason, that Jacob is said to have blessed his posterity. For, in
deposing Reuben from the primogeniture, he pronounced nothing joyous or
prosperous respecting him; he also declared his abhorrence of Simon and
Levi. It cannot be alleged that there is an antiphrasis in the word of
benediction, as if it were used in a sense contrary to what is usual;
because it plainly appears to be applied by Moses in a good, and not an
evil sense. I therefore reconcile these things with each other thus;
that the temporal punishments with which Jacob mildly and paternally
corrected his sons, would not subvert the covenant of grace on which the
benediction was founded; but rather, by obliterating their stains, would
restore them to the original degree of honor from which they had fallen,
so that, at least, they should be patriarchs among the people of God.
And the Lord daily proves, in his own people, that the punishments he
lays upon them, although they occasion shame and disgrace, are so far
from opposing their happiness, that they rather promote it. Unless they
were purified in this manner, it were to be feared lest they should
become more and more hardened in their vices, and lest the hidden virus
should produce corruption, which at length would penetrate to the
vitals. We see how freely the flesh indulges itself, even when God
rouses us by the tokens of his anger. What then do we suppose would take
place if he should always connive at transgression? But when we, after
having been reproved for our sins, repent, this result not only absorbs
the curse which was felt at the beginning, but also proves that the Lord
blesses us more by punishing us, than he would have done by sparing us.
Hence it follows, that diseases, poverty, famine, nakedness, and even
death itself, so far as they promote our salvation, may deservedly be
reckoned blessings, as if their very nature were changed; just as the
letting of blood may be not less conducive to health than food. When it
is added at the close*, every one according to his blessing*, Moses
again affirms, that Jacob not only implored a blessing on his sons, from
a paternal desire for their welfare, but that he pronounced what God had
put into his mouth; because at length the event proved that the
prophecies were efficacious.

<span id="xxvii.i-p168"></span><span id="xxvii.i-p168.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.i-p169"></span>**29.** *And he charged them*. We have
seen before, that Jacob especially commanded his son Joseph to take care
that his body should be buried in the land of Canaan. Moses now repeats
that the same command was given to all his sons, in order that they
might go to that country with one consent; and might mutually assist
each other in performing this office. We have stated elsewhere why he
made such a point of conscience of his sepulture; which we must always
remember, lest the example of the holy man should be drawn injudiciously
into a precedent for superstition. Truly he did not wish to be carried
into the land of Canaan, as if he would be the nearer heaven for being
buried there: but that, being dead, he might claim possession of a land
which he had held during his life, only by a precarious tenure. Not that
any advantage would hence accrue to him privately, seeing he had already
fulfilled his course; but because it was profitable that the memory of
the promise should be renewed, by this symbol, among his surviving sons,
in order that they might aspire to it. Meanwhile, we gather that his
mind did not cleave to the earth; because, unless he had been an heir of
heaven, he would never have hoped that God, for the sake of one who was
dead, would prove so bountiful towards his children. Now, to give the
greater weight to his command, Jacob declares that this thing had not
come first into his own mind, but that he had been thus taught by his
forefathers. Abraham, he says, bought that sepulcher for himself and his
family: hitherto, we have sacredly kept the law delivered to us by him.
You must therefore take care not to violate it, in order that after my
death also, some token of the favor of God may continue with us.

<span id="xxvii.i-p170"></span><span id="xxvii.i-p170.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.i-p171"></span>**33.** *He gathered up his feet*. The
expression is not superfluous: because Moses wished thereby to describe
the placid death of the holy man: as if he had said, that the aged saint
gave directions respecting the disposal of his body, as easily as
healthy and vigorous men are wont to compose themselves to sleep. And
truly a wonderful vigor and presence of mind was necessary for him,
when, while death was in his countenance, he thus courageously fulfilled
the prophetic office enjoined upon him. And it is not to be doubted that
such efficacy of the Holy Spirit manifested itself in him, as served to
produce, in his sons, confidence in, and reverence for his prophecies.
At the same time, however, it is proper to observe, that it is the
effect of a good conscience, to be able to depart out of the world
without terror. For since death is by nature formidable, wonderful
torments agitate the wicked, when they perceive that they are summoned
to the tribunal of God. Moreover, in order that a good conscience may
lead us peacefully and quietly to the grave, it is necessary to rely
upon the resurrection of Christ; for we then go willingly to God, when
we have confidence respecting a better life. We shall not deem it
grievous to leave this failing tabernacle, when we reflect on the
everlasting abode which is prepared for us.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_193"></span>[194](cc02026.htm#fr_193.md) <span
id="xxvii.i-p70.2"></span>

<span id="xxvii.i-p71"></span> <span id="xxvii.i-p71.1"></span>Sed
oblatrant quidam protervi canes.

<span id="fn_194"></span>[195](cc02026.htm#fr_194.md) <span
id="xxvii.i-p72.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.i-p73"></span> The reader will observe, that the entire
structure of these predictions is poetical. The prophecies of the Old
Testament are generally delivered in this form; and God has thus chosen
the most natural method of conveying prophetic intelligence, through the
medium of that elevated strain of diction, which suggests itself to
imaginative minds, which is peculiarly fitted to deal with sublime and
invisible realities, and which best serves to stir up animated feelings,
and to fix important truths in the memory of the reader. They who wish
to examine more minutely the poetical character of the chapter, are
referred to *Dr. Adam Clarke’s* Commentary, and to *Caunter’s* Poetry of
the Pentateuch. A few observations, in passing, will be made in the
notes to such passages as derive elucidation from their poetical
structure. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_195"></span>[196](cc02026.htm#fr_195.md) <span
id="xxvii.i-p77.2"></span>

<span id="xxvii.i-p78"></span> The literal translation of Calvin’s
version is, “Thy velocity was like that of water, thou shalt not excel:
because thou wentest up into thy father’s couch, then thou pollutedst my
bed, he has vanished.” This gives the patriarch’s expression a different
turn from that supposed by our translators; who understand the last word
in the sentence to be a repetition of what had been said before, only
putting it in the third person, as expressive of indignation; as if he
had turned round from Reuben to his other children and said — “Yes, I
declare he went up into my bed!” Another view is given in the margin of
our Bible, “My couch is gone;” which means that, by this defilement, the
marriage bond was broken. To this version Calvin objects at the close of
the paragraph. But both these constructions seem forced. Calvin’s
appears the most natural. He represents Reuben as having lost all, by
his criminal conduct. Honour, excellence, priority, virtue, and
consequently character and influence, had all gone up as the dew from
the face of the earth, and had vanished away. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_196"></span>[197](cc02026.htm#fr_196.md) <span
id="xxvii.i-p81.2"></span>

<span id="xxvii.i-p82"></span> If this interpretation were admitted, the
passage would read thus: “Simeon and Levi are brethren, instruments of
cruelty are their swords.”

<span id="fn_197"></span>[198](cc02026.htm#fr_197.md) <span
id="xxvii.i-p82.3"></span>

<span id="xxvii.i-p83"></span> <span id="xxvii.i-p83.1"></span>In coetu
eorum non uniaris lingua mea This is Calvin’s version; and it may
perhaps be vindicated by the use made of the word <span
id="xxvii.i-p83.2"></span>דבכ in other passages, where the tongue is
metaphorically called the glory of man. Yet the passage plainly admits
of another and perhaps a more simple signification. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_198"></span>[199](cc02026.htm#fr_198.md) <span
id="xxvii.i-p83.3"></span>

<span id="xxvii.i-p84"></span> <span id="xxvii.i-p84.1"></span>Quia in
furore sua, etc. Because in their fury they killed a man. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_199"></span>[200](cc02026.htm#fr_199.md) <span
id="xxvii.i-p84.2"></span>

<span id="xxvii.i-p85"></span> <span id="xxvii.i-p85.1"></span>Libido is
not the word used in Calvin’s version, though his commentary proceeds on
that supposition. His words are “<span
id="xxvii.i-p85.2"></span>voluntate sua eradicaverunt murum.” In their
will, or pleasure, they uprooted a wall. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_200"></span>[201](cc02026.htm#fr_200.md) <span
id="xxvii.i-p85.4"></span>

<span id="xxvii.i-p86"></span> The marginal reading of our Bible for
“they digged down a wall,” is “they houghed oxen.” Some translators who
think that the word ought to be rendered “ox,” and not “wall,” regard
the word ox as a metaphorical term for a brave and powerful man. Thus
*Herder*, in *Caunter’s* Poetry of the Pentateuch, gives the following
version:

<span id="xxvii.i-p87"></span>“My heart was not joined in their
company,  
When in anger they slew a hero,  
And in revenge destroyed a noble ox.”

<span id="xxvii.i-p88"></span>*Dr. A. Clarke* suggests an alteration in
the word, which gives the passage another sense:

<span id="xxvii.i-p89"></span>“In their anger they slew a man,  
And in their pleasure they murdered a prince.”

<span id="xxvii.i-p90"></span>— *Ed*.

<span id="fn_201"></span>[202](cc02026.htm#fr_201.md) <span
id="xxvii.i-p93.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.i-p94"></span> As being no longer applicable to the
case, because it was purely personal and belonged to Levi, only as an
individual, and not to his descendents. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_202"></span>[203](cc02026.htm#fr_202.md) <span
id="xxvii.i-p98.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.i-p99"></span> The original privilege of the birthright,
taken from Reuben, was divided between Joseph and Judah; Joseph
receiving the double portion belonging to the eldest son; Judah the
regal distinction. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_203"></span>[204](cc02026.htm#fr_203.md) <span
id="xxvii.i-p102.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.i-p103"></span> *Bishop* *Lowth’s* translationin this:

<span id="xxvii.i-p104"></span>“Judah is a lion’s welp.  
From the prey, my son, thou art gone up  
He stoopeth down, he coucheth as a lion,  
And as a lioness; who shall rouse him?”

<span id="xxvii.i-p105"></span>It is to be observed that three different
words are here used in the original to express the metaphor, which
illustrates the character of the tribe of Judah. First, <span
id="xxvii.i-p105.1"></span>רוג, (*gur*) the lion’s cub; secondly, <span
id="xxvii.i-p105.2"></span>הירא, (*aryah*,) the full-grown lion; and
thirdly, <span id="xxvii.i-p105.3"></span>איבל, (*labi*,) the old
lioness. These different terms are supposed to represent the tribe of
Judah in its earliest period, in the age of David, and in subsequent
times.

<span id="fn_204"></span>[205](cc02026.htm#fr_204.md) <span
id="xxvii.i-p108.7"></span>

<span id="xxvii.i-p109"></span> Calvin seems to assent to this
interpretation, which is by no means generally accepted. *Gesenius*
renders <span id="xxvii.i-p109.1"></span>הליש, tranquillity — “until
tranquillity shall come;” but the more approved rendering is “the
Peaceable One,” or “the Pacifier.” He who made peace for us, by the
sacrifice of Himself. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_205"></span>[206](cc02026.htm#fr_205.md) <span
id="xxvii.i-p109.2"></span>

<span id="xxvii.i-p110"></span> <span id="xxvii.i-p110.1"></span>Scribam
recessurum negat ex pedibus. But in the text, Calvin uses the word <span
id="xxvii.i-p110.2"></span>Legislator; the French version translates
<span id="xxvii.i-p110.3"></span>ir Legislateur; and the English
translation is lawgiver. It is evident that Calvin had a reason for
using the term Scribe; for the orignal <span
id="xxvii.i-p110.4"></span>קקחמ, (*mechokaik*,) rather means a scribe or
lawyer, than a lawgiver; and rather describes one who aids in the
administration of laws, than one who frames them. In this sense, he
supposes, and probably with truth, that the term is here applied. The
expression “from between his feet,” has been the subject of much
criticism; but perhaps no view of it is so satisfactory as that
maintained by Calvin. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_206"></span>[207](cc02026.htm#fr_206.md) <span
id="xxvii.i-p115.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.i-p116"></span> <span id="xxvii.i-p116.1"></span>Quia
nihil hoc cavilla proficiunt Judaei, ad figmentum venturi sui Messiae
trahentes vetustum regni excidium. Literally translated, the sense of
the passage would not be obvious to the English reader. It is hoped that
the true meaning of the passage is given above. The original, however,
is given, that the learned reader may form his own judgment. It is well
known that modern Jews regard their present depression as a proof that
the Messiah has not yet come, and therefore they draw out (<span
id="xxvii.i-p116.2"></span>trahentes) or postpone the execution of God’s
threatened judgments, which we regard as having taken place under Titus
and the Romans, to a period still future. This seems to be Calvin’s
meaning. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_207"></span>[208](cc02026.htm#fr_207.md) <span
id="xxvii.i-p116.3"></span>

<span id="xxvii.i-p117"></span> On this passage, which has given so much
trouble to commentators, and which Calvin has considered as such length,
it may be observed, that the term rendered scepter means also rod, and
sometimes is translated tribe; perhaps because each of the twelve tribes
had its rod laid up in the tabernacle and temple. Hence it may be
inferred that the expression, “The scepter shall not depart from Judah,”
means that Judah alone should continue in its integrity, as a tribe,
till the coming of the Messiah. This renders it unnecessary to attempt
any proof of the retention of regal power and authority in the tribe.
See *Ainsworth* and *Bush* in loc. The reader may also refer to an
elaborate investigation of the subject in *Rivetus*, Exercitations 178
and 179. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_208"></span>[209](cc02026.htm#fr_208.md) <span
id="xxvii.i-p124.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.i-p125"></span> <span id="xxvii.i-p125.1"></span>Asinus
osseus.

<span id="fn_209"></span>[210](cc02026.htm#fr_209.md) <span
id="xxvii.i-p127.2"></span>

<span id="xxvii.i-p128"></span> See <span id="xxvii.i-p128.1"></span>[Nu
2](../../../bib/kjv/num002.htm#000.md)<span id="xxvii.i-p128.1"></span>,
where the order of the tribes in their encampment is given. Judah had
the standard for the three tribes on the east, Reuben for the three
tribes on the south, Ephriam for the three tribes on the west, and Dan
for the remaining three tribes on the north of the tabernacle. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_210"></span>[211](cc02026.htm#fr_210.md) <span
id="xxvii.i-p128.2"></span>

<span id="xxvii.i-p129"></span> The word <span
id="xxvii.i-p129.1"></span>ןופיפש, (*sheppiphon*,) translated “adder,”
occurs only in this place. It is supposed by Bochart to be the cerastes,
“a serpent so called,” says Calmet, “because it has horns on its
forehead.” *Dr. A. Clarke* gives this translation:

<span id="xxvii.i-p130"></span>“Dan shall be a serpent on the way,  
A cerastes upon the track,  
Biting the heels of the horse,  
And his rider shall fall backwards.”

<span id="xxvii.i-p131"></span>— *Ed*.

<span id="fn_211"></span>[212](cc02026.htm#fr_211.md) <span
id="xxvii.i-p133.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.i-p134"></span> Jewish commentators suppose the
patriarch’s exclamation to have been suggested in this place, by a
prospective view of the temporal deliverances wrought for Israel, by
warriors of the tribe of Daniel So the Chaldee Paraphrast represents him
as saying, “I look not for the salvation of Gideon, because it is a
temporal salvation; nor for the salvation of Sampson the son of Manoah,
because it is transitory; but I look for the redemption of Christ the
Son of David, who is to come to call to himself the children, whose
salvation my soul desireth.” See *Bush* and *Dr. A. Clarke*. Yet there
is something affecting in the thought, that the exclamation might be a
sudden burst of holy desire for the immediate fruition of the glory
which the dying patriarch now saw so near at hand. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_212"></span>[213](cc02026.htm#fr_212.md) <span
id="xxvii.i-p140.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.i-p141"></span> As the word <span
id="xxvii.i-p141.1"></span>הליא, rendered hind, sometimes means a tree,
it is supposed by some, that it should be so translated here. *Bochart*
suggests this translation:

<span id="xxvii.i-p142"></span>“Naphtali is a spreading oak,  
Producing beautiful branches.”

<span id="xxvii.i-p143"></span>*Dr. A. Clarke* strenuously defends this
version, and says, “perhaps no man who understands the genius of the
Hebrew language will attempt to dispute its propriety.” Yet perhaps the
received translation is not to be so easily disposed of. It may be
granted that *Bochart’s* figure is more beautiful; but it will be
difficult to show that his translation is equally literal and correct.
*Caunter* suggests another rendering:

<span id="xxvii.i-p144"></span>*“Naphtali is a deer roaming at
liberty,  
He shooteth forth noble branches,”* — *or antlers.*

<span id="xxvii.i-p145"></span>— *Ed*.

<span id="fn_213"></span>[214](cc02026.htm#fr_213.md) <span
id="xxvii.i-p147.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.i-p148"></span> “<span id="xxvii.i-p148.1"></span>Filium
decoris.” The original is <span id="xxvii.i-p148.2"></span>תרפ נב,
(*Ben* *porath*,) literally, “the son of fruitfulness.” The name of
Joseph’s son, Ephriam, is derived from this word. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_214"></span>[215](cc02026.htm#fr_214.md) <span
id="xxvii.i-p148.3"></span>

<span id="xxvii.i-p149"></span> <span id="xxvii.i-p149.1"></span>תונב,
(*Banoth*,) literally, “the daughters went over the wall.” But Calvin,
with our translators, wisely interprets the expression as a poetical
one, meaning the branches, (which are the daughters of the tree,)
according to a very usual phraseology of the Hebrew Scriptures. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_215"></span>[216](cc02026.htm#fr_215.md) <span
id="xxvii.i-p149.2"></span>

<span id="xxvii.i-p150"></span> Archers, literally, “Lords of the
arrows.”

<span id="xxvii.i-p151"></span>“The archers shot at him with hpoisoned
arrows,  
They have pursued him with hatred.”

<span id="xxvii.i-p152"></span>Waterland in Caunter’s Poetry of the
Pentateuch, vol. I., p. 223. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_216"></span>[217](cc02026.htm#fr_216.md) <span
id="xxvii.i-p159.3"></span>

<span id="xxvii.i-p160"></span> “The blessings of thy father have
prevailed over the blessings of the eternal mountains,

<span id="xxvii.i-p161"></span>And the desirable things of the
everlasting hills.  
These shall be on the head of Joseph,  
And on his crown who was separated from his brethren.”

<span id="xxvii.i-p162"></span>— *Dr. A. Clarke.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 50](cc02027.md)
