[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc02005)  [Next](cc02007) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 2: Genesis, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii"></span>

<span id="vii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 29.

<span id="vii.i"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p1"></span><span id="vii.i-p1.1"></span>[Genesis
29:1-35](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#001)<span id="vii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p2"></span>**1.** Then Jacob went on his journey, and
came into the land of the people of the east.

<span id="vii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Et levavit Iahacob pedes suos, et
perrexit ad terram filiorum Orientalium.

<span id="vii.i-p4"></span>**2.** And he looked, and behold a well in
the field, and, lo, there *were* three flocks of sheep lying by it; for
out of that well they watered the flocks: and a great stone *was* upon
the well’s mouth.

<span id="vii.i-p5"></span>**2.** Et vidit, et ecce puteus erat in agro,
ecce quoque ibi tres greges pecudum, qui cubabant juxta illum: qua e
puteo ipso potum dabant gregibus, et lapis magnus erat super os putei.

<span id="vii.i-p6"></span>**3.** And thither were all the flocks
gathered: and they rolled the stone from the well’s mouth, and watered
the sheep, and put the stone again upon the well’s mouth in his place.

<span id="vii.i-p7"></span>**3.** Et congregabant se illuc omnes greges,
et revolvebant lapidem ab ore putei potumque dabant pecudibus: et
restituebant lapidem super os putei in locum suum.

<span id="vii.i-p8"></span>**4.** And Jacob said unto them, My brethren,
whence *be* ye? And they said, Of Haran *are* we.

<span id="vii.i-p9"></span>**4.** Dixit ergo ad eos Iahacob, Fratres mei
unde estis? Et dixerunt, Novimus.

<span id="vii.i-p10"></span>**5.** And he said unto them, Know ye Laban
the son of Nahor? And they said, We know *him*

<span id="vii.i-p11"></span>**5.** Tunc dixit ad eos, Numquid nostis
Laban filium Nachor? Et dixerunt, Novimus.

<span id="vii.i-p12"></span>**6.** And he said unto them, *Is* he well?
And they said, *He is* well: and, behold, Rachel his daughter cometh
with the sheep.

<span id="vii.i-p13"></span>**6.** Et dixit ad eos, Numquid est pax ei?
Et dixerunt, Pax: et ecce Rachel filia ejus veniens cum pecudibus.

<span id="vii.i-p14"></span>**7.** And he said, Lo, *it is* yet high
day, neither *is it* time that the cattle should be gathered together:
water ye the sheep, and go *and* feed *them*

<span id="vii.i-p15"></span>**7.** Tunc dixit, Ecce, adhuc dies magnus:
non est tempus ut congregetur pecus: potum date pecudibus, et ite,
pascite.

<span id="vii.i-p16"></span>**8.** And they said, We cannot, until all
the flocks be gathered together, and *till* they roll the stone from the
well’s mouth; then we water the sheep.

<span id="vii.i-p17"></span>**8.** Qui dixerunt, Non possumus, donec
congregentur omnes greges, et revolvant lapidem ab ore putei, et potum
demus pecudibus.

<span id="vii.i-p18"></span>**9.** And while he yet spake with them,
Rachel came with her father’s sheep: for she kept them.

<span id="vii.i-p19"></span>**9.** Adhuc eo loquente cum eis, Rachel
venit cum pecudibus quae erant patris sui: quia ipsa pascebat.

<span id="vii.i-p20"></span>**10.** And it came to pass, when Jacob saw
Rachel the daughter of Laban his mother’s brother, and the sheep of
Laban his mother’s brother, that Jacob went near, and rolled the stone
from the well’s mouth, and watered the flock of Laban his mother’s
brother.

<span id="vii.i-p21"></span>**10.** Fuit autem quando vidit Iahacob
Rachel filiam Laban fratris matris suae, et pecudes Laban fratris matris
suae, accessit Iahacob, et revolvit lapidem ab ore putei, et potum dedit
pecudibus Laban fratris matris suae.

<span id="vii.i-p22"></span>**11.** And Jacob kissed Rachel, and lifted
up his voice, and wept.

<span id="vii.i-p23"></span>**11.** Et osculatus est Iahacob Rachel, qui
elevavit vocem suam, et flevit.

<span id="vii.i-p24"></span>**12.** And Jacob told Rachel that he *was*
her father’s brother, and that he *was* Rebekah’s son: and she ran and
told her father.

<span id="vii.i-p25"></span>**12.** Et nuntiavit Iahacob ipsi Rachel
quod frater patris sui esset, et quod filius Ribcae esset: cucurrit
itaque, et nuntiavit patri suo.

<span id="vii.i-p26"></span>**13.** And it came to pass, when Laban
heard the tidings of Jacob his sister’s son, that he ran to meet him,
and embraced him, and kissed him, and brought him to his house. And he
told Laban all these things.

<span id="vii.i-p27"></span>**13.** Et fuit, quum audisset Laban
sermonem (vel, nuntium) Iahacob filii sororis suae, cucurrit in occursum
ejus, et amplexatus est eum, osculatusque est eum, et deduxit eum ad
domum suam, et narravit ipsi Laban omnia haec.

<span id="vii.i-p28"></span>**14.** And Laban said to him, Surely thou
*art* my bone and my flesh. And he abode with him the space of a month.

<span id="vii.i-p29"></span>**14.** Tunc dixit ei Laban, Profecto os
meum et caro mea es. Et habitavit cum eo mensem integrum.

<span id="vii.i-p30"></span>**15.** And Laban said unto Jacob, Because
thou *art* my brother, shouldest thou therefore serve me for nought?
tell me, what *shall* thy wages *be*?

<span id="vii.i-p31"></span>**15.** Dixit autem Laban ad Iahacob, Num
quoniam frater meus es, servies mihi gratis? indica mihi quae sit merces
tua.

<span id="vii.i-p32"></span>**16.** And Laban had two daughters: the
name of the elder *was* Leah, and the name of the younger *was* Rachel.

<span id="vii.i-p33"></span>**16.** Et Laban erant duae filiae: nomen
majoris, Leah, et nomen minoris Rachel.

<span id="vii.i-p34"></span>**17.** Leah *was* tender eyed; but Rachel
was beautiful and well favoured.

<span id="vii.i-p35"></span>**17.** Oculi autem Leah erant teneri: at
Rachel erat pulchra forma, et pulchra aspectu.

<span id="vii.i-p36"></span>**18.** And Jacob loved Rachel; and said, I
will serve thee seven years for Rachel thy younger daughter.

<span id="vii.i-p37"></span>**18.** Dilexit itaque Iahacob Rachel: et
dixit, Serviam tibi septem annos pro Rachel filia tua minore.

<span id="vii.i-p38"></span>**19.** And Laban said, *It is* better that
I give her to thee, than that I should give her to another man: abide
with me.

<span id="vii.i-p39"></span>**19.** Tunc dixit Laban, Melius est ut dem
eam tibi, quam dem eam viro alteri: mane mecum.

<span id="vii.i-p40"></span>**20.** And Jacob served seven years for
Rachel; and they seemed unto him *but* a few days, for the love he had
to her.

<span id="vii.i-p41"></span>**20.** Servivit itaque Iahacob pro Rachel
septem annos; et fuerunt in oculis ejus sicut dies pauci, eo quod
diligeret eam.

<span id="vii.i-p42"></span>**21.** And Jacob said unto Laban, Give *me*
my wife, for my days are fulfilled, that I may go in unto her.

<span id="vii.i-p43"></span>**21.** Postea dixit Iahacob ad Laban, Da
uxorem meam: quia completi sunt dies mei, ut ingrediar ad eam.

<span id="vii.i-p44"></span>**22.** And Laban gathered together all the
men of the place, and made a feast.

<span id="vii.i-p45"></span>**22.** Et congregavit Laban omnes viros
loci, et fecit convivium.

<span id="vii.i-p46"></span>**23.** And it came to pass in the evening,
that he took Leah his daughter, and brought her to him; and he went in
unto her.

<span id="vii.i-p47"></span>**23.** Fuit autem vesperi, in vespera
accepit Leah filiam suam, et adduxit eam ad illum, et ingressus est ad
eam.

<span id="vii.i-p48"></span>**24.** And Laban gave unto his daughter
Leah Zilpah his maid *for* an handmaid.

<span id="vii.i-p49"></span>**24.** Et dedit Laban ei Zilpah ancillam
suam, Leah filiae suae ancillam.

<span id="vii.i-p50"></span>**25.** And it came to pass, that in the
morning, behold, it *was* Leah: and he said to Laban, What *is* this
thou hast done unto me? did not I serve with thee for Rachel? wherefore
then hast thou beguiled me?

<span id="vii.i-p51"></span>**25.** Et fuit mane, et ecce erat Leah, et
dixit ad Laban, Quid hoc fecisti mihi? numquid non pro Rachel servivi
tibi? et utquid decepisti me?

<span id="vii.i-p52"></span>**26.** And Laban said, It must not be so
done in our country, to give the younger before the firstborn.

<span id="vii.i-p53"></span>**26.** Tunc dixit Laban, Non fit ita in
loco nostro, ut detur minor ante primogenitam.

<span id="vii.i-p54"></span>**27.** Fulfil her week, and we will give
thee this also for the service which thou shalt serve with me yet seven
other years.

<span id="vii.i-p55"></span>**27.** Comple hebdomadem hujus, et dabimus
tibi etiam hanc pro servitute, quam servies mihi adhuc septem annos
alios.

<span id="vii.i-p56"></span>**28.** And Jacob did so, and fulfilled her
week: and he gave him Rachel his daughter to wife also.

<span id="vii.i-p57"></span>**28.** Fecit ergo Iahacob sic, et complevit
hebdomadem illius, et dedit ei Rachel filiam suam in uxorem.

<span id="vii.i-p58"></span>**29.** And Laban gave to Rachel his
daughter Bilhah his handmaid to be her maid.

<span id="vii.i-p59"></span>**29.** Et dedit Laban Rachel filiae suae
Bilhah ancillam suam in ancillam.

<span id="vii.i-p60"></span>**30.** And he went in also unto Rachel, and
he loved also Rachel more than Leah, and served with him yet seven other
years.

<span id="vii.i-p61"></span>**30.** Et ingressus est etiam ad Rachel: et
dilexit etiam Rachel magis quam Leah: servivitque ei adhuc septem annos
alios.

<span id="vii.i-p62"></span>**31.** And when the LORD saw that Leah
*was* hated, he opened her womb: but Rachel *was* barren.

<span id="vii.i-p63"></span>**31.** Vidit autem Iehova quod exosa esset
Leah, et aperuit vulvam ejus, et Rachel erat sterilis.

<span id="vii.i-p64"></span>**32.** And Leah conceived, and bare a son,
and she called his name Reuben: for she said, Surely the LORD hath
looked upon my affliction; now therefore my husband will love me.

<span id="vii.i-p65"></span>**32.** Et concepit Leah, et peperit filium,
vocavitque nomen ejus Reuben: quia dixit, Nempe vidit Iehova
afflictionem meam: nunc enim diliget me vir meus.

<span id="vii.i-p66"></span>**33.** And she conceived again, and bare a
son; and said, Because the LORD hath heard that I *was* hated, he hath
therefore given me this *son* also: and she called his name Simeon.

<span id="vii.i-p67"></span>**33.** Et concepit adhuc, et peperit
filium, et dixit, Quia audivit Iehova quod exosa essem, dedit mihi etiam
hunc. Et vocavit nomen ejus Simeon.

<span id="vii.i-p68"></span>**34.** And she conceived again, and bare a
son; and said, Now this time will my husband be joined unto me, because
I have born him three sons: therefore was his name called Levi.

<span id="vii.i-p69"></span>**34.** Et concepit adhuc, et peperit
filium, et dixit, Nunc vice hac copulabitur vir meus mihi, quia peperi
ei tres filios. Idcirco vocavit nomen ejus Levi.

<span id="vii.i-p70"></span>**35.** And she conceived again, and bare a
son: and she said, Now will I praise the LORD: therefore she called his
name Judah; and left bearing.

<span id="vii.i-p71"></span>**35.** Et concepit adhuc, et peperit
filium, et dixit, Vice hac confitebor Iehovae. Idcirco vocavit nomen
ejus Iehudah: et destitit a pariendo.

<span id="vii.i-p72"></span> 

<span id="vii.i-p73"></span><span id="vii.i-p73.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p74"></span>**1.** *Then Jacob went on his journey*
 <span id="fr_61"></span>[62](#fn_61) Moses now relates the arrival of
Jacob in Mesopotamia, and the manner in which he was received by his
uncle; and although the narration may seem superfluous, it yet contains
nothing but what is useful to be known; for he commends the
extraordinary strength of Jacob’s faith, when he says, that he lifted up
his feet to come into an unknown land. Again, he would have us to
consider the providence of God, which caused Jacob to fall in with the
shepherds, by whom he was conducted to the home he sought; for this did
not happen accidentally, but he was guided by the hidden hand of God to
that place; and the shepherds, who were to instruct and confirm him
respecting all things, were brought thither at the same time. Therefore,
whenever we may wander in uncertainty through intricate windings, we
must contemplate, with eyes of faith, the secret providence of God which
governs us and our affairs, and leads us to unexpected results.

<span id="vii.i-p76"></span><span id="vii.i-p76.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p77"></span>**4.** *My brethren, whence be ye?* The
great frankness of that age appears in this manner of meeting together;
for, though the fraternal name is often abused by dishonest and wicked
men, it is yet not to be doubted that friendly intercourse was then more
faithfully cultivated than it is now. This was the reason why Jacob
salutes unknown men as brethren, undoubtedly according to received
custom. Frugality also is apparent, in that Rachel sometimes pays
attention to the flock; for, since Laban abounds with servants, how does
it happen that he employs his own daughter in a vile and sordid service,
except that it was deemed disgraceful to educate children in idleness,
softness, and indulgence? Whereas, on the contrary, at this day, since
ambition, pride, and refinement, have rendered manners effeminate, the
care of domestic concerns is held in such contempt, that women, for the
most part, are ashamed of their proper office. It followed, from the
same purity of manners which has been mentioned, that Jacob ventured so
unceremoniously to kiss his cousin; for much greater liberty was allowed
in their chaste and modest mode of living.  <span
id="fr_62"></span>[63](#fn_62) In our times, impurity and ungovernable
lusts are the cause why not only kisses are suspected, but even looks
are dreaded; and not unjustly, since the world is filled with every kind
of corruption, and such perfidy prevails, that the intercourse between
men and women is seldom conducted with modesty:  <span
id="fr_63"></span>[64](#fn_63) wherefore, that ancient simplicity ought
to cause us deeply to mourn; so that this vile corruption into which the
world has fallen may be distasteful to us, and that the contagion of it
may not affect us and our families. The order of events, however, is
inverted in the narration of Moses; for Jacob did not kiss Rachel till
he had informed her that he was her relative. Hence also his weeping;
for, partly through joy, partly through the memory of his father’s
house, and through natural affection, he burst into tears.

<span id="vii.i-p80"></span><span id="vii.i-p80.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p81"></span>**13.** *And he told Laban all these
things*. Since Laban had previously seen one of Abraham’s servants
replenished with great wealth, an unfavourable opinion of his nephew
might instantly enter into his mind: it was therefore necessary for holy
Jacob to explain the causes of his own departure, and the reason why he
had been sent away so contemptibly clothed. It is also probable that he
had been instructed by his mother respecting the signs and marks by
which he might convince them of his relationship: therefore Laban
exclaims, Surely thou art my bone and my flesh; intimating that he was
fully satisfied, and that he was induced by indubitable tokens to
acknowledge Jacob as his nephew. This knowledge inclines him to
humanity; for the sense of nature dictates that they who are united by
ties of blood should endeavor to assist each other; but though the bond
between relatives is closer, yet our kindness ought to extend more
widely, so that it may diffuse itself through the whole human race. If,
however, all the sons of Adam are thus joined together, that spiritual
relationship which God produces between the faithful, and than which
there is no holier bond of mutual benevolence, ought to be much more
effectual.

<span id="vii.i-p82"></span><span id="vii.i-p82.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p83"></span>**14.** *And he abode with him the space of
a month*. Though Laban did not doubt that Jacob was his nephew by his
sister, he nevertheless puts his character to trial during a month, and
then treats with him respecting wages. Hence may be inferred the
uprightness of the holy man; because he was not idle while with his
uncle, but employed himself in honest labors, that he might not in
idleness eat another’s bread for nothing; hence Laban is compelled to
acknowledge that some reward beyond his mere food was due to him. When
he says, “Because thou art my brother, shouldest thou therefore serve me
for nought?” his meaning may be twofold; either that it would be
excessively absurd and unjust to defraud a relation of his due reward,
for whom he ought to have greater consideration than for any stranger;
or that he was unwilling to exact gratuitous service under the color of
relationship. This second exposition is the more suitable, and is
received nearly by the consent of all. For they read in one connected
sentence, “Because thou art my brother, shalt thou therefore serve me
for nought?” Moreover, we must note the end for which Moses relates
these things. In the first place, a great principle of equity is set
before us in Laban; inasmuch as this sentiment is inherent in almost all
minds, that justice ought to be mutually cultivated, till blind cupidity
draws them away in another direction. And God has engraven in man’s
nature a law of equity; so that whoever declines from that rule, through
an immoderate desire of private advantage, is left utterly without
excuse. But a little while after, when it came to a matter of practice,
Laban, forgetful of this equity, thinks only of what may be profitable
to himself. Such an example is certainly worthy of notice, for men
seldom err in general principles, and therefore, with one mouth, confess
that every man ought to receive what is his due but as soon as they
descend to their own affairs, perverse self-love blinds them, or at
least envelopes them in such clouds that they are carried in an opposite
course. Wherefore, let us learn to restrain ourselves, that a desire of
our own advantage may not prevail to the sacrifice of justice. And hence
has arisen the proverb, that no one is a fit judge in his own cause,
because each, being unduly favorable to himself, becomes forgetful of
what is right. Wherefore, we must ask God to govern and restrain our
affections by a spirit of sound judgment. Laban, in wishing to enter
into a covenant, does what tends to avoid contentions and complaints.
The ancient saying is known, “We should deal lawfully with our friends,
that we may not afterwards be obliged to go to law with them.” For,
whence arise so many legal broils, except that every one is more liberal
towards himself, and more niggardly towards others than he ought to be?
Therefore, for the purpose of cherishing concord, firm compacts are
necessary, which may prevent injustice on one side or the other.

<span id="vii.i-p84"></span><span id="vii.i-p84.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p85"></span>**18.** *I will serve thee seven years*. The
iniquity of Laban betrays itself in a moment; for it is a shameful
barbarity to give his daughter, by way of reward, in exchange for
Jacob’s services, making her the subject of a kind of barter. He ought,
on the other hand, not only to have assigned a portion to his daughter,
but also to have acted more liberally towards his future son-in-law. But
under the pretext of affinity, he defrauds him of the reward of his
labor, the very thing which he had before acknowledged to be unjust.
 <span id="fr_64"></span>[65](#fn_64) We therefore perceive still more
clearly what I have previously alluded to, that although from their
mother’s womb men have a general notion of justice, yet as soon as their
own advantage presents itself to view, they become actually unjust,
unless the Lord reforms them by his Spirit. Moses does not here relate
something rare or unusual, but what is of most common occurrence. For
though men do not set their daughters to sale, yet the desire of gain
hurries the greater part so far away, that they prostitute their honor
and sell their souls. Further, it is not altogether to be deemed a fault
that Jacob was rather inclined to love Rachel; whether it was that Leah,
on account of her tender eyes, was less beautiful, or that she was
pleasing only by the comeliness of her eyes,  <span
id="fr_65"></span>[66](#fn_65) while Rachel excelled her altogether in
elegance of form. For we see how naturally a secret kind of affection
produces mutual love. Only excess is to be guarded against, and so much
the more diligently, because it is difficult so to restrain affections
of this kind, that they do not prevail to the stifling of reason.
Therefore he who shall be induced to choose a wife, because of the
elegance of her form, will not necessarily sin, provided reason always
maintains the ascendancy, and holds the wantonness of passion in
subjection. Yet perhaps Jacob sinned in being too self-indulgent, when
he desired Rachel the younger sister to be given to him, to the injury
of the elder; and also, while yielding to the desire of his own eyes, he
undervalued the virtues of Leah: for this is a very culpable want of
self-government, when any one chooses a wife only for the sake of her
beauty, whereas excellence of disposition ought to be deemed of the
first importance. But the strength and ardor of his attachment manifests
itself in this, that he felt no weariness in the labor of seven years:
but chastity was also joined with it, so that he persevered, during this
long period, with a patient and quiet mind in the midst of so many
labors. And here again the integrity and continence of that age is
apparent, because, though dwelling under the same roof, and accustomed
to familiar intercourse, Jacob yet conducted himself with modesty, and
abstained from all impropriety. Therefore, at the close of the appointed
time he said, “Give me my wife, that I may go in unto her,” by which he
implies that she had been hitherto a pure virgin.

<span id="vii.i-p88"></span><span id="vii.i-p88.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p89"></span>**22.** *And Laban gathered together*. Moses
does not mean that a supper was prepared for the whole people, but that
many guests were invited, as is customary in splendid nuptials; and
there is no doubt that he applied himself with the greater earnestness
to adorn that feast, for the purpose of holding Jacob bound by a sense
of shame, so that he should not dare to depreciate the marriage into
which he had been deceived. We hence gather what, at that time, was the
religious observance connected with the marriage bed. For this was the
occasion of Jacob’s deception that, out of regard for the modesty of
brides, they were led veiled into the chamber; but now, the ancient
discipline being rejected, men become almost brutal.

<span id="vii.i-p90"></span><span id="vii.i-p90.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p91"></span>**25.** *And he said to Laban*. Jacob
rightly expostulates respecting the fraud practiced upon him. And the
answer of Laban, though it is not without a pretext, yet forms no excuse
for the fraud. It was not the custom to give the younger daughters in
marriage before the elder: and injustice would have been done to the
firstborn by disturbing this accustomed order. But he ought not, on that
account, craftily to have betrothed Rachel to Jacob, and then to have
substituted Leah in her place. He should rather have cautioned Jacob
himself, in time, to turn his thoughts to Leah, or else to refrain from
marriage with either of them. But we may learn from this, that wicked
and deceitful men, when once they have turned aside from truth, make no
end of transgressing: meanwhile, they always put forward some pretext
for the purpose of freeing themselves from blame. He had before acted
unjustly toward his nephew in demanding seven years’ labor for his
daughter; he had also unjustly set his daughter to sale, without dowry,
for the sake of gain; but the most unworthy deed of all was perfidiously
to deprive his nephew of his betrothed wife, to pervert the sacred laws
of marriage, and to leave nothing safe or sound. Yet we see him
pretending that he has an honorable defense for his conduct, because it
was not the custom of the country to prefer the younger to the elder.

<span id="vii.i-p92"></span><span id="vii.i-p92.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p93"></span>**27.** *Fulfil her week*. Laban now is
become callous in wickedness, for he extorts other seven years from his
nephew to allow him to marry his other daughter. If he had had ten more
daughters, he would have been ready thus to dispose of them all: yea, of
his own accord, he obtrudes his daughter as an object of merchandise,
thinking nothing of the disgrace of this illicit sale, if only he may
make it a source of gain. In this truly he grievously sins, that he not
only involves his nephew in polygamy, but pollutes both him and his own
daughters by incestuous nuptials. If by any means a wife is not loved by
her husband, it is better to repudiate her than that she should be
retained as a captive, and consumed with grief by the introduction of a
second wife. Therefore the Lord, by Malachi, pronounces divorce to be
more tolerable than polygamy. (<span id="vii.i-p93.1"></span>[Mal
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#014)<span id="vii.i-p93.1"></span>.)
Laban, blinded by avarice, so sets his daughters together, that they
spend their whole lives in mutual hostility. He also perverts all the
laws of nature by casting two sisters into one marriage-bed,  <span
id="fr_66"></span>[67](#fn_66) so that the one is the competitor of the
other. Since Moses sets these crimes before the Israelites in the very
commencement of their history, it is not for them to be inflated by the
sense of their nobility, so that they should boast of their descent from
holy fathers. For, however excellent Jacob might be, he had no other
offspring than that which sprung from an impure source; since, contrary
to nature, two sisters are mixed together in one bed;  <span
id="fr_67"></span>[68](#fn_67) in the mode of beasts; and two concubines
are afterwards added to the mass. We have seen indeed, above, that this
license was too common among oriental nations; but it was not allowable
for men, at their own pleasure, to subvert, by a depraved custom, the
law of marriage divinely sanctioned from the beginning. Therefore, Laban
is, in every way, inexcusable. And although necessity may, in some
degree, excuse the fault of Jacob, it cannot altogether absolve him from
blame. For he might have dismissed Leah, because she had not been his
lawful wife: because the mutual consent of the man and the woman,
respecting which mistake is impossible, constitutes marriage. But Jacob
reluctantly retains her as his wife, from whom he was released and free,
and thus doubles his fault by polygamy, and trebles it by an incestuous
marriage. Thus we see that the inordinate love of Rachel, which had been
once excited in his mind, was inflamed to such a degree, that he
possessed neither moderation nor judgment. With respect to the words
made use of, interpreters ascribe to them different meanings. Some refer
the demonstrative pronoun to the week;  <span
id="fr_68"></span>[69](#fn_68) others to Leah, as if it had been said,
that he should not have Rachel until he had lived with her sister one
week. But I rather explain it of Rachel, that he should purchase a
marriage with her by another seven years’ service; not that Laban
deferred the nuptials to the end of that time, but that Jacob was
compelled to engage himself in a new servitude.

<span id="vii.i-p97"></span><span id="vii.i-p97.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p98"></span>**30.** *And he loved also Rachel more than
Leah*. No doubt Moses intended to exhibit the sins of Jacob, that we
might learn to fear, and to conform all our actions to the sole rule of
God’s word. For if the holy patriarch fell so grievously, who among us
is secure from a similar fall, unless kept by the guardian care of God?
At the same time, it appears how dangerous it is to imitate the fathers
while we neglect the law of the Lord. And yet the foolish Papists so
greatly delight themselves in this imitation, that they do not scruple
to observe, as a law, whatever they find to have been practiced by the
fathers. Besides which, they own as fathers those who are worthy of such
sons, so that any raving monk is of more account with them than all the
patriarchs. It was not without fault on Leah’s part that she was
despised by her husband; and the Lord justly chastised her, because she,
being aware of her father’s fraud, dishonorably obtained possession of
her sister’s husband; but her fault forms no excuse for Jacob’s lust.

<span id="vii.i-p99"></span><span id="vii.i-p99.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p100"></span>**31.** *And when the Lord saw*. Moses here
shows that Jacob’s extravagant love was corrected by the Lord; as the
affections of the faithful, when they become inordinate, are wont to be
tamed by the rod. Rachel is loved, not without wrong to her sister, to
whom due honor is not given. The Lord, therefore, interposes as her
vindicator, and, by a suitable remedy, turns the mind of Jacob into that
direction, to which it had been most averse. This passage teaches us,
that offspring is a special gift of God; since the power of rendering
one fertile, and of cursing the womb of the other with barrenness, is
expressly ascribed to him. We must observe further, that the bringing
forth of offspring tends to conciliate husbands to their wives. Whence
also the ancients have called children by the name of *pledges*; because
they avail, in no slight degree, to increase and to cherish mutual love.
When Moses asserts that Leah was hated, his meaning is, that she was not
loved so much as she ought to have been. For she was not intolerable to
Jacob, neither did he pursue her with hatred; but Moses, by the use of
this word, amplifies his fault, in not having discharged the duty of a
husband, and in not having treated her who was his first wife with
adequate kindness and honor. It is of importance carefully to notice
this, because many think they fulfill their duty if they do not break
out into mortal hatred. But we see that the Holy Spirit pronounces those
as hated who are not sufficiently loved; and we know, that men were
created for this end, that they should love one another. Therefore, none
will be counted guiltless of the crime of hatred before God, but he who
embraces his neighbors with love. For not only will a secret displeasure
be accounted as hatred, but even that neglect of brethren, and that cold
charity which ever reigns in the world. But in proportion as any one is
more closely connected with another, must be the endeavor to adhere to
each other in a more sacred bond of affection. Moreover, with respect to
married persons, though they may not openly disagree, yet if they are
cold in their affection towards each other, this disgust is not far
removed from hatred.

<span id="vii.i-p101"></span><span id="vii.i-p101.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p102"></span>**32.** *She called his name Reuben*. Moses
relates that Leah was not ungrateful to God. And truly, I do not doubt,
that the benefits of God were then commonly more appreciated than they
are now. For a profane stupor so occupies the mind of nearly all men,
that, like cattle, they swallow up whatever benefits God, in his
kindness, bestows upon them. Further, Leah not only acknowledges God as
the author of her fruitfulness; but also assigns as a reason, that her
affliction had been looked upon by the Lord, and a son had been given
her who should draw the affection of her husband to herself. Whence it
appears probable, that when she saw herself despised, she had recourse
to prayer, in order that she might receive more succor from heaven. For
thanksgiving is a proof that persons have previously exercised
themselves in prayer; since they who hope for nothing from God do, by
their indolence, bury in oblivion all the favors he has conferred upon
them. Therefore, Leah inscribed on the person of her son  <span
id="fr_69"></span>[70](#fn_69) a memorial whereby she might stir herself
up to offer praise to God. This passage also teaches, that they who are
unjustly despised by men are regarded by the Lord. Hence it affords a
singularly profitable consolation to the faithful; who, as experience
shows, are for the most part despised in the world. Whenever, therefore,
they are treated harshly and contumeliously by men, let them take refuge
in this thought, that God will be the more propitious to them. Leah
followed the same course in reference to her second son; for she gave
him a name which is derived from “hearing,”  <span
id="fr_70"></span>[71](#fn_70) to recall to her memory that her sighs
had been heard by the Lord. Whence we conjecture (as I have just before
said) that when affliction was pressing upon her, she cast her griefs
into the bosom of God. Her third son she names from “joining;”  <span
id="fr_71"></span>[72](#fn_71) as if she would say, now a new link is
interposed, so that she should be more loved by her husband. In her
fourth son, she again declares her piety towards God, for she gives to
him the name of “praise,”  <span id="fr_72"></span>[73](#fn_72) as
having been granted to her by the special kindness of God. She had,
indeed, previously given thanks to the Lord; but whereas more abundant
material for praise is supplied, she acknowledges not once only, nor by
one single method, but frequently, that she has been assisted by the
favor of God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_61"></span>[62](cc02006.htm#fr_61) <span
id="vii.i-p74.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p75"></span> <span id="vii.i-p75.1"></span>Et levavit
Iahacob pedes suos And Jacob lifted up his feet. See margin of English
Bible. This is a correct translation of the Hebrew <span
id="vii.i-p75.2"></span>וילגר אשי, (*yissa* *reglav*.) “The phrase is
emphatic, and implies that he traveled on briskly and cheerfully,
notwithstanding his age, being refreshed in his spirit by the recent
manifestation of the Divine favor.” — *Bush*. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_62"></span>[63](cc02006.htm#fr_62) <span
id="vii.i-p77.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p78"></span> <span id="vii.i-p78.1"></span>Nam in vita
casta et modesta multo major erat libertas. <span
id="vii.i-p78.2"></span>Car la liberte estoit beaucoup plus grande en
leur facon de vivre, chaste et modeste. — *Fr*. *Tr*.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[64](cc02006.htm#fr_63) <span
id="vii.i-p78.3"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p79"></span> It is scarcely to be doubted that,
notwithstanding Calvin’s sweeping charge, there were many exceptions to
this general dissoluteness of manners in his days, as we must thankfully
acknowledge there are in our own times, however extensively the evil he
reprobates may have prevailed. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[65](cc02006.htm#fr_64) <span
id="vii.i-p85.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p86"></span> Perhaps undue severity of language is here
used respecting Laban; for we find it not unusual for the father to
demand somehting for his daughter, instead of giving a dowry with her.
See the history f Shechem, who says concerning Dinah, “Ask me never so
much dowry and gift, and I will give it.” <span
id="vii.i-p86.1"></span>[Ge 34:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#012)<span
id="vii.i-p86.1"></span>. David also had to purchase Saul’s daughter by
the slaughter of the Philistines. The Prophet Hosea bought his wife “for
fifteen pieces of silver and a homer and a half of barley.” Still it was
by no means generous on the part of Laban to make such terms with a near
relative; and at all events, he ought to have given his daughters and
their children any profit that he might have obtained by his hard
bargain with Jacob — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[66](cc02006.htm#fr_65) <span
id="vii.i-p86.2"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p87"></span> This latter opinion is adopted by *Dr. A
Clarke*, who says, “The chief recommendation of Leah was her soft and
beautiful eyes; but Rachel was beautiful in her shape, person, mien and
gait and beautiful in her countenance.” The greater part of
commentators, however, take the same view of the case as our
translators. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[67](cc02006.htm#fr_66) <span
id="vii.i-p93.2"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p94"></span> It is here added, “<span
id="vii.i-p94.1"></span>ut altera sit alterius pellex.”

<span id="fn_67"></span>[68](cc02006.htm#fr_67) <span
id="vii.i-p94.2"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p95"></span> <span id="vii.i-p95.1"></span>Quasi
belluino more.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[69](cc02006.htm#fr_68) <span
id="vii.i-p95.2"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p96"></span> <span id="vii.i-p96.1"></span>תאז עבש אלמ,
(*Malai* *shebuah* *zot*.) The demonstrative pronoun <span
id="vii.i-p96.2"></span>תאז, if applied to week, would require the
translation to be, “Fulfil this week;” that is, the week of Leah;
meaning the festive week in which the marriage was commemorated, and, as
soon as that week was over, he would also give Jacob his remaining
daughter to wife. This opinion is supported by eminent critics. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_69"></span>[70](cc02006.htm#fr_69) <span
id="vii.i-p102.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p103"></span> <span id="vii.i-p103.1"></span>ןבואר, “See
a son.”

<span id="fn_70"></span>[71](cc02006.htm#fr_70) <span
id="vii.i-p103.2"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p104"></span> <span id="vii.i-p104.1"></span>ןועמש, from
<span id="vii.i-p104.2"></span>עמש, (*shamah*,) to hear.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[72](cc02006.htm#fr_71) <span
id="vii.i-p104.3"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p105"></span> <span id="vii.i-p105.1"></span>יול, from
<span id="vii.i-p105.2"></span>הול, (*lavah*,) to join.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[73](cc02006.htm#fr_72) <span
id="vii.i-p105.3"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p106"></span> <span id="vii.i-p106.1"></span>הדוהי, from
<span id="vii.i-p106.2"></span>הדי, (*yadah*,) to praise. There is
something, as Calvin intimates, in the series of names given by Leah to
her children, which seems to show the pious feelings of her heart. In
her first-born, Reuben, she acknowledged that God had looked upon her
affliction; in Simeon, that he had heard her prayer; in Levi, that he
had joined her husband to her; and in Judah, she commemorates all these
mercies with gratitude and praise. — *Ed*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 30](cc02007)
