<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](boe074) 
[Next](boe076) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0037Z6LLW/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Book of Enoch*, by R.H. Charles, \[1917\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE BOOK OF THE COURSES OF THE HEAVENLY LUMINARIES

(LXXII-LXXXII.)

LXXII\. *The Sun*.

### CHAPTER LXXII.

1\. The book of the courses of the luminaries of the heaven, the
relations of each, according to their classes, their dominion and their
seasons, according to their names and places of origin, and according to
their months, which Uriel, the holy angel, who was with me, who is their
guide, showed me; and he showed me all their laws exactly as they are,
and how it is with regard to all the years of the world and unto
eternity, till the new creation is

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

accomplished which dureth till eternity. 2. And this is the first law of
the luminaries: the luminary the Sun has its rising in the eastern
portals of the heaven, and its setting in the western portals of the
heaven. 3. And I saw six portals in which the sun rises, and six portals
in which the sun sets and the moon rises and sets in these portals, and
the leaders of the stars and those whom they lead: six in the east and
six in the west, and all following each other in accurately
corresponding order: also many windows to the right and left of these
portals. 4. And first there goes forth the great luminary, named the
Sun, and his circumference is like the circumference of the heaven, and
he is quite filled with illuminating and heating fire. 5. The chariot on
which he ascends, the wind drives, and the sun goes down from the heaven
and returns through the north in order to reach the east, and is so
guided that he comes to the appropriate (lit. 'that') portal and shines
in the face of the heaven. 6. In this way he rises in the first month in
the great portal, which is the fourth ⌈those six portals in the cast⌉.
7. And in that fourth portal from which the sun rises in the first month
are twelve window-openings, from which proceed a flame when they are
opened in their season. 8. When the sun rises in the heaven, he comes
forth through that fourth portal thirty mornings in succession, and sets
accurately in the fourth portal in the west of the heaven. 9. And during
this period the day becomes daily longer and the night nightly shorter
to the thirtieth morning. 10. On that day the day is longer than the
night by a ninth part, and the day amounts exactly to ten parts and the
night to eight parts. 11. And the sun rises from that fourth portal, and
sets in the fourth and returns to the fifth portal of the east thirty
mornings, and rises from it and sets in the fifth portal. 12. And then
the day becomes longer by †two† parts and amounts to eleven parts, and
the night becomes shorter and amounts to seven parts. 13. And it returns
to the east and enters into

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

the sixth portal, and rises and sets in the sixth portal one-and-thirty
mornings on account of its sign. 14. On that day the day becomes longer
than the night, and the day becomes double the night, and the day
becomes twelve parts, and the night is shortened and becomes six parts.
15. And the sun mounts up to make the day shorter and the night longer,
and the sun returns to the east and enters into the sixth portal, and
rises from it and sets thirty mornings. 16. And when thirty mornings are
accomplished, the day decreases by exactly one part, and becomes eleven
parts, and the night seven. 17. And the sun goes forth from that sixth
portal in the west, and goes to the east and rises in the fifth portal
for thirty mornings, and sets in the west again in the fifth western
portal. 18. On that day the day decreases by †two† parts, and amounts to
ten parts and the night to eight parts. 19. And the sun goes forth from
that fifth portal and sets in the fifth portal of the west, and rises in
the fourth portal for one-and-thirty mornings on account of its sign,
and sets in the west. 20. On that day the day is equalized with the
night, \[and becomes of equal length\], and the night amounts to nine
parts and the day to nine parts. 21. And the sun rises from that portal
and sets in the west, and returns to the east and rises thirty mornings
in the third portal and sets in the west in the third portal. 22. And on
that day the night becomes longer than the day, and night becomes longer
than night, and day shorter than day till the thirtieth morning, and the
night amounts exactly to ten parts and the day to eight parts. 23. And
the sun rises from that third portal and sets in the third portal in the
west and returns to the east, and for thirty mornings rises in the
second portal in the east, and in like manner sets in the second portal
in the west of the heaven. 24. And on that day the night amounts to
eleven parts and the day to seven parts. 25. And the sun rises on that
day from that second portal and sets in the west in the second portal,
and

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

returns to the east into the first portal for one-and-thirty mornings,
and sets in the first portal in the west of the heaven. 26. And on that
day the night becomes longer and amounts to the double of the day: and
the night amounts exactly to twelve parts and the day to six. 27. And
the sun has (therewith) traversed the divisions of his orbit and turns
again on those divisions of his orbit, and enters that portal thirty
mornings and sets also in the west opposite to it. 28. And on that night
has the night decreased in length by a †ninth† part, and the night has
become eleven parts and the day seven parts. 29. And the sun has
returned and entered into the second portal in the east, and returns on
those his divisions of his orbit for thirty mornings, rising and
setting. 30. And on that day the night decreases in length, and the
night amounts to ten parts and the day to eight. 31. And on that day the
sun rises from that portal, and sets in the west, and returns to the
east, and rises in the third portal for one-and-thirty mornings, and
sets in the west of the heaven. 32. On that day the night decreases and
amounts to nine parts, and the day to nine parts, and the night is equal
to the day and the year is exactly as to its days three hundred and
sixty-four. 33. And the length of the day and of the night, and the
shortness of the day and of the night arise--through the course of the
sun these distinctions are made (lit. 'they are separated'). 34. So it
comes that its course becomes daily longer, and its course nightly
shorter. 35. And this is the law and the course of the sun, and his
return as often as he returns sixty times and rises, *i.e.* the great
luminary which is named the sun, for ever and ever. 36. And that which
(thus) rises is the great luminary, and is so named according to its
appearance, according as the Lord commanded. 37. As he rises, so he sets
and decreases not, and rests not, but runs day and night, and his light
is sevenfold brighter than that of the moon; but as regards size they
are both equal.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXXIII](boe076)

</div>
