<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](boe069) 
[Next](boe071) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0037Z6LLW/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Book of Enoch*, by R.H. Charles, \[1917\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

LXVII\. *God's Promise to Noah: Places of Punishment of the Angels and
of the Kings*.

### CHAPTER LXVII.

1\. And in those days the word of God came unto me, and He said unto me:
'Noah, thy lot has come up before Me, a lot without blame, a lot of love
and uprightness. 2. And now the angels are making a wooden (building),
and when they have completed that task I will place My hand upon it and
preserve it, and there shall come forth from it the seed of life, and a
change shall set in so that the earth will not remain without
inhabitant. 3. And I will make fast thy seed before me for ever and
ever, and I will spread abroad those who dwell with thee: it shall not
**be unfruitful** on the face of the earth, but it shall be blessed and
multiply on the earth in the name of the Lord.'

4\. And He will imprison those angels, who have shown unrighteousness,
in that burning valley which my grandfather Enoch had formerly shown to
me in the west among the mountains of gold and silver and iron and soft
metal and tin. 5. And I saw that valley in which there was a great
convulsion and a convulsion of the waters. 6. And when all this took
place, from that fiery molten metal and from the convulsion thereof in
that place, there was produced a smell of sulphur, and it was connected
with those waters, and that valley of the angels who had led astray
(mankind) burned beneath that land. 7. And through its valleys proceed
streams of fire, where these angels are punished who had led astray
those who dwell upon the earth.

8\. But those waters shall in those days serve for the kings and the
mighty and the exalted, and those who dwell on the earth, for the
healing of the body, but for the punishment of the spirit; now their
spirit is full of lust, that they may be punished in their body, for
they have denied the Lord of Spirits and see their punishment daily, and
yet believe not in His name. 9. And in proportion as the burning

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

of their bodies becomes severe, a corresponding change shall take place
in their spirit for ever and ever; for before the Lord of Spirits none
shall utter an idle word. 10. For the judgement shall come upon them,
because they believe in the lust of their body and deny the Spirit of
the Lord. 11. And those same waters will undergo a change in those days;
for when those angels are punished in these waters, these water-springs
shall change their temperature, and when the angels ascend, this water
of the springs shall change and become cold. 12. And I heard Michael
answering and saying: 'This judgement wherewith the angels are judged is
a testimony for the kings and the mighty who possess the earth.' 13.
Because these waters of judgement minister to the healing of the body of
the **kings** and the lust of their body; therefore they will not see
and will not believe that those waters will change and become a fire
which burns for ever.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXVIII](boe071)

</div>
