<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](boe001) 
[Next](boe003) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0037Z6LLW/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Book of Enoch*, by R.H. Charles, \[1917\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

# INTRODUCTION

### THE APOCALYPTIC LITERATURE

As the Book of Enoch is, in some respects, the most notable extant
apocalyptic work outside the canonical Scriptures, it will not be
inappropriate to offer a few remarks here on the Apocalyptic Literature
generally. In writing about the books which belong to this literature,
Prof. Burkitt says very pointedly that "they are the most characteristic
survival of what I will venture to call, with all its narrowness and its
incoherence, the heroic age of Jewish history, the age when the nation
attempted to realize in action the part of the peculiar people of God.
It ended in catastrophe, but the nation left two successors, the
Christian Church and the Rabbinical Schools, each of which carried on
some of the old national aims. And of the two it was the Christian
Church that was most faithful to the ideas enshrined in the Apocalypses,
and it did consider itself, not without some reason, the fulfilment of
those ideas. What is wanted, therefore, in studying the Apocalypses is,
above all, sympathy with the ideas that underlie them, and especially
with the belief in the New Age. And those who believe that in
Christianity a new Era really did dawn for us ought, I think, to have
that sympathy. . . . We study the Apocalypses to learn how our spiritual
ancestors hoped again that God would make all right in the end; and that
we, their children, are here to-day studying them is an indication

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

that their hope was not wholly unfounded." <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0)

Hope is, indeed, the main underlying motive-power which prompted the
writers of the Apocalypses. And this hope is the more intensive and
ardent in that it shines forth from a background which is dark with
despair; for the Apocalyptists despaired of the world in which they
lived, a world in which the godly were of no account, while the wicked
seemed too often triumphant and prosperous. With evil everywhere around,
the Apocalyptists saw no hope for the world as it was; for such a world
there was no remedy, only destruction; if the good were ever to triumph
it must be in a new world. Despairing, therefore, of the world around
them, the Apocalyptists centred their hope upon a world to come, where
the righteous would come to their own and evil would find no place. It
is this thought which underlies the opening words of the Book of Enoch:
"The words of the blessing of Enoch, wherewith he blessed the elect and
righteous, who will be living in the day of tribulation, when all the
wicked and godless are to be removed." Nowhere in this book is the
essence of this hope more beautifully expressed than in a short metrical
piece in the first chapter:

"But with the righteous He will make peace,  
And will protect the elect,  
And mercy shall be upon them.

"And they shall all belong to God,  
And they shall all be prospered,  
And they shall all be blessed.

"And He will help them all,  
And light shall appear unto them,  
And He will make peace with them" (1 Enoch i. 8).

In all the books belonging to this literature which have come down to us
this hope is expressed more or

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

less vividly; nor is the dark background wanting. with prophecies of
coming wrath. It will, therefore, be realized that the Apocalyptic
Literature is almost wholly concerned with the future; it is true that
again and again the Apocalyptist glances at the contemporary history of
the world around him, to which many a cryptic reference is made--a fact
which necessitates some knowledge of the history of this period (*circa*
200 B.C.-A.D. 100) for a full understanding of the books in
question--but these references are only made with a view to comforting
the oppressed and afflicted with the thought that even the most mighty
of earthly powers are shortly to be overthrown by. the advent of the new
and glorious era when every injustice and all the incongruities of life
will be done away with. So that every reference to the present is merely
a position taken up from which to point to the future. Now, since, as we
have seen, the Apocalyptists despair of any bettering of the present
world, and therefore contemplate its destruction as the preliminary of
the new order of things, they look *away* from this world in their
visions of the future; they conceive of other-worldly forces coming into
play in the reconstitution of things, and of society generally; and
since these *are* other-worldly forces the supernatural plays a great
part in the Apocalyptic Literature. This supernatural colouring will
often strike the reader of this literature as fantastic, and at times
*bizarre*; but this should not be permitted to obscure the reality which
often lies behind these weird shadows. Mental visions are not always
easily expressed in words; the seer who in a vision has received a
message in some fantastic guise necessarily has the impress upon his
mind of what he has seen when giving his message; and when he describes
his vision the picture he presents is, in the nature of the case, more
fantastic to the ear of the hearer than to the eye of him who saw it.
Allowance should be made for this; especially by us Westerns who are so
lacking in the rich imaginativeness

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

of the Oriental. Our love of literalness hinders the play of the
imagination because we are so apt to "materialize" a mental picture
presented by another. The Apocalypses were written by and for Orientals,
and we cannot do justice to them unless we remember this; but it would
be best if we could get into the Oriental mind and look at things from
that point of view.

Another thing which the reader of the Apocalyptic Literature must be
prepared for is the frequent inconsistency of thought to be found there,
together with variableness of teaching often involving contradiction.
The reason of this is not to be sought simply in the fact that in the
Apocalypses the hand of more than one author is frequently to be
discerned, a fact which would easily account for divergence of views in
one and the same book-no, the chief reason is that, on the one hand. the
minds of the Apocalyptists were saturated with the traditional thoughts
and ideas of the Old Testament, and, on the, other, they were eagerly
absorbing the newer conceptions which the spirit of the age had brought
into being. This occasioned a continual conflict of thought in their
minds; the endeavour to harmonize the old and the new would not always
succeed, and in consequence there often resulted a compromise which was
illogical and which presented contradictions. Inconsistency of teaching
on certain points is, therefore, not surprising under the circumstances.

Again, to realize the significance of much that is found in these
Apocalypses one has to reckon with a rigid predestinarianism which was
characteristic of the Apocalyptists as a whole. They started with the
absolute conviction that the whole course of the world, from beginning
to end, both as regards its physical changes and also in all that
concerns the history of nations, their growth and decline, and of every
single individual, was in every respect predetermined by God Almighty
before all time. This

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

belief of the Apocalyptists is well illustrated in one of the later
Apocalypses by these words:

"For He hath weighed the age in the balance,  
And by number hath He numbered the seasons;  
Neither will He move nor stir things,  
Till the measure appointed be fulfilled."  
                      (ii. (iv.) Esdras iv. 36, 37.)

Thus "the times and periods of the course of the world's history have
been predetermined by God. The numbers of the years have been exactly
fixed. This was a fundamental postulate of the Apocalyptists, who
devoted much of their energy to calculations, based upon a close study
of prophecy, as to the exact period when history should reach its
consummation . . . the underlying idea is predestinarian." <span
id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1) But all these things, according to the
Apocalyptists, were divine secrets hidden from the beginning the world,
but revealed to God-fearing men to whom was accorded the faculty of
peering into the hidden things of God and of understanding them; upon
these men was laid the privilege and duty of revealing the divine
secrets to others, hence their name of Apocalyptists or "revealers." It
was because the Apocalyptists believed so firmly in this power which
they possessed of looking into the deep things of God that they claimed
to be able to measure the significance of what had happened in the past
and of what was happening in the present; and upon the basis of this
knowledge they believed that they also had the power, given them by God,
of foreseeing the march of future events; above all, of knowing when the
end of the world would come, a consummation towards which the whole
history of the world had been tending from the beginning.

In spite of all the mysticism, sometimes of a rather fantastic kind, and
of the frequently supra-mundane vision with which the Apocalyptic
Literature abounds,

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>

the Apocalyptists fully realized the need of practical religion; they
were upholders, of the Law, the loyal observance of which they regard as
a necessity for all God-fearing men. In this the Apocalyptists were at
one, in principle, with Pharisaism; but their conception of what
constituted loyal observance of the Law differed from that of the
Pharisees, for, unlike these, the Apocalyptists laid all stress on the
spirit of its observance rather than upon the letter. Characteristic of
their attitude here are the words in 1 Enoch v. 4:

"But ye--ye have not been steadfast, nor done the commandments of the
Lord,  
But ye have turned away, and have spoken proud and hard words  
With your impure mouths against His greatness,  
O ye hard-hearted, ye shall find no peace."

And again, in xcix. 2:

"Woe to them that pervert the words of uprightness,  
           And transgress the eternal Law."

We do not find in this Literature that insistence on the literal
carrying-out of the minutest precepts of the Law which was
characteristic of Pharisaism. Veneration for the Law is whole-hearted;
it is the real guide of life; punishment awaits those who ignore its
guidance; but the Pharisaic interpretation of the Law and its
requirements is alien to the spirit of the Apocalyptists.

As a whole, the Apocalyptic Literature presents an universalistic
attitude very different from the nationalistic narrowness of the
Pharisees. It is true, the Apocalyptists are not always consistent in
this, but normally they embrace the Gentiles equally with the men of
their own nation in the divine scheme of salvation; and, in the same
way, the wicked who are

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

excluded are not restricted to the Gentiles, but the Jews equally with
them shall suffer torment hereafter according to their deserts. <span
id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2)

The Apocalyptic Literature, as distinct from the Apocalyptic Movement
owing to which it took its rise, began to come into existence about the
period 200-150 B.C.; at any rate, the earliest extant example of this
Literature--the earliest portions of the Book of Enoch--belongs to this
period. Works of an Apocalyptic character, continued to be written for
about three centuries; the Second (Fourth) Book of Esdras, one of the
most remarkable Apocalypses, belongs to the end of the first Christian
century, approximately. There are Apocalypses of later date, some of
subordinate interest are of much later date; but the real period of the
Apocalyptic Literature is from about 200 B.C. to about A.D. 100; its
beginnings date, therefore, from a time prior to that great landmark in
Jewish history, the Maccabæan Era.

### THE BOOK OF ENOCH: ITS COMPONENT PARTS AND THEIR DATES

The Book of Enoch is now usually designated 1 Enoch, to distinguish it
from the later Apocalypse, *The Secrets of Enoch*, known as 2 Enoch. The
former is also called the Ethiopic Enoch, the latter the Slavonic Enoch,
after the languages of the earliest versions extant of each
respectively. No manuscript of the original language of either is known
to be in existence.

According to Canon Charles, the various elements of which our book in
its present form is made up belong to different dates. The following
table will show the dates of the different parts of the book. Canon
Charles believes that these are approximately

<span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span>

correct, without committing himself to the certainty of this in each
case:

<table data-border="CELLSPACING=1" width="638">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="TOP" width="27%"><p>CHAPTERS</p></td>
<td data-valign="TOP" width="39%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p> </p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="TOP" width="27%"><p>xii.-xxxvi.<br />
xclii.<br />
xci. 12-17</p></td>
<td data-valign="TOP" width="39%"><p>"The Apocalypse of Weeks."</p></td>
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p>The oldest pre-Maccabæan portions.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="TOP" width="27%"><p>vi.-xi.<br />
liv. 7-lv. 2<br />
lx.<br />
lxv.-lxix. 25<br />
cvi., cvii.</p></td>
<td data-valign="TOP" width="39%"><p>Fragments of "The Book of Noah."</p></td>
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p>Pre-Maccabæan at the latest.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="TOP" width="27%"><p>lxxxiii.-xc.</p></td>
<td data-valign="TOP" width="39%"><p>"The Dream-Visions,"</p></td>
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p>165-161 B.C.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="TOP" width="27%"><p>lxxii.-lxxxii.</p></td>
<td data-valign="TOP" width="39%"><p>"The Book of the Heavenly Luminaries."</p></td>
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p>Before 110 B.C.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="TOP" width="27%"><p>xxxvii.-lxxi.<br />
xci. 1-11, 18, 19-civ.</p></td>
<td data-valign="TOP" width="39%"><p>"The Parables," or "Similitudes."</p></td>
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p>circa 105-64 B.C.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="TOP" width="27%"><p>i.-v.</p></td>
<td data-valign="TOP" width="39%"><p>The latest portion,</p></td>
<td data-valign="TOP" width="33%"><p>but pre-Christian.</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

 

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Chapter cv, which
consists of only two verses, cannot be dated; while cviii. is in the
nature of an appendix, probably added subsequently, to the whole work.

While these dates may be regarded as approximately correct, it should be
pointed out that differences of opinion exist among scholars on the
subject. Schürer holds, for example, that, with the exception of
chapters xxxvii.-lxxi. (the "Parables," or "Similitudes"), the entire
book belongs to the period 130-100 B.C.; the "Parables" he assigns to a
time not earlier than Herod the Great. Beer thinks that the
"Dream-Visions" (chapters lxxxiii.-xc.) belong to the time of John
Hyrcanus (135-105 B.C.), and he includes under the pre-Maccabæan
portions only xci. 12-17, xcii. xciii. 1-14; and holds that the rest of
the book was written before 64 B.C. Dalman maintains that it cannot be
proved that the important section xxxvii.-lxxi. (the "Similitudes") is
"the product of the pre-Christian period," though he fully

<span id="page_xv">p. xv</span>

recognizes its Jewish character. Burkitt regards the writer as "almost
contemporary" with the philosopher Posidonius (135-51 B.C.). There is
thus some diversity of opinion as to the date of the book among leading
authorities. That it is, as a whole, pre-Christian, may be regarded as
definitely established. More difficult is the question whether any
portions of it are pre-Maccabæan; Charles gives various reasons for his
belief that considerable parts are pre-Maccabæan; we are inclined to
agree with him, though it may be questioned whether the last word on the
subject has been spoken.

### AUTHORSHIP

As the various parts of the book <span id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3)
clearly belong to different dates, diversity of authorship is what one
is naturally led to expect; and of this there can, indeed, be no shadow
of doubt. The author of the earliest portions was a Jew who lived, as
Burkitt has shown, in northern Palestine, in the land of Dan, south-west
of the Hermon range, near the headwaters of the Jordan. This is
important, as it tends to show that the book, or books, is really
Palestinian, and one which, therefore, circulated among Jews in
Palestine. "If, moreover, the author came from the north, that helps to
explain the influence the book had upon the Religion that was cradled in
Galilee." <span id="fr_4"></span>[2](#fn_4) Of the authors of the other
three books of which "Enoch" is made up (viz. "The Dream-Visions," "The
Book of the Heavenly Luminaries," and "The Similitudes") we know nothing
save what can be gathered from their writings as to their religious
standpoint.

Charles holds that though there is not unity of authorship there is,
none the less, uniformity; for,

<span id="page_xvi">p. xvi</span>

according to him, all the books were written by *Chassidim*, <span
id="fr_5"></span>[1](#fn_5) or by their successors, the Pharisees. This
contention has been strongly assailed and much weakened by Leszynsky in
a recent work on the Sadducees. <span id="fr_6"></span>[2](#fn_6) While
frankly recognizing the composite character of the book, Leszynsky holds
that the original portions of it <span id="fr_7"></span>[3](#fn_7)
emanate from Sadducæan circles; and that the special object of the book
originally was the bringing about of a reform of the calendar. He points
to the ascription of the book to Enoch as supporting his contention, for
Enoch lived 365 years, <span id="fr_8"></span>[4](#fn_8) *i.e.* is years
correspond to the number of days in the solar year; the basis of
reckoning time was one of the fundamental points of difference between
the Pharisees and Sadducees, for whereas the former reckoned time by the
lunar year (360 days), the latter did so by the solar year. Here a
significant remark of Burkitt's is worth recalling; in writing about the
false titles given to all the Apocalyptic books, he says: "There is
another aspect of pseudonymous authorship to which I venture to think
sufficient attention has not been given. It is this, that the names were
not chosen out of mere caprice; they indicated to a certain extent what
subjects would be treated and the point of view of the writer." <span
id="fr_9"></span>[5](#fn_9) Further, the fact that "Enoch walked with
God; and he was not; for God took him," <span
id="fr_10"></span>[6](#fn_10) *i.e.* that he ascended into the heavens,
is also significant; for he would thereby be just the one to know all
about the heavenly luminaries; he was just the most appropriate author
of a book which was to deal with astronomical questions. "The Sadducæan
character of the original work," says Leszynsky, "is seen most clearly
in the discussion regarding the calendar; chapters

<span id="page_xvii">p. xvii</span>

lxxii.-lxxxii. are rightly called the Book of Astronomy: <span
id="fr_11"></span>[1](#fn_11) 'the book of the courses of the luminaries
of the heaven, the relations of each, according to their classes, their
dominion and their seasons, according to their names and places of
origin, and according to their months . . . with regard to all the years
of the world and unto eternity, till the new creation is accomplished
which endureth till all eternity' (lxxii. 1). That sounds almost as
though the author of the Book of jubilees had written it. That it is not
a merely scientific interest which impels the writer to give expression
to his astronomical theories may be seen from the words at the
conclusion of the section: 'Blessed are all the righteous, blessed are
all those who walk in the way of righteousness, and sin not as the
sinners in the reckoning of all their days, in which the sun traverseth
the heaven, entering into and departing from the portals for thirty days
. . .' (lxxxii. 4-7). Herein one can discern quite clearly the tendency
of the writer. He desires the adoption of the solar year, while his
contemporaries wrongly followed a different reckoning, and therefore
celebrated the feasts at the wrong time. The 'sinners who sin in the
reckoning of the year' are the Pharisees; and the righteous ones who are
blessed, the *Zaddîkim*, <span id="fr_12"></span>[2](#fn_12) who walk
upon the paths of righteousness (*Zedek*) as the name is made to imply,
are the Sadducees." <span id="fr_13"></span>[3](#fn_13) The point may
appear small to us, but we may compare with it the Quartodeciman
controversy in the Church during the second century. It is, at any rate,
a strong point in favour of the Sadducæan authorship of "The Book of the
Heavenly Luminaries."

The pre-Maccabæan portions (assuming that some portions of it are
pre-Maccabæan) of the book of Enoch must certainly be ascribed to the
*Chassidim*;

<span id="page_xviii">p. xviii</span>

but it is not on that account necessary to ascribe *all* the later
portions to the Pharisees. Three points especially militate against
this: some of the teaching concerning the Messiah; the, generally
speaking, universalistic spirit, which is quite un-Pharisaic, and the
attitude towards the Law, which is not that of the Pharisees. It is not
to be denied that some portions (*e.g.* cii. 6 ff.) are from the hands
of Pharisees; nor can it be doubted that the whole collection in its
present form has been worked over by a Pharisee, or Pharisees; but that
all the post-Maccabæan portions in their original form emanated from
Pharisaic circles does not appear to have been proved. It seems more
likely that, with the exceptions already referred to, the various
component parts of the book were written by Apocalyptists who belonged
neither to Pharisaic nor yet to Sadducæan circles.

### LANGUAGE

The Book of Enoch exists only in the Ethiopic Version; this was
translated from the Greek Version, of which only a few portions are
extant. <span id="fr_14"></span>[1](#fn_14) The Latin Version, which was
also made from the Greek, is not extant, with the exception of i. 9, and
cvi. 1-18; the fragment containing these two passages was discovered by
the Rev. Al. R. James, of King's College, Cambridge, in the British
Museum. The book was originally written either in Hebrew or Aramaic;
Charles thinks that chapters vi.-xxxvi., lxxxiii.-xc. were Aramaic, the
rest Hebrew. It is, however, very difficult to say for certain which of
these two languages was really the original, because,

<span id="page_xix">p. xix</span>

as Burkitt says, "most of the most convincing proofs that the Greek text
of Enoch is a translation from a Semitic language fit equally well with
a Hebrew or an Aramaic original"; his opinion is that Aramaic was the
original language, "but that a few passages do seem to suggest a Hebrew
origin, yet not decisively." <span id="fr_15"></span>[1](#fn_15)

### GENERAL CONTENTS

The reader who comes to peruse the Book of Enoch for the first time will
find much that appears to him strange and unattractive; he must not,
however, be repelled by this; for in due time he will come to other arts
of the book which he will soon see to be of real value from many points
of view. But even regarding the less attractive parts, he will find that
when these are carefully studied they contain more that is of interest
than appears upon the surface. Unfortunately, the opening portion
(i.-xxxvi.), which is naturally read first, contains a good deal of the
least important parts of the whole book; some passages are even
repellent. It is well to remember the point, already referred to, that
there are at least four quite independent books included in the "Book of
Enoch," exclusive of certain "Noah" fragments and other pieces (see
below); the student is, therefore, advised to treat these as separate
works, and to read them as such. There is no reason to begin with the
book which happens to come first, especially as the first thirty-six
chapters do not all belong together. <span id="fr_16"></span>[2](#fn_16)
But, in any case, it will be found most useful to have some general idea
of the contents of each of the different books before beginning to read
them. For this purpose a brief *résumé* of each is given here.

<span id="page_xx">p. xx</span>

i\. *The Book of Enoch* (chapters xii.-xxxvi.). The book begins With a
Dream-Vision of Enoch. In this dream Enoch is asked to intercede for the
watchers of heaven, *i.e.* the angels, who had left their heavenly home
to commit iniquity with the daughters of men. He writes out the petition
(cp. the title "Enoch the Scribe") the fallen angels make, and then
retires to await the answer, which comes to him in a series of visions.
These visions are not quite easy to follow; they are evidently
incomplete and somewhat confused; in all probability the text has
suffered in transmission. At any rate, the petition is refused; Enoch
declares to the fallen angels the doom which, as he has been taught in
the visions, is to be their lot; the final words of the message which he
is bidden to give them are: "You have no peace" (xii.-xvi.). There
follow then accounts of the different journeys which Enoch makes, being
conducted by angels of light, through certain parts of the earth, and
through Sheol. After the account of the *first journey* (xvii.-xix.) a
short enumeration is made of the archangels, seven in number, and their
functions (xx.). In the *second journey* is described the place of final
punishment of the fallen angels: "This place is the prison of the angels
and here they will imprisoned for ever." From thence Enoch is taken to
Sheol; then to the west, where he sees the luminaries of heaven. After
that the angels show him "seven magnificent mountains," upon one of
which is the throne of God; he sees also the Tree of Life, which is to
be given to the holy and. righteous after the great judgement. From
thence he comes back to the centre of the earth and sees the "blessed
place," Jerusalem, and the "accursed valley" (xxi.-xxvii.). The book
concludes with what appear to be fragments of other journeys, to the
east, to the north, and to the south. Of special interest here is the
mention of the Garden of Righteousness, and the Tree of Wisdom
(xxviii.-xxxvi.).

Much that is written in these chapters may appear

<span id="page_xxi">p. xxi</span>

pointless and uninspiring; but we must bear in mind the purpose that
lies behind it all. The fallen angels were believed to have brought sin
on to the earth; all the wickedness of the world the Apocalyptist traces
back to them. This cause of sin must be wholly destroyed before
righteousness can come truly to its own. Therefore the Apocalyptist has
a practical aim in view when describing in much detail the final place
of punishment of the fallen angels; for here, too, are to come all those
who by sin are the offspring of this race. No less does he delight in
telling of the abode of joy prepared for the righteous. That all these
descriptions were constructed out of the imagination of the
Apocalyptist, based largely, no doubt, upon popular tradition, did not
detract from their practical value for the people of his day. He was a
preacher of righteousness who looked forward in absolute conviction to
the final overthrow of sin; and all his visions have as their
motive-power the yearning for and belief in the triumph of righteousness
over sin. One of a like mind wrote later on, in a kind of preface to his
book, these significant words, which sum up the essence of the teaching
of this book:

And destroy all the spirits of the reprobate, and the children of the
Watchers. because they have wronged mankind. Destroy all wrong from the
face of the earth, and let every evil work come to an end: and let the
plant of righteousness and truth appear: and it shall prove a blessing:
the works of righteousness and truth shall be planted in truth and joy
for evermore.

ii\. *The Parables* (chapters xxxvii.-lxxi.). There are three Parables.
or Similitudes, and they all have as their underlying thought the
destruction of evil and the triumph of righteousness, as in the
preceding book. But here some new and important elements are introduced
which give special value to this book.

The *first parable* (xxxviii.-xliv.) is a prophecy of coming judgement
upon the wicked, and especially the kings and mighty ones on the earth.
On the

<span id="page_xxii">p. xxii</span>

other hand, the Apocalyptist sees in his vision the abode and
resting-places of the righteous who are continually praising the "Lord
of Spirits "; this is the usual title given -to God in this book. Here
occurs the first mention of the "Elect One" (cp. Luke xxiii. 35). In the
presence of the Lord of Spirits are also the four Archangels and
innumerable companies of other angels. Here he learns many secrets of
the heavens; a fragment on Wisdom (xlii.), which recalls some passages
in Ecclus. xxiv., comes in the middle of the secrets, and is clearly out
of place. The *second parable* (xlv.-lvii.) continues the same theme and
further develops it. Of special importance is the sitting of the Elect
One on the throne of glory as Judge (xlv. 3), and the mention of His
title, "Son of Man" (xlvi. 2). The thought of the vindication of the
righteous is marred by their joy at vengeance upon the wicked. A
particularly striking passage is chapter xlviii. 1-7, which speaks of
the inexhaustible fountain of righteousness reserved for the holy and
elect in the presence of the Son of Man and of the Lord of Spirits. The
Apocalyptist prophesies further of the repentance of the Gentiles
(chapter l.), an universalistic note of significance, and speaks of the
Resurrection of the dead in a notable passage:

And In those days shall the earth also give back that which has been
entrusted to it,  
And Sheol also shall give back that which it has received,  
And Hell shall give back that which it owes.

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The parable ends
with an account of the judgement, followed by two short passages on the
last struggle of the heathen powers against Israel (lvi. 5-8), and the
return from the Dispersion (lvii.), which do not appear to be in their
original place. The *third parable* (lviii.-lxxi.) has clearly suffered
largely from the intrusion of alien matter, and is probably incomplete.
Its main theme is the final judgement upon all flesh, and especially
upon the great ones of -the earth; the judge is the Son of Man. Some of

<span id="page_xxiii">p. xxiii</span>

the passages which speak of the future reward of the righteous are full
of beauty; the following is well worth quoting:

And the righteous and elect shall have risen from the earth,  
And ceased to be of downcast countenance.  
And they shall have been clothed with garments of glory.  
And they shall be garments of life from the Lord of Spirits: And your
garments shall not grow old.  
Nor your glory pass away before the Lord of Spirits.

A large Noah fragment comes in the middle of the Parable (see p. xxvi
below). The close of this Parable is contained in lxix. 26-29; the
account of Enoch's final translation (lxx.), and two of Enoch's visions
(lxxi.) are out of place.

iii\. *The Book of the Courses of the Heavenly Luminaries* (chapters
lxxii.-lxxxii.). In lxxiv. 12 it says: "And the sun and the stars bring
in all the years exactly, so that they do not advance or delay their
position by a single day unto eternity; but complete the years with
perfect justice in 364 days." <span id="fr_17"></span>[1](#fn_17) This
gives the key-note of this book, viz. that time is to be reckoned by the
sun, not by the moon (see further on this the section on Authorship,
above). Until we come to chapter lxxx. this book is uninteresting in the
extreme; it purports to tell in detail of the laws by which the sun,
moon, stars and the winds are governed; they are described by Uriel,
"the holy angel," to the Apocalyptist. The four quarters of the world,
the seven mountains and the seven rivers are also dealt with. "The
author has no other interest save a scientific one coloured by Jewish
conceptions and beliefs." <span id="fr_18"></span>[2](#fn_18) It is,
however, different when we come to chapter lxxx. 2-8; the whole tone
alters in these verses, in which it is said that owing to the sin of men
the moon and the sun will mislead them. An ethical thought is thus
brought in

<span id="page_xxiv">p. xxiv</span>

which is wholly lacking in the previous chapters of this book; this is
also true of chapter lxxxi.; it is probable that neither of these
chapters stood here originally.

Regarding the point of the 364 days to the year which the writer of this
book makes, Charles says that "he did this only through sheer incapacity
for appreciating an thing better; for he must have been acquainted with
the solar year of 365Â¼ days. His acquaintance with the Greek cycles
shows this. . . . The author's reckoning of the year at 364 days may be
partly due to his opposition to heathen systems, and partly to the fact
that 364 is divisible by seven, and amounts to fifty-two weeks
exactly." <span id="fr_19"></span>[1](#fn_19) In any case, he is opposed
to the lunar year, the Pharisaic way of reckoning time; and this is an
important point in favour of Sadducæan authorship. It will be noted that
this book was written in post-Maccabæan times; it was after the
Maccabæan struggle that the Sadducees and Pharisees appeared as parties
definitely opposed to one another. <span id="fr_20"></span>[2](#fn_20)

iv\. *The Dream-Visions* (chapters lxxxiii.-xc.). This book consists of
two dream-visions; the first deals with the judgement brought upon the
world by the deluge on account of sin; the origin of sin is again traced
to the angels who fell. It concludes with a hymn of praise to God in
which a prayer is offered that all flesh may not be destroyed
(lxxxiii.-lxxxiv.). The second dream-vision is much longer; it gives in
brief outline the history of the world to the founding of the Messianic
Kingdom. First, the patriarchs, symbolized by bulls, etc. (lxxxv.); then
the fallen angels, also described in symbolic language, and their
punishment (lxxxvi.-lxxxviii.). The history then proceeds to deal more
specifically with Israel from the time of Noah to the Maccabæan revolt
(lxxxix.-xc. 19).

<span id="page_xxv">p. xxv</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Throughout the
dream-vision symbolic language is used; the faithful in Israel are
spoken of as the sheep, while the Gentiles are symbolized by wild beasts
and birds of prey.

The dream-vision concludes with some familiar eschatological notes: the
judgement and condemnation of the wicked; the establishment of the New
Jerusalem; the conversion of the Gentiles, who become subject to Israel;
the gathering-in of the dispersed Israelites; the resurrection of the
righteous dead and the setting-up of the Messianic Kingdom on the
appearance of the Messiah (xc. 20-38).

v\. *The Concluding Section* of the Book (xcii.-cv.; xci. x-10, 18, 19
also belong here) is a complete, though short, work; but there are some
obvious interpolations, and it is quite possible that some parts of the
text are dislocated. This makes the understanding of the book difficult;
but if we follow Charles's guidance here the difficulties will
disappear. He says that this concluding piece has in some degree
suffered at the hands the final editor of the book, both in the way of
direct interpolation and of severe dislocations of the text. The
interpolations are: xci. 11, xciii. 11-14, xciv. 7<sup>d</sup>, xcvi. 2.
The dislocations of the text are a more important feature of the book.
They are confined (with the exception of xciii. 13-14, and of cvi.
17<sup>a</sup> which should be read immediately after cvi. 14) to
xci.-xciii. All critics are agreed as to the chief of these. xci. 12-17
should undoubtedly be read directly after xciii. . . . Taken together
xciii. 1-10, xci. 12-17 form an independent whole--the Apocalypse of
Weeks--which has been incorporated in xci.-civ. . . . The remaining
dislocations need only to be pointed out in order to be acknowledged. On
other grounds we find that xci.-civ. is a book of different authorship
from that of the rest of the sections. Now, this being so, this section
obviously begins with xcii.: 'Written by Enoch the Scribe.' etc. On
xcii. follows xci. 1-10, 18, 19 as a natural sequel, where

<span id="page_xxvi">p. xxvi</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Enoch summons his
children to receive his parting words. Then comes the Apocalypse of
weeks, xciii. 1-10, xci. 12-17. The original order of the text,
therefore, was: xcii. xci. 1-10, 18, 19, xciii. 1-10, xci. 12-17. xciv.
These dislocations were the work of the editor, who put the different
books of Enoch together, and added lxxx. and lxxxi." <span
id="fr_21"></span>[1](#fn_21)

This book is concerned with the question of the final reward of the
righteous and the final punishment of the wicked. . But a new teaching
of great importance is put forth here. Hitherto it had been taught that
although much incongruity and apparent injustice were to be found on
this earth owing to the suffering of the righteous and the prosperity of
the wicked,. nevertheless all things would be righted in the world to
come, where the wicked would receive their deserts, and the righteous
would come to their own. In this book it is taught that retribution will
overtake the wicked, and the righteous will have peace and prosperity,
even on this earth, with the setting-up of the Messianic Kingdom; and
that at the last there will come, with the final judgement, the
destruction of the former heaven and earth, and the creation of a new
heaven. Then will follow the resurrection of the spirits of the
righteous dead who will live for ever in peace and joy, while the wicked
will perish everlastingly. The important point, which is a development,
is the idea of the punishment of the wicked taking place on this earth,
the very scene of their unrighteous triumphs.

vi\. *The Noah Fragments* (vi.-xi, lvii. 7-lv. 2, ix. lxv.-lxix. 25,
cvi., cvii.). These fragments are not of much importance; the main
topics touched upon are the fall of the angels and sin among men in
consequence; judgement on mankind, *i.e.* the Deluge, and the
preservation of Noah.

The first five chapters are generally field to be as late as any part of
the whole collection; they deal with the punishment hereafter of the
wicked and

<span id="page_xxvii">p. xxvii</span>

the blessedness of the righteous. Chapter cviii., which reads like a
final word to the whole collection, touches upon the same theme.

### THE IMPORTANCE OF THE BOOK FOR THE STUDY OF CHRISTIAN ORIGINS

This is a subject which cannot be thoroughly appreciated without
studying the book in detail, especially from its doctrinal standpoint,
and seeing in how many aspects it represents the doctrine and the
popular conceptions of the Jews during the two last pre-Christian
centuries. To do this here would involve a far too extended
investigation; it must suffice to indicate a few of the many points
which should be studied; from these it will be seen how important the
book is for the study of Christian origins. Charles says that "the
influence of 1 Enoch on the New Testament has been greater than that of
all the other apocryphal and pseudepigraphical books put together"; and
he gives a formidable list of passages in the New Testament which
"either in phraseology or idea directly depend on, or are illustrative
of, passages in 1 Enoch," as well as a further list showing that various
doctrines in 1 Enoch had "an undoubted share in moulding the
corresponding New Testament doctrines." These passages should be
studied--and they will be found to be a most interesting study--in
Charles's work already referred to several times, pp. xcv.-ciii.; and
with these should be read the section on the Theology of the Book of
Enoch, pp. ciii.-cx. Another book of great value and interest--also
already quoted--is Burkitt's *Jewish and Christian Apocalypses*. In
dealing with the subject of 1 Enoch and the Gospels, this writer points
out that the former "contains a serious attempt to account for the
presence of Evil in human history, and this attempt claims our
attention, because it is in essentials the view presupposed in the
Gospels, especially in the Synoptic Gospels.

<span id="page_xxviii">p. xxviii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> It is when you
study Matthew, Mark, and Luke against the background of the Books of
Enoch that you see them in their true perspective. In saying this I have
no intention of detracting from the importance of what the, Gospels
report to us. On the contrary, it puts familiar words into their proper
setting. Indeed, it seems to me that some of the best-known Sayings of
Jesus only appear in their true light if regarded as *Midrash* upon
words and concepts that were familiar to those who heard the Prophet of
Galilee, though now they have been forgotten by Jew and Christian alike"
(p. 21). He then gives an illustration of this from Matt. xii. 43-45,
Luke xi. 24--26. Of still greater interest are his remarks upon the
relationship between 1 Enoch lxii. and Matt. xxv, 31-46; he believes
that "the Similitudes of Enoch are presupposed in the scene from
Matthew." The whole of the discussion which follows should be read.

The special points of interest that should be studied in seeking to
realize the importance of these books of Enoch for the study of
Christian origins are the problems of evil, including, of course, the
subjects of dæmonology, and future judgement; the Messiah and the
Messianic Kingdom--the title "Son of Man" is of special importance--and
the Resurrection. There are, of course, other subjects which will
suggest themselves in studying the book.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[viii:1](boe002.htm#fr_0) *Jewish and Christian
Apocalypses*, pp. 15, 16 (1913).

<span id="fn_1"></span>[xi:1](boe002.htm#fr_1) G. H. Box, *The Ezra
Apocalypse*, pp. 35, 36 (1912).

<span id="fn_2"></span>[xiii:1](boe002.htm#fr_2) The general Pharisaic
point of view regarding this may be gathered from Matt. iii. 7-10.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[xv:1](boe002.htm#fr_3) Burkitt rightly insists
that we should speak of the collection as the books. not the book, of
Enoch.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[xv:2](boe002.htm#fr_4) Burkitt, op. cit., 28-30.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[xvi:1](boe002.htm#fr_5) *i.e.* the " Pious
ones." or " Saints."

<span id="fn_6"></span>[xvi:2](boe002.htm#fr_6) *Die Saddurder* (1912).

<span id="fn_7"></span>[xvi:3](boe002.htm#fr_7) i.e., according to him,
i.-xxxvi., lxxii.-lxxxii., lxxxiii.-xc., xci. 12-17, xciii.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[xvi:4](boe002.htm#fr_8) See Gen. v. 21-23.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[xvi:5](boe002.htm#fr_9) *Op. cit.*, p. 18.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[xvi:6](boe002.htm#fr_10) Gen. v. 24.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[xvii:1](boe002.htm#fr_11) *i.e.* "The Book of
the Heavenly Luminaries." as Charles calls it.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[xvii:2](boe002.htm#fr_12) *i.e.* "the
righteous"; a play on the word *Zaddûkîm*, the "sons of Zadok," *i.e.*
the Sadducees.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[xvii:3](boe002.htm#fr_13) Leszynsky, *op cit.*,
pp. 253 ff.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[xviii:1](boe002.htm#fr_14) Chaps. i.-xxxii. 6.
and xix. 3-xxi. 9 in a duplicate form were discovered at Akhmîm in
1886-1887; vi.-x. 14. xv. 8-xvi. x, and viii. 4-ix. 4 in a duplicate
form, have been preserved in Syncellus; lxxxix. 42-49 occurs in a Greek
Vatican MS. (No. 1809); there are also a few quotations in early Greek
ecclesiastical writings; and i. 9, v. 4. xxvii. 2 are quoted in the
Epistle of St. Jude 14, 15.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[xix:1](boe002.htm#fr_15) *Op. cit.*, p. 27.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[xix:2](boe002.htm#fr_16) It is a great pity
that one system of chapter-enumeration runs through the whole volume; if
each separate book began with chap. i. it would be much better. For
obvious reasons this cannot be done here; see Editors' General Preface.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[xxiii:1](boe002.htm#fr_17) See also lxxxii.
4-6. it.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[xxiii:2](boe002.htm#fr_18) Charles, *The Book
of Enoch*, p. 147 (1912).

<span id="fn_19"></span>[xxiv:1](boe002.htm#fr_19) *Op. cit.* p. 150.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[xxiv:2](boe002.htm#fr_20) for the points of
difference between the Pharisees and Sadducees see the present writer's
*The Books of the Apocrypha, their Origin, Teaching, and Contents*,
chap. vii. (1914).

<span id="fn_21"></span>[xxvi:1](boe002.htm#fr_21) *Op. cit.*, p. 218.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Abbreviations, Brackets and Symbols Specially Used in the
Translation of 1 Enoch](boe003)

</div>
