[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc32006)  [Next](cc32008.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 32: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part II*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p1"></span>matthew 11:20-24; luke 10:13-16

<span id="ii.vi-p2"></span><span id="ii.vi-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
11:20-24](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#020.md)<span id="ii.vi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p3"></span><span id="ii.vi-p3.1"></span>[Luke
10:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#013.md)<span id="ii.vi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p4"></span>**20**. Then he began to upbraid the cities,
in which most of his mighty works were done, because they had not
repented of crimes: **21**. Woe to thee, Chorazin! woe to thee,
Bethsaida! for if the mighty works, which have been done in you, had
been done in Tyre and Sidon, they would have repented of their crimes
long ago in sackcloth and ashes. **22**. But I say to you, It will be
more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon  <span id="fr_35"></span>[36](#fn_35.md)
in the day of judgment than for you. **23**. And thou, Capernaum, which
art exalted even to heaven shall be cast down even to hell; for if the
mighty works, which have been done in thee, had been done in Sodom, it
would have remained until this day. **24**. But I say to you, That it
will be more tolerable for the land of Sodom  <span
id="fr_36"></span>[37](#fn_36.md) in the day of judgment than for thee.

<span id="ii.vi-p7"></span> 

<span id="ii.vi-p8"></span>**13**. Woe to thee, Chorazin! woe to thee,
Bethsaida! for if the might works, which have been done in you, had been
done in Tyre and Sidon, they would have long ago repented, sitting in
sackcloth and ashes. **14**. But it will be more tolerable for Tyre and
Sidon in the judgment than for you.  <span
id="fr_37"></span>[38](#fn_37.md) **15**. And thou, Capernaum, which art
exalted even to heaven, shall be cast down even to hell. **16**. He that
heareth you heareth me; and he that despiseth you despiseth me; and he
that despiseth me despiseth him that sent me.

<span id="ii.vi-p10"></span> 

<span id="ii.vi-p11"></span> 

<span id="ii.vi-p12"></span><span id="ii.vi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p13"></span>**<span id="ii.vi-p13.2"></span>[Matthew
11:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#020.md)<span id="ii.vi-p13.2"></span>.**
*Then he began to upbraid.* Luke states the time when, and the reason
why, Christ uttered such invectives against those cities. It was while
he was sending the disciples away into various parts of Judea, to
proclaim, as they passed along, that the kingdom of God was at hand.
Reflecting on the ingratitude of those among whom he had long discharged
the office of a prophet, and performed many wonderful works, without any
good result, he broke out into these words, announcing that the time was
now come, when he should depart to other cities, having learned, by
experience, that the inhabitants of the country adjoining that lake,
among whom he had begun to preach the Gospel and perform miracles, were
full of obstinacy and of desperate malice. But he says nothing about the
doctrine, and reproaches them that his miracles had not led them to
repent.  <span id="fr_38"></span>[39](#fn_38.md) The object which our Lord
had in view, in exhibiting those manifestations of his power,
undoubtedly was to invite men to himself; but as all are by nature
averse to him, it is necessary to begin with repentance. *Chorazin* and
*Bethsaida* are well known to have been cities which were situated on
the lake of Gennesareth.

<span id="ii.vi-p15"></span><span id="ii.vi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p16"></span>**21.** *If those mighty works had been done
in Tyre and Sidon.* As *Tyre and Sidon,* in consequence of their
proximity, were at that time abhorred for their ungodliness, pride,
debauchery, and other vices, Christ employs this comparison for the
express purpose of making a deeper and more painful impression on his
Jewish countrymen. There was not one of them who did not look upon the
inhabitants of *Tyre and Sidon* as abominable despisers of God. It is,
therefore, no small heightening of his curse, when Christ says, that
there would have been more hope of reformation from those places in
which there was no religion, than is to be seen in Judea itself.

<span id="ii.vi-p17"></span>Lest any should raise thorny questions
 <span id="fr_39"></span>[40](#fn_39.md) about the secret decrees of God,
we must remember, that this discourse of our Lord is accommodated to the
ordinary capacity of the human mind.  <span
id="fr_40"></span>[41](#fn_40.md) Comparing the citizens of *Bethsaida,*
and their neighbors, with the inhabitants of *Tyre and Sidon,* he
reasons, not of what God foresaw would be done either by the one or by
the other, but of what both parties would have done, so far as could be
judged from the facts. The exceedingly corrupt morals and unrestrained
debauchery of those cities might be ascribed to ignorance; for there the
voice of God had never been heard, nor had miracles been performed, to
warn them to repent. But in the cities of Galilee, which Christ
*upbraids,* there was a display of very hardened obstinacy in despising
miracles, of which they had seen a vast number without reaping any
advantage. In short, the words of Christ convey nothing more than that
the inhabitants of *Chorazin* and *Bethsaida* go beyond those of *Tyre
and Sidon* in malice and incurable contempt of God.

<span id="ii.vi-p20"></span>And yet we have no right to contend with
God, for having passed by others of whom better hopes might have been
entertained, and displaying his power before some who were extremely
wicked and altogether desperate. Those on whom he does not bestow his
mercy are justly appointed to perdition. If he withhold his word from
some, and allow them to perish, while, in order to render others more
inexcusable, he entreats and exhorts them, in a variety of ways, to
repentance, who shall charge him, on this account, with injustice? Let
us, therefore, aware of our own weakness, learn to contemplate this
height and depth  <span id="fr_41"></span>[42](#fn_41.md) with reverence;
for it is intolerable fretfulness and pride that is manifested by those
who cannot endure to ascribe praise to the righteousness of God, except
so far as it comes within the reach of their senses, and who
disdainfully reject those mysteries, which it was their duty to adore,
simply because the reason of them is not fully evident.

<span id="ii.vi-p22"></span>*If the mighty works had been done.* We have
said that these words inform us concerning the right use of miracles,
though they likewise include doctrine; for Christ did not remain silent,
 <span id="fr_42"></span>[43](#fn_42.md) while he was holding out to their
view the power of the Father; but, on the contrary, miracles were added
to the Gospel, that they might attend to what was spoken by Christ.

<span id="ii.vi-p24"></span>*In sackcloth and ashes* *Repentance* is
here described by outward signs, the use of which was at that time
common in the Church of God: not that Christ attaches importance to that
matter, but because he accommodates himself to the capacity of the
common people. We know that believers are not only required to exercise
repentance for a few days, but to cherish it incessantly till death. But
there is no necessity, in the present day, for being clothed with
*sackcloth,* and sprinkled with *ashes*; and, therefore, there is not
always occasion for that outward profession of repentance, but only
when, after some aggravated revolt, men turn to God. *Sackcloth and
ashes* are, no doubt, indications of guilt, for the purpose of turning
away the wrath of the Judge;  <span id="fr_43"></span>[44](#fn_43.md) and
therefore relate strictly to the beginning of conversion. But as men
testify by this ceremony their sorrow and grief, it must be preceded by
hatred of sin, fear of God, and mortification of the flesh, according to
the words of Joel, (<span id="ii.vi-p25.2"></span>[Joe
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#013)<span id="ii.vi-p25.2"></span>,.md)
*Rend your hearts and not your garments.* We now see the reason why
*sackcloth and ashes* are mentioned by Christ along with *repentance,*
when he speaks of *Tyre and Sidon,* to the inhabitants of which the
Gospel could not have been preached, without condemning their past life,
leaving nothing for them, but to betake themselves to the wretched
apparel of criminals for the sake of humbly beseeching pardon. Such,
too, is the reference of the word *sitting,* which is employed by Luke,
Sitting *in sackcloth and ashes;* for it denotes *“lying* prostrate on
the ground,”—a posture adapted to express the grief of wretched persons,
as is evident from many passages of the Prophets.

<span id="ii.vi-p26"></span><span id="ii.vi-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p27"></span>**23.** *And thou, Capernaum.* He expressly
addresses the city of *Capernaum,* in which he had resided so
constantly, that many supposed it to be his native place. It was indeed
an inestimable honor, that the Son of God, when about to commence his
reign and priesthood, had chosen *Capernaum* for the seat of his palace
and sanctuary. And yet it was as deeply plunged in its filth, as if
there had never been poured upon it a drop of Divine grace. On this
account, Christ declares, that the punishment awaiting it will be the
more dreadful, in proportion to the higher favors which it had received
from God. It deserves our earnest attention in this passage, that the
profanation of the gifts of God, as it involves sacrilege, will never
pass unpunished; and that the more eminent any one is, he will be
punished with the greater severity, if he shall basely pollute the gifts
which God has bestowed upon him; and above all, an awful vengeance
awaits us, if, after having received the spiritual gifts of Christ, we
treat him and his Gospel with contempt.

<span id="ii.vi-p28"></span>*If they had been done in Sodom.* We have
already hinted, that Christ speaks after the manner of men, and does not
bring forth, as from the heavenly sanctuary,  <span
id="fr_44"></span>[45](#fn_44.md) what God foresaw would happen if he had
sent a Prophet to the inhabitants of *Sodom.* But if quarrelsome persons
are not satisfied with this answer, every ground of objection is removed
by this single consideration, that although God had a remedy in his
power for saving the inhabitants of *Sodom,* yet in destroying them he
was a just avenger.  <span id="fr_45"></span>[46](#fn_45.md)

<span id="ii.vi-p31"></span><span id="ii.vi-p31.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p32"></span>**<span id="ii.vi-p32.2"></span>[Luke
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#016.md)<span id="ii.vi-p32.2"></span>.**
*He that heareth you heareth me.* It is a mistake to suppose that this
passage is a repetition of what we formerly met with in the Gospel of
<span id="ii.vi-p32.3"></span>[Mt
10:40](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#040.md)<span id="ii.vi-p32.3"></span>
*he that receiveth you receiveth me*  <span
id="fr_46"></span>[47](#fn_46.md) *Then,* Christ was speaking of persons,
but *now,* of doctrine. The former *receiving* had a reference to
offices of kindness; but *now* he recommends faith, which receives God
in his Word. The general meaning is, that the godliness of men is
ascertained by the obedience of faith;  <span
id="fr_47"></span>[48](#fn_47.md) and that those who reject the Gospel,
though they may boast of being the most eminent of the worshippers of
God, give evidence that they wickedly despise him.

<span id="ii.vi-p35"></span>We must now attend to the design of Christ.
As a considerable portion of the world foolishly estimates the Gospel
according to the rank of men, and despises it because it is professed by
persons of mean and despicable condition, our Lord here contradicts so
perverse a judgment. Again, almost all are so proud, that they do not
willingly submit to their equals, or to those whom they look down upon
as inferior to them. God has determined, on the other hand, to govern
his Church by the ministry of men, and indeed frequently selects the
ministers of the Word from among the lowest dregs of the people. It was,
therefore, necessary to support the majesty of the Gospel, that it might
not appear to be degraded by proceeding from the lips of men.

<span id="ii.vi-p36"></span>This is a remarkable commendation  <span
id="fr_48"></span>[49](#fn_48.md) of the outward ministry, when Christ
declares, that whatever honor and respect is rendered to the preaching
of men, provided that the preaching be faithful, God acknowledges as
done to Himself. In two points of view, this recommendation is useful.
Nothing ought to be a stronger encouragement to us to embrace the
doctrine of the Gospel, than to learn that this is the highest worship
of God, and a sacrifice of the sweetest odor, to hear him speaking by
human lips, and to yield subjection to his word, which is brought to us
by men, in the same manner as if he were descending from heaven or
making known his will to us by angels. Again, our confidence is
established, and all doubt is removed, when we learn, that the testimony
of our salvation, when delivered to us by men whom God has sent, is not
less worthy of credit, than if His voice resounded from heaven. To deter
us, on the other hand, from despising the Gospel, he adds a severe
threatening:

<span id="ii.vi-p38"></span>*He that despiseth you despiseth me; and he
that despiseth me despiseth him that sent me.* Those who disdain to
listen to ministers, however mean and contemptible they may be, offer an
insult, not to men only, but to Christ himself, and to God the Father.
While a magnificent eulogium is here pronounced on the rank of pastors,
who honestly and faithfully discharge their office, it is absurd in the
Pope and his clergy to take this as a pretense for cloaking their
tyranny. Assuredly, Christ does not speak in such a manner, as to
surrender into the hands of men the power which the Father has given
him, but only to protect his Gospel against contempt. Hence it follows,
that he does not transfer to the persons of men the honor which is due
to himself, but only maintains that it cannot be separated from his
Word. If the Pope wishes to be *received,* let him bring forward the
doctrine by which he may be recognized as a minister of Christ; but so
long as he continues to be what he now is, a mortal enemy of Christ, and
destitute of all resemblance to the Apostles, let him cease to deck
himself with borrowed feathers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_35"></span>[36](cc32007.htm#fr_35.md) <span
id="ii.vi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p5"></span> “<span id="ii.vi-p5.1"></span>Que Tyr et
Sidon seront plus doucement traittez;” — “that Tyre and Sidon will be
treated more gently.”

<span id="fn_36"></span>[37](cc32007.htm#fr_36.md) <span
id="ii.vi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p6"></span> “<span id="ii.vi-p6.1"></span>Que ceux de
Sodome seront traittez plus doucement;” — “that those of Sodom will be
treated more gently.”

<span id="fn_37"></span>[38](cc32007.htm#fr_37.md) <span
id="ii.vi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p9"></span> “<span id="ii.vi-p9.1"></span>Pourtant Tyr
et Sidon seront plus doucement traittez au Iugementque vous;” —
“therefore Tyre and Sidon will be more gently treated in the Judgment
than you.”

<span id="fn_38"></span>[39](cc32007.htm#fr_38.md) <span
id="ii.vi-p13.3"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p14"></span> “<span id="ii.vi-p14.1"></span>Que par les
miracles ils n’ont point esmeus pour se convertir a repentance;” — “that
by the miracles they were not moved to be converted to repentance.”

<span id="fn_39"></span>[40](cc32007.htm#fr_39.md) <span
id="ii.vi-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p18"></span> “<span id="ii.vi-p18.1"></span>Des
questions curieuses et difficiles;” — “curious and difficult questions.”

<span id="fn_40"></span>[41](cc32007.htm#fr_40.md) <span
id="ii.vi-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p19"></span> “<span id="ii.vi-p19.1"></span>A la
capacite et apprehension commune de l’entendement humain;” — “to the
ordinary capacity and apprehension of the human understanding.”

<span id="fn_41"></span>[42](cc32007.htm#fr_41.md) <span
id="ii.vi-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p21"></span> “<span id="ii.vi-p21.1"></span>Ceste
hautesse et profondeur des iugemens de Dieu;” — “this height and depth
of the judgments of God.”

<span id="fn_42"></span>[43](cc32007.htm#fr_42.md) <span
id="ii.vi-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p23"></span> “<span id="ii.vi-p23.1"></span>N’a pas eu
cependant sa bouche close;” — “did not in the meantime keep his mouth
shut.”

<span id="fn_43"></span>[44](cc32007.htm#fr_43.md) <span
id="ii.vi-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p25"></span> “<span id="ii.vi-p25.1"></span>A fin
d’adoucir le Iuge, et destourner son iuste courroux;” — “in order to
pacify the Judge, and to turn away his just wrath.”

<span id="fn_44"></span>[45](cc32007.htm#fr_44.md) <span
id="ii.vi-p28.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p29"></span> “<span id="ii.vi-p29.1"></span>Il ne vent
point ici amener le conseil secret de Dieu;” — “he does not intend here
to exhibit the secret purpose of God.”

<span id="fn_45"></span>[46](cc32007.htm#fr_45.md) <span
id="ii.vi-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p30"></span> “<span id="ii.vi-p30.1"></span>Que
toutesfois, en les destruisant et damnant, il n’a rien fait qui empesche
qu’il ne soit tousiours recognue iuste en sa punition et sa vengeance;”
— “that notwithstanding, in destroying and condemning them, He has done
nothing to prevent Him from being always acknowledged to be righteous in
His punishment and in His vengeance.”

<span id="fn_46"></span>[47](cc32007.htm#fr_46.md) <span
id="ii.vi-p32.4"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p33"></span> Harmony, volume 1 p. 475.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[48](cc32007.htm#fr_47.md) <span
id="ii.vi-p33.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p34"></span> “<span id="ii.vi-p34.1"></span>Que la
crainte de Dieu qui est es hommes, se monstre par l’obeissance de la
foy;” — “that the fear of God which is in men is manifested by the
obedience of faith.”

<span id="fn_48"></span>[49](cc32007.htm#fr_48.md) <span
id="ii.vi-p36.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p37"></span> “<span id="ii.vi-p37.1"></span>C’est donc
une louange et recommendation singuliere;” — “it is then a singular
praise and recommendation.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke 10:17-20](cc32008.md)
