[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc32011)  [Next](cc32013.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 32: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part II*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.xi"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p1"></span><span id="ii.xi-p1.1"></span>[Matthew
12:14-21](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#014.md)<span id="ii.xi-p1.1"></span>;
<span id="ii.xi-p1.2"></span>[Mark
3:6-12](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#006.md)<span id="ii.xi-p1.2"></span>;
<span id="ii.xi-p1.3"></span>[Luke
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#011.md)<span id="ii.xi-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p2"></span><span id="ii.xi-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
12:14-21](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#014.md)<span id="ii.xi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p3"></span><span id="ii.xi-p3.1"></span>[Mark
3:6-12](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#006.md)<span id="ii.xi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p4"></span><span id="ii.xi-p4.1"></span>[Luke
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#011.md)<span id="ii.xi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p5"></span>**14**. Then the Pharisees went out, and took
counsel against him, how they might destroy him.  <span
id="fr_85"></span>[86](#fn_85.md) **15**. But when Jesus knew this, he
withdrew from that place; and great multitudes followed him, and he
cured them all. **16**. And he threatened them,  <span
id="fr_86"></span>[87](#fn_86.md) that they should not make him known:
**17**. That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by Isaiah the
Prophet, who says, **18**. Lo, my servant, whom I have chosen, my
beloved, in whom my soul is well pleased: I will put my Spirit upon him,
and he shall proclaim judgment to the Gentiles. **19**. He shall not
strive, nor cry, nor shall any man hear his voice in the streets.
**20**. The bruised reed he will not break, and the smoking flax he will
not quench, till he send forth judgment into victory. **21**. And in his
name the Gentiles will trust.

<span id="ii.xi-p8"></span> 

<span id="ii.xi-p9"></span>**6**. And the Pharisees went out, and
immediately took counsel with the Herodians against him, to destroy him.
**7**. And Jesus withdrew with his disciples to the sea, and a vast
multitude followed him from Galilee, and from Judea. **8**. And from
Jerusalem, and from Idumea, and from beyond Jordan; and a great
multitude (of men) who dwelt around Tyre and Sidon, who, when they had
heard what he was doing, came to him. **9**. And he commanded his
disciples, that a small ship should wait upon him on account of the
multitude, that they might not press upon him. **10**. For he had cured
many; so that as many as were afflicted pressed upon him to touch him.
**11**. And unclean spirits, when they saw him, fell down before him,
and cried out, saying, Thou art the Son of God. **12**. And he
vehemently threatened the that they should not make him known

<span id="ii.xi-p10"></span>**11**. And they were filled with madness,
and talked with each other what they should do to Jesus.

<span id="ii.xi-p11"></span> 

<span id="ii.xi-p12"></span> 

<span id="ii.xi-p13"></span><span id="ii.xi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p14"></span>**<span id="ii.xi-p14.2"></span>[Matthew
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#014.md)<span id="ii.xi-p14.2"></span>.**
*Then the Pharisees took counsel.* How obstinate is the rage which
drives the wicked to oppose God! Even after having been convinced, they
pour out their venom more and more. It is truly monstrous and shocking,
that the most distinguished teachers of the Law, who were entrusted with
the government of the Church, are engaged, like robbers, in contriving
murder. But this must happen, whenever the malice of men reaches such a
height, that they wish to destroy every thing that is opposed to their
fancy, even though it may be from God.

<span id="ii.xi-p15"></span>The circumstance of Christ’s making his
escape by flight must not be ascribed to fear; for he did not become
more courageous by the lapse of time, but was endued with the same
fortitude of the Spirit at the time when he fled, as when, at a later
period, he voluntarily presented himself to die. And this was a part of
that *emptying of himself* which Paul mentions, (<span
id="ii.xi-p15.1"></span>[Php 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#007.md)<span
id="ii.xi-p15.1"></span>,) that when he could easily have protected his
life by a miracle, he chose rather to submit to our weakness by taking
flight. The only reason why he delayed to die was, that the seasonable
time, which had been appointed by the Father, *was not yet come,* (<span
id="ii.xi-p15.2"></span>[John 7:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#030.md),
[John 8:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#020.md)<span
id="ii.xi-p15.2"></span>.) And yet it is manifest, that he was preserved
by heavenly power rather than by flight; for it would not have been
difficult for his enemies to find out the place to which he had retired,
and so far was he from shrouding himself in darkness, that he carried a
great company along with him, and rendered that place illustrious by his
miracles. He withdrew from their presence for the sole purpose of not
aggravating their rage.

<span id="ii.xi-p16"></span><span id="ii.xi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p17"></span>**<span id="ii.xi-p17.2"></span>[Mark
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#006.md)<span id="ii.xi-p17.2"></span>.**
*The Pharisees took counsel with the Herodians.* Now they regarded *the
Herodians* with the fiercest hatred; for their eagerness to be
considered the guardians and protectors of public liberty made it
necessary for them to make an open profession of mortal hatred to the
ministers of that tyrant. And yet this aversion is counteracted by their
hatred and fury against Christ,  <span id="fr_87"></span>[88](#fn_87.md)
which makes them not only enter into a conspiracy with foreigners, but
insinuate themselves into the good graces of those with whom, on other
occasions, they would have shrunk from intercourse. While ungodliness
hurries men in various directions, and drives them to different courses,
it engages them, with one consent, in a contest with God. No hostilities
prevent them from giving their hand to each other for opposing the truth
of God.

<span id="ii.xi-p19"></span><span id="ii.xi-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p20"></span>**<span id="ii.xi-p20.2"></span>[Matthew
12:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#016.md)<span id="ii.xi-p20.2"></span>.**
*And he threatened them.* The expression used by M*ark* conveys, in a
still more pointed manner, that he restrained the *unclean spirits,*
 <span id="fr_88"></span>[89](#fn_88.md) who were exclaiming, *Thou art the
Son of God.* We have formerly explained the reason why he did not choose
to have such witnesses.  <span id="fr_89"></span>[90](#fn_89.md) And yet
there is no room to doubt, that divine power extorted from the devils
this confession; but having made it evident that they were subject to
his dominion, Christ properly rejected their testimony. But *Matthew*
goes farther, and states, that Christ discharged them from spreading the
fame of the miracles which he was performing. Not that he wished that
fame to be wholly repressed, (as we have pointed out on other occasions,
 <span id="fr_90"></span>[91](#fn_90.md) but to allow it to strike root,
that it might bring forth abundant fruit at the proper season. We know
that Christ did not perform miracles for the purpose of amusement, but
had a distinct object in view, which was to prove that he was the Son of
God, and the appointed Redeemer of the world. But he was manifested
gradually, and by regular steps, and was not revealed in his true
character

<span id="ii.xi-p24"></span>“until the time appointed by the Father,”  
(<span id="ii.xi-p24.2"></span>[Ga
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#002)<span id="ii.xi-p24.2"></span>..md)

<span id="ii.xi-p25"></span>At the same time, it deserves our attention,
that when wicked men do their utmost to extinguish the glory of God,
they are so far from gaining their wish, that, on the contrary, God
turns their rebellious designs in an opposite direction. Though Christ
withdrew from a populous district, yet in this very concealment  <span
id="fr_91"></span>[92](#fn_91.md) his glory continues to shine, and even
bursts forth magnificently into its full splendor.

<span id="ii.xi-p27"></span><span id="ii.xi-p27.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p28"></span>**17.** *That it might be fulfilled which
was spoken* Matthew does not mean that this prediction was entirely
fulfilled by Christ’s prohibiting loud and general reports to be
circulated respecting his power  <span id="fr_92"></span>[93](#fn_92.md) ,
but that this was an exhibition of that mildness which Isaiah describes
in the person of the Messiah. Those wonderful works which Christ
performed in presence of a few, and which he did not wish to be
announced in pompous terms, were fitted to *shake heaven and earth,*
(<span id="ii.xi-p29.2"></span>[Heb
12:26](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#026)<span id="ii.xi-p29.2"></span>..md)
It was, therefore, no ordinary proof, how widely he was removed from the
pomp and ostentation of the world.

<span id="ii.xi-p30"></span>But it will be proper for us to examine more
closely the design of Matthew. By this circumstance he intended to show,
that the glory of Christ’s divinity ought not to be the less admired,
because it appeared under a vail of infirmity. This is unquestionably
the very object to which the Holy Spirit directed the eyes of the
prophet. The flesh is constantly longing for outward display, and to
guard believers against seeking any thing of this description in the
Messiah, the Spirit of God declared that he would be totally different
from earthly kings, who, in order to draw admiration upon themselves,
produce great noises wherever they go, and fill cities and towns with
commotion.  <span id="fr_93"></span>[94](#fn_93.md) We now perceive how
appropriately Matthew applies the prediction of the prophet to the case
in hand. God appointed for his Son a low and mean appearance, and that
ignorant persons may not take offense at an aspect which has no
attraction, and is fitted to awaken contempt, both the prophet and
Matthew come forward to declare, that it is not by accident, but in
consequence of a decree of Heaven, that he assumes such a character.
 <span id="fr_94"></span>[95](#fn_94.md) Hence it follows, that deep blame
attaches to all who despise Christ, because his outward condition does
not correspond to the wishes of the flesh. We are not at liberty to
imagine to ourselves a Christ that corresponds to our fancy, but ought
simply to embrace him as he is offered by the Father. He who is offended
by the low condition of Christ, which God declares to be agreeable to
his will, is unworthy of salvation. I now come to examine the words of
the prophet, (<span id="ii.xi-p32.2"></span>[Isa
42:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#001)<span id="ii.xi-p32.2"></span>..md)

<span id="ii.xi-p33"></span><span id="ii.xi-p33.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p34"></span>**18.** *Lo, my servant, whom I have
chosen.* To fix our attention more closely on his will, God points out
by the finger, as it were, the person whom he is about to send; and this
is the design of the exclamation, Lo! A similar reason may be assigned
for the epithets that follow, when God calls him *his servant, his elect
in whom his soul is well pleased.* For whence comes it, that men venture
to measure Christ by their own sense, but because they do not consider
that their redemption depends exclusively on the grace of God? When God
offers to us an invaluable treasure, it is excessive and wicked
presumption to regulate our estimation of it by the disdainful views of
our flesh. He is called a *servant,* not as if he were of the ordinary
rank, but by way of eminence, and as the person to whom God has
committed the charge and office of redeeming his Church. As:

<span id="ii.xi-p35"></span>no man taketh this honor to himself, but he
who is called of God  
(<span id="ii.xi-p35.2"></span>[Heb
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#006)<span id="ii.xi-p35.2"></span>.md)

<span id="ii.xi-p36"></span>is justly entitled to this rank, God
declares that he who comes forward in this character was *elected* by
his decree.  <span id="fr_95"></span>[96](#fn_95.md) Hence it follows, that
men are not at liberty to reject him; because, by doing so, they would
be guilty of contempt and rebellion against God. And, indeed, it were
the height of absurdity that our choice or our pride should set aside
that calling of God which ought to be regarded as sacred and inviolable.

<span id="ii.xi-p38"></span>*My beloved, in whom my soul is well
pleased.* There is a still wider import in this statement, which God
next makes by the prophet, that the delight of his soul dwells in
Christ; for though the calling of each of us proceeds from the free
favor of God as its only source, yet in Christ there is this remarkable
peculiarity, that in his person God the Father embraces in his love the
whole Church. As we are all by nature enemies of God, his love will
never come to us till it first begin with the Head; which we have seen
on a former occasion, and will see again under another passage, (<span
id="ii.xi-p38.1"></span>[Mt 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#005.md)<span
id="ii.xi-p38.1"></span>.)

<span id="ii.xi-p39"></span>*He will proclaim judgment to the Gentiles.*
The prophet gives a brief description of Christ’s office, when he
foretells that *he will proclaim judgment to the Gentiles* By the word
*judgment* the Jews understand a government which is correctly and
properly arranged, in which order and justice prevail. The design of the
prophet is to inform us, that a person will come who will restore
justice that had fallen, who will be the governor not of one nation
only, but will also bring under subjection to God the Gentiles, among
whom dreadful confusion formerly prevailed. And this is the import of
the word *bring forth,* which the prophet employs; for it was the office
of Christ to spread throughout the whole world the kingdom of God, which
was at that time confined to the corner of Judea;  <span
id="fr_96"></span>[97](#fn_96.md) as it is said in another passage,

<span id="ii.xi-p41"></span>The Lord will send forth the scepter of thy
power out of Zion,  
(<span id="ii.xi-p41.2"></span>[Ps
110:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#002)<span id="ii.xi-p41.2"></span>..md)

<span id="ii.xi-p42"></span>*I will put my Spirit upon him.* This
explains the manner in which judgment shall be *brought forth.* It is no
doubt true, that there never was any portion whatever of *righteousness*
in the world that did not proceed from the Spirit of God, and that was
not maintained by his heavenly power; as none of the kings of the earth
can frame or defend good order, except so far as he shall be assisted by
the same Spirit. But in *bringing forth judgment* Christ is greatly
superior to all others, for he has received the Spirit from the Father,
that he may pour it out on all his people; for not only does he by word
or writing prescribe what is proper, but inwardly forms the hearts of
men, by the grace of his Spirit, to preserve the rule of righteousness.

<span id="ii.xi-p43"></span><span id="ii.xi-p43.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p44"></span>**19.** *He will not strive* The general
meaning is, that the coming of Christ will not be attended by noise,
will have nothing of royal splendor and magnificence. He presently adds,
that this will turn to the advantage of men, by inducing them to love
that mildness which the world everywhere despises. And certainly it is
an astonishing display of the folly of men, that their sentiments with
regard to Christ are less respectful, because he mildly and voluntarily
accommodates himself to their capacity. Were Christ to appear in his
glory, what else could be expected, but that it would altogether swallow
us up? What wickedness then is it to be less willing to receive him,
when on our account he descends from his elevation?

<span id="ii.xi-p45"></span>That the gentleness of Christ may awaken
reverence in believers, Isaiah reminds them how advantageous, and even
how necessary that gentleness must be. Each of us is conscious of his
own weakness; and therefore we ought to consider of what importance it
is that Christ should treat us with kindness. I speak not of
unbelievers, who are entirely destitute of all the graces of the Spirit;
but with respect to those whom God has already called, are they not like
*a half-broken reed* and a *smoking lamp,* till God kindle them to full
brightness, and supply them with perfect strength? When Christ is thus
pleased to condescend to our weakness, let his unspeakable goodness be
embraced by us with joy. Meanwhile, let none flatter himself in his
vices, but let each of us labor to make greater proficiency, that we may
not be *tossed about* (<span id="ii.xi-p45.1"></span>[Eph
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#014)<span id="ii.xi-p45.1"></span>.md)
through our whole life, or bend, like *reeds,* to the slightest gale.
Let us grow to the stature of perfect men, that we may remain firm
against the diversified attacks of Satan, that our faith may not only
emit slight sparks encompassed by thick smoke, but may send out bright
rays.

<span id="ii.xi-p46"></span>The example of Christ instructs all his
ministers in what manner they ought to conduct themselves. But as there
are some who falsely and absurdly maintain that mildness ought to be
exercised indiscriminately towards all, we must attend to the
distinction which the prophet expressly makes between *weak* and
*wicked* persons. Those who are too stubborn need to have their hardness
beaten violently with a hammer; and those who endeavor to spread
darkness in every direction, or who act as torches to kindle
conflagrations, must have their smoke dispelled and their flame
extinguished. While the faithful ministers of the Word ought to endeavor
to spare the weak, and thus to cherish and increase that portion of the
grace of God, however small, which they possess, they must also exercise
prudent caution, lest they encourage the obstinate malice of those who
have no resemblance to the *smoking lamp or bruised reed.*

<span id="ii.xi-p47"></span><span id="ii.xi-p47.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p48"></span>**20.** *Till he send out judgment into
victory.* The words of the prophet are a little different, *he will
bring forth the judgment unto truth.* But the term employed by Matthew
is very emphatic, and is intended to inform us, that *justice* is not
established in the world without a great struggle and exertion. The
devil throws all possible difficulties in the way, which cannot be
removed without violent opposition. This is confirmed by the word
*victory,* for victory is not obtained in any other way than by
fighting.

<span id="ii.xi-p49"></span><span id="ii.xi-p49.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p50"></span>**21.** *And in his name shall the Gentiles
trust* Instead of these words the prophet has, *The isles shall wait for
his law.* But though Matthew has changed the words, the meaning is the
same, that the grace of Christ will be shared by the Gentiles.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_85"></span>[86](cc32012.htm#fr_85.md) <span
id="ii.xi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p6"></span> “<span id="ii.xi-p6.1"></span>Comment ils le
mettroyent a mort;” — “how they should put him to death.”

<span id="fn_86"></span>[87](cc32012.htm#fr_86.md) <span
id="ii.xi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p7"></span> ”<span id="ii.xi-p7.1"></span>Et aveques
menaces leur defendit;” — “and with threatenings prohibited them.”

<span id="fn_87"></span>[88](cc32012.htm#fr_87.md) <span
id="ii.xi-p17.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p18"></span> “<span id="ii.xi-p18.1"></span>Toutesfois
la haine enragee qu’ils ont contre Christ, surmonte toutes leurs autres
meschantes affections;” — “and yet the enraged hatred which they have
against Christ rises above all their other wicked dispositions.”

<span id="fn_88"></span>[89](cc32012.htm#fr_88.md) <span
id="ii.xi-p20.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p21"></span> “<span id="ii.xi-p21.1"></span>A scavoir
qu’il menacoit et faisoit taire les esprits immondes;”— “namely, that he
threatened and silenced the unclean spirits.”

<span id="fn_89"></span>[90](cc32012.htm#fr_89.md) <span
id="ii.xi-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p22"></span> Harmony, volume 1 p. 246.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[91](cc32012.htm#fr_90.md) <span
id="ii.xi-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p23"></span> Harmony, volume 1, pp. 374, 418.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[92](cc32012.htm#fr_91.md) <span
id="ii.xi-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p26"></span> “<span id="ii.xi-p26.1"></span>Toutesfois
mesmes en ceste cachete, (par maniere de dire;”)—”yet even in this
hiding place, (so to speak.”)

<span id="fn_92"></span>[93](cc32012.htm#fr_92.md) <span
id="ii.xi-p28.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p29"></span> “<span id="ii.xi-p29.1"></span>Les miracles
et signes qu’il faisoit par sa vertu Divine;” — “the miracles and signs
which he performed by his Divine power.”

<span id="fn_93"></span>[94](cc32012.htm#fr_93.md) <span
id="ii.xi-p30.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p31"></span> “<span id="ii.xi-p31.1"></span>Ils font
faire de grans bruits: il semble que les villes et citez doyvent tourner
ce que dessus dessous, tant y a grande esmotion;” — “they cause great
noises to be made; and so great is the commotion, that it would seem as
if towns and cities were to be turned upside down.”

<span id="fn_94"></span>[95](cc32012.htm#fr_94.md) <span
id="ii.xi-p31.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p32"></span> “<span id="ii.xi-p32.1"></span>Quand Christ
vient au monde sans pompe exterieure;” — “when Christ comes into the
world without external pomp.”

<span id="fn_95"></span>[96](cc32012.htm#fr_95.md) <span
id="ii.xi-p36.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p37"></span> “<span id="ii.xi-p37.1"></span>Dieu
prononce que par son ordonnance il a eleu celuy qu’on verra venir ayant
les marques qu’il met la;” — “God declares that, by his decree, he hath
elected him who will be seen coming, attended by the marks which he
there describes.”

<span id="fn_96"></span>[97](cc32012.htm#fr_96.md) <span
id="ii.xi-p39.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p40"></span> “<span id="ii.xi-p40.1"></span>Qui estoit
pour lors comme enclos en un anglet au pays de Iudee;” —”which was then
shut up, as it were in a corner, in the country of Judea.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 12:22-24; Mark 3:20-22; Luke 11:14-15](cc32013.md)
