[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc32042)  [Next](cc32044) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 32: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part II*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.xlii"></span>

<span id="ii.xlii-p1"></span><span id="ii.xlii-p1.1"></span>[Matthew
14:13-21](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#013)<span
id="ii.xlii-p1.1"></span>; <span id="ii.xlii-p1.2"></span>[Mark
6:30-44](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#030)<span
id="ii.xlii-p1.2"></span>;  
<span id="ii.xlii-p1.4"></span>[Luke
9:10-17](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#010)<span id="ii.xlii-p1.4"></span>

<span id="ii.xlii-p2"></span><span id="ii.xlii-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
14:13-21](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#013)<span
id="ii.xlii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlii-p3"></span><span id="ii.xlii-p3.1"></span>[Mark
6:30-44](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#030)<span id="ii.xlii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlii-p4"></span><span id="ii.xlii-p4.1"></span>[Luke
9:10-17](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#010)<span id="ii.xlii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlii-p5"></span> **13**. When Jesus heard this, he departed
thence to a ship to a desert place apart; and when the multitudes heard
it, they followed him on foot out of the cities. **14**. And Jesus, when
leaving (the ship,) saw a great multitude, and was moved with compassion
towards them, and healed of such of them as were diseased. **15**. And
when the evening was drawing on, his disciples came to him, saying, It
is a desert place, and the time is now past: send the multitudes away,
that they may go into the village, and purchase victuals for themselves.
**16**. And Jesus said to them, It is not necessary that they should go
away: give you to them something to eat. **17**. And they say to him, We
have nothing here but five loaves and two fishes. **18**. And he said,
Bring them hither to me. **19**. And he commanded the multitudes to sit
down on the grass, and, taking the five loaves and the two fishes, and
raising his eyes to heaven, he blessed.  <span
id="fr_369"></span>[370](#fn_369) And when he had broken the loaves, he
gave them to the disciples, and the disciples to the multitudes.
**20**. And they all ate, and were satisfied, and carried away what
remained of the fragments  <span id="fr_370"></span>[371](#fn_370)
twelve baskets full. **21**. And they who had eaten were nearly five
thousand men, besides women and children.

<span id="ii.xlii-p8"></span> **30**. And the Apostles assembled to
Jesus, and related to him all things, both what they had done and what
they had taught.  <span id="fr_371"></span>[372](#fn_371) **31**. And he
said to them, Come you apart into a desert place, and rest for a little.
For there were many who were coming and going, so that there was not
even leisure to take food.  <span id="fr_372"></span>[373](#fn_372) .
**32**. And he went into a desert place by ship apart. **33**. And the
multitude saw them departing, and many recognized him, and ran hither on
foot out of all the cities, and went before them, and came together to
him. **34**. And Jesus, as he was leaving (the ship,) saw a great
multitude, and was moved with compassion towards them, because they were
as sheep not having a shepherd, and he began to teach them many things.
**35**. And when a great part of the day was already past, his disciples
came to him, saying, It is a desert place, and the day is now far
advanced. **36**. Send them away, that they may go into the surrounding
towns and villages and purchase bread for themselves; for they having
nothing to eat. **37**. And he answering said to them, Give you to them
something to eat. And they said to him Shall we go and purchase bread
for two hundred pence, and give them something to eat? **38**. And he
said to them, How many loaves have you? Go and see. And when they knew,
they say, Five, and two fishes. **39**. And he commanded them to make
them all sit down, arranging the guests on the green grass. **40**. And
they sat down, arranged in hundreds, and fifties. **41**. And when he
had taken the five loaves and the two fishes, raising his eyes to
heaven, he blessed,  <span id="fr_373"></span>[374](#fn_373) and brake
the loaves, and gave to the disciples to set before them, and divided
the two fishes among them all. **42**. And they all ate, and were
satisfied. **43**. And they carried away twelve baskets full of the
fragments and of the fishes. **44**. Now they who had eaten were about
five thousand men.

<span id="ii.xlii-p12"></span> **10**. And the Apostles, having
returned,  <span id="fr_374"></span>[375](#fn_374) related to him all
that they had done. And he took them, and withdrew apart into a desert
place, near a city which is called Bethsaida. **11**. And when the
multitudes knew it, they followed him; and he received them, and spoke
to them about the kingdom of God, and healed those who needed healing.
**12**. And the day began to decline; and the twelve approached and said
to him, Send away the multitudes, that they may go into the neighboring
towns and villages, and procure food; for we are here in a desert place.
**13**. And he said to them, Give you to them something to eat. And they
said, We have no more than five loaves and two fishes; unless we go and
buy food for all this people. **14**. Now they were about five thousand
men. And he saith to his disciples, Make them sit down, fifty in each
division. **15**. And they did so, and made them all sit down.
**16**. And, taking the five loaves and the two fishes, he raised his
eyes to heaven, and blessed them, and broke them,  <span
id="fr_375"></span>[376](#fn_375) and gave them to the disciples to set
before the multitude. **17**. And they all ate, and were satisfied; and
there was carried away what was left of the fragments twelve baskets.

<span id="ii.xlii-p15"></span> 

<span id="ii.xlii-p16"></span> 

<span id="ii.xlii-p17"></span><span id="ii.xlii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlii-p18"></span>**<span id="ii.xlii-p18.2"></span>[Matthew
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#013)<span
id="ii.xlii-p18.2"></span>.** *When Jesus heard it. John,* who relates
the same narrative, does not mention the reason why Jesus crossed over
to the opposite bank, (6: 5.) *Mark* and *Luke* differ somewhat from
*Matthew;* for they describe the occasion of the journey to have been to
give some repose to his disciples, after that they had returned from
their embassy. But there is no contradiction here; for it is possible
that he intended to withdraw his disciples into a desert place, in order
that he might be more at leisure to train them for higher labors, and
that, about the same time, an additional reason arose out of the death
of John. Minds which were still feeble might have been terrified by the
death of John, learning from the melancholy end of that eminent prophet
what condition awaited them all. Certainly, as it was formerly related
that, when John was imprisoned, Christ removed from Herod’s territory,
in order to avoid his fury for the time, so we may now infer that
Christ, in order to keep his trembling disciples at a distance from the
flame, *withdrew into a desert place.*

<span id="ii.xlii-p19"></span>How long the Apostles were employed in
their first embassy it is not in our power to determine; for the
Evangelists, as we have formerly remarked, either did not attend to
dates, or did not observe them with great exactness. I think it highly
probable that their commission to proclaim the kingdom of Christ was not
confined to a single occasion, but that, as opportunities were offered,
they either repeated their visit to some places, or went to others after
a lapse of time. The words, *they came together to him,* I look upon as
meaning that ever afterwards they were his constant attendants; as if
the Evangelist had said, that they did not leave their Master so as to
be individually and constantly employed in the ordinary office of
teaching, but that, having discharged a temporary commission, they went
back to school to make greater advances in learning.

<span id="ii.xlii-p20"></span>*They followed him on foot out of the
cities.* Though Christ, who foresaw all things before they happened, was
in no respect ignorant of what would take place, yet he wished, as a
man, to forewarn his disciples, that the fact might testify the anxiety
which he had about them. The vast crowd that had assembled shows how
widely his fame was spread in every direction: and this left the Jews
without excuse in depriving themselves, by their own carelessness, of
the salvation which was offered to them; for even out of this great
multitude, which was inflamed by a sudden zeal to follow Christ, it is
evident from what is stated by John, (<span
id="ii.xlii-p20.1"></span>[John 6:66](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#066),
[John 12:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#037)<span
id="ii.xlii-p20.1"></span>) that not more than a very small number
yielded a true and steady adherence to his doctrine.

<span id="ii.xlii-p21"></span><span id="ii.xlii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlii-p22"></span>**14.** *He was moved with compassion
towards them.* <span id="ii.xlii-p22.3"></span>The other two
Evangelists, and particularly Mark, state more clearly the reason why
this *compassion*<span id="ii.xlii-p22.4"></span> (<span
id="ii.xlii-p22.5"></span>συμπάθεια<span id="ii.xlii-p22.6"></span>)
<span id="ii.xlii-p22.7"></span>was awakened in the mind of Christ. It
was because he saw famishing souls, whom the warmth of zeal had carried
away from their homes and led into a *desert place* <span
id="ii.xlii-p22.8"></span>This scarcity of teaching indicated a wretched
state of disorder; and accordingly Mark says that *Jesus was moved with
compassion towards them, because they were as sheep not having a
shepherd* <span id="ii.xlii-p22.9"></span>Not that, as to his Divine
nature, he looked upon them all as sheep, but that, as man, he judged
according to the present aspect of the case. It was no small
manifestation of piety that they left their own homes, and flocked in
crowds to the Prophet of God, though he purposely concealed himself from
them. Besides, it ought to be remarked, that Christ was mindful of the
character which he sustained; for he had been commanded to discharge the
duties of a public teacher, and was therefore bound to look upon all the
Jews, for the time being, as belonging to the flock of God and to the
Church, till they withdrew from it.

<span id="ii.xlii-p23"></span>So strongly was Christ moved by this
feeling of *compassion,* that though, in common with his disciples, he
was fatigued and almost worn out by uninterrupted toil, he did not spare
himself. He had endeavored to obtain some relaxation, and that on his
own account as well as for the sake of his disciples; but when urgent
duty calls him to additional labor, he willingly lays aside that private
consideration,  <span id="fr_376"></span>[377](#fn_376) and devotes
himself to teaching the multitudes. Although he has now laid aside those
feelings which belonged to him as a mortal man, yet there is no reason
to doubt that he looks down from heaven on poor sheep that have no
shepherd, provided they ask relief of their wants. Mark says, that *he
began to teach them MANY things;* that is, he spent a long time in
preaching, that they might reap some lasting advantage. Luke says, that
he *spoke to them concerning the Kingdom of God,* which amounts to the
same thing. Matthew makes no mention of any thing but miracles, because
they were of great importance in establishing Christ’s reputation; but
it may naturally be concluded that he did not leave out doctrine, which
was a matter of the highest importance.

<span id="ii.xlii-p25"></span><span id="ii.xlii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlii-p26"></span>**15.** *When the evening was drawing on.*
The disciples had now lost their object, and they see that Christ is
again absorbed in teaching, while the multitudes are so eager to receive
instruction that they do not think of retiring. They therefore advise
that for the sake of attending to their bodily wants, Christ should
*send them away into the neighboring villages.* He had purposely delayed
till now the miracle which he intended to perform; first, that his
disciples might consider it more attentively, and might thus derive from
it greater advantage; and next, that the very circumstance of the time
might convince them that, though he does not prevent, and even does not
immediately supply, the wants of his people, yet he never ceases to care
for them, but has always at hand the assistance which he affords at the
very time when it is required.

<span id="ii.xlii-p27"></span><span id="ii.xlii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlii-p28"></span>**16.** *Give you to them something to
eat.* As a fuller exposition of this miracle will be found at the sixth
chapter of John’s Gospel, instead of troubling my readers with a
repetition of what I have said, I would rather send them to that
exposition; but rather than pass over this passage entirely, I shall
offer a brief recapitulation. Hitherto Christ had bestowed his whole
attention on feeding souls, but now he includes within his duties as a
shepherd the care even of their bodies. And in this way he confirms his
own saying, that to those who

<span id="ii.xlii-p29"></span>seek the kingdom of God, and his
righteousness,  
all other things will be added, (<span id="ii.xlii-p29.2"></span>[Mt
6:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#033)<span id="ii.xlii-p29.2"></span>.)

<span id="ii.xlii-p30"></span>We have no right, indeed, to expect that
Christ will always follow this method of supplying the hungry and
thirsty with food; but it is certain that he will never permit his own
people to want the necessaries of life, but will stretch out his hand
from heaven, whenever he shall see it to be necessary to relieve their
necessities. Those who wish to have Christ for their provider, must
first learn not to long for refined luxuries, but to be satisfied with
barley-bread.

<span id="ii.xlii-p31"></span>Christ commanded that the people should
sit down *in companies;* and he did so, first, that by this arrangement
of the ranks the miracle might be more manifest; secondly, that the
number of the men might be more easily ascertained, and that, while they
looked at each other, they might in their turn bear testimony to this
heavenly favor. Thirdly, perceiving that his disciples were anxious, he
intended to make trial of their obedience by giving them an injunction
which at first sight appeared to be absurd; for, as no provisions were
at hand, there was reason to wonder why Christ was making arrangements
that resembled a feast. To the same purpose is what follows, that *he
gave them the loaves,* in order that in their hands the astonishing
increase might take place, and that they might thus be the ministers of
Christ’s divine power; for as if it had been of small importance that
they should be eye-witnesses, Christ determined that his power should be
handled by them.  <span id="fr_377"></span>[378](#fn_377) *Two hundred
pence,* according to the computation of Budaeus, are worth about
thirty-four French *livres;*  <span id="fr_378"></span>[379](#fn_378)
and so when the disciples speak of what is *sufficient for them, that
every one of them may take a little,* they calculate at the rate of a
farthing for each individual. Forming so high an estimate of the sum of
money that would be required to purchase bread barely sufficient for
procuring a morsel to the people, they are entitled to no small praise
for their obedience, when they implicitly comply with the command of
Christ, and leave the result to his disposal.

<span id="ii.xlii-p34"></span><span id="ii.xlii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlii-p35"></span>**19.** *He blessed.* In this passage, as
in many others, *blessing* denotes thanksgiving. Now Christ has taught
us, by his example, that we cannot partake of our food with holiness and
purity, unless we express our gratitude to God, from whose hand it comes
to us. Accordingly, Paul tells us, that every kind of food which God
bestows upon us is *sanctifed by the word of God and prayer,* (<span
id="ii.xlii-p35.2"></span>[1Ti
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#005)<span id="ii.xlii-p35.2"></span>;)
by which he means, that brutal men, who do not regard by faith the
blessing of God, and do not offer to him thanksgiving, corrupt and
pollute by the filth of their unbelief all that is by nature pure; and,
on the other hand, that they are corrupted and defiled by the food which
they swallow, because to unbelievers nothing is clean. Christ has
therefore laid down for his followers the proper manner of taking food,
that they may not profane their own persons and the gifts of God by
wicked sacrilege.

<span id="ii.xlii-p36"></span>*Raising his eyes towards heaven.* This
expresses warm and earnest supplication. Not that such an attitude is at
all times necessary when we pray, but because the Son of God did not
choose to disregard the outward forms which are fitted to aid human
weakness. It ought also to be taken into account, that *to raise the
eyes* upwards is an excitement well fitted to arouse us from sloth, when
our minds are too strongly fixed on the earth.

<span id="ii.xlii-p37"></span><span id="ii.xlii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlii-p38"></span>**20.** *And carried away what was left.*
The *fragments* that remained after satisfying so vast a multitude of
men were more than twelve times larger in quantity than what was at
first put into their hands, and this contributed not a little to the
splendor of the miracle. In this way all came to know that the power of
Christ had not only created out of nothing the food that was necessary
for immediate use, but that, if it should be required, there was also
provision for future wants; and, in a word, Christ intended that, after
the miracle had been wrought, a striking proof of it should still
remain, which, after being refreshed by food, they might contemplate at
leisure.

<span id="ii.xlii-p39"></span>Now though Christ does not every day
multiply our bread, or feed men without the labor of their hands or the
cultivation of their fields, the advantage of this narrative extends
even to us. If we do not perceive that it is the blessing of God which
multiplies the corn, that we may have a sufficiency of food, the only
obstacle is, our own indolence and ingratitude. That, after we have been
supported by the annual produce, there remains seed for the following
year, and that this could not have happened but for an increase from
heaven, each of us would easily perceive, were he not hindered by that
very depravity which blinds the eyes both of the mind and of the flesh,
so as not to see a manifest work of God. Christ intended to declare
that, as all things have been delivered into his hands by the Father, so
the food which we eat proceeds from his grace.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_369"></span>[370](cc32043.htm#fr_369) <span
id="ii.xlii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlii-p6"></span> “<span id="ii.xlii-p6.1"></span>Rendit
graces;” — “gave thanks.”

<span id="fn_370"></span>[371](cc32043.htm#fr_370) <span
id="ii.xlii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xlii-p7"></span> “<span id="ii.xlii-p7.1"></span>Puis
recueillerent le residu des pieces des pains;” — “then gathered what was
left of the pieces of bread.”

<span id="fn_371"></span>[372](cc32043.htm#fr_371) <span
id="ii.xlii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlii-p9"></span> “<span id="ii.xlii-p9.1"></span>Tout ce
qu’ils avoyent fait et enseigne;” — “all that they had done and taught.”

<span id="fn_372"></span>[373](cc32043.htm#fr_372) <span
id="ii.xlii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xlii-p10"></span> “<span
id="ii.xlii-p10.1"></span>Tellement qu’ils n’avoyent pas mesmes loisir
de manger;” — “so that they had not even leisure to eat.”

<span id="fn_373"></span>[374](cc32043.htm#fr_373) <span
id="ii.xlii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xlii-p11"></span> “<span id="ii.xlii-p11.1"></span>Rendit
graces;” — “gave thanks.”

<span id="fn_374"></span>[375](cc32043.htm#fr_374) <span
id="ii.xlii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlii-p13"></span> “<span id="ii.xlii-p13.1"></span>Quand
les Apostres furent retournez;” — “when the Apostles were returned.”

<span id="fn_375"></span>[376](cc32043.htm#fr_375) <span
id="ii.xlii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xlii-p14"></span> “<span id="ii.xlii-p14.1"></span>Les
benit, et les rompit.”

<span id="fn_376"></span>[377](cc32043.htm#fr_376) <span
id="ii.xlii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlii-p24"></span> “<span id="ii.xlii-p24.1"></span>Mettant
arriere ceste consideration particuliere de donner repos au corps;”—
“setting aside that private consideration of giving rest to the body.”

<span id="fn_377"></span>[378](cc32043.htm#fr_377) <span
id="ii.xlii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlii-p32"></span> “<span id="ii.xlii-p32.1"></span>Car
Christ ne se contentant point de leur faire voir de leurs propres yeux
sa vertu, a voulu mesme qu’elle passast par leurs mains, et qu’ils la
touchassent;”— “for Christ, not satisfied with making them see his power
with their own eyes, determined even that it should pass through their
hands, and that they should touch it.”

<span id="fn_378"></span>[379](cc32043.htm#fr_378) <span
id="ii.xlii-p32.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xlii-p33"></span> The value of a <span
id="ii.xlii-p33.2"></span>*livre* was so much affected both by time and
by place, that it is not easy to determine with exactness how it was
rated by Budaeus or Calvin. Most probably, the reference is to <span
id="ii.xlii-p33.3"></span>*la livre Parisis,* which was three times the
value of a <span id="ii.xlii-p33.4"></span>*franc,* or about two
shillings and sixpence sterling; and thirty-four of these would amount
to *four pounds, five shillings, sterling.* Now reckoning the Roman
<span id="ii.xlii-p33.5"></span>*denarius,* or the eighth part of an
ounce of silver, to be worth sevenpence halfpenny of our own money,
<span id="ii.xlii-p33.6"></span>*une livre Parisis* must have been equal
to four <span id="ii.xlii-p33.7"></span>*denarii,* and therefore *two
hundred denarii* must have been worth—not *thirty-four* but *fifty*
*livres Parisis,* or *six pounds, five shillings, sterling.*—*Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 14:22-33; Mark 6:45-52](cc32044)
