[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc32067)  [Next](cc32069) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 32: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part II*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.lxvii"></span>

<span id="ii.lxvii-p1"></span><span id="ii.lxvii-p1.1"></span>[Matthew
19:3-9](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#003)<span
id="ii.lxvii-p1.1"></span>; <span id="ii.lxvii-p1.2"></span>[Mark
10:2-12](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#002)<span
id="ii.lxvii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.lxvii-p2"></span><span id="ii.lxvii-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
19:3-9](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#003)<span id="ii.lxvii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxvii-p3"></span><span id="ii.lxvii-p3.1"></span>[Mark
10:2-12](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#002)<span
id="ii.lxvii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxvii-p4"></span>**3**. And the Pharisees came to him,
tempting him, and saying to him, Is it lawful for a man to divorce his
wife for any cause whatever? **4**. Who answering said to them, Have you
not read, that he who made them at first,  <span
id="fr_592"></span>[593](#fn_592) made them male and female? **5**. And
he said, Therefore shall a man leave his father and mother, and be
joined to his wife; and they shall be one flesh. **6**. Therefore now
they are not two, but one flesh: what God therefore hath joined, let not
man separate. **7**. They say to him, Why then did Moses order to give a
letter of divorcement, and send her away? **8**. He said to them, Moses,
for the hardness of your heart, permitted you to divorce your wives; but
at the beginning it was not so. **9**. And I say to you, That whosoever
shall divorce his wife, except for fornication, and shall marry another,
committeth adultery; and whosoever shall marry her that is divorced
committeth adultery.

<span id="ii.lxvii-p6"></span> 

<span id="ii.lxvii-p7"></span>**2**. And the Pharisees, coming to him,
asked him, Is it lawful for a man to divorce his wife? tempting him.
**3**. But he answering said to them, What did Moses command you?
**4**. And they said, Moses permitted to write a letter of divorcement,
and to send her away. **5**. And Jesus answering said to them, For the
hardness of your heart he wrote to you this commandment. **6**. But at
the beginning of the creation God made them male and female. **7**. For
this reason shall a man leave his father and mother, and cleave to his
wife; **8**. And they shall be one flesh: therefore now they are not
two, but one flesh. **9**. What therefore God hath joined together let
not man separate. **10**. And in the house his disciples again asked him
about the same subject. **11**. And he saith to them, Whososever shall
divorce his wife, and marry another, committeth adultery against her.
**12**. And if a woman shall divorce her husband, and shall be married
to another, she committeth adultery.

<span id="ii.lxvii-p8"></span> 

<span id="ii.lxvii-p9"></span> 

<span id="ii.lxvii-p10"></span><span id="ii.lxvii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxvii-p11"></span>**<span
id="ii.lxvii-p11.2"></span>[Matthew
19:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#003)<span
id="ii.lxvii-p11.2"></span>.** *And the Pharisees came to him, tempting
him.* Though the Pharisees lay snares for Christ, and cunningly endeavor
to impose upon him, yet their malice proves to be highly useful to us;
as the Lord knows how to turn, in a wonderful manner, to the advantage
of his people all the contrivances of wicked men to overthrow sound
doctrine. For, by means of this occurrence, a question arising out of
the liberty of divorce was settled, and a fixed law was laid down as to
the sacred and indissoluble bond of marriage. The occasion of this
quibbling was, that the reply, in whatever way it were given, could not,
as they thought, fail to be offensive.

<span id="ii.lxvii-p12"></span>They ask, *Is it lawful for a man to
divorce his wife for any cause whatever?* If Christ reply in the
negative, they will exclaim that he wickedly abolishes the Law; and if
in the affirmative, they will give out that he is not a prophet of God,
but rather a pander, who lends such countenance to the lust of men. Such
were the calculations which they had made in their own minds; but the
Son of God, who knew how to *take the wise in their own craftiness*,
(<span id="ii.lxvii-p12.1"></span>[Job
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#013)<span
id="ii.lxvii-p12.1"></span>,) disappointed them, sternly opposing
unlawful divorces, and at the same time showing that he brings forward
nothing which is inconsistent with the Law. For he includes the whole
question under two heads: that the order of creation ought to serve for
a law, that the husband should maintain conjugal fidelity during the
whole of life; and that *divorces* were *permitted*, not because they
were lawful, but because Moses had to deal with a rebellious and
intractable nation.

<span id="ii.lxvii-p13"></span><span id="ii.lxvii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxvii-p14"></span>**4.** *Have you not read?* Christ does
not indeed reply directly to what was asked, but he fully meets the
question which was proposed; just as if a person now interrogated about
the Mass were to explain faithfully the mystery of the Holy Supper, and
at length to conclude, that they are guilty of sacrilege and forgery who
venture either to add or to take away any thing from the pure
institution of the Lord, he would plainly overturn the pretended
sacrifice of the Mass. Now Christ assumes as an admitted principle, that
at the beginning God *joined the male to the female,* so that the two
made an entire man; and therefore he who *divorces his wife* tears from
him, as it were, the half of himself. But nature does not allow any man
to tear in pieces his own body.

<span id="ii.lxvii-p15"></span>He adds another argument drawn from the
less to the greater. The bond of marriage is more sacred than that which
binds children to their parents. But piety binds children to their
parents by a link which cannot be broken. Much less then can the husband
renounce his wife. Hence it follows, that a chain which God made is
burst asunder, if the husband divorce his wife.  <span
id="fr_593"></span>[594](#fn_593)

<span id="ii.lxvii-p17"></span>Now the meaning of the words is this:
God, who created the human race, *made them male and female,* so that
every man might be satisfied with his own wife, and might not desire
more. For he insists on the number *two*, as the prophet Malachi, (<span
id="ii.lxvii-p17.1"></span>[Mal
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#015)<span
id="ii.lxvii-p17.1"></span>,)when he remonstrates against polygamy,
employs the same argument, that God, whose *Spirit was so abundant* that
He had it in His power to create more, *yet made but one man,* that is,
such a man as Christ here describes. And thus from the order of creation
is proved the inviolable union of one husband with one wife. If it be
objected, that in this way it will not be lawful, after the first wife
is dead, to take another, the reply is easy, that not only is the bond
dissolved by death, but the second wife is substituted by God in the
room of the first, as if she had been one and the same woman.

<span id="ii.lxvii-p18"></span><span id="ii.lxvii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxvii-p19"></span>**5.** *Therefore shall a man leave his
father and mother.* It is uncertain whether Moses represents Adam or God
as speaking these words; but it is of little consequence to the present
passage which of these meanings you choose, for it was enough to quote
the decision which God had pronounced, though it might have been uttered
by the mouth of Adam. Now he who marries a wife is not commanded
absolutely to *leave his father*; for God would contradict himself, if
by marriage He set aside those duties which He enjoins on children
towards their parents; but when a comparison is made between the claims,
the *wife* is preferred to the *father and mother* But if any man
abandon his father, and shake off the yoke by which he is bound, no man
will own such a monster;  <span id="fr_594"></span>[595](#fn_594) much
less will he be at liberty to dissolve a marriage.

<span id="ii.lxvii-p21"></span>*And the two shall be one flesh.* This
expression condemns polygamy not less than it condemns unrestrained
liberty in divorcing wives; for, if the mutual union of two persons was
consecrated by the Lord, the mixture of three or four persons is
unauthorized.  <span id="fr_595"></span>[596](#fn_595) But Christ, as I
stated a little ago, applies it in a different manner to his purpose;
namely, to show that whoever divorces his wife tears himself in pieces,
because such is the force of holy marriage, that the husband and wife
become one man. For it was not the design of Christ to introduce the
impure and filthy speculation of Plato, but he spoke with reverence of
the order which God has established. Let the husband and wife,
therefore, live together in such a manner, that each shall cherish the
other in the same manner as if they were the half of themselves. Let the
husband rule, so as to be the head, and not the tyrant, of his wife; and
let the woman, on the other hand, yield modestly to his commands.

<span id="ii.lxvii-p23"></span><span id="ii.lxvii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxvii-p24"></span>**6.** *What God therefore hath joined.*
By this sentence Christ restrains the caprice of husbands, that they may
not, by divorcing their wives, burst asunder the sacred knot. And as he
declares that it is not in the power of the husband to dissolve the
marriage, so likewise he forbids all others to confirm by their
authority unlawful divorces; for the magistrate abuses his power when he
grants permission to the husband to divorce his wife. But the object
which Christ had directly in view was, that every man should sacredly
observe the promise which he has given, and that those who are tempted,
by wantonness or wicked dispositions, to divorce, may reflect thus with
themselves: “Who, art thou that allowest thyself to *burst asunder what
God hath joined?*” But this doctrine may be still farther extended. The
Papists, contriving for us a church separated from Christ the Head,
leave us an imperfect and mutilated body. In the Holy Supper, Christ
joined the bread and the wine; but they have dared to withhold from all
the people the use of the cup. To these diabolical corruptions we shall
be at liberty to oppose these words, *What God hath joined let not man
separate*

<span id="ii.lxvii-p25"></span><span id="ii.lxvii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxvii-p26"></span>**7.** *Why then did Moses order?* They
had thought of this calumny,  <span id="fr_596"></span>[597](#fn_596)
if, which was more probable, Christ should demand a proper cause to be
shown in cases of divorce; for it appears that whatever God permits by
his law, whose will alone establishes the distinction between what is
good or evil, is lawful. But Christ disarms the falsehood and slander by
the appropriate reply, that Moses permitted it on account of their
obstinacy, and not because he approved of it as lawful. And he confirms
his opinion by the best argument, *because it was not so at the
beginning.* He takes for granted that, when God at first instituted
marriage, he established a perpetual law, which ought to remain in force
till the end of the world. And if the institution of marriage is to be
reckoned an inviolable law, it follows that whatever swerves from it
does not arise from its pure nature, but from the depravity of men.

<span id="ii.lxvii-p28"></span>But it is asked, Ought Moses to have
permitted what was in itself bad and sinful? I reply, That, in an
unusual sense of the word, he is said to have *permitted* what he did
not severely forbid;  <span id="fr_597"></span>[598](#fn_597) for he did
not lay down a law about divorces, so as to give them the seal of his
approbation, but as the wickedness of men could not be restrained in any
other way, he applied what was the most admissible remedy, that the
husband should, at least, attest the chastity of his wife. For the law
was made solely for the protection of the women, that they might not
suffer any disgrace after they had been unjustly rejected. Hence we
infer, that it was rather a punishment inflicted on the husbands, than
an indulgence or *permission* fitted to inflame their lust. Besides,
political and outward order is widely different from spiritual
government. What is lawful and proper the Lord has comprehended under
the *ten words*.  <span id="fr_598"></span>[599](#fn_598) Now as it is
possible that many things, for which every man’s conscience reproves and
charges him, may not be called in question at a human tribunal, it is
not wonderful if those things are connived at by political laws.

<span id="ii.lxvii-p31"></span>Let us take a familiar instance. The laws
grant to us a greater liberty of litigation than the law of charity
allows. Why is this? Because the right cannot be conferred on
individuals, unless there be an open door for demanding it; and yet the
inward law of God declares that we ought to follow what charity shall
dictate. And yet there is no reason why magistrates should make this an
excuse for their indolence, if they voluntarily abstain from correcting
vices, or neglect what the nature of their office demands. But let men
in a private station beware of doubling the criminality of the
magistrates, by screening their own vices under the protection of the
laws. For here the Lord indirectly reproves the Jews for not, reckoning
it enough that their stubbornness was allowed to pass unpunished, if
they did not implicate God as defending their iniquity. And if the rule
of a holy and pious life is not always, or in all places, to be sought
from political laws, much less ought we to seek it from custom.

<span id="ii.lxvii-p32"></span><span id="ii.lxvii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxvii-p33"></span>**9.** *But I say to you. Mark* relates
that this was spoken to the disciples apart, when they had come *into
the house;* but *Matthew*, leaving out this circumstance, gives it as a
part of the discourse, as the Evangelists frequently leave out some
intermediate occurrence, because they reckon it enough to sum up the
leading points. There is therefore no difference, except that the one
explains the matter more distinctly than the other. The substance of it
is: though the Law does not punish divorces, which are at variance with
God’s first institution, yet he is an adulterer who rejects his wife and
takes another. For it is not in the power of a man to dissolve the
engagement of marriage, which the Lord wishes to remain inviolate; and
so the woman who occupies the bed of a lawful wife is a concubine.

<span id="ii.lxvii-p34"></span>But an exception is added; for the woman,
by fornication, cuts herself off, as a rotten member, from her husband,
and sets him at liberty. Those who search for other reasons ought justly
to be set at nought, because they choose to be wise above the heavenly
teacher. They say that *leprosy* is a proper ground for divorce, because
the contagion of the disease affects not only the husband, but likewise
the children. For my own part, while I advise a religious man not to
touch a woman afflicted with leprosy, I do not pronounce him to be at
liberty to divorce her. If it be objected, that they who cannot live
unmarried need a remedy, that they may not be *burned*, I answer, that
what is sought in opposition to the word of God is not a remedy. I add
too, that if they give themselves up to be guided by the Lord, they will
never want continence, for they follow what he has prescribed. One man
shall contract such a dislike of his wife, that he cannot endure to keep
company with her: will polygamy cure this evil? Another man’s wife shall
fall into palsy or apoplexy, or be afflicted with some other incurable
disease, shall the husband reject her under the pretense of
incontinency? We know, on the contrary, that none of those who walk in
their ways are ever left destitute of the assistance of the Spirit.

<span id="ii.lxvii-p35"></span>*For the sake of avoiding fornication*,
says Paul, *let every man marry a wife*, (<span
id="ii.lxvii-p35.1"></span>[1Co
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#002)<span id="ii.lxvii-p35.1"></span>.)
He who has done so, though he may not succeed to his wish, has done his
duty; and, therefore, if any thing be wanting, he will be supported by
divine aid. To go beyond this is nothing else than to tempt God. When
Paul mentions another reason, namely, that when, through a dislike of
godliness, wives happen to be rejected by unbelievers, a godly *brother
or sister* is not, in such a case, liable to *bondage*, (<span
id="ii.lxvii-p35.2"></span>[1 Cor.
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#012),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#015)<span id="ii.lxvii-p35.2"></span>,)
this is not inconsistent with Christ’s meaning. For he does not there
inquire into the proper grounds of divorce, but only whether a woman
continues to be bound to an unbelieving husband, after that, through
hatred of God, she has been wickedly rejected, and cannot be reconciled
to him in any other way than by forsaking God; and therefore we need not
wonder if Paul think it better that she should part with a mortal man
than that she should be at variance with God.

<span id="ii.lxvii-p36"></span>But the exception which Christ states
appears to be superfluous. For, if the adulteress deserve to be punished
with death, what purpose does it serve to talk of divorces? But as it
was the duty of the husband to prosecute his wife for adultery, in order
to purge his house from infamy, whatever might be the result, the
husband, who convicts his wife of uncleanness, is here freed by Christ
from the bond. It is even possible that, among a corrupt and degenerate
people, this crime remained to a great extent unpunished; as, in our own
day, the wicked forbearance of magistrates makes it necessary for
husbands to put away unchaste wives, because adulterers are not
punished. It must also be observed, that the right belongs equally and
mutually to both sides, as there is a mutual and equal obligation to
fidelity. For, though in other matters the husband holds the
superiority, as to the marriage bed, the wife has an equal right: for he
is not the lord of his body; and therefore when, by committing adultery,
he has dissolved the marriage, the wife is set at liberty.

<span id="ii.lxvii-p37"></span>*And whosoever shall marry her that is
divorced.* This clause has been very ill explained by many commentators;
for they have thought that generally, and without exception, celibacy is
enjoined in all cases when a divorce has taken place; and, therefore, if
a husband should put away an adulteress, both would be laid under the
necessity of remaining unmarried. As if this liberty of divorce meant
only not to lie with his wife; and as if Christ did not evidently grant
permission in this case to do what the Jews were wont indiscriminately
to do at their pleasure. It was therefore a gross error; for, though
Christ condemns as an adulterer the man *who shall marry a wife that has
been divorced*, this is undoubtedly restricted to unlawful and frivolous
divorces. In like manner, Paul enjoins those who have been so dismissed

<span id="ii.lxvii-p38"></span>to remain unmarried, or to be reconciled
to their husbands,  
(<span id="ii.lxvii-p38.2"></span>[1Co
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#011)<span
id="ii.lxvii-p38.2"></span>;)

<span id="ii.lxvii-p39"></span>that is, because quarrels and differences
do not dissolve a marriage. This is clearly made out from the passage in
Mark, where express mention is made of the wife who has left her
husband: *and if the wife shall divorce her husband* Not that wives were
permitted to give their husbands a letter of divorcement, unless so far
as the Jews had been contaminated by foreign customs; but Mark intended
to show that our Lord condemned the corruption which was at that time
universal, that, after voluntary divorces, they entered on both sides
into new marriages; and therefore he makes no mention of adultery.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_592"></span>[593](cc32068.htm#fr_592) <span
id="ii.lxvii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxvii-p5"></span> “<span id="ii.lxvii-p5.1"></span>Qui feit
*l’homme* des le commencement;” — “who made *man* from the beginning.”

<span id="fn_593"></span>[594](cc32068.htm#fr_593) <span
id="ii.lxvii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxvii-p16"></span> “<span id="ii.lxvii-p16.1"></span>Que le
mari qui se separe d’avecques sa femme rompt le lien dupuel Dieu estoit
autheur;” — “that the husband, who separates from his wife, bursts the
chain of which God was the author.”

<span id="fn_594"></span>[595](cc32068.htm#fr_594) <span
id="ii.lxvii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ii.lxvii-p20"></span> “<span id="ii.lxvii-p20.1"></span>Il n’y
a celuy qui ne fust estonne d’un tel monstre;” — “there is no man who
would not be astonished at such a monster.”

<span id="fn_595"></span>[596](cc32068.htm#fr_595) <span
id="ii.lxvii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxvii-p22"></span> “<span id="ii.lxvii-p22.1"></span>C’est
un meslinge faux et pervers;” — “it is a false and wicked mixture.”

<span id="fn_596"></span>[597](cc32068.htm#fr_596) <span
id="ii.lxvii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxvii-p27"></span> “<span id="ii.lxvii-p27.1"></span>Ils
avoyent songe ceste calomnie pour l’avoir toute preste;” — “they had
thought of this calumny, to have it all ready.”

<span id="fn_597"></span>[598](cc32068.htm#fr_597) <span
id="ii.lxvii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxvii-p29"></span> “<span id="ii.lxvii-p29.1"></span>Ie
repond, Qu’a parler proprement, il ne l’a pas permis: mais d’autant
qu’il ne l’a pas defendu estroittement, il est dit qu’il l’a permis;” —
“I reply, That, strictly speaking, he did not *permit* it; but in so far
as he did not strictly forbid it, he is said to have *permitted* it.”

<span id="fn_598"></span>[599](cc32068.htm#fr_598) <span
id="ii.lxvii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ii.lxvii-p30"></span><span id="ii.lxvii-p30.1"></span> Where
the English version gives the words, *ten commandments*<span
id="ii.lxvii-p30.2"></span>, <span id="ii.lxvii-p30.3"></span>the phrase
in the original Hebrew is, <span id="ii.lxvii-p30.4"></span>עשרת
הדברים<span id="ii.lxvii-p30.5"></span>, *the ten words*<span
id="ii.lxvii-p30.6"></span>, <span id="ii.lxvii-p30.7"></span>(<span
id="ii.lxvii-p30.8"></span>[Ex
34:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#028)<span
id="ii.lxvii-p30.8"></span><span id="ii.lxvii-p30.9"></span>; <span
id="ii.lxvii-p30.10"></span>[Deut.
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#013), [Deut.
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#004)<span
id="ii.lxvii-p30.10"></span><span id="ii.lxvii-p30.11"></span>.) — *Ed*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 19:10-12](cc32069)
