[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc32033)  [Next](cc32035) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 32: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part II*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.xxxiii"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxiii-p1"></span><span id="ii.xxxiii-p1.1"></span>[Luke
16:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#001)<span
id="ii.xxxiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxiii-p2"></span><span id="ii.xxxiii-p2.1"></span>[Luke
16:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#001)<span
id="ii.xxxiii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxiii-p3"></span>**1**. And he said also to his disciples,
There was a certain rich man who had a steward, and he was accused to
him that he was wasting his estate. **2**. And he called him, and said
to him, What is this that I hear of thee? render an account of thy
stewardship, for thou shalt no longer have it in thy power to be
steward. **3**. And the steward said within himself, What shall I do,
since my master taketh from me my stewardship? I cannot dig, and am
ashamed to beg. **4**. I know what I shall do, that, when I shall be
dismissed from the stewardship, they may receive me  <span
id="fr_293"></span>[294](#fn_293) into their houses. **5**. Having
therefore sent for each of his master’s debtors, he said to the first,
How much owest thou to my master? **6**. And he said, A hundred baths of
oil. And he said to him, Take thy bill, and sit down quickly, and write
fifty.  <span id="fr_294"></span>[295](#fn_294) **7**. Then he said to
another, And how much owest thou? Who said, A hundred measures of
barley. He saith to him, Take thy bill, and write eighty. **8**. And the
master commended the unjust steward, because he had acted prudently; for
the children of this world are more prudent in their generation than the
children of light. **9**. And I say to you, Make to yourselves friends
of the unjust mammon, that, when you shall fail, they may receive you
into eternal habitations. **10**. He that is faithful in that which is
least is faithful also in much; and he that is unjust in that which is
least is unjust also in much. **11**. If therefore you have not been
faithful in the unjust mammon, who shall entrust to you what is true?
 <span id="fr_295"></span>[296](#fn_295) **12**. And if you have not
been faithful in what belongs to another, who will give you what is your
own? — (A little after.) **14**. And the Pharisees, who were covetous,
heard all these things, and they ridiculed him. **15**. And he said to
them, It is you that, justify yourselves in the sight of men: but God
knoweth your hearts; for that which is highly esteemed among men is
abomination in the sight of God.

<span id="ii.xxxiii-p7"></span> 

<span id="ii.xxxiii-p8"></span> 

<span id="ii.xxxiii-p9"></span><span id="ii.xxxiii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxiii-p10"></span>The leading object of this parable is,
to show that we ought to deal kindly and generously with our neighbors;
that, when we come to the judgment seat of God, we may reap the fruit of
our liberality. Though the parable appears to be harsh and far-fetched,
yet the conclusion makes it evident, that the design of Christ was
nothing else than what I have stated. And hence we see, that to inquire
with great exactness into every minute part of a parable is an absurd
mode of philosophizing. Christ does not advise us to purchase by large
donations the forgiveness of fraud, and of extortion, and of wasteful
expenditure, and of the other crimes associated with unfaithful
administration. But as all the blessings which God confers upon us are
committed by Him to our administration, our Lord now lays down a method
of procedure, which will protect us against being treated with rigor,
when we come to render our account.

<span id="ii.xxxiii-p11"></span>They who imagine that alms are a
sufficient compensation for sensuality and debauchery, do not
sufficiently consider, that the first injunction given us is, to live in
sobriety and temperance; and that the next is, that the streams which
flow to us come from a pure fountain. It is certain that no man is so
frugal, as not sometimes to waste the property which has been entrusted
to him; and that even those who practice the most rigid economy are not
entirely free from the charge of unfaithful *stewardship.* Add to this,
that there are so many ways of abusing the gifts of God, that some incur
guilt in one way, and some in another. I do not even deny, that the very
consciousness of our own faulty *stewardship* ought to be felt by us as
an additional excitement to kind actions.

<span id="ii.xxxiii-p12"></span>But we ought to have quite another
object in view, than to escape the judgment of God by paying a price for
our redemption; and that object is, first, that seasonable and
well-judged liberality may have the effect of restraining and moderating
unnecessary expenses; and, secondly, that our kindness to our brethren
may draw down upon us the mercy of God. It is very far from being the
intention of Christ to point out to his disciples a way of escape, when
the heavenly Judge shall require them to give their account; but he
warns them to lose no time in guarding against the punishment which will
await their cruelty, if they are found to have swallowed up the gifts of
God, and to have paid no attention to acts of beneficence.  <span
id="fr_296"></span>[297](#fn_296) We must always attend to this maxim,
that

<span id="ii.xxxiii-p14"></span>with what measure a man measures, it
shall be recompensed to him again,  
(<span id="ii.xxxiii-p14.2"></span>[Mt
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#002)<span
id="ii.xxxiii-p14.2"></span>.)

<span id="ii.xxxiii-p15"></span><span id="ii.xxxiii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxiii-p16"></span>**8.** *And the master commended the
unjust steward* Here it is obvious that if we were to attempt to find a
meaning for every minute circumstance, we would act absurdly. To make
donations out of what belongs to another man, is an action which is very
far from deserving applause; and who would patiently endure that an
unprincipled villain should rob him of his property, and give it away
according to his own fancy? It were indeed the grossest stupidity, if
that man who beheld a portion of his substance taken away, should
*commend* the person who stole the remainder of it and bestowed it on
others. But Christ only meant what he adds a little afterwards, that
ungodly and worldly men are more industrious and skillful in conducting
the affairs of this fading life, than the children of God are anxious to
obtain the heavenly and eternal life, or careful to make it the subject
of their study and meditation.

<span id="ii.xxxiii-p17"></span>By this comparison he charges us with
highly criminal indifference, in not providing for the future, with at
least as much earnestness as ungodly men display by attending to their
own interests in this world. How disgraceful is it that *the children of
light,* whom God enlightens by his Spirit and word, should slumber and
neglect the hope of eternal blessedness held out to them, while worldly
men are so eagerly bent on their own accommodations, and so provident
and sagacious! Hence we infer, that our Lord does not intend to compare
the wisdom of the Spirit to the wisdom of the flesh, (which could not
have been done without pouring contempt on God himself,) but only to
arouse believers to consider more attentively what belongs to the future
life, and not to shut their eyes against the light of the Gospel, when
they perceive that even the blind, amidst their darkness, see more
clearly. And, indeed, *the children of light* ought to be more
powerfully excited, when they behold *the* *children of this world*
making provision against a distant period, for a life which is fading,
and which passes in a moment.

<span id="ii.xxxiii-p18"></span><span id="ii.xxxiii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxiii-p19"></span>**9.** *Make to yourselves friends.* As
in the words which were last considered Christ did not enjoin us to
offer sacrifices to God out of the fruits of extortion, so now he does
not mean that we ought to search for defenders or advocates, who will
throw around us the shield of their protection; but teaches us that by
acts of charity we obtain favor with God, who has promised, that *to the
merciful he will show himself merciful,* (<span
id="ii.xxxiii-p19.1"></span>[Ps
18:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#025)<span
id="ii.xxxiii-p19.1"></span>.) It is highly foolish and absurd to infer
from this passage, that the prayers or approbation of the dead are of
service to us: for, on that supposition, all that is bestowed on
unworthy persons would be thrown away; but the depravity of men does not
prevent the Lord from placing on his records all that we have expended
on the poor. The Lord looks not to the persons, but to the work itself,
so that our liberality, though it may happen to be exercised towards
ungrateful men, will be of avail to us in the sight of God. But then he
appears to intimate that eternal life depends on our merits. I reply: it
is sufficiently plain from the context that he speaks after the manner
of men. One who possesses extensive influence or wealth, if he procure
friends during his prosperity, has persons who will support him when he
is visited by adversity. In like manner, our kindness to the poor will
be a seasonable relief to us; for whatever any man may have generously
bestowed on his neighbors the Lord acknowledges as if it had been done
to himself.

<span id="ii.xxxiii-p20"></span>*When you fail.* By this word he
expresses the time of death, and reminds us that the time of our
administration will be short, lest the confident expectation of a longer
continuance of life should make us take a firmer grasp. The greater part
are sunk in slumber through their wealth; many squander what they have
on superfluities; while the niggardliness of others keeps it back, and
deprives both themselves and others of the benefit. Whence comes all
this, but because they are led astray by an unfounded expectation of
long life, and give themselves up to every kind of indulgence?

<span id="ii.xxxiii-p21"></span>*Of the mammon of unrighteousness.* By
giving this name to riches, he intends to render them an object of our
suspicion, because for the most part they involve their possessors in
*unrighteousness* Though in themselves they are not evil, yet as it
rarely happens that they are obtained without deceit, or violence, or
some other unlawful expedient, or that the enjoyment of them is
unaccompanied by pride, or luxury, or some other wicked disposition,
Christ justly represents them as worthy of our suspicion; just as on
another occasion he called them *thorns,* (<span
id="ii.xxxiii-p21.1"></span>[Matt.
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#007),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#022)<span
id="ii.xxxiii-p21.1"></span>.) It would appear that a contrast, though
not expressed, is intended to be supplied, to this effect; that riches,
which otherwise, in consequence of wicked abuse, polluted their
possessors, and are almost in every ease allurements of sin, ought to be
directed to a contrary object, to be the means of procuring favor for
us. Let us also remember what I have formerly stated, that God does not
demand sacrifice to be made from booty unjustly acquired, as if he were
the partner of thieves, and that it is rather a warning given to
believers to keep themselves free from *unrighteousness*

<span id="ii.xxxiii-p22"></span><span id="ii.xxxiii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxiii-p23"></span>**10.** *He who is faithful in that
which is least.* Those maxims are proverbs taken from ordinary practice
and experience, and it is quite enough if they are generally true. It
will sometimes happen, no doubt, that a deceiver, who had disregarded a
small gain, shall display his wickedness in a matter of importance. Nay,
many persons, by affecting honesty in trifling matters, are only in
pursuit of an enormous gain;  <span id="fr_297"></span>[298](#fn_297) as
that author  <span id="fr_298"></span>[299](#fn_298) says: “Fraud
establishes confidence in itself in small matters, that, when a fit
opportunity shall arrive, it may deceive with vast advantage.” And yet
the statement of Christ is not inaccurate; for in proverbs, as I have
mentioned, we attend only to what usually happens.

<span id="ii.xxxiii-p26"></span>Christ, therefore, exhorts his disciples
to act faithfully in small matters, in order to prepare themselves for
the exercise of fidelity in matters of the highest importance. He next
applies this doctrine to the proper *stewardship* of spiritual graces,
which the world, indeed, does not estimate according to their value, but
which far surpass, beyond all question, the fading riches of this world.
Those persons, he tells us, who act improperly and unfaithfully in
things of small value, such as the transitory riches of the world, do
not deserve that God should entrust to them the inestimable treasure of
the Gospel, and of similar gifts. There is, therefore, in these words an
implied threatening, that there is reason to fear lest, on account of
our abuse of an earthly *stewardship,* we fail to obtain heavenly gifts.
In this sense, *what is true* is contrasted with *riches,* as what is
solid and lasting is contrasted with what is shadowy and fading.  <span
id="fr_299"></span>[300](#fn_299)

<span id="ii.xxxiii-p28"></span><span id="ii.xxxiii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxiii-p29"></span>**12.** *And if you have not been
faithful in what belongs to another.* By the expression, *what belongs
to another,* he means what is not within man; for God does not bestow
riches upon us on condition that we shall be attached to them, but makes
us *stewards* of them in such a manner, that they may not bind us with
their chains. And, indeed, it is impossible that our minds should be
free and disengaged for dwelling in heaven, if we did not look upon
every thing that is in the world as *belonging to another*

<span id="ii.xxxiii-p30"></span>*Who shall entrust to you what is your
own?* Spiritual riches, on the other hand, which relate to a future
life, are pronounced by him to be *our own,* because the enjoyment of
them is everlasting. But now he employs a different comparison. There is
no reason, he tells us, to expect that we shall make a proper and
moderate use of *our own* property, if we have acted improperly or
unfaithfully in *what belonged to another.* Men usually care less about
abusing, and allow themselves greater liberty in squandering, *their
own* property, because they are not afraid that any person will find
fault with them; but when a thing has been entrusted to them either in
charge or in loan, and of which they must afterwards render an account,
they are more cautious and more timid.

<span id="ii.xxxiii-p31"></span>We thus ascertain Christ’s meaning to
be, that they who are bad *stewards* of earthly blessings would not be
faithful guardians of spiritual gifts. He next introduces a sentence:
*You cannot serve God and mammon;* which I have explained at <span
id="ii.xxxiii-p31.1"></span>[Mt
6:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#024)<span
id="ii.xxxiii-p31.1"></span>. There the reader will find an explanation
of the word *Mammon*  <span id="fr_300"></span>[301](#fn_300)

<span id="ii.xxxiii-p33"></span><span id="ii.xxxiii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxiii-p34"></span>**14.** *And the Pharisees, who were
covetous, heard all these things. They* who imagine that Christ was
*ridiculed by the Pharisees,* because he chose to employ a plain and
familiar style, and made no use of swelling words,  <span
id="fr_301"></span>[302](#fn_301) do not sufficiently comprehend what
Luke means. Haughty and disdainful men, I do acknowledge, view the
doctrine of the Gospel with contempt; but Luke expressly declares the
reason why Christ was the object of their derision to have been, that
they *were covetous* Entertaining a firm and deep-seated conviction that
the rich are happy, and that there is nothing better for men than to
increase their wealth by every possible method, and earnestly to guard
whatever they have acquired, they reject as foolish paradoxes  <span
id="fr_302"></span>[303](#fn_302) all the sayings of Christ which had a
contrary tendency. And, certainly, any one that speaks of despising
riches, or bestowing alms on the poor, is regarded by the *covetous* as
a madman. Horace’s words on this subject are well known:  <span
id="fr_303"></span>[304](#fn_303) “The people hiss at me, but I am well
satisfied with myself.”  <span id="fr_304"></span>[305](#fn_304) But if,
even when they are condemned by universal opinion, they continue to
flatter themselves, how much more will they ridicule as a fable that
philosophy of Christ which is far removed from the ordinary belief?

<span id="ii.xxxiii-p39"></span>Some other pretense, I have no doubt,
was held out by the Pharisees for ridiculing and evading a doctrine
which opposed their vice. But we must attend to the motive by which they
were actuated; for it is a disease which almost always prevails in the
world, that the greater part of men affect to despise whatever does not
fall in with their corrupt morals. Hence the ridicule, and jest, and
merriment, with which the word of God is frequently assailed; for every
man fights in defense of his own vices, and all imagine that their
witticisms will serve for a cloud to screen their criminality.

<span id="ii.xxxiii-p40"></span><span id="ii.xxxiii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxiii-p41"></span>**15.** *It is you that justify
yourselves before men.* We see that Christ does not give way to their
disdainful conduct, but constantly maintains the authority of his
doctrine in opposition to their mockery; and it is the duty of all the
ministers of the Gospel to pursue the same course, by meeting ungodly
despisers with the dreadful judgment of God. He declares that the
hypocrisy, with which they deceive the eyes of men, will be of no avail
to them at the judgment-seat of God. They were unwilling to have it
thought that their mockery was intended as a defense of their
*covetousness.* But Christ affirms that this venom breaks out from a
concealed ulcer; just as if one were to tell the mitred prelates of our
own day, that their hostility to the Gospel arises from the severity
with which it attacks their hidden vices.

<span id="ii.xxxiii-p42"></span>*But God knoweth your hearts.* He says
that they reckon it enough if they appear to be good in the eyes of men,
and if they can boast of a pretended sanctity; but that *God, who
knoweth the hearts,* is well acquainted with the vices which they
conceal from the view of the world. And here we must attend to the
distinction between the judgments of God and the judgments of men; for
men bestow approbation on outward appearances, but at the judgment-seat
of God nothing is approved but an upright heart. There is added a
striking observation:

<span id="ii.xxxiii-p43"></span>*What is highly esteemed by men is
abomination in the sight of God.* Not that God rejects those virtues,
the approbation of which He hath engraved on the hearts of men; but that
God detests whatever men are disposed, of their own accord, to applaud.
Hence it is evident in what light we ought to view all pretended acts of
worship which the world contrives according to its own fancy. How much
soever they may please their inventors, Christ pronounces that they are
not only vain and worthless, but are even detestable.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_293"></span>[294](cc32034.htm#fr_293) <span
id="ii.xxxiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxiii-p4"></span> “<span id="ii.xxxiii-p4.1"></span>Que
‘quelques uns’ me recoyvent;” — “that ‘some persons’ may receive me.”

<span id="fn_294"></span>[295](cc32034.htm#fr_294) <span
id="ii.xxxiii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxiii-p5"></span> “<span id="ii.xxxiii-p5.1"></span>Et en
escri cinquante;” — “and write fifty of them.”

<span id="fn_295"></span>[296](cc32034.htm#fr_295) <span
id="ii.xxxiii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxiii-p6"></span> “<span id="ii.xxxiii-p6.1"></span>Du
vray ’thresor’ qui s’en fiera en vous?” — “who shall entrust to you the
true (treasure?)”

<span id="fn_296"></span>[297](cc32034.htm#fr_296) <span
id="ii.xxxiii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxiii-p13"></span> “<span id="ii.xxxiii-p13.1"></span>S’il
est trouve qu’ils n’ayent en aucun soin d’exercer charite envers leurs
prochains, et n’ayent pense qu’a despendre en tout exces et a leur
plaisir, les biens de Dieu;” — “if it is found that they have given
themselves no concern about exercising charity to their neighbors, and
have thought only of spending in every excess, and at their own
pleasure, the gifts of God.”

<span id="fn_297"></span>[298](cc32034.htm#fr_297) <span
id="ii.xxxiii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxiii-p24"></span> “<span id="ii.xxxiii-p24.1"></span>Et
mesmes plusieurs sont contens d’user de simplicite et fidelite en de
petites choses, a fin d’attraper puis apres un grand profit tout d’un
coup;” — “and many are even willing to practice honesty and fidelity in
small matters, in order afterwards to seize all at once on a large
profit.”

<span id="fn_298"></span>[299](cc32034.htm#fr_298) <span
id="ii.xxxiii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxiii-p25"></span> Livy.

<span id="fn_299"></span>[300](cc32034.htm#fr_299) <span
id="ii.xxxiii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxiii-p27"></span> “<span
id="ii.xxxiii-p27.1"></span>D’une chose caduque, et qui n’est qu’une
ombre;” — “with a fading thing, and which is only a shadow.”

<span id="fn_300"></span>[301](cc32034.htm#fr_300) <span
id="ii.xxxiii-p31.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxiii-p32"></span> “<span id="ii.xxxiii-p32.1"></span>Et
la aussi on trouvera la signification de ce mot Mammona, lequel est ici
mis, et que nous avons traduit *Richesses* ” — “And *there* will also be
found the meaning of the word *Mammon,* which is used here, and which we
have translated *Riches.*”—In an earlier portion of this Commentary, to
which our author refers, (Harmony, vol. 1 p. 337,) no direct or formal
explanation of the word *Mammon* is to be found; but a careful reader of
the expository remarks on <span id="ii.xxxiii-p32.3"></span>[Mt
6:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#024)<span id="ii.xxxiii-p32.3"></span>
will easily perceive that Calvin understands *riches* to be one of the
*two masters* spoken of in that passage. An indirect definition of the
term is afforded by his French version of the text, both in <span
id="ii.xxxiii-p32.4"></span>[Matth.
6:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#024)<span
id="ii.xxxiii-p32.4"></span>, and in <span
id="ii.xxxiii-p32.5"></span>[Lu
16:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#013)<span
id="ii.xxxiii-p32.5"></span>, “<span id="ii.xxxiii-p32.6"></span>Vous ne
pouvez servir a Dieu et aux richesses;” — “*you cannot serve God and
riches.”*

<span id="fn_301"></span>[302](cc32034.htm#fr_301) <span
id="ii.xxxiii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxiii-p35"></span> “<span id="ii.xxxiii-p35.1"></span>En
affectant des termes exquis, et bien remplissans la bouehe;”— “by
affecting nicely chosen words, and that fill the mouth well.”

<span id="fn_302"></span>[303](cc32034.htm#fr_302) <span
id="ii.xxxiii-p35.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxiii-p36"></span> “<span
id="ii.xxxiii-p36.1"></span>Comme choses absurdes, et contre l’opinion
commune;” — “as absurd statements, and opposed to the common belief.”

<span id="fn_303"></span>[304](cc32034.htm#fr_303) <span
id="ii.xxxiii-p36.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxiii-p37"></span> “<span
id="ii.xxxiii-p37.1"></span>Horace, Poete Latin, dit parlant en la
personne d’un avaricieux;” — “Horace, a Latin Poet, says, speaking in
the person of a covetous man.”

<span id="fn_304"></span>[305](cc32034.htm#fr_304) <span
id="ii.xxxiii-p37.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxiii-p38"></span> “<span
id="ii.xxxiii-p38.1"></span>Populus me sibilat, at mihi plaudo.”— *Sat*.
1. 1:66.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke 16:19-31](cc32035)
