[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc32073)  [Next](cc32075.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 32: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part II*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.lxxiii"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxiii-p1"></span><span id="ii.lxxiii-p1.1"></span>[Matthew
20:1-16](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#001.md)<span
id="ii.lxxiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxiii-p2"></span><span id="ii.lxxiii-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
20:1-16](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#001.md)<span
id="ii.lxxiii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxiii-p3"></span>**1**. For the kingdom of heaven is like
a householder, who went out at break of day to hire laborers into his
vineyard. **2**. And having made an agreement with the laborers for a
penny a day, he sent them into his vineyard. **3**. And having gone out
about the third hour, he saw others standing idle in the market-place.
**4**. And he said to them, Go you also into the vineyard, and whatever
shall be right I will give you. **5**. And they went away. And again he
went out about the sixth and ninth hour, and acted in the same manner.
**6**. And about the eleventh hour he went out, and found others
standing idle, and said to them, Why stand you here all the day idle?
**7**. They say to him, Because nobody hath hired us. He saith to them,
Go you also into the vineyard, and you will receive what shall be right.
**8**. And when the evening was come, the master of the vineyard saith
to his steward, Call the laborers, and pay them their hire, beginning
with the last even to the first. **9**. And when they came who had come
about the eleventh hour, they received every man a penny. **10**. And
they who had come first thought that they would receive more, and they
also received every man a penny. **11**. And when they had received it,
they murmured against the householder, **12**. Saying, These last have
been but one hour at work, and thou hast made them equal to us, who have
endured the burden of the day and the heat. **13**. But he answering one
of them, said, Friend, I do thee no wrong: didst not thou agree with me
for a penny? **14**. Take what is thine, and go away: and I intend to
give to this last as much as to thee. **15**. Is it not lawful for me to
do what I will with my own property? Is thy eye evil, because I am good?
**16**. So the last shall be first, and the first shall be last: for
many are called, but few are chosen.

<span id="ii.lxxiii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.lxxiii-p5"></span> 

<span id="ii.lxxiii-p6"></span><span id="ii.lxxiii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxiii-p7"></span>As this parable is nothing else than a
confirmation of the preceding sentence, *the last shall be first,* it
now remains to see in what manner it ought to be applied. Some
commentators reduce it to this general proposition, that the glory of
all; will be equal, because the heavenly inheritance is not obtained by
the merits of works, but is bestowed freely. But Christ does not here
argue either about the equality of the heavenly glory, or about the
future condition of the godly. He only declares that those who were
first in point of time have no right to boast or to insult others;
because the Lord, whenever he pleases, may call those whom he appeared
for a time to disregard, and may make them equal, or even superior, to
the first. If any man should resolve to sift out with exactness every
portion of this parable, his curiosity would be useless; and therefore
we have nothing more to inquire than what was the design of Christ to
teach. Now we have already said that he had no other object in view than
to excite his people by continual spurs to make progress. We know that
indolence almost always springs from excessive confidence; and this is
the reason why many, as if they had reached the goal, stop short in the
middle of the course. Thus Paul enjoins us to *forget the things which
are behind*, (<span id="ii.lxxiii-p7.1"></span>[Php
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#013.md)<span
id="ii.lxxiii-p7.1"></span>,) that, reflecting on what yet remains for
us, we may arouse ourselves to persevere in running. But there will be
no harm in examining the words, that the doctrine may be more clearly
evinced.

<span id="ii.lxxiii-p8"></span>**<span
id="ii.lxxiii-p8.1"></span>[Matthew
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#001.md)<span
id="ii.lxxiii-p8.1"></span>.** *For the kingdom of heaven is like a
householder.* The meaning is, that such is the nature of the divine
calling, as if a man were, early in the morning, to hire laborers for
the cultivation of his vineyard at a fixed price, and were afterwards to
employ others without an agreement, but to give them an equal hire. He
uses the phrase, *kingdom of heaven,* because he compares the spiritual
life to the earthly life, and the reward of eternal life to money which
men pay in return for work that has been done for them. There are some
who give an ingenious interpretation to this passage, as if Christ were
distinguishing between Jews and Gentiles. The Jews, they tell us, were
called *at the first hour,* with an agreement as to the hire; for the
Lord promised to them eternal life, on the condition that they should
fulfill the law; while, in calling the Gentiles, no bargain was made at
least as to works, for salvation was freely offered to them in Christ.
But all subtleties of that sort are unseasonable; for the Lord makes no
distinction in the bargain, but only in the time; because those who
entered *last*, and in the evening, *into the vineyard*, receive the
same hire with *the first* Though, in the Law, God formerly promised to
the Jews the hire of works, (<span id="ii.lxxiii-p8.2"></span>[Le
18:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#005.md)<span
id="ii.lxxiii-p8.2"></span>,) yet we know that this was without effect,
because no man ever obtained salvation by his merits.

<span id="ii.lxxiii-p9"></span>Why then, it will be said, does Christ
expressly mention a bargain  <span id="fr_642"></span>[643](#fn_642.md) in
reference to *the first*, but make no mention of it in reference to the
others? It was in order to show that, without doing injury to any one,
as much honor is conferred on *the last*, as if they had been called at
the beginning. For strictly speaking, he owes no man any thing, and from
us, who are devoted to his service, he demands, as a matter of right,
all the duties which are incumbent on us. But as he freely offers to us
a *reward*, he is said to *hire* the labors which, on other grounds,
were due to him. This is also the reason why he gives the name of *a
hire* to the crown which he bestows freely. Again, in order to show that
we have no right to complain of God, if he make us companions in honor
with those who followed us after a long interval, he borrowed a
comparison from the ordinary custom of men, who bargain about the
*hire*, before they send laborers to their work.

<span id="ii.lxxiii-p11"></span>If any man infer from this, that men are
created for the purpose of doing something, and that every man has his
province assigned him by God, that they may not sit down in idleness, he
will offer no violence to the words of Christ.  <span
id="fr_643"></span>[644](#fn_643.md) We are also at liberty to infer, that
our whole life is unprofitable, and that we are justly accused of
indolence, until each of us regulate his life by the command and calling
of God. Hence it follows, that they labor to no purpose, who rashly
undertake this or that course of life, and do not wait for the
intimation of the call of God. Lastly, we learn from the words of
Christ, that those only are pleasing to God, who labor for the advantage
of their brethren.

<span id="ii.lxxiii-p13"></span>*A penny* (which was rather more than
four times the value of a French *carolus*,)  <span
id="fr_644"></span>[645](#fn_644.md) was probably the ordinary hire for a
day’s work. The *third*, *sixth*, and *ninth hour*, are expressly
mentioned, because, while the ancients were wont to divide the day into
twelve hours, from sunrise to sunset, there was another division of the
day into every three hours; as, again, the night was divided into four
*watches;* and so *the eleventh hour* means the close of the day.

<span id="ii.lxxiii-p15"></span><span id="ii.lxxiii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxiii-p16"></span>**8.** *And when the evening was come.*
It would be improper to look for a mystery in the injunction of the
*householder to begin with the last,* as if God crowned *those first*
who were last in the order of time; for such a notion would not at all
agree with the doctrine of Paul. They *that are alive*, he says, *at the
coming of Christ will not come before those who previously fell asleep
in Christ*, but will follow, (<span id="ii.lxxiii-p16.1"></span>[1Th
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#015.md)<span
id="ii.lxxiii-p16.1"></span>.) But Christ observes a different order in
this passage, because he could not otherwise have expressed — what he
afterwards adds — that *the first murmured*, because they did not
*receive more*  <span id="fr_645"></span>[646](#fn_645.md)

<span id="ii.lxxiii-p18"></span><span
id="ii.lxxiii-p18.1"></span>Besides, he did not intend to say that this
*murmuring* <span id="ii.lxxiii-p18.2"></span>will take place at the
last day, but merely to affirm that there will be no occasion for
*murmuring* <span id="ii.lxxiii-p18.3"></span>The *personification
(*<span id="ii.lxxiii-p18.4"></span>προσωποποΐα<span
id="ii.lxxiii-p18.5"></span>) which he employs throws no small light on
this doctrine, that men have no right to complain of the bounty of God,
when he honors unworthy persons by large rewards beyond what they
deserve. There is no foundation, therefore, for what some have imagined,
that these words are directed against the Jews, who were full of malice
and envy towards the Gentiles; for it would be absurd to say that such
persons receive an equal *hire* <span id="ii.lxxiii-p18.6"></span>with
the children of God, and this malignity, which leads men to exclaim
against God, does not apply to believers. But the plain meaning is,
that, since God defrauds no man of a just *hire*<span
id="ii.lxxiii-p18.7"></span>, <span id="ii.lxxiii-p18.8"></span>He is at
liberty to bestow on those whom He has lately called an undeserved
reward.

<span id="ii.lxxiii-p19"></span><span id="ii.lxxiii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxiii-p20"></span>**16.** *So the first shall be last.* He
does not now compare the Jews to the Gentiles, (as in another passages)
nor the reprobate, who swerve from the faith, to the elect who
persevere; and therefore the sentence which is introduced by some
interpreters, *many are called, but few are chosen,* does not apply to
that point. Christ only meant to say that every one who has been called
before others ought to run with so much the greater alacrity, and, next,
to exhort all men to be modest, not to give themselves the preference
above others, but willingly to share with them a common prize. As the
apostles were the first-fruits of the whole church, they appeared to
possess some superiority; and Christ did not deny that they would *sit
as judges to govern the twelve tribes of Israel.* But that they might
not be carried away by ambition or vain confidence in themselves, it was
necessary also to remind them that others, who would long afterwards be
called, would be partakers of the same glory, because God is not limited
to any person, but calls freely whomsoever He pleases, and bestows on
those who are called whatever rewards He thinks fit.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_642"></span>[643](cc32074.htm#fr_642.md) <span
id="ii.lxxiii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxiii-p10"></span> “<span id="ii.lxxiii-p10.1"></span>Un
pris conveml;” — “a price agreed upon.”

<span id="fn_643"></span>[644](cc32074.htm#fr_643.md) <span
id="ii.lxxiii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxiii-p12"></span> “<span id="ii.lxxiii-p12.1"></span>Cela
ne sera point tirer trop loin les parollcs de Christ;” — “this will not
be straining too far the words of Christ.”

<span id="fn_644"></span>[645](cc32074.htm#fr_644.md) <span
id="ii.lxxiii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxiii-p14"></span> *A penny* <span
id="ii.lxxiii-p14.1"></span>(<span
id="ii.lxxiii-p14.2"></span>δηνάριον<span id="ii.lxxiii-p14.3"></span>)
was worth about *sevenpence-halfpenny* <span
id="ii.lxxiii-p14.4"></span>of our money. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_645"></span>[646](cc32074.htm#fr_645.md) <span
id="ii.lxxiii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxiii-p17"></span> “<span
id="ii.lxxiii-p17.1"></span>Pource qu’on ne leur donnoit non plus qu’aux
derniers;” — “because no more was given to them than to the last.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 20:17-19; Mark 10:32-34; Luke 18:31-34](cc32075.md)
