[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc32074)  [Next](cc32076.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 32: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part II*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.lxxiv"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxiv-p1"></span><span id="ii.lxxiv-p1.1"></span>[Matthew
20:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#017.md)<span
id="ii.lxxiv-p1.1"></span>; <span id="ii.lxxiv-p1.2"></span>[Mark
10:32-34](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#032.md)<span
id="ii.lxxiv-p1.2"></span>;  
<span id="ii.lxxiv-p1.4"></span>[Luke
18:31-34](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#031.md)<span
id="ii.lxxiv-p1.4"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxiv-p2"></span><span id="ii.lxxiv-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
20:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#017.md)<span
id="ii.lxxiv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxiv-p3"></span><span id="ii.lxxiv-p3.1"></span>[Mark
10:32-34](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#032.md)<span
id="ii.lxxiv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxiv-p4"></span><span id="ii.lxxiv-p4.1"></span>[Luke
18:31-34](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#031.md)<span
id="ii.lxxiv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxiv-p5"></span> **17**. And Jesus, going up to Jerusalem,
took the twelve disciples apart in the way, and said to them,
**18**. Lo, we go up to Jerusalem; and the Son of man will be delivered
to the chief priests and scribes; and they will condemn him to death.
**19**. And they will deliver him to the Gentiles to mock, and to
scourge, and to crucify him;  <span id="fr_646"></span>[647](#fn_646.md)
and on the third day he will rise again.

<span id="ii.lxxiv-p7"></span> 

<span id="ii.lxxiv-p8"></span> **32**. And they were in the way going up
to Jerusalem; and Jesus went before them: and they were amazed; and,
while they followed him, where afraid. And having again taken aside the
twelve, he began to tell them what things would happen to him:
**33**. Lo, we go up to Jerusalem; and the Son of man will be delivered
to the chief priests and scribes; and they will condemn him to death,
and will deliver him to the Gentiles: **34**. And will mock him, and
scourge him, and spit upon him, and kill him; and on the third day he
will rise again.

<span id="ii.lxxiv-p9"></span> **31**. And Jesus took the twelve, and
said to them, Lo, we go up to Jerusalem, and all things which have been
written by the prophets concerning the Son of man will be accomplished.
**32**. For he will be delivered to the Gentiles, and mocked, and
insulted, and spat on; **33**. And after having scourged, they will kill
him; and on the third day he will rise again. **34**. And they
understood none of these things; and this saying was hidden from them,
and they understood not the things which were spoken.  <span
id="fr_647"></span>[648](#fn_647.md)

<span id="ii.lxxiv-p11"></span> 

<span id="ii.lxxiv-p12"></span> 

<span id="ii.lxxiv-p13"></span><span id="ii.lxxiv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxiv-p14"></span>Though the apostles had been previously
informed what kind of death awaited our Lord, yet as they had not
sufficiently profited by it, he now repeats anew what he had frequently
said. He sees that the day of his death is at hand; nay more, he is
already in a state of readiness to offer himself to be sacrificed; and,
on the other hand, he sees the disciples not only afraid, but
overwhelmed by blind alarm. He therefore exhorts them to steadiness,
that they may not immediately yield to temptation. Now there are two
methods by which he confirms them; for, by foretelling what would
happen, he not only fortifies them, that they may not give *way*, when a
calamity, which has arisen suddenly and contrary to expectation, takes
them by surprise, but meets the offense of the cross by a proof of his
Divinity, that they may not lose courage at beholding his short
abasement, when they are convinced that he is the Son of God, and
therefore will be victorious over death. The second method of
confirmation is taken from his approaching resurrection.

<span id="ii.lxxiv-p15"></span>But it will be proper to look more
closely at the words. Mark states — what is omitted by the other two
Evangelists — that, before our Lord explained to his disciples in
private that he was going straight to the sacrifice of death, not only
they, but also the rest of his followers, were sorrowful and
*trembli*n*g*. Now why they were seized with this fear it is not easy to
say, if it was not because they had already learned that they had
dangerous adversaries at *Jerusalem,* and would therefore have wished
that Christ should remain in some quiet retreat beyond the reach of the
darts, rather than voluntarily expose himself to such inveterate
enemies. Although this fear was in many respects improper, yet the
circumstance of their following Christ is a proof of no ordinary respect
and obedience. It would indeed have been far better to hasten cheerfully
and without regret, wheresoever the Son of God chose to lead them; but
commendation is due to their reverence for his person, which appears in
choosing to do violence to their own feelings rather than to forsake
him.

<span id="ii.lxxiv-p16"></span>**<span
id="ii.lxxiv-p16.1"></span>[Matthew
20:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#017.md)<span
id="ii.lxxiv-p16.1"></span>.** *Took the twelve disciples apart in the
way* It may appear surprising that he makes *the twelve* alone
acquainted with his secret, since all have need of consolation, for all
had been alike seized with fear. I consider the reason why he did not
publish his death to have been, that the report might not spread too
widely before the time. Besides, as he did not expect that the warning
would be of immediate advantage, he reckoned it enough to entrust it to
a few, who were afterwards to be his witnesses. For, as the seed thrown
into the earth does not immediately spring up, so we know that Christ
said many things to the apostles which did not immediately yield fruit.
And if he had admitted all indiscriminately to this discourse, it was
possible that many persons, seized with alarm, might flee, and fill the
ears of the public with this report; and thus the death of Christ would
have lost its glory, because he would have appeared to have rashly
brought it on himself. Secretly, therefore, he addresses the apostles,
and does not even select them as qualified to receive profit by it, but,
as I lately hinted, that they may afterwards be witnesses.

<span id="ii.lxxiv-p17"></span>On this subject Luke is more full than
the others; for he relates not only that Christ predicted the events
which were near at hand, but also that he added the doctrine, that
*those things which had been written by the prophets would be
accomplished in the Son of man.* It was an excellent remedy for
overcoming temptation, to perceive in the very ignominy of the cross the
marks by which the Prophets had pointed out the promised Author of
salvation. There can be no doubt that our Lord pointed out also from the
Prophets what kind of fruit they ought to expect from his death; for the
Prophets do not only teach that Christ must suffer, but add the reason,
that he may reconcile the world to God.

<span id="ii.lxxiv-p18"></span><span id="ii.lxxiv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxiv-p19"></span>**18.** *Lo, we go up to Jerusalem.*
Hence we perceive that Christ was endued with divine fortitude for
overcoming the terrors of death, for he knowingly and willingly hastens
to undergo it.  <span id="fr_648"></span>[649](#fn_648.md) For why does he,
without any constraint, march forward to suffer a shocking murder, but
because the invincible power of the Spirit enabled him to subdue fear,
and raised him above all human feelings? By a minute detail of the
circumstances, he gives a still more evident proof of his Divinity. For
he could not — as *man* — *have* foreseen that, after having been
*condemned by the chief priests and scribes*, he would be *delivered up
to the Gentiles,* and *spat on*, and *mocked* in various ways, and
*scourged*, and at length dragged to the punishment of the *cross* Yet
it must be observed that, though our Lord was fully acquainted with the
weakness of his disciples, he does not conceal from them a very grievous
offense. For — as we have said on a former occasion  <span
id="fr_649"></span>[650](#fn_649.md) — nothing could at that time have
happened more powerfully calculated to shake the minds of the godly,
than to see the whole of the sacred order of the Church opposed to
Christ.

<span id="ii.lxxiv-p22"></span>And yet he does not spare their weakness
by deceiving them, but, candidly declaring the whole matter, points out
the way to overcome temptation; namely, by looking forward with
certainty to his resurrection. But as it was necessary that His death
should go before, he makes their triumph, in the meantime, to consist in
hope.

<span id="ii.lxxiv-p23"></span><span id="ii.lxxiv-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxiv-p24"></span>**<span id="ii.lxxiv-p24.2"></span>[Luke
18:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#034.md)<span
id="ii.lxxiv-p24.2"></span>.** *And they understood none of these
things.* What stupidity was this, not to understand what Christ said to
them in a plain and familiar manner, on a subject not too lofty or
intricate, but of which they had, at their own suggestion, entertained
some suspicion! But it is proper also to bear in mind — what I have
formerly observed — the reason why they were held in such gross
ignorance, which was, that they had formed the expectation of a joyful
and prosperous advancement, and therefore reckoned it to be in the
highest degree absurd, that Christ should be ignominiously crucified.
Hence we infer with what madness the minds of men are seized through a
false imagination; and therefore we ought to be the more careful not to
yield to any foolish thoughts, and shut our eyes against the light.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_646"></span>[647](cc32075.htm#fr_646.md) <span
id="ii.lxxiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxiv-p6"></span> “<span id="ii.lxxiv-p6.1"></span>Pour
estre mocque, et flagelle, et crucifie;” — “to be mocked, and scourged,
and crucified.”

<span id="fn_647"></span>[648](cc32075.htm#fr_647.md) <span
id="ii.lxxiv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxiv-p10"></span> “<span id="ii.lxxiv-p10.1"></span>Et ne
pouvoyent entendre ce qu’il leur disoit;” — “and they could not
understand what he said to them.”

<span id="fn_648"></span>[649](cc32075.htm#fr_648.md) <span
id="ii.lxxiv-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxiv-p20"></span> “<span id="ii.lxxiv-p20.1"></span>Veu
qu’il se haste pour s’y presenter de son bon gre, et seachant bien ce
qu’il avoit a endurer;” — “since he hastens to present himself to it of
his own accord, and knowing well what he had to endure.”

<span id="fn_649"></span>[650](cc32075.htm#fr_649.md) <span
id="ii.lxxiv-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxiv-p21"></span> See p. 301 of this volume.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 20:20-23; Mark 10:35-40](cc32076.md)
