[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc32039)  [Next](cc32041.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 32: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part II*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.xxxix"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxix-p1"></span><span id="ii.xxxix-p1.1"></span>[Matthew
13:53-58](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#053.md)<span
id="ii.xxxix-p1.1"></span>; <span id="ii.xxxix-p1.2"></span>[Mark
6:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#001.md)<span id="ii.xxxix-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxix-p2"></span><span id="ii.xxxix-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
13:53-58](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#053.md)<span
id="ii.xxxix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxix-p3"></span><span id="ii.xxxix-p3.1"></span>[Mark
6:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#001.md)<span id="ii.xxxix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxix-p4"></span> **53**. And it happened, when Jesus had
concluded these discourses,  <span id="fr_341"></span>[342](#fn_341.md)
that he departed thence. **54**. And when he was come into his own
country, he taught them in their synagogue, so that they were amazed,
and said, Whence hath this man this wisdom and these miracles?
**55**. Is not this the carpenter’s son? Is not his mother called Mary,
and his brothers James, and Joses, and Simon, and Judas? **56**. And his
sisters, do not they all live amongst us? Whence then hath this man all
these things? **57**. And they were offended at him. But Jesus said to
them, A prophet is not destitute of honor, except in his own country and
in his own house. **58**. And he did not perform many miracles there on
account of their unbelief.

<span id="ii.xxxix-p6"></span> 

<span id="ii.xxxix-p7"></span>**1**. And he departed thence, and came
into his own country, and his disciples followed him. **2**. And when it
was Sabbath, he began to teach in the synagogue, and many hearing were
amazed, saying, Whence hath this man these things?  <span
id="fr_342"></span>[343](#fn_342.md) And what is the wisdom that hath been
given to him, so that such miracles are done by his hands? **3**. Is not
this the carpenter, the son of Mary, the brother of James, and Joses,
and Judas, and Simon? Are not his sisters also here with us? And they
were offended at him. **4**. And Jesus said to them, A prophet is not
devoid of honor,  <span id="fr_343"></span>[344](#fn_343.md) except in his
own country, and among his relatives, and in his own family. **5**. And
he could not perform any miracle there, except that he cured a few sick
persons by laying his hands on them. **6**. And he wondered at their
unbelief, and walked about through the surrounding villages teaching.

<span id="ii.xxxix-p10"></span> 

<span id="ii.xxxix-p11"></span><span id="ii.xxxix-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxix-p12"></span>**<span
id="ii.xxxix-p12.2"></span>[Matthew
13:53](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#053.md)<span
id="ii.xxxix-p12.2"></span>.** *When Jesus had concluded. Matthew* does
not mean, that immediately after delivering these discourses, he came
into his own country; for it is evident from *Mark,* that some interval
of time elapsed. But the meaning is, that after having taught for some
time in Judea, he returned again to the Galileans, but did not receive
from them kind treatment. A narrative which Luke gives (<span
id="ii.xxxix-p12.3"></span>[Lu
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#022)<span id="ii.xxxix-p12.3"></span>.md)
is nearly similar, but is not the same. Nor ought we to wonder that
Christ’s countrymen, when they perceived that his family was mean and
despised, and that he had been poorly educated, were at first so much
offended as to murmur at his doctrine, and afterwards persevered in the
same malice to such an extent, that they did not cease to slander him,
when he chose to discharge the office of a prophet amongst them. This
second rejection of Christ shows that the space of time which had
intervened had not effected a reformation on the inhabitants of
Nazareth, but that the same contempt was constantly thrown as an
obstacle in the way, to prevent them from hearing Christ.  <span
id="fr_344"></span>[345](#fn_344.md)

<span id="ii.xxxix-p14"></span><span id="ii.xxxix-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxix-p15"></span>**54.** *So that they were amazed.* They
are struck with *amazement* at the novelty of the occurrence, that
Christ, who had not learned letters, but had been employed from youth to
manhood in a mechanical occupation, is so eminent a teacher, and is
filled with divine wisdom. In this miracle they ought to have perceived
the hand of God; but their ingratitude made them cover themselves with
darkness.  <span id="fr_345"></span>[346](#fn_345.md) They are compelled to
admire him, whether they will or not; and yet they treat him with
contempt. And what is this but to reject a prophet whom God has taught,
because he has not been educated by men? They cut their throat by means
of their own acknowledgment, when they render so honorable a testimony
to the doctrine of Christ, which after all has no influence on them,
because it does not take its origin, in the usual way, from the earth.
Why do they not rather lift their eyes to heaven, and learn that what
exceeds human reason must have come from God?

<span id="ii.xxxix-p17"></span>Besides, the miracles, which were added
to the doctrine, ought to have affected them the more powerfully, or at
least to have aroused them from their excessive carelessness and
stupidity to glorify God; for certainly, when God adopts unwonted
methods of procedure, so much the more clearly does he display the power
of his hand. And yet this was the very reason why the inhabitants of
Nazareth maliciously drew a veil over their eyes. We see, then, that it
is not mere ignorance that hinders men, but that, of their own accord,
they search after grounds of offense, to prevent them from following the
path to which God invites. We ought rather to argue in the opposite way,
that, when human means fail, the power of God is clearly revealed to us,
and ought to receive undivided praise.

<span id="ii.xxxix-p18"></span><span id="ii.xxxix-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxix-p19"></span>**55.** *Is not this the carpenter’s
son?* It was, we are aware, by the wonderful purpose of God, that Christ
remained in private life till he was thirty years of age. Most
improperly and unjustly, therefore, were the inhabitants of Nazareth
offended on this account; for they ought rather to have received him
with reverence, as one who had suddenly come down from heaven. They see
God working in Christ, and intentionally turn away their eyes from this
sight, to behold Joseph, and Mary, and all his relatives; thus
interposing a veil to shut out the clearest light. The word *brothers,*
we have formerly mentioned, is employed, agreeably to the Hebrew idiom,
to denote any relatives whatever; and, accordingly, *Helvidius*
displayed excessive ignorance in concluding that Mary must have had many
sons, because Christ’s *brothers* are sometimes mentioned.  <span
id="fr_346"></span>[347](#fn_346.md)

<span id="ii.xxxix-p21"></span><span id="ii.xxxix-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxix-p22"></span>**57.** *A prophet is not devoid of
honor.* I have explained this statement at considerable length, where it
occurs in the Gospel of John,  <span id="fr_347"></span>[348](#fn_347.md)
(<span id="ii.xxxix-p23.3"></span>[Joh
4:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#044.md)<span
id="ii.xxxix-p23.3"></span>.) It may, no doubt, be a general proverb,
that those who are distinguished by eminent gifts are nowhere held in
less estimation than *in their own country;* and this manifests the
ingratitude of men, who, in proportion to the greater familiarity with
which God exhibits himself to them, are the more bold to reject him in
the influences of his Spirit. I readily agree, however, with Chrysostom,
who thinks that this proverb was applied in a peculiar manner to the
Jews. But what was usually spoken against the whole nation, Christ now
asserts with special reference to his Galilean countrymen; for nowhere
did he receive less honor than on his native soil. There were good
grounds for the charge which he brings against them, that, instead of
being the first to accept the grace offered to them, as they ought to
have been, they drive him to a distance from them; for it is truly
extraordinary that a prophet of God, whom others warmly receive as a
newly-arrived stranger, should be despised in the place where he was
born.

<span id="ii.xxxix-p24"></span><span id="ii.xxxix-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxix-p25"></span>**58.** *And he did not perform many
miracles in that place. Mark* states it more emphatically, that *he
could not perform any miracle.* But they are perfectly agreed as to the
substance of what is said, that it was the impiety of Christ’s
countrymen that closed the door against the performance of a greater
number of miracles among them. He had already given them some taste of
his power; but they willingly stupify themselves, so as to have no
relish for it. Accordingly, *Augustine* justly compares faith to the
open mouth of a vessel, while he speaks of faith as resembling a
stopper, by which the vessel is closed, so as not to receive the liquor
 <span id="fr_348"></span>[349](#fn_348.md) which God pours into it. And
undoubtedly this is the case; for when the Lord perceives that his power
is not accepted by us, he at length withdraws it; and yet we complain
that we are deprived of his aid, which our unbelief rejects and drives
far from us.

<span id="ii.xxxix-p27"></span>When *Mark* declares that Christ *could
not perform any miracles,* he represents the aggravated guilt of those
by whom his goodness was prevented; for certainly unbelievers, as far as
lies in their power, bind up the hands of God by their obstinacy; not
that God is overcome, as if he were an inferior, but because they do not
permit him to display his power. We must observe, however, what *Mark*
adds, that *some sick people,* notwithstanding, *were cured;* for hence
we infer, that the goodness of Christ strove with their malice, and
triumphed over every obstacle.  <span id="fr_349"></span>[350](#fn_349.md)
We have experience of the same thing daily with respect to God; for,
though he justly and reluctantly restrains his power, because the
entrance to us is shut against him, yet we see that he opens up a path
for himself where none exists, and ceases not to bestow favors upon us.
What an amazing contest, that while we are endeavoring by every possible
method to hinder the grace of God from coming to us, it rises
victorious, and displays its efficacy in spite of all our exertions!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_341"></span>[342](cc32040.htm#fr_341.md) <span
id="ii.xxxix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxix-p5"></span> “<span id="ii.xxxix-p5.1"></span>Quand
Iesus ent acheve ces similitudes-ci;” — “when Jesus had concluded these
parables.”

<span id="fn_342"></span>[343](cc32040.htm#fr_342.md) <span
id="ii.xxxix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxix-p8"></span> “<span id="ii.xxxix-p8.1"></span>D’ou
vienent ces choses a cestuy-ci?” — “Whence comes these things to this
man?”

<span id="fn_343"></span>[344](cc32040.htm#fr_343.md) <span
id="ii.xxxix-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxix-p9"></span> “<span id="ii.xxxix-p9.1"></span>Un
prophete n’est deshonore;” — “a prophet is not dishonored.”

<span id="fn_344"></span>[345](cc32040.htm#fr_344.md) <span
id="ii.xxxix-p12.4"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxix-p13"></span> “<span id="ii.xxxix-p13.1"></span>A fin
de n’approcher de luy, et de ne recevoir sa doctrine;” — “that they
might not approach to him, and might not receive his doctrine.”

<span id="fn_345"></span>[346](cc32040.htm#fr_345.md) <span
id="ii.xxxix-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxix-p16"></span> “<span id="ii.xxxix-p16.1"></span>Mais
par leur ingratitude ils se sont eblouis l’entendement, a fin de ne
faire leur profit de ce qu’ils voyoyent devant leurs yeux;” — “but by
their ingratitude their understanding was dazzled, so that they did not
derive advantage from what they saw before their eyes.”

<span id="fn_346"></span>[347](cc32040.htm#fr_346.md) <span
id="ii.xxxix-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxix-p20"></span> *Jerome* replied to *Helvidius* in a
work entitled, <span id="ii.xxxix-p20.1"></span>*Contra Helvidium de*
*Beatoe Marioe Virginitate* CAVIN has formerly alluded to the
controversy between these two authors, (Harmony, vol. 1. p. 107.) —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_347"></span>[348](cc32040.htm#fr_347.md) <span
id="ii.xxxix-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxix-p23"></span> Our Author’s Preface to his Commentary
on John’s Gospel is dated <span id="ii.xxxix-p23.1"></span>1st January
1553; while the Preface to the Harmony is dated <span
id="ii.xxxix-p23.2"></span>1st August 1555. This accounts for the former
being always referred to as an earlier work. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_348"></span>[349](cc32040.htm#fr_348.md) <span
id="ii.xxxix-p25.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxix-p26"></span> “<span id="ii.xxxix-p26.1"></span>La
bonne liqueur;” — “the good liquor.”

<span id="fn_349"></span>[350](cc32040.htm#fr_349.md) <span
id="ii.xxxix-p27.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxix-p28"></span> “<span id="ii.xxxix-p28.1"></span>En
sorte que quelques empeschemens qu’ils ayent scen y mettre, encore
est—elle venue au dessus, et s’est monstree en quelque maniere.” —”So
that, whatever obstacles they might be able to throw in the way, still
it rose above them, and was in some measure displayed.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 14:1-2; Mark 6:14-16; Luke 9:7-9](cc32041.md)
