[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc32061)  [Next](cc32063) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 32: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part II*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.lxi"></span>

<span id="ii.lxi-p1"></span><span id="ii.lxi-p1.1"></span>[Luke
15:11-24](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#011)<span id="ii.lxi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxi-p2"></span><span id="ii.lxi-p2.1"></span>[Luke
15:11-24](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#011)<span id="ii.lxi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxi-p3"></span> **11**. And he said,  <span
id="fr_513"></span>[514](#fn_513) A certain man had two sons:
**12**. And the younger of them said to his father, Father, give me the
portion of property which falls to me. And he divided between them the
property. **13**. And not many days afterwards,  <span
id="fr_514"></span>[515](#fn_514) the younger son, having gathered all
together, set out on a journey to a distant country, and there wasted
his property by living extravagantly. **14**. But when he had spent all,
a sore famine arose in that country; and he began to be in want.
**15**. And he went and entered into the service of one of the
inhabitants of that country; and he sent him into his field to feed
swine. **16**. And he was desirous to fill his belly with the husks on
which the swine were feeding: and no man gave to him.  <span
id="fr_515"></span>[516](#fn_515) **17**. And when he came to himself,
he said, How many hirelings of my father have abundance of bread,  <span
id="fr_516"></span>[517](#fn_516) while I perish with hunger! **18**. I
will arise, and go to my father,  <span
id="fr_517"></span>[518](#fn_517) and will say to him, Father, I have
sinned against heaven, and before thee, **19**. And am no longer worthy
to be called thy son: make me as one of thy hirelings. **20**. And he
arose, and came to his father. And while he was yet afar off, his father
saw him, and was moved with compassion, and ran, and fell on his neck,
and kissed him. **21**. And the son said to him, Father, I have sinned
against heaven, and before thee, and am no longer worthy to be called
thy son. **22**. And the father said to his servants, Bring out the best
robe, and put it on him; and put a ring on his hand, and shoes on his
feet: **23**. And bring the fatted calf, and kill it; and let us feast,
and be merry: **24**. For this my son was dead, and is alive again; he
was lost, and is found.  <span id="fr_518"></span>[519](#fn_518) And
they began to be merry.

<span id="ii.lxi-p10"></span> 

<span id="ii.lxi-p11"></span> 

<span id="ii.lxi-p12"></span><span id="ii.lxi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxi-p13"></span>This parable is nothing else than a
confirmation of the preceding doctrine.  <span
id="fr_519"></span>[520](#fn_519) In the first part is shown how readily
God is disposed to pardon our sins, and in the second part (which we
shall afterwards treat in the proper place) is shown the great malignity
and obstinacy of those who murmur at his compassion. In the person of a
young prodigal who, after having been reduced to the deepest poverty by
luxury and extravagance, returns as a suppliant to his father,  <span
id="fr_520"></span>[521](#fn_520) to whom he had been disobedient and
rebellious, Christ describes all sinners who, wearied of their folly,
apply to the grace of God. To the kind father,  <span
id="fr_521"></span>[522](#fn_521) on the other hand, who not only
pardons the crimes of his son, but of his own accord meets him when
returning, he compares God, who is not satisfied with pardoning those
who pray to him, but even advances to meet them with the compassion of a
father.  <span id="fr_522"></span>[523](#fn_522) Let us now examine the
parable in detail.

<span id="ii.lxi-p18"></span><span id="ii.lxi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxi-p19"></span>**<span id="ii.lxi-p19.1"></span>[Luke
15:12](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#012)<span
id="ii.lxi-p19.1"></span>.** *And the younger of them said to his
father.* The parable opens by describing a mark of wicked arrogance in
the youth, which appears in his being desirous to leave his father, and
in thinking that he cannot be right without being permitted to indulge
in debauchery, free from his father’s control. There is also ingratitude
in leaving the old man,  <span id="fr_523"></span>[524](#fn_523) and not
only withholding the performance of the duties which be owed to him, but
crippling and diminishing the wealth of his house.  <span
id="fr_524"></span>[525](#fn_524) This is at length followed by wasteful
luxury and wicked extravagance, by which he squanders all that he had.
 <span id="fr_525"></span>[526](#fn_525) After so many offenses he
deserved to find his father implacable.  <span
id="fr_526"></span>[527](#fn_526)

<span id="ii.lxi-p24"></span>Under this image our Lord unquestionably
depicts to us the boundless goodness and inestimable forbearance of God,
that no crimes, however aggravated, may deter us from the hope of
obtaining pardon, There would be some foundation for the analogy, if we
were to say that this foolish and insolent youth resembles those persons
who, enjoying at the hand of God a great abundance of good things, are
moved by a blind and mad ambition to be separated from Him, that they
may enjoy perfect freedom; as if it were not more desirable than all the
kingdoms of the world to live under the fatherly care and government of
God. But as I am afraid that this allusion may be thought overstrained,
I shall satisfy myself with the literal meaning; not that I disapprove
of the opinion, that under this figure is reproved the madness of those
who imagine that it will be advantageous for them to have something of
their own, and to be rich apart from the heavenly Father; but that I now
confine myself within the limits of a Commentator.  <span
id="fr_527"></span>[528](#fn_527)

<span id="ii.lxi-p26"></span>Christ here describes what usually happens
with young men, when they are carried away by their natural disposition.
Destitute of sound judgment, and maddened by passion, they are ill
fitted for governing themselves, and are not restrained by fear or
shame. It is therefore impossible but that they shall abandon themselves
to every thing to which their sinful inclination prompts them, and rush
on in a disgraceful course, till they are involved in shameful poverty.
He afterwards describes the punishment which, in the righteous judgment
of God, generally overtakes spendthrifts and prodigals. After having
wickedly squandered their means, they are left to pine in hunger, and
not having known how to use in moderation an abundant supply of the best
bread, they are reduced to eat acorns and *husks*. In short, they become
the companions of *swine*, and are made to feel that they are unworthy
to partake of human food; for it is swinish gluttony  <span
id="fr_528"></span>[529](#fn_528) to squander wickedly what was given
for the support of life.  <span id="fr_529"></span>[530](#fn_529) As to
the ingenious exposition which some have brought forward, that it is the
just punishment of wicked scorn, when those who have rejected delicious
bread in the house of our heavenly Father are driven by hunger to eat
*husks*, it is a true and useful doctrine; but in the meantime, we must
bear in mind the difference that exists between allegories and the
natural meaning.  <span id="fr_530"></span>[531](#fn_530)

<span id="ii.lxi-p30"></span>*And was desirous to fill his belly.* <span
id="ii.lxi-p30.1"></span>This means that, in consequence of hunger, he
no longer thought of his former luxuries, but greedily devoured *husks;*
<span id="ii.lxi-p30.2"></span>for of that kind of food he could not be
in want, when he was giving it to the *swine* <span
id="ii.lxi-p30.3"></span>There is a well-known saying of Cyrus who,
having for a long time suffered hunger during a flight, and having been
slightly refreshed by eating coarse black bread, declared that he had
never tasted savory bread till now; so the young man who is here
mentioned was compelled by necessity to betake himself with appetite to
*husks* <span id="ii.lxi-p30.4"></span>The reason is added, *because no
man gave to him;* <span id="ii.lxi-p30.5"></span>for the copulative
conjunction *and* <span id="ii.lxi-p30.6"></span>(<span
id="ii.lxi-p30.7"></span>καὶ<span id="ii.lxi-p30.8"></span>) <span
id="ii.lxi-p30.9"></span>must, in my opinion, signify *because*<span
id="ii.lxi-p30.10"></span>,  <span id="fr_531"></span>[532](#fn_531)
<span id="ii.lxi-p31.2"></span>and what is here said does not refer to
*husks*<span id="ii.lxi-p31.3"></span>, <span
id="ii.lxi-p31.4"></span>which he had at hand, but I understand the
meaning to be, that no man pitied his poverty; for prodigals who throw
away the whole of their property are persons whom no man thinks himself
bound to relieve, — nay more, as they have been accustomed to squander
every thing, men think that nothing ought to be given to them.  <span
id="fr_532"></span>[533](#fn_532)

<span id="ii.lxi-p33"></span><span id="ii.lxi-p33.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxi-p34"></span>**17.** *And when he came to himself.* Here
is described to us the way in which God invites men to repentance. If of
their own accord they were wise, and became submissive, he would draw
them more gently; but as they never stoop to obedience, till they have
been subdued by the rod, he chastises them severely. Accordingly, to
this young man, whom abundance  <span id="fr_533"></span>[534](#fn_533)
rendered fierce and rebellious, hunger proved to be the best teacher.
Instructed by this example, let us not imagine that God deals cruelly
with us, if at any time he visits us with heavy afflictions; for in this
manner those who were obstinate and intoxicated with mirth are taught by
him to be obedient. In short, all the miseries which we endure are a
profitable invitation to repentance.  <span
id="fr_534"></span>[535](#fn_534) But as we are slow, we scarcely ever
regain *a sound mind*, unless when we are forced by extreme distress;
for until we are pressed by difficulties on every hand, and shut up to
despair, the flesh always indulges in gaiety, or at least recoils. Hence
we infer, that there is no reason to wonder, if the Lord often uses
violent and even repeated strokes, in order to subdue our obstinacy,
and, as the proverb runs, applies hard wedges to hard knots. It must
also be observed, that the hope of bettering his condition, if he
returned to his father, gave this young man courage to repent; for no
severity of punishment will soften our depravity, or make us displeased
with our sins, till we perceive some advantage. As this young man,
therefore, is induced by confidence in his father’s kindness to seek
reconciliation, so the beginning of our repentance must be an
acknowledgment of the mercy of God to excite in us favorable hopes.

<span id="ii.lxi-p37"></span><span id="ii.lxi-p37.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxi-p38"></span>**20.** *And while he was still afar off.*
This is the main point of the parable. If men, who are by nature prone
to revenge, and too tenacious of their own rights, are moved by fatherly
love kindly to forgive their children, and freely to bring them back,
when they are sunk in wretchedness, God, whose boundless goodness
exceeds all the affection of parents,  <span
id="fr_535"></span>[536](#fn_535) will not treat us more harshly.  <span
id="fr_536"></span>[537](#fn_536) And certainly nothing is here
attributed to an earthly father which God does not promise with respect
to himself. *Before they call*, says he, *I will answer*, (<span
id="ii.lxi-p40.2"></span>[Isa
65:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#024)<span id="ii.lxi-p40.2"></span>.)
That passage too of David is well known,

<span id="ii.lxi-p41"></span>I said, I will acknowledge against me my
unrighteousness to the Lord and thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin,  
(<span id="ii.lxi-p41.2"></span>[Ps
32:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#005)<span id="ii.lxi-p41.2"></span>.)

<span id="ii.lxi-p42"></span>As this father, therefore, is not merely
pacified by the entreaties of his son, but meets him when he is coming,
and before he has heard a word, embraces him, filthy and ugly as he is,
so God does not wait for a long prayer, but of his own free will meets
the sinner as soon as he proposes to confess his fault.

<span id="ii.lxi-p43"></span>It is wretched sophistry to infer from
this, that the grace of God is not exhibited to sinners until they
anticipate it by their repentance. “Here,” say they, “is held out to us
a father ready to pardon, but it is after that his son has begun to
return to him; and therefore God does not look, and does not bestow his
grace, on any but those who begin to seek him.” It is, no doubt, true
that, in order to his obtaining pardon, the sinner is required to have
grief of conscience, and to be dissatisfied with himself; but it is
wrong to infer from this, that repentance, which is the gift of God, is
yielded by men from their own movement of their heart. And in this
respect it would be improper to compare a mortal man to God; for it is
not in the power of an earthly father to renew the stubborn heart of his
son, as God changes hearts of stone into hearts of flesh. In short, the
question here is not whether a man is converted by himself, and returns
to him; but only under the figure of a man is commended the fatherly
gentleness of God, and his readiness to grant forgiveness.

<span id="ii.lxi-p44"></span><span id="ii.lxi-p44.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxi-p45"></span>**21.** *Father, I have sinned against
heaven.* Here is pointed out another branch of repentance, namely, such
a conviction of sin as is accompanied by grief and shame. For he who is
not grieved for having sinned, and whose offense is not placed before
his eyes, will sooner attempt any thing than think of returning to the
path of duty. Displeasure with sin must therefore go before repentance.
And there is great emphasis in this expression, that the young man is
said to have *come to* himself, as one whom the wanderings of wild
desires had hurried away into forgetfulness of himself. And certainly so
far astray are the impulses of the flesh, that any one who gives himself
up to them may be said to have *gone out of himself*, and to have lost
his senses. For this reason transgressors are commanded to *return to
the heart*,  <span id="fr_537"></span>[538](#fn_537) (<span
id="ii.lxi-p46.2"></span>[Isa
46:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#008)<span id="ii.lxi-p46.2"></span>.)
Next follows a confession,  <span id="fr_538"></span>[539](#fn_538) not
such a one as the Pope has contrived, but one by which the son appeases
his offended *father;* for this humility is absolutely necessary in
order to obtain forgiveness of sins. This mode of expression, *I have
sinned against heaven, and before thee,* is of the same import as if he
had said, that God was offended in the person of an earthly father. And
certainly this is the dictate of nature, that every one who rebels
against a *father* rises wickedly also against God, who has placed
children in subjection to parents.

<span id="ii.lxi-p48"></span><span id="ii.lxi-p48.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxi-p49"></span>**22.** *Bring out the best robe.* Although
in parables (as we have frequently observed) it would be idle to follow
out every minute circumstance, yet it will be no violence to the literal
meaning, if we say, that our heavenly Father not only pardons our sins
in such a manner as to bury the remembrance of them, but even restores
those gifts of which we had been deprived; as, on the other hand, by
taking them from us, he chastises our ingratitude in order to make us
feel ashamed at the reproach and disgrace of our nakedness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_513"></span>[514](cc32062.htm#fr_513) <span
id="ii.lxi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxi-p4"></span> “<span id="ii.lxi-p4.1"></span>Il dit
aussi;” — “he said also.”

<span id="fn_514"></span>[515](cc32062.htm#fr_514) <span
id="ii.lxi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ii.lxi-p5"></span> “<span id="ii.lxi-p5.1"></span>Et peu de
iours apres;” — “and a few days after.”

<span id="fn_515"></span>[516](cc32062.htm#fr_515) <span
id="ii.lxi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.lxi-p6"></span> “<span id="ii.lxi-p6.1"></span>Et (*ou*,
*mais*) personne ne luy donnoit;” — “and (*or*, *but*) nobody gave to
him.”

<span id="fn_516"></span>[517](cc32062.htm#fr_516) <span
id="ii.lxi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.lxi-p7"></span> “<span id="ii.lxi-p7.1"></span>Combien
y-a-il de mercenaires en la maison de mon pere, qui ont force pain;” —
“how may hirelings are there in my father’s house, who have plenty of
bread.”

<span id="fn_517"></span>[518](cc32062.htm#fr_517) <span
id="ii.lxi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.lxi-p8"></span> “<span id="ii.lxi-p8.1"></span>Ie partiray
d’icy, et m’en iray a mon pere;” — “I will depart hence, and will go
away to my father.”

<span id="fn_518"></span>[519](cc32062.htm#fr_518) <span
id="ii.lxi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.lxi-p9"></span> “<span id="ii.lxi-p9.1"></span>Car mon fils
que voyci estoit mort, et il est retourne a vie: il estoit perdu, mais
il est retrouve;” — “for this is my son who was dead, and he is returned
to life; he was lost, but he is found again.”

<span id="fn_519"></span>[520](cc32062.htm#fr_519) <span
id="ii.lxi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxi-p14"></span> “<span id="ii.lxi-p14.1"></span>De la
doctrine que nous venons de voir;” — “of the doctrine which we have just
now seen.”

<span id="fn_520"></span>[521](cc32062.htm#fr_520) <span
id="ii.lxi-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ii.lxi-p15"></span> “<span id="ii.lxi-p15.1"></span>Retourne
pour demander pardon a son pere;” — “returns to ask pardon from his
father.”

<span id="fn_521"></span>[522](cc32062.htm#fr_521) <span
id="ii.lxi-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ii.lxi-p16"></span> “<span id="ii.lxi-p16.1"></span>Aussi en
la personne de ce bon pere il nous propose l’affection de Dieu;” — “also
in the person of this good father he holds out to us the affection of
God.”

<span id="fn_522"></span>[523](cc32062.htm#fr_522) <span
id="ii.lxi-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ii.lxi-p17"></span> “<span id="ii.lxi-p17.1"></span>Mais les
previent par sa bonte et misericorde paternelle;” — “but anticipates
them by his fatherly goodness and compassion.”

<span id="fn_523"></span>[524](cc32062.htm#fr_523) <span
id="ii.lxi-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ii.lxi-p20"></span> “<span id="ii.lxi-p20.1"></span>Delaissant
le bon vieil hemme de pere;” — “leaving the good old man his father.”

<span id="fn_524"></span>[525](cc32062.htm#fr_524) <span
id="ii.lxi-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ii.lxi-p21"></span> “<span id="ii.lxi-p21.1"></span>Mais aussi
diminue le bien de la maison, et en emporte une bonne partie;” — “but
also diminishes the wealth of the house, and carries off a good part of
it.”

<span id="fn_525"></span>[526](cc32062.htm#fr_525) <span
id="ii.lxi-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ii.lxi-p22"></span> “<span id="ii.lxi-p22.1"></span>Tout ce
qu’il avoit eu du pere;” — “all that he had got from his father.”

<span id="fn_526"></span>[527](cc32062.htm#fr_526) <span
id="ii.lxi-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ii.lxi-p23"></span> “<span id="ii.lxi-p23.1"></span>Il avoit
bien merite de trouver puis apres un pere rigoreux, et qui teint son
coeur contre luy iusqu’au bout;” — “he had well deserved to find
afterwards a father who was severe, and who kept his heart shut against
him to the end.”

<span id="fn_527"></span>[528](cc32062.htm#fr_527) <span
id="ii.lxi-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxi-p25"></span> “<span id="ii.lxi-p25.1"></span>Pource que
ie me tien maintenant dans mes limites, et ne veux point passer l’office
d’expositeur;” — “because I now keep myself within my limits, and do not
wish to go beyond the duty of an expositor.”

<span id="fn_528"></span>[529](cc32062.htm#fr_528) <span
id="ii.lxi-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxi-p27"></span> “<span id="ii.lxi-p27.1"></span>C’est une
gourmandise plustost convenable a des porceaux qu’a des hommes;” — “it
is a gluttony more suitable to swine than to men.”

<span id="fn_529"></span>[530](cc32062.htm#fr_529) <span
id="ii.lxi-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ii.lxi-p28"></span> “<span id="ii.lxi-p28.1"></span>Pour
subvenir aux necessitez de ceste vie;” — “to supply the necessities of
this life.”

<span id="fn_530"></span>[531](cc32062.htm#fr_530) <span
id="ii.lxi-p28.2"></span>

<span id="ii.lxi-p29"></span> “<span id="ii.lxi-p29.1"></span>Mais
cependant il faut tousiours aviser quelle difference il y a entre les
allegories et le vray sens naturel d’un passage;” — “but yet we must
always consider what difference there is between allegories and the true
natural meaning of a passage.”

<span id="fn_531"></span>[532](cc32062.htm#fr_531) <span
id="ii.lxi-p30.11"></span>

<span id="ii.lxi-p31"></span> “<span id="ii.lxi-p31.1"></span>Car selon
mon avis ce mot et se doit resoudre en Car, ou Pource que;” — “for in my
opinion this word *and* must mean *For*, or *Because*.*”*

<span id="fn_532"></span>[533](cc32062.htm#fr_532) <span
id="ii.lxi-p31.5"></span>

<span id="ii.lxi-p32"></span> “<span id="ii.lxi-p32.1"></span>Il semble
que ce qu’on leur donne soit autant de perdu;” — “what is given to them
appears to be as good as thrown away.”

<span id="fn_533"></span>[534](cc32062.htm#fr_533) <span
id="ii.lxi-p34.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxi-p35"></span> “<span id="ii.lxi-p35.1"></span>L’aise et
la trop grande abondance;” — “ease and too great abundance.”

<span id="fn_534"></span>[535](cc32062.htm#fr_534) <span
id="ii.lxi-p35.2"></span>

<span id="ii.lxi-p36"></span> “<span id="ii.lxi-p36.1"></span>Ce sont
autant d’avertissemens proufitables, par lequel Dieu nous convie a
repentance;” — “they are so many profitable warnings, by which God
invites us to repentance.”

<span id="fn_535"></span>[536](cc32062.htm#fr_535) <span
id="ii.lxi-p38.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxi-p39"></span> “<span id="ii.lxi-p39.1"></span>L’amour de
tous les peres de ce monde;” — “the love of all the fathers in the
world.”

<span id="fn_536"></span>[537](cc32062.htm#fr_536) <span
id="ii.lxi-p39.2"></span>

<span id="ii.lxi-p40"></span> “<span id="ii.lxi-p40.1"></span>Sera bien
pour le moins aussi debonnaire envers nous;” — “will be at least as
gentle towards us.”

<span id="fn_537"></span>[538](cc32062.htm#fr_537) <span
id="ii.lxi-p45.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxi-p46"></span> “<span id="ii.lxi-p46.1"></span>A ceste
cause en l’Escriture Dieu commande aux transgresseurs de retourner a
leur coeur;” — “For this reason, in Scripture God commands transgressors
to return to their heart.” In the authorized version the passage runs
thus: *Bring it again to mind*, *O ye transgressors*. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_538"></span>[539](cc32062.htm#fr_538) <span
id="ii.lxi-p46.3"></span>

<span id="ii.lxi-p47"></span> “<span id="ii.lxi-p47.1"></span>Apres la
cognoissance du peche s’ensuit aussi la confession;” — “after the
knowledge of sin there follows also confession.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke 15:25-32](cc32063)
