[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc32063)  [Next](cc32065.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 32: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part II*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.lxiii"></span>

<span id="ii.lxiii-p1"></span><span id="ii.lxiii-p1.1"></span>[Matthew
18:15-20](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#015.md)<span
id="ii.lxiii-p1.1"></span>; <span id="ii.lxiii-p1.2"></span>[Luke
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#003.md)<span id="ii.lxiii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.lxiii-p2"></span><span id="ii.lxiii-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
18:15-20](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#015.md)<span
id="ii.lxiii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxiii-p3"></span><span id="ii.lxiii-p3.1"></span>[Luke
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#003.md)<span id="ii.lxiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxiii-p4"></span> **15**. But if thy brother hath sinned
against thee, go and reprove him between thee and him alone: if he shall
hear thee, thou hast gained thy brother. **16**. But if he shall not
hear thee, take with thee one or two more, that in the mouth of two or
three witnesses every word may be confirmed: and if he shall not hear
them, tell the church. **17**. And if he shall not hear the church, let
him be to thee as a heathen and a publican. **18**. Verily, I say to
thee, What things soever you shall bind on earth  <span
id="fr_548"></span>[549](#fn_548.md) shall be bound also in heaven; and
what things soever you shall loose on earth shall be loosed also in
heaven. **19**. Again, I say to you, That if two of you shall agree on
earth as to every thing which they shall ask,  <span
id="fr_549"></span>[550](#fn_549.md) it will be done to them by any Father
who is in heaven. **20**. For where two or three are assembled  <span
id="fr_550"></span>[551](#fn_550.md) in my name, there am I in the midst of
them.

<span id="ii.lxiii-p8"></span> 

<span id="ii.lxiii-p9"></span>**3**. Be on your guard. If thy brother
shall sin against thee, reprove him; and if he shall repent, forgive
him.

<span id="ii.lxiii-p10"></span> 

<span id="ii.lxiii-p11"></span> 

<span id="ii.lxiii-p12"></span><span id="ii.lxiii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxiii-p13"></span>**<span
id="ii.lxiii-p13.2"></span>[Matthew
18:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#015.md)<span
id="ii.lxiii-p13.2"></span>.** *But if thy brother shall sin against
thee.* As he had discoursed about bearing the infirmities of brethren,
he now shows more clearly in what manner, and for what purpose, and to
what extent, we ought to bear with them. For otherwise it would have
been easy to reply, that there is no other way of avoiding offenses,
than by every man winking at the faults of others, and thus what is evil
would be encouraged by forbearance. Christ therefore prescribes a middle
course, which does not give too great offense to the weak, and yet is
adapted to cure their diseases; for that severity which is employed as a
medicine is profitable and worthy of praise. In short, Christ enjoins
his disciples to forgive one another, but to do so in such a manner as
to endeavor to correct their faults. It is necessary that this be wisely
observed; for nothing is more difficult than to exercise forbearance
towards men, and, at the same time, not to neglect the freedom necessary
in reproving them.  <span id="fr_551"></span>[552](#fn_551.md) Almost all
lean to the one side or to the other, either to deceive themselves
mutually by deadly flatteries, or to pursue with excessive bitterness
those whom they ought to cure. But Christ recommends to his disciples a
mutual love, which is widely distant from flattery; only he enjoins them
to season their admonitions with moderation, lest, by excessive severity
and harshness, they discourage the weak.

<span id="ii.lxiii-p15"></span>Now he distinctly lays down three steps
of brotherly correction. The first is, to give a private advice to the
person who has offended. The second is, if he shall give any sign of
obstinacy, to advise him again in presence of *witnesses*. The third is,
if no advantage shall be obtained in that way, to deliver him up to the
public decision of *the Church*. The design of this, as I have said, is,
to hinder charity from being violated under the pretence of fervent
zeal. As the greater part of men are driven by ambition to publish with
excessive eagerness the faults of their brethren, Christ seasonably
meets this fault by enjoining us to cover the faults of brethren, as far
as lies in our power; for those who take pleasure in the disgrace and
infamy of brethren are unquestionably carried away by hatred and malice,
since, if they were under the influence of charity, they would endeavor
to prevent the shame of their brethren.

<span id="ii.lxiii-p16"></span>But it is asked, Ought this rule to be
extended indiscriminately to every kind of offense? For there are very
many who do not allow any public censures, till the *offender* has been
privately admonished. But there is an obvious limitation in the words of
Christ; for he does not simply, and without exception, order us to
advise or reprove privately, and in the absence of witnesses, all who
have *offended*, but bids us attempt this method, when we have been
*offended* in private; by which is meant, not that it is a business of
our own, but that we ought to be wounded and grieved whenever God is
*offended*. And Christ does not now speak about bearing injuries, but
teaches us in general to cultivate such meekness towards each other, as
not to ruin by harsh treatment those whom we ought to save.  <span
id="fr_552"></span>[553](#fn_552.md)

<span id="ii.lxiii-p18"></span>*Against thee.* This expression, as is
evident from what we have said, does not denote an injury committed
against any one, but distinguishes between secret and open sins.  <span
id="fr_553"></span>[554](#fn_553.md) For if any man shall *offend* against
the whole Church, Paul enjoins that he be publicly reproved, so that
even *elders* shall not be spared; for it is in reference to them that
he expressly enjoins Timothy, to

<span id="ii.lxiii-p20"></span>rebuke them publicly in presence of all,
and thus to make them a general example to others,  
(<span id="ii.lxiii-p20.2"></span>[1Ti
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#020.md)<span
id="ii.lxiii-p20.2"></span>.)

<span id="ii.lxiii-p21"></span>And certainly it would be absurd that he
who has committed a public offense, so that the disgrace of it is
generally known, should be admonished by individuals; for if a thousand
persons are aware of it, he ought to receive a thousand admonitions. The
distinction, therefore, which Christ expressly lays down, ought to be
kept in mind, that no man may bring disgrace upon *his brother*, by
rashly, and without necessity, divulging secret offenses.

<span id="ii.lxiii-p22"></span>*If he shall hear thee, thou hast gained
thy brother.* Christ confirms his doctrine by its usefulness and
advantage; for it is no small matter to *gain* to God a soul which had
been the slave of Satan. And how comes it that those who have fallen do
not often repent, but because they are regarded with hatred, and treated
as enemies, and thus acquire a character of hardened obstinacy? Nothing,
therefore, is more appropriate than meekness, which reconciles to God
those who had departed from him. On the other hand, he who
inconsiderately indulges in foolish flattery willingly places in
jeopardy the salvation of a *brother*, which he had in his hand.

<span id="ii.lxiii-p23"></span>According to *Luke*, Christ expressly
enjoins us to be satisfied with a private reproof, if the *brother* be
brought to *repentance* Hence, too, we infer how necessary it is that
mutual freedom of reproof should subsist among believers. For, since
each of us in many ways commits daily offenses, it would be outrageous
cruelty to betray, by our silence and concealment, the salvation of
those whom we might, by mild reproof, rescue from perdition. Though it
does not always succeed, yet he is chargeable with heinous guilt, who
has neglected the remedy which the Lord prescribes for promoting the
salvation of the brethren. It is also worthy of notice, that the Lord,
in order to render us more zealous in performing our duty, ascribes to
us that honor which is his own; for to him alone, and to no other, does
it belong to convert a man; and yet he bestows on us this applause,
though we did not deserve it, that we *gain a brother* who was lost.

<span id="ii.lxiii-p24"></span><span id="ii.lxiii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxiii-p25"></span>**16.** *But if he shall not hear thee.*
The second step is, that he who displayed obstinacy, or refused to yield
to one man, should be again admonished in presence of *witnesses* Here
some object, that it will serve no purpose to call *witnesses*, if we
have to deal with an obstinate and rebellious man, because their
presence will be so far from leading him to acknowledge his guilt, that
he will only make a more wicked denial. But this difficulty will be
speedily removed, if we distinguish between *denial* and *evasion* He
who explicitly denies the fact, and declares that he is falsely and
calumniously accused, must be left alone; for it would be ill vain to
press him by calling *witnesses* But as, in most cases, men shamelessly
evade, or impudently excuse, the improper and unjust actions which they
have committed, till greater authority is employed, towards such persons
it is useful to observe this method.

<span id="ii.lxiii-p26"></span><span id="ii.lxiii-p26.1"></span>That
Christ’s discourse ought to be understood in this sense is evident from
the word used, <span id="ii.lxiii-p26.2"></span>ἔλεγξον<span
id="ii.lxiii-p26.3"></span>, *reprove*<span id="ii.lxiii-p26.4"></span>,
<span id="ii.lxiii-p26.5"></span>or *argue;* <span
id="ii.lxiii-p26.6"></span>for to argue is to convince by demonstration.
 <span id="fr_554"></span>[555](#fn_554.md) <span
id="ii.lxiii-p27.2"></span> And how could I *argue* <span
id="ii.lxiii-p27.3"></span>with a man  <span
id="fr_555"></span>[556](#fn_555.md) <span id="ii.lxiii-p28.2"></span> who
boldly denies the whole matter? for he who has the effrontery to deny
the crime which he has committed shuts the door against a second
admonition.

<span id="ii.lxiii-p29"></span>We now perceive for what purpose Christ
proposes to call *witnesses*. It is, to give greater weight and
impressiveness to the admonition. As to the slightly different meaning
to which he has turned the words of Moses, it involves no absurdity.
Moses forbids sentence to be pronounced on a matter that is unknown, and
defines this to be the lawful mode of proving, that it be *established*
by the testimony of

<span id="ii.lxiii-p30"></span>two or three witnesses. At the mouth of
two witnesses, or at the mouth of three witnesses, shall the matter be
established,  
(<span id="ii.lxiii-p30.2"></span>[De
19:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#015.md)<span
id="ii.lxiii-p30.2"></span>.)

<span id="ii.lxiii-p31"></span>Alluding to that law, Christ says that,
when two or three witnesses shall rise up to condemn the obstinacy of
the man, the case will be clear, at least till the Church be prepared to
take cognizance of it; for he who refuses to hear *two or three
witnesses*  <span id="fr_556"></span>[557](#fn_556.md) will have no reason
to complain that he is dragged forth to light.

<span id="ii.lxiii-p33"></span>*Tell it to the Church.* It is asked,
what does he mean by the term *Church?* For Paul orders (<span
id="ii.lxiii-p33.1"></span>[1Co
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#005)<span id="ii.lxiii-p33.1"></span>.md)
that the incestuous Corinthian shall be excommunicated, not by a certain
chosen number, but by the whole assembly of the godly; and therefore it
might appear to be probable that the power of judging is bestowed on the
whole of the people. But as at that time no *Church* as yet was in
existence, which acknowledged the authority of Christ, and no such order
had been established, and as our Lord employs the ordinary and received
forms of expression, there can be no doubt that he alludes to the order
of the ancient *Church*, as in other places also he accommodates his
modes of expression to what was known and customary.  <span
id="fr_557"></span>[558](#fn_557.md) When he commands that:

<span id="ii.lxiii-p35"></span>the offering, which we intend to present,
shall be left at the altar, till we are reconciled to an offended
brother,  
(<span id="ii.lxiii-p35.2"></span>[Mt
5:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#023.md)<span
id="ii.lxiii-p35.2"></span>,)

<span id="ii.lxiii-p36"></span>he unquestionably intends, by means of
that form of the worship of God which was then in existence and in
force, to teach us, that we cannot in a right manner either pray, or
offer any thing to God, so long as we are at variance with our brethren.
So then he now looked at the form of discipline which was observed among
the Jews; for it would have been absurd to propose an appeal to the
judgment of a *Church* which was not yet in existence.

<span id="ii.lxiii-p37"></span><span id="ii.lxiii-p37.1"></span>Now
since among the Jews the power of excommunication belonged to the
elders, who held the government of the whole *Church*<span
id="ii.lxiii-p37.2"></span>, <span id="ii.lxiii-p37.3"></span>Christ
speaks appropriately when he says that they who sinned must at length be
brought forward publicly to *the Church*<span
id="ii.lxiii-p37.4"></span>, <span id="ii.lxiii-p37.5"></span>if they
either despise haughtily, or ridicule and evade, the private
admonitions. We know that, after the Jews returned from the Babylonish
captivity, a council was formed, which they called *Sanhedrim*<span
id="ii.lxiii-p37.6"></span>, <span id="ii.lxiii-p37.7"></span>and in
Greek *Synedrion*<span id="ii.lxiii-p37.8"></span>, <span
id="ii.lxiii-p37.9"></span>(<span
id="ii.lxiii-p37.10"></span>συνέδριον<span id="ii.lxiii-p37.11"></span>)
and that to this council was committed the superintendence of morals and
of doctrine. This government was lawful and approved by God, and was a
bridle to restrain within their duty the dissolute and incorrigible.

<span id="ii.lxiii-p38"></span>It will perhaps be objected that, in the
time of Christ, every thing was corrupt and perverted, so that this
tyranny was very far from deserving to be accounted the judgment of *the
Church* But the reply is easy. Though the method of procedure was at
that time depraved and perverted, yet Christ justly praises that order,
such as it had been handed down to them from the fathers. And when,
shortly afterwards, he erected a *Church*, while he removed the abuse,
he restored the proper use of excommunication. Yet there is no reason to
doubt that the form of discipline, which prevailed in the kingdom of
Christ, succeeded in the room of that ancient discipline. And certainly,
since even heathen nations maintained a shadowy form of excommunication,
it appears that, from the beginning, this was impressed by God on the
minds of men, that those who were impure and polluted ought to be
excluded from religious services.  <span
id="fr_558"></span>[559](#fn_558.md) It would therefore have been highly
disgraceful to the people of God to have been altogether destitute of
that discipline, some trace of which remained among the Gentiles. But
what had been preserved under the Law Christ has conveyed to us, because
we hold the same rank with the ancient fathers. For it was not the
intention of Christ to send his disciples to the synagogue, which, while
it willingly cherished in its bosom disgraceful filth, excommunicated
the true and sincere worshippers of God; but he reminded us that the
order, which had been formerly established in a holy manner under the
Law, must be maintained in his *Church*

<span id="ii.lxiii-p40"></span>*Let him be to thee as a heathen and a
publican.* What is here added as to *heathens and publicans* confirms
the interpretation which I have given. For *heathens and publicans*
having been at that time regarded by the Jews with the greatest hatred
and detestation, he compares to them unholy and irreclaimable men, who
yield to no admonitions. Certainly he did not intend to enjoin them to
avoid the society of *heathens*, of whom *the Church* was afterwards
composed; nor is there any reason at the present day why believers
should shrink from associating with *publicans* But in order that he
might be more easily understood by the ignorant, Christ borrowed a mode
of expression from what was then customary among his nation;  <span
id="fr_559"></span>[560](#fn_559.md) and the meaning is, that we ought to
have no intercourse with the despisers of *the Church* till they repent.

<span id="ii.lxiii-p42"></span><span id="ii.lxiii-p42.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxiii-p43"></span>**18.** *What things soever you shall
bind.* He now repeats the same words which he had formerly used, (<span
id="ii.lxiii-p43.1"></span>[Mt
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#019.md)<span
id="ii.lxiii-p43.1"></span>,) but in a different sense; for there he
intended to maintain their authority in doctrine, but here he appoints
discipline, which is an appendage to doctrine. There Christ declared
that the preaching of the Gospel would not be without effect, but that
the *odor* of it would either be *life-giving* or *deadly*, (<span
id="ii.lxiii-p43.2"></span>[2 Cor.
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#015.md),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#016)<span id="ii.lxiii-p43.2"></span>:.md)
here he affirms that, though wicked men ridicule the judgment of *the
Church*, it will not be ineffectual. We must attend to this distinction,
that *there* our Lord’s discourse relates to the preached word, but
*here* to public censures and discipline. Let the reader go to that
passage for the import of the metaphor, *binding and loosin*g.  <span
id="fr_560"></span>[561](#fn_560.md)

<span id="ii.lxiii-p45"></span>The substance of it is this: Whoever,
after committing a crime, humbly confesses his fault, and entreats *the
Church* to forgive him, is absolved not only by men, but by God himself;
and, on the other hand, whoever treats with ridicule the reproofs and
threatenings of *the Church*, if he is condemned by her, the decision
which men have given will be ratified in heaven. If it be objected, that
in this way God is made a sort of petty judge, who concurs in the
sentence of mortal men, the reply is at hand. For when Christ maintains
the authority of his Church, he does not diminish his own power or that
of his Father, but, on the contrary, supports the majesty of his word.
As in the former case (<span id="ii.lxiii-p45.1"></span>[Mt
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#019.md)<span
id="ii.lxiii-p45.1"></span>) he did not intend to confirm
indiscriminately every kind of doctrine, but only that which had
proceeded out of his mouth, so neither does he say in this place that
every kind of decision will be approved and ratified, but only that in
which he presides, and that too not only by his Spirit, but by his word.
Hence it follows, that men do no injury to the authority of God, when
they pronounce nothing but what comes from his mouth, and only endeavor
faithfully to execute what he has commanded. For, though Christ alone is
the Judge of the world, yet he chooses to have ministers to proclaim his
word.  <span id="fr_561"></span>[562](#fn_561.md) Besides, he wishes that
his own decision should be pronounced by the Church; and thus he takes
nothing from his own authority by employing the ministry of men, but it
is Himself alone that *looses and binds*

<span id="ii.lxiii-p47"></span>But here a question arises. Since the
Church endures many hypocrites, and likewise *absolves* (or *looses)*
many whose professions of repentance are hypocritical, does it follow
that such persons will be *absolved* (or *loosed)* in heaven? I reply,
the discourse is addressed to those only who are truly and sincerely
reconciled to the Church. For Christ, wishing to administer comfort to
trembling consciences, and to relieve them from fear, declares that any
who may have offended are freed from guilt in the sight of God, provided
that they be reconciled to *the Church* For he has appointed this as the
pledge of heavenly grace, which has no reference to hypocrites, who
pervert the proper use of reconciliation, but awakens in the godly no
ordinary confidence, when they hear that their sins are blotted out
before God and angels, as soon as they have obtained forgiveness from
*the Church*

<span id="ii.lxiii-p48"></span>In the other clause, Christ’s meaning is
not at all ambiguous; for, since obstinate and haughty men are strongly
inclined to despise the decision of the Church on this pretense, that
they refuse to be subject to men — as wicked profligates often make bold
appeals to the heavenly tribunal  <span
id="fr_562"></span>[563](#fn_562.md) — Christ, in order to subdue this
obstinacy by terror, threatens that the condemnation, which is now
despised by them, will be ratified in heaven. He encourages his
followers, at the same time, to maintain proper severity, and not to
yield to the wicked obstinacy of those who reject or shake off
discipline.  <span id="fr_563"></span>[564](#fn_563.md)

<span id="ii.lxiii-p51"></span>Hence, too, we may see how absurdly the
Papists torture this passage to cloak every species of tyranny. That the
right of excommunication is granted to the Church is certain, and is
acknowledged by every person of sound judgment; but does it follow that
any individual, even though not called by the *Church*, but elected
 <span id="fr_564"></span>[565](#fn_564.md) by a mitered and disguised
beast, shall at his own caprice throw out the useless squibs of
excommunications?  <span id="fr_565"></span>[566](#fn_565.md) On the
contrary, it is evident that the lawful government of the Church is
committed to elders, and not only to the ministers of the word, but to
those also who, taken from among the people, have been added to them for
the superintendence of morals. And yet, not satisfied with this
impudence, they endeavor even to prove from this passage that we must
bear all the burdens which they shall impose. I do not mention that the
power which has been granted to the Church is basely seized and carried
off by those outrageous enemies of the Church; and I only mention that,
since Christ speaks only about correcting *offenders*, those who by
their laws ensnare souls are chargeable with not less folly than
wickedness in abusing this passage. Of the same stamp is their defense
of their auricular confession on this pretense; for if Christ intended
that those who by their own fault had been brought even to a public
sentence should be reconciled to the Church, he does not therefore lay
an obligations  <span id="fr_566"></span>[567](#fn_566.md) on every
individual to pour his sins into the ear of the priest. But their
fooleries are so ridiculous, that it is unnecessary to spend any longer
time in refuting them.

<span id="ii.lxiii-p55"></span><span id="ii.lxiii-p55.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxiii-p56"></span>**19.** *Again I say to you.* He confirms
the former statement; for not only will God bestow the spirit of wisdom
and prudence on those who ask it, but he will also provide that not one
thing which they shall do according to his word shall want its power and
effect. By uniting *agreement* with *prayer,* he reminds us with what
moderation and humility believers ought to conduct themselves in all
religious acts.  <span id="fr_567"></span>[568](#fn_567.md) The *offender*
must be admonished, and, if he does not receive correction, he must be
excommunicated. Here it is not only necessary to ask counsel at the
sacred mouth of God, so that nothing may be determined but by his word,
but it is proper at the same time to begin with prayer. Hence appears
more clearly what I have formerly stated, that men are not allowed the
liberty of doing whatever they please,  <span
id="fr_568"></span>[569](#fn_568.md) but that God is declared to have the
sole claim to the government of the *Church*, so that he approves and
ratifies the decisions of which he is himself the Author. Meanwhile,
when believers assemble, they are taught to unite their prayers and to
pray in common, not only to testify the unity of faith, but that God may
listen to the *agreement* of them all. So then, as God frequently
promises in other passages that he will graciously listen to the private
requests of each individual, so here Christ makes a remarkable promise
to public prayers, in order to invite us more earnestly to the practice
of them.

<span id="ii.lxiii-p59"></span><span id="ii.lxiii-p59.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxiii-p60"></span>**20.** *For where two or three are
assembled in my name.* This promise is more extensive than the former;
for the Lord declares that he will be present,

<span id="ii.lxiii-p61"></span>wherever two or three are met together in
his name,  
to guide them by his counsel, (<span id="ii.lxiii-p61.2"></span>[Ps
73:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#024.md)<span
id="ii.lxiii-p61.2"></span>,)

<span id="ii.lxiii-p62"></span>and to conduct to a prosperous result
whatever they shall undertake. There is therefore no reason to doubt
that those who give themselves up to his direction will derive most
desirable advantage from his presence. And since it is an invaluable
blessing to have Christ for our director in all our affairs, to bless
our deliberations and their results; and since, on the other hand,
nothing can be more miserable than to be deprived of his grace, this
promise ought to add no small excitement to us to unite with each other
in piety and holiness.  <span id="fr_569"></span>[570](#fn_569.md) For
whoever either disregards the holy assemblies, or separates himself from
brethren, and takes little interest in the cultivation of unity, by this
alone makes it evident that he sets no value on the presence of Christ.

<span id="ii.lxiii-p64"></span>But we must take care, first of all, that
those who are desirous to have Christ present with them shall *assemble
in his name;* and we must likewise understand what is the meaning of
this expression; for we perceive how ungodly men falsely and impudently,
as well as wickedly, cover their conspiracies with his sacred name. If
therefore we do not wish to expose Christ to their ridicule, and at the
same time to overturn what he has here promised, we must know first of
all what is meant by this phrase. It means that those who are *assembled
together*, laying aside every thing that hinders them from approaching
to Christ, shall sincerely raise their desires to him, shall yield
obedience to his word, and allow themselves to be governed by the
Spirit. Where this simplicity prevails, there is no reason to fear that
Christ will not make it manifest that it was not in vain for *the
assembly to meet in his name*

<span id="ii.lxiii-p65"></span>In this is displayed the gross ignorance
of the Papists, who exclaim that Councils could not err, and that all
ought to abide by their decisions, because, *as often as two or three
are assembled in the name of Christ, he is in the midst of them* But we
ought first of all to inquire whether those persons, as to whose faith,
and doctrine, and dispositions, we are in doubt, were *assembled in the
name of Christ.* When the Papists leave out or perplex this matter, who
does not see that they dexteroasly confound the distinction between holy
and profane assemblies, so that the power of doing any thing is taken
from the Church and conveyed to the sworn enemies of Christ? Let us
therefore know that none but the pious worshippers of God, who sincerely
seek Christ, are encouraged to entertain the confident hope that he will
never leave them. Disregarding the bastard and abortive Councils, which
out of their own head have woven a web, let Christ alone, with the
doctrine of his Gospel, be always exalted amongst us.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_548"></span>[549](cc32064.htm#fr_548.md) <span
id="ii.lxiii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxiii-p5"></span> “<span id="ii.lxiii-p5.1"></span>Toutes
choses que vous lierez sur la terre;” — “all things which you shall bind
on earth.”

<span id="fn_549"></span>[550](cc32064.htm#fr_549.md) <span
id="ii.lxiii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.lxiii-p6"></span> “<span id="ii.lxiii-p6.1"></span>De
toutes choses qu’ils demanderont;” — “of all things which they shall
ask.”

<span id="fn_550"></span>[551](cc32064.htm#fr_550.md) <span
id="ii.lxiii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.lxiii-p7"></span> “<span id="ii.lxiii-p7.1"></span>Ou il y
en a deux ou trois assemblez;” — “where there are two or three of them
assembled.”

<span id="fn_551"></span>[552](cc32064.htm#fr_551.md) <span
id="ii.lxiii-p13.3"></span>

<span id="ii.lxiii-p14"></span> “<span id="ii.lxiii-p14.1"></span>Que
toutesfois on retiene tousiours ceste liberte de reprendre ce qui est a
condamner;” — “so as at the same time to reserve always that liberty of
reproving what is worthy of condemnation.”

<span id="fn_552"></span>[553](cc32064.htm#fr_552.md) <span
id="ii.lxiii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxiii-p17"></span> “<span
id="ii.lxiii-p17.1"></span>Lesquels nous devions plustost tascher
d’amener a salut;” — “whom we ought rather to attempt to lead to
salvation.”

<span id="fn_553"></span>[554](cc32064.htm#fr_553.md) <span
id="ii.lxiii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxiii-p19"></span> “<span id="ii.lxiii-p19.1"></span>Mais
pour distinguer et mettre difference entre les pechez secrets, et les
offenses manifestes;” — “but to distinguish and put a difference between
secret sins and open offenses.”

<span id="fn_554"></span>[555](cc32064.htm#fr_554.md) <span
id="ii.lxiii-p26.7"></span>

<span id="ii.lxiii-p27"></span> “<span id="ii.lxiii-p27.1"></span>Car
arguer signifie convaincre par argumens, et remonstrer par bonnes
raisons;” — “for *to argue* signifies to convince by arguments, and to
show by good reasons.”

<span id="fn_555"></span>[556](cc32064.htm#fr_555.md) <span
id="ii.lxiii-p27.4"></span>

<span id="ii.lxiii-p28"></span> “<span id="ii.lxiii-p28.1"></span>Or
comment pourroit on *arguer* ou convaincre un homme, que ce qu’il a fait
est mauvais?” — “Now how could we *argue* or convince a man that what he
has done is wrong?”

<span id="fn_556"></span>[557](cc32064.htm#fr_556.md) <span
id="ii.lxiii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxiii-p32"></span> “<span id="ii.lxiii-p32.1"></span>Veu
qu’il n’a pas voulu recevoir l’admonition qui luy a este faite en prive
par deux ou trois;” — “since he did not choose to receive the admonition
which was given to him in private by two or three.”

<span id="fn_557"></span>[558](cc32064.htm#fr_557.md) <span
id="ii.lxiii-p33.2"></span>

<span id="ii.lxiii-p34"></span> “<span id="ii.lxiii-p34.1"></span>Comme
aussi en d’autres passages il s’accomodi a ce qui estoit lors ordinaire,
et use des termes communes;” — “as also in other passages he adapts
himself to what was then customary, and employs common terms.”

<span id="fn_558"></span>[559](cc32064.htm#fr_558.md) <span
id="ii.lxiii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxiii-p39"></span> “<span id="ii.lxiii-p39.1"></span>Ne
devoycnt estre receus a participer aux choses sacrees appartenantes au
sarvice de Dieu;” — “ought not to be admitted to take part in the sacred
things belonging to the service of God.”

<span id="fn_559"></span>[560](cc32064.htm#fr_559.md) <span
id="ii.lxiii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxiii-p41"></span> “<span id="ii.lxiii-p41.1"></span>A use
d’un terme convenable a la coustume du pays;” — “used a term in
accordance with the custom of the country.”

<span id="fn_560"></span>[561](cc32064.htm#fr_560.md) <span
id="ii.lxiii-p43.3"></span>

<span id="ii.lxiii-p44"></span> See page 293 of this volume.

<span id="fn_561"></span>[562](cc32064.htm#fr_561.md) <span
id="ii.lxiii-p45.2"></span>

<span id="ii.lxiii-p46"></span> “<span id="ii.lxiii-p46.1"></span>Il
vent toutesfois cependant que les ministres soyent ambassadeurs pour
porter et publier sa parole;” — “yet he wishes that ministers should be
ambassadors to carry and publish his word.”

<span id="fn_562"></span>[563](cc32064.htm#fr_562.md) <span
id="ii.lxiii-p48.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxiii-p49"></span> “<span id="ii.lxiii-p49.1"></span>Comme
souventesfois on verra de meschans garnemens sans crainte de Dieu, qui
diront tout haut et hardiment qu’ils appellent au jugement celeste;” —
“as we shall often see wicked profligates without the fear of God, who
will quite loudly and boldly say that they appeal to the heavenly
tribunal.”

<span id="fn_563"></span>[564](cc32064.htm#fr_563.md) <span
id="ii.lxiii-p49.2"></span>

<span id="ii.lxiii-p50"></span> “<span id="ii.lxiii-p50.1"></span>Qui
reietteront la discipline, et n’y voudront ployer le col;” — “who will
reject discipline, and will refuse to bend the neck to it.”

<span id="fn_564"></span>[565](cc32064.htm#fr_564.md) <span
id="ii.lxiii-p51.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxiii-p52"></span> “<span id="ii.lxiii-p52.1"></span>Mais
estant cree et ordonne;” — “but being created and appointed.”

<span id="fn_565"></span>[566](cc32064.htm#fr_565.md) <span
id="ii.lxiii-p52.2"></span>

<span id="ii.lxiii-p53"></span> “<span id="ii.lxiii-p53.1"></span>Et les
face peter pour faire peur a qui bon luy semble;” — “and make them crack
to frighten whomsoever he pleases.”

<span id="fn_566"></span>[567](cc32064.htm#fr_566.md) <span
id="ii.lxiii-p53.2"></span>

<span id="ii.lxiii-p54"></span> “<span id="ii.lxiii-p54.1"></span>Il ne
s’ensuit pas pourtant qu’il ait impose loy.”

<span id="fn_567"></span>[568](cc32064.htm#fr_567.md) <span
id="ii.lxiii-p56.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxiii-p57"></span> “<span id="ii.lxiii-p57.1"></span>En
tous actes concernans la service et la parolle de Dieu;” — “in all acts
relating to the service and the word of God.”

<span id="fn_568"></span>[569](cc32064.htm#fr_568.md) <span
id="ii.lxiii-p57.2"></span>

<span id="ii.lxiii-p58"></span> “<span id="ii.lxiii-p58.1"></span>Tout
ce que bon leur semble;” — “whatever they think right.”

<span id="fn_569"></span>[570](cc32064.htm#fr_569.md) <span
id="ii.lxiii-p62.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxiii-p63"></span> “<span id="ii.lxiii-p63.1"></span>A nous
lier les uns avec les autres en toute sainctete et crainte de Dieu;” —
“to link ourselves with each other in all holiness and fear of God.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 18:21-35 Luke 17:4](cc32065.md)
