[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc32021)  [Next](cc32023) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 32: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part II*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.xxi"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p1"></span><span id="ii.xxi-p1.1"></span>[Matthew
13:31-35](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#031)<span
id="ii.xxi-p1.1"></span>; <span id="ii.xxi-p1.2"></span>[Mark
4:26-34](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#026)<span
id="ii.xxi-p1.2"></span>;  
<span id="ii.xxi-p1.4"></span>[Luke
13:18-22](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#018)<span id="ii.xxi-p1.4"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p2"></span><span id="ii.xxi-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
13:31-35](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#031)<span id="ii.xxi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p3"></span><span id="ii.xxi-p3.1"></span>[Mark
4:26-34](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#026)<span id="ii.xxi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p4"></span><span id="ii.xxi-p4.1"></span>[Luke
13:18-22](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#018)<span id="ii.xxi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p5"></span> **31**. He delivered another parable to
them, saying, The kingdom of heaven is like a grain of mustard, which a
man took and sowed in his field: **32**. Which indeed is the least of
all seeds: but when it is grown up, it is the largest among herbs,
 <span id="fr_219"></span>[220](#fn_219) and becometh a tree, so that
the fowls of heaven come and make their nests among its branches.
**33**. He spake another parable to them: The kingdom of heaven is like
leaven, which a woman took and hid among three measures of meal, till
the whole was leavenened. **34**. All these things Jesus spoke in
parables to the multitudes, and without a parable he spoke nothing to
them. **35**. That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the
prophet, who saith, I will open my mouth in parables; I will utter
things which have been hidden from the foundation of the world.

<span id="ii.xxi-p7"></span> 

<span id="ii.xxi-p8"></span> **26**. And he said, The kingdom of God is
as if a man should cast seed into the ground, **27**. And sleep, and
rise by night and day, and the corn should spring and grow up, while
knoweth not how. **28**. For the earth yieldeth fruit of itself, first
the blade, then the ear, and then the full corn in the ear. **29**. And
when the fruit is matured, he immediately applieth the sickle, because
the harvest is at hand. **30**. And he said, To what shall we say that
the kingdom of God is like? or with what comparison shall we compare it?
**31**. As a grain of mustard, which, when it is sown in the earth, is
smaller than all the seeds which are in the earth; **32**. And when it
is sown, it springs up, and is larger than all herbs,  <span
id="fr_220"></span>[221](#fn_220) and putteth forth great branches, so
that the fowls of heaven can make their nests under its shadow.
**33**. And by such parables he spake the word to them, as they were
able to bear it: **34**. But without a parable he did not speak to them,
but he explained all things to his disciples when they were apart.

<span id="ii.xxi-p10"></span> **18**. Therefore he said, To what is the
kingdom of God like? and to what shall I compare it? **19**. It is like
a grain of mustard, which a man took and cast into his garden, and it
grew, and became a large tree, and the fowls of the air made their nests
among its branches. **20**. And again he said, To what shall I compare
the kingdom of God? **21**. It is like leaven, which a woman took and
hid in three measures of meal, till the whole was leavened. **22**. And
he went through the cities and villages, teaching and journeying towards
Jerusalem.

<span id="ii.xxi-p11"></span> 

<span id="ii.xxi-p12"></span> 

<span id="ii.xxi-p13"></span><span id="ii.xxi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p14"></span>By these parables Christ encourages his
disciples not to be offended and turn back on account of the mean
beginnings of the Gospel. We see how haughtily profane men despise the
Gospel, and even turn it into ridicule, because the ministers by whom it
is preached are men of slender reputation and of low rank; because it is
not instantly received with applause by the whole world; and because the
few disciples whom it does obtain are, for the most part, men of no
weight or consideration, and belong to the common people. This leads
weak minds to despair of its success, which they are apt to estimate
from the manner of its commencement. On the contrary, the Lord opens his
reign with a feeble and despicable commencement, for the express
purpose, that his power may be more fully illustrated by its unexpected
progress.  <span id="fr_221"></span>[222](#fn_221)

<span id="ii.xxi-p16"></span>*The kingdom of God* is compared to *a
grain of mustard, which is the smallest among the seeds,* but grows to
such a height that it becomes a shrub, *in which the birds build their
nests.* It is likewise compared to *leaven,* which, though it may be
small in amount, spreads its influence in such a manner, as to impart
its bitterness to a large quantity of meal.  <span
id="fr_222"></span>[223](#fn_222) If the aspect of Christ’s kingdom be
despicable in the eyes of the flesh, let us learn to raise our minds to
the boundless and incalculable power of God, which at once created all
things out of nothing, and every day raises up *things that are not,*
(<span id="ii.xxi-p17.2"></span>[1Co
1:28](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#028)<span id="ii.xxi-p17.2"></span>,)
in a manner which exceeds the capacity of the human senses. Let us leave
to proud men their disdainful laugh, till the Lord, at an unexpected
hour, shall strike them with amazement. Meanwhile, let us not despond,
but rise by faith against the pride of the world, till the Lord give us
that astonishing display of his power,  <span
id="fr_223"></span>[224](#fn_223) of which he speaks in this passage.

<span id="ii.xxi-p19"></span>The word *leaven* is sometimes taken in a
bad sense, as when Christ warns them to

<span id="ii.xxi-p20"></span>beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and
of the Sadducees,  
(<span id="ii.xxi-p20.2"></span>[Mt
16:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#011)<span id="ii.xxi-p20.2"></span>;)

<span id="ii.xxi-p21"></span>and when Paul says, that

<span id="ii.xxi-p22"></span>a little leaven leaveneth the whole lump,  
(<span id="ii.xxi-p22.2"></span>[1Co
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#006)<span id="ii.xxi-p22.2"></span>.)

<span id="ii.xxi-p23"></span>But here the term must be understood simply
as applying to the present subject. As to the meaning of the phrase,
*the kingdom of God, and the kingdom of heaven,* we have spoken on
former occasions.

<span id="ii.xxi-p24"></span><span id="ii.xxi-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p25"></span>**<span id="ii.xxi-p25.2"></span>[Mark
4:26](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#026)<span id="ii.xxi-p25.2"></span>.**
*So is the kingdom of God.* Though this comparison has the same object
with the two immediately preceding, yet Christ appears to direct his
discourse purposely to the ministers of the word, that they may not grow
indifferent about the discharge of their duty, because the fruit of
their labor does not immediately appear. He holds out for their
imitation the example of husbandmen, who *throw seed into the ground*
with the expectation of reaping, and do not torment themselves with
uneasiness and anxiety, but go to bed and rise again; or, in other
words, pursue their ordinary and daily toil, till the corn arrive at
maturity in due season. In like manner, though the seed of the word be
concealed and choked for a time, Christ enjoins pious teachers to be of
good courage, and not to allow their alacrity to be slackened through
distrust.

<span id="ii.xxi-p26"></span><span id="ii.xxi-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p27"></span>**<span id="ii.xxi-p27.2"></span>[Matthew
13:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#034)<span
id="ii.xxi-p27.2"></span>.** *All these things Jesus spoke in parables.*
Though Mark expressly says, that Christ *spoke the word to them as they
were able to bear it,* yet I think it probable that he continued to
employ *parables,* not so much for the purpose of instruction, as to
keep the attention of his hearers awake till a more convenient time. For
why did he explain them familiarly to his disciples when they were
apart? Was it because they were more slow of apprehension than the great
body of the people? No; but because he wished to convey to them
privately a knowledge of his meaning, and to allow others to remain in a
state of suspense, till a fitter opportunity should arrive. These were
only a sort of introduction to the Gospel, the full brightness and
publication of which was delayed till the proper time.

<span id="ii.xxi-p28"></span>There is an apparent contradiction between
this statement of Matthew and the prediction of Isaiah, which was quoted
a little before. But this is easily removed; for, though he withdrew the
light of doctrine from the reprobate, yet this did not prevent him from
accommodating himself to their capacity, so as to render them
inexcusable. He therefore adopted a method of teaching which was proper
and suitable to hearers, whom he knew to be not yet sufficiently
prepared to receive instruction.

<span id="ii.xxi-p29"></span><span id="ii.xxi-p29.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p30"></span>**35.** *That it might be fulfilled* <span
id="ii.xxi-p30.2"></span>Matthew does not mean, that the psalm, which he
quotes, is a prediction which relates peculiarly to Christ, but that, as
the majesty of the Spirit was displayed in the discourse of the Prophet,
in the same manner was his power manifested in the discourse of Christ.
The Prophet, when he is about to speak of God’s covenant, by which he
adopted the seed of Abraham, of the benefits which he continued to
bestow upon his people, and of the whole government of the Church,
introduces his subject in lofty terms, *I will open my mouth in
parables,* <span id="ii.xxi-p30.3"></span>(<span
id="ii.xxi-p30.4"></span>[Ps 78:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#002)<span
id="ii.xxi-p30.4"></span><span id="ii.xxi-p30.5"></span>:) that is, “I
will not speak of trifling matters, but will handle with becoming
gravity subjects of the highest importance.” When he adds, *I will utter
dark sayings,* <span id="ii.xxi-p30.6"></span>the meaning is the same;
such repetitions being very frequent in the Psalms. The Hebrew word
<span id="ii.xxi-p30.7"></span>משלים<span id="ii.xxi-p30.8"></span>,
*(Meshalim)* <span id="ii.xxi-p30.9"></span>signifies *comparisons;*
<span id="ii.xxi-p30.10"></span>and it came afterwards to be applied to
“weighty sentences,” because *comparisons* <span
id="ii.xxi-p30.11"></span>generally impart beauty and energy to a
discourse. The word <span id="ii.xxi-p30.12"></span>חידות *(Chidoth)*
<span id="ii.xxi-p30.13"></span>sometimes denotes *“riddles,”* <span
id="ii.xxi-p30.14"></span>and at other times, “short sayings.”

<span id="ii.xxi-p31"></span>Now though Matthew seems to allude to the
word *parable,* he undoubtedly means, that Christ spoke figuratively, in
order that his very style, being more brilliant than ordinary discourse,
might carry more weight and dignity. In short, he says that what is
contained in the psalm was *fulfilled;* because the use of allegories
and figures tended to show, that Christ was treating of the hidden
mysteries of God, and to prevent his doctrine from being despised.
Hence, too, we infer, that there was no inconsistency in the various
objects which Christ had in view, when he spoke to the people in a dark
manner. Though he intended to conceal from the reprobate what he was
saying, yet he labored to make them feel, even in the midst of their
amazement, that there was something heavenly and divine in his language.
 <span id="fr_224"></span>[225](#fn_224)

<span id="ii.xxi-p33"></span><span id="ii.xxi-p33.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p34"></span>**<span id="ii.xxi-p34.2"></span>[Luke
13:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#022)<span
id="ii.xxi-p34.2"></span>.** *Journeying towards Jerusalem.* It is
uncertain whether Luke speaks only of one journey, or means that, while
Christ walked throughout Judea, and visited each part of it for the
purpose of teaching, he was wont to *go up to Jerusalem* at the
festivals. The former clause, certainly, appears to describe that course
of life which Christ invariably pursued, from the time that he began to
discharge the office which had been committed to him by the Father. To
make the latter clause agree with this, the meaning will be, that, when
the festivals were at hand, he attended, along with others,  <span
id="fr_225"></span>[226](#fn_225) the holy assemblies.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_219"></span>[220](cc32022.htm#fr_219) <span
id="ii.xxi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p6"></span> “<span id="ii.xxi-p6.1"></span>Il est plus
grand que les autres herbes;” — “it is larger than the other herbs.”

<span id="fn_220"></span>[221](cc32022.htm#fr_220) <span
id="ii.xxi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p9"></span> “<span id="ii.xxi-p9.1"></span>Que toute
autre herbe;” — “than every other herb.”

<span id="fn_221"></span>[222](cc32022.htm#fr_221) <span
id="ii.xxi-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p15"></span> “<span id="ii.xxi-p15.1"></span>A fin que
sa puissance soit tant mieux cognue, quand on verra les avancemens qu’on
n’avoit iamais attendus;” — “in order that his power may be so much the
better known, when the progress, which had not been anticipated, shall
be seen.”

<span id="fn_222"></span>[223](cc32022.htm#fr_222) <span
id="ii.xxi-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p17"></span> “<span id="ii.xxi-p17.1"></span>Qu’il fait
aigrir et lever une grande quantite de paste;” — “that it embitters and
causes to rise a large quantity of paste.”

<span id="fn_223"></span>[224](cc32022.htm#fr_223) <span
id="ii.xxi-p17.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p18"></span> “<span id="ii.xxi-p18.1"></span>Iuques a
ce que le Seigneur nous face sentir l’effect de cette vertu
incomprehensible;” — “till the Lord make us feel the effect of that
incomprehensible power.”

<span id="fn_224"></span>[225](cc32022.htm#fr_224) <span
id="ii.xxi-p31.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p32"></span> “<span id="ii.xxi-p32.1"></span>Car
combien qu’il voulust parler en telle sorte que les reprouvez n’y
entendissent rien, il a toutesfois tellement modere son style, qu’en
leur stupidite ils ont senti que son parler avoit quelque vertu celeste
et Divine;” — “for, though he intended to speak in such a manner, that
the reprobate might understand nothing of it, yet he was so regulated in
his style that, amidst their stupidity, they felt that his manner of
speaking had some Divine and heavenly power.”

<span id="fn_225"></span>[226](cc32022.htm#fr_225) <span
id="ii.xxi-p34.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p35"></span> “<span id="ii.xxi-p35.1"></span>Sa
coustume estoit de se trouver;” — “his custom was to be present.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 13:44-52](cc32023)
