[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc32053)  [Next](cc32055) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 32: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part II*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.liii"></span>

<span id="ii.liii-p1"></span><span id="ii.liii-p1.1"></span>[Matthew
16:20-28](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#020)<span
id="ii.liii-p1.1"></span>; <span id="ii.liii-p1.2"></span>[Mark
8:30-38](../../../bib/kjv/mar008.htm#030)<span
id="ii.liii-p1.2"></span>, 9:1;  
<span id="ii.liii-p1.4"></span>[Luke
9:21-27](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#021)<span id="ii.liii-p1.4"></span>

<span id="ii.liii-p2"></span><span id="ii.liii-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
16:20-28](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#020)<span
id="ii.liii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.liii-p3"></span><span id="ii.liii-p3.1"></span>[Mark
8:30-37](../../../bib/kjv/mar008.htm#030)<span id="ii.liii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.liii-p4"></span><span id="ii.liii-p4.1"></span>[Luke
9:21-27](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#021)<span id="ii.liii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.liii-p5"></span> **20**. Then he charged his disciples
 <span id="fr_450"></span>[451](#fn_450) not to tell any one that he was
Jesus the Christ. **21**. From that time Jesus began to make known to
his disciples, that he must go to Jerusalem and suffer many things from
the elders, and the chief priests, and the scribes, and be killed, and
be raised again on the third day. **22**. And Peter, taking him aside,
 <span id="fr_451"></span>[452](#fn_451) began to rebuke him, saying,
Lord, spare thyself;  <span id="fr_452"></span>[453](#fn_452) this shall
not happen to thee. **23**. But he turning said to Peter, Get thee
behind me, Satan, thou art an offense to me; for thou relishest not
those things which are of God, but those which are of men. **24**. Then
Jesus said to his disciples, If any man chooses to come after me, let
him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me. **25**. For
whosoever would save his life shall lose it; and on the other hand,
whosoever shall lose his life on my account shall find it. **26**. For
what doth it profit a man, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose
his own soul? or what shall a man give, that, in exchange for it, he may
redeem his soul? **27**. For the Son of man will come in the glory of
his Father with his angels: and then will he render to every one
according to his actions. **28**. Verily I say to you, There are some
standing here, who will not taste death till they have seen the Son of
man coming in his kingdom.

<span id="ii.liii-p9"></span> 

<span id="ii.liii-p10"></span> **30**. And he threatened, and forbade
them to tell any one concerning him.  <span
id="fr_453"></span>[454](#fn_453) **31**. And he began to teach them,
that the Son of man must suffer many things, and be rejected by the
elders, and the chief priests, and the scribes, and be killed, and after
three days rise again. **32**. And he spoke that saying openly, and
Peter took him, and began to rebuke him. **33**. But he turning and
looking upon his disciples, rebuked Peter, saying, Get thee behind me,
Satan; for thou relishest not the things that are of God, but those that
are of men. **34**. And when he had called the multitude to him along
with his disciples, he said to them, Whosoever would follow me, let him
deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me. **35**. For
whosoever would save his life shall lose it; and whosoever shall lose
his life for my sake, and for the sake of the gospel, shall save it,
**36**. For what will it profit a man, if he shall gain the whole world,
and lose his soul? **37**. Or what shall a man give as a ransom for his
soul? **38**. For whosoever shall be ashamed of me and of my words in
this adulterous and sinful generation, of him likewise will the Son of
man be ashamed, when he shall come in the glory of his Father with the
holy angels.

<span id="ii.liii-p12"></span><span id="ii.liii-p12.1"></span>[Mark
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#001)<span id="ii.liii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.liii-p13"></span>**1.** And he said to them, Verily, I say
to you, There are some among those who stand here  <span
id="fr_454"></span>[455](#fn_454) that will not taste death, till they
have seen the kingdom of God come with power.

<span id="ii.liii-p15"></span> **21**. And he threatening charged them
not to tell this to any one,  <span id="fr_455"></span>[456](#fn_455)
**22**. Saying, The Son of man must suffer many things and be rejected
by the elders, and the chief priests, and the scribes, and rise again on
the third day. **23**. And he said to all, If any man would come after
me, let him deny himself, and take up hi cross daily,  <span
id="fr_456"></span>[457](#fn_456) and follow me. **24**. For whosoever
would save his life shall lose it; and whosoever shall lose his life on
my account shall save it. **25**. For what doth it profit a man, if he
gain the whole world, and be ruined and lost? **26**. For whosoever
shall be ashamed of me and of my saying, of him likewise will the Son of
man be ashamed, when he shall come in his own majesty, and in the
majesty of his Father, and of the holy angels. **27**. And I say to you,
There truly are some standing here who will not taste death, till they
see the kingdom of God.  <span id="fr_457"></span>[458](#fn_457)

<span id="ii.liii-p19"></span> 

<span id="ii.liii-p20"></span> 

<span id="ii.liii-p21"></span><span id="ii.liii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ii.liii-p22"></span>Having given a proof of his future glory,
Christ reminds his disciples of what *he must suffer*, that they also
may be prepared to *bear the cross;* for the time was at hand when they
must enter into the contest, to which he knew them to be altogether
unequal, if they had not been fortified by fresh courage. And first of
all, it was necessary to inform them that Christ must commence his
reign, not with gaudy display, not with the magnificence of riches, not
with the loud applause of the world, but with an ignominious death. But
nothing was harder than to rise superior to such an offense;
particularly if we consider the opinion which they firmly entertained
respecting their Master; for they imagined that he would procure for
them earthly happiness. This unfounded expectation held them in
suspense, and they eagerly looked forward to the hour when Christ would
suddenly reveal the glory of his reign. So far were they from having
ever adverted to the ignominy of the cross, that they considered it to
be utterly unsuitable that he should be placed in any circumstances from
which he did not receive honor.  <span id="fr_458"></span>[459](#fn_458)
To them it was a distressing occurrence that he should *be rejected by
the elders and the scribes*, who held the government of the Church; and
hence we may readily conclude that this admonition was highly necessary.
But as the bare mention of the cross must, of necessity, have occasioned
heavy distress to their weak minds, he presently heals the wound by
saying, that *on the third day he will rise again from the dead.* And
certainly, as there is nothing to be seen in the cross but the weakness
of the flesh, till we come to his resurrection, in which the power of
the Spirit shines brightly, our faith will find no encouragement or
support. In like manner, all ministers of the Word, who desire that
their preaching may be profitable, ought to be exceedingly careful that
the glory of his resurrection should be always exhibited by them in
connection with the ignominy of his death.

<span id="ii.liii-p24"></span>But we naturally wonder why Christ refuses
to accept as witnesses the Apostles, whom he had already appointed to
that office; for why were they sent but to be the heralds of that
redemption which depended on the coming of Christ? The answer is not
difficult, if we keep in mind the explanations which I have given on
this subject: first, that they were not appointed teachers for the
purpose of bearing full and certain testimony to Christ, but only to
procure disciples for their Master; that is, to induce those who were
too much the victims of sloth to become teachable and attentive; and;
secondly, that their commission was temporary, for it ended when Christ
himself began to preach. As the time of his death was now at hand, and
as they were not yet fully prepared to testify their faith, but, on the
contrary, were so weak in faith, that their confession of it would have
exposed them to ridicule, the Lord enjoins them to remain silent till
others shall have acknowledged him to be the conqueror of death, and
till he shall have endued them with increased firmness.

<span id="ii.liii-p25"></span><span id="ii.liii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ii.liii-p26"></span>**<span id="ii.liii-p26.2"></span>[Matthew
16:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#022)<span
id="ii.liii-p26.2"></span>.** *And Peter, taking him aside, began to
rebuke him.* It is a proof of the excessive zeal of Peter, that he
reproves his Master; though it would appear that the respect he
entertained for him was his reason for *taking him aside,* because he
did not venture to reprove him in presence of others. Still, it was
highly presumptuous in Peter to advise our Lord to *spare himself*, as
if he had been deficient in prudence or self-command. But so completely
are men hurried on and driven headlong by inconsiderate zeal, that they
do not hesitate to pass judgment on God himself, according to their own
fancy. Peter views it as absurd, that the Son of God, who was to be the
Redeemer of the nation, should be *crucified by the elders*, and that he
who was the Author of life should be condemned to die. He therefore
endeavors to restrain Christ from exposing himself to death. The
reasoning is plausible; but we ought without hesitation to yield greater
deference to the opinion of Christ than to the zeal of Peter, whatever
excuse he may plead.

<span id="ii.liii-p27"></span>And here we learn what estimation in the
sight of God belongs to what are called *good intentions*. So deeply is
pride rooted in the hearts of men, that they think wrong is done them,
and complain, if God does not comply with every thing that they consider
to be right. With what obstinacy do we see the Papists boasting of their
devotions! But while they applaud themselves in this daring manner, God
not only rejects what they believe to be worthy of the highest praise,
but even pronounces a severe censure on its folly and wickedness.
Certainly, if the feeling and judgment of the flesh be admitted, Peter’s
intention was pious, or at least it looked well. And yet Christ could
not have conveyed his censure in harsher or more disdainful language.
Tell me, what is the meaning of that stern reply? How comes it that he
who so mildly on all occasions guarded against *breaking* even a
*bruised reed*, (<span id="ii.liii-p27.2"></span>[Isa
42:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#003)<span id="ii.liii-p27.2"></span>,)
thunders so dismally against a chosen disciple? The reason is obvious,
that in the person of one man he intended to restrain all from
gratifying their own passions. Though the lusts of the flesh, as they
resemble wild beasts, are difficult to be restrained, yet there is no
beast more furious than the wisdom of the flesh. It is on this account
that Christ reproves it so sharply, and bruises it, as it were, with an
iron hammer, to teach us that it is only from the word of God that we
ought to be wise.

<span id="ii.liii-p28"></span><span id="ii.liii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="ii.liii-p29"></span>**23.** *Get thee behind me, Satan.* <span
id="ii.liii-p29.2"></span>It is idle to speculate, as some have done,
about the word (<span id="ii.liii-p29.3"></span>ὀπίσω<span
id="ii.liii-p29.4"></span>) *behind;* <span id="ii.liii-p29.5"></span>as
if Peter were ordered to follow, and not to go before; for, in a passage
which we have already considered, Luke (<span
id="ii.liii-p29.6"></span>[Lu 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#008)<span
id="ii.liii-p29.6"></span><span id="ii.liii-p29.7"></span>) informs us
that our Lord used those very words in repelling the attacks of Satan,
and the verb <span id="ii.liii-p29.8"></span>ὕπαγε<span
id="ii.liii-p29.9"></span> (from which the Latin word *Apage* <span
id="ii.liii-p29.10"></span>is derived) signifies to *withdraw*  <span
id="fr_459"></span>[460](#fn_459) <span id="ii.liii-p30.2"></span>Christ
therefore throws his disciple to a distance from him, because, in his
inconsiderate zeal, he acted the part of *Satan;* <span
id="ii.liii-p30.3"></span>for he does not simply call him
*adversary*<span id="ii.liii-p30.4"></span>, <span
id="ii.liii-p30.5"></span>but gives him the name of the devil, as an
expression of the greatest abhorrence.

<span id="ii.liii-p31"></span>*Thou art an offense to me; for thou
relishest not those things which are of God, but those which are of
men.* We must attend to this as the reason assigned by our Lord for
sending Peter away from him. Peter was *an offense* to Christ, so long
as he opposed his calling; for, when Peter attempted to stop the course
of his Master, it was not owing to him that he did not deprive himself
and all mankind of eternal salvation. This single word, therefore, shows
with what care we ought to avoid every thing that withdraws us from
obedience to God. And Christ opens up the original source of the whole
evil, when he says that Peter *relishes those things which are of men.*
 <span id="fr_460"></span>[461](#fn_460) Lest we and our intentions
should be sent away by our heavenly Judge to the devil,  <span
id="fr_461"></span>[462](#fn_461) let us learn not to be too much
attached to our own views, but submissively to embrace whatever the Lord
approves. Let the Papists now go and extol their notions to the skies.
They will one day learn, when they appear before the judgment-seat of
God, what is the value of their boasting, which Christ declares to be
from *Satan* And with regard to ourselves, if we do not, of our own
accord, resolve to shut ourselves out from the way of salvation by
deadly obstacles, let us not desire to be wise in any other manner than
from the mouth of God.

<span id="ii.liii-p34"></span><span id="ii.liii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="ii.liii-p35"></span>**24.** *Then Jesus said to his
disciples.* As Christ saw that Peter had a dread of *the cross*, and
that all the rest were affected in the same way, he enters into a
general discourse about *bearing the cross*, and does not limit his
address to the twelve apostles, but lays down the same law for all the
godly.  <span id="fr_462"></span>[463](#fn_462) We have already met with
a statement nearly similar, (<span id="ii.liii-p36.2"></span>[Mt
10:38](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#038)<span
id="ii.liii-p36.2"></span>.)  <span id="fr_463"></span>[464](#fn_463)
But in that passage the apostles were only reminded of the persecution
which awaited them, as soon as they should begin to discharge their
office; while a general instruction is here conveyed, and the initiatory
lessons, so to speak, inculcated on all who profess to believe the
Gospel.

<span id="ii.liii-p38"></span>*If any man will come after me.* These
words are used for the express purpose of refuting the false views of
Peter  <span id="fr_464"></span>[465](#fn_464) Presenting himself to
every one as an example of self-denial and of patience, he first shows
that it was necessary for him to endure what Peter reckoned to be
inconsistent with his character, and next invites every member of his
body to imitate him. The words must be explained in this manner: “If any
man would be my disciple, let him *follow me by denying himself and
taking up his cross*, or, let him conform himself to my example.” The
meaning is, that none can be reckoned to be the disciples of Christ
unless they are true imitators of him, and are willing to pursue the
same course.

<span id="ii.liii-p40"></span>He lays down a brief rule for our
imitation, in order to make us acquainted with the chief points in which
he wishes us to resemble him. It consists of two parts, *self-denial*
and a voluntary *bearing of the cross. Let him deny himself.* This
*self-denial* is very extensive, and implies that we ought to give up
our natural inclinations, and part with all the affections of the flesh,
and thus give our consent to be reduced to nothing, provided that God
lives and reigns in us. We know with what blind love men naturally
regard themselves, how much they are devoted to themselves, how highly
they estimate themselves. But if we desire to enter into the school of
Christ, we must begin with that folly to which Paul (<span
id="ii.liii-p40.1"></span>[1Co
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#018)<span id="ii.liii-p40.1"></span>)
exhorts us, *becoming fools*, *that we may be wise;* and next we must
control and subdue all our affections.

<span id="ii.liii-p41"></span>*And let him take up his cross.* He lays
down this injunction, because, though there are common miseries to which
the life of men is indiscriminately subjected, yet as God trains his
people in a peculiar manner, in order that they may be *conformed to the
image of his Son,* we need not wonder that this rule is strictly
addressed to them. It may be added that, though God lays both on good
and bad men the burden of the cross, yet unless they willingly bend
their shoulders to it, they are not said to *bear the cross;* for a wild
and refractory horse cannot be said to admit his rider, though he
carries him. The patience of the saints, therefore, consists in
*bearing* willingly *the cross* which has been laid on them.  <span
id="fr_465"></span>[466](#fn_465) Luke adds the word *daily* — *let him
take up his cross Daily* — which is very emphatic; for Christ’s meaning
is, that there will be no end to our warfare till we leave the world.
Let it be the uninterrupted exercise of the godly, that when many
afflictions have run their course, they may be prepared to endure fresh
afflictions.

<span id="ii.liii-p43"></span><span id="ii.liii-p43.1"></span>

<span id="ii.liii-p44"></span>**25.** *For he that would save his life
shall lose it.* It is a most appropriate consolation, that they who
willingly suffer death for the sake of Christ  <span
id="fr_466"></span>[467](#fn_466) do actually obtain life; for Mark
expressly states this as the motive to believers in dying — *for my
sake, and for the sake of the Gospel* — and in the words of Matthew the
same thing must be understood. It frequently happens that irreligious
men are prompted by ambition or despair to despise life; and to such
persons it will be no advantage that they are courageous in meeting
death. The threatening, which is contrasted with the promise, has also a
powerful tendency to shake off carnal sloth, when he reminds men who are
desirous of the present life, that the only advantage which they reap
is, to *lose* life. There is a contrast intended here between temporal
and eternal death, as we have explained under <span
id="ii.liii-p45.2"></span>[Mt
10:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#039)<span id="ii.liii-p45.2"></span>,
where the reader will find the rest of this subject.  <span
id="fr_467"></span>[468](#fn_467)

<span id="ii.liii-p47"></span><span id="ii.liii-p47.1"></span>

<span id="ii.liii-p48"></span>**26.** *For what doth it profit a man?*
The word *soul* is here used in the strictest sense. Christ reminds them
that the *soul* of man was not created merely to enjoy the world for a
few days, but to obtain at length its immortality in heaven. What
carelessness and what brutal stupidity is this, that men are so strongly
attached to the world, and so much occupied with its affairs, as not to
consider why they were born, and that God gave them an immortal soul, in
order that, when the course of the earthly life was finished, they might
live eternally in heaven! And, indeed, it is universally acknowledged,
that the *soul* is of higher value than all the riches and enjoyments of
the world; but yet men are so blinded by carnal views, that they
knowingly and willfully abandon their souls to destruction. That the
world may not fascinate us by its allurements, let us remember the
surpassing worth of our *soul;* for if this be seriously considered, it
will easily dispel the vain imaginations of earthly happiness.

<span id="ii.liii-p49"></span><span id="ii.liii-p49.1"></span>

<span id="ii.liii-p50"></span>**27.** *For the Son of man will come.*
That the doctrine which has just been laid down may more deeply affect
our minds, Christ places before our eyes the future judgment; for if we
would perceive the worthlessness of this fading life, we must be deeply
affected by the view of the heavenly life. So tardy and sluggish is our
mind, that it needs to be aided by looking towards heaven. Christ
summons believers to his judgment-seat, to lead them to reflect at all
times that they lived for no other object than to long after that
blessed redemption, which will be revealed at the proper time. The
admonition is intended to inform us, that they do not strive in vain who
set a higher value on the confession of faith than on their own life.
“Place your lives fearlessly,” says he, “in my hand, and under my
protection; for I will at length appear as your avenger, and will fully
restore you, though for the time you may seem to have perished.”

<span id="ii.liii-p51"></span>*In the glory of the Father, with his
angels.* These are mentioned to guard his disciples against judging of
his kingdom from present appearances; for hitherto he was unknown and
despised, being concealed under the form and condition of a servant. He
assures them that it will be far otherwise when he shall appear as the
Judge of the world. As to the remaining part of the passage in Mark and
Luke, the reader will find it explained under the tenth chapter of
Matthew.  <span id="fr_468"></span>[469](#fn_468)

<span id="ii.liii-p53"></span>*And then will he render to every one
according to his actions.* The reward of works has been treated by me as
fully as was necessary under another passage.  <span
id="fr_469"></span>[470](#fn_469) It amounts to this: When a *reward* is
promised to good works, their merit is not contrasted with the
justification which is freely bestowed on us through faith; nor is it
pointed out as the cause of our salvation, but is only held out to
excite believers to aim at doing what is right,  <span
id="fr_470"></span>[471](#fn_470) by assuring them that their labor will
not be lost. There is a perfect agreement, therefore, between these two
statements, that we are *justified freely*, (<span
id="ii.liii-p55.2"></span>[Ro
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#024)<span id="ii.liii-p55.2"></span>,)
because we are received into God’s favor without any merit;  <span
id="fr_471"></span>[472](#fn_471) and yet that God, of his own good
pleasure, bestows on our works a *reward* which we did not deserve.

<span id="ii.liii-p57"></span><span id="ii.liii-p57.1"></span>

<span id="ii.liii-p58"></span>**28.** *Verily, I say to you.* As the
disciples might still hesitate and inquire when that day would be, our
Lord animates them by the immediate assurance, that he will presently
give them a proof of his future glory. We know the truth of the common
proverb, that to one who is in expectation even speed looks like delay;
but never does it hold more true, than when we are told to wait for our
salvation till the *coming* of Christ. To support his disciples in the
meantime, our Lord holds out to them, for confirmation, an intermediate
period; as much as to say, “If it seem too long to wait for the day of
my coming, I will provide against this in good time; for before you come
to die, you will see with your eyes that kingdom of God, of which I bid
you entertain a confident hope.” This is the natural import of the
words; for the notion adopted by some, that they were intended to apply
to John, is ridiculous.

<span id="ii.liii-p59"></span>*Coming in his kingdom.* By the *coming of
the kingdom of God* we are to understand the manifestation of heavenly
glory, which Christ began to make at his resurrection, and which he
afterwards made more fully by sending the Holy Spirit, and by the
performance of miracles; for by those beginnings he gave his people a
taste of the newness of the heavenly life, when they perceived, by
certain and undoubted proofs, that he was sitting at the right hand of
the Father.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_450"></span>[451](cc32054.htm#fr_450) <span
id="ii.liii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.liii-p6"></span> “<span id="ii.liii-p6.1"></span>Lors il
commanda expressement a ses disciples;” — “then he expressly commanded
his disciples.”

<span id="fn_451"></span>[452](cc32054.htm#fr_451) <span
id="ii.liii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.liii-p7"></span> “<span id="ii.liii-p7.1"></span>L’ayant
prins a part;” — “have taken him aside.”

<span id="fn_452"></span>[453](cc32054.htm#fr_452) <span
id="ii.liii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.liii-p8"></span> “<span id="ii.liii-p8.1"></span>Seigneur,
aye pitie de toy;” — “Lord, have pity on thyself.”

<span id="fn_453"></span>[454](cc32054.htm#fr_453) <span
id="ii.liii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii.liii-p11"></span> “<span id="ii.liii-p11.1"></span>Et il
leur defendit avec menace qu’ils ne dissent \[cela\] de luy a personne;”
— “and he forbade them with threatening to tell \[this\] concerning him
to any one.”

<span id="fn_454"></span>[455](cc32054.htm#fr_454) <span
id="ii.liii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ii.liii-p14"></span> “<span id="ii.liii-p14.1"></span>Il y en
d’aucuns de ceux qui sont ici presens;” — “there are some of those who
are here present.”

<span id="fn_455"></span>[456](cc32054.htm#fr_455) <span
id="ii.liii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ii.liii-p16"></span> “<span id="ii.liii-p16.1"></span>Adonc
usant de menaces il leur commanda qu’ils ne le dissent a personne;” —
“Then employing threatenings, he commanded them not to tell it to any
one.”

<span id="fn_456"></span>[457](cc32054.htm#fr_456) <span
id="ii.liii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ii.liii-p17"></span> “<span id="ii.liii-p17.1"></span>De iour
en iour;” — “day by day.”

<span id="fn_457"></span>[458](cc32054.htm#fr_457) <span
id="ii.liii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ii.liii-p18"></span> “<span id="ii.liii-p18.1"></span>Iusqu’a
taut qu’ils ayent veu le regne de Dieu;” — “till they have seen the
kingdom of God.”

<span id="fn_458"></span>[459](cc32054.htm#fr_458) <span
id="ii.liii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ii.liii-p23"></span> “<span id="ii.liii-p23.1"></span>Que rien
luy peust advenir qui ne fust honorable et magnifique;” — “that any
thing should happen to him which was not honorable and magnificent.”

<span id="fn_459"></span>[460](cc32054.htm#fr_459) <span
id="ii.liii-p29.11"></span>

<span id="ii.liii-p30"></span> “<span id="ii.liii-p30.1"></span>Le mot
Grec signifie simplement se reculer et s’en aller;” — “the Greek word
simply means *to withdraw and go away*.*”*

<span id="fn_460"></span>[461](cc32054.htm#fr_460) <span
id="ii.liii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="ii.liii-p32"></span> “<span id="ii.liii-p32.1"></span>Que
Pierre s’arreste a la sagesse de l’homme;” — “that Peter rests satisfied
with the wisdom of man.”

<span id="fn_461"></span>[462](cc32054.htm#fr_461) <span
id="ii.liii-p32.2"></span>

<span id="ii.liii-p33"></span> “<span id="ii.liii-p33.1"></span>Et
pourtant de peur que le Iuge celeste ne nous renvoye au diable avec nos
bonnes affections et intentions;” — “and then lest our heavenly Judge
should send us away to the devil with our good feelings and intentions.”

<span id="fn_462"></span>[463](cc32054.htm#fr_462) <span
id="ii.liii-p35.2"></span>

<span id="ii.liii-p36"></span> “<span id="ii.liii-p36.1"></span>A tous
fideles;” — “to all believers.”

<span id="fn_463"></span>[464](cc32054.htm#fr_463) <span
id="ii.liii-p36.3"></span>

<span id="ii.liii-p37"></span> Harmony, vol. 1 p. 472.

<span id="fn_464"></span>[465](cc32054.htm#fr_464) <span
id="ii.liii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="ii.liii-p39"></span> “<span id="ii.liii-p39.1"></span>Pour
refuter l’imagination que Pierre avoit en son corveau;” — “to refute the
imagination which Peter had in his brain.”

<span id="fn_465"></span>[466](cc32054.htm#fr_465) <span
id="ii.liii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="ii.liii-p42"></span> “<span id="ii.liii-p42.1"></span>A porter
la croix qua Dieu leur met sur les epaules;” — “in bearing the cross
which God lays on their shoulders.”

<span id="fn_466"></span>[467](cc32054.htm#fr_466) <span
id="ii.liii-p44.2"></span>

<span id="ii.liii-p45"></span> “<span id="ii.liii-p45.1"></span>Ceux qui
meurent alaigrement pour Christ;” — “those who die cheerfully for
Christ.”

<span id="fn_467"></span>[468](cc32054.htm#fr_467) <span
id="ii.liii-p45.3"></span>

<span id="ii.liii-p46"></span> Harmony, vol. 1 p. 472.

<span id="fn_468"></span>[469](cc32054.htm#fr_468) <span
id="ii.liii-p51.1"></span>

<span id="ii.liii-p52"></span> Harmony, vol. 1 p. 466.

<span id="fn_469"></span>[470](cc32054.htm#fr_469) <span
id="ii.liii-p53.1"></span>

<span id="ii.liii-p54"></span> “*Alibi* is a general reference, but
<span id="ii.liii-p54.1"></span>*en un autre passage* is more specific;
and the passage to which he probably refers the reader for a distinct
exhibition of his views, and in which, so far as I remember, he handles
this subject more fully than in any other part of the Gospels, is <span
id="ii.liii-p54.2"></span>[Joh
4:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#036)<span id="ii.liii-p54.2"></span>.”
— *Ed*.

<span id="fn_470"></span>[471](cc32054.htm#fr_470) <span
id="ii.liii-p54.3"></span>

<span id="ii.liii-p55"></span> “<span id="ii.liii-p55.1"></span>A faire
bonnes oeuvres;” — “to do good works.”

<span id="fn_471"></span>[472](cc32054.htm#fr_471) <span
id="ii.liii-p55.3"></span>

<span id="ii.liii-p56"></span> “<span id="ii.liii-p56.1"></span>Sans que
nous en soyons dignes, ou l’ayons meritd;” — “without being worthy of
it, or having deserved it.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 17:1-8; Mark 9:2-8; Luke 9:28-36](cc32055)
