[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc32075)  [Next](cc32077) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 32: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part II*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.lxxv"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxv-p1"></span><span id="ii.lxxv-p1.1"></span>[Matthew
20:20-23](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#020)<span
id="ii.lxxv-p1.1"></span>; <span id="ii.lxxv-p1.2"></span>[Mark
10:35-40](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#035)<span
id="ii.lxxv-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxv-p2"></span><span id="ii.lxxv-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
20:20-23](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#020)<span
id="ii.lxxv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxv-p3"></span><span id="ii.lxxv-p3.1"></span>[Mark
10:35-40](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#035)<span
id="ii.lxxv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxv-p4"></span> **20**. Then came to him the mother of
Zebedee’s children with her sons, worshipping,  <span
id="fr_650"></span>[651](#fn_650) and asking something from him.
**21**. And he said to her, What wilt thou? She saith to him, Grant that
these my two sons may sit, one at thy right hand, and the other at the
left, in thy kingdom. **22**. And Jesus answering said, You know not
what you ask. Can you drink the cup which I shall drink, and be baptized
with the baptism with which I am baptized? They say to him, We can.
**23**. He saith to them, You shall indeed drink my cup, and you shall
be baptized with the baptism with which I am baptized; but to sit at my
right hand, and at my left, is not mine to give; but it shall fall to
those for whom it is prepared by my Father.  <span
id="fr_651"></span>[652](#fn_651)

<span id="ii.lxxv-p7"></span> 

<span id="ii.lxxv-p8"></span> **35**. And James and John, sons of
Zebedee, came to him, saying, Master, we desire that thou shouldest do
for us whatsoever we shall ask. **36**. And he said to them, What do you
wish that I should do for you? **37**. And they said, Grant to us that
we may sit, on at thy right hand, and the other at thy left, in thy
glory. **38**. And Jesus said to them, You know not what you ask. Can
you drink the cup which I drink, and be baptized with the baptism with
which I am baptized? **39**. And they said to him, We can. And Jesus
said to them, You shall indeed drink the cup which I drink, and you
shall be baptized with the baptism with which I am baptized: **40**. But
to sit at my right hand, and at my left is not mine to give; but it
shall fall to those for whom it is prepared.  <span
id="fr_652"></span>[653](#fn_652)

<span id="ii.lxxv-p10"></span> 

<span id="ii.lxxv-p11"></span> 

<span id="ii.lxxv-p12"></span><span id="ii.lxxv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxv-p13"></span>**<span id="ii.lxxv-p13.2"></span>[Matthew
20:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#020)<span
id="ii.lxxv-p13.2"></span>.** *Then came to him the mother of Zebedee’s
children.* This narrative contains a bright mirror of human vanity; for
it shows that proper and holy zeal is often accompanied by ambition, or
some other vice of the flesh, so that they who follow Christ have a
different object in view from what they ought to have. They who are not
satisfied with himself alone, but seek this or the other thing apart
from him and his promises, wander egregiously from the right path. Nor
is it enough that, at the commencement, we sincerely apply our minds to
Christ, if we do not stead-lastly maintain the same purity; for
frequently, in the midst of the course, there spring up sinful
affections by which we are led astray. In this way it is probable that
the *two sons of Zebedee* were, at first, sincere in their adherence to
Christ; but when they see that they have no ordinary share of his favor,
and hear his reign spoken of as near at hand, their minds are
immediately led to wicked ambition, and they are greatly distressed at
the thought of remaining in their present situation. If this happens to
two excellent disciples, with what care ought we to walk, if we do not
wish to turn aside from the right path! More especially, when any
plausible occasion presents itself, we ought to be on our guard, lest
the desire of honors corrupt the feeling of piety.

<span id="ii.lxxv-p14"></span>Though *Matthew* and *Mark* differ
somewhat in the words, yet they agree as to the substance of the matter.
*Matthew* says that the *wife of Zebedee* came, and *asked for her sons*
that they might hold the highest places *in the kingdom* of Christ. Mark
represents themselves as making the request. But it is probable that,
being restrained by bashfulness, they had the dexterity to employ their
mother, who would present the request with greater boldness. That the
wish came originally from themselves may be inferred from this
circumstance, that Christ replied to them, and not to their mother.
Besides, when their mother, *bowing down*, states that she has something
to ask, and when themselves, according to Mark, apply for a general
engagement, *that whatever they ask shall be granted to them,* this
timid insinuation proves that they were conscious of something wrong.
 <span id="fr_653"></span>[654](#fn_653)

<span id="ii.lxxv-p16"></span><span id="ii.lxxv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxv-p17"></span>**21.** *In the kingdom.* It was worthy of
commendation in the *sons of Zebedee*, that they expected some *kingdom*
of Christ, of which not even the slightest trace was then visible. They
see Christ exposed to contempt under the mean aspect of a servant; nay
more, they see him despised and loaded with many reproaches by the
world; but they are convinced that he will soon become a magnificent
king, for so he had taught them. It is unquestionably a noble specimen
of faith; but hence we perceive how easily the pure seed is no sooner
implanted in our hearts than it becomes degenerate and corrupted; for
they imagined to themselves a *kingdom* which had no existence, and
presently committed the folly of desiring the highest places. Since,
therefore, this wicked ambition flowed from a general principle of
faith, which in itself was highly commendable, we ought to pray, not
only that the Lord would open the eyes of our mind, but that he would
give us continual direction, and keep our minds fixed on the proper
object. We ought also to pray, not only that he would bestow faith upon
us, but that he would keep it pure from all mixture.

<span id="ii.lxxv-p18"></span><span id="ii.lxxv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxv-p19"></span>**22.** *You know not what you ask.* Their
ignorance was worthy of blame on two accounts; first, because their
ambition led them to desire more than was proper; and, secondly,
because, instead of the heavenly kingdom of Christ, they had formed the
idea of a phantom in the air. As to the first of those reasons, whoever
is not satisfied with the free adoption of God, and desires to raise
himself, such a person wanders beyond his limits, and, by unseasonably
pressing himself forward beyond what was proper for him to do, is
ungrateful to God. Now to estimate the spiritual kingdom of Christ
according to the feeling of our flesh is highly perverse. And, indeed,
the greater the delight which the mind of man takes in idle
speculations, the more carefully ought we to guard against them; as we
see that the books of the sophists are stuffed with useless notions of
this sort.

<span id="ii.lxxv-p20"></span>*Can you drink the cup which I shall
drink?* To correct their ambition, and to withdraw them from this wicked
desire, he holds out to them the cross, and all the annoyances which the
children of God must endure. As if he had said, “Does your present
warfare allow you so much leisure, that you are now making arrangements
for a triumphal procession?” For if they had been earnestly employed in
the duties of their calling, they would never have given way to this
wicked imagination. In these words, therefore, those who are desirous to
obtain the prize before the proper time are enjoined by Christ to employ
themselves in attending to the duties of piety. And certainly this is an
excellent bridle for restraining ambition; for, so long as we are
pilgrims in this world, our condition is such as ought to banish vain
luxuries. We are surrounded by a thousand dangers. Sometimes the enemy
assails us by ambush, and that in a variety of ways; and sometimes he
attacks us by open violence. Is he not worse than stupid who, amidst so
many deaths, entertains himself at his ease by drawing pictures of a
triumph?

<span id="ii.lxxv-p21"></span>Our Lord enjoins his followers, indeed, to
feel assured of victory, and to sing a triumphal song in the midst of
death; for otherwise they would not have courage to fight valiantly. But
it is one thing to advance manfully to the battle, in reliance on the
reward which God has promised to them, and to labor with their whole
might for this object; and it is another thing to forget the contest, to
turn aside from the enemy, to lose sight of dangers, and to rush forward
to triumph, for which they ought to wait till the proper time. Besides,
this foolish speed, for the most part, draws men aside from their
calling; for as in battle the greatest coward is the keenest to seize
the booty, so in the kingdom of Christ none are more eager to obtain the
superiority than those who shrink from all the annoyance which attends
toil. Most properly, therefore, does Christ enjoin those who were puffed
up with vain glory to keep by their post.  <span
id="fr_654"></span>[655](#fn_654) The sum of the whole is, that for none
but him who has fought lawfully is the crown prepared; and especially,
that none will be a partaker of the life and the kingdom of Christ who
has not previously shared in his sufferings and death.

<span id="ii.lxxv-p23"></span><span id="ii.lxxv-p23.1"></span>In the
word *baptism* <span id="ii.lxxv-p23.2"></span>the force of the metaphor
is very evident; for we know that by *baptism* <span
id="ii.lxxv-p23.3"></span>believers are instructed *to deny
themselves*<span id="ii.lxxv-p23.4"></span>, <span
id="ii.lxxv-p23.5"></span>(<span id="ii.lxxv-p23.6"></span>Matthew
45:24<span id="ii.lxxv-p23.6"></span>;) to *crucify the old man*<span
id="ii.lxxv-p23.7"></span>, <span id="ii.lxxv-p23.8"></span>(<span
id="ii.lxxv-p23.9"></span>[Ro 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#006)<span
id="ii.lxxv-p23.9"></span><span id="ii.lxxv-p23.10"></span>;) and, in
short, to *bear the cross* <span id="ii.lxxv-p23.11"></span>It is
uncertain if, by the word *cup*<span id="ii.lxxv-p23.12"></span>,
*(*<span id="ii.lxxv-p23.13"></span>ποτήριον<span
id="ii.lxxv-p23.14"></span>,*)* <span id="ii.lxxv-p23.15"></span>our
Lord alluded to the mystery of the Holy Supper; but as it had not yet
come into use, I choose to interpret it more simply as denoting the
measure of afflictions which God appoints to every one. For as it is his
right to lay on every one his own burden according to his pleasure, in
the same manner as a householder distributes and allots the portions of
the members of his family, so He is said to *give them a cup to drink*
 <span id="fr_655"></span>[656](#fn_655)

<span id="ii.lxxv-p25"></span>These words contain no ordinary
consolation for alleviating the bitterness of *the cross*, when in *the
cross* Christ associates himself with us. And what could be more
desirable than to have every thing in common with the Son of God? for
thus are those things which at first sight appear to be deadly made to
yield to us salvation and life. On the other hand, how shall he be
reckoned among the disciples of Christ, who desires to be wholly
exempted from the cross? For such person refuses to submit to the
baptism of Christ, which is nothing else than to withdraw from the
earliest lessons.  <span id="fr_656"></span>[657](#fn_656) Now whenever
baptism is mentioned, let us recollect that we were baptized on this
condition, and for this purpose, that the cross may be attached to our
shoulders.

<span id="ii.lxxv-p27"></span>The boast made with so much confidence by
John and James, that they are prepared *to drink the cup*, manifests the
presumption of the flesh; for, when we are beyond the reach of darts, we
think nothing impossible. And not long afterwards, the melancholy result
exposed their rashness; but in so far it was good in them that, when
they were free to make a choice, they presented themselves to bear the
cross.

<span id="ii.lxxv-p28"></span><span id="ii.lxxv-p28.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxv-p29"></span>**23.** *You shall indeed drink my cup.*
As they were disciples, it was proper that they should be assimilated to
their Master. Christ warns them of what will take place, that they may
be prepared to endure it with patience; and, in the persons of two men,
he addresses all his followers. For though many believers die a natural
death, and without violence or shedding of blood, yet it is common to
all of them, as Paul informs us, (<span id="ii.lxxv-p29.2"></span>[Ro
8:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#029)<span id="ii.lxxv-p29.2"></span>;
<span id="ii.lxxv-p29.3"></span>[2Co
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#018)<span id="ii.lxxv-p29.3"></span>,)
*to be conformed to the image of Christ;* and, therefore,

<span id="ii.lxxv-p30"></span>during their whole life, they are sheep
appointed to the slaughter,  
(<span id="ii.lxxv-p30.2"></span>[Ro
8:36](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#036)<span id="ii.lxxv-p30.2"></span>.)

<span id="ii.lxxv-p31"></span>*Is not mine to give*  <span
id="fr_657"></span>[658](#fn_657) By this reply Christ surrenders
nothing, but only states that the Father had not assigned to him this
office of appointing to each person his own peculiar place in the
kingdom of heaven. He came, indeed, in order to bring all his people to
eternal life; but we ought to reckon it enough that the inheritance
obtained by his blood awaits us. As to the degree in which some men rise
above others, it is not our business to inquire, and God did not intend
that it should be revealed to us by Christ, but that it should be
reserved till the latest revelation. We have now ascertained Christ’s
meaning; for he does not here reason as to his power, but only desires
us to consider for what purpose he was sent by the Father, and what
corresponds to his calling, and therefore distinguishes between the
secret purpose of God and the nature of that teaching which had been
enjoined on him. It is a useful warning, that we may learn to be wise
with sobriety, and may not attempt to force our way into the hidden
mysteries of God, and more especially, that we may not indulge excessive
curiosity in our inquiries about the future state; for

<span id="ii.lxxv-p33"></span>It hath not yet appeared what we shall
be,  
till God shall make us like himself, (<span
id="ii.lxxv-p33.2"></span>[1Jo
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#002)<span id="ii.lxxv-p33.2"></span>.

<span id="ii.lxxv-p34"></span>It is also worthy of our notice, that
these words do not imply that there will be equality among the children
of God, after they have been admitted to the heavenly glory, but rather
that to each is promised that degree of honor to which he has been set
apart by the eternal purpose of God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_650"></span>[651](cc32076.htm#fr_650) <span
id="ii.lxxv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxv-p5"></span> “<span
id="ii.lxxv-p5.1"></span>S’enclinant a luy;” — “bowing down to him.”

<span id="fn_651"></span>[652](cc32076.htm#fr_651) <span
id="ii.lxxv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxv-p6"></span> “<span id="ii.lxxv-p6.1"></span>Mais ceux
ausquels il est apparelle de mon l’ere \[l’auront\];” — “but those for
whom it is prepared by my Father \[shall have it.\]”

<span id="fn_652"></span>[653](cc32076.htm#fr_652) <span
id="ii.lxxv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxv-p9"></span> “<span id="ii.lxxv-p9.1"></span>Mais il
sera \[donne\] a ceux ausquels il est prepare;” — “but it shall be given
to those for whom it is prepared.”

<span id="fn_653"></span>[654](cc32076.htm#fr_653) <span
id="ii.lxxv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxv-p15"></span> **“**<span
id="ii.lxxv-p15.1"></span>Monstre que leur conscience les redarguoit;” —
“shows that their conscience was reproving them.”

<span id="fn_654"></span>[655](cc32076.htm#fr_654) <span
id="ii.lxxv-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxv-p22"></span> “<span id="ii.lxxv-p22.1"></span>A bon
droict done Christ royant ses deux disciples eslevez d’une vaine gloire,
les arreste a penser aux choses qui concernent le devoir de leur
vocation;” — “with good reason, then, does Christ, seeing his two
disciples carried away by vain glory, make them stop to consider the
things which belong to the duty of their calling.”

<span id="fn_655"></span>[656](cc32076.htm#fr_655) <span
id="ii.lxxv-p23.16"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxv-p24"></span> “<span id="ii.lxxv-p24.1"></span>Il est
dit pour ceste cause, que Dieu donne la coupe a boire;” — “for this
reason it is said that God gives the cup to drink.”

<span id="fn_656"></span>[657](cc32076.htm#fr_656) <span
id="ii.lxxv-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxv-p26"></span> “<span id="ii.lxxv-p26.1"></span>Car cela
n’est proprement autre chose que se retirer des commencemens, et ne
vouloir entrer a la premiere lecon de son eschole;” — “for that is
properly nothing else than to withdraw at the beginning, and to refuse
to enter into the first lesson of his school.”

<span id="fn_657"></span>[658](cc32076.htm#fr_657) <span
id="ii.lxxv-p31.2"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxv-p32"></span> *“*<span id="ii.lxxv-p32.1"></span>*Ce
n’est pas a moy a le dormer;”* — *“it does not belong to me to give
it.”*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 20:24-28; Mark 10:41-45; Luke 22:24-27](cc32077)
