[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc32037)  [Next](cc32039.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 32: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part II*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.xxxvii"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p1"></span><span id="ii.xxxvii-p1.1"></span>[Luke
18:9-14](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#009.md)<span
id="ii.xxxvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p2"></span><span id="ii.xxxvii-p2.1"></span>[Luke
18:9-14](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#009.md)<span
id="ii.xxxvii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p3"></span>**9**. And he spoke also this parable to
some who trusted in themselves that they were righteous, and despised
others: **10**. Two men went up into the temple to pray; the one a
Pharisee, and the other a publican. **11**. The Pharisee standing  <span
id="fr_326"></span>[327](#fn_326.md) prayed these things within himself:
God, I thank thee that I am not as other men, extortioners, unjust,
adulterous, or even as this publican. **12**. I fast twice in the week,
I give tithes of all that I possess. **13**. And the publican standing
at a distance, did not even wish to raise his eyes towards heaven, but
smote upon his breast, saying, Lord, be reconciled to me a sinner.
**14**. I say to you, this man went down into his house justified rather
than the other; for every one that exalteth himself shall be humbled,
and he that humbleth himself shall be exalted.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p5"></span> 

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p6"></span> 

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p7"></span><span id="ii.xxxvii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p8"></span>Christ now gives directions about another
virtue, which is necessary to acceptable prayer. Believers must not come
into the presence of God but with humility and abasement. No disease is
more dangerous than arrogance; and yet all have it so deeply fixed in
the marrow of their bones, that it can scarcely be removed or extirpated
by any remedy. It is no doubt strange that men should be so mad as to
venture to raise their crests against God, and to plead their own merits
before him. Though men are carried away by their ambition, yet when we
come into the presence of God, all presumption ought to be laid aside;
and yet every man thinks that he has sufficiently humbled himself, if he
only presents a hypocritical prayer for forgiveness. Hence we infer that
this warning which our Lord gives was far from being unnecessary.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p9"></span>There are two faults at which Christ
glances, and which he intended to condemn, — wicked confidence in
ourselves, and the pride of despising brethren, the one of which springs
out of the other. It is impossible that he who deceives himself with
vain confidence should not lift himself up above his brethren. Nor is it
wonderful that it should be so; for how should that man not despise his
equals, who vaunts against God himself? Every man that is puffed up with
self-confidence carries on open war with God, to whom we cannot be
reconciled in any other way than by denial of ourselves; that is, by
laying aside all confidence in our own virtue and righteousness, and
relying on his mercy alone.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p10"></span><span id="ii.xxxvii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p11"></span>**10.** *Two men went up.* Christ makes
a comparison between the two men, both of whom, by *going up to pray,*
seem to manifest the same ardor of piety, while yet they are exceedingly
unlike. *The Pharisee,* possessing outward sanctity, approaches to God
with a commendation which he pronounces on his whole life, and as if he
had an undoubted right to offer the sacrifice of praise. *The publican,*
on the other hand, as if he had been some outcast, and knew that he was
unworthy to approach, presents himself with trembling and with humble
confession. Christ affirms that *the Pharisee* was rejected, and that
the prayers of *the publican* were acceptable to God. The reasons why
the Pharisee was rejected are stated to be these two: *he trusted in
himself that he was righteous, and despised others*

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p12"></span><span id="ii.xxxvii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p13"></span>**11.** *God, I thank thee.* And yet he
is not blamed for boasting of the strength of his free-will, but for
trusting that God was reconciled to him by the merits of his works. For
this thanksgiving, which is presented exclusively in his own name, does
not at all imply that he boasted of his own virtue, as if he had
obtained righteousness from himself, or merited any thing by his own
industry. On the contrary, he ascribes it to the grace of God that he is
righteous. Now though his thanksgiving to God implies an acknowledgment,
that all the good works which he possessed were purely the gift of God,
yet as he places reliance on works, and prefers himself to others,
himself and his prayer are alike rejected. Hence we infer that men are
not truly and properly humbled, though they are convinced that they can
do nothing, unless they likewise distrust the merits of works, and learn
to place their salvation in the undeserved goodness of God, so as to
rest upon it all their confidence.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p14"></span>This is a remarkable passage; for some
think it enough if they take from man the glory of good works, so far as
they are the gifts of the Holy Spirit; and accordingly they admit that
we are justified freely, because God finds in us no righteousness but
what he bestowed. But Christ goes farther, not only ascribing to the
grace of the Spirit the power of acting aright, but stripping us of all
confidence in works; for the Pharisee is not blamed on the ground of
claiming for himself what belongs to God, but because he trusts to his
works, that God will be reconciled to him, because he deserves it. Let
us therefore know that, though a man may ascribe to God the praise of
works, yet if he imagines the righteousness of those works to be the
cause of his salvation, or rests upon it, he is condemned for wicked
arrogance. And observe, that he is not charged with the vainglorious
ambition of those who indulge in boasting before men, while they are
inwardly conscious of their own wickedness, but is charged with
concealed hypocrisy; for he is not said to have been the herald of his
own praises, but to have prayed silently within himself. Though he did
not proclaim aloud the honor of his own righteousness, his internal
pride was abominable in the sight of God. His boasting consists of two
parts: first, he acquits himself of that guilt in which all men are
involved; and, secondly, he brings forward his virtues. He asserts that
he is *not as other men,* because he is not chargeable with crimes which
everywhere prevail in the world.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p15"></span><span id="ii.xxxvii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p16"></span>**12.** *I fast twice in the week, I
give tithes of all that I possess.* This is equivalent to saying that he
performed more than the law required; just as the Popish monks talk
loftily of their works of *supererogation, as* if they found no great
difficulty in fulfilling the law of God. It must be admitted that each
of us, according to the measure of the virtues which God has bestowed
upon him, is the more strongly bound to thank the Author of them; and
that it is an exercise of holy meditation for each of us to ponder on
the benefits which he has received, so as not to bury in ingratitude the
kindness of God. But there are two things here that must be observed: we
must not swell with confidence, as if we had satisfied God; and, next,
we must not look down with disdainful contempt upon our brethren. In
both respects the Pharisee erred; for, by falsely claiming righteousness
for himself, he left nothing to the mercy of God; and, next, he despised
all others in comparison of himself. And, indeed, that thanksgiving
would not have been disapproved by Christ, if it had not labored under
these two defects;  <span id="fr_327"></span>[328](#fn_327.md) but as the
proud hypocrite, by winking at his sins, met the justice of God with a
pretense of complete and perfect righteousness, his wicked and
detestable hardihood could not but make him fall. For the only hope of
the godly, so long as they labor under the weakness of the flesh, is,
after acknowledging what is good in them,  <span
id="fr_328"></span>[329](#fn_328.md) to betake themselves to the mercy of
God alone, and to rest their salvation on prayer for forgiveness.  <span
id="fr_329"></span>[330](#fn_329.md)

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p20"></span>But it may be asked, how did this man,
who was blinded by wicked pride, maintain such sanctity of life; for
such integrity proceeds only from the Spirit of God, who, we are
certain, does not reign in hypocrites? I reply: he trusted only to
outward appearance, as if the hidden and inward uncleanness of the heart
would not be taken into the account. Though he was full of wicked
desires within, yet as he looks only at the appearance, he boldly
maintains his innocence.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p21"></span>Our Lord does not, indeed, accuse him of
vanity, in falsely claiming for himself what he does not possess; but it
ought to be believed that no man is pure from extortion, injustice,
uncleanness, and other vices, unless he is governed by the Spirit of
God.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p22"></span><span id="ii.xxxvii-p22.1"></span>The
word *Sabbath* <span id="ii.xxxvii-p22.2"></span>(<span
id="ii.xxxvii-p22.3"></span>σάββατον<span id="ii.xxxvii-p22.4"></span>)
denotes in this passage, as in many others, *a week* <span
id="ii.xxxvii-p22.5"></span>But God never enjoined in the Law that his
servants should *fast every week;* <span id="ii.xxxvii-p22.6"></span>so
that this *fasting* <span id="ii.xxxvii-p22.7"></span>and the tithes
were voluntary exercises beyond the prescriptions of the Law.  <span
id="fr_330"></span>[331](#fn_330.md)

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p24"></span><span id="ii.xxxvii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p25"></span>**13.** *The publican standing at a
distance.* Here Christ did not intend to lay down a general rule, as if
it were necessary, whenever we pray, to cast down our eyes to the
ground. He merely describes the tokens of humility, which alone he
recommends to his disciples. Now humility lies in not refusing to
acknowledge our sins, but condemning ourselves, and thus anticipating
the judgment of God; and, with the view of being reconciled to God, in
making an honest confession of guilt. Such, too, is the cause of that
shame which always accompanies repentance; for Christ insists chiefly on
this point, that *the publican* sincerely acknowledged himself to be
miserable and lost, and fled to the mercy of God. Though he is a sinner,
he trusts to a free pardon, and hopes that God will be gracious to him.
In a word, in order to obtain favor, he owns that he does not deserve
it. And, certainly, since it is the forgiveness of sins that alone
reconciles God to us,  <span id="fr_331"></span>[332](#fn_331.md) we must
begin with this, if we desire that he would accept our prayers. He who
acknowledges that he is guilty and convicted, and then proceeds to
implore pardon, disavows all confidence in works; and Christ’s object
was to show that God will not be gracious to any but those who betake
themselves with trembling to his mercy alone.  <span
id="fr_332"></span>[333](#fn_332.md)

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p28"></span><span id="ii.xxxvii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p29"></span>**14.** *This man went down justified.*
The comparison is not exact; for Christ does not merely assign to *the
publican* a certain degree of superiority, as if *righteousness* had
belonged alike to both, but means that *the publican* was accepted by
God, while *the Pharisee* was totally rejected. And this passage shows
plainly what is the strict meaning of the word *justified:* it means, to
stand before God as if we were righteous. For it is not said that *the
publican* was justified, because he suddenly acquired some new quality,
but that he obtained grace, because his guilt was blotted out, and his
sins were washed away. Hence it follows, that *righteousness* consists
in the forgiveness of sins. As the virtues of *the Pharisee* were
defiled and polluted by unfounded confidence, so that his integrity,
which deserved commendation before the world, was of no value in the
sight of God; so *the publican,* relying on no merits of works, obtained
righteousness solely by imploring pardon,  <span
id="fr_333"></span>[334](#fn_333.md) because he had no other ground of hope
than the pure mercy of God.

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p31"></span>But it may be thought absurd, that all
should be reduced to the same level, since the purity of saints is
widely different from that of *the publican* I reply: whatever
proficiency any man may have made in the worship of God and in true
holiness, yet if he consider how far he is still deficient, there is no
other form of prayer which he can properly use than to begin with the
acknowledgment of guilt; for though some are more, and others less, yet
all are universally guilty. We cannot doubt, therefore, that Christ now
lays down a rule for all to this effect, that God will not be pacified
towards us, unless we distrust works, and pray that we may be freely
reconciled. And, indeed, the Papists are compelled to acknowledge this
in part, but immediately afterwards they debase this doctrine by a
wicked invention. They admit that all need the remedy of forgiveness,
because no man is perfect; but they first intoxicate wretched men with
reliance on what they call *imperfect righteousness,* and next add
satisfactions, in order to blot out their guilt. But our faith needs no
other support than this, that God has accepted us, not because we
deserved it, but because he does not impute our sins.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_326"></span>[327](cc32038.htm#fr_326.md) <span
id="ii.xxxvii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p4"></span> “<span id="ii.xxxvii-p4.1"></span>Le
Pharisien se tenant l’a;” — “the Pharisee standing there.”

<span id="fn_327"></span>[328](cc32038.htm#fr_327.md) <span
id="ii.xxxvii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p17"></span> “<span id="ii.xxxvii-p17.1"></span>Si
ces deux vices n’y estoyent, qui gastent tout;” — “if those two faults
had not been in it, which spoil the whole.”

<span id="fn_328"></span>[329](cc32038.htm#fr_328.md) <span
id="ii.xxxvii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p18"></span> “<span
id="ii.xxxvii-p18.1"></span>Apres avoir recognu le bien qui est en eux
par la grace de Dieu;” — “after having acknowledged the good that is in
them by the grace of God.”

<span id="fn_329"></span>[330](cc32038.htm#fr_329.md) <span
id="ii.xxxvii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p19"></span> “<span id="ii.xxxvii-p19.1"></span>Et
mettre leur salut en la confession de leurs pechez, et remission
d’iceux;” — “and to place their salvation in the confession of their
sins, and forgiveness of them.”

<span id="fn_330"></span>[331](cc32038.htm#fr_330.md) <span
id="ii.xxxvii-p22.8"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p23"></span> “<span
id="ii.xxxvii-p23.1"></span>Estoyent des exercises volontaires, et
inventez a plaisir;” — “were voluntary exercises, and invented at
pleasure.”

<span id="fn_331"></span>[332](cc32038.htm#fr_331.md) <span
id="ii.xxxvii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p26"></span> “<span id="ii.xxxvii-p26.1"></span>Qui
nous rende agreables a Dieu;” — “which renders us acceptable to God.”

<span id="fn_332"></span>[333](cc32038.htm#fr_332.md) <span
id="ii.xxxvii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p27"></span> “<span id="ii.xxxvii-p27.1"></span>Qui
tremblans a cause d’un vray sentiment de leur pechez, recourront a sa
seule misericorde;” —”who, trembling on account of a true conviction of
their sins, shall have recourse to his mercy alone.”

<span id="fn_333"></span>[334](cc32038.htm#fr_333.md) <span
id="ii.xxxvii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxvii-p30"></span> “<span
id="ii.xxxvii-p30.1"></span>Seulement en confessant sa faute, et
demandant pardon;”— “solely by confessing his faults and asking pardon.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke 17:11-21](cc32039.md)
