[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc32072)  [Next](cc32074.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 32: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part II*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.lxxii"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxii-p1"></span><span id="ii.lxxii-p1.1"></span>[Matthew
19:27-30](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#027.md)<span
id="ii.lxxii-p1.1"></span>; <span id="ii.lxxii-p1.2"></span>[Mark
10:28-31](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#028.md)<span
id="ii.lxxii-p1.2"></span>;  
<span id="ii.lxxii-p1.4"></span>[Luke
18:28-30](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#028.md)<span
id="ii.lxxii-p1.4"></span>; 22:28-30

<span id="ii.lxxii-p2"></span><span id="ii.lxxii-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
19:27-30](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#027.md)<span
id="ii.lxxii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxii-p3"></span><span id="ii.lxxii-p3.1"></span>[Mark
10:28-31](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#028.md)<span
id="ii.lxxii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxii-p4"></span><span id="ii.lxxii-p4.1"></span>[Luke
18:28-30](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#028.md)<span
id="ii.lxxii-p4.1"></span>, 22:28-31

<span id="ii.lxxii-p5"></span> **27**. Then Peter answering said to him,
Lo, we have left all, and have followed thee: what therefore shall we
have? **28**. And Jesus said to them, Verily I say to you, That you who
have followed me in the regeneration, when the Son of man shall sit on
the throne of his majesty, you also shall sit on twelve thrones, judging
the twelve tribes of Israel. **29**. And whosoever shall leave houses,
or brothers, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or
fields, for the sake of my name, shall receive a hundred-fold, and shall
obtain eternal life. **30**. And many that are first shall be last, and
the last first.  <span id="fr_633"></span>[634](#fn_633.md)

<span id="ii.lxxii-p7"></span> **28**. And Peter began to say to him,
Lo, we have left all, and have followed thee. **29**. And Jesus
answering said, Verily I say to you, There is no man that hath left
house, or brothers, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or
children, or fields, for my sake, and (for the sake) of the Gospel,
 <span id="fr_634"></span>[635](#fn_634.md) **30**. But shall receive a
hundred-fold now at this time, houses, and brothers, and sister, and
mothers, and children, and fields, with persecution, and in the world to
come eternal life. **31**. But many that are first shall be last, and
the last first.  <span id="fr_635"></span>[636](#fn_635.md)

<span id="ii.lxxii-p10"></span> 

<span id="ii.lxxii-p11"></span> **28**. And Peter said, Lo, we have left
all, and have followed thee. **29**. Who said to them, Verily I say to
you, There is no man who hath left house, or parents, or brothers, or
wife, or children, on account of the kingdom of God, **30**. Who shall
not receive much more at this time, and in the world to come eternal
life.

<span id="ii.lxxii-p12"></span><span id="ii.lxxii-p12.1"></span>[Luke
22:28-30](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#028.md)<span
id="ii.lxxii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxii-p13"></span>**28**. You are they that have continued
with me in my temptations:  <span id="fr_636"></span>[637](#fn_636.md)
**29**. And I appoint to you the kingdom,  <span
id="fr_637"></span>[638](#fn_637.md) as my Father hath appointed it to me;
**30**. That you may eat and drink at my table in my kingdom and may sit
on thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel.

<span id="ii.lxxii-p16"></span> 

<span id="ii.lxxii-p17"></span> 

<span id="ii.lxxii-p18"></span><span id="ii.lxxii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxii-p19"></span>**<span
id="ii.lxxii-p19.2"></span>[Matthew
19:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#027.md)<span
id="ii.lxxii-p19.2"></span>.** *Then Peter answering said to him.* Peter
tacitly compares himself and the other disciples to the *rich* man, whom
the world had turned aside from Christ. As they had led a poor and
wandering  <span id="fr_638"></span>[639](#fn_638.md) life, which was not
unaccompanied by disgrace and by annoyances, and as no better condition
for the future presented itself, he properly inquires if it be to no
purpose that they have *left all* their property, and devoted themselves
to Christ; for it would be unreasonable if, after having been stripped
of their property by the Lord, they should not be restored to a better
condition.

<span id="ii.lxxii-p21"></span>*Lo, we have left all.* But what were
those *all things?* for, being mean and very poor men, they scarcely had
a home to leave, and therefore this boasting might appear to be
ridiculous. And certainly experience shows how large an estimate men
commonly form of their duties towards God, as at this day, among the
Papists, those who were little else than beggars make it a subject of
haughty reproach that they have sustained great damage for the sake of
the Gospel. But the disciples may be excused on this ground, that,
though their wealth was not magnificent, they subsisted at home, by
their manual labors, not less cheerfully than the richest man. And we
know that men of humble condition, who have been accustomed to a quiet
and modest life, reckon it a greater hardship to be torn from their
wives and children than those who are led by ambition, or who are
carried in various directions by the gale of prosperity. Certainly, if
some reward had not been reserved for the disciples, it would have been
foolish in them to have changed their course of life.  <span
id="fr_639"></span>[640](#fn_639.md) But though on that ground they might
be excused, they err in this respect, that they demand a triumph to be
given them, before they have finished their warfare. If we ever
experience such uneasiness at delay, and if we are tempted by
impatience, let us learn first to reflect on the comforts by which the
Lord soothes the bitterness of the cup in this world, and next elevate
our minds to the hope of the heavenly life; for these two points embrace
the answer of Christ.

<span id="ii.lxxii-p23"></span><span id="ii.lxxii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxii-p24"></span>**28.** *Verily I say to you.* That the
disciples may not think that they have lost their pains, and repent of
having begun the course, Christ warns them that the glory of his
kingdom, which at that time was still hidden, was about to be revealed.
As if he had said, “There is no reason why that mean condition should
discourage you; for I, who am scarcely equal to the lowest, will at
length ascend to my throne of majesty. Endure then for a little, till
the time arrive for revealing nay glory.” And what does he then promise
to them? That they shall be partakers of the same glory.

<span id="ii.lxxii-p25"></span>*You also shall sit on twelve thrones* By
assigning to them *thrones*, from which they may *judge the twelve
tribes of Israel,* he compares them to assessors, or first councilors
and judges, who occupy the highest seats in the royal council. We know
that the number of those who were chosen to be apostles was *twelve*, in
order to testify that, by the agency of Christ, God purposed to collect
the remnant of his people which was scattered. This was a very high
rank, but hitherto was concealed; and therefore Christ holds their
wishes in suspense till the latest revelation of his kingdom, when they
will fully receive the fruit of their election. And though the kingdom
of Christ is, in some respects, manifested by the preaching of the
Gospel, there is no doubt that Christ here speaks of the last day.

<span id="ii.lxxii-p26"></span>*In the regeneration.* Some connect this
term with the following clause. In this sense, *regeneration* would be
nothing else than the renovation which shall follow our restoration,
when life shall swallow up what is mortal, and when our mean body shall
be transformed into the heavenly glory of Christ. But I rather explain
*regeneration* as referring to the first coming of Christ; for then the
world began to be renewed, and arose out of the darkness of death into
the light of life. And this way of speaking occurs frequently in the
Prophets, and is exceedingly adapted to the connection of this passage.
For the renovation of the Church, which had been so frequently promised,
had raised an expectation of wonderful happiness, as soon as the Messiah
should appear; and therefore, in order to guard against that error,
Christ distinguishes between the beginning and the completion of his
reign.

<span id="ii.lxxii-p27"></span><span id="ii.lxxii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxii-p28"></span>**<span id="ii.lxxii-p28.2"></span>[Luke
22:28](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#028.md)<span
id="ii.lxxii-p28.2"></span>.** *You are they who have continued with
me.* Although Luke appears to relate a different discourse of Christ,
and one which was delivered at a different time, yet I have no doubt
that it refers to the same time. For it is not a continued discourse of
Christ that is here related, but detached sentences, without any regard
to the order of time, as we shall shortly afterwards have occasion to
state. But he employs more words than Matthew; for he declares that, as
the apostles had accompanied him, and had *remained steadfastly in his
temptations,* they would also be partakers of his glory. It is asked, in
what sense does he call them *his temptations?* I think that he means
the contests by which God tried him and the apostles in common. And
properly did he use the word *temptations;* for, according to the
feeling of human nature, his faith and patience were actually tried.

<span id="ii.lxxii-p29"></span><span id="ii.lxxii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxii-p30"></span>**29.** *And I appoint to you the
kingdom.* Here he makes them not only judges, but *kings;* for he shares
with them *the kingdom* which he received from *the Father* There is an
emphasis in the word *appoint*, that they may not, by warmth and
vehemence of desire, hasten too eagerly to possess *the kingdom* of
which he alone has the lawful right to dispose. By his own example,
also, he exhorts them to patience; for, though he was ordained by *the
Father* to be a King, yet he was not immediately raised to his glory,
but even *emptied Himself*, (<span id="ii.lxxii-p30.2"></span>[Php
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#007)<span id="ii.lxxii-p30.2"></span>,.md)
and by the ignominy of the cross obtained kingly honor. To *eat and
drink at his table* is put metaphorically for being made partakers of
the same glory.

<span id="ii.lxxii-p31"></span><span id="ii.lxxii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxii-p32"></span>**<span
id="ii.lxxii-p32.2"></span>[Matthew
19:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#029.md)<span
id="ii.lxxii-p32.2"></span>.** *And whosoever shall forsake.* After
having raised the expectation of his followers to the hope of a future
life, he supports them by immediate consolations,  <span
id="fr_640"></span>[641](#fn_640.md) and strengthens them for bearing the
cross. For though God permit his people to be severely afflicted, he
never abandons them, so as not to recompense their distresses by his
assistance. And here he does not merely address the apostles, but takes
occasion to direct his discourse generally to all the godly. The
substance of it is this: Those who shall willingly *lose all* for the
sake of Christ, will be more happy even in this life than if they had
retained the full possession of them; but the chief reward is laid up
for them in heaven.

<span id="ii.lxxii-p34"></span>But what he promises about recompensing
them *a hundredfold* appears not at all to agree with experience; for in
the greater number of cases, those who have been deprived of their
parents, or children, and other relatives — who have been reduced to
widowhood, and stripped of their wealth, for the testimony of Christ —
are so far from recovering their property, that in exile, solitude and
desertion, they have a hard struggle with severe poverty. I reply, if
any man estimate aright the immediate grace of God, by which he relieves
the sorrows of his people, he will acknowledge that it is justly
preferred to all the riches of the world. For though *unbelievers
flourish,* (<span id="ii.lxxii-p34.1"></span>[Ps
92:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#007.md)<span
id="ii.lxxii-p34.1"></span>,) yet as they *know not what awaits them on
the morro*w (<span id="ii.lxxii-p34.2"></span>[Jas
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#014.md)<span
id="ii.lxxii-p34.2"></span>,) they must be always tossed about in
perplexity and terror, and it is only by stupefying themselves in some
sort that they can at all enjoy prosperity.  <span
id="fr_641"></span>[642](#fn_641.md) Yet God gladdens his people, so that
the small portion of good which they enjoy is more highly valued by
them, and far sweeter, than if out of Christ they had enjoyed an
unlimited abundance of good things. In this sense I interpret the
expression used by Mark, *with persecutions;* as if Christ had said,
Though *persecutions* always await the godly in this world, and though
the cross, as it were, is attached to their back, yet so sweet is the
seasoning of the grace of God, which gladdens them, that their condition
is more desirable than the luxuries of kings.

<span id="ii.lxxii-p36"></span><span id="ii.lxxii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxii-p37"></span>**30.** *And many that are first shall be
last.* This sentence was added in order to shake off the indolence of
the flesh. The apostles, though they had scarcely begun the course, were
hastening to demand the prize. And such is the disposition of almost all
of us, that, when a month has elapsed, we ask, like soldiers who have
served their time, to receive a discharge. But Christ exhorts those who
have *begun well* (<span id="ii.lxxii-p37.2"></span>[Gal.
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#003.md), [Gal.
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#007)<span id="ii.lxxii-p37.2"></span>.md)
to vigorous perseverance, and at the same time gives warning, that it
will be of no avail to *runners* to have begun with alacrity, if they
lose courage in the midst of the course. In like manner Paul also warns
us, that *not all who run obtain t/re prize*, (<span
id="ii.lxxii-p37.3"></span>[1Co
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#024.md)<span
id="ii.lxxii-p37.3"></span>;) and in another passage he exhorts
believers, by referring to his own example, to:

<span id="ii.lxxii-p38"></span>forget those things which are behind, and
press forward to the remaining portion of their course,  
(<span id="ii.lxxii-p38.2"></span>[Phil.
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#013.md),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#014)<span id="ii.lxxii-p38.2"></span>..md)

<span id="ii.lxxii-p39"></span>As often, therefore, as we call to mind
the heavenly crown, we ought, as it were, to feel the application of
fresh spurs, that we may not be more indolent for the future.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_633"></span>[634](cc32073.htm#fr_633.md) <span
id="ii.lxxii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxii-p6"></span> “<span id="ii.lxxii-p6.1"></span>Et les
derniers seront premiers;” — “and the last shall be first.”

<span id="fn_634"></span>[635](cc32073.htm#fr_634.md) <span
id="ii.lxxii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxii-p8"></span> “<span id="ii.lxxii-p8.1"></span>Pour
l’amour de moy et de l’Evangile;” — “for the love of me and of the
Gospel.”

<span id="fn_635"></span>[636](cc32073.htm#fr_635.md) <span
id="ii.lxxii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxii-p9"></span> “<span id="ii.lxxii-p9.1"></span>Et les
derniers seront premiers;” — “and the last shall be first.”

<span id="fn_636"></span>[637](cc32073.htm#fr_636.md) <span
id="ii.lxxii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxii-p14"></span> “<span id="ii.lxxii-p14.1"></span>Qui
avez persevere avec moy;” — “who have persevered with me.”

<span id="fn_637"></span>[638](cc32073.htm#fr_637.md) <span
id="ii.lxxii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxii-p15"></span> “<span id="ii.lxxii-p15.1"></span>Le
royaume.”

<span id="fn_638"></span>[639](cc32073.htm#fr_638.md) <span
id="ii.lxxii-p19.3"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxii-p20"></span> “<span id="ii.lxxii-p20.1"></span>Et
suiete a changer souvent de demeurance;” — “and liable to change their
residence frequently.”

<span id="fn_639"></span>[640](cc32073.htm#fr_639.md) <span
id="ii.lxxii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxii-p22"></span> “<span
id="ii.lxxii-p22.1"></span>D’avoir change d’estat et de facon de vivre;”
— “for having changed their condition and their way of living.”

<span id="fn_640"></span>[641](cc32073.htm#fr_640.md) <span
id="ii.lxxii-p32.3"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxii-p33"></span> “<span id="ii.lxxii-p33.1"></span>De
consolations de la vie presente;” — “by consolations of the present
life.”

<span id="fn_641"></span>[642](cc32073.htm#fr_641.md) <span
id="ii.lxxii-p34.3"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxii-p35"></span> “<span id="ii.lxxii-p35.1"></span>Ils ne
peuvent iouir a leur aise des biens qu’ils ont, sinon qu’ils en-trent
comme en une stupidite, et effacent tout sentiment de leur conscience;”
— “they cannot enjoy at their ease the good things which they possess,
unless they become, as it were, stupid, and destroy every feeling of
their conscience.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 20:1-16](cc32074.md)
