[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc32027)  [Next](cc32029) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 32: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part II*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.xxvii"></span>

<span id="ii.xxvii-p1"></span><span id="ii.xxvii-p1.1"></span>[Luke
13:10-17](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#010)<span
id="ii.xxvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxvii-p2"></span><span id="ii.xxvii-p2.1"></span>[Luke
13:10-17](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#010)<span
id="ii.xxvii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxvii-p3"></span> **10**. And he was teaching in one of the
synagogues on the Sabbath. **11**. And, lo, a woman who had a spirit of
infirmity during eighteen years, and was bent down, and was altogether
unable to lift up her head.  <span id="fr_278"></span>[279](#fn_278)
**12**. Whom when Jesus saw, he called her to him, and said to her,
Woman, thou art delivered from thine infirmity. **13**. And he laid his
hands on her, and immediately she stood upright, and glorified God.
**14**. And the ruler of the synagogue answering, being offended because
Christ had performed a cure on the Sabbath, said to the multitude, There
are six days on which we ought to work: on them therefore come, and you
shall be cured, and not on the Sabbath-day. **15**. And the Lord
answering said to her, Doth not each of you, on the Sabbath, loose his
ox or his ass from the stall, and lead him away to watering? **16**. And
must not this daughter of Abraham, whom Satan hath bound, lo, eighteen
years, be loosed from this bond on the Sabbath-day? **17**. And while he
was saying these things, all his adversaries were ashamed, and all the
people rejoiced on account of all the glorious actions which were done
by him.

<span id="ii.xxvii-p5"></span> 

<span id="ii.xxvii-p6"></span><span id="ii.xxvii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxvii-p7"></span>I have resolved to place in immediate
connection some events which are detailed by Luke alone, without a
direct reference to dates; for on that point, as we have formerly
mentioned, the Evangelists did not care much about exactness. We shall
afterwards find a more suitable time for returning to the *Harmony of
the Three Evangelists.*

<span id="ii.xxvii-p8"></span><span id="ii.xxvii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxvii-p9"></span>**11.** *And, lo, a woman* Here is related
a miracle performed on a woman who was cured, and the offense which the
malignity of the Jews led them to take up, because our Lord had cured
her on a *Sabbath*-day Luke says that the *woman* was held by a *spirit
of infirmity,* so that her body was bent by the contraction of her
nerves. As the nature of the disease is no farther described, it is
probable that it was not one of an ordinary kind, or which was
understood by physicians; and, therefore, he calls it a spirit of
*infirmity.* We know that diseases of an unusual and extraordinary kind
are, for the most part, inflicted on men through the agency of the
devil; and this gave the more striking display of the divine power of
Christ, which triumphed over Satan. Not that Satan rules over men
according to his pleasure, but only so far as God grants to him
permission to injure them. Besides, as the Lord, from whom alone all our
blessings flow, makes his glory to shine with peculiar brightness in
those blessings which are more remarkable, and of rare occurrence; so,
on the other hand, it is his will that the power and tyranny of Satan
should be chiefly regarded in extraordinary chastisements, though his
agency is likewise employed in those more gentle applications of the
rod, which we experience from day to day.

<span id="ii.xxvii-p10"></span><span id="ii.xxvii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxvii-p11"></span>**12.** *Woman, thou art delivered* In
this miracle, as well as in others, Christ exhibited a proof both of his
power and of his grace; for in this manner he testified that he had come
for the purpose of granting relief to the wretched. His power is
expressed in these words, *Woman, thou art delivered;* for he
authoritatively declares that deliverance was at his own disposal, and
employs, at the same time, the outward sign, the use of which we have
explained on a former occasion.

<span id="ii.xxvii-p12"></span><span id="ii.xxvii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxvii-p13"></span>**13.** *And glorified God.* As to the
people *glorifying God,* it is mentioned in order to inform us, that
this was distinctly perceived to be a heavenly blessing. It was not some
doubtful work which allowed room for argument on either side, but one
which afforded ample and undoubted grounds for praising God. This
discovers more strongly the malignity of the *ruler of the synagogue*

<span id="ii.xxvii-p14"></span><span id="ii.xxvii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxvii-p15"></span>**14.** *There are six days.* This
reprover does not venture to pass censure openly on Christ, but points
the venom of his dislike to another quarter, and indirectly condemns
Christ in the person of the multitude. What an astonishing display of
furious malice! *Six days,* he tells them, were set apart for labor; but
how incorrectly and foolishly does he define that *work,* which is not
permitted but on *six days!* Why does he not likewise forbid them to
enter the synagogue, lest they should violate the Sabbath? Why does he
not order them to refrain from all the exercises of godliness? But
granting that men are restrained from following their own employments on
*the Sabbath-day,* how unreasonable is it that the grace of God should
be limited in that manner!

<span id="ii.xxvii-p16"></span>*On them, therefore, come and you shall
be cured.* He bids them come on the other days to seek a *cure,* as if
the power of God lay asleep *on Sabbath,* and were not rather exerted
chiefly on that day for the salvation of his people. What purpose is to
be served by the holy assemblies, except to give an opportunity to
believers for entreating the Divine assistance? That ungodly *hypocrite*
talks as if the lawful observation of *the Sabbath* interrupted the
course of God’s favors, hindered men from calling upon him, and took
away from them all feeling of his kindness.

<span id="ii.xxvii-p17"></span><span id="ii.xxvii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxvii-p18"></span>**15.** *Doth not every one of you? etc*
Such a combination of malice and stupidity might easily have been
exposed in many ways, but Christ satisfied himself with this single
argument. If it be lawful *on the Sabbath,* to perform the offices of
humanity to cattle, it is ridiculous to imagine that the due observance
of it will prevent assistance from being granted to the children of God.
The words of Christ present a twofold comparison: that of the cattle
with the *daughter of Abraham,* and that of the halter by which the
*ass* or the *ox* is tied to *its stall* with the chains of Satan, by
which he holds men bound to their destruction. “You,” says he, “who are
so scrupulous about observing the Sabbath, venture to *loose oxen and
asses, and lead them away to watering.* And why may not I be permitted
to perform a similar office of kindness to the elect people of God;
especially when the necessity is more urgent, when some one is to be
delivered from the *snares of Satan?*”

<span id="ii.xxvii-p19"></span>Now though the wicked reprover was struck
dumb with shame, yet we perceive that Christ never performed any work,
however illustrious, which wicked men did not seize as an occasion for
slander. Nor need we wonder that Satan labored, with incessant zeal and
exertions, to subvert the glory of Christ; for he is constantly employed
in spreading his clouds, in order to darken the holy actions of
believers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_278"></span>[279](cc32028.htm#fr_278) <span
id="ii.xxvii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxvii-p4"></span> “<span id="ii.xxvii-p4.1"></span>Laquelle
estoit courbe, et ne pouvoit aucunement se dresser;”— “who was bent
down, and was quite unable to stand upright.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke 13:31-33](cc32029)
