[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc32052)  [Next](cc32054.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 32: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part II*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.lii"></span>

<span id="ii.lii-p1"></span><span id="ii.lii-p1.1"></span>[Matthew
16:13-19](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#013.md)<span
id="ii.lii-p1.1"></span>; <span id="ii.lii-p1.2"></span>[Mark
8:27-29](../../../bib/kjv/mar008.htm#027.md)<span
id="ii.lii-p1.2"></span>;  
<span id="ii.lii-p1.4"></span>[Luke
9:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#018.md)<span id="ii.lii-p1.4"></span>

<span id="ii.lii-p2"></span><span id="ii.lii-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
16:13-19](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#013.md)<span id="ii.lii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lii-p3"></span><span id="ii.lii-p3.1"></span>[Mark
8:27-29](../../../bib/kjv/mar008.htm#027.md)<span id="ii.lii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lii-p4"></span><span id="ii.lii-p4.1"></span>[Luke
9:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#018.md)<span id="ii.lii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lii-p5"></span> **13**. And when Jesus came to the coasts
of Cesarea Philippi, he asked his disciples, saying, Who do men say that
I the Son of man am? **14**. And they said, Some \[say,\] John the
Baptist; and other, Elijah; and others, Jeremiah, or one of the
prophets. **15**. He saith to them, But who do you say that I am?
**16**. And Simon Peter answering said, Thou art the Christ, the Son of
the living God. **17**. And Jesus answering said to him, Blessed art
thou, Simon Bar-Jona;  <span id="fr_435"></span>[436](#fn_435.md) for flesh
and blood hath not revealed it to thee, but my Father who is in heaven.
**18**. But I say to thee, That thou art Peter, and on this rock will I
build my church; and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it.
**19**. And I will give to thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven; and
whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound in heaven; and
whatseover thou shalt loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven.

<span id="ii.lii-p7"></span> 

<span id="ii.lii-p8"></span> **27**. And Jesus departed, and his
disciples, into the villages of Cesarea, which is called, Philippi; and
by the way he asked his disciples, saying to them, Who do men say that I
am? **28**. And they replied, John the Baptist; and some, Elijah; and
others, One of the prophets, **29**. And he saith to them, But who do
you say that I am? And Peter answering saith to him, Thou art the
Christ.

<span id="ii.lii-p9"></span> 

<span id="ii.lii-p10"></span> **18**. And it happened, when he was alone
praying, his disciples also were with him, and he asked them, saying,
Who do the multitudes say that I am? **19**. And they answering said,
John the Baptist; and others, Elijah; and others, that one of the
ancient prophets hath risen. **20**. And he said to them, And who do you
say that I am? Simon Peter answering said, The Christ of God.

<span id="ii.lii-p11"></span> 

<span id="ii.lii-p12"></span> 

<span id="ii.lii-p13"></span><span id="ii.lii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lii-p14"></span>**<span id="ii.lii-p14.2"></span>[Matthew
16:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#013.md)<span
id="ii.lii-p14.2"></span>.** *And when Jesus came to the coasts of
Cesarea Philippi.* Mark says that this conversation took place during
the journey. Luke says that it took place while he was praying, and
while there were none in company with him but his disciples. Matthew is
not so exact in mentioning the time. All the three unquestionably relate
the same narrative; and it is possible that Christ may have stopped at a
certain place during that journey to pray, and that afterwards he may
have put the question to his disciples. There were two towns called
*Cesarea*, of which the former was more celebrated, and had been
anciently called *The Tower of Strato;* while the latter, which is
mentioned here, was situated at the foot of Mount Lebanon, not far from
the river Jordan. It is for the sake of distinguishing between these two
towns that *Philippi* is added to the name; for though it is conjectured
by some to have been built on the same spot where the town of Dan
formerly stood, yet, as it had lately been rebuilt by *Philip* the
Tetrarch, it was called *Philippi*  <span
id="fr_436"></span>[437](#fn_436.md)

<span id="ii.lii-p16"></span>*Who do men say that I am?* This might be
supposed to mean, What was the current rumor about the Redeemer, who
became *the Son of man?* But the question is quite different, What do
men think about Jesus the Son of Mary? He calls himself, according to
custom, *the Son of man*, as much as to say, Now that clothed in flesh I
inhabit the earth like other men, what is the opinion entertained
respecting me? The design of Christ was, to confirm his disciples fully
in the true faith, that they might not be tossed about amidst various
reports, as we shall presently see.

<span id="ii.lii-p17"></span><span id="ii.lii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lii-p18"></span>**14.** *Some \[say,\] John the Baptist.*
This inquiry does not relate to the open enemies of Christ, nor to
ungodly scoffers, but to the sounder and better part of the people, who
might be called the choice and flower of the Church. Those only are
mentioned by the disciples who spoke of Christ with respect; and yet,
though they aimed at the truth, not one of them reaches that point, but
all go astray in their vain fancies. Hence we perceive how great is the
weakness of the human mind; for not only is it unable of itself to
understand what is right or true, but even out of true principles it
coins errors. Besides, though Christ is the only standard of harmony and
peace, by which God gathers the whole world to himself, the greater part
of men seize on this subject as the occasion of prolonged strife. Among
the Jews, certainly, the unity of faith related solely to Christ; and
yet they who formerly appeared to have some sort of agreement among
themselves now split into a variety of sects.

<span id="ii.lii-p19"></span>We see too how one error quickly produces
another; for a preconceived opinion, which had taken a firm hold of the
minds of the common people, that souls passed from one body to another,
made them more ready to adopt this groundless fancy. But though, at the
time of Christ’s coming, the Jews were divided in this manner, such a
diversity of opinions ought not to have hindered the godly from desiring
to attain the pure knowledge of him. For if any man, under such a
pretense, had given himself up to sloth, and neglected to seek Christ,
we would have been forced to declare that there was no excuse for him.
Much less then will any man escape the judgment of God who is led by the
variety of sects to entertain a dislike of Christ, or who, disgusted by
the false opinions of men, does not deign to attach himself to Christ.

<span id="ii.lii-p20"></span><span id="ii.lii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lii-p21"></span>**15.** *But who do you say that I am?*
Here Christ distinguishes his disciples from the rest of the crowd, to
make it more fully evident that, whatever differences may exist among
others, we at least ought not to be led aside from the unity of faith.
They who shall honestly submit to Christ, and shall not attempt to mix
with the Gospel any inventions of their own brain, will never want the
true light. But here the greatest vigilance is necessary, that, though
the whole world may be carried away by its own inventions, believers may
continually adhere to Christ. As Satan could not rob the Jews of the
conviction which they derived from the Law and the Prophets, that Christ
would come, he changed him into various shapes, and, as it were, cut him
in pieces. His next scheme was, to bring forward many pretended Christs,
that they might lose sight of the true Redeemer. By similar
contrivances, he continued ever afterwards either to tear Christ in
pieces, or to exhibit him under a false character. Among the confused
and discordant voices of the world, let this voice of Christ perpetually
sound in our ears, which calls us away from unsettled and wavering men,
that we may not follow the multitude, and that our faith may not be
tossed about amongst the billows of contending opinions.

<span id="ii.lii-p22"></span><span id="ii.lii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lii-p23"></span>**16.** *Thou art the Christ.* <span
id="ii.lii-p23.1"></span>The confession is short, but it embraces all
that is contained in our salvation; for the designation *Christ*<span
id="ii.lii-p23.2"></span>, <span id="ii.lii-p23.3"></span>or
*Anointed*<span id="ii.lii-p23.4"></span>, <span
id="ii.lii-p23.5"></span>includes both an everlasting Kingdom and an
everlasting Priesthood, to reconcile us to God, and, by expiating our
sins through his sacrifice, to obtain for us a perfect righteousness,
and, having received us under his protection, to uphold and supply and
enrich us with every description of blessings. Mark says only, *Thou art
the Christ.* <span id="ii.lii-p23.6"></span>Luke says, *Thou art the
Christ of God* <span id="ii.lii-p23.7"></span>But the meaning is the
same; for the *Christs* <span id="ii.lii-p23.8"></span>(<span
id="ii.lii-p23.9"></span>χριστοί<span id="ii.lii-p23.10"></span>) *of
God* <span id="ii.lii-p23.11"></span>was the appellation anciently
bestowed <span id="ii.lii-p23.12"></span>on kings, who had been anointed
by the divine command.  <span id="fr_437"></span>[438](#fn_437.md) <span
id="ii.lii-p24.3"></span> And this phrase had been previously employed
by Luke, (<span id="ii.lii-p24.4"></span>[Lu
2:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#026.md)<span
id="ii.lii-p24.4"></span><span id="ii.lii-p24.5"></span>,) when he said
that Simeon had been informed by a revelation from heaven that *he would
not see death before he had seen the Lord’s Christ* <span
id="ii.lii-p24.6"></span>For the redemption, which God manifested by the
hand of his Son, was clearly divine; and therefore it was necessary that
he who was to be the Redeemer should come from heaven, bearing the
impress of the *anointing* <span id="ii.lii-p24.7"></span>of God.
Matthew expresses it still more clearly, *Thou art the Son of the living
God;* <span id="ii.lii-p24.8"></span>for, though Peter did not yet
understand distinctly in what way Christ was the begotten of God, he was
so fully persuaded of the dignity of Christ, that he believed him to
come from God, not like other men, but by the inhabitation of the true
and living Godhead in his flesh. When the attribute *living* <span
id="ii.lii-p24.9"></span>is ascribed to God, it is for the purpose of
distinguishing between Him and dead idols, who *are nothing*<span
id="ii.lii-p24.10"></span>, <span id="ii.lii-p24.11"></span>(<span
id="ii.lii-p24.12"></span>[1Co
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#004.md)<span
id="ii.lii-p24.12"></span><span id="ii.lii-p24.13"></span>.)

<span id="ii.lii-p25"></span><span id="ii.lii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lii-p26"></span>**17.** *Blessed art thou, Simon Bar-Jona.*
As

<span id="ii.lii-p27"></span>this is life eternal, to know the only true
God,  
and him whom he hath sent, Jesus Christ, (<span
id="ii.lii-p27.2"></span>[Joh
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#003)<span id="ii.lii-p27.2"></span>,.md)

<span id="ii.lii-p28"></span>Christ justly pronounces him to be
*blessed* who has honestly made such a confession. This was not spoken
in a peculiar manner to Peter alone, but our Lord’s purpose was, to show
in what the only happiness of the whole world consists. That every one
may approach him with greater courage, we must first learn that all are
by nature miserable and accursed, till they find a remedy in Christ.
Next, we must add, that whoever has obtained Christ wants nothing that
is necessary to perfect happiness, since we have no right to desire any
thing better than the eternal glory of God, of which Christ puts us in
possession.

<span id="ii.lii-p29"></span>*Flesh and blood hath not revealed it to
thee.* In the person of one man Christ reminds all that we must ask
faith from the Father, and acknowledge it to the praise of his grace;
for the special illumination of God is here contrasted with *flesh and
blood.* Hence we infer, that the minds of men are destitute of that
sagacity which is necessary for perceiving the mysteries of heavenly
wisdom which are hidden in Christ; and even that all the senses of men
are deficient in this respect, till God opens our eyes to perceive his
glory in Christ. Let no man, therefore, in proud reliance on his own
abilities, attempt to reach it, but let us humbly suffer ourselves to be
inwardly taught by *the Father of Lights*, (<span
id="ii.lii-p29.1"></span>[Jas
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#017)<span id="ii.lii-p29.1"></span>,.md)
that his Spirit alone may enlighten our darkness. And let those who have
received faith, acknowledging the blindness which was natural to them,
learn to render to God the glory that is due to Him.

<span id="ii.lii-p30"></span><span id="ii.lii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lii-p31"></span>**18.** *And I say to thee.* By these words
Christ declares how highly he is delighted with the confession of Peter,
since he bestows upon it so large a reward. For, though he had already
given to his disciple, Simon, the name of *Peter*, (<span
id="ii.lii-p31.1"></span>[Mt 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#002.md)<span
id="ii.lii-p31.1"></span>; <span id="ii.lii-p31.2"></span>[Joh
1:42](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#042)<span id="ii.lii-p31.2"></span>,.md)
and had, out of his undeserved goodness, appointed him to be an apostle,
yet these gifts, though freely bestowed,  <span
id="fr_438"></span>[439](#fn_438.md) are here ascribed to faith as if they
had been a reward, which we not unfrequently find in Scripture. Peter
receives a twofold honor, the former part of which relates to his
personal advantage, and the latter to his office as an Apostle.

<span id="ii.lii-p33"></span>*Thou art Peter.* By these words our Lord
assures him that it was not without a good reason that he had formerly
given him this name, because, as a *living stone* (<span
id="ii.lii-p33.1"></span>[1Pe 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#005.md)<span
id="ii.lii-p33.1"></span>) in the temple of God, he retains his
stedfastness. This extends, no doubt, to all believers, each of whom is
a temple of God, (<span id="ii.lii-p33.2"></span>[1Co
6:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#019)<span id="ii.lii-p33.2"></span>,.md)
and who, united to each other by faith, make together one temple, (<span
id="ii.lii-p33.3"></span>[Eph
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#021)<span id="ii.lii-p33.3"></span>..md)
But it denotes also the distinguished excellence of Peter above the
rest, as each in his own order receives more or less, *according to the
measure of the gift of Christ*, (<span id="ii.lii-p33.4"></span>[Eph
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#007)<span id="ii.lii-p33.4"></span>..md)

<span id="ii.lii-p34"></span>*And on this rock.* Hence it is evident how
the name *Peter* comes to be applied both to Simon individually, and to
other believers. It is because they are founded on the faith of Christ,
and joined together, by a holy consent, into a spiritual building, *that
God may dwell in the midst of them*, (<span
id="ii.lii-p34.1"></span>[Eze
43:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze043.htm#007)<span id="ii.lii-p34.1"></span>..md)
For Christ, by announcing that this would be the common foundation of
the whole Church, intended to associate with Peter all the godly that
would ever exist in the world. “You are now,” said he, “a very small
number of men, and therefore the confession which you have now made is
not at present supposed to have much weight; but ere long a time will
arrive when that confession shall assume a lofty character, and shall be
much more widely spread.” And this was eminently fitted to excite his
disciples to perseverance, that though their faith was little known and
little esteemed, yet they had been chosen by the Lord as the
first-fruits, that out of this mean commencement there might arise a new
Church, which would prove victorious against all the machinations of
hell.

<span id="ii.lii-p35"></span>*Shall not prevail against it.* <span
id="ii.lii-p35.1"></span>The pronoun it (<span
id="ii.lii-p35.2"></span>αὐτὢς<span id="ii.lii-p35.3"></span>) may refer
either to *faith* <span id="ii.lii-p35.4"></span>or to *the Church;*
<span id="ii.lii-p35.5"></span>but the latter meaning is more
appropriate. Against all the power of Satan the firmness of the Church
will prove to be invincible, because the truth of God, on which the
faith of the Church rests, will ever remain unshaken. And to this
statement corresponds that saying of John,

<span id="ii.lii-p36"></span>This is the victory which overcometh the
world, your faith,  
(<span id="ii.lii-p36.2"></span>[1Jo
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#004)<span id="ii.lii-p36.2"></span>..md)

<span id="ii.lii-p37"></span><span id="ii.lii-p37.1"></span>It is a
promise which eminently deserves our observation, that all who are
united to Christ, and acknowledge him to be Christ and Mediator, will
remain to the end safe from all danger; for what is said of the body of
the Church belongs to each of its members, since they are one in Christ.
Yet this passage also instructs us, that so long as the Church shall
continue to be a pilgrim on the earth, she will never enjoy rest, but
will be exposed to many attacks; for, when it is declared that Satan
will not conquer, this implies that he will be her constant enemy.
While, therefore, we rely on this promise of Christ, feel ourselves at
liberty to boast against Satan, and already triumph by faith over all
his forces; let us learn, on the other hand, that this promise is, as it
were, the sound of a trumpet, calling us to be always ready and prepared
for battle. By the word *gates* <span id="ii.lii-p37.2"></span>(<span
id="ii.lii-p37.3"></span>πύλαι<span id="ii.lii-p37.4"></span>) is
unquestionably meant every kind of power and of weapons of war.

<span id="ii.lii-p38"></span><span id="ii.lii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lii-p39"></span>**19.** *And I will give thee the keys*
Here Christ begins now to speak of the public office, that is, of the
Apostleship, which he dignifies with a twofold title. First, he says
that the ministers of the Gospel are porters, so to speak, of the
kingdom of heaven, because they carry its *keys;* and, secondly, he
adds, that they are invested with a power of *binding and loosing,*
which is ratified in heaven.  <span id="fr_439"></span>[440](#fn_439.md)
The comparison of *the keys* is very properly applied to the office of
teaching; as when Christ says (<span id="ii.lii-p40.2"></span>[Lu
11:52](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#052)<span id="ii.lii-p40.2"></span>.md)
that the scribes and Pharisees, in like manner, have *the key* of the
kingdom of heaven, because they are expounders of the law. We know that
there is no other way in which the gate of life is opened to us than by
the word of God; and hence it follows that the key is placed, as it
were, in the hands of the ministers of the word.

<span id="ii.lii-p41"></span>Those who think that the word *keys* is
here used in the plural number, because the Apostles received a
commission not only to *open* but also to *shut*, have some probability
on their side; but if any person choose to take a more simple view of
the meaning, let him enjoy his own opinion.  <span
id="fr_440"></span>[441](#fn_440.md) Here a question arises, Why does the
Lord promise that he will give to Peter what he appeared to have
formerly given him by making him an Apostle? But this question has been
already answered,  <span id="fr_441"></span>[442](#fn_441.md) when I said
that *the twelve* were at first (<span id="ii.lii-p43.2"></span>[Mt
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#005)<span id="ii.lii-p43.2"></span>.md)
nothing more than temporary preachers,  <span
id="fr_442"></span>[443](#fn_442.md) and so, when they returned to Christ,
they had executed their commission; but after that Christ had risen from
the dead, they then began to be appointed to be ordinary teachers of the
Church. It is in this sense that the honor is now bestowed for the
future.

<span id="ii.lii-p45"></span>*Whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth.* The
second metaphor, or comparison, is intended directly to point out the
forgiveness of sins; for Christ, in delivering us, by his Gospel, from
the condemnation of eternal death, *looses* the cords of the curse by
which we are held bound. The doctrine of the Gospel is, therefore,
declared to be appointed for loosing our bonds, that, being loosed on
earth by the voice and testimony of men, we may be actually *loosed* in
heaven. But as there are many who not only are guilty of wickedly
rejecting the deliverance that is offered to them, but by their
obstinacy bring down on themselves a heavier judgment, the power and
authority to *bind* is likewise granted to the ministers of the Gospel.
It must be observed, however, that this does not belong to the nature of
the Gospel, but is accidental; as Paul also informs us, when, speaking
of the *vengeance* which he tells us that he has it in his power to
execute against all unbelievers and rebels, he immediately adds,

<span id="ii.lii-p46"></span>When your obedience shall have been
fulfilled,  
(<span id="ii.lii-p46.2"></span>[2Co
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#006)<span id="ii.lii-p46.2"></span>..md)

<span id="ii.lii-p47"></span>For were it not that the reprobate, through
their own fault, turn life into death, the Gospel would be to all *the
power of God to salvation*, (<span id="ii.lii-p47.1"></span>[Ro
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#016)<span id="ii.lii-p47.1"></span>;.md)
but as many persons no sooner hear it than their impiety openly breaks
out, and provokes against them more and more the wrath of God, to such
persons its *savor* must be *deadly*, (<span
id="ii.lii-p47.2"></span>[2Co
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#016)<span id="ii.lii-p47.2"></span>..md)

<span id="ii.lii-p48"></span>The substance of this statement is, that
Christ intended to assure his followers of the salvation promised to
them in the Gospel, that they might expect it as firmly as if he were
himself to descend from heaven to bear testimony concerning it; and, on
the other hand, to strike despisers with terror, that they might not
expect their mockery of the ministers of the word to remain unpunished.
Both are exceedingly necessary; for the inestimable *treasure* of life
is exhibited to us *in earthen vessels*, (<span
id="ii.lii-p48.1"></span>[2Co 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#007.md)<span
id="ii.lii-p48.1"></span>,) and had not the authority of the doctrine
been established in this manner, the faith of it would have been, almost
every moment, ready to give way.  <span
id="fr_443"></span>[444](#fn_443.md) The reason why the ungodly become so
daring and presumptuous is, that they imagine they have to deal with
men. Christ therefore declares that, by the preaching of the Gospel, is
revealed on the earth what will be the heavenly judgment of God, and
that the certainty of life or death is not to be obtained from any other
source.

<span id="ii.lii-p50"></span>This is a great honor, that we are God’s
messengers to assure the world of its salvation. It is the highest honor
conferred on the Gospel, that it is declared to be the *embassy* of
mutual *reconciliation* between God and men, (<span
id="ii.lii-p50.1"></span>[2Co
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#020)<span id="ii.lii-p50.1"></span>..md)
In a word, it is a wonderful consolation to devout minds to know that
the message of salvation brought to them by a poor mortal man is
ratified before God. Meanwhile, let the ungodly ridicule, as they may
think fit, the doctrine which is preached to them by the command of God,
they will one day learn with what truth and seriousness God threatened
them by the mouth of men. Finally, let pious teachers, resting on this
assurance, encourage themselves and others to defend with boldness the
life-giving grace of God, and yet let them not the less boldly thunder
against the hardened despisers of their doctrine.

<span id="ii.lii-p51"></span><span id="ii.lii-p51.1"></span>Hitherto I
have given a plain exposition of the native meaning of the words, so
that nothing farther could have been desired, had it not been that the
Roman Antichrist, wishing to cloak his tyranny, has wickedly and
dishonestly dared to pervert the whole of this passage. The light of the
true interpretation which I have stated would be of itself sufficient,
one would think, for dispelling his darkness; but that pious readers may
feel no uneasiness, I shall briefly refute his disgusting calumnies.
First, he alleges that Peter is declared to be the foundation of the
Church. But who does not see that what he applies to the person of a man
is said in reference to Peter’s faith in Christ? There is no difference
of meaning, I acknowledge, between the two Greek words <span
id="ii.lii-p51.2"></span>Πέτρος<span id="ii.lii-p51.3"></span>
(*Peter*<span id="ii.lii-p51.4"></span>) <span
id="ii.lii-p51.5"></span>and <span id="ii.lii-p51.6"></span>πέτρα<span
id="ii.lii-p51.7"></span>, (*petra*<span id="ii.lii-p51.8"></span>, *a
stone* <span id="ii.lii-p51.9"></span>or *rock*<span
id="ii.lii-p51.10"></span>,)  <span id="fr_444"></span>[445](#fn_444.md)
<span id="ii.lii-p52.2"></span>except that the former belongs to the
Attic, and the latter to the ordinary dialect. But we are not to suppose
that Matthew had not a good reason for employing this diversity of
expression. On the contrary, the gender of the noun was intentionally
changed, to show that he was now speaking of something different.  <span
id="fr_445"></span>[446](#fn_445.md) <span id="ii.lii-p53.2"></span>A
distinction of the same sort, I have no doubt, was pointed out by Christ
in his own language;  <span id="fr_446"></span>[447](#fn_446.md) <span
id="ii.lii-p54.1"></span> and therefore Augustine judiciously reminds
the reader that it is not <span id="ii.lii-p54.2"></span>πέτρα
*(petra*<span id="ii.lii-p54.3"></span>, *a stone* <span
id="ii.lii-p54.4"></span>or *rock)* <span id="ii.lii-p54.5"></span>that
is derived from <span id="ii.lii-p54.6"></span>Πέτρος<span
id="ii.lii-p54.7"></span>, (*Peter*<span id="ii.lii-p54.8"></span>,)
<span id="ii.lii-p54.9"></span>but <span
id="ii.lii-p54.10"></span>Πέτρος<span id="ii.lii-p54.11"></span>
(*Peter*<span id="ii.lii-p54.12"></span>) <span
id="ii.lii-p54.13"></span>that is derived from <span
id="ii.lii-p54.14"></span>πέτρα<span id="ii.lii-p54.15"></span>,
*(petra*<span id="ii.lii-p54.16"></span>, *a stone* <span
id="ii.lii-p54.17"></span>or *rock* *)*

<span id="ii.lii-p55"></span>But not to be tedious, as we must
acknowledge the truth and certainty of the declaration of Paul, that the
Church can have no other *foundation* than Christ alone, (<span
id="ii.lii-p55.1"></span>[1Co
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#011.md)<span id="ii.lii-p55.1"></span>;
<span id="ii.lii-p55.2"></span>[Eph
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#020)<span id="ii.lii-p55.2"></span>,.md)
it can be nothing less than blasphemy and sacrilege when the Pope has
contrived another *foundation*. And certainly no words can express the
detestation with which we ought to regard the tyranny of the Papal
system on this single account, that, in order to maintain it, the
foundation of the Church has been subverted, that the mouth of hell
might be opened and swallow up wretched souls. Besides, as I have
already hinted, that part does not refer to Peter’s public office, but
only assigns to him a distinguished place among the sacred stones of the
temple. The commendations that follow relate to the Apostolic office;
and hence we conclude that nothing is here said to Peter which does not
apply equally to the others who were his companions, for if the rank of
apostleship was common to them all, whatever was connected with it must
also have been held in common.

<span id="ii.lii-p56"></span>But it will be said, Christ addresses Peter
alone: he does so, because Peter alone, in the name of all, had
confessed Christ to be *the Son of God*, and to him alone is addressed
the discourse, which applies equally to the rest. And the reason adduced
by Cyprian and others is not to be despised, that Christ spake to all in
the person of one man, in order to recommend the unity of the Church.
They reply,  <span id="fr_447"></span>[448](#fn_447.md) that he to whom
this privilege was granted in a peculiar manner is preferred to all
others. But that is equivalent to saying that he was more an apostle
than his companions; for the power to *bind* and to *loose* can no more
be separated from the office of teaching and the Apostleship than light
or heat can be separated from the sun. And even granting that something
more was bestowed on Peter than on the rest, that he might hold a
distinguished place among the Apostles, it is a foolish inference of the
Papists, that he received the primacy, and became the universal head of
the whole Church. Rank is a different thing from power, and to be
elevated to the highest place of honor among a few persons is a
different thing from embracing the whole world under his dominion. And
in fact, Christ laid no heavier burden on him than he was able to bear.
He is ordered to be the porter of the kingdom of heaven; he is ordered
to dispense the grace of God by *binding* and *loosing;* that is, as far
as the power of a mortal man reaches. All that was given to him,
therefore, must be limited to the measure of grace which he received for
the edification of the Church; and so that vast dominion, which the
Papists claim for him, falls to the ground.

<span id="ii.lii-p58"></span>But though there were no strife or
controversy about Peter,  <span id="fr_448"></span>[449](#fn_448.md) still
this passage would not lend countenance to the tyranny of the Pope. For
no man in his senses will admit the principle which the Papists take for
granted, that what is here granted to Peter was intended to be
transmitted by him to posterity by hereditary right; for he does not
receive permission to give any thing to his successors. So then the
Papists make him bountiful with what is not his own. Finally, though the
uninterrupted succession were fully established, still the Pope will
gain nothing by it till he has proved himself to be Peter’s lawful
successor. And how does he prove it? Because Peter died at Rome; as if
Rome, by the detestable murder of the Apostle, had procured for herself
the primacy. But they allege that he was also bishop there. How
frivolous  <span id="fr_449"></span>[450](#fn_449.md) that allegation is, I
have made abundantly evident in my *Institutes*, (Book 4, Chapter 6,) to
which I would willingly send my reader for a complete discussion of this
argument, rather than annoy or weary him by repeating it in this place.
Yet I would add a few words. Though the Bishop of Rome had been the
lawful successor of Peter, since by his own treachery he has deprived
himself of so high an honor, all that Christ bestowed on the successors
of Peter avails him nothing. That the Pope’s court resides at Rome is
sufficiently known, but no mark of a Church there can be pointed out. As
to the pastoral office, his eagerness to shun it is equal to the ardor
with which he contends for his own dominion. Certainly, if it were true
that Christ has left nothing undone to exalt the heirs of Peter, still
he was not so lavish as to part with his own honor to bestow it on
apostates.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_435"></span>[436](cc32053.htm#fr_435.md) <span
id="ii.lii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lii-p6"></span> “<span id="ii.lii-p6.1"></span>Simon, fils
de Iona;” — “Simon, son of Jonah.”

<span id="fn_436"></span>[437](cc32053.htm#fr_436.md) <span
id="ii.lii-p14.3"></span>

<span id="ii.lii-p15"></span> “<span id="ii.lii-p15.1"></span>On la
nommoit Cesaree de Philippe;” — “it was named Cesarea of Philip.”

<span id="fn_437"></span>[438](cc32053.htm#fr_437.md) <span
id="ii.lii-p23.13"></span>

<span id="ii.lii-p24"></span> See Harmony, vol. 1, p. 92, n. 2; p. 142,
n. 2.

<span id="fn_438"></span>[439](cc32053.htm#fr_438.md) <span
id="ii.lii-p31.3"></span>

<span id="ii.lii-p32"></span> “<span id="ii.lii-p32.1"></span>Ces dons
qui estoyent procedez de sa pure liberalite;” — “those gifts which had
proceeded altogether from his liberality.”

<span id="fn_439"></span>[440](cc32053.htm#fr_439.md) <span
id="ii.lii-p39.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lii-p40"></span> “<span id="ii.lii-p40.1"></span>Laquelle
est receue et advouee es cieux;” — “which is received and acknowledged
in heaven.”

<span id="fn_440"></span>[441](cc32053.htm#fr_440.md) <span
id="ii.lii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lii-p42"></span> “<span id="ii.lii-p42.1"></span>Ie n’y
contredi point;” — “I do not contradict him in it.”

<span id="fn_441"></span>[442](cc32053.htm#fr_441.md) <span
id="ii.lii-p42.2"></span>

<span id="ii.lii-p43"></span> Harmony, vol. 1, p. 437.

<span id="fn_442"></span>[443](cc32053.htm#fr_442.md) <span
id="ii.lii-p43.3"></span>

<span id="ii.lii-p44"></span> “<span
id="ii.lii-p44.1"></span>Ambassadeurs ou prescheurs temporels;” —
“temporary messengers or preachers.”

<span id="fn_443"></span>[444](cc32053.htm#fr_443.md) <span
id="ii.lii-p48.2"></span>

<span id="ii.lii-p49"></span> “<span id="ii.lii-p49.1"></span>D’heure en
heure elle seroit revoquee en doute;” — “from hour to hour it would be
called in question.”

<span id="fn_444"></span>[445](cc32053.htm#fr_444.md) <span
id="ii.lii-p51.11"></span>

<span id="ii.lii-p52"></span> “<span id="ii.lii-p52.1"></span>Ie
confesse bien qu’en la langue Grecque il n’y a pas grande difference
entre le mot qui signifie une pierre, et celuy qui signifie un homme
nomme Pierre;” — “I readily acknowledge that, in the Greek language,
there is no great difference between the word that signifies *a stone*,
and that which signifies a man named *Peter*.*”*

<span id="fn_445"></span>[446](cc32053.htm#fr_445.md) <span
id="ii.lii-p52.3"></span>

<span id="ii.lii-p53"></span> “<span id="ii.lii-p53.1"></span>A fin de
monstrer qu’au second lieu il parloit de quelque autre chose que de la
personne de Pierre;” — “in order to show that, in the latter clause, he
was speaking of something totally different from the person of Peter.”

<span id="fn_446"></span>[447](cc32053.htm#fr_446.md) <span
id="ii.lii-p53.3"></span>

<span id="ii.lii-p54"></span> By *Christ’s own language* is meant the
*Syriac* — *a* dialect of *Hebrew* — which is supposed to have been the
vernacular language of Palestine in the time of our Lord, and
consequently to have been spoken by him and his apostles. It is enough
for our present purpose that CALVIN adopted this hypothesis, whatever
may be the result of a controversy in which the claims of the *Greek*
language above the *Syriac*, as familiarly spoken and written in Syria
at that period, have been urged with vast learning and ability. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_447"></span>[448](cc32053.htm#fr_447.md) <span
id="ii.lii-p56.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lii-p57"></span> “<span id="ii.lii-p57.1"></span>Les
Romanisques repliquent a l’encontre;” — “the Romanists reply on the
other hand.”

<span id="fn_448"></span>[449](cc32053.htm#fr_448.md) <span
id="ii.lii-p58.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lii-p59"></span> “<span id="ii.lii-p59.1"></span>Mais
mettons le cas que ce qu’ils disent de Pierre soit hors de doute;” —
“but let us suppose that what they say about Peter were beyond a doubt.”

<span id="fn_449"></span>[450](cc32053.htm#fr_449.md) <span
id="ii.lii-p59.2"></span>

<span id="ii.lii-p60"></span> “<span id="ii.lii-p60.1"></span>Combien
cela est faux et frivole;” — “how false and frivolous it is.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 16:20-28; Mark 8:30-38, 9:1; Luke 9:21-27](cc32054.md)
