[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc32041)  [Next](cc32043.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 32: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part II*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.xli"></span>

<span id="ii.xli-p1"></span><span id="ii.xli-p1.1"></span>[Matthew
14:3-12](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#003.md)<span id="ii.xli-p1.1"></span>;
<span id="ii.xli-p1.2"></span>[Mark
6:17-29](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#017.md)<span id="ii.xli-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xli-p2"></span><span id="ii.xli-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
14:3-12](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#003.md)<span id="ii.xli-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xli-p3"></span><span id="ii.xli-p3.1"></span>[Mark
6:17-29](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#017.md)<span id="ii.xli-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xli-p4"></span>**3**. For Herod had seized John, and bound
him, and put him in prison, on account of Herodias, the wife of his
brother Philip. **4**. For John said to him, It is not lawful for thee
to have her. **5**. And though he wished to put him to death, he feared
the multitude, because they accounted him a prophet. **6**. But when
Herod’s birthday was kept, the daughter of Herodias danced before the
company, and pleased Herod. **7**. And therefore he promised with an
oath, that he would give her whatever she would ask. **8**. But she,
after having been instructed by her mother, said Give me here in a dish
the head of John the Baptist. **9**. And the king was sorry, yet on
account of the oath, and of those who sat with him at table, he
commanded that it should be given. **10**. And he sent and beheaded John
in the prison. **11**. And his head was brought in a dish and given to
the girl, and she carried it to her mother. **12**. And his disciples
came and carried away the body, and buried it, and went and told Jesus.

<span id="ii.xli-p5"></span> 

<span id="ii.xli-p6"></span> **17**. For Herod himself had sent, and
seized John, and bound him in prison, on account of Herodias, the wife
of his brother Philip, because he had married her. **18**. For John said
to Herod, It is not lawful for thee to have thy brother’s wife.
**19**. And Herodias lay in wait for him, and wished to kill him, and
could not. **20**. For Herod dreaded John, knowing that he was a just
and holy man, and observed him, and, having heard him, did many things,
and heard him gladly. **21**. And when a convenient day came, when Herod
on his birthday made a supper to the nobles, and captains, and
distinguished men of Galilee; **22**. And when the daughter of Herodias
entered, and danced, and pleased Herod, and those who sat at table with
him, the king said to the girl, Ask any thing from me,  <span
id="fr_350"></span>[351](#fn_350.md) and I will give it to thee.
**23**. And he swore to her, Whatever thou shalt ask of me, I will give
to thee, even to the half of my kingdom. **24**. But she went out and
said to her mother, What shall I ask? And she said, The head of John the
Baptist. **25**. And she went in immediately with haste to the king, and
asked, saying, I wish that thou wouldst give to me immediately in a dish
the head of John the Baptist. **26**. And the king being sorry on
account of the oath, and of those who sat at table with him, would not
refuse her.  <span id="fr_351"></span>[352](#fn_351.md) **27**. And he
immediately sent a spearman,  <span id="fr_352"></span>[353](#fn_352.md)
and commanded that his head should be brought: and he went, and beheaded
him in the prison. **28**. And he brought his head in a dish, and gave
it to the girl, and the girl gave it to her mother. **29**. And when his
disciples heard of this, they carne and carried off his body, and laid
it in a tomb.

<span id="ii.xli-p10"></span> 

<span id="ii.xli-p11"></span> 

<span id="ii.xli-p12"></span><span id="ii.xli-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xli-p13"></span>This narrative is at present omitted by
Luke, because he had explained it on a former occasion; and for my own
part, as I am unwilling to annoy my readers by writing the same thing
twice, I shall handle this passage with greater brevity  <span
id="fr_353"></span>[354](#fn_353.md) The Evangelists relate that John was
seized, because he had openly condemned *Herod* for carrying off
*Herodias,* and for his incestuous marriage with her. Josephus assigns a
different reason, namely, that Herod, dreading on his own account a
change of affairs, regarded John with suspicion, (Ant. 18. 5:2;) and it
is possible that this may have been the pretext on which the tyrant
excused his crime, or that such a report may have been in circulation;
for it frequently happens that various motives are assigned for unjust
violence and cruelty. The true state of the fact, however, is pointed
out by the Evangelists: Herod was offended at the holy man, because he
had been reproved by him.

<span id="ii.xli-p15"></span>Josephus is mistaken in supposing that
Herodias was carried off, not from his brother Philip, but from Herod,
King of Chalcis, his uncle, (Ant. 18:5:4.) For not only was the crime
still recent when the Evangelists wrote, but it was committed before the
eyes of all. What is elsewhere stated by Josephus, (Ant. 18:4:6,) that
Philip was a person of amiable dispositions, emboldened Herod, I have no
doubt, to expect that an outrage committed on a mild, gentle, and
peaceable man, would pass with impunity. Another probable conjecture may
be mentioned. There is greater reason to suppose that Herodias was
married to her uncle Philip than to her grand-uncle, her grandfather’s
brother, who must have been at that time in the decrepitude of old age.
Now Herod Antipas (who is here mentioned) and Philip were not brothers
by the same mother; for Herod was the son of Marthaca, third wife of
Herod the Great, and Philip was the son of Cleopatra.  <span
id="fr_354"></span>[355](#fn_354.md)

<span id="ii.xli-p17"></span>To return to the Evangelists, they tell us
that John was thrown into prison, because he had reproved Herod’s crime
with greater freedom than the ferocity of the tyrant would endure. The
atrocious character of the deed was in itself sufficiently detestable
and infamous; for not only did he keep in his own house another man’s
wife, whom he had torn away from lawful wedlock, but the person on whom
he had committed this outrage was his own brother. When, in addition to
this, he is freely reproved by John, Herod has some reason to fear that
sedition will suddenly break out. His lust did not allow him to correct
his fault; but having imprisoned the prophet of God, he promises to
himself repose and liberty.  <span id="fr_355"></span>[356](#fn_355.md)

<span id="ii.xli-p19"></span>Ignorance of history has led many persons
into a fruitless debate; “Have I a right to marry the woman who was
formerly married to my brother?” Though the modesty of nature recoils
from such a marriage,  <span id="fr_356"></span>[357](#fn_356.md) yet John
condemns the rape still more than the incest; for it was by violence or
by stratagem  <span id="fr_357"></span>[358](#fn_357.md) that Herod had
deprived his brother of his lawful wife: and otherwise it would have
been less lawful for him to marry his niece than to marry his brother’s
widow. There cannot be a doubt, that a crime so flagrant was universally
blamed. But others loaded Herod with their curses in his absence. John
alone comes into his presence, and reproves him boldly to his face, if
by any means he may be brought to repentance. Hence we learn with what
unshaken fortitude the servants of God ought to be armed when they have
to do with princes; for in almost every court hypocrisy and servile
flattery are prevalent; and the ears of princes, having been accustomed
to this smooth language, do not tolerate any voice which reproves their
vices with any severity. But as a prophet of God ought not to overlook
so shocking a crime, John steps forward, though a disagreeable and
unwelcome adviser, and, rather than fail in his duty, scruples not to
incur the frown of the tyrant, even though he knew Herod to be so
strongly held by the snares of the prostitute, that he could scarcely be
moved from his purpose.

<span id="ii.xli-p22"></span><span id="ii.xli-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xli-p23"></span>**5.** *And though he wished to put him to
death.* There is some appearance of contradiction between the words of
*Matthew* and *Mark:* for the former says that Herod was desirous to
commit this shocking murder, but was restrained by the fear of the
people; while the latter charges Herodias alone with this cruelty. But
the difficulty is soon removed. At first Herod would have been
unwilling, if a stronger necessity had not compelled him reluctantly to
do so, to put to death the holy man; because he regarded him with
reverence, and, indeed, was prevented by religious scruples from
practising such atrocious cruelty against a prophet of God; and that he
afterwards shook off this fear of God, in consequence of the incessant
urgency of Herodias; but that afterwards, when infuriated by that demon
he longed for the death of the holy man, he was withheld by a new
restraint, because he dreaded on his own account a popular commotion.
And here we must attend to the words of Mark, *Herodias lay in wait for
him;*  <span id="fr_358"></span>[359](#fn_358.md) which imply, that as
Herod was not of himself sufficiently disposed to commit the murder, she
either attempted to gain him over by indirect wiles, or labored to find
some secret method of putting the holy man to death. I am more disposed
to adopt the former view, that she employed stratagems for influencing
the mind of her husband, but did not succeed, so long as Herod was
prevented by remorse of conscience from pronouncing sentence of death on
the holy man. Next followed another fear that the business of his death
should excite the people to some insurrection. But Mark glances only at
what prevented Herod from yielding immediately to the entreaties of the
prostitute; for Herodias would have wished that, as soon as John was
thrown into prison, he should be privately executed. Herod, on the
contrary, reverenced the holy man, so far as even to comply willingly
with his advises: *Herod feared John* Now the *fear* which is here
mentioned, was not a *dread* arising from a mistaken opinion, as we
*dread* those who have obtained some authority over us, though we reckon
them to be unworthy of the honor. But this *fear* was a voluntary
respect; for Herod was convinced that he was a holy man and a faithful
servant of God, and therefore did not dare to despise him.  <span
id="fr_359"></span>[360](#fn_359.md) And this deserves our attention; for
though John knew by experience that it was, in many respects,
advantageous for him to have some share in the good wishes of the
tetrarch,  <span id="fr_360"></span>[361](#fn_360.md) yet he was not afraid
to offend him, when he could find no other way of securing that favor,
than by wickedly conniving at a known and disgraceful crime. He might
indeed have protested that he did not at all consult his private
interests, and that he had no other object in view than the public
advantage; for it is certain that he requested nothing from motives of
ambition  <span id="fr_361"></span>[362](#fn_361.md) but that Herod yielded
to his holy counsels, which had a reference to the lawful administration
of the kingdom. But as he perceives that he has no right to accept this
kind of compensation,  <span id="fr_362"></span>[363](#fn_362.md) which
would procure for him some kind offices by betraying the truth, he
chooses rather to turn a friend into an enemy than to encourage, by
flattery or silence, an evil which he is laid under the necessity of
reproving with severity.

<span id="ii.xli-p29"></span>John has thus, by his example, furnished an
undoubted rule for pious teachers, not to wink at the faults of princes,
so as to purchase their favor at this price, how advantageous soever
that favor might appear to be to the public interests.  <span
id="fr_363"></span>[364](#fn_363.md) In Herod, on the other hand, the
Spirit of God exhibits, as in a mirror, how frequently it happens that
those who do not sincerely worship God are nevertheless willing, in some
measure, to obey His commands, provided that He will grant them some
indulgence or abatement. But whenever they are hard pressed, they throw
off the yoke, and break out not only into obstinacy, but into rage.
There is no reason, therefore, why they who comply with many sound
advises should be well satisfied with themselves, till they have learned
to yield and surrender themselves unreservedly to God.

<span id="ii.xli-p31"></span><span id="ii.xli-p31.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xli-p32"></span>**6.** *And when Herod’s birthday was
kept.* The Evangelists now begin to relate the stratagem by which
Herodias at length succeeded in a design which she had long meditated,
the taking away of John’s life. The opportunity was afforded to her by
an annual festival, when Herod was celebrating his birthday. It is
scarcely possible that such magnificent preparations should not draw
luxury, pride, unbridled merriment, and other crimes, and likewise many
other evils, along with them. Not that there is any thing wrong in the
mere act of preparing an expensive banquet; but such is the tendency of
the human mind to licentiousness, that when the reins are loosened, they
quickly go astray. The ancient custom of observing a birthday every year
as an occasion of joy cannot in itself be disapproved; for that day, as
often as it returns, reminds each of us to give thanks to God, who
brought us into this world, and has permitted us, in his kindness, to
spend many years in it; next, to bring to our recollection how
improperly and uselessly the time which God granted to us has been
permitted to pass away; and, lastly, that we ought to commit ourselves
to the protection of the same God for the remainder of our life.

<span id="ii.xli-p33"></span>But nothing is so pure that the world shall
not taint it with its own vices. A *birthday,* which ought to have been
held sacred, is profaned by the greater part of men with disgraceful
abuses; and there is scarcely a single entertainment at all costly that
is free from wicked debauchery. First, men drink more freely; next, the
door is opened to filthy and immodest conversation; and, lastly, no
moderation is observed. This was the reason why the patriarch Job was in
the habit of offering sacrifices, while his sons were feasting
alternately in each other’s houses, (<span id="ii.xli-p33.1"></span>[Job
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#005)<span id="ii.xli-p33.1"></span>..md)
It was because he thought that, when the guests invite one another to
mirth, they are far from maintaining due moderation, and sin in a
variety of ways.

<span id="ii.xli-p34"></span>Thus it happened that Herod, intending to
give a rich entertainment to his guests, permitted his wife’s daughter
to dance. Hence, too, it appears what sort of discipline existed at his
court; for, though most people at that time thought themselves at
liberty to dance, yet for a marriageable young woman to dance was a
shameful display of the impudence of the strumpet. But the unchaste
Herodias had moulded her daughter Salome to her own manners in such a
manner that she might not bring disgrace upon her.  <span
id="fr_364"></span>[365](#fn_364.md) And what was the consequence? The
wicked murder of a holy prophet. The heat of wine had such an influence
on Herod, that, forgetting gravity and prudence, he promised to a
dancing girl, that he would give her *even to the half of his kingdom.*
A shameful example truly, that a drunken king not only permits himself
to behold with approbation a spectacle  <span
id="fr_365"></span>[366](#fn_365.md) which was disgraceful to his family,
but holds out such a reward! Let us therefore learn to be careful in
anticipating and resisting the devil, lest he entangle us in such
snares.

<span id="ii.xli-p37"></span><span id="ii.xli-p37.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xli-p38"></span>**<span id="ii.xli-p38.2"></span>[Mark
6:24](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#024.md)<span id="ii.xli-p38.2"></span>.**
*And she went out, and said to her mother* We need not wonder that
Herodias attached so much importance to John’s death.  <span
id="fr_366"></span>[367](#fn_366.md) The conjecture thrown out by some—that
she was actuated by revenge,—is not at all probable. It was rather the
dread of being cast off that inflamed and tormented her; as it usually
happens that, when adulterers are visited with feelings of uneasiness,
they become ashamed of their own lust. But she hoped that this crime
would bind Herod more closely to her than ever, if the disgrace of a
pretended marriage were washed out by the blood of the prophet. That her
power might be more secure for the future, she longed for the death of
that man whom she imagined to be her only opponent; and this shows us
the wretched anxiety by which a bad conscience is always tormented. John
was detained in prison, and the haughty and cruel woman might have
issued orders that no man should converse with or approach him; and yet
she has no rest, but is oppressed with anxiety and alarm, till the
prophet be removed out of the way. This likewise serves to show the
power of the word of God, that the voice of the holy man, even when shut
up in prison, wounds and tortures in the keenest manner the mind of the
king’s wife.  <span id="fr_367"></span>[368](#fn_367.md)

<span id="ii.xli-p41"></span><span id="ii.xli-p41.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xli-p42"></span>**26.** *And the king being sorry.* His
heart, as we have said, was no longer influenced by religious
sentiments; but, foreseeing the detestation that will be excited by such
a crime, he dreads both the loss of character and positive harm, and
consequently repents of his levity. And yet he has not the courage to
give a refusal to a dancing girl, lest he should incur the reproach of
unsteadiness; as if it were more dishonorable to retract a rash and
foolish promise than to persist in a heinous crime. With the wonted
vanity of kings, he does not choose that what he has once uttered shall
be recalled, and orders that the prophet shall be instantly slain. We
infer that Herod was at that time supping in the castle of Macherus,
where, Josephus tells us, John was imprisoned, (Ant. 18. 5:2.)

<span id="ii.xli-p43"></span>*On account of the oath, and of those who
sat at table with him.* It deserves our attention that the Evangelists
state this to be the reason of his grief; and hence we infer that,
though he had sworn a hundred times, yet if there had been no witness,
he would not have held by his oath. No inward feelings of religion
constrained Herod to do this, but the mere love of power drove him
headlong; for he reckoned that he would sink in the estimation of those
who were present, if he did not fulfill his engagement. Thus it
frequently happens that ungodly men fail to perform their duty, because
they do not look to God, but are only intent on this object, that they
may not incur the reproaches of men.  <span
id="fr_368"></span>[369](#fn_368.md) But though Herod had kept before his
eyes the sacredness of an oath alone, and not the dread of the opinion
of men, he committed a more heinous offense in fulfilling a foolish
promise than if he had violated his oath. First, he was deeply in fault
for such haste in swearing; for the design of an oath is to confirm a
promise in a doubtful matter. Next, when it appeared that he could not
be relieved from his engagement without involving himself in an
aggravated crime, he had no right to implicate the sacred name of God in
such wickedness; for what could be more at variance with the nature of
God than to lend his countenance to a shocking murder? If a private loss
is at stake, let him who has made a rash oath suffer the punishment of
his folly; but, when a man has taken the name of God in vain, let him
beware of doubling his guilt by employing this as a pretense for
committing some enormous crime. Hence it follows, that monastic vows,
which are attended by open impiety, do not bind the conscience any more
than the enchantments of magicians; for it is not the will of God that
his sacred name shall give support to what is sinful. But this passage
teaches us, that we ought to beware of making promises without
consideration; and next, that lightness must not be followed by
obstinacy.

<span id="ii.xli-p45"></span><span id="ii.xli-p45.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xli-p46"></span>**28.** *And gave it to the girl.* It was
an additional aggravation of this detestable crime, that the head of the
holy man was made, after his death, a matter of sport. But in this way
the Lord sometimes gives up his people to the pride of wicked men, till
he at length makes it evident that their blood is *precious in his
sight* (<span id="ii.xli-p46.2"></span>[Ps
116:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#015.md)<span
id="ii.xli-p46.2"></span>.) *Herodias* is delighted with the thought of
having gained her wicked purpose, and cruelly triumphs over her
reprover; but when afterwards, stripped of her wealth, and not only
deprived of the title of queen, but driven from her native country, and
destitute of all means of support, she dragged out a wretched life in
poverty and banishment, she presented a spectacle gratifying to angels
and to all good people. When we perceive that the guests are compelled
to pollute their eyes by beholding this detestable exhibition, let us
learn from it, that those who sit at the tables of kings are often
involved in many crimes; for, granting that the table is not stained by
murder, every thing partakes so largely of all sorts of wickedness, that
they who approach to it must be at least given up to debauchery.

<span id="ii.xli-p47"></span><span id="ii.xli-p47.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xli-p48"></span>**29.** *His disciples came.* One thing
only remained to complete the woman’s cruelty. It was, to leave the
corpse of the holy man unburied; for there is reason to believe that,
when *his disciples* performed this duty, the attendants of the tyrant
had thrown out the corpse. Though the honor of burial is of no
importance to the dead, yet it is the will of the Lord that we should
observe this ceremony as a token of the last resurrection; and therefore
God was pleased with the carefulness which was manifested by the
disciples, when they came to commit to the tomb the body of their
master. Moreover, it was an attestation of their piety; for in this way
they declared that the doctrine of their master continued to have a firm
hold of their hearts after his death. This confession was therefore
worthy of praise, more especially as it was not without danger; for they
could not do honor to a man who had been put to death by the executioner
without exciting against themselves the rage of the tyrant.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_350"></span>[351](cc32042.htm#fr_350.md) <span
id="ii.xli-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xli-p7"></span> “<span id="ii.xli-p7.1"></span>Demande-moy
ce que tu voudras;” — “ask of me what thou wilt.”

<span id="fn_351"></span>[352](cc32042.htm#fr_351.md) <span
id="ii.xli-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xli-p8"></span> “<span id="ii.xli-p8.1"></span>Le roy
estant fort marri, ne la voulut point’ toutesfois’ esconduire *ou
reietter*;” — “The king being very angry, did not wish, however, to deny
or refuse her.”

<span id="fn_352"></span>[353](cc32042.htm#fr_352.md) <span
id="ii.xli-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xli-p9"></span> “<span id="ii.xli-p9.1"></span>Ainsi envoy,
incontinent le bourreau;” —”so he immediately sent the executioner.”

<span id="fn_353"></span>[354](cc32042.htm#fr_353.md) <span
id="ii.xli-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xli-p14"></span> The allusion is to his exposition of <span
id="ii.xli-p14.1"></span>[Luke 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#019.md),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#020.md)<span id="ii.xli-p14.1"></span>,
which will be found in *Harmony,* vol. 1. p. 222. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_354"></span>[355](cc32042.htm#fr_354.md) <span
id="ii.xli-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xli-p16"></span> “The apparent discrepancy between Josephus
and the sacred historians is removed, as was formerly suggested,
*(Harmony,* vol. 1. p. 223, n. 1,) by a hypothesis which appears to be
generally admitted, that the name of the person in question was
*Herod-Philip.* — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_355"></span>[356](cc32042.htm#fr_355.md) <span
id="ii.xli-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xli-p18"></span> “<span id="ii.xli-p18.1"></span>Il se fait
accroire qu’il sera en repos, et qu’il pourra continuer sa meschancete
sans aucune crainte;” — “he makes himself believe that he will be at
ease, and that he will have it in his power to continue his wickedness
without any dread.”

<span id="fn_356"></span>[357](cc32042.htm#fr_356.md) <span
id="ii.xli-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xli-p20"></span> “<span id="ii.xli-p20.1"></span>Combien
que l’honneste naturelle condamne un tel marriage;” — “though natural
decency condemns such a marriage.”

<span id="fn_357"></span>[358](cc32042.htm#fr_357.md) <span
id="ii.xli-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xli-p21"></span> “<span id="ii.xli-p21.1"></span>Ou par
force et violence, ou par quelque ruse et moyen subtil;” — “either by
force and violence, or by some trick and cunning method.”

<span id="fn_358"></span>[359](cc32042.htm#fr_358.md) <span
id="ii.xli-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xli-p24"></span> “<span id="ii.xli-p24.1"></span>Herodias
cherchoit occasion;” — “Herodias sought an opportunity.”

<span id="fn_359"></span>[360](cc32042.htm#fr_359.md) <span
id="ii.xli-p24.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xli-p25"></span> “<span id="ii.xli-p25.1"></span>Estoit
aucunement contreint en soy mesme de luv porter l’honneur, et ne l’osoit
pas mespriser;” — “was somewhat constrained in himself to bear respect
towards him, and did not dare to despise him.”

<span id="fn_360"></span>[361](cc32042.htm#fr_360.md) <span
id="ii.xli-p25.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xli-p26"></span> “<span id="ii.xli-p26.1"></span>Qu’il eust
quelque entree en la Cour, et que le Roy l’eust aucunement agreable;” —
“that he should have some access to the Court, and that the King should
be somewhat favorable to him.”

<span id="fn_361"></span>[362](cc32042.htm#fr_361.md) <span
id="ii.xli-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xli-p27"></span> “<span id="ii.xli-p27.1"></span>Qu’il n’a
rien demande au Roy pour se faire valoir, ou pour monstrer son credit;”
— “that he asked nothing from the King to put himself forward, or to
display his influence.”

<span id="fn_362"></span>[363](cc32042.htm#fr_362.md) <span
id="ii.xli-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xli-p28"></span> “<span id="ii.xli-p28.1"></span>Que ceste
facon de compensation n’est point honneste, ne selon Dieu;” — “that this
kind of compensation is not honorable, nor according to God.”

<span id="fn_363"></span>[364](cc32042.htm#fr_363.md) <span
id="ii.xli-p29.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xli-p30"></span> “<span id="ii.xli-p30.1"></span>Encore
qu’ils ne la cherchent point pour leur regard particulier, mais
seulement pour avoir occasion de profiter plus en d’autres endroits;”
—”even though they do not seek it for their private interest, but solely
in order to have an opportunity of doing more good in other respects.”

<span id="fn_364"></span>[365](cc32042.htm#fr_364.md) <span
id="ii.xli-p34.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xli-p35"></span> “<span id="ii.xli-p35.1"></span>Si elle
eust mieux fallu que sa mere;” — “if she were more highly esteemed than
her mother.”

<span id="fn_365"></span>[366](cc32042.htm#fr_365.md) <span
id="ii.xli-p35.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xli-p36"></span> “<span id="ii.xli-p36.1"></span>Non
seulement prend plaisir a un fol passe-temps;” — “not only takes
pleasure in a foolish pastime.”

<span id="fn_366"></span>[367](cc32042.htm#fr_366.md) <span
id="ii.xli-p38.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xli-p39"></span> “<span id="ii.xli-p39.1"></span>De ce qu’
Herodias a estime un grand avantage pour elle de faire mourir Iean;” —
“that Herodias reckoned it a great advantage to her to put John to
death.”

<span id="fn_367"></span>[368](cc32042.htm#fr_367.md) <span
id="ii.xli-p39.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xli-p40"></span> “<span id="ii.xli-p40.1"></span>Ne laisse
pas d’espouvanter asprement, et navrer au vif le coeur de ceste femme;”
— “fails not vehmently to alarm and cut to the quick the heart of the
woman.”

<span id="fn_368"></span>[369](cc32042.htm#fr_368.md) <span
id="ii.xli-p43.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xli-p44"></span> “<span id="ii.xli-p44.1"></span>Et ne se
soucient seulement que d’eviter le blasme et la moquerie des hommes;”—
“and are only anxious to avoid the censure and ridicule of men.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 14:13-21; Mark 6:30-44; Luke 9:10-17](cc32043.md)
