[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc32003)  [Next](cc32005.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 32: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part II*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iii"></span>

<span id="ii.iii-p1"></span>MATTHEW 11:7-15; LUKE 7:24-28

<span id="ii.iii-p2"></span><span id="ii.iii-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
11:7-15](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#007.md)<span id="ii.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii-p3"></span><span id="ii.iii-p3.1"></span>[Luke
7:24-28](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#024.md)<span id="ii.iii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii-p4"></span>**7**. And as they were departing, Jesus
began to say to the multitudes concerning John, What went you out into
the wilderness to see? A reed, which is shaken by the wind? **8**. But
what went you out to see? A man clothed in soft raiment?  <span
id="fr_7"></span>[8](#fn_7.md) Lo, they who wear soft clothing are in the
houses of kings. **9**. But what went you out to see? A Prophet? Yea, I
say to you, and higher than a Prophet. **10**. For this is he of whom it
is written, Lo, I send my messenger before thy face, who will prepare
the way before thee. **11**. Verily, I say to you, Among those who are
born of women, there hath not arisen a greater than John the Baptist:
yet he who is least in the kingdom of heaven is greater than he.
**12**. And from the days of John the Baptist to this day, the kingdom
of heaven suffereth violence, and the violent take it by force.
**13**. For all the Prophets and the Law itself prophesied until John.
**14**. And if you are willing to receive it,  <span
id="fr_8"></span>[9](#fn_8.md) he is Elijah, who was to come. **15**. He
that hath ears to hear, let him hear.

<span id="ii.iii-p7"></span> 

<span id="ii.iii-p8"></span>**24**. And when the messengers of John had
departed, he began to say to the multitude concerning John, What went
you out into the wilderness to see? A reed, which is shaken by the wind?
**25**. But what went you out to see? A man clothed with soft garments?
 <span id="fr_9"></span>[10](#fn_9.md) Lo, they that live in magnificent
attire, and in delicacies, are in the courts of kings. **26**. But what
went you out to see? A Prophet? Yea, I say to you, and more than a
Prophet. **27**. It is he of whom it is written, Lo, I send my messenger
 <span id="fr_10"></span>[11](#fn_10.md) before my face, who will prepare
the way before thee. **28**. For I say to you, Among those who are born
of women, there is not a great Prophet than John the Baptist; yet he
that is least in the kingdom of God is greater than he.

<span id="ii.iii-p11"></span><span id="ii.iii-p11.1"></span>[Luke
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#016.md)<span id="ii.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii-p12"></span>**16**. The Law and the Prophets (were)
till John: since that time the kingdom of God is preached, and all press
violently into it.

<span id="ii.iii-p13"></span> 

<span id="ii.iii-p14"></span> 

<span id="ii.iii-p15"></span><span id="ii.iii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii-p16"></span>**<span id="ii.iii-p16.2"></span>[Matthew
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#007.md)<span id="ii.iii-p16.2"></span>.**
*And while they were departing* Christ praises John before the people,
in order that they may state from recollection what they have heard from
him, and may give credit to his testimony. For his name was widely
celebrated, and men spoke of him in lofty terms: but his doctrine was
held in less estimation, and there were even few that waited on his
ministrations. Christ reminds them, that those who *went out to see him
in the wilderness* lost their pains, if they did not devoutly apply
their minds and faculties to his doctrine. The meaning of the words,
*you went out into the wilderness,* is this: *“Your* journey would have
been an act of foolish and ridiculous levity, if you had not a fixed
object in view. But it was neither worldly splendor nor any sort of
amusement  <span id="fr_11"></span>[12](#fn_11.md) that you were in quest
of: your design was, to hear the voice of God from the mouth of the
Prophet. If therefore you would reap advantage from your undertaking, it
is necessary that what he spoke should remain fixed in your memory.”

<span id="ii.iii-p18"></span><span id="ii.iii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii-p19"></span>**8.** *Clothed with soft garments* Those
who think that Christ here condemns the extravagance of a court are
mistaken. There are many other passages in which luxury of dress, and
excessive attention to outward appearance, are censured. But this
passage simply means, that there was nothing in the wilderness to
attract the people from every quarter; that every thing there was rude
and unpolished, and fitted only to inspire disgust; and that such
elegance of dress as delights the eyes is rather to be looked for in the
courts of kings.  <span id="fr_12"></span>[13](#fn_12.md)

<span id="ii.iii-p21"></span><span id="ii.iii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii-p22"></span>**11.** *Verily I say to you* These words
not only maintain the authority of John, but elevate his doctrine above
the ancient prophets, that the people may keep in view the right end of
his ministry; for they mistook the design of his mission, and, in
consequence of this, derived almost no advantage from his discourses.
Accordingly, Christ extols and places him above the rank of the
prophets, and gives the people to understand that he had received a
special and more excellent commission. When he elsewhere says respecting
himself that he was *not a Prophet,* (<span
id="ii.iii-p22.2"></span>[Joh
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#021)<span id="ii.iii-p22.2"></span>,.md)
this is not inconsistent with the designation here bestowed upon him by
Christ. He was, no doubt, a Prophet, like others whom God had appointed
in his Church to be expounders of the Law, and messengers of his will;
but he was *more excellent* than the Prophets in this respect, that he
did not, like them, make known redemption at a distance and obscurely
under shadows, but proclaimed that the time of redemption was now
manifest and at hand. Such too is the import of Malachi’s prediction,
(<span id="ii.iii-p22.3"></span>[Mal
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#001)<span id="ii.iii-p22.3"></span>,.md)
which is immediately added, that the pre-eminence of John consisted in
his being the herald and forerunner of Christ;  <span
id="fr_13"></span>[14](#fn_13.md) for although the ancient Prophets spoke
of his kingdom, they were not, like John, placed *before his face,* to
point him out as present. As to the other parts of the passage, the
reader may consult what has been said on the first chapter of Luke’s
Gospel.  <span id="fr_14"></span>[15](#fn_14.md)

<span id="ii.iii-p25"></span>*There hath not arisen* Our Lord proceeds
farther, and declares that the ministers of the Gospel will be as far
superior to John as John was superior to the Prophets. Those who think
that Christ draws a comparison between himself and John have fallen into
a strange blunder; for nothing is said here about personal rank, but
commendation is bestowed on the pre-eminence of office. This appears
more clearly from the words employed by Luke, *there is not a greater
Prophet;* for they expressly restrict his eminence to the office of
teaching. In a word, this magnificent eulogium is bestowed on John, that
the Jews may observe more attentively the commission which he bore.
Again, the teachers who were afterwards to follow are placed above him,
to show the surpassing majesty of the Gospel above the Law, and above
that preaching which came between them. Now, as Christ intended to
prepare the Jews for receiving the Gospel, we ought also, in the present
day, to be aroused to listen with reverence to Christ speaking to us
from the lofty throne of his heavenly glory; lest he take revenge for
our contempt of him by that fearful curse which he pronounces on
unbelievers by Malachi in the same passage.

<span id="ii.iii-p26"></span>*The kingdom of heaven and the kingdom of
God* <span id="ii.iii-p26.1"></span>denote the new condition of the
Church, as in other passages which have already occurred; for it was
promised that at the coming of Christ all things would be restored. *He
that is least in the kingdom.* <span id="ii.iii-p26.2"></span>The Greek
word <span id="ii.iii-p26.3"></span>μικρότερος<span
id="ii.iii-p26.4"></span>, which I have rendered *least,* <span
id="ii.iii-p26.5"></span>is in the comparative degree, and signifies
*less;* <span id="ii.iii-p26.6"></span>but the meaning is more clearly
brought out, that all the ministers of the Gospel are included. Many of
them undoubtedly have received a small portion of faith, and are
therefore greatly inferior to John; but this does not prevent their
preaching from being superior to his, because it holds out Christ as
having rendered complete and eternal satisfaction by his one sacrifice,
as the conqueror of death and the Lord of life, and because it withdraws
the vail, and elevates believers to the heavenly sanctuary.

<span id="ii.iii-p27"></span><span id="ii.iii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii-p28"></span>**12.** *Since the days of John* I have no
doubt that Christ speaks honorably of the majesty of the Gospel on this
ground, that many sought after it with warm affection; for as God had
raised up John to be the herald of the kingdom of his Son, so the Spirit
infused such efficacy into his doctrine, that it entered deeply into the
hearts of men and kindled that zeal. It appears, therefore, that the
Gospel, which comes forward in a manner so sudden and extraordinary,
 <span id="fr_15"></span>[16](#fn_15.md) and awakens powerful emotions,
must have proceeded from God. But in the second clause is added this
restriction, that *the violent take it by force* The greater part of men
were no more excited than if the Prophets had never uttered a word about
Christ, or if John had never appeared as his witness; and therefore
Christ reminds them, that the *violence,* of which he had spoken,
existed only in men of a particular class. The meaning therefore is, A
vast assembly of men is now collected, as if men were rushing
*violently* forward to seize *the kingdom of God;* for, aroused by the
voice of one man, they come together in crowds, and receive, not only
with eagerness, but with vehement impetuosity, the grace which is
offered to them. Although very many are asleep, and are no more affected
than if John in the wilderness were acting a play which had no reference
to them, yet many flock to him with ardent zeal. The tendency of our
Lord’s statement is to show, that those who pass by in a contemptuous
manner, and as it were with closed eyes, the power of God, which
manifestly appears both in the teacher and in the hearers, are
inexcusable. Let us also learn from these words, what is the true nature
and operation of faith. It leads men not only to give, cold and
indifferent assent when God speaks, but to cherish warm affection
towards Him, and to rush forward as it were with a violent struggle.

<span id="ii.iii-p30"></span><span id="ii.iii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii-p31"></span>**<span id="ii.iii-p31.2"></span>[Luke
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#016.md)<span
id="ii.iii-p31.2"></span>.** *The Law and the Prophets were till John*
Our Lord had said that the earnestness of the people was a prelude to
those things which *the Prophets* had foretold as to the future
renovation of the Church. He now compares the ministry of John to *the
Law and the Prophets* “It is not wonderful,” he tells us, “that God
should now act so powerfully on the minds of men; for he is not as
formerly, seen at a distance under dark shadows, but appears openly and
at hand for the establishment of his kingdom.” Hence it follows, that
those who obstinately reject *John’s* doctrine are less excusable than
those who despised *the Law and the Prophets*

<span id="ii.iii-p32"></span><span id="ii.iii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii-p33"></span>**<span id="ii.iii-p33.2"></span>[Matthew
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#013.md)<span
id="ii.iii-p33.2"></span>.** *All the Prophets and the Law itself
Prophesied*. The word *prophesied* is emphatic; for *the Law and the
Prophets* did not present God before the eyes of men, but represented
him under figures and shadows as absent. The comparison, we now
perceive, is intended to show, that it is highly criminal in men to
remain indifferent, when they have obtained a manifestation of the
presence of God, who held his ancient people in suspense by predictions.
Christ does not class *John* with the ministers of the Gospel, though he
formerly assigned to him an intermediate station between them and *the
Prophets.* But there is no inconsistency here: for although John’s
preaching was a part of the Gospel, it was little more than a first
lesson.

<span id="ii.iii-p34"></span><span id="ii.iii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii-p35"></span>**14.** *And if you are willing to receive*
*it* He now explains more clearly in what manner John began to preach
*the kingdom of God* It was in the character of that *Elijah,* who was
to be sent before the face of God, (<span id="ii.iii-p35.2"></span>[Mal
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#005)<span id="ii.iii-p35.2"></span>..md)
Our Lord’s meaning therefore is, that *the great and dreadful day of the
Lord,* which Malachi described, is now beheld by the Jews, when
*Elijah,* who was there promised, discharges his office as a herald.
Again, by this exception, *if you are willing to receive it,* he glances
at their hardened obstinacy, in maliciously shutting their eyes against
the clearest light. But will he cease to be *Elijah,* if he shall not be
*received?* Christ does not mean that John’s official *character*  <span
id="fr_16"></span>[17](#fn_16.md) depends on their approbation; but having
declared that he is *Elijah,* he charges them with carelessness and
ingratitude, if he does not obtain that respect to which he is entitled.

<span id="ii.iii-p37"></span><span id="ii.iii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii-p38"></span>**15.** *He that hath ears to hear, let him
hear.* We know that it is customary with Christ to introduce this
sentence, whenever he treats of subjects which are highly important, and
which deserve no ordinary attention.  <span
id="fr_17"></span>[18](#fn_17.md) He reminds us, at the same time, of the
reason why the mysteries of which he speaks are not received by all. It
is because many of his hearers are deaf, or at least have their ears
closed. But now, as every man is hindered not only by his own unbelief,
but by the mutual influence which men exercise on each other, Christ
here exhorts the elect of God, whose ears have been pierced, to consider
attentively this remarkable secret of God, and not to remain deaf with
unbelievers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_7"></span>[8](cc32004.htm#fr_7.md) <span
id="ii.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii-p5"></span> “<span id="ii.iii-p5.1"></span>Un homme
vestu de precieux vestemens?” — “A man clothed with costly garments?”

<span id="fn_8"></span>[9](cc32004.htm#fr_8.md) <span
id="ii.iii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iii-p6"></span> “<span id="ii.iii-p6.1"></span>Si vous le
voulez recevoir, *ou, et si vous voulez recevoir* mon dire;” — “if you
are willing to receive it, *or, and if you are willing to receive* my
saying.”

<span id="fn_9"></span>[10](cc32004.htm#fr_9.md) <span
id="ii.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii-p9"></span> “<span id="ii.iii-p9.1"></span>Vestu de
precieux vestemens?” — “clothed with costly garments?”

<span id="fn_10"></span>[11](cc32004.htm#fr_10.md) <span
id="ii.iii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iii-p10"></span> “<span id="ii.iii-p10.1"></span>Mon
messager, *ou, Angel;*” — “my messenger, or, Angel.”

<span id="fn_11"></span>[12](cc32004.htm#fr_11.md) <span
id="ii.iii-p16.3"></span>

<span id="ii.iii-p17"></span> “<span id="ii.iii-p17.1"></span>Ni autre
passe-temps et amusement vain;” — “nor other pastime nor vain
amusement.”

<span id="fn_12"></span>[13](cc32004.htm#fr_12.md) <span
id="ii.iii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iii-p20"></span> “<span id="ii.iii-p20.1"></span>Que pour
voir de beaux vestemens et autres choses agencees bien proprement il
faut plustost aller es Cours des Rois;” — “that in order to see fine
dresses, and other things very neatly arranged, we must rather go to the
courts of kings.”

<span id="fn_13"></span>[14](cc32004.htm#fr_13.md) <span
id="ii.iii-p22.4"></span>

<span id="ii.iii-p23"></span> “<span id="ii.iii-p23.1"></span>Pource
qu’il est le Heraut marchant devant Christ pour luy faire honneur;” —
“because he is the Herald marching before Christ to do him honor.”

<span id="fn_14"></span>[15](cc32004.htm#fr_14.md) <span
id="ii.iii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iii-p24"></span> Harmony, volume 1. p.20.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[16](cc32004.htm#fr_15.md) <span
id="ii.iii-p28.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iii-p29"></span> ”<span id="ii.iii-p29.1"></span>Laquelle
tant soudainement gaigne les coeurs des hommes d’une facon non
accoustumee, et y cause des mouvemens merveilleux;” — “which so suddenly
gains the hearts of men in an unusual manner, and excites in them
wonderful emotions.”

<span id="fn_16"></span>[17](cc32004.htm#fr_16.md) <span
id="ii.iii-p35.3"></span>

<span id="ii.iii-p36"></span> “<span id="ii.iii-p36.1"></span>L’estat et
la commission de Iean;” — “John’s rank and commission.”

<span id="fn_17"></span>[18](cc32004.htm#fr_17.md) <span
id="ii.iii-p38.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iii-p39"></span> “<span id="ii.iii-p39.1"></span>Et qui ne
doit pas estre escoutee par acquit;” — “and which ought not to be
listened to in an indifferent manner.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 11:16-19; Luke 7:29-35](cc32005.md)
