[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc32065)  [Next](cc32067) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 32: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part II*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.lxv"></span>

<span id="ii.lxv-p1"></span><span id="ii.lxv-p1.1"></span>[Matthew
17:24-27](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#024)<span id="ii.lxv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxv-p2"></span><span id="ii.lxv-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
17:24-27](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#024)<span id="ii.lxv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxv-p3"></span> **24**. And when they came to Capernaum,
those who received the didrachma came to Peter, and said, Does not your
Master pay the didrachma? **25**. He saith, Yes. And when he came into
the house, Jesus anticipated him, saying, What thinkest thou, Simon?
From whom do the kings of the earth receive tribute or custom? From
their own children, or from strangers? **26**. Peter saith to him, From
strangers. Jesus saith to him, Then are the children free. **27**. But
that we may not offend them, go thou to the sea, throw a hook, and take
that fish which cometh first up; and when thou hast opened its mouth,
thou wilt find a stater: take that, and give it for me and for thee.

<span id="ii.lxv-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.lxv-p5"></span> 

<span id="ii.lxv-p6"></span><span id="ii.lxv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxv-p7"></span>**<span id="ii.lxv-p7.2"></span>[Matthew
17:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#024)<span id="ii.lxv-p7.2"></span>.**
*And when they came to Capernaum.* We must attend, first of all, to the
design of this narrative; which is, that Christ, by paying tribute of
his own accord, declared his subjection, as he had *taken upon him the
form of a servant*, (<span id="ii.lxv-p7.3"></span>[Php
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#007)<span id="ii.lxv-p7.3"></span>,)
but at the same time showed, both by words and by the miracle, that it
was not by obligation or necessity, but by a free and voluntary
submission, that he had reduced himself so low that the world looked
upon him as nothing more than one of the common people. This was not a
tax which was wont to be demanded on crossing the sea,  <span
id="fr_576"></span>[577](#fn_576) but an annual tribute laid
individually on every man among the Jews, so that they paid to tyrants
what they were formerly in the habit of paying to God alone. For we know
that this tax was imposed on them by the Law, that, by paying every year
half a *stater*, (<span id="ii.lxv-p8.2"></span>[Ex
30:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#013)<span id="ii.lxv-p8.2"></span>,)
they might acknowledge that God, by whom they had been redeemed, was
their supreme King. When the kings of Asia appropriated this to
themselves, the Romans followed their example. Thus the Jews, as if they
had disowned the government of God, paid to profane tyrants the sacred
tax required by the Law. But it might appear unreasonable that Christ,
when he appeared as the Redeemer of his people, should not himself be
exempted from *paying tribute* To remove that offense, he taught by
words, that it was only by his will that he was bound; and he proved the
same thing by a miracle, for he who had dominion over the sea and the
fishes might have released himself from earthly government.  <span
id="fr_577"></span>[578](#fn_577)

<span id="ii.lxv-p10"></span>*Doth not your Master pay?* Some think that
the collectors of the *tribute* intended to throw blame on Christ, as if
he were claiming exemption from the common law. For my own part, as men
of that class are insolent and abusive, I interpret these words as
having been spoken by way of reproach. It was customary for every man to
be enrolled in his own city; but we know that Christ had no fixed
habitation in one place. Those people therefore inquire if he be
exempted from the law on the ground of his frequent removals from place
to place.  <span id="fr_578"></span>[579](#fn_578)

<span id="ii.lxv-p12"></span><span id="ii.lxv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxv-p13"></span>**25.** *He saith, Yes. Peter’s* reply
contains a modest excuse  <span id="fr_579"></span>[580](#fn_579) to
satisfy them: “he will pay,”  <span id="fr_580"></span>[581](#fn_580)
says he; from which we infer that Christ had formerly been accustomed to
pay, for *Peter* promises it as a thing about which there was no doubt.
That they address him rather than the other disciples was, as I
conjecture, because Christ lived with him; for if all had occupied the
same habitation, the demand would have been made on all alike. It is
therefore very ridiculous in the Papists, on so frivolous a pretense, to
make *Peter* a partner in the dignity of Christ. “He chose him (they
say) to be his *vicar*, and bestowed on him equal honors, by making him
equal to himself in the payment of tribute.” But in this way they will
make all swine-herds *vicars* of Christ, for they paid as much as he
did. And if the primacy of *Peter* was manifested in the paying of
tribute, whence comes that exemption which they claim for themselves?
But this is the necessary result of the shameful trifling of those who
corrupt Scripture according to their own fancy.

<span id="ii.lxv-p16"></span>*What thinkest thou, Simon?* In this Christ
gave a proof of his Divinity, by showing that nothing was unknown to
him. But what is the object of his discourse? Is it to exempt himself
and his followers from subjection to the laws? Some explain it thus,
that Christians have a right to be exempted, but that they voluntarily
subject themselves to the ordinary government, because otherwise human
society cannot be maintained. To me, however, the meaning appears to be
more simple; for there was danger lest the disciples might think that
Christ had come in vain, because, by paying tribute cut off the hope of
deliverance; and therefore he simply affirms that he pays tribute,
solely because he voluntarily refrains from exercising his right and
power. Hence it is inferred that this takes nothing from his reign. But
why does he not openly claim his right? It is because his kingly power
was unknown to the collectors of the tribute. For, though his kingdom be
spiritual, still we must maintain, that as he is the only Son of God, he
is also the heir of the whole world, so that all things ought to be
subject to him, and to acknowledge his authority. The meaning,
therefore, is, that God has not appointed kings, and established
governments over mankind, in such a manner as to place him who is the
Son in the same rank indiscriminately with others, but yet that, of his
own accord, he will be a servant along with others, till the glory of
his kingdom be displayed.

<span id="ii.lxv-p17"></span>The Pope has not less foolishly than
successfully abused this passage to exempt his clergy from the laws; as
if the shaving of the head made them sons of God, and exempted them from
tributes and taxes. But nothing else was intended by Christ than to
claim for himself the honor of a King’s Son, so as to have at least a
home privileged and exempted from the common law. And therefore it is
also highly foolish in the Anabaptists to torture these words for
overturning political order, since it is more than certain, that Christ
does not say any thing about a privilege common to believers, but only
draws a comparison from the sons of kings, who, together with their
domestics, are exempted.  <span id="fr_581"></span>[582](#fn_581)

<span id="ii.lxv-p19"></span><span id="ii.lxv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxv-p20"></span>**27.** *Throw a hook.* Though I
acknowledge that Christ had not always full coffers, yet I think that he
was not compelled by poverty to give this order to Peter, but that he
did so in order to prove by a miracle, that he had a more extensive
dominion than all earthly kings, since he had even *fishes* for his
tributaries. And we do not read that this was done more than once,
because one proof was enough for his whole life. *Thou wilt find a
stater. A stater* was of the same value as a shekel, namely, four
drachms or two didrachma.  <span id="fr_582"></span>[583](#fn_582)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_576"></span>[577](cc32066.htm#fr_576) <span
id="ii.lxv-p7.4"></span>

<span id="ii.lxv-p8"></span> “<span id="ii.lxv-p8.1"></span>Les
didrachmes, dont est yci parle, n’estoit pas un peage qu’on payast a
passer d’un coste en autre de la mer;” — “*The didrachma*, which are
here spoken of, were not a *custom* paid on crossing from one side of
the sea to the other.”

<span id="fn_577"></span>[578](cc32066.htm#fr_577) <span
id="ii.lxv-p8.3"></span>

<span id="ii.lxv-p9"></span> “<span id="ii.lxv-p9.1"></span>Pouvoit
bien, s’il eust voulu, s’exempter de la suiection des princes terriens;”
— “might easily, if he had chosen, have exempted himself from subjection
to earthly princes.”

<span id="fn_578"></span>[579](cc32066.htm#fr_578) <span
id="ii.lxv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxv-p11"></span> “<span id="ii.lxv-p11.1"></span>Si par ce
moyen qu’il est maintenant ci, maintenant la, il faudra qu’il eschappe
sans rien payer;” — “if, because he is sometimes here, and sometimes
there, he must escape without paying anything.”

<span id="fn_579"></span>[580](cc32066.htm#fr_579) <span
id="ii.lxv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxv-p14"></span> “<span id="ii.lxv-p14.1"></span>Une excuse
bien modeste et honneste;” — “a very modest and civil excuse.”

<span id="fn_580"></span>[581](cc32066.htm#fr_580) <span
id="ii.lxv-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ii.lxv-p15"></span> “<span id="ii.lxv-p15.1"></span>Oui,
(dit-il,) il payera;” — “*Yes*, (says he,) he will pay.”

<span id="fn_581"></span>[582](cc32066.htm#fr_581) <span
id="ii.lxv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxv-p18"></span> “<span id="ii.lxv-p18.1"></span>Lesquels
sont exempts de tous imposts, eux et leurs domestiques;” — “who are
exempted from all taxes, they and their domestics.”

<span id="fn_582"></span>[583](cc32066.htm#fr_582) <span
id="ii.lxv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxv-p21"></span> The *didrachmon* weighed *two drachms*,
and the *stater*, which weighed *two didrachma*, or *four drachms*, was
worth about two shillings and sixpence of our money. — Ed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 19:1-2; Mark 9:38-40, 10:1; Luke 9:49-56](cc32067)
