[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc32078)  [Next](cc32080) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 32: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part II*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.lxxviii"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxviii-p1"></span><span id="ii.lxxviii-p1.1"></span>[Luke
19:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#001)<span
id="ii.lxxviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxviii-p2"></span><span id="ii.lxxviii-p2.1"></span>[Luke
19:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#001)<span
id="ii.lxxviii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxviii-p3"></span>**1**. And having entered, he passeth
through Jericho.  <span id="fr_673"></span>[674](#fn_673) **2**. And,
lo, a man named Zaccheus, and he was chief of the publicans, and was
rich. **3**. And he sought to see Jesus who he was,  <span
id="fr_674"></span>[675](#fn_674) and could not on account of the
multitude; for he was of small stature. **4**. And running before, he
climbed up into a sycamore tree to see him; for he was to pass that way.
**5**. And when Jesus came to the place, he looked up, and saw him, and
said to him, Zaccheus, make haste, and come down; for today I must abide
at thy house. **6**. And he made haste, and came down, and received him
joyfully. **7**. And when they saw it, they all murmured, saying, That
he had gone to lodge with a man who is a sinner. **8**. And Zaccheus
stood, and said to the Lord, Lo, O Lord, the half of my goods I give to
the poor; and if I have defrauded any man in any thing, I restore
fourfold.  <span id="fr_675"></span>[676](#fn_675) **9**. Jesus said to
him, Today is salvation come to this house, inasmuch as he also is a son
of Abraham.  <span id="fr_676"></span>[677](#fn_676) **10**. For the Son
of man came to seek and save what was lost.

<span id="ii.lxxviii-p8"></span> 

<span id="ii.lxxviii-p9"></span> 

<span id="ii.lxxviii-p10"></span><span id="ii.lxxviii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxviii-p11"></span>This shows how little attention Luke
paid to observing the order of dates; for, after having detailed the
miracle, he now relates what happened in the city of *Jericho* He tells
us that, while Christ presented himself to the view of all, as he went
along the streets, *Zaccheus* alone was very desirous to see him. For it
was an evidence of intense desire that he *climbed up a tree;* since
*rich* men are, for the most part, haughty, and plume themselves on
affected gravity. It is possible, indeed, that others entertained the
same wish, but this man was most properly singled out by Luke, both on
account of his rank, and on account of his wonderful conversion, which
took place suddenly. Now, though faith was not yet formed in *Zaccheus*,
yet this was a sort of preparation for it; for it was not without a
heavenly inspiration that he desired so earnestly to get a sight of
Christ; I mean, in reference to that design which immediately appeared.
Some were led, no doubt, by vain curiosity to run even from distant
places, for the purpose of seeing Christ, but the event showed that the
mind of *Zaccheus* contained some seed of piety. In this manner, before
revealing himself to men, the Lord frequently communicates to them a
secret desire, by which they are led to Him, while he is still concealed
and unknown; and, though they have no fixed object in view, He does not
disappoint them, but manifests himself in due time.

<span id="ii.lxxviii-p12"></span><span id="ii.lxxviii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxviii-p13"></span>**5.** *Zaccheus, make haste, and come
down.* It is a remarkable instance of favor, that the Lord anticipates
*Zaccheus*, and does not wait for his invitation, but of his own accord
asks lodging at his house. We know how hateful, nay, how detestable the
name of *publican* at that time was; and we shall find that this is
shortly afterwards mentioned by Luke. It is therefore astonishing
kindness in the Son of God to approach a man, from whom the great body
of men recoil, and that before he is requested to do so. But we need not
wonder, if he bestows this honor on one who was already drawn to him by
a secret movement of the Spirit; for it was a more valuable gift to
dwell in his heart than to enter his house. But by this expression he
made it evident, that he is never sought in vain by those who sincerely
desire to know him; for *Zaccheus* obtained vastly more than he had
expected. Besides, the great readiness of *Zaccheus* to obey, his
*hastening to come down* from the tree, and his *joy* in *receiving*
Christ, exhibit still more clearly the power and guidance of the Holy
Spirit; for, though he did not yet possess a pure faith, yet this
submissiveness and obedience must be regarded as the beginning of faith.

<span id="ii.lxxviii-p14"></span><span id="ii.lxxviii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxviii-p15"></span>**7.** *And when they saw it, they all
murmured.* The inhabitants of the town — and, perhaps, some of Christ’s
followers — *murmur* that *he goes to lodge with a man* who is looked
upon as wicked and infamous, even though nobody invited him. It is thus
that the world disregards the offer of the grace of God, but complains
bitterly  <span id="fr_677"></span>[678](#fn_677) when it is conveyed to
others. But let us consider how unjust this murmuring was. They think it
unreasonable that Christ should bestows so great an honor on a wicked
man; for in this passage, as in many others, the word *sinner* is not
taken in the ordinary sense,  <span id="fr_678"></span>[679](#fn_678)
but denotes a man of disgraceful and scandalous life. Let us suppose
that *Zaccheus* was a person of this description. Still, we ought first
to inquire for what purpose Christ chose to become his guest; for, while
out of doors men are murmuring, *within* the house God displays
magnificently the glory of this name, and refutes their wicked calumny.

<span id="ii.lxxviii-p18"></span>The conversion of *Zaccheus* was an
astonishing work of God, and yet there was no good reason why *Zaccheus*
should be marked with infamy. He had the charge of collecting the taxes.
Now to collect taxes was no crime in itself, but men of that class were
exceedingly despised and hated by the Jews, because they reckoned it to
be in the highest degree unjust that they should pay tribute. But
whatever might be the character of *Zaccheus*, still the kindness of
Christ ought not to be blamed, but commended, in not refusing his
assistance to a wretched man, to rescue him from destruction, and bring
him to salvation. And therefore the offense which was wickedly taken did
not hinder him from proceeding to execute his Father’s command. With
such magnanimity ought all his ministers to be endued, as to think more
highly of the salvation of one soul than of the murmurs which all
ignorant persons may utter, and not to desist from their duty, even
though all their actions and words may expose them to reproaches.

<span id="ii.lxxviii-p19"></span><span id="ii.lxxviii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxviii-p20"></span>**8.** *And Zaccheus stood, and said.*
From this result they ought to have formed their opinion of what Christ
did; but men are so hasty and precipitate, that they do not take time to
wait for God.  <span id="fr_679"></span>[680](#fn_679) The conversion of
Zaceheus is described by fruits and outward signs. As it was probable
that he had enriched himself to the injury of others,

<span id="ii.lxxviii-p22"></span>if he had wronged any man, he was ready
to restore fourfold. Besides, the half of his goods he dedicates to the
poor. A man might indeed bestow all his goods on the poor,  
(<span id="ii.lxxviii-p22.2"></span>[1Co
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#003)<span
id="ii.lxxviii-p22.2"></span>,)

<span id="ii.lxxviii-p23"></span>and yet his generosity might be of no
value in the sight of God; but, though no mention is here made of inward
repentance, yet Luke means that the godly zeal, which he commends in
*Zaccheus*, proceeded from that living root. In like manner, Paul, when
treating of repentance, exhorts us to those duties, by which men may
learn that we are changed for the better.

<span id="ii.lxxviii-p24"></span>Let him that stole steal no more; but
rather let him labor with his hands, that he may assist the poor and
needy,  
(<span id="ii.lxxviii-p24.2"></span>[Eph
4:28](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#028)<span
id="ii.lxxviii-p24.2"></span>.)

<span id="ii.lxxviii-p25"></span>We ought therefore to begin with the
heart, but our repentance ought also to be evinced by works.

<span id="ii.lxxviii-p26"></span>Now let us observe that *Zaccheus* does
not make a present to God out of his extortions, as many rich men give
to God a portion of what they have obtained by dishonesty, that they may
the more freely pillage in future, and that they may be acquitted of the
wrongs which they have formerly done. But *Zaccheus* devotes *the half
of his goods* to God in such a manner, as to give, at the same time,
compensation for whatever wrongs he has done; and hence we infer that
the riches which he possessed were not the fruit of dishonest gain. Thus
*Zaccheus* is not only ready to give satisfaction, if he *has taken any
thing by fraud*, but shares his lawful possessions with the poor; by
which he shows that he is changed from a wolf not only into a sheep, but
even into a shepherd. And while he corrects the faults which had been
formerly committed, he renounces wicked practices for the future, as God
demands from his people, first of all, that they abstain from doing any
act of injury. *Zaccheus* has not laid others under obligation, by his
example, to strip themselves of *the half of their goods;* but we have
only to observe the rule which the Lord prescribes, that we dedicate
ourselves, and all that we have, to holy and lawful purposes.

<span id="ii.lxxviii-p27"></span><span id="ii.lxxviii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxviii-p28"></span>**9.** *Today is salvation come to this
house.* Christ, bearing testimony to Zaccheus, declares that his
professions were not hypocritical. And yet he does not ascribe to the
good works of Zaccheus the cause of *salvation;* but, as that conversion
was an undoubted pledge of the divine adoption, he justly concludes from
it that *this house* is a possessor of *salvation* Such, to is the
import of the words for, since Zaccheus is one of the *children of
Abraham*, he argues that his *house* is saved. In order that any man may
be reckoned among the *children of Abraham*, it is necessary for him to
imitate *Abraham’s* faith; nay, Scripture expressly bestows on faith
this commendation, that it distinguishes the genuine *children of
Abraham* from strangers. Let us therefore know that in Zaccheus faith is
chiefly commended, on account of which his good works were acceptable to
God. Nor is there reason to doubt that the doctrine of Christ went
before the conversion of Zaccheus; and, consequently, the commencement
of his salvation was, to hear Christ discoursing on the undeserved mercy
of God, and on the reconciliation of men to Him, and on the redemption
of the Church, and to embrace this doctrine by faith.

<span id="ii.lxxviii-p29"></span><span id="ii.lxxviii-p29.1"></span>In
consequence of the Greek word <span
id="ii.lxxviii-p29.2"></span>οἴκος<span id="ii.lxxviii-p29.3"></span>;
*(house)* <span id="ii.lxxviii-p29.4"></span>being of the masculine
gender, this passage is explained in two ways. The old translator  <span
id="fr_680"></span>[681](#fn_680) <span id="ii.lxxviii-p30.2"></span>
has made the reference to be to Zaccheus, which I also prefer.  <span
id="fr_681"></span>[682](#fn_681) *Erastians* <span
id="ii.lxxviii-p31.15"></span>has chosen to render it, *inasmuch as*
<span id="ii.lxxviii-p31.16"></span>The House<span
id="ii.lxxviii-p31.17"></span>, *itself is a* <span
id="ii.lxxviii-p31.18"></span>Daughter<span
id="ii.lxxviii-p31.19"></span> of *Abraham;*  <span
id="fr_682"></span>[683](#fn_682) <span id="ii.lxxviii-p32.2"></span>and
although I do not disapprove of this, I think it more natural to explain
it as referring to *Zacche*<span id="ii.lxxviii-p32.3"></span>u*s* <span
id="ii.lxxviii-p32.4"></span>For, since God, when he adopts the head of
a family, promises that He will be a God even to his whole house,
*salvation* <span id="ii.lxxviii-p32.5"></span>is, with propriety,
extended from the head to the whole body. Now the particle <span
id="ii.lxxviii-p32.6"></span>καὶ *(also)* <span
id="ii.lxxviii-p32.7"></span>is emphatic; for Christ means, that
*Zaccheus*<span id="ii.lxxviii-p32.8"></span>, <span
id="ii.lxxviii-p32.9"></span>not less than the other Jews who haughtily
detested him, is *a son of Abraham* <span
id="ii.lxxviii-p32.10"></span>And that his former life may not seem to
have shut against him the gate of salvation, Christ argues from his own
office, that there is nothing in this change at which any man ought to
take offense, since he was sent by the Father to *save those who were
lost.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_673"></span>[674](cc32079.htm#fr_673) <span
id="ii.lxxviii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxviii-p4"></span> “<span
id="ii.lxxviii-p4.1"></span>Estant entre en Iericho, il alloit par la
ville;” — “having entered into Jericho, he went through the town.”

<span id="fn_674"></span>[675](cc32079.htm#fr_674) <span
id="ii.lxxviii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxviii-p5"></span> “<span id="ii.lxxviii-p5.1"></span>Et
taschoit a veoir lequel estoit Iesus;” — “and endeavored to see who
Jesus was.”

<span id="fn_675"></span>[676](cc32079.htm#fr_675) <span
id="ii.lxxviii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxviii-p6"></span> “<span id="ii.lxxviii-p6.1"></span>I’en
rend quatre fois autant;” — “I restore four times as much for it.”

<span id="fn_676"></span>[677](cc32079.htm#fr_676) <span
id="ii.lxxviii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxviii-p7"></span> “<span
id="ii.lxxviii-p7.1"></span>Poutrtant *que ceste-ci aussi est fille
d’Abraham*, ou, *cestuy-ci aussi est fils d’Abraham;*” — “*because this
also is a daughter of Abraha*m, or, *this also is a son of Abraham*.*”*

<span id="fn_677"></span>[678](cc32079.htm#fr_677) <span
id="ii.lxxviii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxviii-p16"></span> “<span id="ii.lxxviii-p16.1"></span>Et
cependant est envieux et marri;” — “and yet is envious and offended.”

<span id="fn_678"></span>[679](cc32079.htm#fr_678) <span
id="ii.lxxviii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxviii-p17"></span> “<span id="ii.lxxviii-p17.1"></span>Et
ne signifie pas ce que communeement nous appelons *pecheur;*” — “and
does not mean what we usually call *a sinner*.*”*

<span id="fn_679"></span>[680](cc32079.htm#fr_679) <span
id="ii.lxxviii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxviii-p21"></span> “<span
id="ii.lxxviii-p21.1"></span>Qu’ils n’ont pas la patience d’attendre que
Dieu monstre ce qu’il vent faire;” — “that they have not patience to
wait till God show what he intends to do.”

<span id="fn_680"></span>[681](cc32079.htm#fr_680) <span
id="ii.lxxviii-p29.5"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxviii-p30"></span> “<span id="ii.lxxviii-p30.1"></span>Le
translateur Latin ancien;” — “the old Latin translator.”

<span id="fn_681"></span>[682](cc32079.htm#fr_681) <span
id="ii.lxxviii-p30.3"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxviii-p31"></span><span id="ii.lxxviii-p31.1"></span> The
question is, whether the antecedent to <span
id="ii.lxxviii-p31.2"></span>αὐτός<span id="ii.lxxviii-p31.3"></span> be
<span id="ii.lxxviii-p31.4"></span>Ζακχαῖος<span
id="ii.lxxviii-p31.5"></span> or <span id="ii.lxxviii-p31.6"></span>ὁ
οἴκος<span id="ii.lxxviii-p31.7"></span>. On the former supposition, our
English version will be approved *HE also* <span
id="ii.lxxviii-p31.8"></span>(namely, *Zaccheus) is a son of Abraham*
<span id="ii.lxxviii-p31.9"></span>On the latter supposition, the
translation will run thus: IT *also* <span
id="ii.lxxviii-p31.10"></span>(namely, *the house) is a child of
Abraham;* <span id="ii.lxxviii-p31.11"></span>or — carrying out the
metaphor as *Erasmus* <span id="ii.lxxviii-p31.12"></span>has done — IT
*also is a* <span id="ii.lxxviii-p31.13"></span>DAUGHTER *of
Abraham*<span id="ii.lxxviii-p31.14"></span>. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_682"></span>[683](cc32079.htm#fr_682) <span
id="ii.lxxviii-p31.20"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxviii-p32"></span> “<span id="ii.lxxviii-p32.1"></span>Eo
*quod ipsu domus sit filia Abrahae*.*”*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 25:14-30; Luke 19:11-28](cc32080)
