[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc32008)  [Next](cc32010.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 32: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part II*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.viii"></span>

<span id="ii.viii-p1"></span><span id="ii.viii-p1.1"></span>[Matthew
11:25-30](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#025.md)<span
id="ii.viii-p1.1"></span>; <span id="ii.viii-p1.2"></span>[Luke
10:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#021.md)<span
id="ii.viii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.viii-p2"></span><span id="ii.viii-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
11:25-30](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#025.md)<span
id="ii.viii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.viii-p3"></span><span id="ii.viii-p3.1"></span>[Luke
10:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#021.md)<span
id="ii.viii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.viii-p4"></span> **25**. At that time Jesus answering said,
I acknowledge to thee,  <span id="fr_55"></span>[56](#fn_55.md) O Father,
Lord of heaven and earth, that thou hast hid these things from the wise
and prudent, and hast revealed them to little children.
**26**. Undoubtedly, O Father, such was thy good pleasure.  <span
id="fr_56"></span>[57](#fn_56.md) **27**. All things have been delivered to
me by my Father; and none knoweth the Son but the Father; and none
knoweth the Father but the Son, and he to whom the Son has chosen to
reveal him.  <span id="fr_57"></span>[58](#fn_57.md) **28**. Come to me,
all that labor and are burdened, and I will relieve you. **29**. Take my
yoke upon you, and learn of me, that I am meek and lowly in heart, and
you shall find rest in your souls. **30**. For my yoke is easy, and my
burden is light.

<span id="ii.viii-p8"></span> 

<span id="ii.viii-p9"></span> **21**. In the same hour Jesus rejoiced in
spirit, and said, I acknowledge to thee,  <span
id="fr_58"></span>[59](#fn_58.md) O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that
thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed
them to little children: certainly, O Father, it is because such was thy
good pleasure. **22**. All things have been delivered to me by my
Father, and none knoweth who the Son is but the Father, and who the
Father is but the Son, and he to whom the Son shall choose to reveal
him.

<span id="ii.viii-p11"></span> 

<span id="ii.viii-p12"></span> 

<span id="ii.viii-p13"></span><span id="ii.viii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ii.viii-p14"></span>**<span id="ii.viii-p14.2"></span>[Matthew
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#025.md)<span
id="ii.viii-p14.2"></span>.** *Jesus answering.* <span
id="ii.viii-p14.3"></span>Though the Hebrew verb, *answer,* <span
id="ii.viii-p14.4"></span>(<span id="ii.viii-p14.5"></span>ענה<span
id="ii.viii-p14.6"></span>,) is frequently employed even in the
commencement of a discourse, yet in this passage I consider it to be
emphatic; for it was from the present occurrence that Christ took
occasion to speak. This is more fully confirmed by the words of Luke,
that *in the same hour Jesus rejoiced in spirit* <span
id="ii.viii-p14.7"></span>Whence came that *rejoicing?*<span
id="ii.viii-p14.8"></span> Was it not because the Church, composed of
poor and despised persons, was viewed by him as not less precious and
valuable than if all the nobility and high rank in the world had lent to
it their brilliancy? Let it be observed, also, that the discourse is
addressed to the *Father,* <span id="ii.viii-p14.9"></span>and
consequently is marked by greater energy than if he had spoken to his
disciples. It was on their behalf, no doubt, and for their sake, that he
*gave thanks to the Father,* <span id="ii.viii-p14.10"></span>that they
might not be displeased with the low and mean aspect of his Church.

<span id="ii.viii-p15"></span>We are constantly looking for splendor;
and nothing appears to us more incongruous, than that the heavenly
kingdom of the Son of God, whose glory is so magnificently celebrated by
the prophets, should consist of the dregs and offscourings of the common
people. And truly it is a wonderful purpose of God, that though he has
the whole world at his command, he chooses rather to select a peculiar
people to himself from among the contemptible vulgar, than from the
nobility, whose high rank would have been a greater ornament to the name
of Christ. But here Christ withdraws his disciples from a proud and
haughty imagination, that they may not venture to despise that mean and
obscure condition of his Church, in which he delights and *rejoices.* To
restrain more fully that curiosity which is constantly springing up in
the minds of men, he rises above the world, and contemplates the secret
decrees of God, that he may lead others to unite with him in admiring
them. And certainly, though this appointment of God contradicts our
senses, we discover not only blind arrogance, but excessive madness, if
we murmur against it, while Christ our Head adores it with reverence.

<span id="ii.viii-p16"></span>*I acknowledge to thee, O Father*  <span
id="fr_59"></span>[60](#fn_59.md) By these words he declares his
acquiescence in that decree of the *Father,* which is so greatly at
variance with human senses. There is an implied contrast between this
praise, which he ascribes to the Father, and the malicious slanders, or
even the impudent barkings, of the world. We must now inquire in what
respect he glorifies the *Father.* It is because, while he was Lord of
the whole world, he preferred *children and ignorant persons to the
wise* It has no small weight, as connected with this subject, that he
calls the *Father Lord of heaven and earth;* for in this manner he
declares that it is a distinction which depends entirely on the will of
God,  <span id="fr_60"></span>[61](#fn_60.md) that the *wise* remain blind,
while the ignorant and unlearned receive the mysteries of the Gospel.
There are many other passages of a similar nature, in which God points
out to us, that those who arrive at salvation have been freely chosen by
him, because he is the Creator and Governor of the world, and all
nations are his.

<span id="ii.viii-p19"></span>This expression implies two things. First,
that all do not obey the Gospel arises from no want of power on the part
of God, who could easily have brought all the creatures into subjection
to his government. Secondly, that some arrive at faith, while others
remain hardened and obstinate, is accomplished by his free election;
for, drawing some, and passing by others, he alone makes a distinction
among men, whose condition by nature is alike.  <span
id="fr_61"></span>[62](#fn_61.md) In choosing *little children* rather than
the *wise,* he has a regard to his glory; for the flesh is too apt to
rise, and if able and learned men had led the way, it would soon have
come to be the general conviction, that men obtain faith by their skill,
or industry, or learning. In no other way can the mercy of God be so
fully known as it ought to be, than by making such a choice, from which
it is evident, that whatever men bring from themselves is nothing; and
therefore human wisdom is justly thrown down, that it may not obscure
the praise of divine grace.

<span id="ii.viii-p21"></span>But it is asked, whom does Christ
denominate *wise?* And whom does he denominate *little children?* For
experience plainly shows, that not all the ignorant and unlearned on the
one hand are enlightened to believe, and that not all the *wise* or
*learned* are left in their blindness. It follows, that those are called
*wise and prudent,* who, swelled with diabolical pride, cannot endure to
hear Christ speaking to them from above. And yet it does not always
happen that God reprobates those who have a higher opinion of themselves
than they ought to have; as we learn from the instance of Paul, whose
fierceness Christ subdued. If we come down to the ignorant multitude,
the majority of whom display envenomed malice, we perceive that they are
left to their destruction equally with the nobles and great men. I do
acknowledge, that all unbelievers swell with a wicked confidence in
themselves, whether their pride be nourished by their wisdom, or by a
reputation for integrity, or by honors, or by riches. But I consider
that Christ here includes all who are eminent for abilities and
learning, without charging them with any fault; as, on the other hand,
he does not represent it to be an excellence in any one that he is a
*little* child. True, humble persons have Christ for their master, and
the first lesson of faith is, Let no man presume on his wisdom. But
Christ does not speak here as to voluntary childhood. He magnifies the
grace of the Father on this ground, that he does not disdain to descend
even to the lowest and most abominable, that he may raise up the poor
out of filth.

<span id="ii.viii-p22"></span>But here a question arises. As *prudence*
is a gift of God, how comes it that it hinders us from perceiving the
brightness of God, which shines in the Gospel? We ought, indeed, to
remember what I have already said, that unbelievers corrupt all the
*prudence* which they possess, and that men of distinguished abilities
are often hindered in this respect, that they cannot submit to be
taught. But with respect to the present passage I reply: Though the
sagacity of the *prudent* does not stand in their way, they may
notwithstanding be deprived of the light of the Gospel. Since the
condition of all is the same or alike, why may not God take this or that
person according to his pleasure? The reason why he passes by the *wise*
and the *great* is declared by Paul to be, that

<span id="ii.viii-p23"></span>God hath chosen the weak and foolish
things of the world to confound the glory of the flesh,  
(<span id="ii.viii-p23.2"></span>[1Co
1:27](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#027)<span id="ii.viii-p23.2"></span>..md)

<span id="ii.viii-p24"></span>Hence also we infer, that the statement
made by Christ is not universal, when he says, that the mysteries of the
Gospel are *hidden from the wise* If out of five *wise men* four reject
the Gospel and one embraces it, and if, out of an equal number of
unlearned persons, two or three become disciples of Christ, this
statement is fulfilled. This is also confirmed by that passage in Paul’s
writings, which I lately quoted; for he does not exclude from the
kingdom of God all the *wise,* and *noble,* and *mighty,* but only
declares that it does not contain *many* of them.

<span id="ii.viii-p25"></span>The question is now solved. *Prudence* is
not condemned as far as it is a gift of God, but Christ merely declares
that it has no influence in procuring faith. On the other hand, he does
not recommend ignorance, as if it rendered men acceptable to God, but
affirms that it does not hinder mercy from enlightening ignorant and
unlearned men with heavenly wisdom. It now remains to explain what is
meant by *revealing* and *hiding.* That Christ does not speak of the
outward preaching may be inferred with certainty from this circumstance,
that he presented himself as a Teacher to all without distinction, and
enjoined his Apostles to do the same. The meaning therefore is, that no
man can obtain faith by his own acuteness, but only by the secret
illumination of the Spirit.

<span id="ii.viii-p26"></span><span id="ii.viii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ii.viii-p27"></span>**26.** *Undoubtedly, O Father* This
expression removes every pretense for that licentiousness of inquiry, to
which we are continually excited. There is nothing which we yield to God
with greater difficulty, than that his will shall be regarded by us as
the highest reason and justice.  <span id="fr_62"></span>[63](#fn_62.md) He
frequently repeats, that his *judgments are a deep abyss,* (<span
id="ii.viii-p28.2"></span>[Ps
36:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#006)<span id="ii.viii-p28.2"></span>;.md)
but we plunge with headlong violence into that depth,  <span
id="fr_63"></span>[64](#fn_63.md) and if there is any thing that does not
please us, we gnash our teeth, or murmur against him, and many even
break out into open blasphemies. On the contrary, our Lord lays down to
us this rule, that whatever God has determined must be regarded by us as
right.  <span id="fr_64"></span>[65](#fn_64.md) This is sober wisdom, to
acquiesce in the good pleasure of God as alone equal to a thousand
arguments.  <span id="fr_65"></span>[66](#fn_65.md) Christ might indeed
have brought forward the causes of that distinction, if there were any;
but he is satisfied with the good pleasure of God, and inquires no
farther why he calls to salvation *little children* rather than others,
and composes his kingdom out of an obscure flock.  <span
id="fr_66"></span>[67](#fn_66.md) Hence it is evident, that men direct
their fury against Christ, when, on learning that some are freely
chosen, and others are reprobated, by the will of God, they storm
because they find it unpleasant to yield to God.  <span
id="fr_67"></span>[68](#fn_67.md)

<span id="ii.viii-p34"></span><span id="ii.viii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="ii.viii-p35"></span>**27.** *All things have been delivered to
me.* The connection of this sentence with the preceding one is not
correctly understood by those commentators who think that Christ intends
nothing more than to strengthen the confidence of his disciples for
preaching the Gospel. My opinion is, that Christ spoke these words for
another reason, and with another object in view. Having formerly
asserted that the Church proceeds from the secret source of God’s free
election, he now shows in what manner the grace of salvation comes to
men. Many persons, as soon as they learn that none are heirs of eternal
life but those whom God *chose before the foundation of the world,*
(<span id="ii.viii-p35.2"></span>[Eph
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#004)<span id="ii.viii-p35.2"></span>,.md)
begin to inquire anxiously how they may be assured of God’s secret
purpose, and thus plunge into a labyrinth, from which they will find no
escape. Christ enjoins them to come direct to himself, in order to
obtain certainty of salvation. The meaning therefore is, that life is
exhibited to us in Christ himself, and that no man will partake of it
who does not enter by the gate of faith. We now see that he connects
faith with the eternal predestination of God, — two things which men
foolishly and wickedly hold to be inconsistent with each other. Though
our salvation was always hidden with God, yet Christ is the channel
through which it flows to us, and we receive it by faith, that it may be
secure and ratified in our hearts. We are not at liberty then to turn
away from Christ, unless we choose to reject the salvation which he
offers to us.

<span id="ii.viii-p36"></span>*None knoweth the Son.* He says this, that
we may not be guided by the judgment of men, and thus form an erroneous
estimate of his majesty. The meaning therefore is, that if we wish to
know what is the character of Christ, we must abide by the testimony of
*the Father,* who alone can truly and certainly inform us what authority
he hath bestowed upon him. And, indeed, by imagining him to be what our
mind, according to its capacity, conceives of him, we deprive him of a
great part of his excellence, so that we cannot know him aright but from
the voice of *the Father* That voice alone would undoubtedly be
insufficient without the guidance of the Spirit; for the power of Christ
is too deep and hidden to be attained by men, until they have been
enlightened by *the Father* We must understand him to mean, not that
*the Father knoweth* for himself, but that He *knoweth* for us to reveal
him to us.

<span id="ii.viii-p37"></span>But the sentence appears to be incomplete,
for the two clauses do not correspond to each other. Of *the Son* it is
said, that *none knoweth the Father except himself, and he to whom he
shall be pleased to reveal him* Of *the Father* nothing more is said
than this, that He alone k*noweth the Son.* Nothing is said about
revelation. I reply, that it was unnecessary to repeat what he had
already said; for what else is contained in the previous thanksgiving,
than that the Father hath revealed the Son to those who approve of him?
When it is now added that He alone *knoweth the Son,* it appears to be
the assigning of a reason; for this thought might, have occurred, What
neccessity was there that *the Son,* who had openly exhibited himself to
the view of men, should be *revealed by the Father?* We now perceive the
reason why it was said, that *none knoweth the Son but the Father only*
It now remains that we attend to the latter clause:

<span id="ii.viii-p38"></span>*None knoweth the Father except the Son,
and he to whom the Son shall be pleased to reveal him.* This is a
different kind of knowledge from the former; for the Son is said to
*know the Father,* not because he reveals Him by his Spirit, but
because, being the lively image of Him, he represents Him visibly in his
own person. At the same time, I do not exclude the Spirit, but explain
the *revelation* here mentioned as referring to the manner of
communicating information. This agrees most completely with the context;
for Christ confirms what he had formerly said, *that all things had been
delivered to him by his Father,* by informing us that *the fullness of
the Godhead dwelleth in him,* (<span id="ii.viii-p38.1"></span>[Col
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#009)<span id="ii.viii-p38.1"></span>..md)
The passage may be thus summed up:  <span id="fr_68"></span>[69](#fn_68.md)
First, it is the gift of *the Father,* that *the Son is known,* because
by his Spirit he opens the eyes of our mind to discern the glory of
Christ, which otherwise would have been hidden from us. Secondly, *the
Father,* who dwells in inaccessible light, and is in himself
incomprehensible, is revealed to us by the Son, because he is the lively
image of Him, so that it is in vain to seek for Him elsewhere.  <span
id="fr_69"></span>[70](#fn_69.md)

<span id="ii.viii-p41"></span><span id="ii.viii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="ii.viii-p42"></span>**28.** *Come to me all that labor* He now
kindly invites to himself those whom he acknowledges to be fit for
becoming his disciples. Though he is ready to reveal the Father to all,
yet the greater part are careless about coming to him, because they are
not affected by a conviction of their necessities. Hypocrites give
themselves no concern about Christ, because they are intoxicated with
their own righteousness, and neither *hunger* nor *thirst* (<span
id="ii.viii-p42.1"></span>[Mt 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#006.md)<span
id="ii.viii-p42.1"></span>) for his grace. Those who are devoted to the
world set no value on heavenly life. It would be in vain, therefore, for
Christ to invite either of these classes, and therefore he turns to the
wretched and afflicted. He speaks of them as *laboring,* or groaning
under a *burden,* and does not mean generally those who are oppressed
with grief and vexations, but those who are overwhelmed by their sins,
who are filled with alarm at the wrath of God, and are ready to sink
under so weighty a *burden.* There are various methods, indeed, by which
God humbles his elect; but as the greater part of those who are loaded
with afflictions still remain obstinate and rebellious, Christ means by
persons laboring *and burdened,* those whose consciences are distressed
by their exposure to eternal death, and who are inwardly so pressed down
by their miseries that they faint; for this very fainting prepares them
for receiving his grace. He tells us that the reason why most men
despise his grace is, that they are not sensible of their poverty; but
that there is no reason why their pride or folly should keep back
afflicted souls that long for relief.

<span id="ii.viii-p43"></span>Let us therefore bid adieu to all who,
entangled by the snares of Satan, either are persuaded that they possess
a righteousness out of Christ, or imagine that they are happy in this
world. Let our miseries drive us to seek Christ; and as he admits none
to the enjoyment of his rest but those who sink under the burden, let us
learn, that there is no venom more deadly than that slothfulness which
is produced in us, either by earthly happiness, or by a false and
deceitful opinion of our own righteousness and virtue. Let each of us
labor earnestly to arouse himself, first, by vigorously shaking off the
luxuries of the world; and, secondly, by laying aside *every* false
confidence. Now though this preparation for coming to Christ makes them
as dead men,  <span id="fr_70"></span>[71](#fn_70.md) yet it ought to be
observed, that it is the gift of the Holy Spirit, because it is the
commencement of repentance, to which no man aspires in his own strength.
Christ did not intend to show what man can do of himself, but only to
inform us what must be the feelings of those who come to him.

<span id="ii.viii-p45"></span>They who limit the *burden* and the
*labor* to ceremonies of the Law, take a very narrow view of Christ’s
meaning. I do acknowledge, that the Law was intolerably burdensome, and
overwhelmed the souls of worshippers; but we must bear in mind what I
have said, that Christ stretches out his hand to all the afflicted, and
thus lays down a distinction between his disciples and those who despise
the Gospel. But we must attend to the universality of the expression;
for Christ included all, without exception, who *labor and are
burdened,* that no man may shut the gate against himself by wicked
doubts.  <span id="fr_71"></span>[72](#fn_71.md) And yet all such persons
are few in number; for, among the innumerable multitude of those that
perish, few are aware that they are perishing. The *relief* which he
promises consists in the free pardon of sins, which alone gives us
peace.

<span id="ii.viii-p47"></span><span id="ii.viii-p47.1"></span>

<span id="ii.viii-p48"></span>**29.** *Take my yoke upon you.* Many
persons, we perceive, abuse the grace of Christ by turning it into an
indulgence of the flesh; and therefore Christ, after promising joyful
rest to wretchedly distressed consciences, reminds them, at the same
time, that he is their Deliverer on condition of their submitting to his
yoke. He does not, he tells us, absolve men from their sins in such a
manner, that, restored to the favor of God, they may sin with greater
freedom, but that, raised up by his grace, they may also *take his yoke
upon them,* and that, being free in spirit, they may restrain the
licentiousness of their flesh. And hence we obtain a definition of that
rest of which he had spoken. It is not at all intended to exempt the
disciples of Christ from the warfare of the flesh, that they may enjoy
themselves at their ease, but to train them under the burden of
discipline, and keep them under the yoke.

<span id="ii.viii-p49"></span>*Learn of me* It is a mistake, I think, to
suppose that Christ here assures us of his meekness*,* lest his
disciples, under the influence of that fear which is usually experienced
in approaching persons of distinction, should remain at a distance from
him on account of his Divine glory. It is rather his design to form us
to the imitation of himself, because the obstinacy of the flesh leads us
to shrink from his *yoke* as harsh and uneasy. Shortly afterwards, he
adds, (verse 30,) *my yoke is easy* But how shall any man be brought
willingly and gently to bend his neck, unless, by putting on meekness,
he be conformed to Christ? That this is the meaning of the words is
plain; for Christ, after exhorting his disciples to bear his *yoke,* and
desirous to prevent them from being deterred by its difficulty,
immediately adds, *Learn of me*; thus declaring that, when his example
shall have accustomed us to *meekness* and humility, we shall no longer
feel his *yoke* to be troublesome. To the same purpose he adds, *I will
relieve you* So long as the flesh kicks, we rebel; and those who refuse
the yoke of Christ, and endeavor to appease God in any other manner,
distress and waste themselves in vain. In this manner, we see the
Papists wretchedly torturing themselves, and silently enduring the
dreadful tyranny under which they groan, that they may not bow to the
*yoke* of Christ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_55"></span>[56](cc32009.htm#fr_55.md) <span
id="ii.viii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.viii-p5"></span> “<span id="ii.viii-p5.1"></span>Ie te ren
graces;” — “I give thee thanks.”

<span id="fn_56"></span>[57](cc32009.htm#fr_56.md) <span
id="ii.viii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.viii-p6"></span> “<span id="ii.viii-p6.1"></span>Il est
ainsi, Pere, pourtant que ton bon plaisir a este tel;” — “it i so, O
Father, because thy good pleasure was such.”

<span id="fn_57"></span>[58](cc32009.htm#fr_57.md) <span
id="ii.viii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.viii-p7"></span> “<span id="ii.viii-p7.1"></span>Le Fils le
vent reveler, *ou, donner a cognoistre*;” —”the Son chooses to reveal
him, *or, to make him known.”*

<span id="fn_58"></span>[59](cc32009.htm#fr_58.md) <span
id="ii.viii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.viii-p10"></span> “<span id="ii.viii-p10.1"></span>Ie to
ren graces;” — “I give thee thanks.”

<span id="fn_59"></span>[60](cc32009.htm#fr_59.md) <span
id="ii.viii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ii.viii-p17"></span> “<span id="ii.viii-p17.1"></span>Ie to
ren graces, que tu as cache**;**” — “I thank thee, that thou hast
concealed.”

<span id="fn_60"></span>[61](cc32009.htm#fr_60.md) <span
id="ii.viii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ii.viii-p18"></span> “<span id="ii.viii-p18.1"></span>Qu’il
n’y a que le bon plaisir et vouloir de Dieu qui soit cause de ceste
diversit,” — “that it is only the good pleasure and will of God that is
the cause of this diversity.”

<span id="fn_61"></span>[62](cc32009.htm#fr_61.md) <span
id="ii.viii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ii.viii-p20"></span> “<span id="ii.viii-p20.1"></span>Desquels
tous la condition est semblable de nature;” — “of all of whom the
condition by nature is alike.”

<span id="fn_62"></span>[63](cc32009.htm#fr_62.md) <span
id="ii.viii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="ii.viii-p28"></span> “<span id="ii.viii-p28.1"></span>Pour la
derniere et souveraine raison, et pour Justice parfaite;” — “for the
last and supreme reason, and for perfect justice.”

<span id="fn_63"></span>[64](cc32009.htm#fr_63.md) <span
id="ii.viii-p28.3"></span>

<span id="ii.viii-p29"></span> “<span id="ii.viii-p29.1"></span>Pour
sonder ce qui y est;” — “to sound what is in it.”

<span id="fn_64"></span>[65](cc32009.htm#fr_64.md) <span
id="ii.viii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ii.viii-p30"></span> “<span id="ii.viii-p30.1"></span>Que tout
ce que Dieu a determine est bon et droict;” — “that all that God has
determined is good and right.”

<span id="fn_65"></span>[66](cc32009.htm#fr_65.md) <span
id="ii.viii-p30.2"></span>

<span id="ii.viii-p31"></span> “<span id="ii.viii-p31.1"></span>Et cela
est estre sage a sobriete, d’acquiescer au seul bon plaisir de Dieu, et
nous y arrester paisiblement, plus que s’il y avoit dix mille raisons
devant nos yeux;” — “and this is to be wise to sobriety, to acquiesce in
the good pleasure of God, and to rest calmly upon it, more than if there
were ten thousand arguments before our eyes.”

<span id="fn_66"></span>[67](cc32009.htm#fr_66.md) <span
id="ii.viii-p31.2"></span>

<span id="ii.viii-p32"></span> “<span id="ii.viii-p32.1"></span>D’une
troupe de gens incognus, et de petite estime;” — “from a flock of
persons unknown and little esteemed.”

<span id="fn_67"></span>[68](cc32009.htm#fr_67.md) <span
id="ii.viii-p32.2"></span>

<span id="ii.viii-p33"></span> “<span id="ii.viii-p33.1"></span>Vienent
incontinent a tempester, pource quil leur fasche que Dieu ait le dernier
mot;” — “come immediately to storm, because it gives them uneasiness
that God should have the last word.”

<span id="fn_68"></span>[69](cc32009.htm#fr_68.md) <span
id="ii.viii-p38.2"></span>

<span id="ii.viii-p39"></span> “<span id="ii.viii-p39.1"></span>Tout ce
passage revient a ces deux points;” — “the whole of this passage amounts
to these two points.”

<span id="fn_69"></span>[70](cc32009.htm#fr_69.md) <span
id="ii.viii-p39.2"></span>

<span id="ii.viii-p40"></span> “<span id="ii.viii-p40.1"></span>En sorte
que c’est temps perdu de le chercher ailleurs;” — “so that it is lost
time to seek him elsewhere.”

<span id="fn_70"></span>[71](cc32009.htm#fr_70.md) <span
id="ii.viii-p43.1"></span>

<span id="ii.viii-p44"></span> “<span id="ii.viii-p44.1"></span>Combien
que ceste preparation a recevoir la grace de Christ despouille desia
entierement les hommes, et monstre qu’ils sont du tout vuides de vertu;”
— “though this preparation for receiving the grace of Christ already
strips men entirely, and shows that they are wholly devoid of virtue.”

<span id="fn_71"></span>[72](cc32009.htm#fr_71.md) <span
id="ii.viii-p45.1"></span>

<span id="ii.viii-p46"></span> “<span id="ii.viii-p46.1"></span>Par une
desfiance et facon perverse de douter;” — “by a distrust and wicked
manner of doubting.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 12:1-8; Mark 2:23-28; Luke 6:1-5](cc32010.md)
