[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc32056)  [Next](cc32058.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 32: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part II*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.lvi"></span>

<span id="ii.lvi-p1"></span><span id="ii.lvi-p1.1"></span>[Matthew
17:14-18](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#014.md)<span
id="ii.lvi-p1.1"></span>; <span id="ii.lvi-p1.2"></span>[Mark
9:14-27](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#014.md)<span
id="ii.lvi-p1.2"></span>;  
<span id="ii.lvi-p1.4"></span>[Luke
9:37-43](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#037.md)<span id="ii.lvi-p1.4"></span>

<span id="ii.lvi-p2"></span><span id="ii.lvi-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
17:14-18](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#014.md)<span id="ii.lvi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lvi-p3"></span><span id="ii.lvi-p3.1"></span>[Mark
9:14-27](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#014.md)<span id="ii.lvi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lvi-p4"></span><span id="ii.lvi-p4.1"></span>[Luke
9:37-43](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#037.md)<span id="ii.lvi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lvi-p5"></span> **14**. And when they were come to the
multitude, a man came to him, kneeling before him, **15**. And saying,
Lord, have compassion on my son, for he is lunatic, and is grievously
distressed; for frequently he falleth into the fire, and frequently into
the water. **16**. And I brought him to thy disciples, and they could
not cure him. **17**. And Jesus answering said, O unbelieving and
perverse nation, how long shall I be with you? How long shall I suffer
you? Bring him hither to me. **18**. And Jesus rebuked the devil, who
went out of him; and from that instant the child was cured.

<span id="ii.lvi-p6"></span> 

<span id="ii.lvi-p7"></span> **14**. And when he came to the disciples,
he saw a great multitude around them, and the scribes disputing with
them. **15**. And the whole multitude, as soon as they saw him, were
astonished, and, running to him, saluted him. **16**. And he asked the
scribes, What do you dispute among yourselves? **17**. And one of the
multitude answering said, Master, I have brought to thee my son, who
hath a dumb spirit; **18**. And wheresoever it seizeth him, it teareth
him, and he foameth, and gnasheth with his teeth, and languished: and I
spoke to thy disciples to cast him out, and they could not. **19**. And
he, answering, saith to him, O unbelieving nation, how long shall I be
with you? How long shall I suffer you? Bring him to me. **20**. And they
brought him to him; and as soon as he saw him, the spirit tore him, and
he lay on the ground, and rolled about, foaming. **21**. And he asked hi
father, How long is it since this happened to him? And he said, From a
child. **22**. And frequently it hath thrown him into the fire, and into
the water, to destroy him: but if thou canst do any thing, have
compassion on us, and help us. **23**. And Jesus said, If thou canst
believe it, all things are possible to him that believeth. **24**. And
immediately the father of the child, exclaiming with tears, said, Lord,
I believe; aid thou my unbelief. **25**. And when Jesus saw that the
multitude were crowding upon him, he rebuked the unclean spirit, saying
to him, Dumb and deaf spirit, I command thee, go out of him, and enter
no more into him. **26**. And when the spirit had cried out, and torn
him greatly, he went out of him; and he became like a dead person, so
that many said, He is dead. **27**. But Jesus stretched out his hand,
and raised him; and he stood up.

<span id="ii.lvi-p8"></span> **37**. And it happened on the following
day, while they were going down from the mountain, a great multitude met
him. **38**. And, lo, a man, who was one of the multitude, cried out,
saying, Master, I beseech thee, look to my son; for he is my only son.
**39**. And, lo, a spirit seizeth him, and teareth him foaming, and
bruising him, hardly departeth from him. **40**. And I besought thy
disciples to cast him out, and they could not. **41**. And Jesus
answering said, O unbelieving and perverse nation, how long shall I be
with you, and suffer you? Bring thy son hither. **42**. And while he was
still approaching, the devil tore him, and threw him down; and Jesus
rebuked the unclean spirit, and cured the child, and restored him to his
father. **43**. And they were all astonished at the mighty power of God.

<span id="ii.lvi-p9"></span> 

<span id="ii.lvi-p10"></span> 

<span id="ii.lvi-p11"></span><span id="ii.lvi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lvi-p12"></span>As Mark is more full, and explains the
circumstances very minutely, we shall follow the order of his narrative.
And first he points out clearly the reason why Christ uses a harshness
so unusual with him, when he exclaims that the Jews, on account of their
perverse malice, do not deserve to be any longer endured. We know how
gently he was wont to receive them, even when their requests were
excessively importunate.  <span id="fr_485"></span>[486](#fn_485.md) A
father here entreats in behalf of an only son, the necessity is
extremely urgent, and a modest and humble appeal is made to the
compassion of Christ. Why then does he, contrary to his custom, break
out suddenly into passion, and declare that they can be endured no
longer? As the narrative of Matthew and Luke does not enable us to
discover the reason of this great severity, some commentators have
fallen into the mistake of supposing that this rebuke was directed
either against the disciples, or against the father of the afflicted
child. But if we duly consider all the circumstances of the case, as
they are related by Mark, there will be no difficulty in arriving at the
conclusion, that the indignation of Christ was directed against the
malice of the scribes, and that he did not intend to treat the ignorant
and weak with such harshness.

<span id="ii.lvi-p14"></span>During Christ’s absence, a *lunatic* child
had been brought forward. The scribes, regarding this as a plausible
occasion for giving annoyance, seized upon it eagerly, and entreated the
disciples that, if they had any power, they would exercise it in curing
the child. It is probable that the disciples made an attempt, and that
their efforts were unavailing; upon which the scribes raise the shout of
victory, and not only ridicule the disciples, but break out against
Christ, as if in their person his power had been baffled. It was an
extraordinary display of outrageous impiety united with equally base
ingratitude, maliciously to keep out of view so many miracles, from
which they had learned the amazing power of Christ; for they manifestly
endeavored to extinguish the light which was placed before their eyes.
With good reason, therefore, does Christ exclaim that they could no
longer be endured, and pronounce them to be *an unbelieving and perverse
nation;* for the numerous proofs which they had formerly beheld ought at
least to have had the effect of preventing them from seeking occasion of
disparagement.  <span id="fr_486"></span>[487](#fn_486.md)

<span id="ii.lvi-p16"></span>**<span id="ii.lvi-p16.1"></span>[Mark
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#014.md)<span id="ii.lvi-p16.1"></span>.**
*He saw a great multitude around them.* The disciples were, no doubt,
held up to public gaze, as the enemies of the truth are wont, on
occasions of triumph, to assemble a crowd about a trifle. The scribes
had made such a noise about it, as to draw down on the disciples the
ridicule of many persons. And yet it appears that there were some who
were not ill disposed; for, as soon as they see Jesus, they salute him;
and even the insolence of the scribes is restrained by his presence,
for, when they are asked what is the matter in dispute, they have not a
word to say.

<span id="ii.lvi-p17"></span><span id="ii.lvi-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lvi-p18"></span>**17.** *Master, I have brought to thee my
son.* Matthew describes a different sort of disease from what is
described by Mark, for he says that the man was *lunatic* But both agree
as to these two points, that he was *dumb*, and that at certain
intervals he became furious. The term *lunatic* is applied to those who,
about the waning of the *moon*, are seized with epilepsy, or afflicted
with giddiness. I do not admit the fanciful notion of Chrysostom, that
the word *lunatic* was invented by a trick of Satan, in order to throw
disgrace on the good creatures of God; for we learn from undoubted
experience, that the course of the moon affects the increase or decline
of these diseases.  <span id="fr_487"></span>[488](#fn_487.md) And yet this
does not prevent Satan from mixing up his attacks with natural means. I
am of opinion, therefore, that the man was not naturally *deaf* and
*dumb*, but that Satan had taken possession of his tongue and ears; and
that, as the weakness of his brain and nerves made him liable to
epilepsy, Satan availed himself of this for aggravating the disease. The
consequence was, that he was exposed to danger on every hand, and was
thrown into violent convulsions, which left him lying on the ground, in
a fainting state, and like a dead man.

<span id="ii.lvi-p20"></span>Let us learn from this how many ways Satan
has of injuring us, were it not that he is restrained by the hand of
God. Our infirmities both of soul and body, which we feel to be
innumerable, are so many darts with which Satan is supplied for wounding
us. We are worse than stupid, if a condition so wretched does not,
arouse us to prayer. But in this we see also an amazing display of the
goodness of God, that, though we are liable to such a variety of
dangers,  <span id="fr_488"></span>[489](#fn_488.md) he surrounds us with
his protection; particularly if we consider with what eagerness our
enemy is bent on our destruction. We ought also to call to remembrance
the consoling truth, that Christ has come to bridle his rage, and that
we are safe in the midst of so many dangers, because our diseases are
effectually counteracted by heavenly medicine.

<span id="ii.lvi-p22"></span>We must attend also to the circumstance of
the time. The father replies, that his son had been subject to this
grievous disease from his *infancy*. If Satan was permitted to exert his
power, to such an extent, on a person of that tender age, what reason
have not we to fear, who are continually exposing ourselves by our
crimes to deadly strokes, who even supply our enemy with darts, and on
whom he might justly be permitted to spend his rage, if it were not kept
under restraint by the astonishing goodness of God?

<span id="ii.lvi-p23"></span><span id="ii.lvi-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lvi-p24"></span>**<span id="ii.lvi-p24.2"></span>[Matthew
17:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#017.md)<span
id="ii.lvi-p24.2"></span>.** *O unbelieving and rebellious nation.*
Though Christ appears to direct his discourse to the father of the
*lunatic*, yet there can be no doubt that he refers to the scribes, as I
have lately explained; for it is certain that the reproof is directed,
not against ignorant and weak persons, but against those who, through
inveterate malice, obstinately resist God. This is the reason why Christ
declares that they are no longer worthy to be endured, and threatens
that ere long he will separate from them. But nothing worse could happen
to them than that Christ should leave them, and it was no light reproach
that they rejected so disdainfully the grace of their visitation. We
must also observe here, that we ought to treat men in various ways, each
according to his natural disposition. For, while our Lord attracts to
him the teachable by the utmost mildness, supports the weak, and gently
arouses even the sluggish, he does not spare those crooked serpents, on
whom he perceives that no remedies can effect a cure.

<span id="ii.lvi-p25"></span><span id="ii.lvi-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lvi-p26"></span>**<span id="ii.lvi-p26.2"></span>[Mark
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#020.md)<span id="ii.lvi-p26.2"></span>.**
*And as soon as he saw him.* That the devil should rage with more than
ordinary cruelty against the man, when he is brought to Christ, ought
not to excite surprise; for in proportion as the grace of Christ is seen
to be nearer at hand, and acts more powerfully, the fury of Satan is the
more highly excited. The presence of Christ awakens him like the sound
of a trumpet. He raises as violent a storm as he can, and contends with
all his might. We ought to be prepared beforehand with such meditations,
that our faith may not be disturbed, when the approach of the grace of
Christ is met by more than ordinary violence on the part of our enemy.
Nor ought we to lose sight of another point, that the true commencement
of our cure is, when our affliction is so heavy that we are almost at
the point of death. It must also be taken into account that, by means of
the furious attack of Satan, our Lord lights a torch to cause his grace
to be seen; for, when the spectators were appalled at the dreadful
spectacle, the display of the power of Christ, which immediately
followed, was more distinctly perceived.

<span id="ii.lvi-p27"></span><span id="ii.lvi-p27.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lvi-p28"></span>**21.** *From a child.* Hence we infer that
this punishment was not inflicted on account of the sins of the
individual, but was a secret judgment of God. True indeed, even infants,
as soon as they have come out of the womb, are not innocent in the sight
of God, or free from guilt; but God’s chastisements have sometimes
hidden causes, and are intended to try our obedience. We do not render
to God the honor which is due to Him, unless with reverence and modesty
we adore His justice, when it is concealed from us. Whoever wishes to
obtain more full information on this point, may consult my *Commentary*
on these words, *Neither hath this man sinned*, *nor his parents*,
(<span id="ii.lvi-p28.1"></span>[Joh
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#003)<span id="ii.lvi-p28.1"></span>..md)

<span id="ii.lvi-p29"></span><span id="ii.lvi-p29.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lvi-p30"></span>**22.** *If thou canst do any thing, have
compassion on us, and help us.* We see how little honor he renders to
Christ; for, supposing him to be some prophet, whose power was limited,
he approaches to him with hesitation. On the other hand, the first
foundation of faith is, to embrace the boundless power of God; and the
first step to prayer is, to raise it above all opposition by the firm
belief that our prayers are not in vain. As this man did not suppose
Christ to be at all different from other men, his false opinion is
corrected; for our faith must be so formed as to be capable and prepared
for receiving the desired favor. In his reply Christ does not administer
a direct reproof, but indirectly reminding the man of what he had said
amiss, points out to him his fault, and informs him how a remedy may be
obtained.

<span id="ii.lvi-p31"></span><span id="ii.lvi-p31.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lvi-p32"></span>**23.** *If thou canst believe.* “You ask
me,” says he, “to aid you as far as I can; but you will find in me an
inexhaustible fountain of power, provided that the faith which you bring
be sufficiently large.” Hence may be learned a useful doctrine, which
will apply equally to all of us, that it is not the Lord that prevents
his benefits from flowing to us in large abundance, but that it must be
attributed to the narrowness of our faith, that it comes to us only in
drops, and that frequently we do not feel even a drop, because unbelief
shuts up our heart. It is an idle exercise of ingenuity to prove
Christ’s meaning to be, that a man can believe of himself: for nothing
more was intended than to throw back on men the blame of their poverty,
whenever they disparage the power of God by their unbelief.

<span id="ii.lvi-p33"></span>*All things are possible to him that
believeth.* Christ undoubtedly intended to teach that the fullness of
all blessings has been given to us by the Father, and that every kind of
assistance must be expected from him alone in the same manner as we
expect it from the hand of God. “Only exercise,” says he, “a firm
belief, and you will obtain.” In what manner faith obtains any thing for
us we shall immediately see.

<span id="ii.lvi-p34"></span><span id="ii.lvi-p34.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lvi-p35"></span>**24.** *Lord, I believe.* He declares that
he *believes*, and yet acknowledges himself to have *unbelief* These two
statements may appear to contradict each other, but there is none of us
that does not experience both of them in himself. As our *faith* is
never perfect, it follows that we are partly *unbelievers;* but God
forgives us, and exercises such forbearance towards us, as to reckon us
believers on account of a small portion of faith. It is our duty, in the
meantime, carefully to shake off the remains of infidelity which adhere
to us, to strive against them, and to pray to God to correct them, and,
as often as we are engaged in this conflict, to fly to him for aid. If
we duly inquire what portion has been bestowed on each, it will
evidently appear that there are very few who are eminent in faith, few
who have a moderate portion, and very many who have but a small measure.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_485"></span>[486](cc32057.htm#fr_485.md) <span
id="ii.lvi-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ii.lvi-p13"></span> “<span id="ii.lvi-p13.1"></span>Encores
mesme qu’ils se monstrassent import uns et facheux en leurs requestes;”
— “even though they showed themselves to be importunate and troublesome
in their requests.”

<span id="fn_486"></span>[487](cc32057.htm#fr_486.md) <span
id="ii.lvi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lvi-p15"></span> “<span id="ii.lvi-p15.1"></span>Qu’ils
n’allassent plus chercher des cavillations et moyens obliques pour luy
resister;” — “not to resort any more to cavils and indirect methods of
opposing him.”

<span id="fn_487"></span>[488](cc32057.htm#fr_487.md) <span
id="ii.lvi-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ii.lvi-p19"></span> On the opinion expressed by calvin, as to
the influence of the *moon* on these diseases, the reader may consult
*Harmony*, vol. 1 p. 245, n.l. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_488"></span>[489](cc32057.htm#fr_488.md) <span
id="ii.lvi-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lvi-p21"></span> “<span id="ii.lvi-p21.1"></span>Combien
que nous soyons subiets a mille dangers et inconveniens;” — “though we
are liable to a thousand dangers and inconveniences.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 17:19-21; Mark 9:28-29; Luke 17:5-6](cc32058.md)
