[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc32080)  [Next](cc32082.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 32: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part II*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.lxxx"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxx-p1"></span><span id="ii.lxxx-p1.1"></span>[Matthew
21:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#001.md)<span id="ii.lxxx-p1.1"></span>;
<span id="ii.lxxx-p1.2"></span>[Mark
11:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#001.md)<span
id="ii.lxxx-p1.2"></span>; <span id="ii.lxxx-p1.3"></span>[Luke
19:29-38](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#029.md)<span
id="ii.lxxx-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxx-p2"></span><span id="ii.lxxx-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
21:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#001.md)<span id="ii.lxxx-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxx-p3"></span><span id="ii.lxxx-p3.1"></span>[Mark
11:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#001.md)<span id="ii.lxxx-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxx-p4"></span><span id="ii.lxxx-p4.1"></span>[Luke
19:29-38](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#029.md)<span
id="ii.lxxx-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxx-p5"></span>**1**. And when they approached Jerusalem,
and were come to Bethphage, to the mountain of Olives, then Jesus sent
two disciples,  <span id="fr_697"></span>[698](#fn_697.md) **2**. Saying to
them, Go into the village which is opposite to you, and immediately you
will find an ass tied, and a colt with her: loose them, and bring them
to me. **3**. And if any man shall say anything to you, say, The Lord
hath need of them; and immediately he will send them.  <span
id="fr_698"></span>[699](#fn_698.md) **4**. Now all this was done, that it
might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet, saying, **5**. Say
to the daughter of Zion, Lo, thy King cometh to thee, meek, and sitting
on an ass, and on a colt, the foal of one that is under the yoke.  <span
id="fr_699"></span>[700](#fn_699.md) **6**. And the disciples went, and did
as Jesus had commanded them. **7**. And they brought the ass and the
colt, and laid on them their garments, and placed him upon them.  <span
id="fr_700"></span>[701](#fn_700.md) **8**. And a very great multitude
spread their garments in the way; and others cut down branches from the
trees, and strawed them in the way. **9**. And the multitudes that went
before, and that followed, cried, saying, Hosanna to the Son of David:
Blessed be he  <span id="fr_701"></span>[702](#fn_701.md) that cometh in
the name of the Lord; Hosanna in the highest.  <span
id="fr_702"></span>[703](#fn_702.md)

<span id="ii.lxxx-p12"></span> 

<span id="ii.lxxx-p13"></span>**1**. And as they approach Jerusalem, at
Bethphage and Bethany, near the mountain of Olives, he sendeth two of
his disciples. **2**. And saith to them, Go away into the village which
is opposite to you, and, just as you are entering into it, you will find
a colt tied, on which no man ever sat; loose him, and bring him.
**3**. And if any man shall say to you, Why do you this? say, Because
the Lord hath need of him; and immediately he will send him hither.
**4** And they went away, and found a colt tied near a door where two
ways meet, and they loose him. **5**. And some of those who stood there
said to them, What do you,  <span id="fr_703"></span>[704](#fn_703.md)
loosing the colt? **6**. And they said to them as Jesus had commanded,
and they allowed them.  <span id="fr_704"></span>[705](#fn_704.md)
**7**. And they brought the colt to Jesus, and threw their garments on
him, and he sat upon him, **8**. And many spread their garments in the
way; and others cut down branches from the trees, and strawed them in
the way. **9**. And they that went before, and that followed, cried,
saying, Blessed be he  <span id="fr_705"></span>[706](#fn_705.md) that
cometh in the name of the Lord: **10**. Blessed be the kingdom of our
father David, that cometh in the name of the Lord; Hosanna in the
highest.  <span id="fr_706"></span>[707](#fn_706.md)

<span id="ii.lxxx-p18"></span> 

<span id="ii.lxxx-p19"></span> **29**. And it happened, when he
approached Bethphage and Bethany, near the mountain which is called the
mountain of Olives, he sent two of his disciples, **30**. Saying, Go
into the village which is opposite; and, as you enter into it, you will
find a colt tied, on which no man ever sat; loose him, and bring him.
**31**. And if any man shall ask you, Why do you loose him? thus shall
you say to him, Because the Lord hath need of him. **32**. And they that
were sent went away, and found as he had said to them. **33**. And while
they were loosing the colt, its owners  <span
id="fr_707"></span>[708](#fn_707.md) said to them, Why do you loose the
colt? **34**. And they said, The Lord hath need of him. **35**. And they
brought him to Jesus; and, having thrown their garments on the colt,
they set Jesus upon it. **36**. And while he was going, they strawed
their garments in the way. **37**. And when he was already of the
mountain of Olives, the whole multitude of the disciples, rejoicing,
began to praise God with a loud voice, for all the miracles which they
had seen, **38**. Saying, Blessed be the King that cometh in the name of
the Lord; peace in heaven, and glory in the highest.  <span
id="fr_708"></span>[709](#fn_708.md)

<span id="ii.lxxx-p22"></span> 

<span id="ii.lxxx-p23"></span> 

<span id="ii.lxxx-p24"></span><span id="ii.lxxx-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxx-p25"></span>**<span id="ii.lxxx-p25.2"></span>[Matthew
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#001.md)<span
id="ii.lxxx-p25.2"></span>.** *Then Jesus sent two disciples* Jesus
*sends* his *disciples* to bring *an ass* to him, not because he was
wearied with the journey, but for a different reason; for, in
consequence of the time of his death being at hand, he intended to show,
by a solemn performance, what was the nature of his kingdom. He had
begun, indeed, to do this at his baptism, but it remained that this
demonstration should be given by him towards the end of his calling: for
why did he hitherto refrain from the title of *King,* and now at length
openly declare himself to be a *King,* but because he is not far from
the end of his course?  <span id="fr_709"></span>[710](#fn_709.md) So then,
as his removal to heaven was at hand, he intended to commence his reign
openly on earth.

<span id="ii.lxxx-p27"></span>This would have been a ridiculous display,
if it had not been in accordance with the prediction of Zechariah,
(<span id="ii.lxxx-p27.1"></span>[Zec
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#009)<span id="ii.lxxx-p27.1"></span>..md)
In order to lay claim to the honors of royalty, he enters Jerusalem,
*riding an ass.* A magnificent display, truly! more especially when *the
ass* was borrowed from some person, and when the want of a saddle and of
accouterments compelled the disciples to *throw their garments on it,*
which was mark of mean and disgraceful poverty. He is attended, I admit,
by a large retinue; but of what sort of people? Of those who had hastily
assembled from the neighboring villages. Sounds of loud and joyful
welcome are heard;  <span id="fr_710"></span>[711](#fn_710.md) but from
whom? From the very poorest, and from those who belong to the despised
multitude. One might think, therefore, that he intentionally exposed
himself to the ridicule of all. But as he had two things to do at the
same time, — as he had to exhibit some proof of his kingdom, and to show
that it does not resemble earthly kingdoms, and does not consist of the
fading riches of this world, it was altogether necessary for him to take
this method.

<span id="ii.lxxx-p29"></span>To wicked men, no doubt, this might be
very unacceptable, had not God long before testified by his Prophet that
such would be the king who would come to restore the salvation of his
people. In order, therefore, that the mean aspect of Christ may not
hinder us from perceiving in this exhibition,  <span
id="fr_711"></span>[712](#fn_711.md) his spiritual kingdom, let us keep
before our eyes the heavenly prediction, by which God conferred more
honor on his Son under the revolting aspect of a beggar, than if he had
been decorated with all the dazzling ornaments of kings. Without this
seasoning, we shall never have any relish for this history; and
therefore there is great weight in the words of Matthew, when he says,
that *the prediction of the Prophet was fulfilled*  <span
id="fr_712"></span>[713](#fn_712.md) Perceiving that it was hardly possible
that men, who are too much devoted to wealth and splendor, should derive
any advantage from this narrative, when viewed according to the feeling
of the flesh, he leads them away from the simple contemplation of the
fact to the consideration of the prophecy.

<span id="ii.lxxx-p32"></span><span id="ii.lxxx-p32.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxx-p33"></span>**2.** *Go into the village.* As he was
*at Bethany*, he did not ask for *an ass* to relieve the fatigue of
traveling; for he could easily have performed the rest of the journey on
foot.  <span id="fr_713"></span>[714](#fn_713.md) But as kings are wont to
ascend their chariots, from which they may be easily seen, so the Lord
intended to turn the eyes of the people on himself, and to place some
mark of approbation on the applauses of his followers, lest any might
think that he unwillingly received the honor of a king.  <span
id="fr_714"></span>[715](#fn_714.md)

<span id="ii.lxxx-p36"></span>From what place he ordered *the ass* to be
brought is uncertain, except, what may naturally be inferred, that it
was some village adjoining to the city; for the allegorical exposition
of it, which some give, as applying to Jerusalem, is ridiculous. Not a
whit more admissible is the allegory which certain persons have
contrived about the *ass* and the *colt* “The *she-ass,”* they tell us,
“is a figure of the Jewish nation, which had been long subdued, and
accustomed to the yoke of the Law. The Gentiles, again, are represented
by *the colt, on which no man ever sat.* Christ sat first on the *ass*
for this reason, that it was proper for him to begin with the Jews; and
afterwards he passed over to the *colt*, because he was appointed to
govern the Gentiles also in the second place.” And indeed Matthew
appears to say that he rode on both of them; but as instances of
*Synecdoche* occur frequently in Scripture, we need not wonder if he
mentions two instead of one. From the other Evangelists it appears
manifestly that the *colt* only was used by Christ; and all doubt is
removed by Zechariah, (<span id="ii.lxxx-p36.2"></span>[Zec
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#009.md)<span
id="ii.lxxx-p36.2"></span>,)who twice repeats the same thing, according
to the ordinary custom of the Hebrew language.  <span
id="fr_715"></span>[716](#fn_715.md)

<span id="ii.lxxx-p38"></span>*And immediately you will find* That the
disciples may feel no hesitation about immediate compliance, our Lord
anticipates and replies to their questions. First, he explains that he
does not send them away at random, and this he does by saying that, at
the very entrance into the village, they will find an *ass-colt with its
mother;* and, secondly, that nobody will hinder them from leading him
away, if they only reply that He *hath need of him* In this way he
proved his Divinity; for both to know absent matters, and to bend the
hearts of men to compliance,  <span id="fr_716"></span>[717](#fn_716.md)
belonged to God alone. It was, no doubt, possible that the owner of the
ass, entertaining no unfavorable opinion of Christ, would cheerfully
grant it; but to foresee if he would be at home, if it would then be
convenient for him, or if he would place confidence in unknown persons,
was not in the power of a mortal man. Again, as Christ strengthens the
disciples, that they may be more ready to obey, so we see how they, on
the other hand, yield submission. The result shows that the whole of
this affair was directed by God.

<span id="ii.lxxx-p40"></span><span id="ii.lxxx-p40.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxx-p41"></span>**5.** *Say to the daughter of Zion.* This
is not found, word for word, in Zechariah; but what God commanded one
Prophet to proclaim, the Evangelist justly and appropriately applies to
all godly teachers; for the only hope, on which the children of God
ought both to build and to rely, was, that the Redeemer would at length
come. Accordingly, the Prophet shows that the coming of Christ yields to
believers a full and complete ground of joy; for, since God is not
reconciled to them in any other way than through the agency of the
Mediator, and as it is the same Mediator who delivers his people from
all evils, what can there be, apart from him, that is fitted to cheer
men ruined by their sins, and oppressed by troubles? And as we must be
altogether overwhelmed with grief when Christ is absent, so on the other
hand, the Prophet reminds believers that, when the Redeemer is present
with them, they ought to be perfectly joyful. Now though he bestows on
Christ other commendations — namely, that *he is just, and having
salvation* — *Matthew* has taken but a single portion, which applied to
the object he had in view, which is, that Christ will come, *poor* or
*meek;* or in other words, that he will be unlike earthly kings, whose
apparel is very magnificent and costly. Another mark of poverty is
added, that he will *ride on an ass*, or *the foal of an ass;* for there
can be no doubt that the manner of *riding* which belongs to the common
people is contrasted with royal splendor.

<span id="ii.lxxx-p42"></span><span id="ii.lxxx-p42.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxx-p43"></span>**6.** *And the disciples went* It was
just now remarked, that the zeal and readiness of *the disciples* to
obey are here mentioned with commendation; for the influence of Christ
was not so great, that his name alone would be sufficient to produce an
impression on unknown persons; and besides, there was reason to fear
that they would be blamed for theft. It is therefore a proof of the
deference which they paid to their Master, when they make no reply, but
proceed readily towards that place to which he has ordered them to go,
relying on his command and promise. Let us also learn by their example
to press forward through every kind of difficulty, so as to render to
the Lord the obedience which he demands from us; for he will remove
obstacles, and open up a path, and will not permit our endeavors to be
unavailing.

<span id="ii.lxxx-p44"></span><span id="ii.lxxx-p44.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxx-p45"></span>**8.** *And a very great multitude.* Here
the Evangelists relate that Christ was acknowledged as a king by the
people. It might, indeed, appear to be a ludicrous exhibition,  <span
id="fr_717"></span>[718](#fn_717.md) that a multitude of obscure persons,
by *cutting down trees, and strawing their garments*, bestowed on Christ
the empty title of *King;* but as they did this in good earnest, and as
they gave an honest testimony of their reverence, so Christ looked upon
them as fit heralds of his kingdom. Nor ought we to wonder at such a
beginning, when even in the present day, while sitting at the right hand
of the Father, he commissions from the heavenly throne obscure men, by
whom his majesty is celebrated in a despicable manner. I do not think it
probable that the *branches of palm-trees* were cut down, as some
interpreters conjecture, in accordance with an ancient and solemn rite
appointed for that day. On the contrary, it would seem to have been by a
sudden movement of the Spirit that this honor was rendered to Christ,
when nothing of this nature had been intended by the disciples, whom the
rest of the multitude imitated by doing the same thing; for this also
may be inferred from the words of Luke.

<span id="ii.lxxx-p47"></span><span id="ii.lxxx-p47.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxx-p48"></span>**9.** *Hosanna to the Son of David.*
<span id="ii.lxxx-p48.3"></span>This prayer is taken from <span
id="ii.lxxx-p48.4"></span>[Ps
118:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#025.md)<span
id="ii.lxxx-p48.4"></span><span id="ii.lxxx-p48.5"></span>. Matthew
relates expressly the Hebrew words, in order to inform us, that these
applauses were not rashly bestowed on Christ, and that the disciples did
not utter without consideration the prayers which came to their lips,
but that they followed with reverence the form of prayer, which the Holy
Spirit had prescribed to the whole Church by the mouth of the Prophet.
For, though he speaks there of his own kingdom, yet there is no reason
to doubt that he principally looks, and intends others to look, to the
eternal succession, which the Lord had promised to him. He drew up a
perpetual form of prayer, which would be observed, even when the wealth
of the kingdom was decayed; and therefore it was a prevailing custom,
that prayers for the promised redemption were generally presented in
these words. And the design of Matthew was, as we have just hinted, to
quote in Hebrew a well-known psalm, for the purpose of showing that
Christ was acknowledged by the multitude as a Redeemer. <span
id="ii.lxxx-p48.7"></span>The pronunciation of the words, indeed, is
somewhat changed; for it ought rather to have been written,
*Hoshiana*<span id="ii.lxxx-p48.8"></span>, (<span
id="ii.lxxx-p48.9"></span>הושיע נא<span id="ii.lxxx-p48.10"></span>)
*Save now, we beseech thee;* <span id="ii.lxxx-p48.11"></span>but we
know that it is scarcely possible to take a word from one language into
another, without making some alteration in the sound. Nor was it only
the ancient people whom God enjoined to pray daily for the kingdom of
Christ, but the same rule is now laid down for us. And certainly, as it
is the will of God to reign only in the person of his Son, when we say,
*May thy kingdom come*<span id="ii.lxxx-p48.12"></span>, <span
id="ii.lxxx-p48.13"></span>under this petition is conveyed the same
thing which is expressed more clearly in the psalm. Besides, when we
pray to God to maintain his Son as our King, we acknowledge that this
kingdom was not erected by men, and is not upheld by the power of men,
but remains invincible through heavenly protection.

<span id="ii.lxxx-p49"></span>*In the name of the Lord.* He is said to
come in *the name of God,* who not only conducts himself, but receives
the kingdom, by the command and appointment of God. This may be more
certainly inferred from the words of *MARK,* where another exclamation
is added, *Blessed be the kingdom of our father David, which cometh in
the name of the Lord;* for they speak thus in reference to the promises;
because the Lord had testified that he would at length be a deliverer of
that nation, and had appointed as the means the restoration of the
kingdom of David. We see then that the honor of Mediator, from whom the
restoration of all things and of salvation was to be expected, is
ascribed to Christ. Now as it was mean and uneducated men by whom the
kingdom of Christ was called *the kingdom of David,* let us hence learn
that this doctrine was at that time well known, which in the present day
appears to many to be forced and harsh, because they are not well
acquainted with Scripture.

<span id="ii.lxxx-p50"></span>*Luke* adds a few words, *Peace in heaven,
and glory in the highest;*  <span id="fr_718"></span>[719](#fn_718.md) in
which there would be no obscurity, were it not that they do not
correspond to the song of the angels, (<span
id="ii.lxxx-p51.2"></span>[Lu
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#014)<span id="ii.lxxx-p51.2"></span>;.md)
for there the angels ascribe to God *glory in heaven,* and to men *peace
on earth;* while here both *peace* and *glory* are ascribed to God. But
there is no contradiction in the meaning; for, though the angels state
more distinctly the reason why we ought to sing, *Glory to God* —
*namely*, because through his mercy men enjoy peace in this world — yet
the meaning is the same with what is now declared by the multitude, that
there is *peace in heaven;* for we know that there is no other way in
which wretched souls find rest in the world, than by God reconciling
himself to them out of heaven.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_697"></span>[698](cc32081.htm#fr_697.md) <span
id="ii.lxxx-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxx-p6"></span> “<span id="ii.lxxx-p6.1"></span>*Deux* de
ses *disciples;”* — *“two* of his disciples?”

<span id="fn_698"></span>[699](cc32081.htm#fr_698.md) <span
id="ii.lxxx-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxx-p7"></span> “<span id="ii.lxxx-p7.1"></span>Et
incontinent les laissera aller;” — “and immediately he will allow them
to go.”

<span id="fn_699"></span>[700](cc32081.htm#fr_699.md) <span
id="ii.lxxx-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxx-p8"></span> “<span id="ii.lxxx-p8.1"></span>Et la
petit asnon de celle qui est sous le ioug;” — “and the young ass-colt of
her that is under the *yoke*.*”* — *Campbell* brings out, in the same
manner, the force of Greek, “even the *colt of a laboring beast*.*”* —
*Ed*.

<span id="fn_700"></span>[701](cc32081.htm#fr_700.md) <span
id="ii.lxxx-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxx-p9"></span> *“*<span id="ii.lxxx-p9.1"></span>*Et le
feirent asseoir sur iceux* vestemens;” — “*and made him sit on* *these*
garments.”

<span id="fn_701"></span>[702](cc32081.htm#fr_701.md) <span
id="ii.lxxx-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxx-p10"></span> “<span id="ii.lxxx-p10.1"></span>*Benit
soil celuy;”* — *“blessed be he*.*”*

<span id="fn_702"></span>[703](cc32081.htm#fr_702.md) <span
id="ii.lxxx-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxx-p11"></span> “<span id="ii.lxxx-p11.1"></span>*Es
tres-hauts lieux;”* — *“in the very high places*.*”*

<span id="fn_703"></span>[704](cc32081.htm#fr_703.md) <span
id="ii.lxxx-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxx-p14"></span> *“*<span id="ii.lxxx-p14.1"></span>*Que
voulez-vous faire?*” — “*Witat do you wish to do?”*

<span id="fn_704"></span>[705](cc32081.htm#fr_704.md) <span
id="ii.lxxx-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxx-p15"></span> *“*<span id="ii.lxxx-p15.1"></span>*Et*
ceux-la *les laisserent aller;*” — “*and* those men *allowed them to
go*.*”*

<span id="fn_705"></span>[706](cc32081.htm#fr_705.md) <span
id="ii.lxxx-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxx-p16"></span> “<span id="ii.lxxx-p16.1"></span>*Benit
soil celuy;”* — *“blessed be he*.*”*

<span id="fn_706"></span>[707](cc32081.htm#fr_706.md) <span
id="ii.lxxx-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxx-p17"></span> “<span id="ii.lxxx-p17.1"></span>*Es
tres-hauts lieux;”* — *“in the very high places*.*”*

<span id="fn_707"></span>[708](cc32081.htm#fr_707.md) <span
id="ii.lxxx-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxx-p20"></span> *“*<span id="ii.lxxx-p20.1"></span>*Ceux
a qui il estoit;*” — “those to whom it belonged.”

<span id="fn_708"></span>[709](cc32081.htm#fr_708.md) <span
id="ii.lxxx-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxx-p21"></span> “<span id="ii.lxxx-p21.1"></span>*Es
tres-hauts lieux;”* — *“in the very high places*.*”*

<span id="fn_709"></span>[710](cc32081.htm#fr_709.md) <span
id="ii.lxxx-p25.3"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxx-p26"></span> “<span id="ii.lxxx-p26.1"></span>Pource
qu’il se voit estre bien pres du but de sa course;” — “because he sees
that he is very near the end of his course.”

<span id="fn_710"></span>[711](cc32081.htm#fr_710.md) <span
id="ii.lxxx-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxx-p28"></span> “<span id="ii.lxxx-p28.1"></span>Les voix
retentissent pour luy faire honneur, et le recevoir en grande ioye et
triomphe;” — “voices resound to do him honor, and to receive him in
great joy and triumph.”

<span id="fn_711"></span>[712](cc32081.htm#fr_711.md) <span
id="ii.lxxx-p29.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxx-p30"></span> “<span id="ii.lxxx-p30.1"></span>Sous la
couverture des choses yci recitees;” — “under the disguise of the things
here related.”

<span id="fn_712"></span>[713](cc32081.htm#fr_712.md) <span
id="ii.lxxx-p30.2"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxx-p31"></span> “<span id="ii.lxxx-p31.1"></span>Quand il
dit que *tout cela se faisoit afin que ce qui avoit este dit loaf le
Prophete fust accompli;*” — “when he says that *all this was done*, *in
order that what had been said by the Prophet might be fulfilled*.*”*

<span id="fn_713"></span>[714](cc32081.htm#fr_713.md) <span
id="ii.lxxx-p33.2"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxx-p34"></span> “<span id="ii.lxxx-p34.1"></span>Car il y
avoit si pen de la iusques en Ierusalem, qu’il y fust aisee-merit alle a
pied;” — “for it was so short a distance from that place to Jerusalem,
that he would easily have gone thither on foot.”

<span id="fn_714"></span>[715](cc32081.htm#fr_714.md) <span
id="ii.lxxx-p34.2"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxx-p35"></span> “<span id="ii.lxxx-p35.1"></span>Afin
qu’on ne pensast point qu’il prinst cela a desplaisir, et qu’on lui
attribuast l’honneur de Roy contre son vouloir;” — “that it might not be
thought that he took offense at this, and that the honor of King was
given to him in opposition to his will.”

<span id="fn_715"></span>[716](cc32081.htm#fr_715.md) <span
id="ii.lxxx-p36.3"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxx-p37"></span> “<span id="ii.lxxx-p37.1"></span>Car
voyla ses mots, *Estant monte sur an asne*, *et sur un asnon* *poullain
d’asnesse;*” — “for his words are these, *Sitting on an ass*, *and on*
*an ass-colt*, *the foal of an ass*.*”*

<span id="fn_716"></span>[717](cc32081.htm#fr_716.md) <span
id="ii.lxxx-p38.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxx-p39"></span> “<span id="ii.lxxx-p39.1"></span>Et de
faire flechir les coeurs des hommes, pour accorder ce qu’il luy plaist;”
— “and to bend the hearts of men to grant what he pleases.”

<span id="fn_717"></span>[718](cc32081.htm#fr_717.md) <span
id="ii.lxxx-p45.2"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxx-p46"></span> “<span id="ii.lxxx-p46.1"></span>Vray est
qu’il pouvoit sembler que c’estoit un ieu de petits enfans;” — “true, it
might be thought that it was a game of little children.”

<span id="fn_718"></span>[719](cc32081.htm#fr_718.md) <span
id="ii.lxxx-p50.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxx-p51"></span> “<span id="ii.lxxx-p51.1"></span>Es lieux
tres-hauts;” — “in the very high places.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke 19:41-44](cc32082.md)
