[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc32014)  [Next](cc32016.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 32: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part II*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.xiv"></span>

<span id="ii.xiv-p1"></span>MATTHEW 12:33-37

<span id="ii.xiv-p2"></span><span id="ii.xiv-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
12:33-37](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#033.md)<span id="ii.xiv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xiv-p3"></span> **33**. Either make the tree good, and its
fruit good: or make the tree bad, and its fruit bad; for the tree is
known by the fruit. **34**. Offspring of vipers, how can you speak what
is good, when you are bad? for out of the abundance of the heart the
mouth speaketh. **35**. A good man, out of the good treasure of his
heart, bringeth forth what is good, and a bad man, out of the bad
treasure, bringeth forth what is evil. **36**. But I say to you, That
men will give account, at the day of judgment, for every idle word which
they shall have spoken. **37**. For by thy words thou shalt be
justified, and by thy words thou shalt be condemned.

<span id="ii.xiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.xiv-p5"></span><span id="ii.xiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xiv-p6"></span>**33.** *Either make the tree good* It might
look like absurdity, that men should be allowed a choice of being
*either good or bad;* but if we consider what sort of persons Christ is
addressing, the difficulty will be speedily resolved. We know what
opinion was generally entertained about the Pharisees; for their
pretended sanctity had so blinded the minds of the common people, that
no one ventured to pass sentence on their vices.  <span
id="fr_133"></span>[134](#fn_133.md) Wishing to remove this mask, Christ
desires them to be *either good or bad*; or, in other words, declares
that nothing is more inconsistent with honesty than hypocrisy, and that
it is in vain for men to boast of pretensions to righteousness who are
not sincere and upright.  <span id="fr_134"></span>[135](#fn_134.md) So
then he puts nothing at their disposal, and withdraws no restraint from
them, but only reminds them that their empty professions will avail them
nothing so long as they are double, because they must be *either good or
bad*

<span id="ii.xiv-p9"></span>From the expression, *make the tree,* some
foolishly infer, that it is in every man’s power to regulate his own
life and conduct. It is a rhetorical mode of speaking, by which Christ
points out the scribes, dispels—so to speak—the smoke of their
hypocrisy, and recalls them to pure and genuine uprightness. He
afterwards explains the way and manner in which they may show that they
are *good or bad trees;* which is by yielding *good or bad fruit:* so
that there is no ambiguity in the meaning. The life of the scribes was
not rendered infamous among men by gross vices. Pride, ambition, and
envy, displayed their venom in the slanders which they uttered; but as
that venom was not perceived by ignorant people, Christ brings the
concealed evil from its lurking-place, and drags it forth to light.

<span id="ii.xiv-p10"></span>But perhaps it will be objected that, in
consequence of the corruption of our nature, it is impossible to find
any man who is altogether upright, and free from every vice. The answer
is ready. Christ does not demand absolute and entire perfection, but
only a sincere and unfeigned disposition, which the Pharisees whom he
addresses were far from possessing. As Scripture applies the terms, *bad
and wicked,* to those who are completely given up to Satan, so the
sincere worshippers of God, though they are encompassed by the infirmity
of their flesh and by many sins, and groan under the burden, are called
*good.* This arises from the undeserved kindness of God, who bestows so
honorable a designation on those who aim at goodness.

<span id="ii.xiv-p11"></span><span id="ii.xiv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xiv-p12"></span>**34.** *Offspring of vipers.* The
similarity between *the tree* and *the fruit* is here applied by Christ
to nothing more than speech, because this afforded an opportunity of
detecting the inward and concealed malice of the scribes; and that is
the reason why he dwells so much on this one kind of sin. It is because
their falsehood and slanders betrayed what was not so visible in the
rest of their life, that Christ attacks them with such severity. “There
is no reason to wonder,” he says, “that you vomit out wicked words; for
your heart is full of malice.” Nor are we to suppose that he ought to
have treated them with greater gentleness, because some might regard
this reproof as excessively severe. There are other sins, no doubt, that
call for harsh reproofs; but when hypocritical persons pervert what is
right, or put a false coloring on what is sinful, such wickedness
renders it necessary that God should thunder against it in a more
terrible manner than against other sins.

<span id="ii.xiv-p13"></span>Now the design of Christ, suggested by the
present occurrence, was to condemn the wicked sophistry which turns
light into darkness. This passage shows how highly valuable in the sight
of the Lord truth is, since he maintains and defends it with such rigor.
Would that this were earnestly considered by those persons, whose
ingenuity is too ready to be employed in defending any cause, and whose
venal tongue disguises impostures! In a particular manner, Christ waxes
wroth against those whom ambition, or envy, or some other fraudulent
design, prompts to slander, even when there is nothing that their
conscience condemns. Against the Pharisees, too, as his custom was,
Christ used greater harshness, because they were so captivated by an
unfounded conviction of their righteousness, that an ordinary warning
had no effect upon them. And till hypocrites are sharply pierced,  <span
id="fr_135"></span>[136](#fn_135.md) all that is said to them is treated
with scorn and contempt.

<span id="ii.xiv-p15"></span>*How can you speak what is good?* We have
formerly hinted, that proverbial sayings ought not to be rigidly
interpreted as an invariable rule, for they state nothing more than the
ordinary fact. Sometimes, no doubt, a cruel man will deceive the simple
by honied flatteries, a cunning man will cheat under the garb of
simplicity, and a man of very wicked thoughts will breathe almost
angelical purity of language.  <span id="fr_136"></span>[137](#fn_136.md)
But the ordinary practice demonstrates the truth of what Christ here
says, that *out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh;*
agreeably to the old proverb, which declared the tongue to be the index
of the mind.  <span id="fr_137"></span>[138](#fn_137.md) And, indeed,
whatever hidden and crooked recesses may exist in the heart of man, and
whatever may be the amazing contrivances by which every man conceals his
vices, yet the Lord extorts from each of them some kind of confession,
so that they discover by the tongue their natural disposition and hidden
feelings. We must also observe the purpose for which Christ employs
those parables; for he reproaches the Pharisees with having manifested
by words the malice which they had inwardly conceived. Besides, knowing
them to be sworn enemies, he takes occasion from, single calumny to
expose their whole life, and to destroy their credit with the people,
which gave them too great influence in deceiving and in doing mischief.
Though *good* speeches do not always proceed from the inmost heart, but
originate (as the phrase is) on the tip of the tongue, yet it is an
invariable truth, that bad speeches are indications of a bad heart.

<span id="ii.xiv-p18"></span><span id="ii.xiv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xiv-p19"></span>**36.** *Of every idle word* This is an
argument from the less to the greater; for if *every idle word* is to be
called in question, how would God spare the open blasphemies and
sacrilegious insolence of those who bark against his glory?  <span
id="fr_138"></span>[139](#fn_138.md) An *idle word* means one that is
useless, or that yields no edification or advantage. Many look upon this
as too severe;  <span id="fr_139"></span>[140](#fn_139.md) but if we
consider the purpose for which our tongues were made, we will
acknowledge, that those men are justly held guilty who unthinkingly
devote them to trifling fooleries, and prostitute them to such a
purpose. It is no light fault to abuse, for frivolous purposes, the
*time,* which Paul enjoins us to be careful to *redeem,* (<span
id="ii.xiv-p21.2"></span>[Eph
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#016.md)<span id="ii.xiv-p21.2"></span>;
<span id="ii.xiv-p21.3"></span>[Col
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#005)<span id="ii.xiv-p21.3"></span>..md)

<span id="ii.xiv-p22"></span>Now since no man is so cautious in speech,
or maintains such a wise restraint upon himself, as never to allow some
*idle words* to escape him, there remains for all of us absolute
despair, if the Lord should treat us with rigor. But as the confident
hope of our salvation rests on the assurance that God will *not enter
into judgment* with us, (<span id="ii.xiv-p22.1"></span>[Ps
143:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa143.htm#002)<span id="ii.xiv-p22.1"></span>,.md)
but will bury in gracious forgetfulness the sins which deserve
innumerable deaths,  <span id="fr_140"></span>[141](#fn_140.md) we
entertain no doubt that, when he removes the condemnation of our whole
life, he will likewise pardon the guilt of idle talking. When the
judgment of God is mentioned in Scripture, it does not in any way set
aside the forgiveness of sins. And yet let no man indulge himself, but
let every man earnestly endeavor to *bridle his tongue,* (<span
id="ii.xiv-p23.2"></span>[Jas
1:26](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#026)<span id="ii.xiv-p23.2"></span>..md)
First, let us speak of the sacred mysteries of God with the utmost
reverence and sobriety; secondly, let us abstain from talkativeness,
buffoonery, and vain jests, and much more from slanderous attacks; and,
lastly, let us endeavor to have *our speech seasoned with salt,* (<span
id="ii.xiv-p23.3"></span>[Col 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#006.md)<span
id="ii.xiv-p23.3"></span>.)

<span id="ii.xiv-p24"></span><span id="ii.xiv-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xiv-p25"></span>**37.** *By thy words thou shalt be
justified* This was a common proverb, which he applied to the present
subject; for I have no doubt that this was a saying which the people had
frequently in their mouths, that “every man is condemned or acquitted by
his own acknowledgment.” But Christ turns it to a meaning somewhat
different, that a wicked speech, being the indication of concealed
malice, is enough to condemn a man. The attempt which the Papists make
to torture this passage, so as to set aside the righteousness of faith,
is childish. A man is *justified by his words,* not because his *speech*
is the ground of his justification, (for we obtain by faith the favor of
God, so that he reckons us to be righteous persons;) but because pure
*speech*  <span id="fr_141"></span>[142](#fn_141.md) absolves us in such a
manner, that we are not condemned as wicked persons by our tongue. Is it
not absurd to infer from this, that men deserve a single drop of
righteousness in the sight of God? On the contrary, this passage upholds
our doctrine; for, although Christ does not here treat of the ground of
our justification, yet the contrast between the two words points out the
meaning of the word *justify.* The Papists reckon it absurd in us to
say, that a man is justified by faith, because they explain the word
*justified* to mean, that he becomes, and is, actually righteous; while
we understand it to mean, that he is accounted righteous, and is
*acquitted* before the tribunal of God, as is evident from numerous
passages of Scripture. And is not the same thing confirmed by Christ,
when he draws a contrast between *justified* and *condemned?*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_133"></span>[134](cc32015.htm#fr_133.md) <span
id="ii.xiv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xiv-p7"></span> “<span id="ii.xiv-p7.1"></span>Que nul
n’osoit parler de leurs vices, et les condamner;” — “that none dared to
speak of their vices, or to condemn them.”

<span id="fn_134"></span>[135](cc32015.htm#fr_134.md) <span
id="ii.xiv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xiv-p8"></span> “<span id="ii.xiv-p8.1"></span>Lesquels ne
vont point rondement, et n’ont une affection droite;” — “who do not go
straight forward, and have not an upright disposition.”

<span id="fn_135"></span>[136](cc32015.htm#fr_135.md) <span
id="ii.xiv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xiv-p14"></span> “<span id="ii.xiv-p14.1"></span>Iusques a
ce qu’ils sentent qu’on le poigne a bon escient;” — “till they feel that
they are pierced in good earnest.”

<span id="fn_136"></span>[137](cc32015.htm#fr_136.md) <span
id="ii.xiv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xiv-p16"></span> “<span id="ii.xiv-p16.1"></span>Il
semblera, a l’ouir parler, qu’il ait une purete Angelique;” — “to hear
him speak, you would imagine that he has the purity of an Angel.”

<span id="fn_137"></span>[138](cc32015.htm#fr_137.md) <span
id="ii.xiv-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xiv-p17"></span> “<span id="ii.xiv-p17.1"></span>Comme
aussi le proverbe ancien portoit, Que la langue est le charactere ou
pourtrait du coeur;” — “as also the old proverb bore, That the tongue is
the type or portrait of the heart.”

<span id="fn_138"></span>[139](cc32015.htm#fr_138.md) <span
id="ii.xiv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xiv-p20"></span> “<span id="ii.xiv-p20.1"></span>Qui
abbayent contre sa gloire, comme chiens mastins;” — “who bark against
his glory, like mastiff-dogs.”

<span id="fn_139"></span>[140](cc32015.htm#fr_139.md) <span
id="ii.xiv-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xiv-p21"></span> “<span id="ii.xiv-p21.1"></span>Ceci
semble a plusieurs estre trop extreme et rigoureux;”— “this appears to
many to be too extreme and rigorous.”

<span id="fn_140"></span>[141](cc32015.htm#fr_140.md) <span
id="ii.xiv-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xiv-p23"></span> “<span id="ii.xiv-p23.1"></span>Qui
meritent dix mille morts;” — “which deserve ten thousand deaths.”

<span id="fn_141"></span>[142](cc32015.htm#fr_141.md) <span
id="ii.xiv-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xiv-p26"></span> “<span id="ii.xiv-p26.1"></span>La parole
pure, droite, et honneste;” — “pure, upright, and becoming speech.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 12:43-45; Luke 11:24-26](cc32016.md)
