[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc32018)  [Next](cc32020) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 32: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part II*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.xviii"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p1"></span><span id="ii.xviii-p1.1"></span>[Matthew
13:1-17](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#001)<span
id="ii.xviii-p1.1"></span>; <span id="ii.xviii-p1.2"></span>[Mark
4:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#001)<span
id="ii.xviii-p1.2"></span>, 24-25;  
<span id="ii.xviii-p1.4"></span>[Luke
8:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#001)<span
id="ii.xviii-p1.4"></span>, 18; 10:23-24

<span id="ii.xviii-p2"></span><span id="ii.xviii-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
13:1-17](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#001)<span
id="ii.xviii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p3"></span><span id="ii.xviii-p3.1"></span>[Mark
4:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#001)<span
id="ii.xviii-p3.1"></span>, 24-25

<span id="ii.xviii-p4"></span><span id="ii.xviii-p4.1"></span>[Luke
8:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#001)<span
id="ii.xviii-p4.1"></span>, 18

<span id="ii.xviii-p5"></span>**1**. And on the same day Jesus went out
of the house, and sat down near the sea. **2**. And great multitudes
were gathered to him, so that he entered into a ship, and sat down, and
the whole multitude was standing on the shore. **3**. And he said many
things to them by parables, saying, Lo, one who was sowing, some seeds
fell near the road, and the birds came and devoured them. **5**. And
some fell on stony places, where they had not much earth, and
immediately they sprang up, because they had not depth of earth.
**6**. But when the sun rose, they were burnt up, and because they had
not a root, they withered away. **7**. Others again fell on thorns, and
the thorns grew up, and choked them. **8**. And others fell on good
soil, and yielded fruit: some a hundred-fold, some sixty-fold, some
thirty-fold. **9**. He that hath ears to hear, let him hear. **10**. And
the disciples approaching said to him, Why dost thou speak to them by
parables? **11**. But he answering, said to them, To you it is given to
know the mysteries  <span id="fr_167"></span>[168](#fn_167) of the
kingdom of heaven, but to them it is not given, **12**. For whosoever
hath, it shall be given to him, and he shall be rendered more wealthy;
 <span id="fr_168"></span>[169](#fn_168) and whosoever hath not, even
that which he hath shall be taken from him. **13**. For this reason I
speak to them in parables, because seeing, they do not see, and hearing,
they do not hear nor understand. **14**. And in them is fulfilled the
prophecy of Isaiah, which saith, With the ears you shall hear, and shall
not understand, and seeing, you shall see, and shall not perceive.
**15**. For the heart of this people hath become gross, and with their
ears they have heard heavily, and their eyes they have shut, lest at any
time they should see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and
understand with the heart, and be converted, and I should heal them.
**16**. But your eyes are blessed for they see; and your ears, for they
hear. **17**. Verily, I say to you, That many prophets and righteous men
have desired to see the things which you see, and have not seen them,
and to hear the things which you hear, and have not heard them.

<span id="ii.xviii-p8"></span>**1**. And again he began to teach near
the sea, and a great multitude was gathered to him, so that, entering
into a ship, he sat on the sea, and the whole multitude was near the sea
on land. **2**. And he taught them many things by parables, and said to
them in his doctrine: **3**. Hear, lo, a sower went out to sow.
**4**. And it happened while he was sowing, some fell closer to the
road; and the fowls of heaven came and ate them up. **5**. And some fell
on stony places, where it had not much earth, and immediately it sprang
up, because it had not depth of earth. **6**. And when the sun had
risen, it was scorched; and because it had not a root, it withered.
**7**. And some fell among thorns; and the thorns grew, and choked it,
and it did not yield fruit. **8**. And some fell on good soil, and
yielded fruit springing up and growing, and produced some thirty, and
some sixty, and some a hundred. **9**. And he said to them, He that hath
ears to hear, let him hear. **10**. And when he began to be alone, those
who were around him, with the twelve, asked him about the parable.
**11**. And he said to them, To you it is given to know the mystery
 <span id="fr_169"></span>[170](#fn_169) of the kingdom of God, but to
those who are without all things are done by parables: **12**. That
seeing, they may see and may not perceive, and hearing, they may hear
and may not understand, lest at any time they may be converted, and
their sins may be forgiven them. — (A little after,) **24**. And he said
to them, Observe what you hear: with what measure, the same
admeasurement shall be made to you, and it shall be added to you who
shall hear. **25**. For to him who hath it shall be given; and he that
hath not, even that which he hath shall be taken away from him.

<span id="ii.xviii-p10"></span> 

<span id="ii.xviii-p11"></span>**1**. And it happened afterwards, and he
was traveling through each city and village,  <span
id="fr_170"></span>[171](#fn_170) preaching and proclaiming the glad
tidings of the kingdom of God; and the twelve were with him, **2**. And
likewise some women, who had been cured of evil spirits and diseases,
Mary, who is called Magdalene, out of whom had gone seven devils,
**3**. And Joanna, the wife of Chuza, Herod’s steward, and Susanna, and
many others, who assisted him out of their property **4**. And while a
very great multitude was assembling, and while they were crowding to him
out of each city, he said by a parable: **5**. One who sowed went out to
sow his seed, and while he was sowing, some fell near the road, and the
fowls of heaven ate it up. **6**. And some fell on a rock, and when it
was sprung up, it withered, because it hath not moisture. **7**. And
some fell among thorns, and the thorns springing up along with it,
choked it. **8**. And some fell on a good soil, and, springing up,
produced fruit a hundred-fold. Saying these things, he exclaimed, He
that hath ears to hear, let him hear. **9**. And his disciples asked
him, saying, What was this parable?  <span
id="fr_171"></span>[172](#fn_171) **10**. But he said, To you it is
given to know the mysteries  <span id="fr_172"></span>[173](#fn_172) of
the kingdom of God, but to the rest by parables; that seeing, they may
not see, and hearing, they may not understand. — (A little after,)
**18**. Consider then how you hear. For whosoever hath, it shall be
given to him; and whosoever hath not, even that which he thinketh that
he hath shall be taken from him.

<span id="ii.xviii-p15"></span><span id="ii.xviii-p15.1"></span>[Luke
10:23-24](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#023)<span
id="ii.xviii-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="ii.xviii-p16"></span> **23**. And turning to his disciples, he
said to them privately, Blessed are the eyes that see the things which
you see. **24**. For I say to you, That many prophets and kings have
desired to see the things which you see, and have not seen them; and to
hear the things which you hear, and have not heard them.

<span id="ii.xviii-p17"></span> 

<span id="ii.xviii-p18"></span> 

<span id="ii.xviii-p19"></span><span id="ii.xviii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p20"></span>What I have here introduced from Luke
belongs, perhaps, to another time; but I saw no necessity for separating
what he has placed in immediate connection. First, he says that the
*twelve* apostles *preached the kingdom of God* along with Christ; from
which we infer that, though the ordinary office of teaching had not yet
been committed to them, they constantly attended as heralds to procure
an audience for their Master; and, therefore, though they held an
inferior rank, they are said to have been Christ’s assistants. Next, he
adds, that among those who accompanied Christ were *certain women, who
had been cured of evil spirits and diseases,* such as *Mary Magdalene,*
who had been tormented *by seven devils* To be associated with such
persons might be thought dishonorable; for what could be more unworthy
of the Son of God than to lead about with him women who were marked with
infamy? But this enables us more clearly to perceive that the crimes
with which we were loaded before we believed, are so far from
diminishing the glory of Christ, that they tend rather to raise it to a
higher pitch. And, certainly, it is not said, that the Church which he
elected was found by him to be without spot and blemish, but that he
cleansed it with his blood, and made it pure and fair.

<span id="ii.xviii-p21"></span>The wretched and disgraceful condition of
those women, now that they had been delivered from it, redounded greatly
to the glory of Christ, by holding out public manifestations of his
power and grace. At the same time, Luke applauds their gratitude in
following their Deliverer, and disregarding the ridicule of the world.
 <span id="fr_173"></span>[174](#fn_173) Beyond all question, they were
pointed at with the finger on every side, and the presence of Christ
served for a platform to exhibit them; but they do not refuse to have
their own shame made generally known, provided that the grace of Christ
be not concealed. On the contrary, they willingly endure to be humbled,
in order to become a mirror, by which he may be illustriously displayed.

<span id="ii.xviii-p23"></span>In *Mary,* the boundless goodness of
Christ was displayed in an astonishing manner. A woman, who had been
possessed by *seven devils,* and might be said to have been the meanest
slave of Satan, was not merely honored to be his disciple, but admitted
to enjoy his society. Luke adds the surname *Magdalene,* to distinguish
her from the sister of Martha, and other persons of the name of Mary*,*
who are mentioned in other passages, (<span
id="ii.xviii-p23.1"></span>[John 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#001),
[John 19:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#025)<span
id="ii.xviii-p23.1"></span>.)

<span id="ii.xviii-p24"></span><span id="ii.xviii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p25"></span>**<span id="ii.xviii-p25.1"></span>[Luke
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#003)<span
id="ii.xviii-p25.1"></span>.** *Joanna, the wife of Chuza* It is
uncertain whether or not Luke intended his statement to be applied to
those women in the same manner as to Mary To me it appears probable that
she is placed first in order, as a person in whom Christ had given a
signal display of his power; and that *the wife of Chuza, and Susanna,*
matrons of respectability and of spotless reputation, are mentioned
afterwards, because they had only been cured of ordinary diseases. Those
matrons being wealthy and of high rank, it reflects higher commendation
on their pious zeal, that they supply Christ’s expenses out of their own
property, and, not satisfied with so doing, leave the care of their
household affairs, and choose to follow him, attended by reproach and
many other inconveniences, through various and uncertain habitations,
instead of living quietly and at ease in their own houses. It is even
possible, that *Chuza, Herod’s steward,* being too like his master, was
strongly opposed to what his wife did in this matter, but that the pious
woman overcame this opposition by the ardor and constancy of her zeal.

<span id="ii.xviii-p26"></span><span id="ii.xviii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p27"></span>**<span
id="ii.xviii-p27.2"></span>[Matthew
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#002)<span
id="ii.xviii-p27.2"></span>.** *And great multitudes were gathered
together to him.* It is not without good reason that the Evangelists
begin with informing us that, a vast multitude had assembled, and that
when Christ beheld them, he was led to compare his doctrine to *seed*
That *multitude* had been collected from various places: all were held
in suspense; all were alike eager to hear, but not equally desirous to
receive instruction. The design of the parable was to inform them, that
the *seed* of doctrine, which is scattered far and wide, is not
everywhere productive; because it does not always find a fertile and
well cultivated soil. Christ declared that he was there in the capacity
of a husbandman, who was going out *to sow seed,* but that many of his
hearers resembled an uncultivated and parched soil, while others
resembled a thorny soil; so that the labor and the very seed were thrown
away. I forbear to make any farther inquiry into the meaning of the
parable, till we come to the explanation of it; which, as we shall find,
is shortly afterwards given by our Lord. It may only be necessary, for
the present, to remind the reader, that if those who ran from distant
places to Christ, like hungry persons, are compared to an unproductive
and barren soil, we need not wonder if, in our own day, the Gospel does
not yield fruit in many, of whom some are lazy and sluggish, others hear
with indifference, and others are scarcely drawn even to hear.

<span id="ii.xviii-p28"></span><span id="ii.xviii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p29"></span>**9.** *He that hath ears to hear, let
him hear.* These words were intended partly to show that all were not
endued with true understanding to comprehend what he said, and partly to
arouse his disciples to consider attentively that doctrine which is not
readily and easily understood by all. Indeed, he makes a distinction
among the hearers, by pronouncing some to have ears, and others to be
deaf. If it is next inquired, how it comes to pass that the former have
ears, Scripture testifies in other passages, that it is the Lord who
*pierces the ears,* (<span id="ii.xviii-p29.2"></span>[Ps
40:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#007)<span
id="ii.xviii-p29.2"></span>,)and that no man obtains or accomplishes
this by his own industry.

<span id="ii.xviii-p30"></span><span id="ii.xviii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p31"></span>**10.** *The disciples approaching said
to him.* From the words of Matthew it is evident, that the disciples did
not merely look to themselves, but wished also to consult the benefit of
others. Being unable to comprehend the parable, they concluded that it
would be as little understood by the people; and, therefore, they
complain that Christ employed language from which his hearers could
derive no profit. Now though parables are generally found to illustrate
the subject of which they treat, yet the uninterrupted course of a
metaphor may lead to obscurity.  <span id="fr_174"></span>[175](#fn_174)
So then Christ, in delivering this parable, intended to wrap up, in an
allegory, what he might have said more plainly and fully, without a
figure.  <span id="fr_175"></span>[176](#fn_175) But now that the
exposition is added, the figurative discourse has greater energy and
force than if it had been simple: by which is meant, that it is not only
fitted to produce a more powerful impression on the mind, but is also
more clear. So highly important is the manner in which any thing is
said.  <span id="fr_176"></span>[177](#fn_176)

<span id="ii.xviii-p35"></span><span id="ii.xviii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p36"></span>**11.** *To you it is given to know the
mysteries*  <span id="fr_177"></span>[178](#fn_177) *of the kingdom of
heaven* From this reply of Christ we learn, that the doctrine of
salvation is proclaimed by God to men for various purposes; for Christ
declares that he intentionally spoke obscurely, in order that his
discourse might be a riddle to many, and might only strike their ears
with a confused and doubtful sound. It will perhaps be objected, that
this is inconsistent with that prophecy,

<span id="ii.xviii-p38"></span>I have not spoken in secret, nor in a
dark corner: I said not in vain to the seed of Jacob, Seek me,  
(<span id="ii.xviii-p38.2"></span>[Isa
45:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#019)<span
id="ii.xviii-p38.2"></span>;)

<span id="ii.xviii-p39"></span>or with the commendations which David
pronounces on the Law, that it

<span id="ii.xviii-p40"></span>is a lamp to the feet, and that it giveth
wisdom to little children  
(<span id="ii.xviii-p40.2"></span>[Ps.
119:105](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#105),
[130](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#130)<span
id="ii.xviii-p40.2"></span>.)

<span id="ii.xviii-p41"></span>But the answer is easy: the word of God,
in its own nature, is always bright,  <span
id="fr_178"></span>[179](#fn_178) but its light is choked by the
darkness of men. Though the Law was concealed, as it were, by a kind of
veil, yet the truth, of God shone brightly in it, if the eyes of many
had not been blinded. With respect to the Gospel, Paul affirms with
truth, that it is *hidden* to none but to the reprobate, and to those
who are devoted to destruction, *whose minds Satan hath blinded,* (<span
id="ii.xviii-p42.2"></span>[2 Cor.
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#004)<span id="ii.xviii-p42.2"></span>.)
Besides, it ought to be understood, that the power of enlightening which
David mentions, and the familiar manner of teaching which Isaiah
predicts, refer exclusively to the elect people.

<span id="ii.xviii-p43"></span>Still it remains a fixed principle, that
the word of God is not obscure, except so far as the world darkens it by
its own blindness. And yet the Lord conceals its mysteries, so that the
perception of them may not reach the reprobate.  <span
id="fr_179"></span>[180](#fn_179) There are two ways in which he
deprives them of the light of his doctrine. Sometimes he states, in a
dark manner, what might be more clearly expressed; and sometimes he
explains his mind fully, without ambiguity and without metaphor, but
strikes their senses with dulness and their minds with stupidity, so
that they are blind amidst bright sunshine.

<span id="ii.xviii-p45"></span>Such is the import of those dreadful
threatenings, in which Isaiah forewarns, that he will be to the people a
barbarian, speaking in a foreign and unknown language; that the
prophetical visions will be to the learned a shut and sealed book, in
which they cannot read; and that when the book shall be opened, all will
be *unlearned,* and will remain in amazement, through inability to read,
(<span id="ii.xviii-p45.1"></span>[Isa.
28:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#011), [Isa.
29:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#011)<span
id="ii.xviii-p45.1"></span>.) Now since Christ has purposely dispensed
his doctrine in such a manner, that it might be profitable only to a
small number, being firmly seated in their minds, and might hold others
in suspense and perplexity, it follows that, by divine appointment, the
doctrine of salvation is not proclaimed to all for the same end, but is
so regulated by his wonderful purpose, that it is not less *a savor of
death to death* to the reprobate than *a life-giving savor* to the
elect, (<span id="ii.xviii-p45.2"></span>[2 Cor.
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#015),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#016)<span id="ii.xviii-p45.2"></span>.)
And that no one may dare to murmur, Paul declares, in that passage that
whatever may be the effect of the Gospel, its *savor,* though deadly, is
always *a sweet savor* to God.

<span id="ii.xviii-p46"></span>To ascertain fully the meaning of the
present passage, we must examine more closely the design of Christ, the
reason why, and the purpose for which, these words were spoken. First,
the comparison is undoubtedly intended by Christ to exhibit the
magnitude of the grace bestowed on his disciples, in having specially
received what was not given indiscriminately to all. If it is asked, why
this privilege was peculiar to the apostles,  <span
id="fr_180"></span>[181](#fn_180) the reason certainly will not be found
in themselves, and Christ, by declaring that it was *given* to them,
excludes all merit.  <span id="fr_181"></span>[182](#fn_181) Christ
declares that there are certain and elect men, on whom God specially
bestows this honor of revealing to them his *secrets,* and that others
are deprived of this grace. No other reason will be found for this
distinction, except that God calls to himself those whom he has
gratuitously elected.

<span id="ii.xviii-p49"></span><span id="ii.xviii-p49.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p50"></span>**12.** *For whosoever hath, it shall be
given to him.* Christ pursues the subject which I have just mentioned;
for he reminds his disciples how kindly God acts towards them, that they
may more highly prize his grace, and may acknowledge themselves to be
under deeper obligations to his kindness. The same words he afterwards
repeats, but in a different sense, (<span id="ii.xviii-p50.3"></span>[Mt
25:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#029)<span
id="ii.xviii-p50.3"></span>;) for on that occasion the discourse relates
to the lawful use of gifts.  <span id="fr_182"></span>[183](#fn_182) But
here he simply teaches, that more is *given* to the apostles than to the
generality of men, because the heavenly Father is pleased to display in
perfection his kindness towards them.

<span id="ii.xviii-p52"></span>He does not forsake the work of his own
hand,  
(<span id="ii.xviii-p52.2"></span>[Ps
138:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#008)<span
id="ii.xviii-p52.2"></span>.)

<span id="ii.xviii-p53"></span>Those whom he has once begun to form are
continually polished more and more, till they are at length brought to
the highest perfection. The multiplied favors which are continually
flowing from him to us, and the joyful progress which we make, spring
from God’s contemplation of his own liberality, which prompts him to an
uninterrupted course of bounty. And as his riches are inexhaustible,
 <span id="fr_183"></span>[184](#fn_183) so he is never wearied with
enriching his children. Whenever he advances us to a higher degree, let
us remember that every increase of the favors which we daily receive
from him flows from this source, that it is his purpose to complete the
work, of our salvation already commenced. On the other hand, Christ
declares that the reprobate are continually proceeding from bad to
worse, till, at length exhausted, they waste away in their own poverty.

<span id="ii.xviii-p55"></span>*And he that hath not, even that which he
hath shall be taken from him.* This may appear to be a harsh expression;
but instead of saying, that *what* the ungodly *have not is taken from
them,* Luke softens the harshness and removes the ambiguity by a slight
change of the words: *and whosoever hath not, even that which he
thinketh that he hath shall be taken from him.* And indeed it frequently
happens, that the reprobate are endued with eminent gifts, and appear to
resemble the children of God: but there is nothing of real value about
them; for their mind is destitute of piety, and has only the glitter of
an empty show. *Matthew* is therefore justified in saying that they
*have nothing;* for what they have is of no value in the sight of God,
and has no permanency within. Equally appropriate is the statement of
*Luke,* that the gifts, with which they have been endued, are corrupted
by them, so that they shine only in the eyes of men, but have nothing
more than splendor and empty display. Hence, also let us learn to aim at
progress throughout our whole life; for God grants to us the taste of
his heavenly doctrine on the express condition, that we feed on it
abundantly from day to day, till we come to be fully satiated with it.

<span id="ii.xviii-p56"></span>The manner in which *Mark* introduces
this sentence has some appearance of confusion. *Consider,* says our
Lord, *what you hear;* and then, if they make due progress, he holds out
the expectation of more plentiful grace: *it shall be added to you that
hear* Lastly, follows the clause which agrees with the words of
*Matthew,* but is inserted in the middle of a sentence which I expounded
under the seventh chapter of *Matthew;*  <span
id="fr_184"></span>[185](#fn_184) for it is not probable that they are
here placed in their proper order. The Evangelists, as we have remarked
on former occasions, were not very exact in arranging Christ’s
discourses, but frequently throw together a variety of sayings uttered
by him. *Luke* mixes this sentence with other discourses of Christ
spoken at different times, and likewise points out a different purpose
for which Christ used these words. It was that they might be attentive
to his doctrine, and not permit the seed of life to pass away
unimproved, which ought to be cordially received, and take root in their
minds. “Beware,” he says, “lest what has been given be taken away from
you, if it yield no fruit.”

<span id="ii.xviii-p58"></span><span id="ii.xviii-p58.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p59"></span>**13.** *For this reason I speak by
parables.* He says that he speaks to the multitude in an obscure manner,
because they are not partakers of the true light. And yet, while he
declares that a veil is spread over the blind, that they may remain in
their darkness, he does not ascribe the blame of this to themselves, but
takes occasion to commend more highly the grace bestowed on the
Apostles, because it is not equally communicated to all. He assigns no
cause for it, except the secret purpose of God; for which, as we shall
afterwards see more fully, there is a good reason, though it has been
concealed from us. It is not the only design of *a parable* to state, in
an obscure manner, what God is not pleased to reveal clearly; but we
have said that the *parable* now under our consideration was delivered
by Christ, in order that the form of an allegory might present a
doubtful riddle.

<span id="ii.xviii-p60"></span><span id="ii.xviii-p60.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p61"></span>**14.** *And in them is fulfilled the
prophecy of Isaiah.* He confirms his statement by a prediction of
*Isaiah,* that it is far from being a new thing, if many persons derive
no advantage from the word of God, which was formerly appointed to the
ancient people, for the purpose of inducing greater blindness. This
passage of the Prophet is quoted, in a variety of ways, in the New
Testament. Paul quotes it (<span id="ii.xviii-p61.1"></span>[Ac
28:26](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#026)<span
id="ii.xviii-p61.1"></span>) to charge the Jews with obstinate malice,
and says that they were blinded by the light of the Gospel, because they
were bitter and rebellious against God. There he points out the
immediate cause which appeared in the men themselves. But in the Epistle
to the Romans (<span id="ii.xviii-p61.2"></span>[Ro
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#007)<span id="ii.xviii-p61.2"></span>)
he draws the distinction from a deeper and more hidden source; for he
tells us, that *the remnant was saved according to the election of
grace,* and that *the rest were blinded, according as it is written.*
The contrast must there be observed; for if it is *the election* of God,
and an undeserved *election,* which alone saves any remnant of the
people, it follows that all others perish by a hidden, though just,
judgment of God. Who are the *rest,* whom Paul contrasts with the *elect
remnant,* but those on whom God has not bestowed a special salvation?

<span id="ii.xviii-p62"></span>Similar reasoning may be applied to the
passage in John, (<span id="ii.xviii-p62.1"></span>[Joh
12:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#038)<span
id="ii.xviii-p62.1"></span>;) for he says that *many believed not,*
because no man believes, except he to whom God *reveals his arm,* and
immediately adds, that *they could not believe, because it is again
written, Blind the heart of this people.* Such, too is the object which
Christ has in view, when he ascribes it to the secret purpose of God,
that the truth of the Gospel is not revealed indiscriminately to all,
but is exhibited at a distance under obscure forms, so as to have no
other effect than to overspread the minds of the people with grosser
darkness.  <span id="fr_185"></span>[186](#fn_185) In all cases, I
admit, those whom God blinds will be found to deserve this condemnation;
but as the immediate cause is not always obvious in the persons of men,
let it be held as a fixed principle, that God enlightens to salvation,
and that by a peculiar gift, those whom He has freely chosen; and that
all the reprobate are deprived of the light of life, whether God
withholds his word from them, or keeps their eyes and ears closed, that
they do not hear or see.

<span id="ii.xviii-p64"></span>*Hearing you shall hear.* We now perceive
the manner in which Christ applies the prediction of the prophet to the
present occasion. He does not quote the prophet’s words, nor was it
necessary; for Christ reckoned it enough to show, that it was no new or
uncommon occurrence, if many were hardened by the word of God. The words
of the prophet were,

<span id="ii.xviii-p65"></span>Go, blind their minds, and harden their
hearts, (<span id="ii.xviii-p65.1"></span>[Isa
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#010)<span
id="ii.xviii-p65.1"></span>.)

<span id="ii.xviii-p66"></span>Matthew ascribes this to the hearers,
that they may endure the blame of their own blindness and hardness; for
the one cannot be separated from the other. All who have been *given
over to a reprobate mind* (<span id="ii.xviii-p66.1"></span>[Ro
1:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#028)<span id="ii.xviii-p66.1"></span>)
do voluntarily, and from inward malice, blind and harden themselves. Nor
can it be otherwise, wherever the Spirit of God does not reign, by whom
the elect alone are governed. Let us, therefore, attend to this
connection, that all whom God does not enlighten with the Spirit of
adoption are men of unsound mind; and that, while they are more and more
blinded by the word of God, the blame rests wholly on themselves,
because this blindness is voluntary. Again, the ministers of the word
ought to seek consolation from this passage, if the success of their
labors does not always correspond to their wish. Many are so far from
profiting by their instruction, that they are rendered worse by it. What
has befallen them was experienced by a Prophet,  <span
id="fr_186"></span>[187](#fn_186) to whom they are not superior. It
were, indeed, to be wished, that they should bring all under subjection
to God; and they ought to labor and strive for that end. But let them
not wonder if that judgment, which God anciently displayed through the
ministration of the Prophet, is likewise fulfilled at the present day.
At the same time, we ought to be extremely careful, that the fruit of
the Gospel be not lost through our negligence.

<span id="ii.xviii-p68"></span><span id="ii.xviii-p68.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p69"></span>**<span id="ii.xviii-p69.2"></span>[Mark
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#012)<span
id="ii.xviii-p69.2"></span>.** *That seeing, they may see, and not
perceive.* Here it may suffice to state briefly what has already been
fully explained, that the doctrine is not, strictly speaking, or by
itself, or in its own nature, but by accident, the cause of blindness.
When persons of a weak sight come out into sunshine, their eyes become
dimmer than before, and that defect is in no way attributed to the sun,
but to their eyes. In like manner, when the word of God blinds and
hardens the reprobate, as this takes place through their own depravity,
it belongs truly and naturally to themselves, but is accidental, as
respects the word.

<span id="ii.xviii-p70"></span>*Lest at any time they should be
converted.* This clause points out the advantage that is gained by
*seeing and understanding* It is, that men, having been *converted* to
God, are restored to his favor, and, being reconciled to him, enjoy
prosperity and happiness. The true end for which

<span id="ii.xviii-p71"></span>God desires that his word should be
preached is, to reconcile men to himself by renewing their minds and
hearts. With respect to the reprobate, on the other hand, Isaiah here
declares that the stony hardness remains in them, so that they do not
obtain mercy, and that the word fails to produce its effect upon them,
so as to soften their minds to repentance.

<span id="ii.xviii-p72"></span><span id="ii.xviii-p72.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p73"></span>**<span
id="ii.xviii-p73.2"></span>[Matthew
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#015)<span
id="ii.xviii-p73.2"></span>.** *Lest I should heal them* In the word
*healing,* Matthew, as well as the Prophet, includes deliverance from
every evil; for a people afflicted by the hand of God is metaphorically
compared by them to a sick man. They say that *healing* is bestowed,
 <span id="fr_187"></span>[188](#fn_187) when the Lord releases from
punishment. But as this healing depends on the pardon of sins, *Mark*
describes appropriately and justly its cause and source, *lest they
should be converted, and their sins should be forgiven them* For whence
comes the mitigation of chastisements, but because God has been
reconciled to us, and makes us the objects of his blessing? Sometimes,
no doubt, after removing our guilt, he continues to punish us, either
with the view of humbling us the more, or of making us more cautious for
the future. And yet, not only does he show evidences of his favor by
restoring us to life and health; but as punishments usually terminate
when the guilt is removed, *healing* and *forgiveness* are properly
introduced together. It must not, however, be concluded, that repentance
is the cause of pardon, as if God received into his favor *converted*
men, because they deserved it;  <span id="fr_188"></span>[189](#fn_188)
for *conversion* itself is a mark of God’s free favor. Nothing more is
expressed than such an order and connection, that God does not forgive
the sins of any but those who are dissatisfied with themselves.

<span id="ii.xviii-p76"></span><span id="ii.xviii-p76.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p77"></span>**<span
id="ii.xviii-p77.2"></span>[Matthew
13:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#016)<span
id="ii.xviii-p77.2"></span>.** *But blessed are your eyes.* Luke appears
to represent this statement as having been spoken at another time; but
this is easily explained, for in that passage he throws together a
variety of our Lord’s sayings, without attending to the order of dates.
We shall, therefore, follow the text of Matthew, who explains more
clearly the circumstances from which Christ took occasion to utter these
words. Having formerly reminded them of the extraordinary favor which
they had received, in being separated by our Lord from the common
people, and familiarly admitted to the mysteries of his kingdom, he now
magnifies that grace by another comparison, which is, that they excel
ancient *Prophets* and holy *Kings* This is a far loftier distinction
than to be preferred to an unbelieving multitude. Christ does not mean
any kind of *hearing,* or the mere *beholding* of the flesh, but
pronounces their *eyes* to be *blessed,* because they perceive in him a
glory which is worthy of the only-begotten Son of God, so as to
acknowledge him as the Redeemer; because they perceive shining in him
the lively image of God, by which they obtain salvation and perfect
happiness; and because in them is fulfilled what had been spoken by the
Prophets, that those who have been truly and perfectly *taught by the
Lord* (<span id="ii.xviii-p77.3"></span>[Isa
54:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#013)<span
id="ii.xviii-p77.3"></span>) do not need to *learn every man from his
neighbor,* (<span id="ii.xviii-p77.4"></span>[Jer
31:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#034)<span
id="ii.xviii-p77.4"></span>.)

<span id="ii.xviii-p78"></span>This furnishes a reply to an objection
that might be drawn from another saying of Christ, that

<span id="ii.xviii-p79"></span>blessed are they who have not seen, and
yet have believed,  
(<span id="ii.xviii-p79.2"></span>[Joh
20:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#029)<span
id="ii.xviii-p79.2"></span>;)

<span id="ii.xviii-p80"></span>for there he describes that kind of
*seeing* which Thomas desired in consequence of his gross apprehension.
 <span id="fr_189"></span>[190](#fn_189) But that *seeing,* of which
Christ now speaks, has been enjoyed by believers in every age in common
with the Apostles. We do not see Christ, and yet we see him; we do not
hear Christ, and yet we hear him: for in the Gospel we behold him, as
Paul says,

<span id="ii.xviii-p82"></span>face to face, so as to be transformed
into his image,  
(<span id="ii.xviii-p82.2"></span>[2Co
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#018)<span
id="ii.xviii-p82.2"></span>;)

<span id="ii.xviii-p83"></span>and the perfection of wisdom,
righteousness, and life, which was formerly exhibited in him, shines
there continually.

<span id="ii.xviii-p84"></span><span id="ii.xviii-p84.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p85"></span>**<span id="ii.xviii-p85.2"></span>[Luke
10:24](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#024)<span
id="ii.xviii-p85.2"></span>.** *Many Prophets and Kings have desired to
see.* The condition of the Church, at the present day, is justly
pronounced to be preferable to that of the holy fathers, who lived under
the Law; because to them was exhibited, under shadows and figures only,
what is now openly manifested in the shining face of Christ. *The vail
of the temple being rent,* (<span id="ii.xviii-p85.3"></span>[Mt
27:51](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#051)<span
id="ii.xviii-p85.3"></span>,) we enter by faith into the heavenly
sanctuary, and are freely permitted to approach to God. Although the
fathers were satisfied with their lot, and enjoyed a blessed peace in
their own minds, yet this did not prevent their desires from extending
farther. Thus, Abraham *saw the day of Christ* afar off, *and rejoice,*
(<span id="ii.xviii-p85.4"></span>[Joh
8:56](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#056)<span
id="ii.xviii-p85.4"></span>,) and yet longed to enjoy a nearer view, but
did not obtain his wish. Simeon spoke the sentiments of all,  <span
id="fr_190"></span>[191](#fn_190) when he said, *Now thou sendest thy
servant away in peace,* (<span id="ii.xviii-p86.2"></span>[Lu
2:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#029)<span
id="ii.xviii-p86.2"></span>.) And indeed it was impossible that, under
the burden of that curse by which the human race is crushed, they should
be otherwise than altogether inflamed with the desire of a promised
deliverance.  <span id="fr_191"></span>[192](#fn_191) Let us therefore
learn, that they breathed after Christ, like hungry persons, and yet
possessed a serene faith; so that they did not murmur against God, but
kept their minds in patient expectation till the full time of
revelation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_167"></span>[168](cc32019.htm#fr_167) <span
id="ii.xviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p6"></span> “<span id="ii.xviii-p6.1"></span>De
cognoistre les secrets;” — “to know the secrets.”

<span id="fn_168"></span>[169](cc32019.htm#fr_168) <span
id="ii.xviii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p7"></span> “<span id="ii.xviii-p7.1"></span>Et en
aura tant plus;” — “and he shall have so much the more of it.”

<span id="fn_169"></span>[170](cc32019.htm#fr_169) <span
id="ii.xviii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p9"></span> “<span id="ii.xviii-p9.1"></span>De
cognoistre le secret;” — “to know the secret.”

<span id="fn_170"></span>[171](cc32019.htm#fr_170) <span
id="ii.xviii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p12"></span> “<span id="ii.xviii-p12.1"></span>Il
alloit de ville en ville, et de village en village;” — “he was going
from town to town, and from village to village.”

<span id="fn_171"></span>[172](cc32019.htm#fr_171) <span
id="ii.xviii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p13"></span> “<span id="ii.xviii-p13.1"></span>Et ses
disciples l’interroguerent, dema, dans quelle estoit ceste similitude;”
— “and his disciples interrogated him, asking what was this parable.”

<span id="fn_172"></span>[173](cc32019.htm#fr_172) <span
id="ii.xviii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p14"></span> “<span id="ii.xviii-p14.1"></span>De
cognoistre les secrets;” — “to know the secrets.”

<span id="fn_173"></span>[174](cc32019.htm#fr_173) <span
id="ii.xviii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p22"></span> “<span
id="ii.xviii-p22.1"></span>D’autant qu’elles ont suyvi leur Liberateur,
nonobstant l’ignominie du monde qu’il leur faloit endurer en ce
faisant;” — “because they followed their Deliverer, notwithstanding the
ignominy of the world which they must endure by so doing.”

<span id="fn_174"></span>[175](cc32019.htm#fr_174) <span
id="ii.xviii-p31.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p32"></span> “<span id="ii.xviii-p32.1"></span>Si
est-ce toutesfois qu’elles sont obscures et enveloppees, quand on
continue tousiours la metaphore sans rien y entremesler;” — “yet they
are obscure and involved, when the metaphor is constantly pursued,
without any thing being intermingled with it.”

<span id="fn_175"></span>[176](cc32019.htm#fr_175) <span
id="ii.xviii-p32.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p33"></span> “<span id="ii.xviii-p33.1"></span>En
usant de termes communs;” — “by using ordinary terms.”

<span id="fn_176"></span>[177](cc32019.htm#fr_176) <span
id="ii.xviii-p33.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p34"></span> “<span id="ii.xviii-p34.1"></span>Voyla
comme il y a bien a regarder comment on couche ou on deduit un propos;”
— “this shows us the great attention that is due to the manner in which
a discourse is expressed or conveyed.”

<span id="fn_177"></span>[178](cc32019.htm#fr_177) <span
id="ii.xviii-p36.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p37"></span> “<span id="ii.xviii-p37.1"></span>De
cognoistre les secrets;” — “to know the secrets.”

<span id="fn_178"></span>[179](cc32019.htm#fr_178) <span
id="ii.xviii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p42"></span> “<span id="ii.xviii-p42.1"></span>La
parole de Dieu de sa nature est tousiours pleine de lumiere et clairte;”
— “the word of God in its own nature is always full of light and
brightness.”

<span id="fn_179"></span>[180](cc32019.htm#fr_179) <span
id="ii.xviii-p43.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p44"></span> “<span
id="ii.xviii-p44.1"></span>Cependant neantmoins il ne laisse point
d’estre vray, que le Seigneur tient ses secrets cachez, a fin que le
goust et la fruition d’iceux ne parviene aux reprouvez;” — “yet,
nevertheless, it does not cease to be true, that the Lord keeps its
secrets hidden, in order that the relish and enjoyment of them may not
reach the reprobate.”

<span id="fn_180"></span>[181](cc32019.htm#fr_180) <span
id="ii.xviii-p46.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p47"></span> “<span id="ii.xviii-p47.1"></span>Si on
demande d’ou venoit un tel privilege et honneur aux Apostres plustost
aux autres;” — “if it is asked, whence came such a privilege and honor
to the Apostles rather than to the others.”

<span id="fn_181"></span>[182](cc32019.htm#fr_181) <span
id="ii.xviii-p47.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p48"></span> “<span id="ii.xviii-p48.1"></span>Exclud
toute merite de sa part;” — “excludes all merit on their part.”

<span id="fn_182"></span>[183](cc32019.htm#fr_182) <span
id="ii.xviii-p50.4"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p51"></span> “<span id="ii.xviii-p51.1"></span>Car la
le propos sera touchant le droict et legitime usage des dons de Dieu;” —
“for there the discourse will relate to the right and lawful use of the
gifts of God.”

<span id="fn_183"></span>[184](cc32019.htm#fr_183) <span
id="ii.xviii-p53.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p54"></span> “<span id="ii.xviii-p54.1"></span>Et
comme ses richesses sont infinies, et ne se peuvent espuiser;”— “and as
his riches are infinite, and cannot be exhausted.”

<span id="fn_184"></span>[185](cc32019.htm#fr_184) <span
id="ii.xviii-p56.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p57"></span> Harmony, volume 1 p. 345.

<span id="fn_185"></span>[186](cc32019.htm#fr_185) <span
id="ii.xviii-p62.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p63"></span> “<span id="ii.xviii-p63.1"></span>En
sorte que c’estoit tousiours pour esblouir de plus en plus les yeux de l
entendement du peuple;” — “so that it was always to dazzle more and more
the eyes of the understanding of the people.”

<span id="fn_186"></span>[187](cc32019.htm#fr_186) <span
id="ii.xviii-p66.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p67"></span> “<span id="ii.xviii-p67.1"></span>Il
leur advient ce que le Prophete Isaie a experimente;” — “it happens to
them what the Prophet Isaiah experienced.”

<span id="fn_187"></span>[188](cc32019.htm#fr_187) <span
id="ii.xviii-p73.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p74"></span> “<span id="ii.xviii-p74.1"></span>Ils
disent qu’il guarit, et remet en sante;” — “they say that he heals, and
restores to health.”

<span id="fn_188"></span>[189](cc32019.htm#fr_188) <span
id="ii.xviii-p74.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p75"></span> “<span id="ii.xviii-p75.1"></span>Il ne
faut pas conclurre par cela que la repentance, ou conversion, soit cause
de nous faire avoir remission et pardon de nos pechez; comme si Dieu
prenoit a merci ceux qui se convertissent, pource qu’ils en sont dignes,
et le meritent;” — “we must not therefore conclude, that repentance, or
conversion, is the cause of making us have forgiveness and pardon of our
sins; as if God exercised mercy towards those who are converted, because
they are worthy of it, and deserve it.”

<span id="fn_189"></span>[190](cc32019.htm#fr_189) <span
id="ii.xviii-p80.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p81"></span> “<span id="ii.xviii-p81.1"></span>Selon
son apprehension carnale et grossiere;” — “according to his carnal and
gross apprehension.”

<span id="fn_190"></span>[191](cc32019.htm#fr_190) <span
id="ii.xviii-p85.5"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p86"></span> “<span id="ii.xviii-p86.1"></span>Simeon
disoit selon l’affection de tours les Peres;” — “Simeon spoke according
to the feeling of all the Fathers.”

<span id="fn_191"></span>[192](cc32019.htm#fr_191) <span
id="ii.xviii-p86.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p87"></span> “<span id="ii.xviii-p87.1"></span>Et de
faict, il ne se pouvoit faire que ces bons personnages ne fussent tous
ravis, et comme enflambez d’un grand desir de la delivrance promise.” —
“And indeed it was impossible that those good men should not be
altogether transported, and as it were inflamed with a great desire of
the promised deliverance.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 13:18-23; Mark 4:13-20; Luke 8:11-15](cc32020)
