[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc32030)  [Next](cc32032.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 32: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part II*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.xxx"></span>

<span id="ii.xxx-p1"></span><span id="ii.xxx-p1.1"></span>[Luke
14:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#001.md)<span id="ii.xxx-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxx-p2"></span><span id="ii.xxx-p2.1"></span>[Luke
14:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#001.md)<span id="ii.xxx-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxx-p3"></span>**1**. And it happened that he entered into
the house of a certain ruler of the Pharisees on a Sabbath, to take
food, and they watched him. **2**. And, lo, a certain man who had a
dropsy was before him, **3**. And Jesus answering said to the lawyers
 <span id="fr_287"></span>[288](#fn_287.md) and Pharisees, saying, Is it
lawful to cure on the Sabbath? **4**. But they were silent; and he took
and cured him, and sent him away. **5**. And he answering to them said,
Which of you shall have an ass or an ox that shall fall into a pit, and
will not immediately pull him out on the Sabbath-day? **6**. And they
could not answer him to these things.

<span id="ii.xxx-p5"></span> 

<span id="ii.xxx-p6"></span> 

<span id="ii.xxx-p7"></span><span id="ii.xxx-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxx-p8"></span>This narrative contains nothing more than a
miracle which Christ performed, in order to correct the superstitious
observance of the Sabbath. For he did not, intend, as some imagine,
absolutely to abolish the Sabbath, but only to point out, that neither
the works of God, nor the duties of charity, violate the holy rest which
is enjoined by the law. Whether or not those very persons had purposely
brought the dropsical man to that place cannot be known with certainty.
He unquestionably could not be present at the table by accident, nor
break into a private dwelling without the permission and consent of the
owner. It is therefore probable, that he was placed there with the
concealed design of tempting Christ, which, on their part, was as
foolish an action as it was wicked; for they had already known by
experience what Christ was accustomed to do, whenever a similar occasion
presented itself.

<span id="ii.xxx-p9"></span><span id="ii.xxx-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxx-p10"></span>**3.** *Is it lawful to cure on Sabbath?*
The meaning of this question is, ought the *curing* of a man to be
reckoned among the works which violate the Sabbath? If they had said
that the observance of the Sabbath is violated in this way, the reply
was obvious, that it is a work of God. Now the law of the Sabbath goes
no farther, than that men shall rest from their own works. Christ first
puts the question to them, and he does so for the purpose of guarding
against offense. It would not have been necessary for him to pacify
them, if they had not been instigated by hardened malice. Not that he
always laid himself under this restriction; for in many cases he did
what had been enjoined on him by the Father, without attending to the
offense that might arise from it. But he intended to show by this
example, that he did not inconsiderately perform miracles on Sabbath,
because he was prepared to assign a reason for what he did. They, on the
other hand, make it evident by their silence, that their desire of
finding fault is stronger than their zeal for the law; and therefore
Christ treats with utter indifference their opinion about his action,
because it was evident that they intentionally sought out an occasion of
offense.

<span id="ii.xxx-p11"></span><span id="ii.xxx-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxx-p12"></span>**5.** *Which of you shall have an ox or an
ass?* Though they did not deserve that Christ should take pains to
remove the offense, yet he shows that he did nothing inconsistent with
the observance of the Sabbath. And this he undoubtedly does, not so much
with the view of instructing them, as of protecting himself against
their slanders; for he knew that they were too much blinded by virulent
hatred to yield submissively, to argument, but wished to triumph over
their malice, by compelling them through shame to be silent. If we are
at liberty to relieve brute animals on Sabbath, it would be unreasonable
that we should not perform a similar office of kindness to man, who is
formed after the image of God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_287"></span>[288](cc32031.htm#fr_287.md) <span
id="ii.xxx-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxx-p4"></span> “<span id="ii.xxx-p4.1"></span>Aux Docteurs
de la Loy;” — “to the Doctors of the Law.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke 14:7-14](cc32032.md)
