[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc32035)  [Next](cc32037) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 32: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part II*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.xxxv"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxv-p1"></span><span id="ii.xxxv-p1.1"></span>[Luke
17:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#007)<span id="ii.xxxv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxv-p2"></span><span id="ii.xxxv-p2.1"></span>[Luke
17:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#007)<span id="ii.xxxv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxv-p3"></span>**7**. But which of you that hath a servant
ploughing or feeding, when he hath returned from the field, will
immediately say to him, Come  <span id="fr_313"></span>[314](#fn_313)
and sit down at table? **8**. And doth not rather say to him, Prepare
supper for me, and gird thyself, and serve me, till I have eaten and
drunk, and, after that, eat and drink thou.  <span
id="fr_314"></span>[315](#fn_314) **9**. Doth he thank that servant,
 <span id="fr_315"></span>[316](#fn_315) because he did the things which
were commanded him? I suppose not. **10**. So likewise, when you shall
have done those things which were commanded you, do you say, We are
unprofitable servants: we have done what we were bound to do.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p7"></span> 

<span id="ii.xxxv-p8"></span><span id="ii.xxxv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxv-p9"></span>The object of this parable is to show that
God claims all that belongs to us as his property, and possesses an
entire control over our persons and services; and, therefore, that all
the zeal that may be manifested by us in discharging our duty does not
lay him under obligation to us by any sort of merit; for, as we are his
property, so he on his part can owe us nothing.  <span
id="fr_316"></span>[317](#fn_316) He adduces the comparison of *a
servant,* who, after having spent the day in severe toil, returns home
in the evening, and continues his labors till his master is pleased to
relieve him.  <span id="fr_317"></span>[318](#fn_317) Christ speaks not
of such servants as we have in the present day, who work for hire, but
of the slaves that lived in ancient times, whose condition in society
was such, that they gained nothing for themselves, but all that belonged
to them—their toil, and application, and industry, even to their very
blood—was the property of their masters. Christ now shows that a bond of
servitude not less rigorous binds and obliges us to serve God; from
which he infers, that we have no means of laying Him under obligations
to us.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p12"></span>It is an argument drawn from the less to
the greater; for if a mortal man is permitted to hold such power over
another man, as to enjoin upon him uninterrupted services by night and
by day, and yet contract no sort of mutual obligation, as if he were
that man’s debtor, how much more shall God have a right to demand the
services of our whole life, to the utmost extent that our ability
allows, and yet be in no degree indebted to us? We see then that all are
held guilty of wicked arrogance who imagine that they deserve any thing
from God, or that he is bound to them in any way. And yet no crime is
more generally practiced than this kind of arrogance; for there is no
man that would not willingly call God to account, and hence the notion
of merits has prevailed in almost every age.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p13"></span>But we must attend more closely to the
statement made by Christ, that we render nothing to God beyond what he
has a right to claim, but are so strongly bound to his service, that we
owe him every thing that lies in our power. It consists of two clauses.
First, our life, even to the very end of our course, belongs entirely to
God; so that, if a person were to spend a part of it in obedience to
God, he would have no right to bargain that he should rest for the
remainder of the time; as a considerable number of men, after serving as
soldiers for ten years, would gladly apply for a discharge. Then follows
the second clause, on which we have already touched, that God is not
bound to pay us hire for any of our services. Let each of us remember,
that he has been created by God for the purpose of laboring, and of
being vigorously employed in his work; and that not only for a limited
time, but till death itself, and, what is more, that he shall not only
*live, but die, to God,* (<span id="ii.xxxv-p13.1"></span>[Ro
14:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#008)<span id="ii.xxxv-p13.1"></span>.)

<span id="ii.xxxv-p14"></span>With respect to merit, we must remove the
difficulty by which many are perplexed; for Scripture so frequently
promises a reward to our works, that they think it allows them some
merit. The reply is easy. A reward is promised, not as a debt, but from
the mere good pleasure of God. It is a great mistake to suppose that
there is a mutual relation between Reward and Merit; for it is by his
own undeserved favor, and not by the value of our works, that God is
induced to reward them. By the engagements of the Law  <span
id="fr_318"></span>[319](#fn_318) , I readily acknowledge, God is bound
to men, if they were to discharge fully all that is required from them;
but still, as this is a voluntary obligation, it remains a fixed
principle, that man can demand nothing from God, as if he had merited
any thing. And thus the arrogance of the flesh falls to the ground; for,
granting that any man fulfilled the Law, he cannot plead that he has any
claims on God, having done no more than he was bound to do. When he says
that *we are unprofitable servants,* his meaning is, that God receives
from us nothing beyond what is justly due but only collects the lawful
revenues of his dominion.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p16"></span>There are two principles, therefore, that
must be maintained: first, that God naturally owes us nothing, and that
all the services which we render to him are not worth a single straw;
secondly, that, according to the engagements of the Law, a reward is
attached to works, not on account of their value, but because God is
graciously pleased to become our debtor.  <span
id="fr_319"></span>[320](#fn_319) It would evince intolerable
ingratitude, if on such a ground any person should indulge in proud
vaunting. The kindness and liberality which God exercises towards us are
so far from giving us a right to swell with foolish confidence, that we
are only laid under deeper obligations to Him. Whenever we meet with the
word *reward,* or whenever it occurs to our recollection, let us look
upon this as the crowning act of the goodness of God to us, that, though
we are completely in his debt, he condescends to enter into a bargain
with us. So much the more detestable is the invention of the Sophists,
who have had the effrontery to forge a kind of merit, which professes to
be founded on a just claim.  <span id="fr_320"></span>[321](#fn_320) The
word *merit,* taken by itself, was sufficiently profane and inconsistent
with the standard of piety; but to intoxicate men with diabolical pride,
as if they could merit any thing by a just claim, is far worse.

<span id="ii.xxxv-p19"></span><span id="ii.xxxv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxv-p20"></span>**10.** *We have done what we were bound
to do.* That is, “we have brought nothing of our own, but have only done
what we were bound by the law to do ” Christ speaks here of an entire
observance of the law, which is nowhere to be found; for the most
perfect of all men is still at a great distance from that righteousness
which the law demands. The present question is not, Are we justified by
works? but, Is the observance of the law meritorious of any reward from
God? This latter question is answered in the negative; for God holds us
for his slaves, and therefore reckons all that can proceed from us to be
his just right. Nay, though it were true, that a reward is due to the
observance of the law in respect of merit, it will not therefore follow
that any man is justified by the merits of works; for we all fail: and
not only is our obedience imperfect, but there is not a single part of
it that corresponds exactly to the judgment of God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_313"></span>[314](cc32036.htm#fr_313) <span
id="ii.xxxv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxv-p4"></span> “<span id="ii.xxxv-p4.1"></span>Avance-toy
incontinent;” — “come forward immediately.”

<span id="fn_314"></span>[315](cc32036.htm#fr_314) <span
id="ii.xxxv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxv-p5"></span> “<span id="ii.xxxv-p5.1"></span>Et apres
cela tu mangeras et boiras;” — “and after that thou shalt eat and
drink.”

<span id="fn_315"></span>[316](cc32036.htm#fr_315) <span
id="ii.xxxv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxv-p6"></span> “<span id="ii.xxxv-p6.1"></span>Scait-il
gre a ce serviteur-la?” — “does he feel obliged to that servant?”

<span id="fn_316"></span>[317](cc32036.htm#fr_316) <span
id="ii.xxxv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxv-p10"></span> “<span id="ii.xxxv-p10.1"></span>Il ne
pent pas estre nostre deteur;” — “he cannot be our debtor.”

<span id="fn_317"></span>[318](cc32036.htm#fr_317) <span
id="ii.xxxv-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxv-p11"></span> “<span id="ii.xxxv-p11.1"></span>Iusqu’a
ce qu’il se soit acquitte au bon plaisir du maistre; et qu’on luy dise,
C’est assez;” — “till he is discharged at the good pleasure of the
master; and till he is told, It is enough.”

<span id="fn_318"></span>[319](cc32036.htm#fr_318) <span
id="ii.xxxv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxv-p15"></span> “<span id="ii.xxxv-p15.1"></span>Selon
les conventions contenus en la Loy;” — “according to the engagements
contained in the Law.”

<span id="fn_319"></span>[320](cc32036.htm#fr_319) <span
id="ii.xxxv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxv-p17"></span> “<span id="ii.xxxv-p17.1"></span>Mais en
telle sorte que Dieu se rend volontairement deteur, sans qu’il y soit
tenu;” — “but in such a manner that God voluntarily becomes our debtor,
though he is under no obligation to do so.”

<span id="fn_320"></span>[321](cc32036.htm#fr_320) <span
id="ii.xxxv-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxv-p18"></span> “<span id="ii.xxxv-p18.1"></span>Et
d’antant plus est detestable la sophisterie des Theologiens Scho-
lastiques, ou Sorbonnistes, lesquels ont ose forger leur merite, qu’ils
appellent De condigno;” — “And so much the more detestable is the
sophistry of the Scholastic Theologians, or Sorbonnists, *(see* p. 142,
n. 2, *of this volume,)* who have dared to forge their merit, which they
call *De condigno.*” The reader will find not only the general doctrine
of m*erit,* but this particular aspect of it, fully treated by our
Author in his *Institutes of the Christian Religion,* Book III. ch. 15:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke 18:1-8](cc32037)
