[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc32048)  [Next](cc32050.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 32: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part II*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.xlviii"></span>

<span id="ii.xlviii-p1"></span><span id="ii.xlviii-p1.1"></span>[Matthew
15:29-39](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#029.md)<span
id="ii.xlviii-p1.1"></span>; <span id="ii.xlviii-p1.2"></span>[Mark
7:31-37](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#031.md)<span
id="ii.xlviii-p1.2"></span>, 8:1-10

<span id="ii.xlviii-p2"></span><span id="ii.xlviii-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
15:29-39](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#029.md)<span
id="ii.xlviii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlviii-p3"></span><span id="ii.xlviii-p3.1"></span>[Mark
7:31-37](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#031.md)<span
id="ii.xlviii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlviii-p4"></span> **29**. And Jesus departing thence, came
near the sea of Galilee, and he went up into the mountain, and sat down
there. **30**. And great multitudes came to him, bringing with them the
lame, the blind, the dumb, the maimed, and many others, and laid them at
the feet of Jesus; and he cured them: **31**. So that the multitudes
wondered, when they perceived the dumb to speak, the maimed to be whole,
the lame to walk, the blind to see; and they glorified the God of
Israel. **32**. And Jesus, having called his disciples to him, said, I
have compassion on the multitude, because they have now remained with me
three days, and have nothing to eat; and I do not choose to send them
away fasting, lest they faint by the way. **33**. His disciples say to
him, Whence shall we obtain so many loaves in a solitary place as to
satisfy so great a multitude? **34**. And Jesus saith to them, How many
loaves have you? And they say, Seven, and a few small fishes.
**35**. And he commanded the multitudes to sit down on the ground.
**36**. And he took those seven loaves, and the fishes, and after that
he had given thanks, he broke and gave to his disciples, and the
disciples to the multitude. **37**. And they all ate, and were
satisfied; and they took up of the fragments that were left seven
baskets full. **38**. And they who had eaten were four thousand men,
besides women and children. **39**. And having sent away the multitudes,
he embarked, and came to the borders of Magdala.

<span id="ii.xlviii-p5"></span> **31**. And again, departing from the
territories of Tyre and Sidon, he came to the sea of Galilee, through
the midst of the territories of Decapolis. **32**. And they bring to him
one who was deaf, and had an impediment in his speech, and implore him
to lay his hand on him. **33**. And when he had taken him aside from the
multitude, he put his fingers into his ears, and spat, and touched his
tongue; **34**. And looking up to heaven, he sighed, and said to him,
Ephphatha, that is, Be opened. **35**. And immediately his ears were
opened, and the string of his tongue was loosed, and he spoke
distinctly. **36**. Then he enjoined them not to tell it to any person;
but the more he enjoined them, so much the more the published it:
**37**. And were amazed beyond measure, saying, He hath done all things
well; he maketh both the deaf to hear and the dumb to speak.

<span id="ii.xlviii-p6"></span><span id="ii.xlviii-p6.1"></span>[Mark
8:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/mar008.htm#001.md)<span
id="ii.xlviii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlviii-p7"></span>**1**. In those days, when there wa a
very great multitude, and they had nothing to eat, Jesus called his
disciples to him, and said to them, **2**. I am moved with compassion
towards the multitude, because they have now remained with me three
days, and have nothing to eat. **3**. And if I shall send them home
fasting, they will faint by the way; for some of them have come from a
distance. **4**. And his disciples answered him, Whence shall any man be
able to satisfy those persons with bread in this solitary place?
**5**. And he asked them, How many loaves have you? And they said,
Seven. **6**. And he commanded the multitude to sit down on the ground;
and took the seven loaves, and, when he had given thanks, brake, and
gave to his disciples to set before them, and they set them before the
multitude. **7**. And they had a few small fishes; and when he had
blessed, he ordered these likewise to be set before them. **8**. And
they ate, and were satisfied; and of the fragments that remained they
carried away seven baskets full. **9**. And they that had eaten were
about four thousand; and he sent them away. **10**. And immediately
embarking, he came with his disciples to the coasts of Dalmanutha.

<span id="ii.xlviii-p8"></span> 

<span id="ii.xlviii-p9"></span> 

<span id="ii.xlviii-p10"></span><span id="ii.xlviii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlviii-p11"></span>**<span
id="ii.xlviii-p11.2"></span>[Matthew
15:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#029.md)<span
id="ii.xlviii-p11.2"></span>.** *And Jesus departing thence.* Though it
is unquestionably the same journey of Christ, on his return from the
neighborhood of Sidon, that is related by Matthew and by Mark, yet in
some points they do not quite agree. It is of little moment that the one
says he *came to the borders of Magdala*, and the other, that *he came
to the coasts of Dalmanutha;* for the cities were adjacent, being
situated on the lake of Gennesareth, and we need not wonder that the
district which lay between them received both names.  <span
id="fr_421"></span>[422](#fn_421.md)

<span id="ii.xlviii-p13"></span>*Decapolis* <span
id="ii.xlviii-p13.1"></span>was so called from its containing (<span
id="ii.xlviii-p13.2"></span>δέκα πόλεις<span
id="ii.xlviii-p13.3"></span>) *ten cities;* <span
id="ii.xlviii-p13.4"></span>and as it was contiguous to Phenicia and to
that part of Galilee which lay towards the sea, Christ must have passed
through it, when he returned from Phenicia into Galilee of Judea. There
is a greater appearance of contradiction in another part of the
narrative, where *Matthew* <span id="ii.xlviii-p13.5"></span>says that
our Lord cured *many* <span id="ii.xlviii-p13.6"></span>who labored
under various diseases, while *Mark* <span
id="ii.xlviii-p13.7"></span>takes no notice of any but of one *deaf*
<span id="ii.xlviii-p13.8"></span>man. But this difficulty need not
detain us; for *Mark* <span id="ii.xlviii-p13.9"></span>selected for
description a miracle which was performed during the journey, and the
report of which was no sooner circulated than it aroused the inhabitants
of every part of that country to bring *many* <span
id="ii.xlviii-p13.10"></span>persons to Christ to be cured. Now we know
that the Evangelists are not anxious to relate all that Christ did, and
are so far from dwelling largely on miracles, that they only glance at a
few by way of example. Besides, *Mark* <span
id="ii.xlviii-p13.11"></span>was satisfied with producing one instance,
in which the power of Christ is as brightly displayed as in others of
the same sort which followed shortly afterwards.

<span id="ii.xlviii-p14"></span><span id="ii.xlviii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlviii-p15"></span>**<span
id="ii.xlviii-p15.2"></span>[Mark
7:32](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#032.md)<span
id="ii.xlviii-p15.2"></span>.** *And they bring to him one who was
deaf.* The reason why *they implored him to lay his hands upon him* may
be learned from passages which we have already considered; for the
*laying on of hands* was a solemn symbol of consecration,  <span
id="fr_422"></span>[423](#fn_422.md) and by means of it, the gifts of the
Holy Spirit were also bestowed. And there is no doubt that this ceremony
was frequently used by Christ; so that those men requested nothing but
what they knew that he had been formerly in the habit of doing. On the
present occasion, Christ employs other symbols; for he puts his
*spittle* on the *tongue* of the *dumb man, and puts his fingers into
his ears.* The *laying on of hands* would of itself have been
sufficiently efficacious, and even, without moving a finger, he might
have accomplished it by a single act of his will; but it is evident that
he made abundant use of outward signs, when they were found to be
advantageous. Thus, by touching the *tongue* with *spittle*, he intended
to point out that the faculty of speech was communicated by himself
alone; and by *putting his finger into the ears*, he showed that it
belonged to his office to pierce the ears of the deaf. There is no
necessity for having recourse to allegories; and we find that those who
have amused themselves with ingenious discussions on this subject, are
so far from bringing forward any thing of real value, that they tend
rather to hold up the Scriptures to ridicule. Readers of sobriety and
judgment will be satisfied with this single instruction, that we obtain
from Christ, in answer to our prayers, both speech and hearing; for he
pours his energy into our tongues, and pierces our ears with his
fingers.

<span id="ii.xlviii-p17"></span><span id="ii.xlviii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlviii-p18"></span>**33.** *And when he had taken him aside
from the multitude.* <span id="ii.xlviii-p18.1"></span>This was done,
partly to afford to those who were ignorant, and not yet sufficiently
qualified for becoming witnesses, an opportunity of perceiving at a
distance the glory of his Divine nature, and partly that he might have a
better opportunity of pouring out earnest prayer. When he *looked up to
heaven and sighed*<span id="ii.xlviii-p18.2"></span>, <span
id="ii.xlviii-p18.3"></span>it was an expression of strong feeling; and
this enables us to perceive the vehemence of his love towards men, for
whose miseries he feels so much compassion. Nor can it be doubted, that
by conveying the spittle from his own mouth to the mouth of another, and
by *putting his fingers into his ears,* <span
id="ii.xlviii-p18.4"></span>he intended to manifest and express the same
feeling of kindness. Yet that he has supreme power to remove all our
defects, and restore us to health, is proclaimed by him when he simply
orders the tongue and ears *to be opened;* <span
id="ii.xlviii-p18.5"></span>for it was not without a good reason that
Mark inserted that Chaldaic word, (<span
id="ii.xlviii-p18.6"></span>ἐφφαθά<span id="ii.xlviii-p18.7"></span>)
*Ephphatha*<span id="ii.xlviii-p18.8"></span>, *be opened*<span
id="ii.xlviii-p18.9"></span>, <span id="ii.xlviii-p18.10"></span>but to
testify the divine power of Christ. Among other fooleries with which
baptism has been debased by foolish men, the ceremony used by our Lord
is turned into a piece of buffoonery; and this instance shows us that
there is no end to licentiousness, when men wantonly change at their own
pleasure the mysteries of God.

<span id="ii.xlviii-p19"></span><span id="ii.xlviii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlviii-p20"></span>**36.** *Then he enjoined them not to
tell it to any person.* Many commentators torture these *injunctions* to
an opposite meaning, as if Christ had purposely excited them to spread
abroad the fame of the miracle; but I prefer a more natural
interpretation which I have formerly stated,  <span
id="fr_423"></span>[424](#fn_423.md) that Christ only intended to delay the
publication of it till a more proper and convenient time. I have no
doubt, therefore, that their zeal was unseasonable, when, though
*enjoined* to be silent, they were in haste to speak. We need not wonder
that men unaccustomed to the doctrine of Christ are carried away by
immoderate zeal, when it is not called for. Yet what they unwisely
attempted to do, was made by Christ to promote his own glory; for not
only was the miracle made known, but the whole of that district, in
despising the Author of heavenly gifts, was rendered inexcusable.

<span id="ii.xlviii-p22"></span><span id="ii.xlviii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlviii-p23"></span>**37.** *He hath done all things well.*
<span id="ii.xlviii-p23.2"></span>Matthew, after collecting many
miracles, concludes by saying that *the multitudes wondered, and
glorified the God of Israel;* <span id="ii.xlviii-p23.3"></span>that is,
because God, taking unusual methods of illustrating his power, had
called up the remembrance of his covenant. But the words of Mark contain
perhaps an implied contrast; for the reports concerning Christ were
various, and the word *multitude* <span id="ii.xlviii-p23.4"></span>or
*crowd* <span id="ii.xlviii-p23.5"></span>(<span
id="ii.xlviii-p23.6"></span>ὄχλος<span id="ii.xlviii-p23.7"></span>) may
be intended to mean that it was only wicked and malicious persons who
slandered his actions, since all that he did was so far from exposing
him to calumny that it deserved the highest praise. But we know, and it
is what nature teaches us, that nothing is more unjust than to make the
bestowal of favors an occasion of envy and ill-will.

<span id="ii.xlviii-p24"></span><span id="ii.xlviii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlviii-p25"></span>**<span
id="ii.xlviii-p25.2"></span>[Matthew
15:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#032.md)<span
id="ii.xlviii-p25.2"></span>.** *I have compassion on the multitude.*
Here a miracle is related not unlike another which we have lately
explained. The only difference is, that on the former occasion Christ
satisfied *five thousand men* with *five loaves and two fishes*, while,
on the present occasion, *four thousand men* are fed with *seven loaves
and a few small fishes;* and that *twelve baskets* were then filled with
fragments, while out of a greater abundance a smaller portion is left.
Let us learn from this, that the power of God is not restricted to means
or outward assistance, and that it is all one with Him whether there be
much or little, as Jonathan  <span id="fr_424"></span>[425](#fn_424.md)
said when speaking of his own moderate army and the vast multitude of
enemies:

<span id="ii.xlviii-p27"></span>there is no restraint to the Lord to
save by many or by few,  
(<span id="ii.xlviii-p27.2"></span>[1Sa
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#006.md)<span
id="ii.xlviii-p27.2"></span>.)

<span id="ii.xlviii-p28"></span>As the blessing of God can make one loaf
suffice as well as twenty for satisfying a great multitude, so, if that
be wanting, a hundred loaves will not be a sufficient meal for ten men;
for when *the staff of bread is broken*, (<span
id="ii.xlviii-p28.1"></span>[Le
26:26](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#026.md)<span
id="ii.xlviii-p28.1"></span>,) though the flour should come in full
weight from the mill, and the bread from the oven, it will serve no
purpose to stuff the belly. The *three days’ fasting,* of which Christ
speaks, must not be understood to mean that they had eaten nothing for
three days; but that in desert places they had few conveniences, and
must have wanted their ordinary food. Besides, in those warm countries,
hunger is less keen than in our thick and cold atmosphere; and,
therefore, we need not wonder that they should abstain longer from food.

<span id="ii.xlviii-p29"></span><span id="ii.xlviii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlviii-p30"></span>**33.** *Whence shall we obtain so many
loaves in a solitary place?* The disciples manifest excessive stupidity
in not remembering, at least, that earlier proof of the power and grace
of Christ, which they might have applied to the case in hand. As if they
had never seen any thing of the same sort, they forget to apply to him
for relief. There is not a day on which a similar indifference does not
steal upon us; and we ought to be the more careful not to allow our
minds to be drawn away from the contemplation of divine benefits, that
the experience of the past may lead us to expect for the future the same
assistance which God has already on one or more occasions bestowed upon
us.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_421"></span>[422](cc32049.htm#fr_421.md) <span
id="ii.xlviii-p11.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xlviii-p12"></span> “<span id="ii.xlviii-p12.1"></span>Est
nomme maintenant de l’une, maintenant de l’autre ville;” — “was named
sometimes from the one, and sometimes from the other town.”

<span id="fn_422"></span>[423](cc32049.htm#fr_422.md) <span
id="ii.xlviii-p15.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xlviii-p16"></span> “<span id="ii.xlviii-p16.1"></span>Pour
dedier et eonsacrer les personnes;” — “for dedicating and con-secrating
persons.”

<span id="fn_423"></span>[424](cc32049.htm#fr_423.md) <span
id="ii.xlviii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlviii-p21"></span> Harmony, vol. 1. p. 374.

<span id="fn_424"></span>[425](cc32049.htm#fr_424.md) <span
id="ii.xlviii-p25.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xlviii-p26"></span> Instead of *Jonathan*, the French copy
mentions *Asa*, whose words are similar, and were uttered on a similar
occasion: *Lord*, *it is nothing with thee to help*, *whether* *with*
*many*, *or with them that have no power*, (<span
id="ii.xlviii-p26.1"></span>[2Ch
14:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#011.md)<span
id="ii.xlviii-p26.1"></span>.) — *Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 16:1-4; Mark 8:11-13; Luke 12:54-57](cc32050.md)
