[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc32069)  [Next](cc32071.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 32: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part II*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.lxix"></span>

<span id="ii.lxix-p1"></span><span id="ii.lxix-p1.1"></span>[Matthew
19:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#013.md)<span
id="ii.lxix-p1.1"></span>; <span id="ii.lxix-p1.2"></span>[Mark
10:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#013.md)<span
id="ii.lxix-p1.2"></span>;  
<span id="ii.lxix-p1.4"></span>[Luke
18:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#015.md)<span
id="ii.lxix-p1.4"></span>

<span id="ii.lxix-p2"></span><span id="ii.lxix-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
19:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#013.md)<span
id="ii.lxix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxix-p3"></span><span id="ii.lxix-p3.1"></span>[Mark
10:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#013.md)<span
id="ii.lxix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxix-p4"></span><span id="ii.lxix-p4.1"></span>[Luke
18:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#015.md)<span
id="ii.lxix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxix-p5"></span> **13**. Then were presented to him
children, that he might lay hands on them and pray; but the disciples
rebuked them. **14**. And Jesus said to them, Suffer children, and
forbid them not, to come to me; for of such is the kingdom of heaven.
**15**. And when he had laid hands on them, he departed thence.

<span id="ii.lxix-p6"></span> **13**. And they brought to him children,
that he might touch them; but the disciples rebuked those who presented
them. **14**. And when Jesus saw it, he was displeased, and said to
them, Suffer children to come to me, and do not forbid them; for of such
is the kingdom of heaven. **15**. Verily I say to you, Whosoever shall
not receive the kingdom of God as a child shall not enter into it.
**16**. And when he had taken them in his arms, he laid hands on them,
and blessed them.

<span id="ii.lxix-p7"></span> 

<span id="ii.lxix-p8"></span> **15**. And they presented to him also
infants, that he might touch them; which, when the disciples saw, they
rebuked them. **16**. But Jesus, when he had called them to him, said,
Suffer children to come to me, and do not forbid them; for of such is
the kingdom of God. **17**. Verily I say to you, Whosoever shall not
receive the kingdom of God as a child shall not enter into it.

<span id="ii.lxix-p9"></span> 

<span id="ii.lxix-p10"></span> 

<span id="ii.lxix-p11"></span><span id="ii.lxix-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxix-p12"></span>This narrative is highly useful; for it
shows that Christ receives not only those who, moved by holy desire and
faith, freely approach to him, but those who are not yet of age to know
how much they need his grace. Those *little children* have not yet any
understanding to desire his blessing; but when they are presented to
him, he gently and kindly receives them, and dedicates them to the
Father  <span id="fr_610"></span>[611](#fn_610.md) by a solemn act of
blessing. We must observe the intention of those who present the
children; for if there had not been a deep-rooted conviction in their
minds, that the power of the Spirit was at his disposal, that he might
pour it out on the people of God, it would have been unreasonable to
present their children. There is no room, therefore, to doubt, that they
ask for them a participation of his grace; and so, by way of
amplification, Luke adds the particle *also*; as if he had said that,
after they had experienced the various ways in which he assisted adults,
they formed an expectation likewise in regard to *children*, that, if he
*laid hands on them*, they would not leave him without having received
some of the gifts of the Spirit. The *laying on of hands* (as we have
said on a former occasion) was an ancient and well known sign of
*blessing*; and so there is no reason to wonder, if they desire that
Christ, while employing that solemn ceremony, should pray for the
*children* At the same time, as *the inferior are blessed by the
better*, (<span id="ii.lxix-p13.2"></span>[Heb
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#007)<span id="ii.lxix-p13.2"></span>,.md)
they ascribe to him the power and honor of the highest Prophet.

<span id="ii.lxix-p14"></span>**<span id="ii.lxix-p14.1"></span>[Matthew
19:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#013.md)<span
id="ii.lxix-p14.1"></span>.** *But the disciples rebuked them.* If a
crown  <span id="fr_611"></span>[612](#fn_611.md) had been put on his head,
they would have admitted it willingly, and with approbation; for they
did not yet comprehend his actual office. But they reckon it unworthy of
his character to receive *children*; and their error wanted not
plausibility; for what has the highest Prophet and the Son of God to do
with *infants?* But hence we learn, that they who judge of Christ
according to the feeling of their flesh are unfair judges; for they
constantly deprive him of his peculiar excellencies, and, on the other
hand, ascribe, under the appearance of honor, what does not at all
belong to him. Hence arose an immense mass of superstitions, which
presented to the world a fancied Christ.  <span
id="fr_612"></span>[613](#fn_612.md) And therefore let us learn not to
think of him otherwise than what himself teaches, and not to assign to
him a character different from what he has received from the Father. We
see what happened with Popery. They thought that they were conferring a
great honor on Christ, if they bowed down before a small piece of bread;
but in the sight of God it was an offensive abomination. Again, because
they did not think it sufficiently honorable to him to perform the
office of an Advocate for us, they made for themselves innumerable
intercessors; but in this way they deprived him of the honor of
Mediator.

<span id="ii.lxix-p17"></span><span id="ii.lxix-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxix-p18"></span>**14.** *Suffer children.* He declares
that he wishes to receive *children*; and at length, *taking them in his
arms,* he not only embraces, but *blesses* them by the *laying on of
hand;* from which we infer that his grace is extended even to those who
are of that age. And no wonder; for since the whole race of Adam is shut
up under the sentence of death, all from the least even to the greatest
must perish, except those who are rescued by the only Redeemer. To
exclude from the grace of redemption those who are of that age would be
too cruel; and therefore it is not without reason that we employ this
passage as a shield against the Anabaptists. They refuse baptism to
*infants*, because infants are incapable of understanding that mystery
which is denoted by it. We, on the other hand, maintain that, since
baptism is the pledge and figure of the forgiveness of sins, and
likewise of adoption by God, it ought not to be denied to *infants*,
whom God adopts and washes with the blood of his Son. Their objection,
that repentance and newness of life are also denoted by it, is easily
answered. *Infants* are renewed by the Spirit of God, according to the
capacity of their age, till that power which was concealed within them
grows by degrees, and becomes fully manifest at the proper time. Again,
when they argue that there is no other way in which we are reconciled to
God, and become heirs of adoption, than by faith, we admit this as to
adults, but, with respect to *infants*, this passage demonstrates it to
be false. Certainly, the *laying on of hands* was not a trifling or
empty sign, and the prayers of Christ were not idly wasted in air. But
he could not present the infants solemnly to God without giving them
purity. And for what did he pray for them, but that they might be
received into the number of the children of God? Hence it follows, that
they were renewed by the Spirit to the hope of salvation. In short, by
embracing them, he testified that they were reckoned by Christ among his
flock. And if they were partakers of the spiritual gifts, which are
represented by Baptism, it is unreasonable that they should be deprived
of the outward sign. But it is presumption and sacrilege to drive far
from the fold of Christ those whom he cherishes in his bosom, and to
shut the door, and exclude as strangers those whom he does not wish to
be *forbidden to come to him*

<span id="ii.lxix-p19"></span>*For of such is the kingdom of heaven.*
Under this term he includes both *little children* and those who
resemble them; for the Anabaptists foolishly exclude children, with whom
the subject must have commenced; but at the same time, taking occasion
from the present occurrence, he intended to exhort his disciples to lay
aside malice and pride, and put on the nature of *children* Accordingly,
it is added by Mark and Luke, that no man *can enter into the kingdom of
heaven* unless he be made to resemble a child. But we must attend to
Paul’s admonition,

<span id="ii.lxix-p20"></span>not to be children in understanding, but
in malice,  
(<span id="ii.lxix-p20.2"></span>[1Co
14:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#020.md)<span
id="ii.lxix-p20.2"></span>.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_610"></span>[611](cc32070.htm#fr_610.md) <span
id="ii.lxix-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ii.lxix-p13"></span> “<span id="ii.lxix-p13.1"></span>A Dieu
son Pere;” — “to God his Father.”

<span id="fn_611"></span>[612](cc32070.htm#fr_611.md) <span
id="ii.lxix-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ii.lxix-p15"></span> “<span id="ii.lxix-p15.1"></span>Une
couronne royale;” — “a royal crown.”

<span id="fn_612"></span>[613](cc32070.htm#fr_612.md) <span
id="ii.lxix-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ii.lxix-p16"></span> “<span id="ii.lxix-p16.1"></span>Un
Christ faict a la fantasie des hommes;” — “a Christ made according to
the fancy of men.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 19:16-22; Mark 10:17-22; Luke 18:18-23](cc32071.md)
