[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc32040)  [Next](cc32042.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 32: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part II*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.xl"></span>

<span id="ii.xl-p1"></span><span id="ii.xl-p1.1"></span>[Matthew
14:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#001.md)<span id="ii.xl-p1.1"></span>;
<span id="ii.xl-p1.2"></span>[Mark
6:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#014.md)<span id="ii.xl-p1.2"></span>;
<span id="ii.xl-p1.3"></span>[Luke
9:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#007.md)<span id="ii.xl-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xl-p2"></span><span id="ii.xl-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
14:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#001.md)<span id="ii.xl-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xl-p3"></span><span id="ii.xl-p3.1"></span>[Mark
6:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#014.md)<span id="ii.xl-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xl-p4"></span><span id="ii.xl-p4.1"></span>[Luke
9:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#007.md)<span id="ii.xl-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xl-p5"></span>**1**. At that time, Herod the tetrarch heard
of the fame of Jesus, **2**. And said to his servants, This is John the
Baptist: he is raised from the dead, and therefore miracles work in him.

<span id="ii.xl-p6"></span> 

<span id="ii.xl-p7"></span> **14**. And king Herod heard of him, (for
his name had become celebrated,) and said, John, who baptized, hath
risen from the dead, and therefore miracles are performed by him.
**15**. Others said, It is Elijah; and others said, It is a prophet, or
as one of the prophets. **16**. But when Herod heard that, he said, It
is John whom I beheaded, he hath rasen from the dead.

<span id="ii.xl-p8"></span> 

<span id="ii.xl-p9"></span>**7**. Now Herod the tetrarch heard of all
that was done by him, and was perplexed, because it was said by some
that Christ had risen from the dead; **8**. And by some, that Elijah had
appeared; and by others, that one of the ancient prophets had risen
again. **9**. And Herod said, John have I beheaded, but who is this of
whom I hear such things? And he desired to see him.

<span id="ii.xl-p10"></span> 

<span id="ii.xl-p11"></span><span id="ii.xl-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xl-p12"></span>The reason why the Evangelists relate this
occurrence is, to inform us that the name of Christ was universally
celebrated, and, therefore, the Jews could not be excused on the plea of
ignorance. Many might otherwise have been perplexed by this question,
“How came it that, while Christ dwelt on the earth, Judea remained in a
profound sleep, as if he had withdrawn into some corner, and had
displayed to none his divine power?” The Evangelists accordingly state,
that the report concerning him was everywhere spread abroad, and
penetrated even into the court of Herod.

<span id="ii.xl-p13"></span><span id="ii.xl-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xl-p14"></span>**2.** *And said to his servants.* From the
words of Luke it may be inferred, that Herod did not of his own accord
adopt this conjecture, but that it was suggested to him by a report
which was current among the people. And, indeed, I have no doubt that
the hatred which they bore to the tyrant, and their detestation of so
shocking a murder, gave rise, as is commonly the ease, to those rumors.
It was a superstition deeply rooted, as we have formerly mentioned, in
the minds of men, that the dead return to life in a different person.
Nearly akin to this is the opinion which they now adopt, that Herod,
when he cruelly put to death the holy man, was far from obtaining what
he expected; because he had suddenly risen from the dead by the
miraculous power of God, and would oppose and attack his enemies with
greater severity than ever.

<span id="ii.xl-p15"></span>*Mark* and *Luke,* however, show that men
spoke variously on this subject: some thought that he was *Elijah,* and
others that he was *one of the prophets,* or that he was so eminently
endued with the gifts of the Spirit, that he might be compared to *the
prophets.* The reason why they thought that he might be *Elijah,* rather
than any other prophet, has been already stated. Malachi having
predicted (<span id="ii.xl-p15.1"></span>[Mal.
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#005.md),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#006)<span id="ii.xl-p15.1"></span>.md) that
*Elijah would come* to gather the scattered Church, they misunderstood
that prediction as relating to the person of *Elijah,* instead of being
a simple comparison to the following effect: “That the coming of Messiah
may not be unknown, and that the people may not remain ignorant of the
grace of redemption, there will be an *Elijah* to go before, like him
who of old raised up that which was fallen, and the worship of God which
had been overthrown. *He will go before,* by a remarkable power of the
Spirit, to proclaim *the great and dreadful day of the Lord.”* The Jews,
with their usual grossness of interpretation, had applied this to
*Elijah the Tishbite,* (<span id="ii.xl-p15.2"></span>[1Ki
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#001)<span id="ii.xl-p15.2"></span>,.md)
as if he were to appear again and discharge the office of a prophet.
Others again conjecture, either that some one of the ancient prophets
had risen, or that he was some great man, who approached to them in
excellence.

<span id="ii.xl-p16"></span>It was astonishing that, amidst the
diversity of views which were suggested, the true interpretation did not
occur to any one; more especially as the state of matters at that very
time directed them to Christ. God had promised to them a Redeemer, who
would relieve them when they were distressed and in despair. The
extremity of affliction into which they had been plunged was a loud call
for divine assistance. The Redeemer is at hand, who had been so clearly
pointed out by the preaching of John, and who himself testifies
respecting his office. They are compelled to acknowledge that some
divine power belongs to him, and yet they fall into their own fancies,
and change him into the persons of other men. It is thus that the world
is wont, in base ingratitude, to obliterate the remembrance of the
favors which God has bestowed.

<span id="ii.xl-p17"></span>With respect to Herod himself, as I hinted,
little ago, the conjecture that John had risen did not at first occur to
himself; but as bad consciences are wont to tremble and hesitate, and
turn with every wind, he readily believed what he dreaded. With such
blind terrors God frequently alarms wicked men; so that, after all the
pains they take to harden themselves, and to escape agitation, their
internal executioner gives them no rest, but chastises them with
severity.

<span id="ii.xl-p18"></span>*And therefore miracles work in him.* <span
id="ii.xl-p18.1"></span>We naturally wonder what reasoning could have
led them to this conclusion. John had performed no miracle during the
whole course of his preaching. There appears to be no probability,
therefore, in the conjecture, that it was John whom they saw performing
extraordinary miracles. But they imagine that miracles are now performed
by him for the first time, in order to prove his resurrection, and to
show that the holy prophet of God had been wickedly put to death by
Herod, and now came forward with a visible and divine protection, that
no man might afterwards venture to assail him. They think that *miracles
work (*<span id="ii.xl-p18.2"></span>ἐνεζγοῦσιν*) in him;* <span
id="ii.xl-p18.3"></span>that is, are powerfully displayed, so as to give
him greater authority, and make it evident that the Lord is with him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 14:3-12; Mark 6:17-29](cc32042.md)
