[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc08033)  [Next](cc08035.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 8: Psalms, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxxv"></span>

<span id="xxxv-p1"></span>PSALM 29.

<span id="xxxv-p2"></span>David, that he may humble all men before God,
from the highest to the lowest, celebrates his terrible power in the
various wonders of nature, which he affirms are not less fitted to
arouse us to give glory to God, than if he were to assert his empire and
majesty with his own voice. After he has struck fear into the proud, who
are reluctant to yield, and addressed an exhortation to them accompanied
by a gentle reproof, he sweetly invites the faithful voluntarily to fear
the Lord.

<span id="xxxv-p3"></span>A Psalm of David.

<span id="xxxv.i"></span>

<span id="xxxv.i-p1"></span><span id="xxxv.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
29:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#001.md)<span id="xxxv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxxv.i-p2"></span>**1.** Give unto Jehovah, ye sons of the
mighty, give unto Jehovah glory and strength. **2.** Give unto Jehovah
the glory of his name;  <span id="fr_603"></span>[604](#fn_603.md) worship
before Jehovah in the brightness of his sanctuary. **3.** The voice of
Jehovah is upon the waters; the God of glory thundereth; Jehovah is upon
the great waters. **4.** The voice of Jehovah is in strength, the voice
of Jehovah is in beauty.

<span id="xxxv.i-p4"></span> 

<span id="xxxv.i-p5"></span><span id="xxxv.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xxxv.i-p6"></span>**1.** *Give unto Jehovah, ye sons of the
mighty.* It was no doubt David’s design to lead all men to worship and
reverence God; but as it is more difficult to reduce great men, who
excel in rank, to order, he expressly addresses himself to them. It is
obvious, that the LXX, in giving the translation, *sons of rams,*  <span
id="fr_604"></span>[605](#fn_604.md) were led into a mistake by the
affinity of the Hebrew words.  <span id="fr_605"></span>[606](#fn_605.md)
About the signification of the word, indeed, the Jewish commentators are
all agreed; but when they proceed to speak of its meaning, they pervert
and obscure it by the most chilling comments. Some expound it of the
angels,  <span id="fr_606"></span>[607](#fn_606.md) some of the stars; and
others will have it, that by the great men who are referred to are meant
the holy fathers. But David only intended to humble the princes of this
world, who, being intoxicated with pride, lift up their horns against
God. This, accordingly, is the reason why he introduces God, with a
terrific voice, subduing by thunders, hail-storms, tempests, and
lightnings, these stubborn and stiff-necked giants, who, if they are not
struck with fear, refuse to stand in awe of any power in heaven. We see,
therefore, why, passing by others, he directs his discourse particularly
to the sons of the mighty. The reason is, because there is nothing more
common with them than to abuse their lofty station by impious deeds,
while they madly arrogate to themselves every divine prerogative. At
least that they may modestly submit themselves to God, and, mindful of
their frailty, place their dependence upon his grace, it is necessary,
as it were, to compel them by force. David, therefore, commands them *to
give strength unto Jehovah,* because, deluded by their treacherous
imaginations, they think that the power which they possess is supplied
to them from some other quarter than from heaven. In short, he exhorts
them to lay aside their haughtiness, and their false opinion about their
own strength, and to glorify God as he deserves. By *the glory of God’s
name,* (ver. 2,) he means that which is worthy of his majesty, of which
the great men of this world are wont to deprive him. The repetition,
also, shows that they must be vehemently urged ere a proper
acknowledgement be extorted from them. By *the brightness of God’s
sanctuary*  <span id="fr_607"></span>[608](#fn_607.md) is to be understood,
not heaven as some think, but the tabernacle of the covenant, adorned
with the symbols of the divine glory, as is evident from the context.
And the prophet designedly makes mention of this place, in which the
true God had manifested himself, that all men, bidding adieu to
superstition, should betake themselves to the pure worship of God. It
would not be sufficient to worship any heavenly power, but the one and
unchangeable God alone must be worshipped, which cannot come to pass
until the world be reclaimed from all foolish inventions and services
forged in the brains of men.

<span id="xxxv.i-p11"></span><span id="xxxv.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xxxv.i-p12"></span>**3.** *The voice of Jehovah is upon the
waters.* David now rehearses the wonders of nature which I have
previously referred to; and well indeed does he celebrate the power of
God as well as his goodness, in his works. As there is nothing in the
ordinary course of nature, throughout the whole frame of heaven and
earth, which does not invite us to the contemplation of God, he might
have brought forward, as in <span id="xxxv.i-p12.1"></span>[Ps
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#001.md)<span id="xxxv.i-p12.1"></span>,
the sun and the stars, and the whole host of heaven, and the earth with
its riches; but he selects only those works of God which prove not only
that the world was at first created by him, and is governed by his
power, but which also awaken the torpid, and drag them, as it were, in
spite of themselves, humbly to adore him; as even Horace was compelled,
though he was not only a heathen poet, but an Epicurean, and a vile
contemner of Deity, to say of himself in one of his Odes, — (Lib. I. Ode
34.)

<span id="xxxv.i-p13"></span>“A fugitive from heaven and prayer,  
I mocked at all religious fear,  
Deep scienced in the mazy lore  
Of mad philosophy; but now  
Hoist sail, and back my voyage plough  
To that blest harbour which I left before.

<span id="xxxv.i-p14"></span>“For, lo! that awful heavenly Sire,  
Who frequent cleaves the clouds with fire,  
Parent of day, immortal Jove;  
Late through the floating fields of air,  
The face of heaven serene and fair,  
His thund’ring steeds, and winged chariot drove,” etc.  <span
id="fr_608"></span>[609](#fn_608.md)

<span id="xxxv.i-p16"></span>Experience, too, tells us that those who
are most daring in their contempt of God are most afraid of thunderings,
storms, and such like violent commotions. With great propriety,
therefore, does the prophet invite our attention to these instances
which strike the rude and insensible with some sense of the existence of
a God,  <span id="fr_609"></span>[610](#fn_609.md) and rouse them to
action, however sluggish and regardless they are. He says not that the
sun rises from day to day, and sheds abroad his life-giving beams, nor
that the rain gently descends to fertilise the earth with its moisture;
but he brings forward thunders, violent tempests, and such things as
smite the hearts of men with dread by their violence. God, it is true,
speaks in all his creatures, but here the prophet mentions those sounds
which rouse us from our drowsiness, or rather our lethargy, by the
loudness of their noise. We have said, that this language is chiefly
directed to those who with stubborn recklessness, cast from them, as far
as they can, all thought of God. The very figures which he uses
sufficiently declare, that David’s design was to subdue by fear the
obstinacy which yields not willingly otherwise. Thrice he repeats that
God’s voice is heard in great and violent tempests, and in the
subsequent verse he adds, that it is full of power and majesty.

<span id="xxxv.ii"></span>

<span id="xxxv.ii-p1"></span><span id="xxxv.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
29:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#005.md)<span id="xxxv.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxxv.ii-p2"></span>**5.** The voice of Jehovah breaketh the
cedars; I say, Jehovah breaketh the cedars of Lebanon. **6.** And he
maketh Lebanon to skip like a calf, and Sirion like a young unicorn.
**7.** The voice of Jehovah striketh out \[or heweth out\] flames of
fire. **8.** The voice of Jehovah maketh the wilderness to quake, the
voice of Jehovah maketh the wilderness of Kadesh to tremble.

<span id="xxxv.ii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xxxv.ii-p4"></span><span id="xxxv.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xxxv.ii-p5"></span>**5.** *The voice of Jehovah breaketh the
cedars.* We see how the prophet, in order to subdue the stubbornness of
men, shows, by every word, that God is terrible. He also seems to
rebuke, in passing, the madness of the proud, and of those who swell
with vain presumption, because they hearken not to the voice of God in
his thunders, rending the air with his lightnings, shaking the lofty
mountains, prostrating and overthrowing the loftiest trees. What a
monstrous thing is it, that while all the irrational portion of the
creation tremble before God, men alone, who are endued with sense and
reason, are not moved! Moreover, though they possess genius and
learning, they employ enchantments to shut their ears against God’s
voice, however powerful, lest it should reach their hearts. Philosophers
think not that they have reasoned skilfully enough about inferior
causes, unless they separate God very far from his works. It is a
diabolical science, however, which fixes our contemplations on the works
of nature, and turns them away from God. If any one who wished to know a
man should take no notice of his face, but should fix his eyes only on
the points of his nails, his folly might justly be derided. But far
greater is the folly of those philosophers, who, out of mediate and
proximate causes, weave themselves vails, lest they should be compelled
to acknowledge the hand of God, which manifestly displays itself in his
works. The Psalmist particularly mentions *the cedars of Lebanon,*
because lofty and beautiful cedars were to be found there. He also
refers to *Lebanon* and *Mount Hermon,* and to *the wilderness of
Kadesh,*  <span id="fr_610"></span>[611](#fn_610.md) because these places
were best known to the Jews. He uses, indeed, a highly poetical figure
accompanied with a hyperbole, when he says, *that Lebanon skips like a
calf at God’s voice,* and *Sirion* (which is also called Mount Hermon
 <span id="fr_611"></span>[612](#fn_611) .md) *like a unicorn,* which, we
know, is one of the swiftest animals. He also alludes to the terrific
noise of thunder, which seems almost to shake the mountains to their
foundations. Similar is the figure, when he says, *the Lord striketh out
flames of fire,* which is done when the vapours, being struck, as it
were, with his hammer, burst forth into lightnings and thunderbolts.
Aristotle, in his book on Meteors, reasons very shrewdly about these
things, in so far as relates to proximate causes, only that he omits the
chief point. The investigation of these would, indeed, be both a
profitable and pleasant exercise, were we led by it, as we ought, to the
Author of Nature himself. But nothing is more preposterous than, when we
meet with mediate causes, however many, to be stopped and retarded by
them, as by so many obstacles, from approaching God;  <span
id="fr_612"></span>[613](#fn_612.md) for this is the same as if a man were
to remain at the very rudiments of things during his whole life, without
going farther. In short, this is to learn in such a manner that you can
never know any thing. That shrewdness alone, therefore, is worthy of
praise, which elevates us by these means even to heaven, in order that
not a confused noise only may strike our ears, but that the voice of the
Lord may penetrate our hearts, and teach us to pray and serve God. Some
expound the Hebrew word <span id="xxxv.ii-p8.2"></span>יחיל, *yachil,*
which we have translated to *tremble,* in another way, namely, that *God
maketh the wilderness of Kadesh to travail in birth;*  <span
id="fr_613"></span>[614](#fn_613.md) because of the manifold wonders which
were wrought in it as the Israelites passed through it. But this sense I
object to, as far too subtle and strained. David appears rather to refer
to the common feelings of men; for as wildernesses are dreadful of
themselves, they are much more so when they are filled with thunders,
hail, and storms. I do not, however, object that the wilderness may be
understood, by synecdoche, to mean the wild beasts which lodge in it;
and thus the next verse, where hinds are mentioned, may be considered as
added by way of exposition.

<span id="xxxv.iii"></span>

<span id="xxxv.iii-p1"></span><span id="xxxv.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
29:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#009.md)<span
id="xxxv.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxxv.iii-p2"></span>**9.** The voice of Jehovah maketh the
hinds to bring forth, and discovereth \[or maketh bare\] the forests,
and in his temple every one speaketh of his praise. **10.** Jehovah
sitteth upon the flood; Jehovah, I say, sitteth king for ever. **11.**
Jehovah will give strength to his people; Jehovah will bless his people
with peace.

<span id="xxxv.iii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xxxv.iii-p4"></span><span id="xxxv.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xxxv.iii-p5"></span>**9.** *The voice of Jehovah maketh the
hinds to bring forth*  <span id="fr_614"></span>[615](#fn_614.md) A tacit
comparison, as I have said, is here made. It is worse than irrational,
it is monstrous, that men are not moved at God’s voice, when it has such
power and influence on wild beasts. It is base ingratitude, indeed, in
men not to perceive his providence and government in the whole course of
nature; but it is a detestable insensibility that at least his unusual
and extraordinary works, which compel even wild beasts to obey him, will
not teach them wisdom. Some interpreters think that *hinds* are
mentioned, rather than other beasts, on account of their difficulty in
bringing forth their young; which I disapprove not. *The voice of the
Lord* is also said *to discover* or *make bare the forests,* either
because there is no covering which can prevent it from penetrating into
the most secret recesses and caverns; or, because lightnings, rains, and
stormy winds, beat off the leaves and make the trees bare. Either sense
is appropriate.

<span id="xxxv.iii-p7"></span>*In his temple.* God’s voice fills the
whole world, and spreads itself to its farthest limits; but the prophet
declares that his glory is celebrated only in his church, because God
not only speaks intelligibly and distinctly there, but also there gently
allures the faithful to himself. His terrible voice, which thunders in
various ways in the air, strikes upon the ears, and causes the hearts of
men to beat in such a manner, as to make them shrink from rather than
approach him not to mention that a considerable portion turn a deaf ear
to its sound in storms, rains, thunder, and lightnings. As men,
therefore, profit not so much in this common school as to submit
themselves to God, David wisely says especially that the faithful sing
the praises of God in his temple, because, being familiarly instructed
there by his fatherly voice, they devote and consecrate themselves
wholly to his service. No man proclaims the glory of God aright but he
who worships him willingly. This may be understood likewise as a
complaint, in which David reproves the whole world of being silent in so
far as the glory of God is concerned,  <span
id="fr_615"></span>[616](#fn_615.md) and laments that although his voice
resounds through all regions, yet his praises are no where sung but in
his temple alone. He appears, however, after the example of all the
godly, to exhort the whole of mankind to praise God’s name, and
designedly to erect a temple as a receptacle for his glory, for the
purpose of teaching us, that in order truly to know God, and praise him
as is his due, we need another voice than that which is heard in
thunders, showers, and storms in the air, in the mountains, and in the
forests; for if he teach us not in plain words, and also kindly allure
us to himself, by giving us a taste of his fatherly love, we will
continue dumb. It is the doctrine of salvation alone, therefore, which
cheers our hearts and opens our mouths in his praises, by clearly
revealing to us his grace, and the whole of his will. It is from thence
that we must learn how we ought to praise him. We may also
unquestionably see that at that time there was nothing of the light of
godliness in the whole world, except in Judea. Even philosophers, who
appeared to approach nearest to the knowledge of God, contributed
nothing whatever that might truly glorify him. All that they say
concerning religion is not only frigid, but for the most part insipid.
It is therefore in his word alone that there shines forth the truth
which may lead us to true piety, and to fear and serve God aright.
 <span id="fr_616"></span>[617](#fn_616.md)

<span id="xxxv.iii-p10"></span><span id="xxxv.iii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xxxv.iii-p11"></span>**10.** *Jehovah sitteth upon the flood.*
Some think that David here alludes to that memorable instance of God’s
vengeance, when he drowned the world at once by the flood,  <span
id="fr_617"></span>[618](#fn_617.md) and thus testified to all ages that he
is the judge of mankind. I agree to this in part, but extend his meaning
still farther. In my opinion, he prosecutes the former subject, putting
us in mind that those floods, which still threaten destruction to the
earth, are controlled by the providence of God in such a way, as to make
it evident that it is he alone who governs all things at all times.
 <span id="fr_618"></span>[619](#fn_618.md) David, therefore, mentions this
among other proofs of God’s power, that even when the elements appear to
be mingled and confounded together by the utmost fury of the weather,
God controls and moderates these commotions from his throne in heaven.
He accordingly adds, for the sake of explanation, *God sits King for
ever.*

<span id="xxxv.iii-p14"></span><span id="xxxv.iii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xxxv.iii-p15"></span>**11.** *Jehovah will give strength to
his people.* He returns to his former doctrine, namely, that although
God exhibits his visible power to the view of the whole world
indiscriminately, yet he exerts it in a peculiar manner in behalf of his
elect people. Moreover, he here describes him in a very different manner
from what he did formerly; that is to say, not as one who overwhelms
with fear and dread those to whom he speaks, but as one who upholds,
cherishes, and strengthens them. By the word *strength* is to be
understood the whole condition of man. And thus he intimates that every
thing necessary to the preservation of the life of the godly depends
entirely upon the grace of God. He amplifies this by the word *bless;*
for God is said *to bless with peace* those whom he treats liberally and
kindly, so that nothing is awanting to the prosperous course of their
life, and to their complete happiness. From this we may learn, that we
ought to stand in awe of the majesty of God, in such a manner as,
notwithstanding, to hope from him all that is necessary to our
prosperity; and let us be assuredly persuaded, that since his power is
infinite, we are defended by an invincible fortress.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_603"></span>[604](cc08034.htm#fr_603.md) <span
id="xxxv.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxxv.i-p3"></span> “<span id="xxxv.i-p3.1"></span>C’est, digne
de son nom.” — *Note, Fr. Marg.* “That is, worthy of his name.”

<span id="fn_604"></span>[605](cc08034.htm#fr_604.md) <span
id="xxxv.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxxv.i-p7"></span> The entire reading of the verse in the
Septuagint is, “<span id="xxxv.i-p7.1"></span>Ενέγκατε τῷ Κυρίῳ ὑιοὶ
Θεοῦ ενέγκατε τῷ Κυρίῳ ὑιοὺς κριῶν*”* “Bring to the Lord, ye sons of
God, bring to the Lord young rams.” Thus the LXX, as is not unusual in
other places, render the words for “Ye sons of the mighty” twice; first,
in the vocative case, addressing them, <span
id="xxxv.i-p7.2"></span>Υιοὶ Θεου*, Ye sons of God,* and then in the
accusative case, <span id="xxxv.i-p7.3"></span>ὑιοὺς κριῶν*, young
rams,* being apparently doubtful which was the correct rendering, and,
therefore, putting down both. The Vulgate, Arabic, and Ethiopic, exactly
follow them. *Jerome* also reads, “<span id="xxxv.i-p7.4"></span>Afferte
Domino filios arietum;” although he does not give a double translation
of the original words. But the correct rendering, we have no doubt, is,
“Ye sons of the mighty;” which is just a Hebrew idiomatic expression for
“Ye mighty ones,” or, “Ye princes;” and to them the inspired writer
addresses an invitation to acknowledge and worship God from the
manifestation of his majesty and power in the wonders of nature.

<span id="fn_605"></span>[606](cc08034.htm#fr_605.md) <span
id="xxxv.i-p7.5"></span>

<span id="xxxv.i-p8"></span> The Hebrew word which Calvin renders
*“mighty,”* is <span id="xxxv.i-p8.1"></span>אלים, *elym*, a word which
means *gods.* The Hebrew word <span id="xxxv.i-p8.2"></span>אילים,
*eylim,* which means *rams,* nearly resembles it, having only an
additional <span id="xxxv.i-p8.3"></span>י, *yod,* and this letter is
often cut off in nouns.

<span id="fn_606"></span>[607](cc08034.htm#fr_606.md) <span
id="xxxv.i-p8.4"></span>

<span id="xxxv.i-p9"></span> The Chaldee paraphrases it thus:— “The
assembly of angels, sons of God,” meaning by God *angels.*

<span id="fn_607"></span>[608](cc08034.htm#fr_607.md) <span
id="xxxv.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xxxv.i-p10"></span> This translation conveys a somewhat
different meaning from that of our English version; but it is supported
by several critics. *Green* reads, “In his beautiful sanctuary;” and
*Fry*, “Worship Jehovah with holy reverence,” or, “Worship Jehovah in
the glorious places of the sanctuary.” “Where the Hebrews read <span
id="xxxv.i-p10.2"></span>בהדרת” says *Hammond*, “in *the glory* or
*beauty* of *holiness,* from <span id="xxxv.i-p10.3"></span>הדר, *to
honor,* or *beautify,* the LXX. read, <span id="xxxv.i-p10.4"></span>ἐν
αὐλὣ ἁγίᾳ αὐτου*, in his holy court,* as if it were from, “*penetrale,
thalamus, area*, a closet*,* a marriage-chamber, a court; and so the
Latin and Syriac follow them, and the Arabic, in his *“holy
habitation.”*

<span id="fn_608"></span>[609](cc08034.htm#fr_608.md) <span
id="xxxv.i-p14.6"></span>

<span id="xxxv.i-p15"></span> *Dr Francis’* Translation of Horace.

<span id="fn_609"></span>[610](cc08034.htm#fr_609.md) <span
id="xxxv.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xxxv.i-p17"></span> “<span id="xxxv.i-p17.1"></span>Qui
contraignent les barbares et gens esbestez sentir qu’il y a un Dieu.” —
*Fr.* “Which constrain the rude and insensible to feel that there is a
God.”

<span id="fn_610"></span>[611](cc08034.htm#fr_610.md) <span
id="xxxv.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xxxv.ii-p6"></span> That is, the wilderness of Zin, <span
id="xxxv.ii-p6.1"></span>[Nu
33:36](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#036.md)<span id="xxxv.ii-p6.1"></span>.
It is described in <span id="xxxv.ii-p6.2"></span>[De
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#019.md)<span id="xxxv.ii-p6.2"></span>,
as the “great and terrible wilderness.” The Israelites passed through
this wilderness in their way from Egypt to the promised land, <span
id="xxxv.ii-p6.3"></span>[Nu
13:27](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#027.md)<span id="xxxv.ii-p6.3"></span>.
It received its name from the city of Kadesh, by which it lay, <span
id="xxxv.ii-p6.4"></span>[Num. 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#001.md),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#016.md)<span id="xxxv.ii-p6.4"></span>.

<span id="fn_611"></span>[612](cc08034.htm#fr_611.md) <span
id="xxxv.ii-p6.5"></span>

<span id="xxxv.ii-p7"></span> The Sidonians applied to Hermon the name
of Sirion, <span id="xxxv.ii-p7.1"></span>[De
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#009.md)<span id="xxxv.ii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_612"></span>[613](cc08034.htm#fr_612.md) <span
id="xxxv.ii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xxxv.ii-p8"></span> “<span
id="xxxv.ii-p8.1"></span>D’approcher de Dieu.” — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_613"></span>[614](cc08034.htm#fr_613.md) <span
id="xxxv.ii-p8.3"></span>

<span id="xxxv.ii-p9"></span> “<span id="xxxv.ii-p9.1"></span>Fait
avortir.” — *Fr.* “To miscarry or prove abortive.”

<span id="fn_614"></span>[615](cc08034.htm#fr_614.md) <span
id="xxxv.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xxxv.iii-p6"></span> *Bishop* *Lowth* reads, “Maketh the oaks
to tremble,” (Lectures on Hebrew Poetry, vol. 2, p.253,) in which he is
followed by *Dimock, Green, Seeker, Horsley, Fry*, and others. But
*Dathe, Berlin, De Rossi, Dr Adam Clarke, Rogers,* etc., adhere to the
common interpretation, in which they are supported by all the ancient
versions, except the Syriac, which seems to favor the view of Lowth. A
main argument of *Lowth* and those who follow him in support of his
rendering is, that the common translation, which supposes the passage to
relate to *the hinds bring forth their young,* agrees very little with
the rest of the imagery either in nature or dignity; whereas the oak
struck with lightning, is a far nobler image, and one which falls in
more naturally with the scattering of a forest’s foliage under the
action of a storm. But *Rogers* justly observes, that “we are not
warranted in altering the Hebrew text, because the oriental imagery
which we meet with does not correspond with our ideas of poetical beauty
and grandeur,” (Book of Psalms in Hebrew, metrically arranged, vol. it.
p. 186.) With respect to the sense conveyed by the common reading, it
may be observed, that birds bring forth their young with great
difficulty and pain, bowing themselves, bruising their young ones, and
casting out their sorrows, (<span id="xxxv.iii-p6.1"></span>[Job
39:4](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#004.md),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#006)<span id="xxxv.iii-p6.1"></span>;.md)
and it therefore heightens the description given of the terrific
character of the thunder-storm, when the thunder, which is here called
the voice of God, is represented as causing, through the terror which it
inspires, the hinds in their pregnant state prematurely to drop their
young; although, according to our ideas of poetical imagery, this may
not accord so well with the other images in the passage nor appear so
beautiful and sublime as the image of the oaks trembling at the voice of
Jehovah.

<span id="fn_615"></span>[616](cc08034.htm#fr_615.md) <span
id="xxxv.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xxxv.iii-p8"></span> “<span id="xxxv.iii-p8.1"></span>Etant
que touche la gloire de Dieu.” — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_616"></span>[617](cc08034.htm#fr_616.md) <span
id="xxxv.iii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xxxv.iii-p9"></span> “<span id="xxxv.iii-p9.1"></span>Pour le
craindre et servir comme il appartient.” — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_617"></span>[618](cc08034.htm#fr_617.md) <span
id="xxxv.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xxxv.iii-p12"></span> “<span id="xxxv.iii-p12.1"></span>Par le
deluge.” — *Fr.* This is the view taken of the passage by the ancient
versions. “God,” says the Chaldee, “in the generation of the deluge sat
in judgment.” The Septuagint reads, “God shall make the deluge to be
inhabited,” or “make the world habitable after it;" the Syriac, “God
called back the deluge;” and the Arabic, “God restrained the deluge.”
*Ainsworth* reads, “Jehovah sat at the flood,” and explains it as
meaning “Noah’s flood.”

<span id="fn_618"></span>[619](cc08034.htm#fr_618.md) <span
id="xxxv.iii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="xxxv.iii-p13"></span> “<span id="xxxv.iii-p13.1"></span>Que
c’est luy seul qui gouverne toutes choses en tout temps.” — *Fr.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 30](cc08035.md)
