[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc08019)  [Next](cc08021.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 8: Psalms, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxi"></span>

<span id="xxi-p1"></span>PSALM 15.

<span id="xxi-p2"></span>This psalm teaches us upon what condition God
made choice of the Jews to be his people, and placed his sanctuary in
the midst of them. This condition was, that they should show themselves
to be a peculiar and holy people, by leading a just and upright life.

<span id="xxi-p3"></span>A Song of David.

<span id="xxi.i"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p1"></span><span id="xxi.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
15:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#001.md)<span id="xxi.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p2"></span>**1.** O Jehovah, who shall dwell in thy
tabernacle? Who shall rest in the mountain of thy holiness? **2.** He
who walketh in integrity, and doeth righteousness, and who speaketh
truth in his heart.

<span id="xxi.i-p3"></span> 

<span id="xxi.i-p4"></span><span id="xxi.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p5"></span>**1.** *O Jehovah, who shall dwell in thy
tabernacle?* As nothing is more common in the world than falsely to
assume the name of God, or to pretend to be his people, and as a great
part of men allow themselves to do this without any apprehension of the
danger it involves, David, without stopping to speak to men, addresses
himself to God, which he considers the better course; and he intimates,
that if men assume the title of the people of God, without being so in
deed and in truth, they gain nothing by their self-delusion, for God
continues always like himself, and as he is faithful himself, so will he
have us to keep faith with him in return. No doubt, he adopted Abraham
freely, but, at the same time, he stipulated with him that he should
live a holy and an upright life, and this is the general rule of the
covenant which God has, from the beginning, made with his Church. The
sum is, that hypocrites, who occupy a place in the temple of God, in
vain pretend to be his people, for he acknowledges none as such but
those who follow after justice and uprightness during the whole course
of their life. David saw the temple crowded with a great multitude of
men who all made a profession of the same religion, and presented
themselves before God as to the outward ceremony; and, therefore,
assuming the person of one wondering at the spectacle, he directs his
discourse to God, who, in such a confusion and medley of characters,
could easily distinguish his own people from strangers.

<span id="xxi.i-p6"></span>There is a threefold use of this doctrine. In
the first place, If we really wish to be reckoned among the number of
the children of God, the Holy Ghost teaches us, that we must show
ourselves to be such by a holy and an upright life; for it is not enough
to serve God by outward ceremonies, unless we also live uprightly, and
without doing wrong to our neighbors. In the second place, As we too
often see the Church of God defaced by much impurity, to prevent us from
stumbling at what appears so offensive, a distinction is made between
those who are permanent citizens of the Church, and strangers who are
mingled among them only for a time. This is undoubtedly a warning highly
necessary, in order that when the temple of God happens to be tainted by
many impurities, we may not contract such disgust and chagrin as will
make us withdraw from it. By impurities I understand the vices of a
corrupt and polluted life. Provided religion continue pure as to
doctrine and worship, we must not be so much stumbled at the faults and
sins which men commit, as on that account to rend the unity of the
Church. Yet the experience of all ages teaches us how dangerous a
temptation it is when we behold the Church of God, which ought to be
free from all polluting stains, and to shine in uncorrupted purity,
cherishing in her bosom many ungodly hypocrites, or wicked persons. From
this the Catharists, Novatians, and Donatists, took occasion in former
times to separate themselves from the fellowship of the godly. The
Anabaptists, at the present day, renew the same schisms, because it does
not seem to them that a church in which vices are tolerated can be a
true church. But Christ, in <span id="xxi.i-p6.1"></span>[Mt
25:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#032.md)<span id="xxi.i-p6.1"></span>,
justly claims it as his own peculiar office to separate the sheep from
the goats; and thereby admonishes us, that we must bear with the evils
which it is not in our power to correct, until all things become ripe,
and the proper season of purging the Church arrive. At the same time,
the faithful are here enjoined, each in his own sphere, to use their
endeavors that the Church of God may be purified from the corruptions
which still exist within her. And this is the third use which we should
make of this doctrine. God’s sacred barn-floor will not be perfectly
cleansed before the last day, when Christ at his coming will cast out
the chaff; but he has already begun to do this by the doctrine of his
gospel, which on this account he terms a fan. We must, therefore, by no
means be indifferent about this matter; on the contrary, we ought rather
to exert ourselves in good earnest, that all who profess themselves
Christians may lead a holy and an unspotted life. But above all, what
God here declares with respect to all the unrighteous should be deeply
imprinted on our memory; namely, that he prohibits them from coming to
his sanctuary, and condemns their impious presumption, in irreverently
thrusting themselves into the society of the godly. David makes mention
of *the tabernacle,* because the temple was not yet built. The meaning
of his discourse, to express it in a few words, is this, that those only
have access to God who are his genuine servants, and who live a holy
life.

<span id="xxi.i-p7"></span><span id="xxi.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p8"></span>**2.** *He that walketh in integrity.* Here
we should mark, that in the words there is an implied contrast between
the vain boasting of those who are only the people of God in name, or
who make only a bare profession of being so, which consists in outward
observances, and this indubitable and genuine evidence of true godliness
which David commends. But it might be asked, As the service of God takes
precedence of the duties of charity towards our neighbors, why is there
no mention here made of faith and prayer; for, certainly, these are the
marks by which the genuine children of God ought to have been
distinguished from hypocrites? The answer is easy: David does not intend
to exclude faith and prayer, and other spiritual sacrifices; but as
hypocrites, in order to promote their own interests, are not sparing in
their attention to a multiplicity of external religious observances,
while their ungodliness, notwithstanding, is manifested outwardly in the
life, seeing they are fall of pride, cruelty, violence, and are given to
deceitfulness and extortion, - the Psalmist, for the purpose of
discovering and drawing forth into the light all who are of such a
character, takes the marks and evidences of true and sincere faith from
the second table of the law. According to the care which every man takes
to practice righteousness and equity towards his neighbors, so does he
actually show that he fears God. David, then, is not here to be
understood as resting satisfied with political or social justice, as if
it were enough to render to our fellow-men what is their own, while we
may lawfully defraud God of his right; but he describes the approved
servants of God, as distinguished and known by the fruits of
righteousness which they produce. In the first place, he requires
*sincerity;* in other words, that men should conduct themselves in all
their affairs with singleness of heart, and without sinful craft or
cunning. Secondly, he requires *justice;* that is to say, that they
should study to do good to their neighbors, hurt nobody, and abstain
from all wrong. Thirdly, he requires *truth* in their speech, so that
they may speak nothing falsely or deceitfully. *To speak in the heart*
is a strong figurative expression, but it expresses more forcibly
David’s meaning than if he had said *from the heart.* It denotes such
agreement and harmony between the heart and tongue, as that the speech
is, as it were, a vivid representation of the hidden affection or
feeling within.

<span id="xxi.ii"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii-p1"></span><span id="xxi.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
15:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#003.md)<span id="xxi.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii-p2"></span>**3.** He that slandereth not with his
tongue, nor doeth evil to his companion, nor raiseth up a calumnious
report against his neighbor.

<span id="xxi.ii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xxi.ii-p4"></span><span id="xxi.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii-p5"></span>David, after having briefly set forth the
virtues with which all who desire to have a place in the Church ought to
be endued, now enumerates certain vices from which they ought to be
free. In the first place, he tells them that they must not be
*slanderers* or *detractors;* secondly, that they must restrain
themselves from doing any thing mischievous and injurious to their
neighbors; and, thirdly, that they must not aid in giving currency to
calumnies and false reports. Other vices, from which the righteous are
free, we shall meet with as we proceed. David, then, sets down calumny
and detraction as the first point of injustice by which our neighbors
are injured. If a good name is a treasure, more precious than all the
riches of the world, (<span id="xxi.ii-p5.1"></span>[Pr
22:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#001)<span id="xxi.ii-p5.1"></span>,.md)
no greater injury can be inflicted upon men than to wound their
reputation. It is not, however, every injurious word which is here
condemned; but the disease and lust of detraction, which stirs up
malicious persons to spread abroad calumnies. At the same time, it
cannot be doubted that the design of the Holy Spirit is to condemn all
false and wicked accusations. In the clause which immediately follows,
the doctrine that the children of God ought to be far removed from all
injustice, is stated more generally: *Nor doeth evil to his companion.*
By the words *companion and neighbor,* the Psalmist means not only those
with whom we enjoy familiar intercourse, and live on terms of intimate
friendship, but all men, to whom we are bound by the ties of humanity
and a common nature. He employs these terms to show more clearly the
odiousness of what he condemns, and that the saints may have the greater
abhorrence of all wrong dealing, since every man who hurts his neighbor
violates the fundamental law of human society. With respect to the
meaning of the last clause, interpreters are not agreed. Some take the
phrase, *to raise up a calumnious report,* for *to invent,* because
malicious persons raise up calumnies from nothing; and thus it would be
a repetition of the statement contained in the first clause of the
verse, namely, that good men should not allow themselves to indulge in
detraction. But I think there is also here rebuked the vice of undue
credulity, which, when any evil reports are spread against our
neighbors, leads us either eagerly to listen to them, or at least to
receive them without sufficient reason; whereas we ought rather to use
all means to suppress and trample them under foot.  <span
id="fr_294"></span>[295](#fn_294.md) When any one is the bearer of invented
falsehoods, those who reject them leave them, as it were, to fall to the
ground; while, on the contrary, those who propagate and publish them
from one person to another are, by an expressive form of speech, said to
raise them up.

<span id="xxi.iii"></span>

<span id="xxi.iii-p1"></span><span id="xxi.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#004.md)<span id="xxi.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.iii-p2"></span>**4.** In his eyes the offcast \[or
reprobate  <span id="fr_295"></span>[296](#fn_295.md) \] is despised; but
he honoureth them that fear the Lord; when he hath sworn to his own
hurt, he changeth not.

<span id="xxi.iii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xxi.iii-p5"></span><span id="xxi.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.iii-p6"></span>The first part of this verse is explained
in different ways. Some draw from it this meaning, that the true
servants of God are contemptible and worthless in their own estimation.
If we adopt this interpretation, the copula *and,* which David does not
express, must be supplied, making the reading thus, *He is vile and
despised in his own eyes.* But besides the consideration, that, if this
had been the sense, the words would probably have been joined together
by the copula *and,* I have another reason which leads me to think that
David had a different meaning, He compares together two opposite things,
namely, to despise perverse and worthless characters, and to honor the
righteous and those who fear God. In order that these two clauses may
correspond with each other, the only sense in which I can understand
what is here said about *being despised* is this, that the children of
God despise the ungodly, and form that low and contemptuous estimate of
them which their character deserves. The godly, it is true, although
living a praiseworthy and virtuous life, are not inflated with
presumption, but, on the contrary, are rather dissatisfied with
themselves, because they feel how far short they are as yet of the
perfection which is required. When, however, I consider what the scope
of the passage demands, I do not think that we are here to view the
Psalmist as commending humility or modesty, but rather a free and
upright judgment of human character, by which the wicked, on the one
hand, are not spared, while virtue, on the other, receives the honor
which belongs to it; for flattery, which nourishes vices by covering
them, is an evil not less pernicious than it is common. I indeed admit,
that if the wicked are in authority, we ought not to carry our contempt
of them the length of refusing to obey them in so far as a regard to our
duty will permit; but, at the same time, we must beware of flattery and
of accommodating ourselves to them, which would be to involve us in the
same condemnation with them. He who not only seems to regard their
wicked actions with indifference, but also honors them, shows that he
approves of them as much as it is in his power. Paul therefore teaches
us, (<span id="xxi.iii-p6.1"></span>[Eph
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#011)<span id="xxi.iii-p6.1"></span>,.md)
that it is a species of fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness
when we do not reprove them. It is certainly a very perverse way of
acting, when persons, for the sake of obtaining the favor of men, will
indirectly mock God; and all are chargeable with doing this who make it
their business to please the wicked. David, however, has a respect, not
so much to persons as to wicked works. The man who sees the wicked
honored, and by the applause of the world rendered more obstinate in
their wickedness, and who willingly gives his consent or approbation to
this, does he not, by so doing, exalt vice to authority, and invest it
with sovereign power? “But woe,” says the prophet Isaiah, (<span
id="xxi.iii-p6.2"></span>[Isa
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#020)<span id="xxi.iii-p6.2"></span>,.md)
“unto them that call evil good, and good evil; that put darkness for
light, and light for darkness.”

<span id="xxi.iii-p7"></span>Nor ought it to be regarded as a rude or
violent manner of speaking, when David calls base and wicked persons
*reprobates,* although they may be placed in an exalted and honorable
station. If (as Cicero affirms, in his book entitled The Responses of
the Aruspices) the inspectors of the entrails of the sacrifices, and
other heathen soothsayers, applied to worthless and abandoned characters
the term *rejected,* although they excelled in dignity and riches, why
should not a prophet of God be permitted to apply the name of *degraded
outcasts* to all who are rejected by God? The meaning of the Psalmist,
to express it in a few words, is, that the children of God freely judge
of every man’s doings, and that for the purpose of obtaining the favor
of men, they will not stoop to vile flattery, and thereby encourage the
wicked in their wickedness.

<span id="xxi.iii-p8"></span>What follows immediately after, namely, *to
honor* the righteous and *those who fear God,* is no mean virtue. As
they are often, as it were, the filth and the offscouring of all things
in the estimation of the world, so it frequently happens that those who
show them favor and sympathy, excite against themselves every where the
hatred of the world. The greater part of mankind, therefore, refuse the
friendship of good men, and leave them to be despised, which cannot be
done without grievous and heinous injury to God. Let us learn then not
to value men by their estate or their money, or their transitory honors,
but to hold in estimation godliness, or the fear of God. And certainly
no man will ever truly apply his mind to the study of godliness who does
not, at the same time, reverence the servants of God; as, on the other
hand, the love we bear to them incites us to imitate them in sanctity of
life.

<span id="xxi.iii-p9"></span>*When he hath sworn to his own hurt.* The
translation of the LXX. would agree very well with the scope of the
passage, were it not that the points which are under the words in the
Hebrew text will not bear such a sense.  <span
id="fr_296"></span>[297](#fn_296.md) It is, indeed, no proof of the
inaccuracy of their rendering, that it does not agree with the points;
for, although the Jews have always used the points in reading, it is
probable that they did not always express them in writing. I, however,
prefer following the commonly received reading. And the meaning is, that
the faithful will rather submit to suffer loss than break their word.
When a man keeps his promises, in as far as he sees it to be for his own
advantage, there is in this no argument to prove his uprightness and
faithfulness. But when men make a promise to each other, there is
nothing more common than from some slight loss which the performance of
it would occasion, to endeavor to find a pretext for breaking their
engagements. Every one considers with himself what is for his own
advantage, and if it puts him to inconvenience or trouble to stand to
his promises, he is ingenious enough to imagine that he will incur a far
greater loss than there is any reason to apprehend. It seems, indeed, a
fair excuse when a man complains that, if he does not depart from his
engagement, he will suffer great loss. Hence it is, that we generally
see so much unfaithfulness among men, that they do not consider
themselves bound to perform the promises which they have made, except in
so far as it will promote their own personal interest. David, therefore,
condemning this inconstancy, requires the children of God to exhibit the
greatest steadfastness in the fulfillment of their promises. Here the
question might be asked, If a man, having fallen into the hands of a
highwayman, promise him a sum of money to save his life, and if, in
consequence of this, he is let go, should he in that case keep his
promise? Again, if a man has been basely deceived, in entering into a
contract, is it lawful for him to break the oath which he shall have
made in such an engagement? With respect to the highwayman, he who
confers upon him money falls into another fault, for he supports at his
own expense a common enemy of mankind to the detriment of the public
welfare. David does not impose upon the faithful such an alternative as
this, but only enjoins them to show a greater regard to their promises
than to their own personal interests, and to do this especially when
their promises have been confirmed by an oath. As to the other case,
namely, when a person has sworn, from being deceived and imposed upon by
wicked artifice he ought certainly to hold the holy name of God in such
veneration, as rather patiently to submit to loss than violate his oath.
Yet it is perfectly lawful for him to discover or reveal the fraud which
has been practiced upon him, provided he is not led to do so by a regard
to his own personal interest; and there is, besides, nothing to hinder
him from peaceably endeavoring to compromise the matter with his
adversary. Many of the Jewish expositors restrict this passage to vows,
as if David exhorted the faithful to perform their vows when they have
promised to humble and afflict themselves by fasting. But in this they
are mistaken. Nothing is farther from his meaning than this, for he
discourses here only of the second table of the law, and of the mutual
rectitude which men should maintain in their dealings with one another.

<span id="xxi.iv"></span>

<span id="xxi.iv-p1"></span><span id="xxi.iv-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#005.md)<span id="xxi.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.iv-p2"></span>**5.** He putteth not out his money to
usury, nor taketh bribes upon the innocent. He that doeth these things
shall not be moved for ever.

<span id="xxi.iv-p3"></span> 

<span id="xxi.iv-p4"></span><span id="xxi.iv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.iv-p5"></span>In this verse David enjoins the godly
neither to oppress their neighbors by usury, nor to suffer themselves to
be corrupted with bribes to favor unrighteous causes. With respect to
the first clause, as David seems to condemn all kinds of usury in
general, and without exception, the very name has been every where held
in detestation. But crafty men have invented specious names under which
to conceal the vice; and thinking by this artifice to escape, they have
plundered with greater excess than if they had lent on usury avowedly
and openly. God, however, will not be dealt with and imposed upon by
sophistry and false pretences. He looks upon the thing as it really is.
There is no worse species of usury than an unjust way of making
bargains, where equity is disregarded on both sides. Let us then
remember that all bargains in which the one party unrighteously strives
to make gain by the loss of the other party, whatever name may be given
to them, are here condemned. It may be asked, Whether all kinds of usury
are to be put into this denunciation, and regarded as alike unlawful? If
we condemn all without distinction, there is a danger lest many, seeing
themselves brought into such a strait, as to find that sin must be
incurred, in whatever way they can turn themselves, may be rendered
bolder by despair, and may rush headlong into all kinds of usury,
without choice or discrimination. On the other hand, whenever we concede
that something may be lawfully done this way, many will give themselves
loose reins, thinking that a liberty to exercise usury, without control
or moderation, has been granted them. In the first place, therefore, I
would, above all things, counsel my readers to beware of ingeniously
contriving deceitful pretexts, by which to take advantage of their
fellow-men, and let them not imagine that any thing can be lawful to
them which is grievous and hurtful to others.

<span id="xxi.iv-p6"></span>With respect to usury, it is scarcely
possible to find in the world a usurer who is not at the same time an
extortioner, and addicted to unlawful and dishonorable gain.
Accordingly, Cato  <span id="fr_297"></span>[298](#fn_297.md) of old justly
placed the practice of usury and the killing of men in the same rank of
criminality, for the object of this class of people is to suck the blood
of other men. It is also a very strange and shameful thing, that, while
all other men obtain the means of their subsistence with much toil,
while husbandmen fatigue themselves by their daily occupations, and
artisans serve the community by the sweat of their brow, and merchants
not only employ themselves in labors, but also expose themselves to many
inconveniences and dangers, — that money-mongers should sit at their
ease without doing any thing, and receive tribute from the labor of all
other people. Besides, we know that generally it is not the rich who are
exhausted by their usury,  <span id="fr_298"></span>[299](#fn_298.md) but
poor men, who ought rather to be relieved. It is not, therefore, without
cause that God has, in <span id="xxi.iv-p8.2"></span>[Lev.
25:35](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#035.md),
[36](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#036.md)<span id="xxi.iv-p8.2"></span>,
forbidden usury, adding this reason, “And if thy brother be waxen poor
and fallen in decay with thee, then thou shalt relieve him; take thou no
usury of him or increase.” We see that the end for which the law was
framed was, that men should not cruelly oppress the poor, who ought
rather to receive sympathy and compassion.  <span
id="fr_299"></span>[300](#fn_299.md) This was, indeed, a part of the
judicial law which God appointed for the Jews in particular; but it is a
common principle of justice which extends to all nations and to all
ages, that we should keep ourselves from plundering and devouring the
poor who are in distress and want, Whence it follows, that the gain
which he who lends his money upon interest acquires, without doing
injury to any one, is not to be included under the head of unlawful
usury. The Hebrew word <span id="xxi.iv-p9.2"></span>נשך, *neshek,*
which David employs, being derived from another word, which signifies
*to bite,* sufficiently shows that usuries are condemned in so far as
they involve in them or lead to a license of robbing and plundering our
fellow-men. Ezekiel, indeed, <span id="xxi.iv-p9.3"></span>[Eze
18:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#017.md)<span id="xxi.iv-p9.3"></span>,
and <span id="xxi.iv-p9.4"></span>[Eze
22:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze022.htm#012.md)<span id="xxi.iv-p9.4"></span>,
seems to condemn the taking of any interest whatever upon money lent;
but he doubtless has an eye to the unjust and crafty arts of gaining, by
which the rich devoured the poor people. In short, provided we had
engraven on our hearts the rule of equity, which Christ prescribes in
<span id="xxi.iv-p9.5"></span>[Mt
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#012.md)<span id="xxi.iv-p9.5"></span>,

<span id="xxi.iv-p10"></span>“Therefore, all things whatsoever ye would
that men should do to you, do ye even so to them,”

<span id="xxi.iv-p11"></span>it would not be necessary to enter into
lengthened disputes concerning usury.

<span id="xxi.iv-p12"></span>What next follows in the text properly
applies to judges who, being corrupted by presents and rewards, pervert
all law and justice. It may, however, be extended farther, inasmuch as
it often happens, that even private individuals are corrupted by bribes
to favor and defend bad causes. David, therefore, comprehends, in
general, all those corruptions by which we are led away from truth and
uprightness. Some think that what is here intended is the rapacity of
judges in extorting money from the innocent who are accused, as the
price of their deliverance, when they ought rather to have protected and
assisted them gratuitously. But it appears from the passages similar to
this in Ezekiel, which we have quoted, that the sense is different.

<span id="xxi.iv-p13"></span>*He who doeth these things.* This
conclusion warns us again, that all who thrust themselves into the
sanctuary of God are not permanent citizens of “the holy Jerusalem which
is above;”  <span id="fr_300"></span>[301](#fn_300.md) but that hypocrites,
and all who falsely assume the title of saints, shall at length be “cast
out” with Ishmael whom they resemble. That which is ascribed in <span
id="xxi.iv-p14.2"></span>[Psalm
46](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#000.md)<span id="xxi.iv-p14.2"></span>, to
the whole Church, David here applies to every one of the faithful: *He
shall not be moved for ever.* The reason of this which is there
expressed is, because God dwells in the midst of Jerusalem. On the
contrary, we know that he is far from the perfidious and the wicked, who
approach him only with the mouth, and with reigned lips.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_294"></span>[295](cc08020.htm#fr_294.md) <span
id="xxi.ii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii-p6"></span> “<span id="xxi.ii-p6.1"></span>Et mettre
sous le pied.” — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_295"></span>[296](cc08020.htm#fr_295.md) <span
id="xxi.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.iii-p3"></span> “<span id="xxi.iii-p3.1"></span>Meschant,
ou vilein et abominable.” — *Note, Fr. marg.* “The wicked, or the vile
and abominable.”

<span id="fn_296"></span>[297](cc08020.htm#fr_296.md) <span
id="xxi.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.iii-p10"></span> “The LXX., instead of <span
id="xxi.iii-p10.1"></span>להרע, *\[lehara,\] to hurt,* seem to have read
<span id="xxi.iii-p10.2"></span>להרע, *\[leharea,\] to his fellow,* for
they render it, <span id="xxi.iii-p10.3"></span>τῷ πλησίον αὐτου, *to
his neighbor,* and so the Syriac, and Latin, and Arabic, and Ethiopic.”
— *Hammond.* This rendering agrees very well with the scope of the
Psalm, which relates to our dealing justly with our fellow-men; and it
represents the good man as scrupulously performing the promissory oaths
which he makes to his neighbor. But the ordinary reading, *he* *sweareth
to his own hurt, and changeth not,* sets forth the moral integrity of
the good man in a still more striking light, by describing him as
performing his oath in the face of the greatest temptations to break it,
when the performance of it may prove detrimental to his own interests;
and this is no mean trial of a man’s virtue.

<span id="fn_297"></span>[298](cc08020.htm#fr_297.md) <span
id="xxi.iv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.iv-p7"></span> “<span id="xxi.iv-p7.1"></span>C’estoit un
personnage Romain de grande reputation.” — *Fr*. *marg.* “This was a
Roman personage of great reputation.” - See *Cicero de Officiis,* Lib.
2, cap. 25.

<span id="fn_298"></span>[299](cc08020.htm#fr_298.md) <span
id="xxi.iv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.iv-p8"></span> “<span id="xxi.iv-p8.1"></span>Ce ne sont
pas les riches lesquels on mange d’usures.” — *Fr*. “It is not the rich
whom they devour by usuries.”

<span id="fn_299"></span>[300](cc08020.htm#fr_299.md) <span
id="xxi.iv-p8.3"></span>

<span id="xxi.iv-p9"></span> The Jews were prohibited by the law from
taking usury or interest on money lent to their brethren, but not on
what was lent to strangers; that is, foreigners of other countries,
(<span id="xxi.iv-p9.1"></span>[De
23:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#020)<span id="xxi.iv-p9.1"></span>..md)
The manifest design of this prohibition was, to promote humane and
fraternal sentiments in the bosoms of the Israelites towards each other.
A more remote end seems also to have been aimed at, viz., to check the
formation of a commercial character among the Jews, and to confine them
as much as possible to those agricultural and private pursuits, which
would seclude them from intercourse with the surrounding nations, as it
was not very likely that a practice of this nature would be extended
much among foreigners which was prohibited at home.” — *Walford’s New
Translation of the Book of Psalms.*

<span id="fn_300"></span>[301](cc08020.htm#fr_300.md) <span
id="xxi.iv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.iv-p14"></span> “<span id="xxi.iv-p14.1"></span>De la
sainete Jerusalem celeste.” — *Fr*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 16](cc08021.md)
