[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc08022)  [Next](cc08024) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 8: Psalms, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxiv"></span>

<span id="xxiv-p1"></span>PSALM 18.

<span id="xxiv-p2"></span>We all know through what difficulties and
almost insurmountable obstacles David came to the kingdom. Even to the
time of Saul’s death he was a fugitive, and, as it were, an outlaw, and
wearily passed his life in fear, amidst many threatenings and dangers of
death. After God had, with his own hand, placed him on the royal throne,
he was immediately harassed with the tumults and insurrections of his
own subjects, and the hostile faction being superior to him in power, he
was often at the point of being completely overthrown. Foreign enemies,
on the other hand, severely tried him even to his old age. These
calamities he would never have surmounted had he not been aided by the
power of God. Having therefore obtained many and signal victories, he
does not, as irreligious men are accustomed to do, sing a song of
triumph in honor of himself, but exalts and magnifies God the author of
these victories, by a train of striking and appropriate epithets, and in
a style of surpassing grandeur and sublimity. This psalm, therefore, is
the first of those psalms in which David celebrates, in lofty strains,
the wonderful grace which God had shown towards him, both in putting him
in possession of the kingdom, and in afterwards maintaining him in it.
He also shows that his reign was an image and type of the kingdom of
Christ, to teach and assure the faithful that Christ, in spite of the
whole world, and of all the resistance which it can make, will, by the
stupendous and incomprehensible power of the Father, be always
victorious.

<span id="xxiv-p3"></span>To the chief musician of David, the servant of
Jehovah, who sung to Jehovah the words of this song in the day that
Jehovah delivered him from the hand of all his enemies, and from the
hand of Saul.

<span id="xxiv-p4"></span>We ought carefully to mark the particular time
when this psalm was composed, as it shows us that David, when his
affairs were brought to a state of peace and prosperity, was not
intoxicated with extravagant joy like irreligious men, who, when they
have obtained deliverance from their calamities, shake off from their
minds the remembrance of God’s benefits, and plunge themselves into
gross and degrading pleasures, or erect their crests, and obscure the
glory of God by their proud and vain boasting. David, as the sacred
history relates, (<span id="xxiv-p4.1"></span>[2Sa
22:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#001)<span id="xxiv-p4.1"></span>,)
sung this song to the Lord, when he was now almost spent with age, and
when, being delivered from all his troubles, he enjoyed tranquillity.
The inscription here agrees with that account, and, from What is there
stated, we conclude, that it has not been improperly or incorrectly
prefixed to this psalm. David points out the time when it was sung,
namely, *after God had delivered him from all his enemies,* to show us
that he was then in perfectly quiet possession of his kingdom, and that
God had assisted him not once, nor against one kind of enemies only;
seeing his conflicts were from time to time renewed, and the end of one
war was the commencement of another; yea, many armies often rose up
against him at the same time. Since the creation of the world, we will
scarcely find another individual in it whom God has tried by so many and
so varied afflictions. As Saul had persecuted him with more cruelty, and
with greater fury and determination than all others, his name on that
account is here expressly mentioned, although, in the preceding clause,
the Psalmist had spoken in general terms of all his enemies. Saul is not
put last, as if he had been one of his later enemies,  <span
id="fr_382"></span>[383](#fn_382) for his death had taken place about
thirty years previous to this time; and since that event David had
discomfited many foreign enemies, and had also suppressed the rebellion
of his own son Absalom. But, persuaded that it was a singular
manifestation of the grace of God towards him, and eminently worthy of
being remembered, that he had for so many years escaped from innumerable
deaths, or rather that as many days as he had lived under the reign of
Saul, God had wrought, as it were, so many miracles for his deliverance,
he firstly mentions and celebrates in particular his deliverance from
the hands of this relentless enemy. By calling himself *the servant of
God,* he doubtless intended to bear testimony to his call to be king, as
if he had said, I have not rashly, and by my own authority, usurped the
kingdom, but have only acted in obedience to the oracle of heaven. And,
indeed, amidst the many storms which he had to encounter, it was a
support highly necessary to be well assured in his own mind of having
undertaken nothing but by the appointment of God; or rather, this was to
him a peaceful haven, and a secure retreat in the midst of so many
broils and strange calamities.  <span id="fr_383"></span>[384](#fn_383)
There is not a more wretched object than mail in adversity, when he has
brought himself into distress by acting according to the mere impulse of
his own mind, and not by acting in obedience to the call of God. David,
therefore, had a good reason for wishing it to be known that it was not
ambition which impelled him to enter into those contests which were so
painful and difficult for him to bear, and that he had not attempted any
thing unlawful or by wicked means, but had always kept steadily in view
the will of God, which served as a light to guide him in his path. This
is a point which it is highly useful for us to know, in order that we
may not expect to be exempted from all trouble, when we follow the call
of God, but may rather prepare ourselves for a condition of warfare
painful and disagreeable to our flesh. The name *servant,* therefore, in
this passage, as in many others, relates to his public office; just as
when the prophets and apostles call themselves the servants of God, they
have a reference to their official character. It is as if he had said, I
am not a king of my own creation, but have been chosen by God to fill
that high station. At the same time, we ought particularly to notice the
humility of David, who, although distinguished by so many victories, and
the conqueror of so many nations, and possessed of so great dignity and
wealth, honors himself with no other title than this, *The servant of
God;* as if he meant to show that he accounted it more honorable to have
faithfully performed the duties of the office with which God had
invested him, than to possess all the honors and excellence of the
world.

<span id="xxiv.i"></span>

<span id="xxiv.i-p1"></span><span id="xxiv.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
18:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#001)<span id="xxiv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.i-p2"></span>**1.** And he said, I will affectionately
love thee,  <span id="fr_384"></span>[385](#fn_384) O Jehovah, my
strength. **2.** Jehovah is my rock,  <span
id="fr_385"></span>[386](#fn_385) a my fortress, and my deliverer; my
God, my rock, I will trust in him my shield, and the horn  <span
id="fr_386"></span>[387](#fn_386) of my salvation, my refuge.

<span id="xxiv.i-p6"></span> 

<span id="xxiv.i-p7"></span><span id="xxiv.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.i-p8"></span>**1.** *And he said, etc.* I will not stop
to examine too minutely the syllables, or the few words, in which this
psalm differs from the song which is recorded in the twenty-second
chapter of the Second Book of Samuel. When, however, we meet with any
important difference, we shall advert to it in the proper place; and we
find one in the remarkable sentence with which this psalm commences, *I
will love thee affectionately, O Jehovah, my strength,* which is omitted
in the song in Samuel. As the Scripture does not use the verb <span
id="xxiv.i-p8.1"></span>רהם, *racham,* for *to love,* except in the
conjugation *pihel,* and as it is here put in the conjugation *kal,*
some of the Jewish expositors explain it as here meaning *to seek
mercy;* as if David had said, Lord, since I have so often experienced
thee to be a merciful God, I will trust to and repose in thy mercies for
ever. And certainly this exposition would not be unsuitable, but I am
unwilling to depart from the other, which is more generally received. It
is to be observed, that love to God is here laid down as constituting
the principal part of true godliness; for there is no better way of
serving God than to love him. No doubt, the service which we owe him is
better expressed by the word *reverence,* that thus his majesty may
prominently stand forth to our view in its infinite greatness. But as he
requires nothing so expressly as to possess all the affections of our
heart, and to have them going out towards him, so there is no sacrifice
which he values more than when we are bound fast to him by the chain of
a free and spontaneous love; and, on the other hand, there is nothing in
which his glory shines forth more conspicuously than in his free and
sovereign goodness. Moses, therefore, (<span id="xxiv.i-p8.2"></span>[De
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#012)<span id="xxiv.i-p8.2"></span>,)
when he meant to give a summary of the law, says,

<span id="xxiv.i-p9"></span>“And now, Israel, what doth the Lord thy God
require  
of thee but to love him?”

<span id="xxiv.i-p10"></span>In speaking thus, David, at the same time,
intended to show that his thoughts and affections were not so intently
fixed upon the benefits of God as to be ungrateful to him who was the
author of them, a sin which has been too common in all ages. Even at
this day we see how the greater part of mankind enjoy wholly at their
ease the gifts of God without paying any regard to him, or, if they
think of him at all, it is only to despise him. David, to prevent
himself from falling into this ingratitude, in these words makes as it
were a solemn vow, Lord, as thou art my strength, I will continue united
and devoted to thee by unfeigned love.

<span id="xxiv.i-p11"></span><span id="xxiv.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.i-p12"></span>**2.** *Jehovah is my rock, etc.* When
David thus heaps together many titles by which to honor God, it is no
useless or unnecessary accumulation of words. We know how difficult it
is for men to keep their minds and hearts stayed in God. They either
imagine that it is not enough to have God for them, and, consequently,
are always seeking after support and succor elsewhere, or, at the first
temptation which assails them, fall from the confidence which they
placed in him. David, therefore, by attributing to God various methods
of saving his people, protests that, provided he has God for his
protector and defender, he is effectually fortified against all peril
and assault; as if he had said, Those whom God intends to succor and
defend are not only safe against one kind of dangers, but are as it were
surrounded by impregnable ramparts on all sides, so that, should a
thousand deaths be presented to their view, they ought not to be afraid
even at this formidable array.  <span id="fr_387"></span>[388](#fn_387)
We see, then, that the design of David here is not only to celebrate the
praises of God, in token of his gratitude, but also to fortify our minds
with a firm and steadfast faith, so that, whatever afflictions befall
us, we may always have recourse to God, and may be fully persuaded that
he has virtue and power to assist us in different ways, according to the
different methods of doing us mischief which the wicked devise. Nor, as
I have observed before, does David insist so much on this point, and
express the same thing by different terms without cause. God may have
aided us in one way, and yet whenever a new tempest arises, we are
immediately stricken with terror, as if we had never experienced any
thing of his aid. And those who in one trouble expect protection and
succor from him, but who afterwards circumscribe his power, accounting
it limited in other respects, act like a man who upon going into battle,
considers himself well secured as to his breast, because he has a
breastplate and a shield to defend him, and yet is afraid of his head,
because he is without a helmet. David, therefore, here furnishes the
faithful with a complete suit of armor,  <span
id="fr_388"></span>[389](#fn_388) that they may feel that they are in no
danger of being wounded, provided they are shielded by the power of God.
That such is the object he has in view, is apparent from the declaration
which he makes of his confidence in God: *I will trust in him* Let us,
therefore, learn from his example, to apply to our own use those titles
which are here attributed to God, and to apply them as an antidote
against all the perplexities and distresses which may assail us; or
rather, let them be deeply imprinted upon our memory, so that we may be
able at once to repel to a distance whatever fear Satan may suggest to
our mind. I give this exhortation, not only because we tremble under the
calamities with which we are presently assailed, but also because we
groundlessly conjure up in our own imaginations dangers as to the time
to come, and thus needlessly disquiet ourselves by the mere creations of
fancy. In the song, as recorded in <span id="xxiv.i-p14.2"></span>[2Sa
22:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#003)<span id="xxiv.i-p14.2"></span>,
instead of these words, *My God, my rock,* it is, *God of my rock.* And
after the word *refuge,* there is, *My fortress, my savior, thou shalt
preserve me from violence;* words which make the sentence fuller, but
the meaning comes to the same thing.

<span id="xxiv.ii"></span>

<span id="xxiv.ii-p1"></span><span id="xxiv.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
18:3-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#003)<span id="xxiv.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.ii-p2"></span>**3.** I will call upon the praised
Jehovah, and I shall be saved from mine enemies. **4.** The cords  <span
id="fr_389"></span>[390](#fn_389) of death had compassed me about; the
torrents of wickedness  <span id="fr_390"></span>[391](#fn_390) had made
me afraid. **5.** The cords of the grave  <span
id="fr_391"></span>[392](#fn_391) had compassed me about; the snares of
death had prevented me. **6.** In my distress I called upon Jehovah, and
cried to my God: and he heard my voice from his temple, and my cry came
before him, even into his ears.

<span id="xxiv.ii-p6"></span> 

<span id="xxiv.ii-p7"></span><span id="xxiv.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.ii-p8"></span>**3.** *I will call upon the praised
Jehovah.* Calling upon God, as has been observed elsewhere, frequently
comprehends the whole of his service; but as the effect or fruit of
prayer is particularly mentioned in what follows, this phrase in the
passage before us, I have no doubt, signifies to have recourse to God
for protection, and to ask by prayer deliverance from him. David having
said in the second verse, that he trusted in God, now subjoins this as
an evidence of his trust; for every one who confides in God will
earnestly beseech his aid in the time of need. He therefore declares,
that he *will be saved,* and prove victorious over all *his enemies,*
because he will have recourse to God for help. He calls God the *praised
Jehovah,* not only to intimate that he is worthy of being praised, as
almost all interpreters explain it, but also to point out, that, when he
came to the throne of grace, his prayers would be mingled and interwoven
with praises.  <span id="fr_392"></span>[393](#fn_392) The scope of the
passage seems to require that it be understood as meaning, that giving
thanks to God for the benefits which he has received from him in times
past, he will ask his assistance by renewed supplications. And certainly
no man will ever invoke God in prayer freely and frankly unless he
animate and encourage himself by the remembrance of the grace of God.
Accordingly Paul, in <span id="xxiv.ii-p9.4"></span>[Php
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#006)<span id="xxiv.ii-p9.4"></span>,
exhorts the faithful

<span id="xxiv.ii-p10"></span>“in every thing by prayer and supplication
with thanksgiving, to make their requests known unto God” (<span
id="xxiv.ii-p10.1"></span>[Php
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#006)<span id="xxiv.ii-p10.1"></span>)

<span id="xxiv.ii-p11"></span>and to disburden their cares, as it were,
into his bosom. All those whose prayers are not accompanied with the
praises of God are chargeable with clamouring and complaining against
him, when engaged in that solemn exercise.

<span id="xxiv.ii-p12"></span><span id="xxiv.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.ii-p13"></span>**4.** *The cords*  <span
id="fr_393"></span>[394](#fn_393) *of death had compassed me about.*
David now begins to recount the undoubted and illustrious proofs by
which he had experienced that the hand of God is sufficiently strong and
powerful to repel all the dangers and calamities with which he may be
assailed. And we need not wonder that those things which might have been
described more simply, and in an unadorned style, are clothed in
poetical forms of expression, and set forth with all the elegancies and
ornaments of language. The Holy Spirit, to contend against and make an
impression upon the wicked and perverse dispositions of men, has here
furnished David with eloquence full of majesty, energy, and wonderful
power, to awaken mankind to consider the benefits of God. There is
scarcely any assistance God bestows, however evident and palpable it may
be to our senses, which our indifference or proud disdain does not
obscure. David, therefore, the more effectually to move and penetrate
our minds, says that the deliverance and succor which God had granted
him had been conspicuous in the whole frame-work of the world. This his
intention it is needful for us to take into view, lest we should think
that he exceeds due bounds in expressing himself in a style so
remarkable for sublimity. The sum is, that, when in his distresses he
had been reduced to extremity, he had betaken himself to God for help,
and had been wonderfully preserved.

<span id="xxiv.ii-p15"></span><span id="xxiv.ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.ii-p16"></span>We shall now make a few observations with
respect to the words. The Hebrew word <span
id="xxiv.ii-p16.2"></span>חבלי, *chebley,* means *cords* or *sorrows,*
or any deadly evil,  <span id="fr_394"></span>[395](#fn_394) which
consumes a man’s health and strength, and which tends to his
destruction. That the psalm may correspond with the song recorded in 2nd
Samuel, formerly referred to, I do not disapprove of this word being
here taken for *contrition,* because the phrase there employed is <span
id="xxiv.ii-p17.3"></span>משברי מות, *mishberey maveth,*  <span
id="fr_395"></span>[396](#fn_395) and the noun <span
id="xxiv.ii-p18.3"></span>משברי, *mishberey,* is derived from a verb
which signifies to *break.* But as the metaphor taken from cords or
snares agrees better with the verb *compass about,* the import of which
is, that David was on all sides involved and entangled in the perils of
death, I am disposed rather to adopt this interpretation. What follows
concerning *torrents* implies that he had been almost overwhelmed by the
violence and impetuosity of his enemies against him, even as a man who
is covered over the head with floods of water is almost lost. He calls
them *the torrents of Belial,* because it was wicked and perverse men
who had conspired against him. The Hebrew word *Belial* has a wide
signification. With respect to its etymology there are different
opinions among expositors. Why Jerome has rendered it *without yoke,*
 <span id="fr_396"></span>[397](#fn_396) I know not. The more generally
received opinion is, that it is compounded of these two words, <span
id="xxiv.ii-p19.3"></span>בלי, *beli, not,* and <span
id="xxiv.ii-p19.4"></span>יעל, *yaäl,*  <span
id="fr_397"></span>[398](#fn_397) to denote that the wicked do not rise,
in other words, ultimately gain nothing, and obtain no advantage by
their infatuated course. The Jews certainly employed this word to
designate every kind of detestable wickedness, and from this it is
highly probable that David by it meant to describe his enemies, who
basely and wickedly plotted his destruction.  <span
id="fr_398"></span>[399](#fn_398) If, however, any prefer translating
the phrase, by *deadly torrents,* I am not disposed to oppose this
rendering. In the following verse he again repeats, *that the
corruptions* or *cords of the grave had compassed him about* As the
Hebrew word is the same which he had employed in the preceding verse, I
have thought it proper to translate it *cords* here, as I have done
there, not only because he uses a verb which signifies *to beset, to
inclose,* or *to surround,* but also because he adds immediately after,
*the snares of death,* which, in my opinion, is to be understood in the
same sense. This, then, is the description of the dangerous
circumstances into which he was brought, and it enhances and magnifies
so much the more the glory of his deliverance. As David had been reduced
to a condition so desperate that no hope of relief or deliverance from
it was apparent, it is certain that he was delivered by the hand of God,
and that it was not a thing effected by the power of man.

<span id="xxiv.ii-p22"></span><span id="xxiv.ii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.ii-p23"></span>**6.** *In my distress, etc.* It was a
very evident proof of uncommon faith in David, when, being almost
plunged into the gulf of death, he lifted up his heart to heaven by
prayer. Let us therefore learn, that such an example is set before our
eyes, that no calamities, however great and oppressive, may hinder us
from praying, or create an aversion to it. It was prayer which brought
to David the fruits or wonderful effects of which he speaks a little
after, and from this it appears still more clearly that his deliverance
was effected by the power of God. In saying that he *cried,* he means,
as we have observed elsewhere, the ardor and earnestness of affection
which he had in prayer. Again, by calling God *his God,* he separates
himself from the gross despisers of God, or hypocrites, who, when
constrained by necessity, call upon the Divine Majesty in a confused and
tumultuous manner, but do not come to God familiarly and with a pure
heart, as they know nothing of his fatherly favor and goodness. When,
therefore, as we approach to God, faith goes before to illumine the way,
giving us the full persuasion that He is our Father, then is the gate
opened, and we may converse freely with Him and he with us. David, by
calling God his God, and putting him on his side, also intimates that
God was opposed to his enemies; and this serves to show that he was
actuated by true piety and the fear of God. By the word *temple* we are
not here to understand the sanctuary as in many other places, but
heaven; for the description which immediately follows cannot be applied
to the sanctuary. Accordingly, the sense is, that when David was
forsaken and abandoned in the world, and all men shut their ears to his
cry for help, God stretched forth his hand from heaven to save him.

<span id="xxiv.iii"></span>

<span id="xxiv.iii-p1"></span><span id="xxiv.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
18:7-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#007)<span
id="xxiv.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.iii-p2"></span>**7.** Then the earth shook and trembled;
the foundations of the mountains were troubled, and were shaken, because
he was wroth. **8.** There went up a smoke by \[or out of\] his
nostrils, and fire proceeding from his mouth devoured; coals were
kindled by it. **9.** And he bowed the heavens and came down: and thick
darkness was under his feet. **10.** He rode also upon a cherub, and did
fly; and was carried upon the wings of the wind. **11.** He made
darkness his secret \[or hiding\] place; his pavilion \[or tent\] round
about him was dark waters, and the clouds of the skies.

<span id="xxiv.iii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xxiv.iii-p4"></span><span id="xxiv.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.iii-p5"></span>**7.** *Then the earth shook.* David,
convinced that the aid of God, which he had experienced, was of such a
character, that it was impossible for him to extol it sufficiently and
as it deserved, sets forth an image of it in the sky and the earth, as
if he had said, It has been as visible as the changes which give
different appearances to the sky and the earth. If natural things always
flowed in an even and uniform course, the power of God would not be so
perceptible. But when he changes the face of the sky by sudden rain, or
by loud thunder, or by dreadful tempests, those who before were, as it
were, asleep and insensible, must necessarily be awakened, and be
tremblingly conscious of the existence of a presiding God.  <span
id="fr_399"></span>[400](#fn_399) Such sudden and unforeseen changes
manifest more clearly the presence of the great Author of nature. No
doubt, when the sky is unclouded and tranquil, we see in it sufficient
evidences of the majesty of God, but as men will not stir up their minds
to reflect upon that majesty, until it come nearer to them, David, the
more powerfully to affect us, recounts the sudden changes by which we
are usually moved and dismayed, and introduces God at one time clothed
with a dark cloud, — at another, throwing the air into confusion by
tempests, — now rending it by the boisterous violence of winds, — now
launching the lightnings, — and anon darting down hailstones and
thunderbolts. In short, the object of the Psalmist is to show that the
God who, as often as he pleases, causes all parts of the world to
tremble by his power, when he intended to manifest himself as the
deliverer of David, was known as openly and by signs as evident as if he
had displayed his power in all the creatures both above and beneath.

<span id="xxiv.iii-p7"></span>In the first place, he says, *The earth
shook,* and nothing is more dreadful than an earthquake. Instead of the
words, *the foundations of the mountains,* it is in the song, as
recorded in 2nd Samuel, *the foundations of the heavens;* but the
meaning is the same, namely, that there was nothing in the world so
settled and steadfast which did not tremble, and which was not removed
out of its place. David, however, as I have already observed in the
beginning, does not relate this as a piece of history, or as what had
actually taken place, but he employs these similitudes for the purpose
of removing all doubt, and for the greater confirmation of faith as to
the power and providence of God; because men, from their slowness of
understanding, cannot apprehend God except by means of external signs.
Some think that these miracles were actually wrought, and performed
exactly as they are here related; but it is not easy to believe this,
since the Holy Spirit, in the narrative given of David’s life, makes no
mention whatever of such wonderful displays of divine power in his
behalf. We cannot, however, justly censure or find fault with this
hyperbolic manner of speaking, when we consider our slowness of
apprehension, and also our depravity, to which I have just now called
your attention. David, who was much more penetrating and quick of
understanding than ordinary men, finding he could not sufficiently
succeed in impressing and profiting people of sluggish and weak
understandings by a simple manner of speaking, describes under outward
figures the power of God, which he had discovered by means of faith, and
the revelation of the Holy Spirit. He doubtless hereby apprehended and
knew more distinctly the omnipresent majesty of God, than the dull sort
of common people perceive the hand of God in earthquakes, tempests,
thunders, the gloomy lowerings of the heavens, and the boisterous winds.
At the same time, it is proper to consider, that although God had, in a
wonderful manner, displayed his grace in defending and maintaining
David, many, nevertheless, thought that it was by his own skill, or by
chance, or by other natural means, that all his affairs had come to a
prosperous issue; and it was such stupidity or depravity as this which
he saw in the men of his own time, that constrained him to mention and
to summon together all parts of creation as witnesses for God. Some also
justly and judiciously consider that, in the whole of this description,
David has an allusion to the common deliverance of God’s chosen people
from Egypt. As God then designed and established that event to be a
perpetual memorial, from which the faithful might learn that he was the
guardian and protector of their welfare, so all the benefits which, from
that period, he bestowed upon his people, either as a public body or as
private individuals, were, so to speak, appendages of that first
deliverance. Accordingly David, in other places as well as here, with
the view of exalting the succor which God had granted to his people,
sets forth that most memorable instance of the goodness of God towards
the children of Israel, as if it were the archtype or original copy of
the grace of God. And surely, while many, seeing him an exile from his
country, held him in derision as a man expelled from the family of God,
and many murmured that he had violently and unrighteously usurped the
kingdom, he had good ground to include, under the deliverance which had
been common to all the people, the protection and safety which God had
afforded to himself; as if he had said, I have been wrongfully cast off
as an alien or stranger, seeing God has sufficiently shown, in the
deliverance which he has wrought for me, that by him I am owned and
acknowledged to be a distinguished and valuable member of the Church. We
see how the prophets, whenever they would inspire the people with the
hope of salvation, call their thoughts back to the contemplation of that
first covenant which had been confirmed by those miracles which were
wrought in Egypt, in the passage through the Red Sea and in Mount Sinai.
When he says, *The earth trembled, because he was wroth,* it is to be
understood as referring to the ungodly. It is a form of speech which God
often employs, to say, that, being inflamed with indignation, he arms
himself to maintain the safety of his people against their persecutors.

<span id="xxiv.iii-p8"></span><span id="xxiv.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.iii-p9"></span>**8.** *There went up a smoke by \[or out
of\] his nostrils, etc* The Hebrew word <span
id="xxiv.iii-p9.1"></span>אף, *aph,* properly signifies *the nose,* or
*the nostrils.* But as it is sometimes taken metaphorically for *wrath,*
some translate it thus, *There went up a smoke in his wrath,* which, in
my opinion, is not at all appropriate. David compares the mists and
vapours which darken the air to the thick smoke which a man sends forth
from his nostrils when he is angry. And when God, by his very breath,
covers the heaven with clouds, and taking away from us the brightness of
the sun and of all the stars, overwhelms us in darkness, by this we are
very impressively taught how dreadful is his wrath. By the rendering
which I have given, the figure here strikingly harmonises with the one
in the clause which immediately follows, namely, *that fire proceeding
from his mouth consumed* The Psalmist means, that God, without great
labor or effort, as soon as he shall have sent forth a breath or blast
from his nostrils, and opened his mouth, will kindle such a fire that
its smoke will darken the whole world, and its intense heat devour it.
What he adds, *Coals were kindled by it,* serves to distinguish this
dreadful fire from a flame which blazes for a moment, and then is
extinguished. *The bowing of the heavens,* denotes a time when the
heavens are covered and obscured with clouds. When dense vapours occupy
the middle of the air, the clouds seem to us to come down and to lie
upon our heads. And not only so, but the majesty of God then
approaching, as it were, nearer us, strikes us with dread dismay, and
greatly distresses us, although before, when the sky was fair,
agreeable, and tranquil, we took ample scope, and enjoyed ourselves with
much gaiety. Again, let us remember, that the Scripture, under these
descriptions of a clouded and darkened sky, pourtray to us the anger of
God. When the sky is clear and unclouded, it seems as if it were the
pleasant and benignant countenance of God beaming upon us, and causing
us to rejoice; whereas, on the other hand, when the atmosphere is
troubled, we feel a depression of the animal spirits which constrains us
to look sad, as if we saw God coming against us with a threatening
aspect. At the same time, we are taught that no change takes place
either in the atmosphere or in the earth, but what is a witness to us of
the presence of God.

<span id="xxiv.iii-p10"></span><span id="xxiv.iii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.iii-p11"></span>**10.** *He rode also upon a cherub.* The
Psalmist having exhibited to us a sign of the wrath of God in the
clouds, and in the darkening of the air, representing him as if he
breathed out smoke,  <span id="fr_400"></span>[401](#fn_400) from his
nostrils, and descended with a threatening countenance, to afflict men
by the dreadful weight of his power; and having also represented
lightnings and thunderbolts as flaming fire proceeding from his mouths —
he now introduces him as riding upon the winds and tempests, to take a
survey of the whole world with rapid speed, or rather with the swiftness
of flying. We meet with a similar description in <span
id="xxiv.iii-p12.2"></span>[Ps
104:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#003)<span
id="xxiv.iii-p12.2"></span>, where God is said to “walk upon the wings
of the winds,” and to send them forth in every direction as his swift
messengers. David does not, however, simply represent God as the
governor of the winds, who drives them by his power whithersoever he
pleases; he at the same time tells us that he rides upon *a cherub,* to
teach us that the very violence of the winds is governed by angels as
God has ordained. We know that the angels were represented under the
figure of the cherubim. David, therefore, I have no doubt, here intended
to make an allusion to the ark of the covenant. In proposing for our
consideration the power of God as manifested in the wonders of nature,
he does it in such a manner as all the time to have an eye to the
temple, where he knew God had made himself known in a peculiar manner to
the children of Abraham. He therefore celebrates God not only as creator
of the world, but as He who entered into covenant with Israel, and chose
for himself a holy dwelling-place in the midst of that people. David
might have called the angels by their common name, but he has expressly
made use of a term which has a reference to the visible symbol of the
ark, that true believers, in singing this psalm, might always have their
minds directed to the service of God which was performed in the temple.
What follows with respect, to God’s *dark pavilion* or *tent,* is a
repetition of the preceding sentence in different words, namely, that
when God covers the air with dark clouds, it is as if he spread a thick
veil between him and men, to deprive them of the sight of his
countenance,  <span id="fr_401"></span>[402](#fn_401) just as if a king,
incensed against his subjects, should retire into his secret chamber and
hide himself from them. Those take a mistaken view of this verse who
bring it forward to prove, in general, the hidden and mysterious
character of the glory of God, as if David, with the view of restraining
the presumption of human curiosity, had said that God is hidden in
darkness in regard to men. God, it is true, is said to dwell in the
light which no man can approach unto” (<span
id="xxiv.iii-p13.2"></span>[1Ti
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#016)<span
id="xxiv.iii-p13.2"></span>;) but the form of expression which David
here employs, I have no doubt, ought to be restricted, according to the
scope of the passage, to the sense which I have given.

<span id="xxiv.iv"></span>

<span id="xxiv.iv-p1"></span><span id="xxiv.iv-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
18:12-19](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#012)<span
id="xxiv.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.iv-p2"></span>**12.** At the brightness which was before
him, his clouds passed away; there was hail-storm and coals of fire.
**13.** Jehovah thundered in the heavens, and the Highest sent forth his
voice; there was hail-storm and coals of fire. **14.** He sent out his
arrows, and scattered them, \[or put them to flight;\] he multiplied
lightnings,  <span id="fr_402"></span>[403](#fn_402) and put them into
confusion. **15.** The sources of the waters were seen, and the
foundations of the world were disclosed at thy rebuke, O Jehovah! at the
blast of the breath of thy nostrils.  <span
id="fr_403"></span>[404](#fn_403) **16.** He sent from on high, he took
me, and drew me out of great waters. **17.** He delivered me from my
strong enemy, and from my adversary; for they were too strong for me.
**18.** They had prevented me in the day of my calamity; but Jehovah was
my support. **19.** He brought me forth also into a large place; he
delivered me, because he had a good will to me, \[or because he loved
me.\]

<span id="xxiv.iv-p5"></span> 

<span id="xxiv.iv-p6"></span><span id="xxiv.iv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.iv-p7"></span>**12.** *At the brightness, etc.* The
Psalmist again returns to the lightnings which, by dividing and as it
were cleaving the clouds, lay open the heaven; and, therefore, he says,
that the clouds of God (that is to say, those which he had set before
him, in token of his anger, for the purpose of depriving men of the
enjoyment of the light of his countenance) passed away *at the
brightness which was before him* These sudden changes affect us with a
much more lively sense of the power and agency of God than natural
phenomena which move on in one uniform course. He adds, that there
followed *hail-storm and coals of fire;* for when the thunder separates
and rends asunder the clouds, it either breaks out in lightnings, or the
clouds resolve themselves into hail.

<span id="xxiv.iv-p8"></span><span id="xxiv.iv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.iv-p9"></span>**13.** *Jehovah thundered.* David here
repeats the same thing in different words, declaring that God thundered
from heaven; and he calls the thunder *the yoke of God,* that we may not
suppose it is produced merely by chance or by natural causes,
independent of the appointment and will of God. Philosophers, it is
true, are well acquainted with the intermediate or secondary causes,
from which the thunder proceeds, namely, that when the cold and humid
vapours obstruct the dry and hot exhalations in their course upwards, a
collision takes place, and by this, together with the noise of the
clouds rushing against each other, is produced the rumbling
thunder-peal.  <span id="fr_404"></span>[405](#fn_404) But David, in
describing the phenomena of the atmosphere, rises, under the guidance of
the Holy Spirit, above the mere phenomena themselves, and represents God
to us as the supreme governor of the whole, who, at his will, penetrates
into the hidden veins of the earth, and thence draws forth exhalations;
who then, dividing them into different sorts, disperses them through the
air; who again collects the vapours together, and sets them in conflict
with the subtile and dry heats, so that the thunder which follows seems
to be a loud pealing voice proceeding from his own mouth. The song in
2nd Samuel also contains the repetition to which we have referred in the
commencement of our remarks on this verse; but the sense of this and the
preceding verse, and of the corresponding verses in Samuel, are entirely
similar. We should remember what I have said before, that David, under
these figures, describes to us the dreadful power of God, the better to
exalt and magnify the divine grace, which was manifested in his
deliverance. He declares a little after, that this was his intention;
for, when speaking of his enemies, he says, (verse 14,) that they *were
scattered,* or *put to flight, by the arrows of God;* as if he had said,
They have been overthrown, not by the hands or swords of men, but by
God, who openly launched his thunderbolts against them. Not that he
means to affirm that this happened literally, but he speaks in this
metaphorical language, because those who were uninstructed and slow to
acknowledge the power of God,  <span id="fr_405"></span>[406](#fn_405)
could not otherwise be brought to perceive that God was the author of
his deliverance. The import of his words is, Whoever does not
acknowledge that I have been preserved by the hand of God, may as well
deny that it is God who thunders from heaven, and abolish his power
which is manifested in the whole order of nature, and especially in
those wonderful changes which we see taking place in the atmosphere. As
God shoots lightnings as if they were arrows, the Psalmist has, in the
first place, employed this metaphor; and then he has expressed the thing
simply by its proper name.

<span id="xxiv.iv-p12"></span><span id="xxiv.iv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.iv-p13"></span>**15.** *And the sources of the waters
were seen.* In this verse, David doubtless alludes to the miracle which
was wrought when the chosen tribes passed through the Red Sea. I have
before declared the purpose for which he does this. As all the special
benefits which God in old time conferred upon any of the children of
Abraham as individuals, were so many testimonies by which he recalled to
their remembrance the covenant which he had once entered into with the
whole people, to assure them that he would always continue his grace
towards them, and that one deliverance might be to them a token or
pledge of their perpetual safety, and of the protection of God, David
fitly conjoins with that ancient deliverance of the Church the
assistance which God had sent from heaven to him in particular. As the
grace which he declares God had shown towards him was not to be
separated from that first deliverance, since it was, so to speak, a part
and an appendage of it, he beholds, as it were at a glance, or in an
instant, both the ancient miracle of the drying up of the Red Sea, and
the assistance which God granted to himself. In short, God, who once
opened up for his people a way through the Red Sea, and then showed
himself to be their protector upon this condition, that they should
assure themselves of being always maintained and preserved under his
keeping, now again displayed his wonderful power in the defense and
preservation of one man, to renew the remembrance of that ancient
history. From this it appears the more evidently, that David, in using
these apparently strange and exaggerated hyperboles, does not recite to
us the mere creations of romance to please the fancy, after the manner
of the heathen poets,  <span id="fr_406"></span>[407](#fn_406) but
observes the style and manner which God had, as it were, prescribed to
his people. At the same time, we ought carefully to mark the reason
already adverted to, which constrained him to magnify the grace of God
in a style of such splendid imagery, namely, because the greater part of
the people never made the grace of God the subject of serious
consideration, but, either through wickedness or stupidity, passed over
it with shut eyes. The Hebrew word <span
id="xxiv.iv-p14.2"></span>אפיקים, *aphikim,* which I have rendered
*sources,* properly signifies *the channels of rivers;* but David, in
this passage, evidently means that the very springs or sources of the
waters were laid open, and that thus it could be discerned whence
proceeds the great and inexhaustible abundance of waters which supply
the rivers, and by which they always continue to flow on in their
course.

<span id="xxiv.iv-p15"></span><span id="xxiv.iv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.iv-p16"></span>**16.** *He sent down from above.* Here
there is briefly shown the drift of the sublime and magnificent
narrative which has now passed under our review, namely, to teach us
that David at length emerged from the profound abyss of his troubles,
neither by his own skill, nor by the aid of men, but that he was drawn
out of them by the hand of God. When God defends and preserves us
wonderfully and by extraordinary means, he is said in Scripture language
to send down succor from above; and this *sending* is set in opposition
to human and earthly aids, on which we usually place a mistaken and an
undue confidence. I do not disapprove of the opinion of those who
consider this as referring to the angels, but I understand it in a more
general sense; for by whatever means we are preserved, it is God who
having his creatures ready at his nod to do his will, appoints them to
take charge of us, and girds or prepares them for succouring us. But,
although every kind of aid comes from heaven, David, with good reason,
affirms that God had stretched out his hand from on high to deliver him.
In speaking thus, he meant to place the astonishing benefit referred to,
by way of eminence, above others of a more common kind; and besides,
there is in this expression a tacit comparison between the unusual
exercise of the power of God here celebrated, and the common and
ordinary means by which he succours his people. When he says, that *God
drew him out of great waters,* it is a metaphorical form of expression.
By comparing the cruelty of his enemies to impetuous torrents, by which
he might have been swallowed up a hundred times, he expresses more
clearly the greatness of the danger; as if he had said, I have, contrary
to the expectation of men, escaped, and been delivered from a deep abyss
in which I was ready to be overwhelmed. In the following verse he
expresses the thing simply and without a figure, declaring that he had
been delivered from a *strong enemy,*  <span
id="fr_407"></span>[408](#fn_407) who mortally hated and persecuted him.
The more to exalt and magnify the power of God, he directs our attention
to this circumstance, that no strength or power of men had been able to
prevent God from saving him, even when he was reduced to the greatest
extremity of distress. As in the end of the verse there is the Hebrew
particle <span id="xxiv.iv-p17.1"></span>כי, *ki,* which generally
denotes the cause of what is predicated, almost all interpreters agree
in explaining the verse thus: God has succoured me from above, because
my enemies were so numerous and so strong that no relief was to be
expected by the mere aid of men. From this we deduce a very profitable
doctrine, namely, that the most seasonable time for God to aid his
people is when they are unable to sustain the assaults of their enemies,
or rather, when, broken and afflicted, they sink under their violence,
like the wretched man who having in a shipwreck lost all hope of being
able to swim to the shore, sinks with great rapidity to the bottom of
the deep. The particle <span id="xxiv.iv-p17.2"></span>יכ, *ki,*
however, might also be explained by the adversative particle *although,*
in this way: Although the enemies of David were superior to him in
number and power, he nevertheless was saved.

<span id="xxiv.iv-p18"></span><span id="xxiv.iv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.iv-p19"></span>**18.** *They had prevented me in the day
of my calamity.*  <span id="fr_408"></span>[409](#fn_408) The Psalmist
here confirms in different words the preceding sentence, namely, that he
had been sustained by the aid of God, when there was no way of escaping
by the power of man. He tells us how he had been besieged on all sides,
and that not by an ordinary siege, inasmuch as his enemies, in
persecuting him, always molested him most in the time of his calamity.
From this circumstance it is the more evident that he had obtained
enlargement by no other means than by the hand of God. Whence proceeded
so sudden a restoration from death to life, but because God intended to
show that he has in his hand, and under his absolute control, the issues
of death? In short, the Psalmist ascribes his deliverance to no other
cause than the mere good pleasure of God, that all the praise might
redound to him alone: *He delivered me, because he loved me,* or *had a
good will to me.* In mentioning the good pleasure of God, he has a
special respect to his own calling to be king. The point on which he
principally insisted is, that the assaults which were made upon him, and
the conflicts which he had to sustain, were stirred up against him for
no other reason but because he had obeyed the call of God, and followed
with humble obedience the revelation of his oracle. Ambitious and
turbulent men, who are carried headlong by their unruly lusts,
inconsiderately to attempt any thing, and who, by their rashness,
involve themselves in dangers, may often accomplish their undertakings
by vigorous and resolute efforts, but at length a reverse takes place,
and they are stopt short in their career of success, for they are
unworthy of being sustained and prospered by God, since, without having
any warrant or foundation for what they do in his call, they would raise
their insane structures even to heaven, and disturb all around them. In
short, David testifies, by this expression, that the assistance of God
had never failed him, because he had not thrust himself into the office
of king of his own accord, but that when he was contented with his
humble condition, and would willingly have lived in obscurity, in the
sheep-cotes, or in his father’s hut, he had been anointed by the hand of
Samuel, which was the symbol of his free election by God to fill the
throne.

<span id="xxiv.v"></span>

<span id="xxiv.v-p1"></span><span id="xxiv.v-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
18:20-24](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#020)<span id="xxiv.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.v-p2"></span>**20.** Jehovah rewarded me according to my
righteousness; he recompensed me according to the cleanness of my hands.
**21.** For I have kept the ways of Jehovah, and have not wickedly
departed from my God. **22.** For all his judgments were before me, nor
did I put away his statutes \[or ordinances\] from me. **23.** I was
also upright with him,  <span id="fr_409"></span>[410](#fn_409) and kept
myself from my iniquity. **24.** Therefore Jehovah hath recompensed me
according to my righteousness, according to the cleanness of my hands
before his eyes.

<span id="xxiv.v-p4"></span> 

<span id="xxiv.v-p5"></span><span id="xxiv.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.v-p6"></span>**20.** *Jehovah rewarded me.* David might
seem at first sight to contradict himself; for, while a little before he
declared that all the blessings which he possessed were to be traced to
the good pleasure of God, he now boasts that God rendered to him a just
recompense. But if we remember for what purpose he connects these
commendations of his own integrity with the good pleasure of God, it
will be easy to reconcile these apparently conflicting statements. He
has before declared that God was the sole author and originator of the
hope of coming to the kingdom which he entertained, and that he had not
been elevated to it by the suffrages of men, nor had he rushed forward
to it through the mere impulse of his own mind, but accepted it because
such was the will of God. Now he adds, in the second place, that he had
yielded faithful obedience to God, and had never turned aside from his
will. Both these things were necessary; first, that God should
previously show his favor freely towards David, in choosing him to be
king; and next, that David, on the other hand, should, with an obedient
spirit, and a pure conscience, receive the kingdom which God thus freely
gave him; and farther, that whatever the wicked might attempt, with the
view of overthrowing or shaking his faith, he should nevertheless
continue to adhere to the direct course of his calling. Thus, then, we
see that these two statements, so far from disagreeing with each other,
admirably harmonise. David here represents God as if the president
 <span id="fr_410"></span>[411](#fn_410) of a combat, under whose
authority and conduct he had been brought forth to engage in the
combats. Now that depended upon election, in other words, upon this,
that God having embraced him with his favor, had created him king. He
adds in the verses which immediately follow, that he had faithfully
performed the duties of the charge and office committed to him even to
the uttermost. It is not, therefore, wonderful if God maintained and
protected David, and even showed, by manifest miracles, that he was the
defender of his own champion,  <span id="fr_411"></span>[412](#fn_411)
whom he had, of his own free choice, admitted to the combat, and who he
saw had performed his duty with all fidelity. We ought not, however, to
think that David, for the sake of obtaining praise among men, has here
purposely indulged in the language of vain boasting; we ought rather to
view the Holy Spirit as intending by the mouth of David to teach us the
profitable doctrine, that the aid of God will never fail us, provided we
follow our calling, keep ourselves within the limits which it
prescribes, and undertake nothing without the command or warrant of God.
At the same time, let this truth be deeply fixed in our minds, that we
can only begin an upright course of life when God of his good pleasure
adopts us into his family, and in effectually calling, anticipates us by
his grace, without which neither we nor any creature would give him an
opportunity of bestowing this blessing upon us.  <span
id="fr_412"></span>[413](#fn_412)

<span id="xxiv.v-p10"></span>There, however, still remains one question.
If God rendered to David a just recompense, it may be said, does it not
seem, when he shows himself liberal towards his people, that he is so in
proportion as each of them has deserved? I answer, When the Scripture
uses the word *reward* or *recompense,* it is not to show that God owes
us any thing, and it is therefore a groundless and false conclusion to
infer from this that there is any merit or worth in works. God, as a
just judge, rewards every man according to his works, but he does it in
such a manner, as to show that all men are indebted to him, while he
himself is under obligation to no one. The reason is not only that which
St Augustine has assigned, namely, that God finds no righteousness in us
to recompense, except what he himself has freely given us, but also
because, forgiving the blemishes and imperfections which cleave to our
works, he imputes to us for righteousness that which he might justly
reject. If, therefore, none of our works please God, unless the sin
which mingles with them is pardoned, it follows, that the recompense
which he bestows on account of them proceeds not from our merit, but
from his free and undeserved grace. We ought, however, to attend to the
special reason why David here speaks of God rewarding him according to
his righteousness. He does not presumptuously thrust himself into the
presence of God, trusting to or depending upon his own obedience to the
law as the ground of his justification; but knowing that God approved
the affection of his heart, and wishing to defend and acquit himself
from the false and wicked calumnies of his enemies, he makes God himself
the judge of his cause. We know how unjustly and shamefully he had been
loaded with false accusations, and yet these calumnies did not so much
bear against the honor and name of David as against the welfare and
estate of the whole Church in common. It was indeed mere private spite
which stirred up Saul, and drove him into fury against David, and it was
to please the king that all other men were so rancorous against an
innocent individual, and broke forth so outrageously against him; but
Satan, there is no doubt, had a prime agency in exciting these
formidable assaults upon the kingdom of David, and by them he endeavored
to accomplish his ruin, because in the person of this one man God had
placed, and, as it were, shut up the hope of the salvation of the whole
people. This is the reason why David labors so carefully and so
earnestly to show and to maintain the righteousness of his cause. When
he presents and defends himself before the judgment-seat of God against
his enemies, the question is not concerning the whole course of his
life, but only respecting one certain cause, or a particular point. We
ought, therefore, to attend to the precise subject of his discourse, and
what he here debates. The state of the matter is this: His adversaries
charged him with many crimes; first, of rebellion and treason, accusing
him of having revolted from the king his father-in-law; in the second
place, of plunder and robbery, as if, like a robber, he had taken
possession of the kingdom; thirdly, of sedition, as if he had thrown the
kingdom into confusion when it enjoyed tranquillity; and, lastly, of
cruelty and many flagitious actions, as if he had been the cause of
murders, and had prosecuted his conspiracy by many dangerous means and
unlawful artifices. David, in opposition to these accusations, with the
view of maintaining his innocence before God, protests and affirms that
he had acted uprightly and sincerely in this matter, inasmuch as he
attempted nothing without the command or warrant of God; and whatever
hostile attempts his enemies made against him, he nevertheless always
kept himself within the bounds prescribed by the Divine Law. It would be
absurd to draw from this the inference that God is merciful to men
according as he judges them to be worthy of his favor. Here the object
in view is only to show the goodness of a particular cause, and to
maintain it in opposition to wicked calumniators; and not to bring into
examination the whole life of a man, that he may obtain favor, and be
pronounced righteous before God. In short, David concludes from the
effect and the issue, that his cause was approved of by God, not that
one victory is always and necessarily the sign of a good cause, but
because God, by evident tokens of his assistance, showed that he was on
the side of David.

<span id="xxiv.v-p11"></span><span id="xxiv.v-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.v-p12"></span>**21.** *For I have kept the ways of
Jehovah.* He had spoken in the preceding verse of the cleanness of his
hands, but finding that men judged of him perversely, and were very
active in spreading evil reports concerning him,  <span
id="fr_413"></span>[414](#fn_413) he affirms that he had kept the ways
of the Lord, which is equivalent to his appealing the matter to the
judgment-seat of God. Hypocrites, it is true, are accustomed confidently
to appeal to God in the same way; yea, there is nothing which they are
more forward in doing than in dallying with the sacred name of God, and
making it a cover to conceal their hypocrisy; but David brings forward
nothing which men might not have certainly known to be true, if any
regard to justice had existed among them. Let us, therefore, from his
example, endeavor above all things to have a good conscience. And, in
the second place, let us have the magnanimity to despise the false
judgments of men, and to look up to heaven for the vindicator of our
character and cause. He adds, *I have not wickedly departed from my God*
This implies, that he always aimed directly at the mark of his calling,
although the ungodly attempted many things to overthrow his faith. The
verb which he uses does not denote one fall only, but a defection which
utterly removes and alienates a man from God. David, it is true,
sometimes fell into sin through the weakness of the flesh, but he never
desisted from following after godliness, nor deserted the service to
which God had called him.

<span id="xxiv.v-p14"></span><span id="xxiv.v-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.v-p15"></span>**22.** *For all his judgments were before
me.* He now shows how he came to possess that unbending rectitude of
character, by which he was enabled to act uprightly amidst so many and
so grievous temptations, namely, because he always applied his mind to
the study of the law of God. As Satan is daily making new assaults upon
us, it is necessary for us to have recourse to arms, and it is
meditation upon the Divine Law which furnishes us with armor to resist.
Whoever, therefore, would desire to persevere in uprightness and
integrity of life, let them learn to exercise themselves daily in the
study of the word of God; for, whenever a man despises or neglects
instruction, he easily falls into carelessness and stupidity, and all
fear of God vanishes from his mind. I do not intend here to make any
subtle distinction between these two words, *judgments* and
*ordinances.* If, however, any person is inclined to make a distinction
between them, the best distinction is to refer *judgments* to the second
table of the law, and *ordinances,* or *statutes,* which in Hebrew are
called <span id="xxiv.v-p15.1"></span>חוכות, *chukoth,* to the duties of
piety and the exercises immediately connected with the worship of God.

<span id="xxiv.v-p16"></span><span id="xxiv.v-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.v-p17"></span>**23.** *I was also upright with him.* All
the verbs in this verse are put by David in the future tense, *I will be
upright, etc.* because he does not boast of one act only, or of a good
work performed by fits and starts, but of steady perseverance in an
upright course. What I have said before, namely, that David takes God
for his judge, as he saw that he was wrongfully and unrighteously
condemned by men, appears still more clearly from what he here says, “I
have been upright with him.” The Scriptures, indeed, sometimes speak in
similar terms of the saints, to distinguish them from hypocrites, who
content themselves with wearing the outward mask of religious
observances; but it is to disprove the false reports which were spread
against him that David thus confidently appeals to God with respect to
them. This is still more fully confirmed by the repetition of the same
thing which is made a little after, *According to the cleanness of my
hands before his eyes* In these words there is evidently a contrast
between the eyes of God and the blinded or malignant eyes of the world;
as if he had said, I disregard false and wicked calumnies, provided I am
pure and upright in the sight of God, whose judgment can never be
perverted by malevolent or other vicious and perverse affections.
Moreover, the integrity which he attributes to himself is not perfection
but sincerity, which is opposed to dissimulation and hypocrisy. This may
be gathered from the last clause of the 23rd verse, where he says, *I
have kept myself from my iniquity* In thus speaking, he tacitly
acknowledges that he had not been so pure and free from sinful
affections as that the malignity of his enemies did not frequently
excite indignation within him, and gall him to the heart. He had
therefore to fight in his own mind against many temptations, for as he
was a man, he must have felt in the flesh on many occasions the
stirrings of vexation and anger. But this was the proof of his virtue,
that he imposed a restraint upon himself, and refrained from whatever he
knew to be contrary to the word of God. A man will never persevere in
the practice of uprightness and of godliness, unless he carefully keep
himself from his iniquity.

<span id="xxiv.vi"></span>

<span id="xxiv.vi-p1"></span><span id="xxiv.vi-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
18:25-27](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#025)<span
id="xxiv.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.vi-p2"></span>**25.** With the merciful thou wilt deal
mercifully,  <span id="fr_414"></span>[415](#fn_414) with an upright man
thou wilt show thyself upright. **26.** With the pure  <span
id="fr_415"></span>[416](#fn_415) thou wilt be pure, and with the
perverse thou wilt show thyself perverse. **27** For thou wilt save the
afflicted people,  <span id="fr_416"></span>[417](#fn_416) and wilt
bring down the haughty eyes.  <span id="fr_417"></span>[418](#fn_417)

<span id="xxiv.vi-p7"></span> 

<span id="xxiv.vi-p8"></span><span id="xxiv.vi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.vi-p9"></span>**25.** *With the merciful, etc.* David
here prosecutes the same subject. In considering the grace of God by
which he had been delivered, he brings it forward as a proof of his
integrity, and thus triumphs over the unfounded and disgraceful
calumnies of his enemies. Hypocrites, I confess, are also accustomed to
act in the same way; for prosperity and the success of their affairs so
elates them that they are not ashamed proudly to vaunt themselves not
only against men, but even against God. As such persons, however, openly
mock God, when, by his long-suffering, he allures them to repentance,
their wicked and unhappy presumption has no resemblance to the boasting
by which we here see David encouraging himself. He does not abuse the
forbearance and mercy of God by palliating or spreading a specious
varnish over his iniquities, because God bears with them; but having, by
the manifold aids he had received from God, experienced beyond doubt
that he was merciful to him, he justly viewed them as evident
testimonies of the divine favor towards him. And we ought to mark well
this difference between the ungodly and the faithful, namely, that the
former, intoxicated with prosperity, unblushingly boast of being
acceptable to God, while yet they disregard him, and rather sacrifice to
Fortune, and make it their God;  <span id="fr_418"></span>[419](#fn_418)
whereas the latter in their prosperity magnify the grace of God, from
the deep sense of his grace with which their consciences are affected.
Thus David here boasts that God had succoured him on account of the
justice of his cause. For, in the first place, we must adapt the words
to the scope of the whole discourse, and view them as implying that God,
in so often delivering an innocent man from death, when it was near him,
showed, indeed, that he is merciful towards the merciful, and pure
towards the pure. In the second place, we must view the words as
teaching the general doctrine, that God never disappoints his servants,
but always at length deals graciously with them, provided they wait for
his aid with meekness and patience. To this purpose Jacob said, in <span
id="xxiv.vi-p10.2"></span>[Ge
30:33](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#033)<span id="xxiv.vi-p10.2"></span>,

<span id="xxiv.vi-p11"></span>“God will make my righteousness to return
upon me.”

<span id="xxiv.vi-p12"></span>The scope of the discourse is, that the
people of God should entertain good hope, and encourage themselves to
practice uprightness and integrity, since every man shall reap the fruit
of his own righteousness.

<span id="xxiv.vi-p13"></span><span id="xxiv.vi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.vi-p14"></span>The last clause of the 26th verse, where
it is said, *With the perverse thou wilt show thyself perverse,* seems
to convey a meaning somewhat strange, but it does not imply any thing
absurd; yea, rather, it is not without good reason that the Holy Spirit
uses this manner of speaking; for he designs thereby to awaken
hypocrites and the gross despisers of God, who lull themselves asleep in
their vices without any apprehension of danger.  <span
id="fr_419"></span>[420](#fn_419) We see how such persons, when the
Scripture proclaims the sore and dreadful judgments of God, and when
also God himself denounces terrible vengeance, pass over all these
things, without giving themselves any trouble about them. Accordingly,
this brutish, and, as it were, monstrous stupidity which we see in men,
compels God to invent new forms of expression, and, as it were, to
clothe himself with a different character. There is a similar sentence
in <span id="xxiv.vi-p15.2"></span>[Le
26:21-24](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#021)<span
id="xxiv.vi-p15.2"></span>, where God says, “And if ye walk contrary
unto \[*or* perversely with\] me, then will I also walk contrary unto
\[*or* perversely or roughly, or at random against\] you;” as if he had
said, that their obstinacy and stubbornness would make him on his part
forget his accustomed forbearance and gentleness, and cast himself
recklessly or at random against them.  <span
id="fr_420"></span>[421](#fn_420) We see, then, what the stubborn at
length gain by their obduracy; it is this, that God hardens himself
still more to break them in pieces, and if they are of stone, he causes
them to feel that he has the hardness of iron. Another reason which we
may assign for this manner of speaking is, that the Holy Spirit, in
addressing his discourse to the wicked, commonly speaks according to
their own apprehension. When God thunders in good earnest upon them,
they transform him, through the blind terrors which seize upon them,
into a character different from his real one, inasmuch as they conceive
of nothing as entering into it but barbarity, cruelty, and ferocity. We
now see the reason why David does not simply attribute to God the name
and office of judge, but introduces him as armed with impetuous
violence, for resisting and overcoming the perverse, according as it is
said in the common proverb, A tough knot requires a stout wedge.

<span id="xxiv.vi-p17"></span><span id="xxiv.vi-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.vi-p18"></span>**27.** *For thou wilt save the afflicted
people.* This verse contains the correction of a mistake into which we
are very ready to fall. As experience shows that the merciful are often
severely afflicted, and the sincere involved in troubles of a very
distressing description, to prevent any from regarding the statement as
false that God deals mercifully with the merciful, David admonishes us
that we must wait for the end; for although God does not immediately run
to succor the good, yet, after having exercised their patience for a
time, he lifts them up from the dust on which they lay prostrate, and
brings effectual relief to them, even when they were in despair. Whence
it follows, that we ought only to judge by the issue how God shows
himself merciful towards the merciful and pure towards the pure. If he
did not keep his people in suspense and waiting long for deliverance
from affliction, it could not be said that it is his prerogative to save
the afflicted. And it is no small consolation, in the midst of our
adversities, to know that God purposely delays to communicate his
assistance, which otherwise is quite prepared, that we may experience
his goodness in saving us after we have been afflicted and brought low.
 <span id="fr_421"></span>[422](#fn_421) Nor ought we to reckon the
wrongs which are inflicted upon us too bitter, since they excite God to
show towards us his favor which bringeth salvation. As to the second
clause of this verse, the reading is a little different in the song in
the 2nd Book of Samuel, where the words are, *Thine eyes are against the
proud to cast them down.* But this difference makes no alteration as to
the meaning, except that the Holy Spirit there more plainly threatens
the proud, that, as God is on the watch to overthrow them, it is
impossible for them to escape destruction. The substance of both places
is this: The more the ungodly indulge in gratifying their own
inclinations, without any fear of danger, and the more proudly they
despise the afflicted poor who are under their feet, they are so much
the nearer to destruction. Whenever, therefore, they cruelly break forth
against us with mockery and contempt, let us know that there is nothing
which prevents God from repelling their headstrong pertinacity, but that
their pride is not yet come to its height.

<span id="xxiv.vii"></span>

<span id="xxiv.vii-p1"></span><span id="xxiv.vii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
18:28-32](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#028)<span
id="xxiv.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.vii-p2"></span>**28.** For thou shalt light my lamp, O
Jehovah; my God shall enlighten my darkness. **29.** For by thee  <span
id="fr_422"></span>[423](#fn_422) I shall break through the wedge  <span
id="fr_423"></span>[424](#fn_423) of a troop, and by my God I shall leap
over a wall. **30.** The way of God is perfect; the word of Jehovah is
refined, \[or purified;\] he is a shield to all those who trust in him.
**31.** For who is God besides Jehovah? and who is strong except our
God? **32.** It is God who hath girded me with strength, and hath made
my way perfect.

<span id="xxiv.vii-p5"></span> 

<span id="xxiv.vii-p6"></span><span id="xxiv.vii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.vii-p7"></span>**28.** *For thou shalt light my lamp.* In
the song in Samuel, the form of the expression is somewhat more precise;
for there it is said not that God lights our lamp, but that he himself
is our lamp. The meaning, however, comes to the same thing, namely, that
it was by the grace of God that David, who had been plunged in darkness,
returned to the light. David does not simply give thanks to God for
having lighted up a lamp before him, but also for having converted his
darkness into light. He, therefore, acknowledges that he had been
reduced to such extremity of distress, that he was like a man whose
condition was forlorn and hopeless; for he compares the confused and
perplexed state of his affairs to darkness. This, indeed, by the
transference of material things to things spiritual, may be applied to
the spiritual illumination of the understanding; but, at the same time,
we must attend to the subject of which David treats, that we may not
depart from the true and proper meaning. Now, as he acknowledges that he
had been restored to prosperity by the favor of God, which was to him,
as it were, a life-giving light, let us, after his example, regard it as
certain that we will never have the comfort of seeing our adversities
brought to an end, unless God disperse the darkness which envelops us,
and restore to us the light of joy. Let it not, however, be distressing
to us to walk through darkness, provided God is pleased to perform to us
the office of a lamp. In the following verse, David ascribes his
victories to God, declaring that, under his conduct, he *had broken
through the wedges or phalanxes* of his enemies, and had taken by storm
their fortified cities.  <span id="fr_424"></span>[425](#fn_424) Thus we
see that, although he was a valiant warrior, and skilled in arms, he
arrogates nothing to himself. As to the tenses of the verbs, we would
inform our readers once for all, that in this psalm David uses the past
and the future tenses indifferently, not only because he comprehends
different histories, but also because he presents to himself the things
of which he speaks as if they were still taking place before his eyes,
and, at the same time, describes a continued course of the grace of God
towards him.

<span id="xxiv.vii-p9"></span><span id="xxiv.vii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.vii-p10"></span>**30.** *The way of God is perfect.* The
phrase, *The way of God,* is not here taken for his revealed will, but
for his method of dealing towards his people. The meaning, therefore,
is, that God never disappoints or deceives his servants, nor forsakes
them in the time of need, (as may be the case with men who do not aid
their dependants, except in so far as it contributes to their own
particular advantage,) but faithfully defends and maintains those whom
he has once taken under his protection. But we will never have any
nearness to God, unless he first come near to us by his word; and, for
this reason, David, after having asserted that God aids his people in
good earnest, adds, at the same time, that *his word is purified.* Let
us, therefore, rest assured that God will actually show himself upright
towards us, seeing he has promised to be the guardian and protector of
our welfare, and his promise is certain and infallible truth. That by
*the word* we are not here to understand the commandments, but the
promises of God, is easily gathered from the following clause, where it
is said, *He is a shield to all those who trust in him* It seems,
indeed, a common commendation to say, that the word of God is pure, and
without any mixture of fraud and deceit, like silver which is well
refined and purified from all its dross. But our unbelief is the cause
why God, so to speak, is constrained to use such a similitude, for the
purpose of commending and leading us to form exalted conceptions of the
steadfastness and certainty of his promises; for whenever the issue does
not answer our expectation, there is nothing to which we are naturally
more prone than forthwith to begin to entertain unhallowed and
distrustful thoughts of the word of God. For a farther explanation of
these words, we would refer our readers to our remarks on <span
id="xxiv.vii-p10.2"></span>[Psalm
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#006)<span id="xxiv.vii-p10.2"></span>.

<span id="xxiv.vii-p11"></span><span id="xxiv.vii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.vii-p12"></span>**31.** *For who is God besides Jehovah?*
David here, deriding the foolish inventions of men, who, according to
their own fancy, make for themselves tutelary gods,  <span
id="fr_425"></span>[426](#fn_425) confirms what I have said before, that
he never undertook any thing but by the authority and command of God. If
he had passed beyond the limits of his calling, he could not with such
confidence have said that God was on his side. Besides, although in
these words he opposes to the true God all the false gods invented by
men, his purpose, at the same time, is to overthrow all the vain hopes
in which the world is wrapped up, and by which it is carried about, and
prevented from resting in God. The question which David here treats of
is not the bare title and name of *God,* but he declares that whatever
assistance we need we should seek it from God, and from no other
quarter, because he alone is endued with power: *Who is strong except
our God?* We should, however, attend to the design of David, which I
have first adverted to, namely, that, by confidently representing God as
opposed to all his enemies, and as the leader, under whose standard he
had valiantly fought against them, he means to affirm that he had
attempted nothing according to his own fancy, or with an evil and
condemning conscience.

<span id="xxiv.vii-p14"></span><span id="xxiv.vii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.vii-p15"></span>**32.** *It is God who hath girded.* This
is a metaphor taken either from the belt or girdle of a warrior, or from
the reins, in which the Scripture sometimes places a man’s vigor or
strength. It is, therefore, as if he had said, I, who would otherwise
have been feeble and effeminate, have been made strong and courageous by
the power of God. He afterwards speaks of the success itself with which
God had favored him; for it would not be enough for persons to have
prompt and active courage, nor even to excel in strength, if their
undertakings were not at the same time crowned with a prosperous issue.
Irreligious men imagine that this proceeds from their own prudence, or
from fortune; but David ascribes it to God alone: *It is God who hath
made my way perfect.* The word *way* is here to be understood of the
course of our actions, and the language implies, that whatever David
undertook, God, by his blessing, directed it to a successful issue.

<span id="xxiv.viii"></span>

<span id="xxiv.viii-p1"></span><span id="xxiv.viii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
18:33-36](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#033)<span
id="xxiv.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.viii-p2"></span>**33.** Making my feet like hinds’  <span
id="fr_426"></span>[427](#fn_426) feet, and he hath set me upon my high
places. **34.** Teaching my hands to war: and a bow of steel  <span
id="fr_427"></span>[428](#fn_427) will be broken by my arms. **35.**
Thou hast also given me the shield of thy salvation; and thy right hand
hath holden me up, and thy clemency hath increased me. **36.** Thou hast
enlarged my steps under me, and my feet have not staggered.

<span id="xxiv.viii-p5"></span> 

<span id="xxiv.viii-p6"></span><span id="xxiv.viii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.viii-p7"></span>David, having taken many strongholds
which, on account of their steep and difficult access, were believed to
be impregnable, extols the grace of God in this particular. When he says
that God had given him feet like *hinds’ feet,* he means that he had
given him unusual swiftness, and such as does not naturally belong to
men. The sense, therefore, is, that he had been aided by God in an
extraordinary manner, so that like a roe he climbed with amazing speed
over inaccessible rocks. He calls the strongholds, which, as conqueror,
he had obtained by right of war, *his high places;* for he could justly
boast that he took possession of nothing which belonged to another man,
inasmuch as he knew that he had been called to occupy these fortresses
by God. When he says that *his hands* had been taught and framed *to
war,* he confesses that he had not acquired his dexterity in fighting by
his own skill, nor by exercise and experience, but had obtained it as a
gift through the singular goodness of God. It is true in general, that
strength and skill in war proceed only from a secret virtue communicated
by God; but David immediately after shows that he had been furnished
with greater strength for carrying on his wars than what men commonly
possess, inasmuch as his arms were sufficiently strong *to break even
bows of brass in pieces* True, he had by nature a vigorous and powerful
bodily frame; but the Scripture describes him as a man of low stature,
and the similitude itself which he here uses implies something
surpassing the natural strength of man. In the following verse, he
declares that it was by the grace of God alone that he had escaped, and
been kept in perfect safety: *Thou hast also given me the shield of thy
salvation.* By the phrase, *the shield of God’s salvation,* he
intimates, that if God had not wonderfully preserved him, he would have
been exposed unprotected to many deadly wounds; and thus God’s shield of
salvation is tacitly opposed to all the coverings and armor with which
he had been provided. He again ascribes his safety to the free goodness
of God as its cause, which he says *had increased him,* or more and more
carried him forward in the path of honor and success; for, by the word
*increase,* he means a continuation and an unintermitted and ever
growing augmentation of the tokens of the divine favor towards him.

<span id="xxiv.viii-p8"></span><span id="xxiv.viii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.viii-p9"></span>*By the enlargement of his steps,* he
intimates that God had opened up to him an even and an accommodating
pathway through places to which there was before no means of access; for
there is in the words an implied contrast between a large and spacious
place and a narrow spot, out of which a person cannot move his foot. The
meaning is, that when David was reduced to the greatest distress, and
saw no way of escape, God had graciously brought him out of his straits
and difficulties. This is a lesson which may be highly useful for
correcting our distrust. Unless we see before us a beautiful and
pleasant plain, in which the flesh may freely enjoy itself, we tremble
as if the earth would sink under our feet. Let us, therefore, remember,
that the office of enlarging our ways and making them level belongs to
God, and is here justly ascribed to him. In short, the Psalmist subjoins
the effect of this instance of the grace of God towards him, namely,
that *his feet had not staggered* or *slipped;* in other words, no
resistance, adversity, or calamity, which had befallen him, had been
able to deprive him of courage or cast him into despair.

<span id="xxiv.ix"></span>

<span id="xxiv.ix-p1"></span><span id="xxiv.ix-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
18:37-40](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#037)<span
id="xxiv.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.ix-p2"></span>**37.** I will pursue my enemies, and will
overtake them; nor will I return till I have consumed them. **38.** I
have afflicted \[or smitten\] them, so that they were not able to rise;
they have fallen under my feet. **39.** Thou hast girded me with
strength  <span id="fr_428"></span>[429](#fn_428) for the war; thou hast
bowed down my enemies under me. **40.** And thou hast given me the neck
of my enemies, and those who hated me I have destroyed.  <span
id="fr_429"></span>[430](#fn_429)

<span id="xxiv.ix-p5"></span> 

<span id="xxiv.ix-p6"></span><span id="xxiv.ix-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.ix-p7"></span>The point on which David insists so much
is, that of showing from the effect or issue, that all his victories
were to be traced to the favor of God; and from this it follows that his
cause was good and just. God, no doubt, sometimes grants successes even
to the ungodly and wicked; but he at length shows by the issue, that he
was all the while opposed to them and their enemy. It is his servants
alone who experience such tokens of his favor as he shewed towards
David, and he intends by these to testify that they are approved and
accepted by him. We are apt to think that David here speaks too much
after the manner of a soldier, in declaring that he will not cease from
the work of slaughter until he has destroyed all his enemies; or rather
that he has forgotten the gentleness and meekness which ought to shine
in all true believers, and in which they should resemble their heavenly
Father; but as he attempted nothing without the command of God, and as
his affections were governed and regulated by the Holy Spirit, we may be
assured that these are not the words of a man who was cruel, and who
took pleasure in shedding blood, but of a man who faithfully executed
the judgment which God had committed to him. And, indeed, we know that
he was so distinguished for gentleness of disposition as to abhor the
shedding of even a single drop of blood, except in so far as duty and
the necessity of his office required. We must, therefore, take into
consideration David’s vocation, and also his pure zeal, which was free
from all perturbation of the flesh. Moreover, it should be particularly
attended to that the Psalmist here calls those his *enemies* whose
indomitable and infatuated obstinacy merited and called forth such
vengeance from God. As he represented the person of Christ, he inflicted
the punishment of death only on those who were so inflexible that they
could not be reduced to order by the exercise of a mild and humane
authority; and this of itself shows, that there was nothing in which he
more delighted than to pardon those who repented and reformed
themselves. He thus resembled Christ, who gently allures all men to
repentance, but breaks in pieces, with his iron rod, those who
obstinately resist him to the last. The sum of these verses is, that
David, as he fought under the authority of God, being chosen king by
him, and engaging in no undertaking without his warrant, was assisted by
him, and rendered invincible against the assaults of all his enemies,
and enabled even to discomfit vast and very powerful armies. Farther,
let us remember, that under this type there is shadowed forth the
invincible character and condition of the kingdom of Christ, who,
trusting to, and sustained by, the power of God, overthrows and destroys
his enemies, — who, in every encounter, uniformly comes off victorious,
— and who continues king in spite of all the resistance which the world
makes to his authority and power. And as the victories secured to him
involve a security of similar victories to us, it follows that there is
here promised us an impregnable defense against all the efforts of
Satan, all the machinations of sin, and all the temptations of the
flesh. Although, therefore, Christ can only obtain a tranquil kingdom by
fighting, let us not on that account be troubled, but let it be enough
to satisfy us, that the hand of God is always ready to be stretched
forth for its preservation. David was, for a time, a fugitive, so that
it was with difficulty he could save his life, by taking shelter in the
dens of wild beasts; but God, at length, made his enemies turn their
backs, and not only put them to flight, but also delivered them over to
him, that he might pursue and utterly discomfit them. In like manner,
our enemies for a time may be, as it were, just ready to put the knife
to our throat  <span id="fr_430"></span>[431](#fn_430) to destroy us,
but God, at length, will make them not only to flee before us, but also
to perish in our presence, as they deserve. At the same time, let us
remember what kind of warfare it is to which God is calling us, against
what kind of persons he will have us to contend, and with what armor he
furnishes us, that it may suffice us to have the devil, the flesh, and
sin overthrown and placed under our feet by his spiritual power. With
respect to those to whom he has given the power of the sword, he will
also defend them, and not suffer them to be unrighteously opposed,
provided they reign under Christ, and acknowledge him as their head. As
to the words, interpreters almost unanimously render the beginning of
the 40th verse, *My* *enemies have turned the back,* a phrase of the
same import as, *They have been put to flight;* but as the Hebrew word
<span id="xxiv.ix-p8.2"></span>ערף, *oreph,* properly signifies *the
head or neck,* we may very suitably view the words as meaning that God
gave David the neck of his enemies, inasmuch as he delivered them into
his hands to be slain.

<span id="xxiv.x"></span>

<span id="xxiv.x-p1"></span><span id="xxiv.x-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
18:41-45](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#041)<span id="xxiv.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.x-p2"></span>**41.** They shall cry, but there shall be
no savior for them; even unto Jehovah, but he shall not answer them.
**42.** And I will beat \[or grind\] them small as the dust which is
driven by the wind;  <span id="fr_431"></span>[432](#fn_431) as the mire
of the streets I will tread them under foot. **43.** Thou shalt deliver
me from the contentions of the people; thou shalt make me the head of
the nations; a people whom I have not known shall serve me. **44.** At
the hearing of the ear,  <span id="fr_432"></span>[433](#fn_432) they
shall obey me; the children of strangers  <span
id="fr_433"></span>[434](#fn_433) shall lie to me.  <span
id="fr_434"></span>[435](#fn_434) **45.** The children of strangers
shall lose their courage, and tremble out of their places of
concealment.

<span id="xxiv.x-p7"></span> 

<span id="xxiv.x-p8"></span><span id="xxiv.x-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.x-p9"></span>**41.** *They shall cry, etc.* The change of
the tense in the verb from the past to the future does not break the
continuity of the narration; and, therefore, the words should be
explained thus: Although they cried to God, yet their prayers were
rejected by him. He pursues the same subject which it was his object to
illustrate before, namely, that it was at length manifest from the issue
that his enemies falsely boasted of having the support and countenance
of God, who showed that he had turned away from them. It is true, that
when their affairs continued to go on prosperously, they sometimes
received such applause and commendation, that it was commonly believed
that God was favorable to them, while, at the same time he seemed to be
opposed to David, who although he cried night and day to him, found it
of no avail. But after God had sufficiently tried the patience of his
servant, he cast them down, and disappointed them of their vain hope;
yea, rather he would not deign to hear their prayers. We now perceive
the design of David in these words. As the ungodly had long wickedly
abused the name of God, by pretending that he favored their unjust
proceedings, the Psalmist derides their vain boasting, in which they
were completely disappointed. It is to be observed, that he here speaks
of hypocrites, who never call upon God in sincerity and truth. For this
promise shall never fail,

<span id="xxiv.x-p10"></span>“The Lord is nigh unto all them that call
upon him, to all that call upon him in truth,” (<span
id="xxiv.x-p10.1"></span>[Ps
145:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#018)<span
id="xxiv.x-p10.1"></span>.)

<span id="xxiv.x-p11"></span>David does not, therefore, say that his
enemies were repulsed when they had recourse to God with sincere
affection of heart, but only when, with their accustomed effrontery,
they thought that God was, so to speak, bound to conduct and advance
their wicked enterprises. When the ungodly, in the extremity of their
distress, pour forth prayers, and when, cast down with fear, and
trembling with the dread of impending evils, they show an appearance of
humility, they, notwithstanding, do not change their purpose so as truly
to repent and amend the evil of their ways. Besides, instead of being
influenced by faith, they are actuated by presumption and hardness of
heart, or they pour forth their complaints in doubt, rather for the
purpose of murmuring against God, than of familiarly and confidently
placing their trust in him. from this passage we may gather a profitable
warning, namely, that all who treat the afflicted poor with cruel
mockery, and who proudly thrust back those who come to them as humble
suppliants, will experience that God is deaf to their prayers. We are
farther taught by the following verse, that after God has cast off the
ungodly, he leaves them to be treated with every kind of indignity, and
gives them up to be trampled under foot, as *the mire of the streets*.
He not only declares, that when the proud and the cruel cry to him in
their affliction, he will shut his ears against their cry; but he also
threatens, that, in the course of his retributive providence, they shall
be treated in the same manner in which they treat others.

<span id="xxiv.x-p12"></span><span id="xxiv.x-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.x-p13"></span>**43.** *Thou shalt deliver me from the
contentions of the people.* David states, in a few words, that he had
experienced the assistance of God in all variety of ways. He was in
great danger from the tumults which sometimes arose among his own
subjects, if God had not wonderfully allayed them, and subdued the
fierceness of the people. It also happened, contrary to the general
expectation, that David, as is stated in the second clause of the verse,
was victorious far and wide, and overthrew the neighboring nations who
had a little before discomfited all Israel by their forces. It was an
astonishing renovation of things, when he not only suddenly restored to
their former estate the people of Israel, who had been greatly reduced
by defeat and slaughter, but also made his tributaries the neighboring
nations, with whom before, on account of their hostility to the nation
of Israel, it was impossible to live in peace. It would have been much
to see the kingdom, after having sustained so grievous a calamity, still
surviving, and after having again collected strength recovering its
former state; but God, contrary to all expectation, conferred upon the
people of Israel more than this; he enabled them even to subdue those
who before had been their conquerors. David makes mention of both these;
he tells us, in the first place, that when the people rose up in tumult
against him, it was none other but God who stilled these commotions
which took place within the kingdom; and, in the second place, that it
was under the authority, and by the conduct and power of God, that
powerful nations were subjected to him, and that the limits of the
kingdom, which, in the time of Saul, had been weak and half broken, were
greatly enlarged. Hence it is evident that David was assisted by God,
not less with respect to his domestic affairs, that is to say, within
his own kingdom, than against foreign enemies. As the kingdom of David
was a type under which the Holy Spirit intended to shadow forth to us
the kingdom of Christ, let us remember that, both in erecting and
preserving it, it is necessary for God not only to stretch forth his arm
and fight against avowed enemies, who from without rise up against him,
but also to repress the tumults and strifes which may take place within
the Church. This was clearly shown in the person of Christ from the
beginning. In the first place, he met with much opposition from the
infatuated obstinacy of those of his own nation. In the next place, the
experience of all ages shows that the dissensions and strifes with which
hypocrites rend and mangle the Church, are not less hurtful in
undermining the kingdom of Christ, (if God do not interpose his hand to
prevent their injurious effects,) than the violent efforts of his
enemies. Accordingly God, to advance and maintain the kingdom of his own
Son, not only overthrows before him external enemies, but also delivers
him from domestic contentions; that is to say, from those within his
kingdom, which is the Church.  <span id="fr_435"></span>[436](#fn_435)
In the song in 2nd Samuel, instead of these words, *Thou hast made me
the head of the nations,* the word employed is <span
id="xxiv.x-p14.2"></span>תשמרני*, tishmereni,* which signifies *to keep*
or g*uard,* and is therefore to be understood in this sense, that David
will be securely, and for a long time, maintained in possession of the
kingdom. He knew how difficult it is to keep under discipline and
subjection those who have not been accustomed to the yoke; and,
accordingly, nothing is of more frequent occurrence than for kingdoms
which have been lately acquired by conquest to be shaken with fresh
commotions. But David, in the song in Samuel, declares that God, having
elevated him to such a high degree of power as to make him the head of
the nations, will also maintain him in the possession of the sovereignty
he had been pleased to confer upon him.

<span id="xxiv.x-p15"></span>*A people whom I have not known shall serve
me.* The whole of this passage strongly confirms what I have just now
touched upon, that the statements here made are not to be restricted to
the person of David, but contain a prophecy respecting the kingdom of
Christ which was to come. David, it is true, might have boasted that
nations, with whose manners and dispositions he was only very
imperfectly acquainted, were subject to him; but it is nevertheless
certain, that none of the nations which he conquered were altogether
unknown to him, nor removed at so great a distance as to render it
difficult for him to acquire some knowledge of them. The conquests of
David, therefore, and the submission of the people to him, were only an
obscure figure in which God has exhibited to us some faint
representation of the boundless dominion of his own Son, whose kingdom
extends

<span id="xxiv.x-p16"></span>“from the rising of the sun, even unto the
going down of the same,”  
(<span id="xxiv.x-p16.2"></span>[Mal
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#011)<span id="xxiv.x-p16.2"></span>,)

<span id="xxiv.x-p17"></span>and comprehends the whole world.

<span id="xxiv.x-p18"></span><span id="xxiv.x-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.x-p19"></span>**44.** *At the simple fame of my name they
shall obey me.* This is of the same import with the last clause of the
preceding verse. Although David, by his victories, had acquired such
reputation and renown, that many laid down their arms and came
voluntarily to surrender themselves to him; yet, as they also had been
subdued through the dread of the power of his arms, which they saw their
neighbors had experienced to their smart, it cannot be said, properly
speaking, that at the simple fame of the name of David they submitted
themselves to him. This applies more truly to the person of Christ, who,
by means of his word, subdues the world to himself, and, at the simple
hearing of his name, makes those obedient to him who before had been
rebels against him. As David was intended to be a type of Christ, God
subjected to his authority distant nations, and such as before had been
unknown to Israel in so far as familiar intercourse was concerned. But
that was only a prelude, and, as it were, preparatory to the dominion
promised to Christ, the boundaries of which must be extended to the
uttermost ends of the earth. In like manner, David had acquired to
himself so great a name by arms and warlike prowess, that many of his
enemies, subdued by fear, submitted themselves to him. And in this God
exhibited a type of the conquest which Christ would make of the
Gentiles, who, by the preaching of the Gospel alone, were subdued, and
brought voluntarily to submit to his dominion; for the obedience of
faith in which the dominion of Christ is founded “cometh by hearing,”
(<span id="xxiv.x-p19.1"></span>[Ro
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#017)<span id="xxiv.x-p19.1"></span>.)

<span id="xxiv.x-p20"></span>*The children of strangers shall lie to
me.* Here there is described what commonly happens in new dominions
acquired by conquest, namely, that those who have been vanquished pay
homage with great reverence to their conqueror; but it is by a reigned
and forced humility. They obey in a slavish manner, and not willingly or
cheerfully. This is evidently the sense. Some interpreters, indeed, give
a different explanation of the word *lie,* viewing David as meaning by
it that his enemies had either been disappointed in their expectation,
or that, in order to escape the punishment which they were afraid he
might inflict upon them, they had lied in declaring that they had never
devised any thing hostile against him; but it appears to me, that this
does not sufficiently express what David intended. In my opinion,
therefore, the words *to lie* are here to be understood generally as in
other places, for *to be humbled after a slavish manner.* The Hebrew
word <span id="xxiv.x-p20.2"></span>כהש, *cachash,* here used, which
signifies *to lie,* is sometimes to be understood metaphorically for *to
be humbled, to submit to, to take upon one’s self the yoke of
subjection;*  <span id="fr_436"></span>[437](#fn_436) but still in a
feigned and servile manner. Those whom he terms the *children of the
stranger,* or *of strangers,* are the nations who did not belong to the
people of Israel, but who, previous to their being conquered by him,
formed a distinct and an independent community by themselves. This also
we see fulfilled in Christ, to whom many come with apparent humility;
not, however, with true affection, but with a double and false heart,
whom, on that account, the Holy Spirit fitly terms *strangers.* They
are, indeed, mingled among the chosen people, but they are not united to
the same body with them by a true faith, and, therefore, ought not to be
accounted children of the Church. It is very true that all the Gentiles,
when in the beginning they were called into the Church, were strangers;
but when they began to entertain new feelings and new affections towards
Christ, they who before were “strangers and foreigners” became

<span id="xxiv.x-p22"></span>“fellow-citizens with the saints, and of
the household of God,” (<span id="xxiv.x-p22.1"></span>[Eph
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#019)<span id="xxiv.x-p22.1"></span>.)

<span id="xxiv.x-p23"></span><span id="xxiv.x-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.x-p24"></span>What is added immediately after, (verse
45,) the *children of strangers shall fade away; they shall tremble*
 <span id="fr_437"></span>[438](#fn_437) *from within their places of
concealment,* serves to place, in a still more striking light, the great
fame and formidable name which we have said David had acquired. It is no
ordinary sign of reverence when those who are protected in
hiding-places, and shut up within steep fortifications, are so stricken
with terror as to come forth of their own accord and surrender
themselves. As fear made the enemies of David to come forth from their
places of concealment, to meet him with submission, so the Gospel
strikes the unbelieving with such fear, as compels them to yield
obedience to Christ. Such is the power of prophecy, that is to say, the
preaching of the word, as Paul testifies in <span
id="xxiv.x-p28.2"></span>[1Co
14:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#024)<span id="xxiv.x-p28.2"></span>,
that, convincing the consciences of men, and making manifest the secrets
of their hearts, it causes those who before were rebels to prostrate
themselves with fear, and to give glory to God.

<span id="xxiv.xi"></span>

<span id="xxiv.xi-p1"></span><span id="xxiv.xi-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
18:46-50](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#046)<span
id="xxiv.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.xi-p2"></span>**46.** Let Jehovah live,  <span
id="fr_438"></span>[439](#fn_438) and blessed be my strength:  <span
id="fr_439"></span>[440](#fn_439) and let the God of my salvation be
exalted; **47.** The God who giveth me vengeance, and subdueth peoples
\[or nations\] under me. **48.** My deliverer from my enemies; yea, thou
hast lifted me up from those who had risen up against me; thou hast
delivered me from the man of violence. **49.** Therefore will I praise
thee, O Jehovah, among the heathen, and will sing to thy name. **50.**
He worketh great deliverances for his king, and showeth mercy to David,
his anointed, and to his seed for ever.

<span id="xxiv.xi-p5"></span> 

<span id="xxiv.xi-p6"></span><span id="xxiv.xi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.xi-p7"></span>**46.** *Let Jehovah live.* If it is
thought proper to adopt this reading, which is in the optative mood
expressing a wish *that God might live,* the manner of expression may
seem somewhat strange; but it may be alleged in defense of it, that it
is a metaphor borrowed from the custom of men, who not only use this
manner of speaking when they wish well to any one, but likewise utter it
with loud and applauding acclamation, when they intend to receive their
princes with due honor. According to this view, it would be an
expression in which praise is ascribed to God, and suitable for a
triumphal song.  <span id="fr_440"></span>[441](#fn_440) It may,
however, be very properly considered as a simple affirmation, in which
David declares that *God lives,* in other words, that he is endued with
sovereign power. Farther, the life which David attributes to God is not
to be restricted to the being or essence of God, but is rather to be
understood of the evidence of it deducible from his works, which
manifest to us that he liveth. Whenever he withdraws the working of his
power from before our eyes, the sense and cognisance of the truth, “God
liveth,” also evanishes from our minds. He is, therefore, said *to
live,* inasmuch as he shows, by evident proofs of his power, that it is
he who preserves and upholds the world. And as David had known, by
experience, this life of God, he celebrates it with praises and
thanksgiving. If we read the first clause in the present tense, *The
Lord liveth,* the copula *and,* which follows, has the force of an
inference; and, accordingly, the words should be resolved thus:—
*Jehovah liveth, and, therefore, blessed be my strength* The epithet,
*My strength,* and the other which occurs in verse 48th, *My deliverer,*
confirm what I have already stated, that God does not simply live in
himself, and in his secret place, but displays his vital energy in the
government of the whole world. The Hebrew word, <span
id="xxiv.xi-p8.2"></span>צורי, *tsuri,* which we have translated *my
strength,* is here to be understood in a transitive sense for *Him* who
bestows strength.

<span id="xxiv.xi-p9"></span><span id="xxiv.xi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.xi-p10"></span>**47.** *The God who giveth me vengeance.*
The Psalmist again attributes to God the victories which he had
obtained. As he could never have expected to obtain them unless he had
been confident that he would receive the aid of God, so now he
acknowledges God to be the sole author of them. That he may not seem
carelessly to bestow upon him, as it were, in passing, only a small
sprinkling of the praise of his victories, he repeats, in express terms,
that he had nothing but what God had given him. In the first place, he
acknowledges that power was given him from above, to enable him to
inflict on his enemies the punishment which they deserved. It may seem
at first sight strange that God should arm his own people to execute
vengeance; but as I have previously shown you, we ought always to
remember David’s vocation. He was not a private person, but being endued
with royal power and authority, the judgment which he executed was
enjoined upon him by God. If a man, upon receiving injury, breaks forth
to avenge himself, he usurps the office of God; and, therefore, it is
rash and impious for private individuals to retaliate the injuries which
have been inflicted upon them. With respect to kings and magistrates,
God, who declares that vengeance belongeth to him, in arming them with
the sword, constitutes them the ministers and executioners of his
vengeance. David, therefore, has put the word *vengeance* for the just
punishments which it was lawful for him to inflict by the commandment of
God, provided he was led under the influence of a zeal duly regulated by
the Holy Spirit, and not under the influence of the impetuosity of the
flesh. Unless this moderation is exemplified in performing the duties of
their calling, it is in vain for kings to boast that God has committed
to them the charge of taking vengeance; seeing it is not less
unwarrantable for a man to abuse, according to his own fancy and the
lust of the flesh, the sword which he is allowed to use, than to seize
it without the command of God. The Church militant, which is under the
standard of Christ, has no permission to execute vengeance, except
against those who obstinately refuse to be reclaimed. We are commanded
to endeavor to overcome our enemies by doing them good, and to pray for
their salvation. It becomes us, therefore, at the same time, to desire
that they may be brought to repentance, and to a right state of mind,
until it appear beyond all doubt that they are irrecoverably and
hopelessly depraved. In the meantime, in regard to vengeance, it must be
left to God, that we may not be carried headlong to execute it before
the time. David next concludes, from the perils and distresses in which
he had been involved, that if he had not been preserved by the hand of
God, he could not in any other way have escaped in safety: *My deliverer
from my enemies; yea, thou hast lifted me up from those who had risen up
against me.* The sense in which we are to understand *the lifting up* of
which he speaks is, that he was wonderfully raised up above the power
and malice of his enemies that he might not sink under their violence,
and that they might not be victorious over him.

<span id="xxiv.xi-p11"></span><span id="xxiv.xi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.xi-p12"></span>**49.** *Therefore will I praise thee, O
Jehovah!* In this verse he teaches us that the blessings God had
conferred upon him, of which he had spoken, are worthy of being
celebrated with extraordinary and unusual praises, that the fame of them
might reach even the heathen. There is in the words an implied contrast
between the ordinary worship of God which the faithful were then
accustomed to perform in the temple, and this thanksgiving of which
David speaks, which could not be confined within so narrow limits. The
meaning, therefore, is, O Lord, I will not only give thee thanks in the
assembly of thy people, according to the ritual which thou hast
appointed in thy law, but thy praises shall extend to a greater
distance, even as thy grace towards me is worthy of being recounted
through the whole world. Moreover, from these words we conclude that
this passage contains a prophecy concerning the kingdom of Christ, which
was to come. Unless the heathen had been allured into the fellowship of
the chosen people, and united into one body with them, to praise God
among them would have been to sing his praises among the deaf, which
would have been foolish work and lost labor. Accordingly, Paul very
properly and suitably proves from this text, that the calling of the
Gentiles was not a thing which happened by chance, or at a venture,
(<span id="xxiv.xi-p12.1"></span>[Ro
15:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#009)<span id="xxiv.xi-p12.1"></span>.)
We shall afterwards see in many places that the Church is appointed to
be the sacred dwelling-place for showing forth the praises of God. And,
therefore, the name of God could not have been rightly and profitably
celebrated elsewhere than in Judea, until the ears of the Gentiles were
opened, which was done when God adopted them, and called them to himself
by the gospel.

<span id="xxiv.xi-p13"></span><span id="xxiv.xi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.xi-p14"></span>**50.** *He worketh great deliverances,
etc* This concluding verse clearly shows why God had exercised such
goodness and liberality towards David, namely, because he had anointed
him to be king. By calling himself *God’s king,* David testifies that he
had not rashly rushed into that office, nor was thrust into it by
conspiracies and wicked intrigues, but, on the contrary, reigned by
lawful right, inasmuch as it was the will of God that he should be king.
This he proves by the ceremony of anointing; for God, in anointing him
by the hand of Samuel, had asserted his right to reign not less than if
he had visibly stretched forth his hand from heaven to place and
establish him on the royal throne. This election, he says, was confirmed
by a continued series of great deliverances; and from this it follows,
that all who enter on any course without having the call of God, are
chargeable with avowedly making war against him. At the same time, he
attributes these deliverances to the goodness of God as their cause, to
teach us, that that kingdom was founded purely and simply upon the good
pleasure of God. Farther, from the concluding sentence of the psalm, it
appears, as I have said before, that David does not here so much recount
by way of history the singular and varied instances of the grace of God
which he had personally experienced, as predict the everlasting duration
of his kingdom. And it is to be observed, that by the word *seed* we are
not to understand all his descendants indiscriminately; but we are to
consider it as particularly referring to that successor of David of whom
God had spoken in <span id="xxiv.xi-p14.1"></span>[2Sa
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#012)<span id="xxiv.xi-p14.1"></span>,
promising that he would be a father to him. As it had been predicted
that his kingdom would continue as long as the sun and the moon should
shine in the heavens, the prophecy must necessarily be viewed as
descending to him who was to be king not for a time, but for ever.
David, therefore, commends his seed to us, as honored by that remarkable
promise, which fully applies neither to Solomon nor to any other of his
successors, but to the only begotten Son of God; as the apostle, in his
Epistle to the Hebrews, (<span id="xxiv.xi-p14.2"></span>[Heb
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#004)<span id="xxiv.xi-p14.2"></span>,)
teaches us, that this is a dignity in which he excels the angels. In
conclusion, we shall then only duly profit in the study of this psalm,
when we are led by the contemplation of the shadow and type to him who
is the substance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_382"></span>[383](cc08023.htm#fr_382) <span
id="xxiv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xxiv-p5"></span> “<span id="xxiv-p5.1"></span>Car il ne faut
pas penser qu’il soit mis en dernier lieu, comme celuy dont il fust plus
fresche memoire, que de tons les autres.” — *Fr.* “It is not necessary
to suppose that Saul is put last, as he of whom he retained a fresher
remembrance than of all his other enemies.”

<span id="fn_383"></span>[384](cc08023.htm#fr_383) <span
id="xxiv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xxiv-p6"></span> “<span id="xxiv-p6.1"></span>Ou plustost ce
luy avoit este un bon port et retraite seure au milieu de tant
d’esclandres et calamitez estranges.” — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_384"></span>[385](cc08023.htm#fr_384) <span
id="xxiv.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.i-p3"></span> This is the rendering of the French
version. The word in the Hebrew text, which is <span
id="xxiv.i-p3.1"></span>רחם, *racham,* is very expressive. “<span
id="xxiv.i-p3.2"></span>רחם,” says *Cocceius*, “<span
id="xxiv.i-p3.3"></span>est intime ac medullitus cum motu omnium
viscerum diligere;” — “is to love with the deepest and strongest
affections of the heart, with all of all the bowels.” *Ainsworth* reads,
“I will dearly love thee;” *Street*, “I love thee exceedingly;” *Bishop
Horne*, “With all the yearnings of affection I will love thee, O
Jehovah;” and *Dr Adam Clarke*, “From my inmost bowels will I love thee,
O Lord.” The word, therefore, denotes the tenderness and intensity of
David’s emotions.

<span id="fn_385"></span>[386](cc08023.htm#fr_385) <span
id="xxiv.i-p3.4"></span>

<span id="xxiv.i-p4"></span> The Hebrew word literally means *a cliff*
or *crag;* and is a different word from the one which is translated
*rock* in the following part of this verse. “The word <span
id="xxiv.i-p4.1"></span>סלע, *sela,”* says *Dr Adam Clarke*, “signifies
those craggy precipices which afforded shelter to men and animals; where
the bees often made their nests, and whence honey was collected in great
abundance. ‘He made him to suck honey out of the rock,’ <span
id="xxiv.i-p4.2"></span>[De 32:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#013)<span
id="xxiv.i-p4.2"></span>.”

<span id="fn_386"></span>[387](cc08023.htm#fr_386) <span
id="xxiv.i-p4.3"></span>

<span id="xxiv.i-p5"></span> The *horn* is the emblem of strength and
power. The metaphor is taken from the bull and other powerful animals,
who put forth their strength principally by the use of their horns.

<span id="fn_387"></span>[388](cc08023.htm#fr_387) <span
id="xxiv.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.i-p13"></span> “<span id="xxiv.i-p13.1"></span>Comme
environnez de bons rempars de tous costez, tellement que mille morts,
quand autant il s’en presenteroit a eux, ne leur doyvent point faire
peur.” — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_388"></span>[389](cc08023.htm#fr_388) <span
id="xxiv.i-p13.2"></span>

<span id="xxiv.i-p14"></span> “<span id="xxiv.i-p14.1"></span>Et
pourtant David equippe yci les fideles de pied en cap comme on dit.” —
*Fr.* “David, therefore, here equips the faithful from head to foot, as
we say.”

<span id="fn_389"></span>[390](cc08023.htm#fr_389) <span
id="xxiv.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.ii-p3"></span> “<span id="xxiv.ii-p3.1"></span>Ou
brisemens. — *Fr. marg. “*Or contritions.”

<span id="fn_390"></span>[391](cc08023.htm#fr_390) <span
id="xxiv.ii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xxiv.ii-p4"></span> “<span id="xxiv.ii-p4.1"></span>Hebrews de
Belial.” — *Fr. marg.* “Hebrews of Belial.”

<span id="fn_391"></span>[392](cc08023.htm#fr_391) <span
id="xxiv.ii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xxiv.ii-p5"></span> “<span id="xxiv.ii-p5.1"></span>Ou de
corruption.” — *Fr.* *marg.* “Or of corruption.”

<span id="fn_392"></span>[393](cc08023.htm#fr_392) <span
id="xxiv.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.ii-p9"></span> The word in the Hebrew text <span
id="xxiv.ii-p9.1"></span>מהלל, *mehullal,* literally signifies *praise.*
The ancient versions view the word not as denoting that God is worthy to
be praised, which is the meaning attached to it in our English version,
but as referring to the Psalmist’s resolution to praise God. The
Septuagint reads, <span id="xxiv.ii-p9.2"></span>Αινων επικαλεσομαι
Κυριον *Kytov,* “Praising I will call upon the Lord.” The reading of the
Vulgate is the same, “<span id="xxiv.ii-p9.3"></span>Laudans invocabo.”
The Chaldee reads, “In a song or hymn I pour out prayers unto the Lord:”
and the Arabic. “I will praise the Lord, and call upon him.” This is
precisely the sense in which Calvin understands the words, “I will call
upon the praised Jehovah.”

<span id="fn_393"></span>[394](cc08023.htm#fr_393) <span
id="xxiv.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.ii-p14"></span> “Death is here personified under the
semblance of a mighty conqueror, who binds his vanquished foes in strong
fetters.” — *Walford*.

<span id="fn_394"></span>[395](cc08023.htm#fr_394) <span
id="xxiv.ii-p16.3"></span>

<span id="xxiv.ii-p17"></span> “<span id="xxiv.ii-p17.1"></span>חבל,
*chebel,”* says *Hammond*, “signifies two things, a cord, and a pang of
a woman’s travail, and which it signifies must be resolved still by the
context. Here, where it is joined with encompassing, it is most fitly to
be understood in the former sense, because ropes or cords are proper for
that turn, as for holding and keeping in when they are inclosed.” The
Chaldee understands the word in the other sense, and paraphrases the
clause thus: ”Distress hath compassed me as a woman in travail which
hath not strength to bring forth, and is in danger of death,” The
Septuagint adopts the same view, reading, “<span
id="xxiv.ii-p17.2"></span>ὠδινες θανατου, the pangs of death.”

<span id="fn_395"></span>[396](cc08023.htm#fr_395) <span
id="xxiv.ii-p17.4"></span>

<span id="xxiv.ii-p18"></span> *Cocceius* renders the words, “the waves
of death,” and he observes, that the words “waves’” explains the verb
“compassed me about.” Death sent its sorrows thick upon him one after
another, as the sea sends forth its waves, and with such violence that
he was ready to be overwhelmed. The word <span
id="xxiv.ii-p18.1"></span>משברי, *mishberey,* is applied both to the
breaking waves of the sea, (<span id="xxiv.ii-p18.2"></span>[Ps
42:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#007)<span id="xxiv.ii-p18.2"></span>.)
— *Ainsworth. Horsley* translates the phrase, “The breakers of death.”
“The metaphor,” says he, “is taken from those dangerous waves our
mariners call white breakers.”

<span id="fn_396"></span>[397](cc08023.htm#fr_396) <span
id="xxiv.ii-p18.4"></span>

<span id="xxiv.ii-p19"></span> *Jerome* doubtless derived the word from
<span id="xxiv.ii-p19.1"></span>בלי, *beli, not* or *without,* and <span
id="xxiv.ii-p19.2"></span>עול, *ol, a yoke,* and thus the term *Belial*
means those who shake off all restraint. Signifying to profit, or to
gain advantage in any respect.

<span id="fn_397"></span>[398](cc08023.htm#fr_397) <span
id="xxiv.ii-p19.5"></span>

<span id="xxiv.ii-p20"></span> Belial is a compound term, significant of
vileness and worthlessness.

<span id="fn_398"></span>[399](cc08023.htm#fr_398) <span
id="xxiv.ii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.ii-p21"></span> “The ‘floods of Belial’ intend large
bodies of men, who rush forward in impetuous torrents to overwhelm and
destroy whatever opposes them.” - *Walford.*

<span id="fn_399"></span>[400](cc08023.htm#fr_399) <span
id="xxiv.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.iii-p6"></span> “<span id="xxiv.iii-p6.1"></span>Il faut
necessa ement que les gens qui auparavant estoyent comme endormis et
stupides se resueillent et apprehendent qu’il y a un Dieu.” — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_400"></span>[401](cc08023.htm#fr_400) <span
id="xxiv.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.iii-p12"></span> “<span id="xxiv.iii-p12.1"></span>Tout
ainsi que s’il jettoit une fureur par les narines.” — *Fr.* “As if he
cast forth fury from his nostrils.”

<span id="fn_401"></span>[402](cc08023.htm#fr_401) <span
id="xxiv.iii-p12.3"></span>

<span id="xxiv.iii-p13"></span> “<span id="xxiv.iii-p13.1"></span>C’est
comme s’il tendoit un voile espes entre luy et les hommes, afin de leur
oster le regard de sa face.” — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_402"></span>[403](cc08023.htm#fr_402) <span
id="xxiv.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.iv-p3"></span> In our English version it is, *He shot out
lightnings.* The Hebrew word <span id="xxiv.iv-p3.1"></span>רבב,
*rabab,* signifies both *to multiply* and *to shoot.* As the shooting of
arrows is mentioned in the first clause of the verse, it may be presumed
that it is the shooting of lightnings which is meant in the second
clause, arrows and lightnings being contrasted. The reading of the
Septuagint, Chaldee, Syriac, Vulgate, Arabic, and Ethiopic versions,
however, is the same as that of Calvin, — *He multiplied lightnings.*

<span id="fn_403"></span>[404](cc08023.htm#fr_403) <span
id="xxiv.iv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xxiv.iv-p4"></span> “<span id="xxiv.iv-p4.1"></span>Ou de ton
ire.” — *Fr.* *marg.* “Or at thy wrath.”

<span id="fn_404"></span>[405](cc08023.htm#fr_404) <span
id="xxiv.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.iv-p10"></span> “<span id="xxiv.iv-p10.1"></span>De ce
combat et aussi du bruit des nuees allans l’une contre l’autre, se fait
un son.” — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_405"></span>[406](cc08023.htm#fr_405) <span
id="xxiv.iv-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xxiv.iv-p11"></span> “<span id="xxiv.iv-p11.1"></span>Et
tardifs a reconnaistre la vertu de Dieu.” — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_406"></span>[407](cc08023.htm#fr_406) <span
id="xxiv.iv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.iv-p14"></span> “<span id="xxiv.iv-p14.1"></span>En usant
de ces hyperboles et similitudes qui semblent estranges et excessives ne
nous recite pas des fables et contes faits a plaisir a la fakon des
Poietes profanes.” — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_407"></span>[408](cc08023.htm#fr_407) <span
id="xxiv.iv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.iv-p17"></span> *Bishop Patrick* paraphrases the verse
thus:— “He delivered me first from that mighty giant, Goliath, and then
from Saul, whose power I was not able to withstand; and afterwards from
the Philistines and Syrians, and many other nations, whose forces were
far superior unto mine, and whose hatred instigated them to do all they
could to destroy me.”

<span id="fn_408"></span>[409](cc08023.htm#fr_408) <span
id="xxiv.iv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.iv-p20"></span> “They set their faces against me in the
day of my calamity,” — *Walford.*

<span id="fn_409"></span>[410](cc08023.htm#fr_409) <span
id="xxiv.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.v-p3"></span> “<span id="xxiv.v-p3.1"></span>Envers ou
devant luy.” — *Note, Fr. marg.* “Towards or before him.”

<span id="fn_410"></span>[411](cc08023.htm#fr_410) <span
id="xxiv.v-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.v-p7"></span> *Agonotheta.* Calvin alludes to the ancient
games and combats of Greece, the presidents of which were called
*Agonothetee.*

<span id="fn_411"></span>[412](cc08023.htm#fr_411) <span
id="xxiv.v-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.v-p8"></span> *ArMeta.* Those who exercised themselves
with the view of contending for the prizes in the Grecian games and
combats were called *AtMetce.*

<span id="fn_412"></span>[413](cc08023.htm#fr_412) <span
id="xxiv.v-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.v-p9"></span> “<span id="xxiv.v-p9.1"></span>Sans que
nous ne creature quelconque luy en donnions” occasion. — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_413"></span>[414](cc08023.htm#fr_413) <span
id="xxiv.v-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.v-p13"></span> “<span id="xxiv.v-p13.1"></span>Et que
bien legerement on semoit de luy de mauvais bruits.” — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_414"></span>[415](cc08023.htm#fr_414) <span
id="xxiv.vi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.vi-p3"></span> “<span id="xxiv.vi-p3.1"></span>Tu to
montreras debonnaire envers le debonnaire.” — *Fr.* “Towards the
merciful thou wilt show thyself merciful.”

<span id="fn_415"></span>[416](cc08023.htm#fr_415) <span
id="xxiv.vi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xxiv.vi-p4"></span> *“*<span
id="xxiv.vi-p4.1"></span>*Envers.”* — *Note, Fr. marg.* “That is,
towards.”

<span id="fn_416"></span>[417](cc08023.htm#fr_416) <span
id="xxiv.vi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xxiv.vi-p5"></span> Some read, *The humble people,* supposing
that, as the contrast is between them and *proud looks, humility* rather
than *suffering* is meant.

<span id="fn_417"></span>[418](cc08023.htm#fr_417) <span
id="xxiv.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.vi-p6"></span> This is the literal rendering of the
Hebrew text. “The meaning obviously is, that the haughty themselves
shall be humbled, however confident they may be.” — *French and
Skinner,*

<span id="fn_418"></span>[419](cc08023.htm#fr_418) <span
id="xxiv.vi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.vi-p10"></span> “<span id="xxiv.vi-p10.1"></span>Ils
sacrifient plustest a Fortune, et en font leur Dieu.” — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_419"></span>[420](cc08023.htm#fr_419) <span
id="xxiv.vi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.vi-p15"></span> “<span id="xxiv.vi-p15.1"></span>Qui
s’endorment en leurs vices sans rien craindre.” — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_420"></span>[421](cc08023.htm#fr_420) <span
id="xxiv.vi-p15.3"></span>

<span id="xxiv.vi-p16"></span> “<span id="xxiv.vi-p16.1"></span>Comme
s’il disoit que leur obstination et opiniastrete sera cause que luy de
son coste oubliant sa moderation et douceur accoustumee, se jettera le
tors et a travers contre eux.” — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_421"></span>[422](cc08023.htm#fr_421) <span
id="xxiv.vi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.vi-p19"></span> “<span id="xxiv.vi-p19.1"></span>Afin de
nous faire esprouver comment il sauve les affligez.” — Fr.

<span id="fn_422"></span>[423](cc08023.htm#fr_422) <span
id="xxiv.vii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.vii-p3"></span> “<span id="xxiv.vii-p3.1"></span>Par ta
vertu.” — *Note, Fr. marg.* “That is, by thy power.”

<span id="fn_423"></span>[424](cc08023.htm#fr_423) <span
id="xxiv.vii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xxiv.vii-p4"></span> <span id="xxiv.vii-p4.1"></span>*Cuneum*
A battalion or company of foot drawn up in the form of a wedge, the
better to break the enemies’ ranks.

<span id="fn_424"></span>[425](cc08023.htm#fr_424) <span
id="xxiv.vii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xxiv.vii-p8"></span> The last clause, *By my God have I leaped
over a wall,* is rendered by the Chaldee, “I will subdue fortified
towers.” *Hammond* renders it, “By my God I have taken a fort.” In
support of this view, he observes that the word <span
id="xxiv.vii-p8.1"></span>שור, *shur,* from <span
id="xxiv.vii-p8.2"></span>שור, *shor, to look,* signifies both *a wall,*
from which to observe the approach of the enemy, and *a watch-tower and
fort;* that if we take <span id="xxiv.vii-p8.3"></span>שור, *shur,* as
meaning a wall, the verb <span id="xxiv.vii-p8.4"></span>דלג, *dalag,*
will be rightly rendered to leap over; but if <span
id="xxiv.vii-p8.5"></span>שור, *shur,* means a fort, then the verb will
mean to seize on it suddenly, and will therefore be best translated *to
take it.*

<span id="fn_425"></span>[426](cc08023.htm#fr_425) <span
id="xxiv.vii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.vii-p13"></span> “<span id="xxiv.vii-p13.1"></span>Qui se
forgent a leur fantasie des dieux qui soyent leurs protecteurs et
patrons.” — *Fr.* “Who, according to their own fancy, make for
themselves gods to be their protectors and patrons.”

<span id="fn_426"></span>[427](cc08023.htm#fr_426) <span
id="xxiv.viii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.viii-p3"></span> “<span
id="xxiv.viii-p3.1"></span>Faisant, ascavoir, me donnant legerete de
pieds.” — *Note, Fr. marg.* “Making, namely, giving me swiftness of
feet.”

<span id="fn_427"></span>[428](cc08023.htm#fr_427) <span
id="xxiv.viii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xxiv.viii-p4"></span> “It should be *brass,* and not *steel.*
A bow of *steel,*” says *Dr Adam Clarke*, “is out of the question. In
the days of David, it is not likely that the method of making *steel*
was known. The method of making *brass* out of *copper* was known at a
very early period of the world; and the ancients had the art of
*hardening* it, so as to work it into the most efficient swords.”
*Horsley* reads, “Thou hast made my arms like a brazen bow.” This is
also the reading of the Septuagint, Vulgate, *Jerome*, and all the
versions. But the reading of Calvin, which is that of our English
version, seems preferable, and is more expressive. To bend a strong bow
was anciently considered a proof of great strength, much more to
compress it so as to break it. To bend a bow of *brass* is still more
expressive, and still more so to do it by the *arms* without requiring
the assistance of the foot, which was then usually employed in making
that effort.

<span id="fn_428"></span>[429](cc08023.htm#fr_428) <span
id="xxiv.ix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.ix-p3"></span> “To be *well girt* was to be *well armed*
in the Greek and Latin idioms, as well as in the Hebrew.” — *Dr*
*Geddes.*

<span id="fn_429"></span>[430](cc08023.htm#fr_429) <span
id="xxiv.ix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.ix-p4"></span> In the French version it is, “<span
id="xxiv.ix-p4.1"></span>Tu les as desfruits;” — “Thou hast destroyed
them.”

<span id="fn_430"></span>[431](cc08023.htm#fr_430) <span
id="xxiv.ix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.ix-p8"></span> “<span id="xxiv.ix-p8.1"></span>Comme tous
prests a nous mettre le cousteau sur la gorge.” — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_431"></span>[432](cc08023.htm#fr_431) <span
id="xxiv.x-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.x-p3"></span> “<span id="xxiv.x-p3.1"></span>Qui est
jette par le vent.” — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_432"></span>[433](cc08023.htm#fr_432) <span
id="xxiv.x-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xxiv.x-p4"></span> “<span id="xxiv.x-p4.1"></span>Si tost que
le bruit de mon nom viendra a leurs aureilles.” — *Note, Fr. marg.*
“That is, as soon as the fame of my name reaches their ears.”

<span id="fn_433"></span>[434](cc08023.htm#fr_433) <span
id="xxiv.x-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xxiv.x-p5"></span> “<span id="xxiv.x-p5.1"></span>Les peuples
estranges.” — *Note, Fr. marg*. “That is, strange peoples, or foreign
nations.”

<span id="fn_434"></span>[435](cc08023.htm#fr_434) <span
id="xxiv.x-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xxiv.x-p6"></span> “<span id="xxiv.x-p6.1"></span>Feront
semblant d’estre des miens s’humilians de crainte.” — *Note, Fr. marg.*
“That is, shall feign to be my servants, \[or submission to me,\]
humbling themselves through fear.”

<span id="fn_435"></span>[436](cc08023.htm#fr_435) <span
id="xxiv.x-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.x-p14"></span> “<span id="xxiv.x-p14.1"></span>C’est a
dire au dedans de son royaume qui est l’Eglise.” — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_436"></span>[437](cc08023.htm#fr_436) <span
id="xxiv.x-p20.3"></span>

<span id="xxiv.x-p21"></span> The Syriac version reads, “They shall
submit themselves to me;” meaning a forced, and so a feigned and
hypocritical subjection.

<span id="fn_437"></span>[438](cc08023.htm#fr_437) <span
id="xxiv.x-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.x-p25"></span> The Hebrew word <span
id="xxiv.x-p25.1"></span>חרג, *charag,* signifies both *to be moved* and
*to tremble,* and combining both ideas, *to move fearfully.* The last
appears to be the view which Calvin attaches to the word. “Fear shall
cause them to be afraid, and come forth of their secret holes and holds,
to seek pardon.” — *Note, Bassandyne’s Bible.* Walford reads,

<span id="xxiv.x-p26"></span>“The sons of the stranger lose their
strength;  
Through alarm they quit their strongholds.

<span id="xxiv.x-p27"></span>*Street* reads,

<span id="xxiv.x-p28"></span>“Foreign nations are confounded,  
and they shudder within their fortresses.”

<span id="fn_438"></span>[439](cc08023.htm#fr_438) <span
id="xxiv.xi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.xi-p3"></span> “<span id="xxiv.xi-p3.1"></span>Ou, le
Seigneur vit.” — *Fr.* *marg.* “Or, Jehovah lives.”

<span id="fn_439"></span>[440](cc08023.htm#fr_439) <span
id="xxiv.xi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xxiv.xi-p4"></span> “<span id="xxiv.xi-p4.1"></span>Celuy qui
me donne force.” — *Note, Fr. marg.* “That is, he who giveth me
strength.”

<span id="fn_440"></span>[441](cc08023.htm#fr_440) <span
id="xxiv.xi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.xi-p8"></span> “<span id="xxiv.xi-p8.1"></span>Ainsi ce
seroit un mot tendant a lour Dieu et convenable a un cantique de
triomphe.” — *Fr.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 19](cc08024)
