[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc08035)  [Next](cc08037) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 8: Psalms, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxxvii"></span>

<span id="xxxvii-p1"></span>PSALM 31.

<span id="xxxvii-p2"></span>David, having been delivered from some great
danger, or rather from many dangers, first relates the prayers which he
had offered up to God amidst the terrors of death. He then subjoins his
thanksgiving, which is no ordinary one; for he celebrates his
deliverance at great length, and exhorts all the saints to be of good
hope, as they had in him a most excellent and memorable example of God’s
goodness.

<span id="xxxvii-p3"></span>To the chief musician. A psalm of David.

<span id="xxxvii.i"></span>

<span id="xxxvii.i-p1"></span><span id="xxxvii.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
31:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#001)<span id="xxxvii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxxvii.i-p2"></span>**1.** In thee, O Jehovah! have I put my
trust, let me not be ashamed for ever: deliver me in thy righteousness.
**2.** Incline thine ear unto me, deliver me speedily; be unto me a
strong rock, a house of defense to save me. **3.** For thou art my rock
and my fortress: and for thy name’s sake thou wilt lead and guide me.
 <span id="fr_634"></span>[635](#fn_634) **4.** Pluck me out of the net
which they have hidden for me; for thou art my strength.

<span id="xxxvii.i-p4"></span> 

<span id="xxxvii.i-p5"></span><span id="xxxvii.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xxxvii.i-p6"></span>**1.** *In thee, O Jehovah! have I put my
trust.* Some are of opinion that this psalm was composed by David, after
he had most unexpectedly escaped out of the wilderness of Maon; to which
I do not object, although it is only a doubtful conjecture. Certainly he
celebrates one or more of the greatest of his dangers. In the
commencement he tells us what kind of prayer he offered in his agony and
distress; and its language breathes affection of the most ardent nature.
He takes it for a ground of hope that he trusted in the Lord, or
continued to trust in him; for the verb in the past tense seems to
denote a continued act. He held it as a principle, that the hope which
depends upon God cannot possibly be disappointed. Meanwhile, we see how
he brings forward nothing but faith alone; promising himself deliverance
only because he is persuaded that he will be saved by the help and favor
of God. But as this doctrine has been expounded already, and will yet
occur oftener than once, it is sufficient at present to have glanced at
it. Oh! that all of us would practice it in such a manner as that,
whenever we approach to God, we may be able with David to declare that
our prayers proceed from this source, namely, from a firm persuasion
that our safety depends on the power of God. The particle signifying
*for ever* may be explained in two ways. As God sometimes withdraws his
favor, the meaning may not unsuitably be, Although I am now deprived of
thy help, yet cast me not off utterly, or for evermore. Thus David,
wishing to arm himself with patience against his temptations, would make
a contrast between these two things, — being in distress for a time, and
remaining in a state of confusion.  <span
id="fr_635"></span>[636](#fn_635) But if any one choose rather to
understand his words in this way, “Whatever afflictions befall me, may
God be ready to help me, and ever and anon stretch forth his hand to me,
as the case requires,” I would not reject this meaning any more than the
other. David desires to be *delivered in the righteousness of God,*
because God displays his righteousness in performing his promise to his
servants. It is too much refinement of reasoning to assert that David
here betakes himself to the righteousness which God freely bestows on
his people, because his own righteousness by works was of no avail.
Still more out of place is the opinion of those who think that God
preserves the saints according to his righteousness; that is to say,
because having acted so meritoriously, justice requires that they should
obtain their reward. It is easy to see from the frequent use of the term
in The Psalms, that God’s righteousness means his faithfulness, in the
exercise of which he defends all his people who commit themselves to his
guardianship and protection. David, therefore, confirms his hope from
the consideration of the nature of God, who cannot deny himself, and who
always continues like himself.

<span id="xxxvii.i-p8"></span><span id="xxxvii.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxxvii.i-p9"></span>**2.** *incline thine ear unto me.* These
words express with how much ardor David’s soul was stimulated to pray.
He affects no splendid or ornate language, as rhetoricians are wont to
do; but only describes in suitable figures the vehemence of his desire.
In praying that he may be delivered *speedily* there is shown the
greatness of his danger, as if he had said, All will soon be over with
my life, unless God make haste to help me. By the words, *house of
defense, fortress,* and *rock,* he intimates, that, being unable to
resist his enemies, his hope rests only on the protection of God.

<span id="xxxvii.i-p10"></span><span id="xxxvii.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xxxvii.i-p11"></span>**3.** *For thou art my rock.* This verse
may be read as one sentence, thus: As thou art like a tower for my
defense, for thy name’s sake direct and guide me during my whole life.
And thus the conjunction, as in many similar cases, would be
superfluous. But I rather prefer a different sense, namely, that David,
by interjecting this reflection, encourages himself not only to
earnestness in prayer, but also in the confident hope of obtaining his
requests. We know, at all events, that it is usual with him to mingle
such things in his prayers as may serve to remove his doubts, and to
confirm his assurance. Having, therefore, expressed his need, he assures
himself, in order to encourage and animate himself, that his prayer
shall certainly have a happy answer. He had formerly said, *Be thou my
strong rock and fortress;* and now he adds, *Assuredly thou art my rock,
and my fortress:* intimating, that he did not throw out these words
rashly, like unbelievers, who, although they are accustomed to ask much
from God, are kept in suspense by the dread of uncertain events. From
this he also draws another encouragement, that he shall have God for his
guide and governor during the whole course of his life. He uses two
words, *lead* and *guide,* to express the same thing, and this he does
(at least so I explain it) on account of the various accidents and
unequal vicissitudes by which the lives of men are tried: as if he had
said, Whether I must climb the steep mountain, or struggle along through
rough places, or walk among thorns, I trust that thou wilt be my
continual guide. Moreover, as men will always find in themselves matter
for doubt, if they look to their own merits,  <span
id="fr_636"></span>[637](#fn_636) David expressly asks that God may be
induced to help *him for his own name’s sake,* or from regard to his own
glory, as, properly speaking, there is no other thing which can induce
him to aid us. It must therefore be remembered, that *God’s name,* as it
is opposed to all merit whatever, is the only cause of our salvation. In
the next verse, under the metaphor of a *net,* he appears to designate
the snares and artifices with which his enemies encompassed him. We know
that conspiracies were frequently formed against his life, which would
have left him no room for escape; and as his enemies were deeply skilled
in policy, and hating him with an inconceivable hatred, were eagerly
bent on his destruction, it was impossible for him to be saved from them
by any human power. On this account he calls God *his strength;* as if
he had said, He alone is sufficient to rend asunder all the snares with
which he sees his afflicted people entangled.

<span id="xxxvii.ii"></span>

<span id="xxxvii.ii-p1"></span><span id="xxxvii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
31:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#005)<span
id="xxxvii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxxvii.ii-p2"></span>**5.** Into thy hand I commit my spirit,
for thou hast redeemed me, O Jehovah! God of truth. **6.** I hate all
that give heed to lying vanities; but I have trusted in Jehovah. **7.**
I will be glad and rejoice in thy goodness, because thou hast regarded
my affliction: thou hast known my soul in distresses. **8.** And thou
hast not shut me up in the hand of mine enemy:  <span
id="fr_637"></span>[638](#fn_637) thou hast set my feet in a large
place.

<span id="xxxvii.ii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xxxvii.ii-p5"></span><span id="xxxvii.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xxxvii.ii-p6"></span>**5.** *Into thy hand I commit my
spirit.* David again declares his faith to God, and affirms that he had
such high thoughts of his providence, as to cast all his cares upon it.
Whoever commits himself into God’s hand and to his guardianship, not
only constitutes him the arbiter of life and death to him, but also
calmly depends on him for protection amidst all his dangers. The verb is
in the future tense, “I will commit,” and it unquestionably denotes a
continued act, and is therefore fitly translated into the present tense.
It is also to be observed, that no man can possibly commit his life to
God with sincerity, but he who considers himself exposed to a thousand
deaths, and that his life hangs by a thread, or differs almost nothing
from a breath which passes suddenly away. David being thus at the point
of despair, leaves nothing to himself to do but this — to go on his way,
trusting in God as the keeper and governor of his life. It is
marvellous, that, although many things distress us all, scarcely one in
a hundred is so wise as to commit his life into God’s hand. Multitudes
live from day to day as merry and careless as if they were in a quiet
nest, free from all disturbance; but as soon as they encounter any thing
to terrify them, they are ready to die for anguish. It thus happens that
they never betake themselves to God, either because they deceive
themselves with vain delusions, flattering themselves that all will yet
be well,  <span id="fr_638"></span>[639](#fn_638) or because they are so
stricken with dread and stupified with amazement, that they have no
desire for his fatherly care. Farther, as various tempests of grief
disturb us, and even sometimes throw us down headlong, or drag us from
the direct path of duty, or at least remove us from our post, the only
remedy which exists for setting these things at rest is to consider that
God, who is the author of our life, is also its preserver. This, then,
is the only means of lightening all our burdens, and preserving us from
being swallowed up of over-much sorrow. Seeing, therefore, that God
condescends to undertake the care of our lives, and to support them,
although they are often exposed to various sorts of death, let us learn
always to flee to this asylum; nay, the more that any one is exposed to
dangers, let him exercise himself the more carefully in meditating on
it. In short, let this be our shield against all dangerous attacks — our
haven amidst all tossings and tempests — that, although our safety may
be beyond all human hope, God is the faithful guardian of it; and let
this again arouse us to prayer, that he would defend us, and make our
deliverance sure. This confidence will likewise make every man forward
to discharge his duty with alacrity, and constantly and fearlessly to
struggle onward to the end of his course. How does it happen that so
many are slothful and indifferent, and that others perfidiously forsake
their duty, but because, overwhelmed with anxiety, they are terrified at
dangers and inconveniences, and leave no room for the operation of the
providence of God?

<span id="xxxvii.ii-p8"></span>To conclude, whoever relies not on the
providence of God, so as to commit his life to its faithful
guardianship, has not yet learned aright what it is to live. On the
other hand, he who shall entrust the keeping of his life to God’s care,
will not doubt of its safety even in the midst of death. We must
therefore put our life into God’s hand, not only that he may keep it
safely in this world, but also that he may preserve it from destruction
in death itself, as Christ’s own example has taught us. As David wished
to have his life prolonged amidst the dangers of death, so Christ passed
out of this transitory life that his soul might be saved in death. This
is a general prayer, therefore, in which the faithful commit their lives
to God, first, that he may protect them by his power, so long as they
are exposed to the dangers of this world; and, secondly, that he may
preserve them safe in the grave, where nothing is to be seen but
destruction. We ought farther to assure ourselves, that we are not
forsaken of God either in life or in death; for those whom God brings
safely by his power to the end of their course, he at last receives to
himself at their death. This is one of the principal places of Scripture
which are most suitable for correcting distrust. It teaches us, first,
that the faithful ought not to torment themselves above measure with
unhappy cares and anxieties; and, secondly, that they should not be so
distracted with fear as to cease from performing their duty, nor decline
and faint in such a manner as to grasp at vain hopes and deceitful
helps, nor give way to fears and alarms; and, in fine, that they should
not be afraid of death, which, though it destroys the body, cannot
extinguish the soul. This, indeed, ought to be our principal argument
for overcoming all temptations, that Christ, when commending his soul to
his Father, undertook the guardianship of the souls of all his people.
Stephen, therefore, calls upon him to be his keeper, saying, “Lord
Jesus, receive my spirit,” (<span id="xxxvii.ii-p8.1"></span>[Ac
7:59](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#059)<span
id="xxxvii.ii-p8.1"></span>.) As the soul is the seat of life, it is on
this account, as is well known, used to signify life.

<span id="xxxvii.ii-p9"></span>*Thou hast redeemed me.* Some translate
the past tense here into the future; but, in my opinion, without any
reason. For it is evident to me, that David is here encouraging himself
to continued confidence in God, by calling to remembrance the proofs of
his favor which he had already experienced.  <span
id="fr_639"></span>[640](#fn_639) It is no small encouragement to us for
the future, to be assuredly persuaded that God will watch over our life,
because he hath been our deliverer already. Hence the epithet by which
David recognises God. He calls him *true* or *faithful,* because he
believes that he will continue the same to him for ever that he has
already been. Accordingly, this is as it were a bond by which he joins
to the former benefits which God had conferred upon him confidence in
prayer, and the hope of aid for the time to come: as if he had said,
Lord, thou who art ever the same, and changest not thy mind like men,
hast already testified in very deed that thou art the defender of my
life: now, therefore, I commit my life, of which thou hast been the
preserver, into thy hands. What David here declares concerning his
temporal life, Paul transfers to eternal salvation.

<span id="xxxvii.ii-p11"></span>“I know,” says he, “whom I have
believed, and am persuaded that he is able to keep that which I have
committed to him,”  
(<span id="xxxvii.ii-p11.2"></span>[2Ti
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#012)<span
id="xxxvii.ii-p11.2"></span>.)

<span id="xxxvii.ii-p12"></span>And surely, if David derived so much
confidence from temporal deliverance, it is more than wicked and
ungrateful on our part, if the redemption purchased by the blood of
Christ does not furnish us with invincible courage against all the
devices of Satan.

<span id="xxxvii.ii-p13"></span><span id="xxxvii.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xxxvii.ii-p14"></span>**6.** *I hate all that give heed to
lying vanities.* In order the better to express that his faith was
firmly fixed on God, he affirms that he was free from the vile
affections which usually turn away our minds from God, and under which
unbelievers for the most part labor. For we know that by contrasting
things which are opposite, a subject is better illustrated. To restrict
the Hebrew word <span id="xxxvii.ii-p14.1"></span>הבל, *hebel,* which we
have rendered *vanities,* to magical arts, as some interpreters do, is
absurd.  <span id="fr_640"></span>[641](#fn_640) I confess, indeed, that
the Orientals were so much addicted to these impostures, that it was a
common evil among them. But as the devices by which Satan ensnares the
minds of men, and the allurements by which he draws them away from God,
are innumerable, it is not at all probable that the prophet mentions one
species only. Whatever vain hopes, therefore, we form to ourselves,
which may draw us off from our confidence in God, David generally
denominates *vanities,* yea, *false* or *lying vanities,* because,
although they feed us for a time with magnificent promises, in the end
they beguile and disappoint us. He affirms, therefore, that casting away
the vanities which men usually invent to support their hopes, he relies
solely on God. And as men not only intoxicate themselves personally with
the deceitful allurements of the world, but in this respect also deceive
one another, the prophet expressly declares, with a view that we may
carefully avoid them, unless we wish to be wilfully entangled in their
dangerous toils, that he hated all who involved themselves in such lies.
The second clause, *I have trusted in Jehovah,* must be read in
connection with the first, because it both assigns the cause of his
hatred of lying vanities, and shows that it is impossible for men to
have any true faith in God, unless they abhor whatever would draw them
away from him.

<span id="xxxvii.ii-p16"></span><span id="xxxvii.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xxxvii.ii-p17"></span>**7.** *I will be glad and rejoice in
thy goodness.* Here is inserted a thanksgiving, although many are rather
of opinion that David’s prayer is suspended, and that he makes a vow,
when he shall be delivered from present danger. But as no condition is
annexed, I am rather inclined to think that stopping all at once in the
middle of his prayer, he promises himself a deliverance, for which he
will have abundant matter for giving thanks. Nor is it to be wondered at
that different feelings are mingled in the psalms in which David has set
forth his own temptations, as well as the resistance which his faith
made to them, considering also that when he sung the praises of God,
after having already obtained deliverance from him, he embraces
different periods in his song, as he here says, *that God had regarded
his affliction, intimating* by this the effect of the assistance which
God had afforded him. And that he may the better confirm this, he adds,
*that he had not been delivered into the hands of his enemies:* in which
words there is an implied antithesis, namely, that when he was
encompassed on every side by severe afflictions, he was marvellously
delivered by God. This is also farther intimated by the following
sentence, *Thou hast set my feet in a large place,*  <span
id="fr_641"></span>[642](#fn_641) which denotes a sudden and unexpected
change.

<span id="xxxvii.iii"></span>

<span id="xxxvii.iii-p1"></span><span id="xxxvii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
31:9-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#009)<span
id="xxxvii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxxvii.iii-p2"></span>**9.** Have mercy upon me, O Jehovah!
for I am in trouble: mine eye, my soul, and my belly, are consumed by
reason of anger. **10.** For my life is wasted by reason of grief, and
my years with groaning; my strength faileth in my sorrow, and my bones
are consumed. **11.** I was a reproach by reason of all mine enemies,
yea, exceedingly to my neighbors, and a fear to my acquaintances; and
they who saw me abroad fled from me. **12.** I am forgotten as one dead,
I am become like a broken vessel. **13.** For I have heard the railing
of many,  <span id="fr_642"></span>[643](#fn_642) and fear encloseth me
on every side, while they consult together against me, and plot to take
away my life.

<span id="xxxvii.iii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xxxvii.iii-p5"></span><span id="xxxvii.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xxxvii.iii-p6"></span>**9.** *Have mercy upon me, O Jehovah!*
To move God to succor him, he magnifies the greatness of his misery and
grief by the number of his complaints; not that God needs arguments to
persuade him, but because he allows the faithful to deal familiarly with
him, that they may disburden themselves of their cares. The greater the
number of afflictions with which they are oppressed, the more do they
encourage themselves, while bewailing them before God, in the hope of
obtaining his assistance. These forms of expression may seem
hyperbolical, but it is obvious that it was David’s purpose to declare
and set forth what he had felt in his own person. First, he says that
*his eyes, his soul, and his belly, were consumed with grief.* From this
it appears that it was neither lightly nor for a short time that he was
thus tormented and vexed by these calamities. Indeed, he was endued with
so much meekness of spirit that he would not allow himself to be excited
easily, and by a slight circumstance, nor vexed by immoderate sorrow. He
had also been for a long time inured to the endurance of troubles. We
must, therefore, admit that his afflictions were incredibly severe, when
he gave way to such a degree of passion. By the word *anger,* too, he
shows that he was not at all times of such iron-like firmness, or so
free from sinful passion, as that his grief did not now and then break
forth into an excess of impetuosity and keenness. Whence we infer that
the saints have often a severe and arduous conflict with their own
passions; and that although their patience has not always been free from
peevishness, yet by carefully wrestling against it, they have at last
attained this much, that no accumulation of troubles has overwhelmed
them. By *life* some understand the vital senses, an interpretation
which I do not altogether reject. But I prefer to explain it as simply
meaning, that, being consumed with grief, he felt his life and his years
sliding away and failing. And by these words again, David bewails not so
much his pusillanimity of mind as the grievousness of his calamities;
although he was by no means ashamed to confess his infirmity, for which
he was anxiously seeking a remedy. When he says, that *his strength
failed under his sorrow,* some interpreters prefer reading, *under his
iniquity;* and I confess that the Hebrew word <span
id="xxxvii.iii-p6.1"></span>עון, *on,* bears both significations,  <span
id="fr_643"></span>[644](#fn_643) nay, more frequently it signifies *an
offense* or *a fault.* But as it is sometimes used for *punishment,* I
have chosen the sense which appears most agreeable to the context. And
although it is true that David was accustomed to ascribe the afflictions
which he at any time suffered to his own fault, yet, as he is only
recounting his miseries here, without mentioning the cause of them, it
is probable that, according to his usual manner, he expresses the same
thing twice by different words.

<span id="xxxvii.iii-p8"></span><span id="xxxvii.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxxvii.iii-p9"></span>**11.** *I was a reproach by reason of
all mine enemies.* Others translate thus - *more than mine enemies,* and
as the Hebrew letter <span id="xxxvii.iii-p9.1"></span>מ*, mem,* is
often used as a sign of comparison, they interpret this clause to mean
that David’s friends and acquaintances reproached him more than all his
enemies. But, in my opinion, he intended to express a different idea,
namely, that as he was everywhere hated, and his enemies had induced
almost the whole realm to take part with them against him, he had an
evil name even among his friends and neighbors; just as popular opinion,
like a violent tempest, usually carries all before it. I suppose,
therefore, that the Hebrew copula <span id="xxxvii.iii-p9.2"></span>ו*,
vau,* is used for the sake of amplification, to show that David was an
object of detestation, not only to strangers to whom he was formerly
unknown, but also to his principal friends. He adds, likewise, that
*when they saw him abroad they fled from him* By the adverb, *abroad,*
he means to say, that they did not think the miserable man worthy of a
near approach to them; nay, that they fled from the very sight of him,
at however great a distance, lest the contagion of his misery should
reach them, and because they reckoned it would be injurious and
disgraceful to them to show him any sign of friendship.

<span id="xxxvii.iii-p10"></span><span id="xxxvii.iii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xxxvii.iii-p11"></span>**12.** *I am forgotten as one dead.*
The Psalmist still pursues the same idea, and complains that he was as
completely blotted out of all men’s remembrance as if he had been dead.
The memory of some men after their death flourishes for a time among
survivors, but it more frequently vanishes; for there is no longer any
intercourse between the quick and the dead, nor can the living be of any
farther service to the dead. David illustrates this idea by the metaphor
of *a broken vessel,*  <span id="fr_644"></span>[645](#fn_644) which
denotes utter contempt and meanness; as if he had said, that he was
accounted no longer worthy of any place or respect. He adds, in fine,
that he was railed upon by the multitude, and agitated with terrors. I
would, however, prefer translating the Hebrew word <span
id="xxxvii.iii-p12.1"></span>רבים, *rabbim,* by *the great,*  <span
id="fr_645"></span>[646](#fn_645) rather than by *many.* When great men,
who are often as powerful in judgment as in authority, slander and
defame us as wicked persons, this adds to the indignity with which we
are treated, because, whatever they say in condemnation of us has the
effect of prejudicing the common people against us. It will therefore be
very suitable to understand the words as meaning that David was
ignominiously condemned by the whole order of the nobility; and thus the
innocence of this afflicted man was thrown into the shade by their
greatness. This interpretation is confirmed by what immediately
follows:— *Fear encloseth me on every side,*  <span
id="fr_646"></span>[647](#fn_646) *while they consult together against
me.* As he is still speaking of the same persons, it is certain that
this language applies more appropriately to the nobles than to the
common people. Moreover, we see that the primary object of the wicked in
the deceitful counsels by which they conspired to destroy David, was to
create among the whole people hatred against him as a wicked and
reprobate man. We also see that while they mangled his reputation, they
did it in such a manner as that they covered their wickedness under the
appearance of grave and considerate procedure, in consulting among
themselves to destroy him as a man who no longer ought to be tolerated
on the earth. It is not to be wondered at, therefore, that his mind was
wounded, as we have just seen, by so many and so sharp temptations.

<span id="xxxvii.iv"></span>

<span id="xxxvii.iv-p1"></span><span id="xxxvii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
31:14-18](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#014)<span
id="xxxvii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxxvii.iv-p2"></span>**14.** Yet have I trusted in thee, O
Jehovah! I have said, Thou art my God. **15.** My times are in thy hand;
deliver me from the hand of mine enemies, and from them that persecute
me. **16.** Make thy face to shine upon thy servant; preserve me in thy
goodness. **17.** O Jehovah! let me not be ashamed; for I have called on
thee: let the wicked be ashamed, let them be silent in the grave.
**18.** Let lying lips be put to silence, which speak a hard \[or
grievous\] thing against the just, in pride and scorn.

<span id="xxxvii.iv-p3"></span> 

<span id="xxxvii.iv-p4"></span><span id="xxxvii.iv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xxxvii.iv-p5"></span>**14.** *Yet have I trusted in thee, O
Jehovah!* The rendering properly is, *And I have trusted in thee;* but
the Hebrew copulative particle <span id="xxxvii.iv-p5.1"></span>ו, *vau,
and,* is used here instead of the adversative particle *yet,* or
*nevertheless.* David, setting the steadfastness of his faith in
opposition to the assaults of the temptations of which he has made
mention, denies that he had ever fainted, but rather maintains, on the
contrary, that he stood firm in his hope of deliverance from God. Nor
does this imply that he boasted of being so magnanimous and courageous
that he could not be overthrown through the infirmity of the flesh.
However contrary to one another they appear, yet these things are often
joined together, as they ought to be, in the same person, namely, that
while he pines away with grief, and is deprived of all strength, he is
nevertheless supported by so strong a hope that he ceases not to call
upon God. David, therefore, was not so overwhelmed in deep sorrow, and
other direful sufferings, as that the hidden light of faith could not
shine inwardly in his heart; nor did he groan so much under the weighty
load of his temptations, as to be prevented from arousing himself to
call upon God. He struggled through many obstacles to be able to make
the confession which he here makes. He next defines the manner of his
faith, namely, that he reflected with himself thus that God would never
fail him nor forsake him. Let us mark his manner of speech: *I have
said, Thou art my God* In these words he intimates that he was so
entirely persuaded of this truth, that God was his God, that he would
not admit even a suggestion to the contrary. And until this persuasion
prevails so as to take possession of our minds, we shall always waver in
uncertainty. It is, however, to be observed, that this declaration is
not only inward and secret - made rather in the heart than with the
tongue - but that it is directed to God himself, as to him who is the
alone witness of it. Nothing is more difficult, when we see our faith
derided by the whole world, than to direct our speech to God only, and
to rest satisfied with this testimony which our conscience gives us,
*that he is our God.* And certainly it is an undoubted proof of genuine
faith, when, however fierce the waves are which beat against us, and
however sore the assaults by which we are shaken, we hold fast this as a
fixed principle, that we are constantly under the protection of God, and
can say to him freely, *Thou art our God.*

<span id="xxxvii.iv-p6"></span><span id="xxxvii.iv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxxvii.iv-p7"></span>**15.** *My times are in thy hand.* That
he might the more cheerfully commit the preservation of his person to
God, he assures us, that, trusting to his divine guardianship, he did
not trouble himself about those casual and unforeseen events which men
commonly dread. The import of his language is, Lord, it is thy
prerogative, and thou alone hast the power, to dispose of both my life
and my death. Nor does he use the plural number, in my opinion, without
reason; but rather to mark the variety of casualties by which the life
of man is usually harassed. It is a cold exposition to restrict the
phrase, *my times,* to the time which he had to live, as if David meant
no more than that his time or his days on earth were in God’s hand. On
the contrary, I am of opinion that, while he mused on the various
revolutions and manifold dangers which continually hang over us, and the
manifold unlooked-for events which from time to time happen, he
nevertheless confidently reposed upon the providence of God, which he
believed to be, according to the common saying, the arbiter both of good
and of evil fortune. In the first clause we see that he not only
denominates God the governor of the world in general, but also affirms
that his life is in his hand; and not only so, but that to whatever
agitations it might be subjected, and whatever trials and vicissitudes
might befall him, he was safe under his protection. On this he founds
his prayer, that God would preserve and *deliver him from the hand of
his enemies.*

<span id="xxxvii.iv-p8"></span><span id="xxxvii.iv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxxvii.iv-p9"></span>**16.** *Make thy face to shine upon thy
servant.* We have said formerly, and we shall see in many instances
hereafter, that this form of speech is taken from the common
apprehension of men, who think that God regards them not, unless he
really show his care of them by its effects. According to the judgment
of sense, afflictions hide his countenance, just as clouds obscure the
brightness of the sun. David therefore supplicates that *God,* by
affording him immediate assistance, would make it evident to him that he
enjoyed his grace and favor, which it is not very easy to discern amidst
the darkness of afflictions. Now, God is said to lift the light of his
countenance upon us in two ways; either when he opens his eyes to take
care of our affairs, or when he shows to us his favor. These two things
are indeed inseparable, or rather, the one depends upon the other. But
by the first mode of speech, we, according to our carnal conceptions,
attribute to God a mutability which, properly speaking, does not belong
to him: whereas the second form of speech indicates, that our own eyes,
rather than the eyes of God, are shut or heavy when he seems to have no
regard to our afflictions. By the word *preserve* David explains what he
meant by the former expression; but as there was at that time no way of
safety apparent to him, he encourages himself to hope for it by setting
before him *the goodness of God.*

<span id="xxxvii.iv-p10"></span><span id="xxxvii.iv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xxxvii.iv-p11"></span>**17.** *O Jehovah! let me not be
ashamed.* In these words, the Psalmist continues his prayer, and to
strengthen his hopes, he contrasts himself with his enemies; for it
would have been more than absurd to permit those who by their wickedness
so openly provoked the wrath of God to escape with impunity, and that
one who was innocent and relied upon God should be disappointed and made
a laughing-stock. Here, accordingly, we perceive what the Psalmist’s
comparison implies. Moreover, instead of speaking of his hope or trust,
he now speaks of his calling upon God, saying, *I have called on thee;*
and he does this with good reason, for he who relies on the providence
of God must flee to him with prayers and strong cries. *To be silent in
the grave,* implies that death, when it befalls the ungodly, restrains
and prevents them from doing farther injury. This silence is opposed
both to their deceitful and treacherous devices, and to their outrageous
insolence. In the very next verse, therefore, he adds, *Let lying lips
be put to silence,* which, in my opinion, includes both their
craftiness, and the false pretences and calumnies by which they endeavor
to accomplish their designs, and also the vain boasting in which they
indulge themselves. For he tells us that *they speak with harshness and
severity against the righteous, in pride and scorn;* because it was
their froward conceit, which almost always begets contempt, that made
David’s enemies so bold in lying. Whoever proudly arrogates to himself
more than is his due, will almost necessarily treat others with
contempt.

<span id="xxxvii.v"></span>

<span id="xxxvii.v-p1"></span><span id="xxxvii.v-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
31:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#019)<span
id="xxxvii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxxvii.v-p2"></span>**19.** O how great is thy goodness which
thou hast hidden  <span id="fr_647"></span>[648](#fn_647) for them that
fear thee! which thou hast performed for them that trust in thee before
the sons of men! **20.** Thou shalt hide them in the secret \[or, in the
hiding-place\] of thy countenance from the pride of man; thou shalt hide
them as in a tent from the strife of tongues. **21.** Blessed be
Jehovah! for he hath made wonderful his goodness towards me, as in a
fortified city.

<span id="xxxvii.v-p4"></span> 

<span id="xxxvii.v-p5"></span><span id="xxxvii.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xxxvii.v-p6"></span>**19.** *O how great is thy goodness which
thou hast hidden for them that fear thee!* In this verse the Psalmist
exclaims that God is incomprehensibly good and beneficent towards his
servants. *Goodness* here means those divine blessings which are the
effects of it. The interrogatory form of the sentence has a peculiar
emphasis; for David not only asserts that God is good, but he is
ravished with admiration of the goodness which he had experienced. It
was this experience, undoubtedly, which caused him break out into the
rapturous language of this verse; for he had been marvellously and
unexpectedly delivered from his calamities. By his example, therefore,
he enjoins believers to rise above the apprehension of their own
understanding, in order that they may promise themselves, and expect far
more from the grace of God than human reason is able to conceive. He
says that the goodness of God is *hidden* for his servants, because it
is a treasure which is peculiar to them. It, no doubt, extends itself in
various ways to the irreligious and unworthy, and is set before them
indiscriminately; but it displays itself much more plenteously and
clearly towards the faithful, because it is they alone who enjoy all
God’s benefits for their salvation. God

<span id="xxxvii.v-p7"></span>“maketh his sun to rise on the evil and on
the good,”  
(<span id="xxxvii.v-p7.2"></span>[Mt
5:45](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#045)<span id="xxxvii.v-p7.2"></span>,)

<span id="xxxvii.v-p8"></span>and shows himself bountiful even to the
irrational creation; but he declares himself a Father, in the true and
full sense of the term, to those only who are his servants. It is not
without reason, therefore, that the goodness of God is said to be hidden
for the faithful, whom alone he accounts worthy of enjoying his favor
most intimately and tenderly. Some give a more subtle interpretation of
the phrase, *the goodness of God is hidden,* explaining it as meaning
that *God,* by often exercising his children with crosses and
afflictions, hides his favor from them, although, at the same time, he
does not forget them. It is more probable, however, that it should be
understood of a treasure which God has set apart and laid up in store
for them, unless perhaps we choose to refer it to the experience of the
saints, because they alone, as I have said, experience in their souls
the fruit of divine goodness; whereas brutish stupidity hinders the
wicked from acknowledging God as a beneficent Father, even while they
are devouring greedily his good things. And thus it comes to pass, that
while the goodness of God fills and overspreads all parts of the world,
it is notwithstanding generally unknown. But the mind of the sacred
writer will be more clearly perceived from the contrast which exists
between the faithful and those who are strangers to God’s love. As a
provident man will regulate his liberality towards all men in such a
manner as not to defraud his children or family, nor impoverish his own
house, by spending his substance prodigally on others; so God, in like
manner, in exercising his beneficence to aliens from his family, knows
well how to reserve for his own children that which belongs to them as
it were by hereditary right; that is to say, because of their adoption.
 <span id="fr_648"></span>[649](#fn_648) The attempt of Augustine to
prove from these words that those who unbelievingly dread God’s judgment
have no experience of his goodness, is most inappropriate. To perceive
his mistaken view of the passage, it is only necessary to look to the
following clause, in which David says that God makes the world to
perceive that he exercises inestimable goodness towards those who serve
him, both in protecting them and in providing for their welfare. Whence
we learn, that it is not of the everlasting blessedness which is
reserved for the godly in heaven that the Psalmist here speaks, but of
the protection and other blessings which belong to the preservation of
the present life; which he declares to be so manifest that even the
ungodly themselves are forced to become *eye-witnesses* of them. The
world, I admit, passes over all the works of God with its eyes shut, and
is especially ignorant of his fatherly care of the saints; still it is
certain that there shine forth such daily proofs of it, that even the
reprobate cannot but see them, except in so far as they willingly shut
their eyes against the light. David, therefore, speaks according to
truth, when he declares that God gives evidences of his goodness to his
people *before the sons of men,* that it may be clearly seen that they
do not serve him unadvisedly or in vain.  <span
id="fr_649"></span>[650](#fn_649)

<span id="xxxvii.v-p11"></span><span id="xxxvii.v-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xxxvii.v-p12"></span>**20.** *Thou shalt hide them in the
secret of thy countenance.* In this verse the Psalmist specially
commends the grace of God, because it preserves and protects the
faithful against all harm. As Satan assiduously and by innumerable means
opposes their welfare, and as the greater part of the world is at deadly
war with them, they must be exposed to many dangers. Unless God,
therefore, protected them by his power, and came from time to time to
their aid, their condition would be most miserable. The Psalmist makes
an allusion to *the hiding* which he had just mentioned, and although
the metaphor may, at first sight, appear somewhat harsh, it very aptly
expresses, that provided the Lord take care of them, the faithful are
perfectly safe under his protection alone. By this eulogium, therefore,
he sublimely extols the power of divine Providence, because it alone
suffices to ward off every species of evil, and while it shines upon the
godly, it blinds the eyes of all the wicked, and weakens their hands.
 <span id="fr_650"></span>[651](#fn_650) In the opinion of some, the
Psalmist, when he speaks *of the secret of God’s countenance,* refers to
the sanctuary, an interpretation which I do not altogether reject,
although it does not appear to me sufficiently solid. Again, he says
that God hides the faithful from *the pride of man and the strife of
tongues,* because, if God restrain not the wicked, we know that they
have the audacity to break forth with outrageous violence against the
truly godly; but however unbridled their lust and insolence may be, God
preserves his people from harm, by wondrously covering them with the
brightness of his countenance. Some translate the Hebrew word <span
id="xxxvii.v-p13.2"></span>ריכסים, *rikasim, conspiracies,*  <span
id="fr_651"></span>[652](#fn_651) others *perversities,* but without any
reason; nor, indeed, does the etymology of the word admit of it, for it
comes from a root which signifies *to lift up,* or *to elevate.* To
*pride* is added *the strife of tongues,* because God’s children have
cause to fear not only the inhuman deeds of their enemies, but also
their still more wicked and violent calumnies, as David himself more
than enough experienced. And as our innocence ought to be justly dearer
to us than our life, let us learn to cultivate uprightness in such a
manner as that, trusting to God’s protection, we may disregard every
false calumny. And let us always remember that it is God’s peculiar
prerogative to vindicate his people from all unjust reproaches.

<span id="xxxvii.v-p15"></span><span id="xxxvii.v-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xxxvii.v-p16"></span>**21.** *Blessed be Jehovah!* These
general truths the Psalmist here proceeds to apply to his own
circumstances, and he declares that the goodness of God in preserving
his life was wondrously displayed. As he speaks of aid which had been
suddenly and unexpectedly afforded him in very desperate circumstances,
those interpreters judge aright who here supply *as,* the mark of
similitude,  <span id="fr_652"></span>[653](#fn_652) in this way, *as in
a fortified city* David lay open to every blow, and had been exposed to
every sort of injury, and he boasts that in his nakedness and
destitution the assistance of God had been of greater service to him
than a city well fortified, or an impregnable fortress would have been.

<span id="xxxvii.vi"></span>

<span id="xxxvii.vi-p1"></span><span id="xxxvii.vi-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
31:22-24](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#022)<span
id="xxxvii.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxxvii.vi-p2"></span>**22.** And I said in my fear  <span
id="fr_653"></span>[654](#fn_653) I am cast out of thy sight: yet truly
thou hast heard the voice of my supplications when I cried unto thee.
**23.** O love Jehovah, all ye his meek ones! Jehovah preserveth the
faithful, and plentifully  <span id="fr_654"></span>[655](#fn_654)
recompenseth him who behaveth himself proudly. **24.** Be of good
courage, and he shall strengthen your heart, all ye who hope in Jehovah.

<span id="xxxvii.vi-p5"></span> 

<span id="xxxvii.vi-p6"></span><span id="xxxvii.vi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxxvii.vi-p7"></span>**22.** *And I said in my fear.* David
here confesses that for his distrust he deserved to be deserted by God
and left to perish. It is true that to confess this before men he felt
to be a shameful thing; but that he may the more fully illustrate the
grace of God to him, he hesitates not to publish the shame of his fault.
He repeats almost the same acknowledgement in <span
id="xxxvii.vi-p7.1"></span>[Ps
116:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#011)<span
id="xxxvii.vi-p7.1"></span>, “I said in my haste, All men are liars.” I
am aware that the Hebrew word <span id="xxxvii.vi-p7.2"></span>חפז,
*chaphaz,* is explained by some as meaning *flight;* as if David, in
fleeing from death, because he was unable to make resistance, was
stricken with this fear. But I refer it rather to his trouble of mind.
Whether, therefore, we translate it *haste* or *fear,* it means that he
had been, as it were, carried headlong to entertain the thought that he
was neglected by God. And this haste is opposed to calm and deliberate
consideration; for although David was stricken with fear, he did not
faint under the trial, and this persuasion did not continue fixed in his
mind. For we know that the faithful are often disquieted by fears and
the heat of impatience, or driven headlong as it were by their too hasty
or precipitate wishes, but afterwards they come to themselves. That
David’s faith had never been overthrown by this temptation appears from
the context, for he immediately adds, *that God had heard the voice of
his supplications;* but if his faith had been extinguished, he could not
have brought his mind earnestly to engage in prayer, and therefore this
complaint was only a lapse of the tongue uttered in haste. Now if
peevish hastiness of thought could drive this holy prophet of God, a man
who was adorned with so many excellencies, to despair, how much reason
have we to fear, lest our minds should fail and fatally ruin us? This
confession of David, as we have already observed, serves to magnify the
grace of God; but at the same time he sufficiently shows, in the second
clause of the verse, that his faith, although severely shaken, had not
been altogether eradicated, because he ceased not meanwhile to pray. The
saints often wrestle in this manner with their distrust, that partly
they may not despond, and that partly they may gather courage and
stimulate themselves to prayer. Nor does the weakness of the flesh, even
when they are almost overthrown, hinder them from showing that they are
unwearied and invincible champions before God. But although David
stoutly resisted temptation, he nevertheless acknowledges himself
unworthy of God’s grace, of which he in some measure deprived himself by
his doubt. For the Hebrew particle <span id="xxxvii.vi-p7.3"></span>אכן,
*aken,* is here to be understood adversatively and rendered *yet,*
intimating that David had been preserved without any desert of his own,
inasmuch as God’s immeasurable goodness strove with his unbelief. But as
it is a sign of affirmation in Hebrew, I have thought proper to
translate it, *Yet truly.* I have no doubt that he opposes his language
to the various temptations with which, it is probable, his mind had been
driven hither and thither.

<span id="xxxvii.vi-p8"></span><span id="xxxvii.vi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxxvii.vi-p9"></span>**23.** *O love Jehovah, all ye his meek
ones!* In my opinion, the Psalmist does not here exhort the saints to
fear and reverence God, as many think, but encourages them to confide in
him; or, in other words, to devote themselves wholly to him, to put all
their hope in him, and to rely entirely upon him, without seeking to any
other. Whence is it that our own fond devices delight us, but because we
do not delight in God so much as we ought, and because our affections do
not cleave to him? This love of God, therefore, comprehends in it all
the desires of the heart. By nature, all men greatly desire to be in a
prosperous or happy state; but while the greater number are fascinated
by the allurements of the world, and prefer its lies and impostures,
scarcely one in a hundred sets his heart on God. The reason which
immediately follows confirms this interpretation; for the inspired
Psalmist exhorts *the meek* to love God, because he *preserves the
faithful,* which is as if he had desired them to rest satisfied with his
guardianship, and to acknowledge that in it they had sufficient succor.
 <span id="fr_655"></span>[656](#fn_655) In the meantime, he admonishes
them to keep a good conscience, and to cultivate uprightness, since God
promises to preserve only such as are upright and faithful. On the other
hand, he declares that he *plentifully recompenses the proud,* in order
that when we observe them succeeding prosperously for a time, an
unworthy emulation may not entice us to imitate them, and that their
haughtiness, and the outrage they commit, while they think they are at
liberty to do what they please, may not crush and break our spirits. The
amount of the whole is this, Although the ungodly flatter themselves,
while they proceed in their wickedness with impunity, and believers are
harassed with many fears and dangers, yet devote yourselves to God, and
rely upon his grace, for he will always defend the faithful, and reward
the proud as they deserve. Concerning the meaning of the Hebrew word
<span id="xxxvii.vi-p10.2"></span>על-יתר, *al-yether,* which we have
rendered *plentifully,*  <span id="fr_656"></span>[657](#fn_656)
interpreters are not agreed. Some translate it *pride,* meaning that to
those who behave themselves proudly, God will render according to their
pride; others translate it *to overflowing,* or *beyond measure,*
because <span id="xxxvii.vi-p11.1"></span>יתר*, yether,* signifies in
Hebrew *residue* or *remnant;* instead of which I have translated it
*plentifully.* Some understand it as extending to their children and
children’s children, who shall remain the residue of their seed.
Besides, as the same word is frequently used for *excellence,*  <span
id="fr_657"></span>[658](#fn_657) I have no doubt that the prophet
elegantly rebukes the proud, who imagine that their fancied excellence
is not only a shield to them, but, an invincible fortress against God.
As their groundless authority and power blind, or rather bewitch them,
so that they vaunt themselves intemperately and without measure against
those who are lowly and feeble, the prophet elegantly says that there is
a reward in store for them proportioned to the haughtiness with which
they are puffed up.

<span id="xxxvii.vi-p13"></span><span id="xxxvii.vi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xxxvii.vi-p14"></span>**24.** *Be of good courage.* This
exhortation is to be understood in the same way as the preceding; for
the steadfastness which the Psalmist here enjoins is founded on the love
of God of which he had spoken, when renouncing all the enticements of
the world, we embrace with our whole hearts the defense and protection
which he promises to us. Nor is his exhortation to courage and firmness
unnecessary; because, when any one begins to rely on God, he must lay
his account with and arm himself for sustaining many assaults from
Satan. We are first, then, calmly to commit ourselves to the protection
and guardianship of God, and to endeavor to have the experience of his
goodness pervading our whole minds. Secondly, thus furnished with steady
firmness and unfailing strength, we are to stand prepared to sustain
every day new conflicts. As no man, however, is able of himself to
sustain these conflicts, David urges us to hope for and ask the spirit
of fortitude from God, a matter particularly worthy of our notice. For
hence we are taught, that when the Spirit of God puts us in mind of our
duty, he examines not what each man’s ability is, nor does he measure
men’s services by their own strength, but stimulates us rather to pray
and beseech God to correct our defects, as it is he alone who can do
this.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_634"></span>[635](cc08036.htm#fr_634) <span
id="xxxvii.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxxvii.i-p3"></span> “<span id="xxxvii.i-p3.1"></span>Ou,
adresse moy et conduy.” — *Fr*. *marg.* “Or, do thou direct and guide
me.”

<span id="fn_635"></span>[636](cc08036.htm#fr_635) <span
id="xxxvii.i-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xxxvii.i-p7"></span> “<span id="xxxvii.i-p7.1"></span>Feroit
une antithese entre ces deux choses, Estre en destresse pour un temps,
et demeurer confus.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_636"></span>[637](cc08036.htm#fr_636) <span
id="xxxvii.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xxxvii.i-p12"></span> “<span id="xxxvii.i-p12.1"></span>Si los
hommes regardent a leur dignite.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_637"></span>[638](cc08036.htm#fr_637) <span
id="xxxvii.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxxvii.ii-p3"></span> *Dr Geddes* observes, that this is the
literal translation of the Hebrew words; “but,” says he, “as negative
propositions in Hebrew are often equivalent in sense to opposite
positives, I deemed it better to use an equivalent as more agreeable to
what precerdes and follows.” His rendering is, “Rescued me from the hand
of mine enemy.”

<span id="fn_638"></span>[639](cc08036.htm#fr_638) <span
id="xxxvii.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxxvii.ii-p7"></span> “<span id="xxxvii.ii-p7.1"></span>Se
faisans a croire que de leur faict ce ne sera que triomphe.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_639"></span>[640](cc08036.htm#fr_639) <span
id="xxxvii.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xxxvii.ii-p10"></span> *Horsley*, while his translation is
similar to that of Calvin, “Thou hast delivered me,” takes a somewhat
different view of the meaning. “Thou hast, i.e., Thou most surely wilt.
— The thing is as certain as if it were done.”

<span id="fn_640"></span>[641](cc08036.htm#fr_640) <span
id="xxxvii.ii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="xxxvii.ii-p15"></span> *Hammond* considers “vanities” as
referring to the practice of superstitiously having recourse to auguries
and divinations for advice and direction, a practice which prevailed
among the heathen, when they met with any difficulty or danger. To the
responses of augury, they showed the greatest regard; although they were
deceived and disappointed in the confidence which they reposed in them.
David declares that he detested all such practices, and trusted for aid
to God alone. *French* and *Skinner*, by *lying vanities,* understand
*idols.* “Idols,” says *Walford*, “are often thus denominated; though
the term is not to be confined to this sense, as all the pursuits of
iniquity may be justly comprehended under it. - *Vide* <span
id="xxxvii.ii-p15.1"></span>[De
32:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#021)<span
id="xxxvii.ii-p15.1"></span>; <span id="xxxvii.ii-p15.2"></span>[Jon
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#008)<span
id="xxxvii.ii-p15.2"></span>.”

<span id="fn_641"></span>[642](cc08036.htm#fr_641) <span
id="xxxvii.ii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xxxvii.ii-p18"></span> “There is a contrast in the expression
between the straits to which he had been confined, and the freedom which
was now bestowed upon him.” — *Walford.*

<span id="fn_642"></span>[643](cc08036.htm#fr_642) <span
id="xxxvii.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxxvii.iii-p3"></span> “<span id="xxxvii.iii-p3.1"></span>Ou,
des grans.” — *Fr*. *marg.* “Or, of the great.”

<span id="fn_643"></span>[644](cc08036.htm#fr_643) <span
id="xxxvii.iii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xxxvii.iii-p7"></span> “The word <span
id="xxxvii.iii-p7.2"></span>עוך,” says *Hammond*, “as it signifies
*sin,* so it signifies also the punishment of sin, <span
id="xxxvii.iii-p7.3"></span>[Isa.
53:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#006),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#011)<span
id="xxxvii.iii-p7.3"></span>;” and in this last sense this critic here
understands it, that it may be connected with *grief* and *sighing,*
which are mentioned in the preceding clause, and may express those
miseries which David’s sins had brought upon him. “<span
id="xxxvii.iii-p7.4"></span>וזע” observes *Rogers*, “signifies here and
in some other places, *affliction,* the punishment or consequence of
sin; see <span id="xxxvii.iii-p7.5"></span>[Ge
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#013)<span
id="xxxvii.iii-p7.5"></span>; <span id="xxxvii.iii-p7.6"></span>[1Sa
28:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#010)<span
id="xxxvii.iii-p7.6"></span>; <span id="xxxvii.iii-p7.7"></span>[2Ki
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2007.htm#009)<span
id="xxxvii.iii-p7.7"></span>,” etc. - *Book of Psalms in Hebrew,
metrically arranged,* vol. 2, p.188. The Septuagint reads, *in poverty*
or *affliction, in* which it is followed by the Syriac and Vulgate.

<span id="fn_644"></span>[645](cc08036.htm#fr_644) <span
id="xxxvii.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xxxvii.iii-p12"></span> “I am become like a broken vessel;”
that is, utterly neglected as being worthless.

<span id="fn_645"></span>[646](cc08036.htm#fr_645) <span
id="xxxvii.iii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="xxxvii.iii-p13"></span> *Horsley* takes the same view. He
reads, “the mighty.”

<span id="fn_646"></span>[647](cc08036.htm#fr_646) <span
id="xxxvii.iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xxxvii.iii-p14"></span> “*Fearfulness on every side,* or
*terror round about.* In Heb., *magor missabib,* which name Jeremiah
gave to Pashur the priest, signifying that he should be a terror to
himself and to all his friends; <span id="xxxvii.iii-p14.1"></span>[Jer.
20:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#004)<span
id="xxxvii.iii-p14.1"></span>.” — *Ainsworth. Horsley* reads,

<span id="xxxvii.iii-p15"></span>“Truly I heard the angry muttering of
the mighty,  
of them that are the general dread.”

<span id="xxxvii.iii-p16"></span>On this he has the following note:
”<span id="xxxvii.iii-p16.1"></span>מסביב מגור, I take this to be a
phrase describing the mighty, whose malignant threats against him he
overheard, as persons universally dreaded for their power and their
cruelty.”

<span id="fn_647"></span>[648](cc08036.htm#fr_647) <span
id="xxxvii.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxxvii.v-p3"></span> “<span id="xxxvii.v-p3.1"></span>C’est,
reservee.” — *Fr*. *marg.* “That is, laid up.”

<span id="fn_648"></span>[649](cc08036.htm#fr_648) <span
id="xxxvii.v-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxxvii.v-p9"></span> “<span id="xxxvii.v-p9.1"></span>C’est a
dire, a cause de leur adoption.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_649"></span>[650](cc08036.htm#fr_649) <span
id="xxxvii.v-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xxxvii.v-p10"></span> *“Before the sons of men, i.e.* openly,
so that the world must acknowledge ‘there is a reward for the righteous
man.’ Compare <span id="xxxvii.v-p10.1"></span>[Ps
58:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#011)<span
id="xxxvii.v-p10.1"></span>.” — *French and Skinner.*

<span id="fn_650"></span>[651](cc08036.htm#fr_650) <span
id="xxxvii.v-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xxxvii.v-p13"></span> “<span id="xxxvii.v-p13.1"></span>Et que
quand elle luit sur les fideles, ses rayons sont pour esblouir les yeux
de tous les iniques, et affoiblir leur mains.." — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_651"></span>[652](cc08036.htm#fr_651) <span
id="xxxvii.v-p13.3"></span>

<span id="xxxvii.v-p14"></span> This is the reading adopted by
*Walford*. “<span id="xxxvii.v-p14.1"></span>רכס ,מרכסי*, colligavit:*
hence ‘bands,’ ‘conspiracies.’”

<span id="fn_652"></span>[653](cc08036.htm#fr_652) <span
id="xxxvii.v-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xxxvii.v-p17"></span> “The particle of similitude is wanting
in Hebrew, as is not uncommon. The intention of the Psalmist is
evidently to describe by a metaphor his signal deliverance, as if he had
been guarded by invincible fortifications.” — *Walford.*

<span id="fn_653"></span>[654](cc08036.htm#fr_653) <span
id="xxxvii.vi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxxvii.vi-p3"></span> “<span id="xxxvii.vi-p3.1"></span>Ou,
perturbation; ou, hastivete.” — *Fr*. *marg.* “Or, perturbation; or,
haste.”

<span id="fn_654"></span>[655](cc08036.htm#fr_654) <span
id="xxxvii.vi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xxxvii.vi-p4"></span> ”<span id="xxxvii.vi-p4.1"></span>Ou,
par excellence.” — “Or, excellently.” — *Fr.* *marg.*

<span id="fn_655"></span>[656](cc08036.htm#fr_655) <span
id="xxxvii.vi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xxxvii.vi-p10"></span> “<span id="xxxvii.vi-p10.1"></span>Et
recognoistre qu’en icelle ils ont assez de secours.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_656"></span>[657](cc08036.htm#fr_656) <span
id="xxxvii.vi-p10.3"></span>

<span id="xxxvii.vi-p11"></span> Literally, “with plenty.”

<span id="fn_657"></span>[658](cc08036.htm#fr_657) <span
id="xxxvii.vi-p11.2"></span>

<span id="xxxvii.vi-p12"></span> The word <span
id="xxxvii.vi-p12.1"></span>גאה, *gaäh,* from which <span
id="xxxvii.vi-p12.2"></span>גאוה, *gaävah,* which we have rendered
*proudly,* is derived, signifies *elatus est, eminuit;* and <span
id="xxxvii.vi-p12.3"></span>גאוה, *gaävah,* “is sometimes taken in a bad
sense for *pride* or *arrogance,* as in <span
id="xxxvii.vi-p12.4"></span>[Ps
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#002)<span
id="xxxvii.vi-p12.4"></span>; and sometimes in a good sense for
*splendor, magnificence, strength, excellence.* In the latter sense it
is used of God, <span id="xxxvii.vi-p12.5"></span>[Ps
68:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#034)<span
id="xxxvii.vi-p12.5"></span>, *His height,* or *excellence and strength,
are in the clouds.”* — *Hammond.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 32](cc08037)
