[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc08031)  [Next](cc08033) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 8: Psalms, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxxiii"></span>

<span id="xxxiii-p1"></span>PSALM 27.

<span id="xxxiii-p2"></span>In this psalm, David rehearses the desires
and meditations with which he had exercised himself in the midst of his
great dangers. The thanksgivings which he mingles with them show that it
was composed after his deliverance. It is also probable that he repeats
at once the prayers which had exercised his thoughts in his different
meditations. Hence it is to be seen here with what invincible fortitude
of soul the holy man was endued, that he might overcome the most
grievous assaults of his enemies. His wonderful piety shines forth in
this, that he wished to live for no other purpose than to serve God: nor
could he be turned aside from this purpose by any anxiety or trouble.

<span id="xxxiii-p3"></span>A Psalm of David.

<span id="xxxiii.i"></span>

<span id="xxxiii.i-p1"></span><span id="xxxiii.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
27:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#001)<span id="xxxiii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxxiii.i-p2"></span>**1.** Jehovah is my light and my
salvation, whom shall I fear? Jehovah is the strength of my life, of
whom shall I be afraid? **2.** When the wicked came upon me to eat up my
flesh, when my oppressors and mine enemies came upon me, they stumbled
and fell. **3.** Though armies should encamp against me, my heart shall
not fear; though war should rise against me, in this will I be
confident.

<span id="xxxiii.i-p3"></span> 

<span id="xxxiii.i-p4"></span><span id="xxxiii.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xxxiii.i-p5"></span>**1.** *Jehovah is my light.* This
commencement may be understood as meaning that David, having already
experienced God’s mercy, publishes a testimony of his gratitude. But I
rather incline to another meaning, namely, that, perceiving the conflict
he had to wage with the sharpest temptations, he fortifies himself
beforehand, and as it were brings together matter for confidence: for it
is necessary that the saints earnestly wrestle with themselves to repel
or subdue the doubts which the flesh is so prone to cherish, that they
may cheerfully and speedily betake themselves to prayer. David,
accordingly, having been tossed with various tempests, at length
recovers himself, and shouts triumphantly over the troubles with which
he had been harassed, rejoicing that whenever God displays his mercy and
favor, there is nothing to be feared. This is farther intimated by the
accumulation of terms which he employs, when he calls God not only *his
light,* but *his salvation,* and *the rock* or *strength of his life*
His object was, to put a threefold shield, as it were, against his
various fears, as sufficient to ward them off. The term *light,* as is
well known, is used in Scripture to denote joy, or the perfection of
happiness. Farther, to explain his meaning, he adds that God was *his
salvation* and *the strength of his life,* as it was by his help that he
felt himself safe, and free from the terrors of death. Certainly we find
that all our fears arise from this source, that we are too anxious about
our life, while we acknowledge not that God is its preserver. We can
have no tranquillity, therefore, until we attain the persuasion that our
life is sufficiently guarded, because it is protected by his omnipotent
power. The interrogation, too, shows how highly David esteemed the
Divine protection, as he thus boldly exults against all his enemies and
dangers. Nor assuredly do we ascribe due homage to God, unless, trusting
to his promised aid, we dare to boast of the certainty of our safety.
Weighing, as it were, in scales the whole power of earth and hell, David
accounts it all lighter than a feather, and considers God alone as far
outweighing the whole.

<span id="xxxiii.i-p6"></span>Let us learn, therefore, to put such a
value on God’s power to protect us as to put to flight all our fears.
Not that the minds of the faithful can, by reason of the infirmity of
the flesh, be at all times entirely devoid of fear; but immediately
recovering courage, let us, from the high tower of our confidence, look
down upon all our dangers with contempt. Those who have never tasted the
grace of God tremble because they refuse to rely on him, and imagine
that he is often incensed against them, or at least far removed from
them. But with the promises of God before our eyes, and the grace which
they offer, our unbelief does him grievous wrong, if we do not with
unshrinking courage boldly set him against all our enemies. When God,
therefore, kindly allures us to himself, and assures us that he will
take care of our safety, since we have embraced his promises, or because
we believe him to be faithful, it is meet that we highly extol his
power, that it may ravish our hearts with admiration of himself. We must
mark well this comparison, What are all creatures to God? Moreover, we
must extend this confidence still farther, in order to banish all fears
from our consciences, like Paul, who, when speaking of his eternal
salvation, boldly exclaims,

<span id="xxxiii.i-p7"></span>“If God be for us, who can be against us?”
(<span id="xxxiii.i-p7.1"></span>[Ro
8:34](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#034)<span id="xxxiii.i-p7.1"></span>.)

<span id="xxxiii.i-p8"></span><span id="xxxiii.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxxiii.i-p9"></span>**2.** *When the wicked, etc.* There is no
reason for translating this sentence, as some interpreters do, into the
future tense.  <span id="fr_578"></span>[579](#fn_578) But while we
retain the past tense which the prophet employs, the words may be
explained in a twofold manner. The meaning but in the prophetic writings
it is often used for the future. There does not, however, as Calvin
remarks, appear to be any necessity for translating the verbs into the
future tense in this passage, in which David may be considered as
contemplating the past evidences of the goodness of God towards him, and
from them taking encouragement with respect to the future. either is,
that David celebrates the victory which he had obtained by the blessing
of God; or there is a reference to the manner in which he had encouraged
himself to hope the best, even in the midst of his temptations, namely,
by thinking of God’s former favors. The latter is the exposition which I
prefer. They both, however, amount to the same thing, and imply that
David had no reason henceforth to doubt of God’s assistance when he
considered his former experience; for nothing is of greater use to
confirm our faith, than the remembrance of those instances in which God
has clearly given us a proof not only of his grace, but of his truth and
power. I connect this verse, accordingly, with the following one. In the
former, David recalls to mind the triumphs which, by God’s help, he had
already obtained; and from this he concludes, that by what hosts soever
he may be environed, or whatever mischief his enemies may devise against
him, he would fearlessly stand up against them. The Hebrew word <span
id="xxxiii.i-p10.2"></span>קרב *karab,* signifies *to approach;* but
here it refers to the irruption that David’s enemies made upon him when
they assaulted him. Some translate it *to fight,* but this translation
is flat. To testify his innocence, he calls them *wicked or froward,*
and by saying that they *came upon him to eat up his flesh,*  <span
id="fr_579"></span>[580](#fn_579) he expresses their savage cruelty.

<span id="xxxiii.i-p12"></span><span id="xxxiii.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xxxiii.i-p13"></span>**3.** *Though armies should encamp.* He
infers from his former experience, as I have already mentioned, that
whatever adversity may befall him, he ought to hope well, and to have no
misgivings about the divine protection, which had been so effectually
vouchsafed to him in his former need. He had asserted this, indeed, in
the first verse, but now, upon farther proof of it, he repeats it. Under
the terms, *camps* and *armies,* he includes whatever is most formidable
in the world: as if he had said, Although all men should conspire for my
destruction, I will disregard their violence, because the power of God,
which I know is on my side, is far above theirs. But when he declares,
*My heart shall not fear,* this does not imply that he would be entirely
devoid of fear, — for that would have been more worthy of the name of
insensibility than of virtue; but lest his heart should faint under the
terrors which he had to encounter, he opposed to them the shield of
faith. Some transfer the word translated *in this* to the following
verse, meaning that he was confident that he would dwell in God’s house;
but I am of opinion that it belongs rather to the preceding doctrine.
For then does faith bring forth its fruit in due season, when we remain
firm and fearless in the midst of dangers. David, therefore, intimates,
that when the trial comes, his faith will prove invincible, because it
relies on the power of God.

<span id="xxxiii.ii"></span>

<span id="xxxiii.ii-p1"></span><span id="xxxiii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
27:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#004)<span
id="xxxiii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxxiii.ii-p2"></span>**4.** One thing have I desired of
Jehovah, this will I follow after; that I may dwell in the house of
Jehovah all the days of my life, to behold the beauty of Jehovah, and
diligently to survey his temple. **5.** For he shall hide me in his tent
in the day of evil:  <span id="fr_580"></span>[581](#fn_580) he shall
hide me in the secret place of his tent; he shall set me up upon a rock.
**6.** And now shall he lift up my head above mine enemies who surround
me: and I will offer sacrifices of joy in his tabernacle; I will sing
and praise Jehovah.

<span id="xxxiii.ii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xxxiii.ii-p5"></span><span id="xxxiii.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xxxiii.ii-p6"></span>**4.** *One thing have I desired.* Some
consider this as a prophecy of the perpetuity of David’s kingdom, on
which not only his own personal happiness depended, but also the
happiness of his whole people; as if he had said, I am so well contented
with this singular proof of God’s favor, that I can think on nothing
else night and day. In my opinion, however, it appears a simpler
interpretation to view the words as meaning, that although David was
banished from his country, despoiled of his wife, bereft of his
kinsfolk; and, in fine, dispossessed of his substance, yet he was not so
desirous for the recovery of these, as he was grieved and afflicted for
his banishment from God’s sanctuary, and the loss of his sacred
privileges. Under the word *one,* there is an implied antithesis, in
which David, disregarding all other interests, displays his intense
affection for the service of God; so that it was bitterer to him to be
an exile from the sanctuary, than to be denied access to his own house.
That David desired only one thing, therefore, namely, to dwell in the
house of the Lord, must be read in one sentence. For there is no
probability that he means by this some secret wish which he suppressed,
seeing he distinctly proclaims what it was that chiefly troubled him. He
adds, too, steadiness of purpose, declaring that he will not cease to
reiterate these prayers. Many may be seen spurring on with great
impetuosity at first, whose ardor, in process of time, not only
languishes, but is almost immediately extinguished. By declaring,
therefore, that he would persevere in this wish during his whole life,
he thereby distinguishes between himself and hypocrites.

<span id="xxxiii.ii-p7"></span>We must, however, observe by what motive
David was so powerfully stimulated. “Surely,” some may say, “he could
have called on God beyond the precincts of the temple. Wherever he
wandered as an exile, he carried with him the precious promise of God,
so that he needed not to put so great a value upon the sight of the
external edifice. He appears, by some gross imagination or other, to
suppose that God could be enclosed by wood and stones.” But if we
examine the words more carefully, it will be easy to see, that his
object was altogether different from a mere sight of the noble building
and its ornaments, however costly. He speaks, indeed, of the beauty of
the temple, but he places that beauty not so much in the goodliness that
was to be seen by the eye, as in its being the celestial pattern which
was shown to Moses, as it is written in <span
id="xxxiii.ii-p7.1"></span>[Ex
25:40](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#040)<span
id="xxxiii.ii-p7.1"></span>,

<span id="xxxiii.ii-p8"></span>“And look that thou make them after this
pattern which was showed thee in the mount.”

<span id="xxxiii.ii-p9"></span>As the fashion of the temple was not
framed according to the wisdom of man, but was an image of spiritual
things, the prophet directed his eyes and all his affections to this
object. Their madness is, therefore, truly detestable who wrest this
place in favor of pictures and images, which, instead of deserving to be
numbered among temple ornaments, are rather like dung and filth,
defiling all the purity of holy things. We should now consider, whether
the faithful are to be like-minded under the Christian or Gospel
dispensation.  <span id="fr_581"></span>[582](#fn_581) I own, indeed,
that we are in very different circumstances from the ancient fathers;
but so far as God still preserves his people under a certain external
order, and draws them to him by earthly instructions, temples have still
their beauty, which deservedly ought to draw the affections and desires
of the faithful to them. The Word, sacraments, public prayers, and other
helps of the same kind, cannot be neglected, without a wicked contempt
of God, who manifests himself to us in these ordinances, as in a mirror
or image.

<span id="xxxiii.ii-p11"></span><span id="xxxiii.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xxxiii.ii-p12"></span>**5.** *For he shall hide me in his
tent.* Here the Psalmist promises himself that his prayer would not be
in vain. Although he is deprived of the visible sanctuary for a time, he
doubts not that, wherever he may be, he shall experience the protecting
power of God. And he alludes to the temple, because it was a symbol to
the faithful of the divine presence; as if he had said, that in making
the request which he mentioned he by no means lost his labor; for every
one who shall seek God sincerely, and with a pure heart, shall be safely
concealed under the wings of his protection. The figure of the temple,
he therefore affirms, was not an unmeaning one, for there God, so to
speak, spread forth his wings to gather true believers under his
protection. From this he concludes, that as he had no greater desire
than to flee for refuge under these wings, there would be a shelter
ready for him in times of adversity, under the divine protection, which,
under the figure of a *rock,* he tells us, would be impregnable like
towers, which, for the sake of strength, were wont to be built, in
ancient times, in lofty places. Although he was, therefore, at this
time, environed by enemies on every side, yet he boasts that he shall
overcome them. It is, indeed, a common form of speech in the Scriptures
to say, that those who are oppressed with grief walk with a bowed down
back and dejected countenance, while, on the other hand, they lift up
their heads when their joyfulness is restored. Thus David spake, <span
id="xxxiii.ii-p12.1"></span>[Ps
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#004)<span id="xxxiii.ii-p12.1"></span>,
“Thou, Lord, art the lifter up of mine head.” But because besieging is
here put in opposition to this, he meant to say, that in that divine
refuge he would be as it were lifted on high, so that he might
fearlessly disregard the darts of his enemies, which might have
otherwise pierced him. And in hoping for victory, though he was reduced
to such straits as threatened instant death, he gives us a remarkable
proof of his faith; by which we are taught not to measure the aid of God
by outward appearances or visible means, but even in the midst of death
to hope for deliverance from his powerful and victorious hand.

<span id="xxxiii.ii-p13"></span><span id="xxxiii.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xxxiii.ii-p14"></span>**6.** *And I will offer sacrifices of
triumph*  <span id="fr_582"></span>[583](#fn_582) *in his tabernacle.*
By making a solemn vow of thanksgiving, after he shall have been
delivered from dangers, he confirms himself again in the hope of
deliverance. The faithful under the Law, we know, were wont, by a solemn
rite, to pay their vows, when they had experienced any remarkable
blessing from God. Here, therefore, David, though in banishment, and
prohibited from approaching the temple, boasts that he would again come
to the altar of God, and offer the sacrifice of praise. It appears,
however, that he tacitly sets the holy rejoicing and songs, in which he
promises to give thanks to God, in opposition to the profane triumphings
of the world.

<span id="xxxiii.iii"></span>

<span id="xxxiii.iii-p1"></span><span id="xxxiii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
27:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#007)<span
id="xxxiii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxxiii.iii-p2"></span>**7.** Hear, O Jehovah! my voice, with
which I cry unto thee; have mercy upon me, and answer me. **8.** My
heart said to thee,  <span id="fr_583"></span>[584](#fn_583) Seek ye my
face; therefore,  <span id="fr_584"></span>[585](#fn_584) thy face, O
Jehovah! will I seek. **9.** Hide not thy face from me; east not away
thy servant in thy wrath: thou hast been my strength; leave me not,
neither forsake me utterly, O God of my salvation!

<span id="xxxiii.iii-p5"></span> 

<span id="xxxiii.iii-p6"></span><span id="xxxiii.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxxiii.iii-p7"></span>**7.** *Hear, O Jehovah! my voice.* The
Psalmist returns again to prayer, and in doing so, he declares with what
armor he was furnished to break through his temptations. By the word
*cry,* he expresses his vehemence, as I have elsewhere said, that he may
thereby move God the sooner to help him. For the same purpose, also, he
a little after mentions his misery, because the more the faithful are
oppressed, the more does their very need induce God to extend his favor
towards them.

<span id="xxxiii.iii-p8"></span><span id="xxxiii.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxxiii.iii-p9"></span>**8.** *My heart said to thee.* The
change of person in the verbs has occasioned a variety of
interpretations of this verse. But whoever closely examines David’s
design will perceive that the text runs perfectly well. As it becomes us
not rashly to rush into the presence of God, until he first calls us,
David first tells us, that he carefully considered how gently and
sweetly God prevents his people, by spontaneously inviting them to seek
his face; and then, recovering his cheerfulness, he declares he would
come wheresoever God may call him. The sense of the Hebrew word <span
id="xxxiii.iii-p9.1"></span>לך, *leka,* is somewhat ambiguous. It may
mean the same thing as *tibi, to thee,* in Latin. But as the Hebrew
letter <span id="xxxiii.iii-p9.2"></span>ל, *lamed,* is often used for
the preposition *of*, or *concerning,* it may properly enough be
translated, *my heart hath said of thee;* an exposition to which the
majority of interpreters incline. More probably, however, in my opinion,
it denotes a mutual conversation between God and the prophet. I have
just said, that no one can believingly rise to seek God until the way is
first opened by God’s invitation, as I have elsewhere shown from the
prophet’s declaration,

<span id="xxxiii.iii-p10"></span>“I will say, It is my people; and they
shall say, The Lord is my God,” (<span id="xxxiii.iii-p10.1"></span>[Zec
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#009)<span
id="xxxiii.iii-p10.1"></span>.)

<span id="xxxiii.iii-p11"></span>David accordingly says, that in this
way the door was opened for him to seek God: he brings forward this
promise, and thus responds, as it were, to God.  <span
id="fr_585"></span>[586](#fn_585) And, certainly, if this symphony does
not precede, no man will conduct aright the chorus of the invitation. As
soon, therefore, as we hear God presenting himself to us, let us
cordially reply, Amen; and let us think with ourselves of his promises,
as if they were familiarly addressed to us. Thus true believers have no
need to seek any subtle artifice or tedious circuits to introduce
themselves into God’s favor, since this preface prepares so easy a way
for them, “However unworthy we are to be received by thee, O Lord, yet
thy commandment, by which thou enjoinest upon us to come to thee, is
sufficient encouragement to us.” The voice of God, therefore, ought to
resound in our hearts, like an echo in hollow places, that from this
mutual concord there may spring confidence to call upon him.

<span id="xxxiii.iii-p13"></span>The term, *face,* is commonly explained
to mean *help* or *succor;* as if it had been said, Seek me. But I am
persuaded that the allusion here is also to the sanctuary, and that
David refers to the mode of manifestation in which God was wont to
render himself in some degree visible. No doubt, it is unlawful to form
any gross or carnal idea of him, but as he appointed the ark of the
covenant to be a token of his presence, it is, without any impropriety,
every where denominated his face. It is indeed true, that we are far
from God so long as we abide in this world, because faith is far removed
from sight; but it is equally true, that we now see God as in a mirror,
and darkly, (<span id="xxxiii.iii-p13.1"></span>[1Co
13:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#012)<span
id="xxxiii.iii-p13.1"></span>,) until he shall openly show himself to us
at the last day. Under this word, therefore, I am persuaded, are
represented to us those helps by which God raises us to his presence,
descending from his inconceivable glory to us, and furnishing us on
earth with a vision of his heavenly glory. But as it is according to his
own sovereign pleasure that God vouchsafes us to look upon him, (as he
does in Word and sacraments,) it becomes us steadily to fix our eyes on
this view, that it may not be with us as with the Papists, who, by means
of the wildest inventions, wickedly transform God into whatever shapes
please their fancy, or their brains have conceived.

<span id="xxxiii.iii-p14"></span><span id="xxxiii.iii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xxxiii.iii-p15"></span>**9.** *Hide not thy face from me.* The
Psalmist elegantly continues the same form of speech, but with a
different meaning. *The face of God* is now employed to describe the
sensible effects of his grace and favor: as if it had been said, Lord,
make me truly to experience that thou hast been near to me, and let me
clearly behold thy power in saving me. We must observe the distinction
between the theoretical knowledge derived from the Word of God and what
is called the experimental knowledge of his grace. For as God shows
himself present in operation, (as they usually speak,) he must first be
sought in his Word. The sentence which follows, *Cast not away thy
servant in thine anger,* some Jewish interpreters expound in too forced
a manner to mean, Suffer not thy servant to be immersed in the wicked
cares of this world, which are nothing but anger and madness. I,
however, prefer to translate the Hebrew word <span
id="xxxiii.iii-p15.1"></span>נטה, *natah,* as many translate it, *to
turn away from,* or *to remove.* Their meaning is more probable who
interpret it, Make not thy servant to decline to anger. When a person is
utterly forsaken by God, he cannot but be agitated within by murmuring
thoughts, and break forth into the manifestations of vexation and anger.
If any one think that David now anticipates this temptation, I shall not
object, for he was not without reason afraid of impatience, which
weakens us and makes us go beyond the bounds of reason. But I keep to
the first exposition, as it is confirmed by the two words which follow;
and thus the term *anger* imports a tacit confession of sin; because,
although David acknowledges that God might justly cast him off, he
deprecates his anger. Moreover, by recalling to mind God’s former
favors, he encourages himself to hope for more, and by this argument he
moves God to continue his help, and not to leave his work imperfect.

<span id="xxxiii.iv"></span>

<span id="xxxiii.iv-p1"></span><span id="xxxiii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
27:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#010)<span
id="xxxiii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxxiii.iv-p2"></span>**10.** When my father and mother shall
forsake me, Jehovah will take me up. **11.** Teach me thy way, O
Jehovah! and lead me in the right path, because of mine adversaries.
**12.** Give me not up to the desire  <span
id="fr_586"></span>[587](#fn_586) of mine oppressors: for false
witnesses have risen up against me, and he who bringeth forth violence.

<span id="xxxiii.iv-p4"></span> 

<span id="xxxiii.iv-p5"></span><span id="xxxiii.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xxxiii.iv-p6"></span>**10.** *When my father and my mother
shall forsake me.* As it appears from the sacred history, that Jesse, so
far as his opportunity admitted, performed his duty to his son David,
some are of opinion that the nobles and councillors are here mentioned
allegorically; but this is not suitable. Nor is it with any reason that
they urge this scruple. David does not complain that he was unnaturally
betrayed by his father or mother; but by this comparison he magnifies
the grace of God, declaring, that he would ever find him ready to help
him, although he might be forsaken of all men. The Hebrew particle <span
id="xxxiii.iv-p6.1"></span>כי, *ki,* for the most part, signifies *for,*
but it is also known to be often employed for the adverb of time,
*when.* David, therefore, meant to intimate, that whatever benevolence,
love, zeal, attention, or service, might be found among men, they are
far inferior to the paternal mercy with which God encircles his people.
The highest degree of love among men, it is true, is to be found in
parents who love their children as their own bowels. But God advances us
higher, declaring, by the prophet Isaiah, that though a mother may
forget the child of her womb, he would always be mindful of us, (<span
id="xxxiii.iv-p6.2"></span>[Isa
49:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#015)<span
id="xxxiii.iv-p6.2"></span>.) In this degree does David place him, so
that he who is the source of all goodness far surpasses all mortals, who
are naturally malevolent and niggardly. It is, however, an imperfect
mode of speech, like that in <span id="xxxiii.iv-p6.3"></span>[Isa
63:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#016)<span
id="xxxiii.iv-p6.3"></span>,

<span id="xxxiii.iv-p7"></span>“Doubtless, thou art our Father, though
Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel acknowledge us not.”

<span id="xxxiii.iv-p8"></span>The purport of the whole is this: However
inclined by nature earthly parents are to help their children, nay,
though they should endeavor to cherish them with the greatest ardor of
affection, yet should affection be wholly extinguished in the earth, God
would fulfill the duty both of father and mother to his people. From
which it follows, that we basely undervalue the grace of God, if our
faith rise not above all the affections of nature; for sooner shall the
laws of nature be overturned a hundred times, than God shall fail his
people.

<span id="xxxiii.iv-p9"></span><span id="xxxiii.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xxxiii.iv-p10"></span>**11.** *Teach me thy way, O Jehovah!*
Many think that David here requests that God would guide him by his
Spirit, lest he should surpass his enemies in acting violently and
wickedly. This doctrine is, no doubt, very useful, but it does not seem
to agree with the scope of the passage. It is a simpler interpretation,
in my opinion, to consider that David desires, in order to escape the
snares and violence of his enemies, that God would extend to him his
hand, and safely conduct him, so as to give a happy issue to his
affairs. He sets *the right path* in opposition to the difficulties and
impediments which are in places which are rough, and of difficult
access, to overcome which he was unequal, unless God undertook the
office of a guide to lead him. But he who thus desires to commit himself
to the safeguard and protection of God,  <span
id="fr_587"></span>[588](#fn_587) must first renounce crafty and wicked
devices. We must not expect that God, who promises to grant a happy
issue only to the single in heart, and those who trust in his
faithfulness, will bless crooked and wicked counsels.

<span id="xxxiii.iv-p12"></span><span id="xxxiii.iv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xxxiii.iv-p13"></span>**12.** *Give me not up to the desire of
mine oppressors.* The Hebrew noun <span id="xxxiii.iv-p13.1"></span>נפש,
*nephesh,* signifies *lust, will,* or *desire;* and the language of
David implies, Deliver me not up to the pleasure or lust of mine
enemies, and thus he intimates, that they greedily gaped for his
destruction. God delivers his people in two ways; either by appeasing
the cruelty of the wicked, and rendering them meek; or, if he permit
them to burn with fury, by restraining their power and violence, so that
they desire and endeavor in vain to do mischief. The Psalmist afterwards
adds, that he is persecuted both with slanders and false accusations,
and also by open violence; for when he says, that they *bring forth
violence,*  <span id="fr_588"></span>[589](#fn_588) he means that they
speak of nothing but of war and slaughter. We thus see that the holy man
was miserably oppressed on every side. Even his integrity, which we know
to have been singular, could not free him from bitter and deadly
calumnies, and he was at the same time overwhelmed by the violence and
force of his enemies. If the ungodly, therefore, should at any time rise
against us, not only with menaces and cruel violence, but to give the
semblance of justice to their enmity, should slander us with lies, let
us remember the example of David, who was assaulted in both ways; nay,
let us recall to mind that Christ the Son of God suffered no less injury
from lying tongues than from violence.  <span
id="fr_589"></span>[590](#fn_589) Moreover, this prayer was dictated for
our comfort, to intimate that God can maintain our innocence, and oppose
the shield of his protection to the cruelty of our enemies.

<span id="xxxiii.v"></span>

<span id="xxxiii.v-p1"></span><span id="xxxiii.v-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
27:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#013)<span
id="xxxiii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxxiii.v-p2"></span>**13.** Unless I had believed to see the
goodness of Jehovah in the land of the living:  <span
id="fr_590"></span>[591](#fn_590) **14.** Wait thou on Jehovah; be of
good courage, and he shall strengthen thine heart: wait thou also on
Jehovah.

<span id="xxxiii.v-p4"></span> 

<span id="xxxiii.v-p5"></span><span id="xxxiii.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xxxiii.v-p6"></span>**13.** *Unless I had believed to see the
goodness of Jehovah.* It is generally agreed among interpreters, that
this sentence is incomplete. Some, however, are of opinion, that the
Hebrew particle <span id="xxxiii.v-p6.2"></span>לולא *lulë,* is used for
the purpose of affirmation, as if it were a species of oath; the Hebrews
being accustomed to swear elliptically; for breaking off in the middle
of the discourse and leaving it imperfect, they supplied an imprecation,
namely, that God would punish them in case they perjured themselves. But
the greater number give a different interpretation, namely, that David
intimates that he was supported solely by faith, otherwise he had
perished a hundred times. The meaning which they elicit, accordingly,
is, Had I not relied on the promise of God, and been assuredly persuaded
that he would safely preserve me, and had I not continued firm in this
persuasion, I had utterly perished: There was no other remedy. Some
understand by *the land of the living,* the heavenly inheritance; but
this interpretation is forced, and disagrees with the usual style of
Scripture. When Hezekiah laments in his song recorded in <span
id="xxxiii.v-p6.3"></span>[Isa
38:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#011)<span id="xxxiii.v-p6.3"></span>,
that he had no hope of seeing God “in the land of the living,” he means,
without all doubt, the present life, as he immediately adds, “I shall
behold man no more with the inhabitants of the world.” A similar form of
speech occurs also in another place, (<span
id="xxxiii.v-p6.4"></span>[Jer
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#019)<span
id="xxxiii.v-p6.4"></span>.) David then believed that he would still
enjoy the goodness of God in this world, although he was now deprived of
all experience of his favor, and could see no spark of light. From the
darkness of death, therefore, he promises himself a view of the divine
favor, and by this persuasion his life is sustained, although, according
to the judgment of carnal reason, it was past recovery and lost. It is
to be observed, however, that David does not rashly go beyond the divine
promise. It is true that “godliness is profitable unto all things,
having promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to come,”
(<span id="xxxiii.v-p6.5"></span>[1Ti
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#008)<span id="xxxiii.v-p6.5"></span>;)
but he would have never dared to entertain this persuasion had he not
been informed by a special revelation, and assuredly promised a
successor, who should always sit upon his throne, (<span
id="xxxiii.v-p6.6"></span>[Ps. 132:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#012)<span id="xxxiii.v-p6.6"></span>.)
He was, therefore, justly persuaded that he would not die till this
promise was fulfilled. Lest any man, therefore, by an unwarranted
imitation of his example, should overleap the boundaries of faith, it is
necessary to understand what was peculiar to him, and did not belong to
us. In general, however, we ought all to hope that, although God may not
openly work deliverance for us, or show us his favor in a visible
manner, he will, nevertheless, be always merciful to us, even in the
present life.

<span id="xxxiii.v-p7"></span><span id="xxxiii.v-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xxxiii.v-p8"></span>**14.** *Wait thou on Jehovah.* It may be
doubted whether David, having in the preceding verses spoken of himself,
here addresses his discourse to others, and exhorts them by his own
example to fortitude and persevering patience, as he does in the
conclusion of <span id="xxxiii.v-p8.1"></span>[Ps
31:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#019)<span id="xxxiii.v-p8.1"></span>,
where, after speaking concerning himself particularly, he makes a
transition, and addresses himself to all the godly. But as he speaks
here in the singular number, and uses no mark to show that he directs
his discourse to others, it is in my opinion probable that he applies it
to himself, the more to encourage his confidence in God, lest at any
time his heart should faint.  <span id="fr_591"></span>[592](#fn_591) As
he was conscious of his weakness, and knew that his faith was the great
means of preserving him safe, he seasonably strengthens himself for the
future. Under the word *waiting,* too, he puts himself in mind of new
trials, and sets before his eyes the cross which he must bear. We are
then said to wait on God, when, withdrawing his grace from us, he
suffers us to languish under afflictions. David, therefore, having got
through one conflict, prepares himself to encounter new ones. But as
nothing is more difficult than to give God the honor of relying upon
him, when he hides himself from us, or delays his assistance, David
stirs himself up to collect strength; as if he had said, If fearfulness
steal upon thee; if temptation shake thy faith; if the feelings of the
flesh rise in tumult, do not faint; but rather endeavor to rise above
them by an invincible resolution of mind. From this we may learn, that
the children of God overcome, not by sullenness, but by patience, when
they commit their souls quietly to God; as Isaiah says,

<span id="xxxiii.v-p10"></span>“In quietness and in confidence shall be
your strength,”  
(<span id="xxxiii.v-p10.2"></span>[Isa
30:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#015)<span
id="xxxiii.v-p10.2"></span>.)

<span id="xxxiii.v-p11"></span>As David did not feel himself equal to
great and difficult efforts, he borrows strength from God by prayer. Had
he said no more than *Act like a man,*  <span
id="fr_592"></span>[593](#fn_592) he would have appeared to allege the
motions of his own free-will, but as he immediately adds, by way of
correction, that God would be at hand *to strengthen his heart,* he
plainly enough shows, that when the saints strive vigorously, they fight
in the strength of another, and not in their own. David does not, like
the Papists, put his own efforts into the van, and afterwards supplicate
for divine aid, but having done his own duty, although he knew that he
was destitute of strength in himself, he requests that his deficiency
may be supplied by the grace of the Holy Spirit. And as he knew that the
war must be continued during his whole life, and that new conflicts
would daily arise, and that the troubles of the saints are often
protracted for a long period, he again repeats what he had said about
waiting on God: *Wait thou alone on Jehovah*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_578"></span>[579](cc08032.htm#fr_578) <span
id="xxxiii.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xxxiii.i-p10"></span> The rendering of the learned *Castellio*
is, “<span id="xxxiii.i-p10.1"></span>Si invadant — offensuri sunt atque
casuri;” — “If they invade me they shall stumble and fall The Hebrew
verbs for “stumble” and “fall”

<span id="fn_579"></span>[580](cc08032.htm#fr_579) <span
id="xxxiii.i-p10.3"></span>

<span id="xxxiii.i-p11"></span> *French* and *Skinner* read, “to devour
my flesh;” and observe, that “this image is taken from a wild beast.
Compare <span id="xxxiii.i-p11.1"></span>[Ps
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#007)<span id="xxxiii.i-p11.1"></span>,
and <span id="xxxiii.i-p11.2"></span>[Ps
22:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#013)<span
id="xxxiii.i-p11.2"></span>.”

<span id="fn_580"></span>[581](cc08032.htm#fr_580) <span
id="xxxiii.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxxiii.ii-p3"></span> “<span id="xxxiii.ii-p3.1"></span>C’est,
d’adversite.” — *Note, Fr. marg.* “That is, of adversity.”

<span id="fn_581"></span>[582](cc08032.htm#fr_581) <span
id="xxxiii.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xxxiii.ii-p10"></span> “<span id="xxxiii.ii-p10.1"></span>Sous
le regne de Christ.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_582"></span>[583](cc08032.htm#fr_582) <span
id="xxxiii.ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xxxiii.ii-p15"></span> “<span
id="xxxiii.ii-p15.1"></span>Sacrificia jubili.” — *Lat.* “<span
id="xxxiii.ii-p15.2"></span>Sacrifice de triomphe.” — *Fr*. *Ainsworth*
reads, “Sacrifices of shouting, or of triumph, of joyful sounding and
alarm.” “This,” says he, “hath respect to the law which appointed over
the sacrifices trumpets to be sounded, <span
id="xxxiii.ii-p15.3"></span>[Nu
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#010)<span
id="xxxiii.ii-p15.3"></span>, whose chiefest, most loud, joyful, and
triumphant sound was called *trughnah,* \[or <span
id="xxxiii.ii-p15.4"></span>תרועה, *truah,* the word here used,\]
‘triumph,’ ‘alarm,’ or ‘jubilation,’ <span
id="xxxiii.ii-p15.5"></span>[Nu
10:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#005)<span
id="xxxiii.ii-p15.5"></span>.”

<span id="fn_583"></span>[584](cc08032.htm#fr_583) <span
id="xxxiii.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxxiii.iii-p3"></span> “<span id="xxxiii.iii-p3.1"></span>Ou
dit de toy.” — *Fr*. *marg.* “Or said of or concerning thee.”

<span id="fn_584"></span>[585](cc08032.htm#fr_584) <span
id="xxxiii.iii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xxxiii.iii-p4"></span> “<span
id="xxxiii.iii-p4.1"></span>*Pourtant.”* — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_585"></span>[586](cc08032.htm#fr_585) <span
id="xxxiii.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xxxiii.iii-p12"></span> Calvin’s meaning appears to be this:-
God has given us in his word that gracious command or invitation, “Seek
ye my face,” inviting us to seek him by prayer and the other exercises
of religion. Now, when David says, “My heart said to thee, Seek ye my
face,” he means that his heart reminded God of his command or
invitation; and by this he encouraged himself to seek God’s face, which
he expresses his resolution to do in the following clause, “Thy face, O
Jehovah! will I seek.”

<span id="fn_586"></span>[587](cc08032.htm#fr_586) <span
id="xxxiii.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxxiii.iv-p3"></span> “<span id="xxxiii.iv-p3.1"></span>C’est,
plaisir.” — *Fr*. *marg.* “That is, will or pleasure.”

<span id="fn_587"></span>[588](cc08032.htm#fr_587) <span
id="xxxiii.iv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xxxiii.iv-p11"></span> “<span id="xxxiii.iv-p11.1"></span>En
la sauvegarde et protection de Dieu.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_588"></span>[589](cc08032.htm#fr_588) <span
id="xxxiii.iv-p13.2"></span>

<span id="xxxiii.iv-p14"></span> *Hammond* renders the words “breathers
or *speakers of injury* or *rapine;* <span
id="xxxiii.iv-p14.1"></span>חמס, signifying *injury* or *rapine,* and
<span id="xxxiii.iv-p14.2"></span>פוח, *speak.” Ainsworth* reads, “He
that breatheth or puffeth out violent wrong.

<span id="fn_589"></span>[590](cc08032.htm#fr_589) <span
id="xxxiii.iv-p14.3"></span>

<span id="xxxiii.iv-p15"></span> “<span id="xxxiii.iv-p15.1"></span>De
glaives et autre tels efforts.” — *Fr*. “From the sword and other such
weapons.”

<span id="fn_590"></span>[591](cc08032.htm#fr_590) <span
id="xxxiii.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxxiii.v-p3"></span> In the Hebrew this verse is elliptical,
as Calvin here translates it. In the French version he supplies the
ellipsis, by adding to the end of the verse the words, “<span
id="xxxiii.v-p3.1"></span>C’estoit fait de moy,” “I had perished.” In
our English version, the words, “I had fainted,” are introduced as a
supplement, in the beginning of the verse. Both the supplement of
Calvin, and that of our English version, which are substantially the
same, doubtless explain the meaning of the passage; but they destroy the
elegant abrupt form of the expression employed by the Psalmist, who
breaks off in the middle of his discourse without completing the
sentence, although what he meant to say is very evident. “Unless I had
believed to see the goodness of the Lord in the land of the living,
What! what, alas! should have become of me!” - *Dr* *Adam Clarke.* As,
however, <span id="xxxiii.v-p3.2"></span>לולא, *lulë,* which is rendered
*unless,* is omitted by the ancient versions and several MSS., some
consider it an interpolation, and translate the verse without an
ellipsis. Thus *Walford* renders it, “I have believed that I shall
behold the goodness of Jehovah in the land of the living.”

<span id="fn_591"></span>[592](cc08032.htm#fr_591) <span
id="xxxiii.v-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xxxiii.v-p9"></span> “<span id="xxxiii.v-p9.1"></span>A ce que
sa foy ne soit jamais esbranier.” — *Fr.* “That his faith might never be
shaken.”

<span id="fn_592"></span>[593](cc08032.htm#fr_592) <span
id="xxxiii.v-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xxxiii.v-p12"></span> Calvin here seems to use the Septuagint
version. What he renders in the text, “Be of good courage,” is rendered
by the Septuagint, <span id="xxxiii.v-p12.1"></span>ἀνδρίζου “Be manly,
or act like a man.” The Vulgate reads, “<span
id="xxxiii.v-p12.2"></span>vinliter ae,” following the Septuagint, as it
generally does. Paul uses the same phraseology in <span
id="xxxiii.v-p12.3"></span>[1Co
16:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#013)<span
id="xxxiii.v-p12.3"></span>. “These,” says *Ainsworth*, “are the words
of encouragement against remissness, fear, faintness of heart, or other
infirmities.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 28](cc08033)
