[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc08037)  [Next](cc08039) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 8: Psalms, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxxix"></span>

<span id="xxxix-p1"></span>PSALM 33.

<span id="xxxix-p2"></span>David, or whoever was the author of this
psalm, in order to excite believers to praise God, founds his argument
upon the general providence of God, by which he sustains, protects, and
governs the whole world. Afterwards he celebrates God’s paternal
kindness towards his chosen people, showing at the same time how
necessary it is that the godly should be cherished by his special care.

<span id="xxxix.i"></span>

<span id="xxxix.i-p1"></span><span id="xxxix.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
33:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#001)<span id="xxxix.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxxix.i-p2"></span>**1.** Rejoice in Jehovah, ye righteous;
praise is comely  <span id="fr_669"></span>[670](#fn_669) for the
upright. **2.** Praise Jehovah upon the harp; sing unto him upon the
viol, and an instrument of ten strings. **3.** Sing a new song to him;
sing loudly with joyfulness: **4.** For the word of Jehovah is right;
and all his works are in faithfulness.  <span
id="fr_670"></span>[671](#fn_670)

<span id="xxxix.i-p5"></span> 

<span id="xxxix.i-p6"></span><span id="xxxix.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxxix.i-p7"></span>**1.** *Rejoice in Jehovah, ye righteous.*
Here the inspired writer addresses believers or the righteous by name,
because they alone are capable of proclaiming the glory of God.
Unbelievers, who have never tasted his goodness, cannot praise him from
the heart, and God has no pleasure in his name being pronounced by their
unholy tongues. But the context shows more distinctly why this
exhortation is suitable for believers only. Many, accordingly, expound
the latter clause, *Praise is comely for the upright,* as meaning, that
if the ungodly or hypocrites attempt this exercise, it will turn to the
reproach and dishonor of God rather than to his praise; nay, more, that
they only profane his holy name. It is, no doubt, very true, as I have
already remarked, that God creates for himself a church in the world by
gracious adoption, for the express purpose, that his name may be duly
praised by witnesses suitable for such a work. But the real meaning of
the clause, *Praise is comely for the upright,* is, that there is no
exercise in which they can be better employed. And, assuredly, since God
by his daily benefits furnishes them with such matter for celebrating
his glory, and since his boundless goodness, as we have elsewhere seen,
is laid up as a peculiar treasure for them, it were disgraceful and
utterly unreasonable for them to be silent in the praises of God. The
amount of the matter is, that the principal exercise in which it becomes
the righteous to be employed is to publish among men the righteousness,
goodness, and power of God, the knowledge of which is implanted in their
minds. Following other interpreters, I have translated the clause,
*Praise is comely,* but the word rendered *comely* may also be properly
rendered *desirable,* if we view it as derived from the Hebrew word
<span id="xxxix.i-p7.1"></span>אוה, *avah,* which signifies to *wish* or
*desire.* And certainly, when God allures believers so sweetly, it is
proper that they employ themselves in celebrating his praises with their
whole hearts. It is also to be observed, that when the prophet, after
having in the first clause used the appellation, *the righteous,*
immediately adds the words, *the upright,* which comprehend the inward
integrity of the heart, he defines what true righteousness is, or in
what it consists.

<span id="xxxix.i-p8"></span><span id="xxxix.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxxix.i-p9"></span>**2.** *Praise Jehovah upon the harp.* It
is evident that the Psalmist here expresses the vehement and ardent
affection which the faithful ought to have in praising God, when he
enjoins musical instruments to be employed for this purpose. He would
have nothing omitted by believers which tends to animate the minds and
feelings of men in singing God’s praises. The name of God, no doubt,
can, properly speaking, be celebrated only by the articulate voice; but
it is not without reason that David adds to this those aids by which
believers were wont to stimulate themselves the more to this exercise;
especially considering that he was speaking to God’s ancient people.
There is a distinction, however, to be observed here, that we may not
indiscriminately consider as applicable to ourselves, every thing which
was formerly enjoined upon the Jews. I have no doubt that playing upon
cymbals, touching the harp and the viol, and all that kind of music,
which is so frequently mentioned in the Psalms, was a part of the
education; that is to say, the puerile instruction of the law: I speak
of the stated service of the temple. For even now, if believers choose
to cheer themselves with musical instruments, they should, I think, make
it their object not to dissever their cheerfulness from the praises of
God. But when they frequent their sacred assemblies, musical instruments
in celebrating the praises of God would be no more suitable than the
burning of incense, the lighting up of lamps, and the restoration of the
other shadows of the law. The Papists, therefore, have foolishly
borrowed this, as well as many other things, from the Jews. Men who are
fond of outward pomp may delight in that noise; but the simplicity which
God recommends to us by the apostle is far more pleasing to him. Paul
allows us to bless God in the public assembly of the saints only in a
known tongue, (<span id="xxxix.i-p9.2"></span>[1Co
14:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#016)<span id="xxxix.i-p9.2"></span>.)
The voice of man, although not understood by the generality, assuredly
excels all inanimate instruments of music; and yet we see what St Paul
determines concerning speaking in an unknown tongue.  <span
id="fr_671"></span>[672](#fn_671) What shall we then say of chanting,
which fills the ears with nothing but an empty sound? Does any one
object, that music is very useful for awakening the minds of men and
moving their hearts? I own it; but we should always take care that no
corruption creep in, which might both defile the pure worship of God and
involve men in superstition. Moreover, since the Holy Spirit expressly
warns us of this danger by the mouth of Paul, to proceed beyond what we
are there warranted by him is not only, I must say, unadvised zeal, but
wicked and perverse obstinacy.

<span id="xxxix.i-p11"></span><span id="xxxix.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xxxix.i-p12"></span>**3.** *Sing unto him a new song.* As the
Psalmist afterwards treats of the mighty works of God, and particularly
concerning the preservation of the Church, it is not wonderful that he
exhorts the righteous to sing a new, that is, a rare and choice song.
The more closely and diligently that believers consider the works of
God, the more will they exert themselves in his praises. It is no common
song, therefore, which he exhorts them to sing, but a song corresponding
to the magnificence of the subject. This is also the meaning of the
second clause, in which he urges them *to sing loudly.* In this sense, I
understand the Hebrew word <span id="xxxix.i-p12.1"></span>היתיב,
*heytib,* although others refer it rather to the proper setting of the
notes.

<span id="xxxix.i-p13"></span><span id="xxxix.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xxxix.i-p14"></span>**4.** *For the word of Jehovah is right.*
As I have just remarked, the Psalmist first sets forth God’s general
providence by which he governs the whole world; and he tells us that he
so exerts his power in the whole course of his operations, that the most
perfect equity and faithfulness shine forth everywhere. Some will have
the terms *word* and *work* to be synonymous; but I think there is a
distinction, and that *word* means the same thing as *counsel* or
*ordinance,* while *work* signifies the effect or execution of his
counsel. I grant that here the same subject is repeated in different
words, as is the case in other places; but a slight variation will be
found in such repetitions, that the same thing may he expressed in
various ways. The amount of what is stated is, that whatever God
appoints and commands is right; and whatever he brings to pass in actual
operation is faithful and true. Meanwhile, it ought to be observed, that
the term *word* is not to be understood of doctrine, but of the method
by which God governs the world.

<span id="xxxix.ii"></span>

<span id="xxxix.ii-p1"></span><span id="xxxix.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
33:5-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#005)<span id="xxxix.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxxix.ii-p2"></span>**5.** He loveth righteousness and
judgment: the earth is full of the goodness of Jehovah. **6.** By the
word of Jehovah were the heavens established; and all the host of them
by the spirit  <span id="fr_672"></span>[673](#fn_672) of his mouth.
**7.** He gathered together the waters of the sea as into a heap; He
hath laid up the deeps in treasures. **8.** Let all the earth fear
Jehovah; let the inhabitants of the world stand in awe of him: **9.**
For he spake, and it was; he commanded, and it stood.

<span id="xxxix.ii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xxxix.ii-p5"></span><span id="xxxix.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xxxix.ii-p6"></span>**5.** *He loveth righteousness and
judgment.* This is a confirmation of the preceding verse, and intimates
to us that God of his own nature loves righteousness and equity. It
therefore follows, that froward affections cannot hurry him, after the
manner of men, to evil devices. At first sight, indeed, this appears but
a common commendation of God, and of small importance, because all
confess that he observes the most perfect rule of righteousness in all
his works. Why then, may some one say, has a new song just been spoken
of, as if it had been about some unusual matter? We answer, in the first
place, because it is too obvious how wickedly a great part of the world
shut their eyes to God’s righteousness, while they either carelessly
overlook innumerable proofs of his providence, or imagine that they
happen by chance. But there is often a worse fault than this; namely,
that if our wishes are not gratified, we instantly murmur against God’s
righteousness; and although the maxim, “God doeth all things
righteously,” is in every man’s mouth, yet scarcely one in a hundred
firmly believes it in his heart, otherwise, as soon as this truth is
pronounced, “Thus it pleaseth God,” every man would obediently submit
himself to God’s will. Now, as men in adversity are with the utmost
difficulty brought to this point - to acknowledge that God is just, and
as, in prosperity, they soon fall from the acknowledgement of it, it is
not to be wondered at that the prophet, in order to persuade men that
God is an upright governor, affirms that he loveth righteousness.
Whoever, therefore, has thoroughly embraced this doctrine, let him know
that he has profited much.

<span id="xxxix.ii-p7"></span>Others explain this to mean, that God
loveth righteousness in men. This, indeed, is true; but it is far from
the sense of the text, because the design of the Holy Spirit here is to
maintain the glory of God in opposition to the poison of ungodliness,
which is deeply seated in many hearts. In the second clause of the
verse, the Psalmist commends another part of God’s excellence, namely,
that *the earth is full of his goodness* The righteousness of God ought
justly to incite us to praise him, but his goodness is a more powerful
motive; because, the more experience which any man has of his
beneficence and mercy, the more strongly is he influenced to worship
him. Farther, the discourse is still concerning all the benefits of God
which he scatters over the whole human race. These, the inspired writer
declares, meet us wherever we turn our eyes.

<span id="xxxix.ii-p8"></span><span id="xxxix.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxxix.ii-p9"></span>**6.** *By the word of Jehovah.* That he
may stir us up to think more closely of God’s works, he brings before us
the creation of the world itself; for until God be acknowledged as the
Creator and Framer of the world, who will believe that he attends to the
affairs of men, and that the state of the world is controlled by his
wisdom and power? But the creation of the world leads us by direct
consequence to the providence of God. Not that all men reason so justly,
or are endued with so sound a judgment, as to conclude that the world is
at this day maintained by the same divine power which was once put forth
in creating it: on the contrary, the great majority imagine that he is
an idle spectator in heaven of whatever is transacted on earth. But no
man truly believes that the world was created by God unless he is also
firmly persuaded that it is maintained and preserved by him. Wisely and
properly, therefore, does the prophet carry us back to the very origin
of the world, in order to fix in our minds the certainty of God’s
providence in the continual order of nature. By the figure synecdoche,
he uses the term *heavens* for the whole fabric of the world, because,
as I have elsewhere remarked, the sight of the heavens more than all the
other parts of creation transports us with admiration. He therefore
immediately adds, *And all the host of them,* by which phraseology,
according to the usual method of Scripture, he means the stars and
planets; for if the heavens were destitute of this ornament, they would
in a manner be empty. In saying that the heavens were created by *the
word of God,* he greatly magnifies his power, because by his nod alone,
 <span id="fr_673"></span>[674](#fn_673) without any other aid or means,
and without much time or labor,  <span id="fr_674"></span>[675](#fn_674)
he created so noble and magnificent a work. But although the Psalmist
sets *the* *word of God* and *the breath of his mouth* in opposition
both to all external means, and to every idea of painful labor on God’s
part, yet we may truly and certainly infer from this passage, that the
world was framed by God’s Eternal Word, his only begotten Son. Ancient
interpreters have, with considerable ingenuity, employed this passage as
a proof of the eternal Deity of the Holy Spirit against the Sabellians.
But it appears from other places, particularly from <span
id="xxxix.ii-p11.3"></span>[Isa
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#004)<span id="xxxix.ii-p11.3"></span>,
that by *the breath of the mouth* is meant nothing else but *speech.*
For it is there said concerning Christ, “He shall smite the earth with
the rod of his mouth, and with the breath of his lips shall he slay the
wicked.” As powerful and effective speech is there allegorically
denominated *the rod of his mouth;* so in like manner, for another
purpose it is denominated in the immediately succeeding clause *the
breath of his mouth,* to mark the difference that exists between God’s
speech and the empty sounds which proceed from the mouths of men. In
proving the Divinity of the Holy Spirit, therefore, I durst not press
this text against Sabellius. Let us account it sufficient that God has
formed the heavens by his Word in such a manner as to prove the eternal
Deity of Christ. Should any object that these divine persons would not
appear distinct if the terms *Word* and *Breath* are synonymous; I
answer, that the term *breath* is not employed here simply as in other
places, in which there is evidently a distinction made between the
*Word* and the *Spirit;* but *the breath of his mouth* is used
figuratively for the very utterance of speech; as if it had been said,
As soon as God uttered the breath of his mouth, or proclaimed in word
what he wished to be done, the heavens were instantly brought into
existence, and were furnished, too, with an inconceivable number and
variety of stars. It is indeed true that this similitude is borrowed
from men; but the Scriptures often teach in other places, that the world
was created by that Eternal Word, who, being the only begotten Son of
God, appeared afterwards in flesh.

<span id="xxxix.ii-p12"></span><span id="xxxix.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xxxix.ii-p13"></span>**7.** *He gathered together the waters
of the sea as into a heap.*  <span id="fr_675"></span>[676](#fn_675)
Here the Psalmist does not speak of all that might have been said of
every part of the world, but under one department he comprehends all the
rest. He celebrates, however, a signal and remarkable miracle which we
see in looking on the surface of the earth; namely, that God gathers
together the element of water, fluid and unstable as it is, into a solid
heap, and holds it so at his pleasure. Natural philosophers confess, and
experience openly proclaims, that the waters occupy a higher place than
the earth. How is it then that, as they are fluid and naturally disposed
to flow, they do not spread abroad and cover the earth, and how is it
that the earth, which is lower in position, remains dry? In this we
certainly perceive that God, who is ever attentive to the welfare of the
human race, has inclosed the waters within certain invisible barriers,
and keeps them shut up to this day; and the prophet elegantly declares
that they stand still at God’s commandment, as if they were a heap of
firm and solid matter. Nor is it without design that the Holy Spirit, in
various passages, adduces this proof of divine power, as in <span
id="xxxix.ii-p14.2"></span>[Jer
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#022)<span id="xxxix.ii-p14.2"></span>,
and <span id="xxxix.ii-p14.3"></span>[Job
38:8](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#008)<span id="xxxix.ii-p14.3"></span>

<span id="xxxix.ii-p15"></span>In the second part of the verse, he seems
to repeat the same idea, but with amplification. God not only confines
the immense mass of waters in the seas, but also hides them, by a
mysterious and incomprehensible power, in the very bowels of the earth.
Whoever will compare the elements among themselves, will reckon it
contrary to nature that the bottomless depths, or the immeasurable gulfs
of waters, whose native tendency is rather to overwhelm the earth,
should lie hid under it. That so many hollow channels and gulfs,
accordingly, should not swallow up the earth every moment, affords
another magnificent display of divine power; for although now and then
some cities and fields are engulfed, yet the body of the earth is
preserved in its place.

<span id="xxxix.ii-p16"></span><span id="xxxix.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xxxix.ii-p17"></span>**8.** *Let all the earth fear Jehovah.*
The Psalmist concludes that there is just reason why the whole world
should reverently submit itself to the government of God, who gave it
being, and who also preserves it. *To fear Jehovah,* and *to stand in
awe of him,* just means to do honor to, and to reverence his mighty
power. It is a mark of great insensibility not to bow at God’s presence,
from whom we have our being, and upon whom our condition depends. The
prophet alludes to both these things, affirming that the world appeared
as soon as God spake, and that it is upheld in being by his commandment;
for it would not have been enough for the world to have been created in
a moment, if it had not been supported in existence by the power of God.
He did not employ a great array of means in creating the world, but to
prove the inconceivable power of his word, he ordered that so soon as he
should as it were pronounce the word, the thing should be done.  <span
id="fr_676"></span>[677](#fn_676) The word *command,* therefore,
confirms what I formerly said, that his speech was nothing else than a
nod, or wish, and that *to speak* implies the same thing as to command.
It is proper, however, to understand that in this nod, or command, the
eternal wisdom of God displayed itself.

<span id="xxxix.iii"></span>

<span id="xxxix.iii-p1"></span><span id="xxxix.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
33:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#010)<span
id="xxxix.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxxix.iii-p2"></span>**10.** Jehovah scattereth the counsel of
the nations, and bringeth to nought the imaginations of the people.
 <span id="fr_677"></span>[678](#fn_677) **11.** The counsel of Jehovah
shall stand for ever, and the thoughts of his heart from age to age.
 <span id="fr_678"></span>[679](#fn_678) **12.** Blessed are the people
whose God is Jehovah, the people whom he hath chosen for his
inheritance.

<span id="xxxix.iii-p5"></span> 

<span id="xxxix.iii-p6"></span><span id="xxxix.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxxix.iii-p7"></span>**10.** *Jehovah scattereth the counsel
of the nations.* After briefly touching upon the creation of the world,
the Psalmist returns to his former subject, namely, to show that the
events which daily come to pass are undoubted proofs of the providence
of God. And lest any man should be surprised, that he should exhibit God
as an adversary to men, scattering their counsels rather than
establishing and bringing them to a happy issue, he selects an instance
which had the greatest power to comfort the saints. We know how many
things men continually venture upon and contrive against all law and
justice, and how they endeavor by their devices to turn the world upside
down, that they may tyrannically acquire power to trample upon the good
and simple. What creatures then would be more miserable than we, if men,
possessed of such a variety of wicked affections, were permitted to act
with unlicensed wantonness towards us? But when God declares from heaven
to us, that it is his work to dash in pieces their devices, and to bring
their determinations to nought, there is no reason why we should not
keep ourselves quiet, even when they bestir themselves most
tumultuously. God is, therefore, said to overthrow the counsels of men,
not because he professedly delights in frustrating them, but to check
their wantonness; for they would immediately throw all things into
confusion were they to succeed according to their wishes: yea, as in
outraging equity, and vexing the upright and innocent, they fail not to
fight against God himself, it is very necessary to consider that God’s
power and protection is set in opposition to their fury. And as the
great majority of men, despising all modesty, rush headlong into
indiscriminate licentiousness, the prophet speaks not only of individual
men, but of whole nations; in other words, he affirms, that however men
may conspire among themselves, and determine to attempt this or that
with great hosts, yet shall their purposes be brought to nought, because
it is as easy for God to scatter multitudes as to restrain a few. But
although it is God’s design in this place to fortify us with good hope
against the boldness of the wicked, he warns us, at the same time, to
undertake nothing without his command and guidance.

<span id="xxxix.iii-p8"></span><span id="xxxix.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxxix.iii-p9"></span>**11.** *The counsel of Jehovah.* The
prophet extols the infinite power of God in such a manner as that he may
build up our faith in its greatness; for he does not here commend a
counsel of God which is hidden in heaven, and which he would have us to
honor and revere at a distance. But as the Lord everywhere in Scripture
testifies that he loveth righteousness and truth; that he cares for the
righteous and good; and that he is ever inclined to succor his servants
when they are wrongfully oppressed; — the prophet means, that all this
shall remain sure and steadfast. Thus he declares for what end God
bringeth to nought the counsels of the nations, namely, because without
discrimination they run headlong into the violation of all order.

<span id="xxxix.iii-p10"></span>In the first place, then, let us learn
to look at God’s counsel in the glass of his word; and when we have
satisfied ourselves that he has promised nothing but what he has
determined to perform, let us immediately call to mind the steadfastness
of which the prophet here speaks. And as many, or rather whole, nations
sometimes endeavor to impede its course by innumerable hinderances, let
us also remember the preceding declaration, that when men have imagined
many devices, it is in God’s power, and often his pleasure, to bring
them to nought. The Holy Spirit unquestionably intended to have our
faith exercised in this practical knowledge; otherwise what he here says
of the counsel of God would be but cold and fruitless. But when we shall
have once persuaded ourselves of this, that God will defend his servants
who call upon his name, and rid them of all dangers; whatever mischief
the wicked may practice against them, their endeavors and attempts shall
in nowise terrify us, because, so soon as God sets himself in opposition
to their machinations, no craft on their part will be able to defeat his
counsel.

<span id="xxxix.iii-p11"></span><span id="xxxix.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xxxix.iii-p12"></span>**12.** *Blessed are the people whose
God is Jehovah.* This verse excellently agrees with the preceding,
because it would profit us little to observe what is said of the
stability of God’s counsel if that counsel referred not to us. The
prophet, therefore, in proclaiming that they are blessed whom God
receives into his protection, reminds us that the counsel which he had
just mentioned is not a secret which remains always hidden in God, but
is displayed in the existence and protection of the Church, and may
there be beheld. Thus we see, that it is not those who coldly speculate
about the power of God, but those alone who apply it to their own
present benefit, who rightly acknowledge God as the Governor of the
world. Moreover, when the Psalmist places all our blessedness in this,
that *Jehovah is our God,* in touching upon the fountain of divine love
towards us, he comprehends, in one word, whatever is wont to be desired
to make life happy. For when God condescends to undertake the care of
our salvation, to cherish us under his wings, to provide for our
necessities, to aid us in all our dangers, all this depends on our
adoption by him. But lest it should be thought that men obtain so great
a good by their own efforts and industry, David teaches us expressly
that it proceeds from the fountain of God’s gracious electing love that
we are accounted the people of God. It is indeed true, that, in the
person of Adam, men were created at first for the very purpose that they
should be the sons of God; but the estrangement which followed upon sin
deprived us of that great blessing. Until God, therefore, freely adopt
us, we are all by nature wretched, and we have no other entrance to or
means of attaining happiness but this, that God, of his own good
pleasure, should choose us who are altogether unworthy. It appears,
accordingly, how foolishly they corrupt this passage, who transfer to
men what the prophet here ascribes to God, as if men would choose God
for their inheritance. I own, indeed, that it is by faith that we
distinguish the true God from idols; but this principle is always to be
held fast, that we have no interest in him at all unless he prevent us
by his grace.

<span id="xxxix.iv"></span>

<span id="xxxix.iv-p1"></span><span id="xxxix.iv-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
33:13-17](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#013)<span
id="xxxix.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxxix.iv-p2"></span>**13.** Jehovah looked down from heaven;
he beheld the children of Adam. **14.** From the dwelling-place of his
throne he looked on all the inhabitants of the earth. **15.** He who
fashioned their hearts altogether,  <span
id="fr_679"></span>[680](#fn_679) who understandeth all their works.
**16.** A king is not saved for the multitude of his host, nor a giant
delivered for the greatness of his strength. **17.** A horse is a
deceitful thing for safety,  <span id="fr_680"></span>[681](#fn_680) and
will not deliver by the greatness of his strength.

<span id="xxxix.iv-p5"></span> 

<span id="xxxix.iv-p6"></span><span id="xxxix.iv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxxix.iv-p7"></span>**13.** *Jehovah looked down from heaven.*
The Psalmist still proceeds with the same doctrine, namely, that human
affairs are not tossed hither and thither fortuitously, but that God
secretly guides and directs all that we see taking place. Now he here
commends God’s inspection of all things, that we on our part may learn
to behold, and to contemplate with the eye of faith, his invisible
providence. There are, no doubt, evident proofs of it continually before
our eyes; but the great majority of men, notwithstanding, see nothing of
them, and, in their blindness, imagine that all things are under the
conduct of a blind fortune. Nay, the more plenteously and abundantly
that he sheds his goodness upon us, the less do we raise our thoughts to
him, but preposterously settle them down immovably on the external
circumstances which surround us. The prophet here rebukes this base
conduct, because no greater affront can be offered to God than to shut
him up in heaven in a state of idleness. This is the same as if he were
to lie buried in a grave. What kind of life would God’s life be, if he
neither saw nor took care of any thing? Under the term *throne,* too,
the sacred writer shows, from what is implied in it, what an absurd
infatuation it is to divest God of thought and understanding. He gives
us to understand by this word, that heaven is not a palace in which God
remains idle and indulges in pleasures, as the Epicureans dream, but a
royal court, from which he exercises his government over all parts of
the world. If he has erected his throne, therefore, in the sanctuary of
heaven, in order to govern the universe, it follows that he in no wise
neglects the affairs of earth, but governs them with the highest reason
and wisdom.

<span id="xxxix.iv-p8"></span><span id="xxxix.iv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxxix.iv-p9"></span>**15.** *He who fashioned their hearts
altogether.* It appears that this is added for the express purpose of
assuredly persuading believers, that, however the wicked might craftily,
deceitfully, and by secret stratagems, attempt to withdraw themselves
from God’s sight, and hide themselves in caverns, yet his eyes would
penetrate into their dark hiding-places. And the Psalmist argues from
the very creation that God cannot but bring men’s devices and doings
into reckoning and judgment; because, though each man has intricate
recesses concealed in his bosom, so that there is a wonderful diversity
of different minds in this respect, and this great variety creates a
most confounding obscurity; yet the eyes of God cannot be dazzled and
darkened, so that he may not be a competent judge and take cognisance of
his own work. By the adverb *together,* therefore, he does not mean that
the hearts of men were formed at the same moment of time; but that all
of them were fashioned even to one, and without a single exception; so
that those manifest great folly who attempt to hide, or to withdraw the
knowledge of their hearts from him who framed them. The discourse may
also be understood as meaning, that men cannot, by the erring devices of
their own thoughts, diminish the authority of God over them, so that he
may not govern by his secret providence the events which seem to them to
happen by chance. We see, indeed, he in forming their vain hopes, they
despoil God of his power, and transfer it to the creatures, at one time
to this object, and at another time to that, conceiving that they have
no need of his aid, so long as they are furnished with outward means and
helps to protect themselves.

<span id="xxxix.iv-p10"></span><span id="xxxix.iv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xxxix.iv-p11"></span>It therefore follows, *A king is not
saved for the multitude of his host, etc* By this the inspired writer
means to teach us, that the safety of men’s lives depends not upon their
own strength, but upon the favor of God. He names particularly *kings*
and *giants* rather than others; because, as they are not of the common
class of men, but of a higher condition, they appear to themselves to be
beyond the reach of all danger from darts, and if any adversity befall
them, they promise themselves an easy deliverance from it. In short,
intoxicated with a presumptuous confidence of their own strength, they
scarcely think themselves mortal. They are still more hardened in this
pride by the foolish admiration of the common people, who stand amazed
at the greatness of their power. If, therefore, neither a king is saved
by his troops, nor a giant by his strength, when they are exposed to
danger, in vain do mankind neglect the providence of God, and look
around them for human help. From this it follows, that the condition,
both of the strong and the weak, is miserable, until they learn to rely
on the protection of God.

<span id="xxxix.iv-p12"></span><span id="xxxix.iv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xxxix.iv-p13"></span>**17.** *A horse is a deceitful thing for
safety.* In this verse, the Psalmist, by the figure synecdoche under the
name of *horse,* is to be understood as meaning any kind of help. The
sense is, that in general those who conceive that their life is well
protected by earthly means, are commonly disappointed at the very crisis
of danger, and are miserably beguiled to their utter undoing, so that
God therein clearly shows them their folly. It is true, that kings are
not armed with the sword in vain, nor is the use of horses superfluous,
nor are the treasures and resources which God furnishes to defend men’s
lives unnecessary, provided a right method of employing them be
observed. But as the greater part of men the more they are surrounded
with human defences, withdraw themselves the farther from God, and by a
false imagination persuade themselves that they are in a haven safe from
all disturbance, God acts most justly in disappointing this madness.
This is the reason why his gifts often pass away without effect, because
the world, by separating them from the giver, is also justly deprived of
his blessing.

<span id="xxxix.v"></span>

<span id="xxxix.v-p1"></span><span id="xxxix.v-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
33:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#018)<span
id="xxxix.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxxix.v-p2"></span>**18.** Behold, the eye of Jehovah is upon
them that fear him, upon those who hope in his mercy; **19.** To deliver
their souls from death, and to give them life in the time of famine.

<span id="xxxix.v-p3"></span> 

<span id="xxxix.v-p4"></span><span id="xxxix.v-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xxxix.v-p5"></span>**18.** *Behold, the eye of Jehovah is upon
them that fear him.* Having shown that what men account their best
defences often profit them nothing, or rather are utterly worthless,
when men depend upon them; the Psalmist now shows, on the other hand,
that believers, although they are neither men of great power nor of
great wealth, are nevertheless sufficiently protected by God’s favor
alone, and shall be safe for ever. His meaning is not a little
illustrated by this comparison, that kings and giants derive no aid from
their invincible strength, while God supports the life of the saints in
famine and dearth, as really as if he were to restore life to them when
dead. We consequently understand better why the prophet lays low all the
strength of the world; not, surely, that men should lie prostrate, or be
so heart-broken as to pine away in despair; but that, laying aside their
pride, they should fix their thoughts on God alone, and persuade
themselves that their life depends on his protection. Moreover, in
saying that the eye of God is bent upon them that fear him to save them,
he expresses more than if he had said that his hand and power were
sufficient to preserve them. A doubt might creep into the minds of the
weak, whether God would extend this protection to every individual; but
when the Psalmist introduces him as keeping watch and ward, as it were,
over the safety of the faithful, there is no reason why any one of them
should tremble, or hesitate with himself a moment longer, since it is
certain that God is present with him to assist him, provided he remain
quietly under his providence. From this, also, it appears still more
clearly how truly he had said a little before, that *the people are
blessed whose God is Jehovah,* because, without him, all the strength
and riches which we may possess will be vain, deceitful, and perishing;
whereas, with a single look he can defend his people, supply their
wants, feed them in a time of famine, and preserve them alive when they
are appointed to death. The whole human race, no doubt, are maintained
by the providence of God; but we know that his fatherly care is
specially vouchsafed to none but his own children, that they may feel
that their necessities are truly regarded by him.

<span id="xxxix.v-p6"></span><span id="xxxix.v-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxxix.v-p7"></span>Again, when it is affirmed, that God, in
times of famine and dearth, has remedies in readiness to preserve the
lives of the godly, we are taught that the faithful only pay due honor
to his providence when they allow not their hearts to despond in the
extremest indigence; but, on the contrary, raise their hopes even from
the grave. God often suffers his servants to be hungry for a time that
he may afterwards satiate them, and he overspreads them with the
darkness of death that he may afterwards restore them to the light of
life. Yea, we only begin to place our trust firmly in him when death
comes to present itself before our eyes; for, until we have known by
experience the vanity of the aids of the world, our affections continue
entangled in them, and wedded to them. The Psalmist characterises
believers by two marks, which comprehend the whole perfection of our
life. The first is, that we reverently serve the Lord; and the second,
that we depend upon his grace. Hypocrites may loudly boast of their
faith, but they have never tasted even a little of the divine goodness,
so as to be induced to look to him for what they need. On the contrary,
when the faithful give themselves with their whole heart to the service
and fear of God, this affection springs from faith; or rather the
principal part of right worship, which the faithful render to God,
consists in this, that they depend upon his mercy.

<span id="xxxix.vi"></span>

<span id="xxxix.vi-p1"></span><span id="xxxix.vi-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
33:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#020)<span
id="xxxix.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxxix.vi-p2"></span>**20.** Our soul waiteth upon Jehovah, he
is our help and our shield. **21.** Surely our heart shall rejoice in
him, because  <span id="fr_681"></span>[682](#fn_681) we will trust in
his holy name. **22.** Let thy mercy be upon us, O Jehovah: according as
we have trusted in thee.

<span id="xxxix.vi-p4"></span> 

<span id="xxxix.vi-p5"></span><span id="xxxix.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xxxix.vi-p6"></span>**20.** *Our soul waiteth upon Jehovah.*
What the Psalmist has hitherto spoken concerning God’s providence, and
particularly concerning that faithful guardianship by which he protects
his people, he has spoken not so much from himself as from the mouth of
the Holy Spirit. He now, therefore, in the name of the whole Church,
raises his song to declare that there is nothing better than to commit
our welfare to God. Thus we see that the fruit of the preceding doctrine
is set forth to all true believers, that they may unhesitatingly cast
themselves with confidence, and with a cheerful heart, upon the paternal
care of God. In this matter, the Psalmist declares nothing concerning
himself in particular, but unites the whole of the godly with him in the
acknowledgement of the same faith. There is an emphasis in the word
*soul* which should be attended to; for, although this is a common mode
of speech among the Hebrews, yet it expresses earnest affection; as if
believers should say, We sincerely rely upon God with our whole heart,
accounting him our shield and help.

<span id="xxxix.vi-p7"></span><span id="xxxix.vi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xxxix.vi-p8"></span>**21.** *Surely our heart shall rejoice in
him.* As the particle <span id="xxxix.vi-p8.1"></span>כי*, ki,* which is
twice employed in this verse, has various meanings in Hebrew, it may be
understood in a twofold sense here. If we expound it affirmatively in
both clauses, the sense will be, that believers glory both in their joy
and in their hope. Nor do I think it improper that these two should be
referred to distinctly in the same context thus: Surely God shall always
be our joy; surely his holy name shall be like an impregnable fortress
for our refuge. Whence is it that believers continue perseveringly to
call upon God, but because, satisfied with his favor, they have always,
amidst their sorrows and griefs, this comfort, which is sufficient to
maintain their cheerfulness? Justly, therefore, do believers affirm, in
the first place, that their heart rejoices in the Lord; because, freed
from wandering after the fascinations of the world, they neither waver
nor hesitate at every change of fortune, but place the whole felicity of
their life in enjoying the free and paternal favor of God. They
afterwards add, in the second place, that *they trust in his holy name.*
If any one, however, choose to understand the particle <span
id="xxxix.vi-p8.2"></span>כי*, ki*, as meaning *because,* assigning a
cause or reason, the sense will be no less properly and elegantly
expressed in this way: Because our hope is fixed on God, he will be
equally ready on his part to minister to us continual matter of joy. And
experience undoubtedly proves, that when men are overwhelmed with
sorrow, and pine away with care, grief, and anxiety, it is that they may
receive the recompense of their folly; seeing that there is nothing to
which they are led with more difficulty, than to set their hopes on God
alone, and not to exult in their own deceitful imaginations, with which
they please themselves.

<span id="xxxix.vi-p9"></span><span id="xxxix.vi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xxxix.vi-p10"></span>**22.** *Let thy mercy be on us, O
Jehovah!* At length the psalm concludes with a prayer, which the sacred
writer offers in the name of all the godly, that God would make them
feel from the effect that they have not relied on the divine goodness in
vain. In the meantime, the Spirit, by dictating to us this rule of
prayer by the mouth of the prophet, teaches us, that the gate of divine
grace is opened for us when salvation is neither sought nor hoped for
from any other quarter. This passage gives us another very sweet
consolation, namely, that if our hope faint not in the midst of our
course, we have no reason to fear that God will fail to continue his
mercy towards us, without intermission, to the end of it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_669"></span>[670](cc08038.htm#fr_669) <span
id="xxxix.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxxix.i-p3"></span> “<span id="xxxix.i-p3.1"></span>Ou, digne
d’estre aimee par les,” etc. — *Fr*. *marg.* “Or, is worthy of being
loved by them.”

<span id="fn_670"></span>[671](cc08038.htm#fr_670) <span
id="xxxix.i-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xxxix.i-p4"></span> “<span id="xxxix.i-p4.1"></span>Fideles,
c’est, fermes et permanentes.” — *Fr*. *marg.* “Faithful, that is, firm
and permanent.”

<span id="fn_671"></span>[672](cc08038.htm#fr_671) <span
id="xxxix.i-p9.3"></span>

<span id="xxxix.i-p10"></span> “<span id="xxxix.i-p10.1"></span>Et neant
moins nous voyons ce que Sainct Paul en determine.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_672"></span>[673](cc08038.htm#fr_672) <span
id="xxxix.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxxix.ii-p3"></span> “<span id="xxxix.ii-p3.1"></span>C’est,
le soufie, le vent.” — *Note, Fr. marg.* “That is, the breath.”

<span id="fn_673"></span>[674](cc08038.htm#fr_673) <span
id="xxxix.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xxxix.ii-p10"></span> “<span id="xxxix.ii-p10.1"></span>Par
son simple vouloir et commandement.” — *Fr.* “Simply by his will and
commandment.”

<span id="fn_674"></span>[675](cc08038.htm#fr_674) <span
id="xxxix.ii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xxxix.ii-p11"></span> “<span id="xxxix.ii-p11.1"></span>Sans
aussi y employer beaucoup de temps ou travail.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_675"></span>[676](cc08038.htm#fr_675) <span
id="xxxix.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xxxix.ii-p14"></span> In <span id="xxxix.ii-p14.1"></span>[Ge
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#009)<span id="xxxix.ii-p14.1"></span>
we read, “God said, Let the waters under the heavens be gathered
together into one place, and let the dry land appear: and it was so.”
The Psalmist here probably has a reference to that passage, as in the
9th verse there is evidently an imitation of the style in which God is
described in the first chapter of Genesis as performing the work of
creation.

<span id="fn_676"></span>[677](cc08038.htm#fr_676) <span
id="xxxix.ii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xxxix.ii-p18"></span> “<span id="xxxix.ii-p18.1"></span>Il a
commande que si tost qu’il auroit comme prononce le mot, la chose aussi
se trouvast faire.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_677"></span>[678](cc08038.htm#fr_677) <span
id="xxxix.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxxix.iii-p3"></span> The Septuagint here adds a sentence
which is not in the Hebrew, namely, “<span
id="xxxix.iii-p3.1"></span>Καὶ ἀθετεῖ βουλὰς ἀρχόντων”- “And frustrates
the counsels of princes.” The Vulgate, Arabic, and Ethiopic, copying
from the Septuagint, have the same addition. But it is not in the
Chaldee and Syriac versions, which agree with our Hebrew Bibles; and
from this we are led to conclude that the translators of the Greek
version have added this by way of paraphrase; a liberty which we find
them using in other places.

<span id="fn_678"></span>[679](cc08038.htm#fr_678) <span
id="xxxix.iii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xxxix.iii-p4"></span> Hebrews *To generation and generation.*

<span id="fn_679"></span>[680](cc08038.htm#fr_679) <span
id="xxxix.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxxix.iv-p3"></span> “<span id="xxxix.iv-p3.1"></span>C’est,
sans en excepter un.” — *Note, Fr. marg,* “That is, without a single
exception.”

<span id="fn_680"></span>[681](cc08038.htm#fr_680) <span
id="xxxix.iv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xxxix.iv-p4"></span> “<span id="xxxix.iv-p4.1"></span>Hebrews
est mensonge a salut.” — *Fr*. *marg.* “Hebrews is a lie for safety.”

<span id="fn_681"></span>[682](cc08038.htm#fr_681) <span
id="xxxix.vi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxxix.vi-p3"></span> “<span id="xxxix.vi-p3.1"></span>Ou,
certes.” — *Fr*. *marg.* “Or, certainly.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 34](cc08039)
