[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc08030)  [Next](cc08032) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 8: Psalms, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxxii"></span>

<span id="xxxii-p1"></span>PSALM 26.

<span id="xxxii-p2"></span>This psalm, for the most part, is similar to
the preceding. The prophet, oppressed with numerous wrongs, and finding
no succor in the world, implores the aid of God, entreating him to
undertake the cause of a man unrighteously afflicted, and to assert his
innocence. And as his contest was with hypocrites, he appeals to the
judgment of God, sharply reproving them for making a false profession of
God’s name. In the conclusion, as if he had obtained his wish, he
promises a sacrifice of praise to God for his deliverance.

<span id="xxxii-p3"></span>A Psalm of David.

<span id="xxxii.i"></span>

<span id="xxxii.i-p1"></span><span id="xxxii.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
26:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#001)<span id="xxxii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxxii.i-p2"></span>**1.** Judge me, O Jehovah! because I have
walked in mine integrity, and trusted in Jehovah, I shall not stumble.
**2.** Prove me, O Jehovah! and try me; search my reins and my heart.
**3.** For thy goodness is before mine eyes: I have therefore walked in
thy truth. **4.** I have not sat with vain men, neither will I walk with
deceitful men.

<span id="xxxii.i-p3"></span> 

<span id="xxxii.i-p4"></span><span id="xxxii.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xxxii.i-p5"></span>**1.** *Judge me, O Jehovah!* I have just
said, that David betakes himself to the judgment of God, because he
found neither equity nor humanity among men. The Hebrew word which is
rendered to *judge,* signifies to undertake the cognisance of a cause.
The meaning here, therefore, is as if David called upon God to be the
defender of his right.  <span id="fr_566"></span>[567](#fn_566) When God
leaves us for a time to the injuries and petulance of our enemies, he
seems to neglect our cause; but when he restrains them from assailing us
at their pleasure he clearly demonstrates that the defense of our cause
is the object of his care. Let us, therefore, learn from the example of
David, when we are destitute of man’s aid, to have recourse to the
judgment-seat of God, and to rely upon his protection. The clause which
follows is variously explained by interpreters. Some read it in
connection with the first clause, *Judge me, O Jehovah! because I have
walked in mine integrity;* but others refer it to the last clause,
*Because I have walked in mine integrity, therefore I shall not
stumble.* In my opinion, it may be properly connected with both. As it
is the proper work of God to maintain and defend righteous causes, the
Psalmist, in constituting him his defender, summons him as the witness
of his integrity and trust, and thus conceives the hope of obtaining his
aid. If, on the other hand, any one thinks that the clauses should be
separated, it seems most probable that this sentence, *judge me, O
Lord!* should be read by itself; and then that the second prayer should
follow, *that God would not allow him to stumble, because he had behaved
himself inoffensively and uprightly, etc.* But there is a force in the
possessive pronoun *my,* which interpreters have overlooked. For David
does not simply aver that he had been upright, but that he had
constantly proceeded in an upright course, without being driven from his
purpose, however powerful the devices by which he had been assailed.
When wicked men attack us with a view to overwhelm us, either by force
or fraud, we know how difficult it is to preserve always the same
fortitude. We place our hope of victory in endeavoring resolutely and
vigorously to oppose force to force, and art to art. And this is a
temptation which so much the more affects honest and steady men, who are
otherwise zealous to do well, when the cruelty of their enemies compels
them to turn aside from the right path. Let us, therefore, learn from
the example of David, even when an opportunity of injuring our enemies
is offered us, and when by various methods they force and provoke us, to
remain firm in our course, and not suffer ourselves to be diverted in
any manner from persevering in the path of our integrity.

<span id="xxxii.i-p7"></span><span id="xxxii.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xxxii.i-p8"></span>**2.** *Prove me,*  <span
id="fr_567"></span>[568](#fn_567) *O Jehovah!* The more that David
observed himself basely and undeservedly pursued with calumnies, the
more powerfully was he excited by the vehemence of his grief fearlessly
to assert his rectitude. Nor does he merely clear himself of outward
sins; he glories also in the uprightness of his heart, and the purity of
its affections, tacitly comparing himself, at the same time, with his
enemies. As they were gross hypocrites, proudly boasting of their
reverence for God, he lays open before him their shameless effrontery
and hardihood. This protestation, too, shows how intimately acquainted
he was with himself, when he durst offer to submit the whole recesses of
his heart to the examination of God. It is to be observed, however, that
it was the wickedness of his enemies which forced him to commend himself
so much. Had he not been unjustly condemned by men, he would have humbly
deprecated such an examination, as he well knew, notwithstanding his
zeal to act aright, that he was far from perfection. But when he felt
himself to be falsely accused, the injustice and cruelty of men
emboldened him to appeal to God’s judgment-seat without hesitation. And
as he knew that an external appearance of innocence was of no avail
there, he brings forward the honest uprightness of his heart. The
distinction which some make here, that *the heart* signifies the higher
affections, and *the reins* those that are sensual (as they term them)
and more gross, is more subtle than solid. We know that the Hebrews
understood by the term *reins* that which is most secret in men. David,
therefore, conscious of his innocence, offers the whole man to the
examination of God; not like careless, or rather stupid men, who,
flattering themselves, imagine that they will deceive God with their
pretences. It is evident, on the contrary, that he had honestly and
thoroughly searched himself, before he presented himself with such
confidence in the divine presence. And this we must especially bear in
mind, if we would desire to obtain the approbation of God, that when
unjustly persecuted, we must not only abstain from retaliation, but also
persevere in a right spirit.

<span id="xxxii.i-p10"></span><span id="xxxii.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xxxii.i-p11"></span>**3.** *For thy goodness is before mine
eyes.* This verse may be viewed as one sentence, or divided into two
parts, but with almost the same sense. If the former reading is adopted,
both the verbs will be emphatic, after this manner: ”Because thy
goodness, O Lord, has been ever before mine eyes, and I have trusted in
thy faithfulness, I have restrained all wicked lusts in my heart, lest,
provoked by the malice of mine enemies, I should be forced to
retaliate.” By this interpretation there would be the rendering of a
cause. The other exposition, also, is not unsuitable, namely, “Because
thy goodness has been before mine eyes, I have walked in the truth which
thou commandest.” In this case the conjunction, as is common among the
Hebrews, is superfluous. But although this exposition is allied to the
former, I would rather prefer one less remote from the words. As it is a
rare and difficult virtue, not only to refrain one’s self from wicked
actions, when greatly tempted thereto, but also to preserve integrity of
heart; the prophet declares in what manner he pursued his course in the
midst of such powerful temptations, telling us that it was by setting
the goodness of God, which so carefully preserves his servants, before
his eyes, lest, declining to evil practices, he might deprive himself of
his protection; and by confiding in his faithfulness, he possessed his
soul in patience, firmly persuaded that God would never forsake his
faithful people who trusted in him. And certainly, had he not relied
upon the goodness of God, he could not have so constantly prosecuted the
path of integrity amidst such numerous and such severe assaults. It is,
indeed, a remarkable difference between the children of God and worldly
men, that the former, in the hope of a favorable issue at the Lord’s
hand, rely upon his word, and are not driven by restlessness to
mischievous practices; while the latter, although they maintain a good
cause, yet because they are ignorant of the providence of God, are
hurried hither and thither; follow unlawful counsels; betake themselves
to craftiness; and, in short, have no other object than to overcome evil
with evil. Whence, accordingly, their miserable and sorrowful, and often
their tragical ends, but because, despising the favor of God, they give
themselves up to cunning and deceit? In short, David was steady in
preserving his uprightness, because he had resolved that God should be
his guide. In the first place, *therefore,* he mentions his *goodness,*
and afterwards he adds, his *truth,* because his goodness, which enables
us to walk with unyielding courage in the midst of all temptations, is
only known to us by his promises.

<span id="xxxii.i-p12"></span><span id="xxxii.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xxxii.i-p13"></span>**4.** *I have not sat with vain men.* He
again declares the very great dissimilarity which existed between him
and his adversaries. For the contrast is always to be observed, that
wicked men, by all the harm and mischief they wrought against him, could
never drive him from the path of rectitude. This verse might likewise be
joined with the former, as if completing the sentence, in this way, That
David, by confiding in the favor of God, had withdrawn himself from
deceivers. The words, *sitting* and *walking,* denote *sharing in
counsel and fellowship in working,* according to what is said in the
first psalm. David denies that he had any intercourse with vain and
deceitful men. And certainly the best remedy to recall and save us from
the assembly of the wicked is to fix our eyes upon God’s goodness; for
he who walks in the confidence of God’s protection, committing all
events to his providence, will never imitate their deceitfulness. Those
whom he denominates in the first clause, *men of vanity,* he soon after
terms <span id="xxxii.i-p13.1"></span>נעלמים, *naälamim,* that is,
*close and wrapped up in craftiness.*  <span
id="fr_568"></span>[569](#fn_568) For in this consists the vanity of
dissimulation, that deceitful men conceal in their hearts another thing
than that which their tongues declare. It is, however, absurd to derive
this word from <span id="xxxii.i-p14.1"></span>עלם*, alam, to play,* for
it is out of place here to compare their impostures to children’s play.
I confess, indeed, that those who give themselves to craftiness are
mockers; but why have recourse to such a forced exposition, when it is
plain that the word shows the source from which all lying and deceit
proceed? Thus faith, which steadily looks to God’s promises, is aptly
opposed to all the crooked and iniquitous counsels in which unbelief
involves us as often as we ascribe not proper honor to the guardianship
of God. David teaches, by his own example, that we have not the
slightest cause to fear that our integrity will make us a prey to the
ungodly, when God promises us safety under his hand. The children of
God, indeed, are prudent, but their prudence is altogether different
from that of the flesh. Under the guidance and government of the Holy
Spirit, they take every necessary precaution against snares, but in such
a manner as not to practice any craftiness.

<span id="xxxii.ii"></span>

<span id="xxxii.ii-p1"></span><span id="xxxii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
26:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#005)<span id="xxxii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxxii.ii-p2"></span>**5.** I hate the assembly of
transgressors, and I will not sit with the wicked. **6.** I will wash my
hands in purity,  <span id="fr_569"></span>[570](#fn_569) and will
encompass thine altar, O Jehovah! **7.** That I may make men to hear the
voice of thy praise, and tell them of all thy wonderful works.

<span id="xxxii.ii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xxxii.ii-p5"></span><span id="xxxii.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xxxii.ii-p6"></span>**5.** *I hate the assembly.* The Psalmist
protests again how greatly he abhorred the ungodly. Formerly he denied
that he had any fellowship with them; now he still more explicitly
declares that he fled from their company with loathing, for that is the
meaning of the phrase, *I hate.* It is indeed true, that the wicked are
everywhere hated; but how few withdraw themselves from them, that they
may not imitate their vices! David asserts both; he tells us that he
hated their society, and that he had no communion with them, from which
it appears that he warred not so much with their persons as with their
evil doings. He mentions also as another qualification, that he shunned
the wicked in such a manner as not on that account to forsake the
congregation of God, or withdraw himself from the company of those with
whom he was commanded by divine appointment to associate. Many err in
this way grievously; imagining when they see the evil mingled with the
good, that they will be infected with pollution, unless they immediately
withdraw themselves from the whole congregation. This preciseness drove
the Donatists of old, and prior to them the Cathari and the Novatians,
into mischievous schisms. In our own times, too, the Anabaptists, from a
similar conceit, have separated themselves from the sacred assemblies,
because they reckoned them not so free from all defilement as could have
been wished. Moreover, the Donatists made themselves a laughing-stock in
a certain process, by tenaciously clinging to mere words. When an
assembly was held to settle dissensions, and they were invited by the
president of the meeting, with a view to do honor to them, to take a
seat, they replied, they would stand, because it was not lawful to “sit
with the wicked.” Why then, wittily replied Augustine, did your
conscience permit you to come in amongst us? for the one is written as
well as the other, *I will not go in to the wicked, neither will I sit
with the ungodly.* David, therefore, prudently moderates his zeal, and
while separating himself from the ungodly, ceases not to frequent the
temple, as the divine commandment and the order prescribed in the law
required. When he denominates them *the assembly* of the ungodly, we may
unquestionably conclude, that their number was not few; nay, it is
probable that they flaunted about at that time, as if they alone were
exalted above the people of God, and were lords over them: yet this did
not prevent David from coming as usual to the sacrifices. Public care,
indeed, is to be used that the Church be not defiled by such wickedness,
and every man ought privately to endeavor, in his own place, that his
*remissness* and forbearance do not cherish the disorders which these
vices occasion. Although, however, this strictness should not be
exercised with that care which is necessary, there is nothing in this to
hinder any of the faithful from piously and holily remaining in the
fellowship of the Church. It is to be observed, in the meantime, that
what retained David, was his communion with God and with sacred things.

<span id="xxxii.ii-p7"></span><span id="xxxii.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xxxii.ii-p8"></span>**6.** *I will wash my hands in purity.*
Referring, in these words, to the ordinary use of the sacrifices, he
makes a distinction between himself and those who professed to offer the
same divine worship, and thrust themselves forward in the services of
the sanctuary, as if they alone had the sole right to perform them. As
David, therefore, and these hypocrites were one in this respect, that
they entered the sanctuary, and surrounded the sacred altar together, he
proceeds to show that he was a true worshipper, declaring, that he not
only diligently attended to the external rites, but came to worship God
with unfeigned devotion. It is obvious that he alludes to the solemn
rite of washing which was practiced under the law.  <span
id="fr_570"></span>[571](#fn_570) He, accordingly, reproves the gross
superstition of hypocrites, who in seeking only the purification of
water, neglected true purification; whereas it was God’s design, in the
appointment of the outward sign, to put men in mind of their inward
pollution, and thus to encourage them to repentance. The outward washing
alone, instead of profiting hypocrites, kept them at a greater distance
from God. When the Psalmist, therefore, says, *I will wash my hands in
innocence,* he intimates that they only gather more pollution and filth
by their washings. The Hebrew word <span
id="xxxii.ii-p9.3"></span>נקיון, *nikkayon,* signifies the cleanness of
any thing, and is figuratively used for *innocence.* We thus see, that
as hypocrites derive no moral purity whatever from their washings, David
mocks at the labor with which they vainly toil and torment themselves in
such rites. However high, therefore, the wicked may be exalted in the
Church, and though crowds of them should fill our sanctuaries, let us,
after the example of David, celebrate the outward profession of our
faith in such a manner as not deceitfully to substitute its external
rites in the room of true devotion. Thus shall we be pure and free from
all stain of wickedness. Moreover, as the people were not permitted to
touch the altar, David uses the word *encompass.*  <span
id="fr_571"></span>[572](#fn_571)

<span id="xxxii.ii-p11"></span><span id="xxxii.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xxxii.ii-p12"></span>**7.** *That I may make men to hear, etc*
In these words, he shows that he referred the sacrifices to their proper
use and design, which hypocrites were far from doing. They neither know,
nor do they consider, for what purpose God appointed the services of
worship, but think it sufficient to thrust themselves into the divine
presence with the pomp and form of their dissimulation. David,
therefore, wishing to distinguish spiritual worship from that which is
fictitious and counterfeit, affirms that he came into the sanctuary to
set forth the praise of God’s name. There is, however, a synecdoche in
his words, as only one kind of worship is mentioned, although, in
offering the sacrifices, the exercise of repentance and faith was
required, as well as the giving of thanks. But as the ultimate design of
the sacrifices, or at least their principal object was to celebrate the
goodness of God in thus acknowledging his blessings, there was no
impropriety in comprehending the other parts of worship under this.
Thus, in <span id="xxxii.ii-p12.1"></span>[Ps
50:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#014)<span
id="xxxii.ii-p12.1"></span>, the sacrifice of praise is preferred to all
external ceremonies, as if the whole of devotion consisted in it alone.
Likewise in <span id="xxxii.ii-p12.2"></span>[Ps
116:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#012)<span
id="xxxii.ii-p12.2"></span>, it is said, “What shall I render unto the
Lord for all his benefits? I will take the cup of salvation, and call
upon the name of the Lord.” Moreover, that he may the better commend the
acknowledged power of God, and more impressively extol his benefits,
David employs the phrase *wondrous;* as if he had said, that it was in
no ordinary way that God had helped him.

<span id="xxxii.iii"></span>

<span id="xxxii.iii-p1"></span><span id="xxxii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
26:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#008)<span
id="xxxii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxxii.iii-p2"></span>**8.** O Jehovah! I have loved the
habitation of thy house,  <span id="fr_572"></span>[573](#fn_572) and
the dwelling-place of thy glory. **9.** Gather not my soul with wicked
men, nor my life with blood;  <span id="fr_573"></span>[574](#fn_573)
**10.** For in their hands is maliciousness, and their right hand is
full of bribes. **11.** But I will walk in mine integrity: redeem me,
and be merciful to me.

<span id="xxxii.iii-p5"></span> 

<span id="xxxii.iii-p6"></span><span id="xxxii.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxxii.iii-p7"></span>**8.** *O Jehovah! I have loved, etc* In
this verse he confirms what he had said before, that he came not into
the sanctuary in a careless manner, but with serious devotion.
Irreligious men, although they often resort to the sacred assemblies,
frequent them merely as lurking places, where they may escape the eye of
God. On the contrary, the truly pious and pure in heart resort to them,
not for the sake of vain ostentation, but as they are sincerely bent on
seeking God, they willingly and affectionately employ the helps which he
there affords them; and the advantage which they derive from them
creates love to them in their hearts, and longings after them. This
declaration farther shows, that however David excelled others in faith,
yet he was not without fear lest the violence of his enemies might
deprive him of the ordinary means of instruction which God had conferred
on his Church. He felt his need of the Church’s common discipline and
order, and he therefore anxiously labored to retain his enjoyment of
them. From this we infer the impious pride of those who look with
contempt on the services of religion as unnecessary, although David
himself could not live without them. Another consideration, indeed,
existed in those days, I confess, while the law, like a schoolmaster,
held the ancient people in a state of servitude compared with ours. Our
case, however, is one with theirs in this respect, that the weakness of
our faith requires help as well as theirs. And as God for this purpose
has appointed the sacraments, as well as the whole order of the Church,
woe to the pride of those who recklessly desert the services which we
perceive to have been held in such high esteem by the pious servants of
God. The Hebrew word <span id="xxxii.iii-p7.1"></span>מעון, *me-on,*
according to some, is derived from a word  <span
id="fr_574"></span>[575](#fn_574) which signifies *an eye;* and they
translate it *comeliness,* or *appearance.* This is the translation of
the Septuagint.  <span id="fr_575"></span>[576](#fn_575) But as the word
is almost every where used to signify *a dwelling-place,* which is more
simple, I prefer to retain it. The sanctuary is called *God’s house,*
and *the dwelling-place of his glory;* and we know how frequently
expressions of this kind are employed in Scripture to bear testimony to
the presence of God. Not that God either dwelt in a tent, or wished to
confine the minds of his people to earthly symbols; but it was needful
to remind the faithful of God’s present goodness, that they might not
think they sought him in vain, as we have elsewhere already said. Now,
that God’s glory may dwell among us, it is necessary that a lively image
of it should shine forth in word and sacraments. From this it follows,
that the temples which are reckoned such among Papists are only filthy
brothels of Satan.

<span id="xxxii.iii-p10"></span><span id="xxxii.iii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xxxii.iii-p11"></span>**9.** *Gather not my soul with wicked
men.* Having now affirmed his innocence, he has recourse again to
prayer, and calls upon God to defend him. At first sight, indeed, it
appears strange to pray that God would not involve a righteous man in
the same destruction with the wicked; but God, with paternal indulgence,
allows this freedom in prayer, that his people may themselves in this
way correct their anxieties, and overcome the fears with which they are
tempted. David, when he conceived this supplication, in order to free
himself from anxiety and fear, placed before his eyes the righteous
judgment of God, to whom nothing is more abhorrent than to mingle good
and bad together without distinction. The Hebrew word <span
id="xxxii.iii-p11.1"></span>אספ, *asaph,* sometimes signifies *to gather
together,* and sometimes *to destroy.* In this place, I am of opinion it
signifies to *gather into a heap,* as was wont to be the case in a
confused slaughter. This was the objection stated by Abraham,

<span id="xxxii.iii-p12"></span>“That be far from thee to do after this
manner, to slay the righteous with the wicked: and that the righteous
should be as the wicked, that be far from thee.” (<span
id="xxxii.iii-p12.1"></span>[Ge
18:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#025)<span
id="xxxii.iii-p12.1"></span>,)

<span id="xxxii.iii-p13"></span>Let us remember, therefore, that these
forms of prayer are dictated by the Holy Spirit, in order that the
faithful may unhesitatingly assure themselves that God still sits in
inquisition upon every man’s case, in order to give righteous judgment
at last. In the second clause, instead of the phrase, *wicked men,* he
uses *bloody men,* amplifying what he had said. For although many wicked
men rush not all at once to murder, yet in process of time they harden
themselves to cruelty; nor does Satan allow them to rest until he
precipitate them into deeds of blood.

<span id="xxxii.iii-p14"></span><span id="xxxii.iii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xxxii.iii-p15"></span>**10.** *For in their hands is
maliciousness.* The Hebrew word <span id="xxxii.iii-p15.1"></span>זמה*,
zimmah,* signifies properly *an inward stratagem,* or *device.* But here
it is not improperly applied to *the hands,* because David wished to
intimate, that the wicked, of whom he was speaking, not only secretly
imagined deceits, but also vigorously executed with their hands the
malice which their hearts devised. When he farther says, *Their right
hands are full of bribes,* we may infer from this, that it was not the
common people whom he pointed out for observation, but the nobility
themselves, who were most guilty of practising this corruption. Although
the common and baser sort of men may be hired for reward, and suborned
as agents in wickedness, yet we know that bribes are offered chiefly to
judges, and other great men who are in power; and we likewise know, that
at the time referred to here the worst of men bore sway. It was no
wonder, therefore, that David complained that justice was exposed to
sale. We are farther admonished by this expression, that those who
delight in gifts can scarcely do otherwise than sell themselves to
iniquity. Nor is it in vain, unquestionably, that God declares that

<span id="xxxii.iii-p16"></span>“gifts blind the eyes of the wise, and
pervert the hearts of the righteous,”  
(<span id="xxxii.iii-p16.2"></span>[De
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#019)<span
id="xxxii.iii-p16.2"></span>.)

<span id="xxxii.iii-p17"></span><span id="xxxii.iii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xxxii.iii-p18"></span>**11.** *But I will walk in mine
integrity.* In this repetition there is to be remarked a circumstance
which more clearly illustrates David’s righteousness; namely, that, in
the midst of so many temptations, he steadily held on his way. He saw
many become suddenly rich by gifts, as we still see those who sit at the
helm of affairs accumulating to themselves, in a very brief space, a
great abundance of wealth, building sumptuous palaces, and extending
their lands far and wide. As no allurements could induce him to imitate
their example in this, he gave a proof of rare and heroic virtue. He
therefore affirms with truth, that although the world accounted them
happy, he had not been seduced from his wonted integrity, that thus it
might appear that he ascribed more to the providence of God than to evil
practices. He, therefore, beseeches God *to redeem him,* because, being
oppressed with wrongs, and tempted in various ways, he relied only on
God, trusting that he would deliver him. From this we may conclude, that
he was at this time reduced to great straits. He adds, *Be merciful to
me,* by which he shows that this deliverance flows from the grace of
God, as its true source; and we have already seen that the cause is
often put for the effect.

<span id="xxxii.iv"></span>

<span id="xxxii.iv-p1"></span><span id="xxxii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
26:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#012)<span id="xxxii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxxii.iv-p2"></span>**12.** My foot hath stood in uprightness:
 <span id="fr_576"></span>[577](#fn_576) in the congregations will I
bless thee, O Jehovah!

<span id="xxxii.iv-p4"></span> 

<span id="xxxii.iv-p5"></span><span id="xxxii.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xxxii.iv-p6"></span>This verse may be explained in two ways.
Some are of opinion that David declares how carefully he had studied
uprightness among men; but I rather think that he celebrates the grace
of God towards him, and, at the same time, vows his gratitude. By the
use of the metaphor, therefore, he tells us that he was preserved in
safety. And as he knew that it was the hand of God alone which enabled
him to stand, he therefore addresses himself to the exercise of praise
and thanksgiving. Nor does he merely say, that he will acknowledge in
private the goodness of God bestowed upon him, but in public also, that
the assemblies of God’s people may be witnesses of it. It is highly
necessary that every one should publicly celebrate his experience of the
grace of God, as an example to others to confide in him.  <span
id="fr_577"></span>[578](#fn_577)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_566"></span>[567](cc08031.htm#fr_566) <span
id="xxxii.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xxxii.i-p6"></span> *Hammond* renders the original word,
“Plead for, or defend me;” and *Green*, “Vindicate me.” The word denotes
both the act of a judge and of an advocate. This last view agrees very
well with the scope of the psalm, which, from the strong assertions of
innocence with which it abounds, appears to have been written by David
in vindication of himself from various crimes which had been alleged
against him; although the particular events to which it refers are not
indicated.

<span id="fn_567"></span>[568](cc08031.htm#fr_567) <span
id="xxxii.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxxii.i-p9"></span> The primary signification of the Hebrew
word <span id="xxxii.i-p9.1"></span>צרף, *tsaraph* is to try as the
refiner tries his gold by dissolving and melting it, In this sense it is
used in <span id="xxxii.i-p9.2"></span>[Ps
66:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#010)<span id="xxxii.i-p9.2"></span>,
“Thou hast tried us as silver is tried.”

<span id="fn_568"></span>[569](cc08031.htm#fr_568) <span
id="xxxii.i-p13.2"></span>

<span id="xxxii.i-p14"></span> *Horsley* renders the word, “Those who
seek concealment.” In like manner, the Chaldee paraphrases it, “They
that hide themselves that they may do evil.”

<span id="fn_569"></span>[570](cc08031.htm#fr_569) <span
id="xxxii.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxxii.ii-p3"></span> *“*<span
id="xxxii.ii-p3.1"></span>*Innocence.”* — *Fr. marg*

<span id="fn_570"></span>[571](cc08031.htm#fr_570) <span
id="xxxii.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxxii.ii-p9"></span> The washing of the hands in solemn
protestation of innocence, on particular occasions, was enjoined by the
Mosaic ritual, and was common among the Jews, <span
id="xxxii.ii-p9.1"></span>[Deut. 21:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#007)<span id="xxxii.ii-p9.1"></span>. It
was in common use among them before prayer; and the priests, in
particular, were not to perform any sacred office in the sanctuary until
they had poured water from the laver, which was set in the temple for
that purpose, and washed their hands, <span
id="xxxii.ii-p9.2"></span>[Ex
40:30-33](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#030)<span
id="xxxii.ii-p9.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_571"></span>[572](cc08031.htm#fr_571) <span
id="xxxii.ii-p9.4"></span>

<span id="xxxii.ii-p10"></span> *Mudge* conjectures that the expression,
*encompass,* is probably taken from the custom of forming a ring round
the altar at the time of worship. And *Goodwyn* informs us, that at the
feast of tabernacles the people, on the seventh day, encompassed the
altar seven times, carrying branches of palm trees in their hands in
remembrance of the overthrow of Jericho, and singing hosannas. — *Moses
and Aaron,* p. 132. David, however, may refer to the practice of the
priests, who, when they offered sacrifices, went round about the altar;
and his meaning may simply be, that as the priests first washed their
hands, and then performed their sacred office at the altar; so he deeply
felt the necessity of personal purity, in order to his engaging in the
service of God.

<span id="fn_572"></span>[573](cc08031.htm#fr_572) <span
id="xxxii.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxxii.iii-p3"></span> *The habitation of thy house* — a
Hebraism for *the house which thou inhabitest.* This name was given to
the tabernacle, <span id="xxxii.iii-p3.1"></span>[1 Sam.
2:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#029),
[32](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#032)<span id="xxxii.iii-p3.1"></span>,
and afterwards to Solomon’s temple, <span
id="xxxii.iii-p3.2"></span>[2Ch
36:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#015)<span
id="xxxii.iii-p3.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_573"></span>[574](cc08031.htm#fr_573) <span
id="xxxii.iii-p3.3"></span>

<span id="xxxii.iii-p4"></span> Hebrew:— *men of blood.* See <span
id="xxxii.iii-p4.2"></span>[Psalm
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#007)<span id="xxxii.iii-p4.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_574"></span>[575](cc08031.htm#fr_574) <span
id="xxxii.iii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xxxii.iii-p8"></span> Namely <span
id="xxxii.iii-p8.1"></span>עיך, *ayin.*

<span id="fn_575"></span>[576](cc08031.htm#fr_575) <span
id="xxxii.iii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xxxii.iii-p9"></span> The word which it employs is <span
id="xxxii.iii-p9.1"></span>ἐυπρέρπεια

<span id="fn_576"></span>[577](cc08031.htm#fr_576) <span
id="xxxii.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxxii.iv-p3"></span> “<span id="xxxii.iv-p3.1"></span>C’est,
en lieu plain et droict; c’est a dire, seur.” — *Fr*. *marg.* “That is,
in a plain and straight; that is to say, sure place.”

<span id="fn_577"></span>[578](cc08031.htm#fr_577) <span
id="xxxii.iv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxxii.iv-p7"></span> “<span id="xxxii.iv-p7.1"></span>Qu’elle
soit celebree publiquement; afin qu’elle serve d’exempleaux autres pour
se confermer en Dieu.” — *Fr*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 27](cc08032)
