[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc08034)  [Next](cc08036.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 8: Psalms, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxxvi"></span>

<span id="xxxvi-p1"></span>PSALM 30.

<span id="xxxvi-p2"></span>David having been delivered from great
danger, not only renders thanks to God apart by himself, but at the same
time invites and exhorts all the pious to perform the same duty. He then
confesses that he had flattered himself too confidently in his
prosperity, and that his security had justly been chastised. In the
third place, having briefly expressed his sorrow, he returns again to
thanksgiving.

<span id="xxxvi-p3"></span>A psalm sung at the dedication of David’s
house.

<span id="xxxvi-p4"></span>Interpreters doubt whether this psalm was
composed by David, or by some of the prophets after the return of the
Jews from the Babylonish captivity; for *house* means, in their opinion,
*the temple.* But as the title expressly mentions David’s name, it is
more probable that it is David’s private house which is here spoken of.
Moreover, the supposition entertained by some, that when he was about to
dedicate his palace, he was seized with heavy sickness, is founded upon
no solid reason. We may rather conjecture from what is stated in sacred
history, that as soon as he had built his royal palace, he dwelt in it
quietly and at his ease. He said to the prophet Nathan, that he felt
ashamed comfortably “to dwell within an house of cedar,” while “the ark
of God dwelt under curtains,” (<span id="xxxvi-p4.1"></span>[2Sa
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#002)<span id="xxxvi-p4.1"></span>..md)
Besides, to restrict that to sickness which is here spoken generally
concerning some kind of danger, is altogether groundless. It is more
probable, that Absalom being dead, and his faction extinguished, and the
fatal commotion which they had raised put down, David celebrated the
divine favor toward him, as one who had returned from exile to his
former station in his kingdom. For he mentions that he was chastised by
God’s hand, because, exulting too much in his happy estate, and almost
intoxicated with it, he falsely and foolishly promised himself entire
freedom from adversity. Moreover, when he began to inherit the
magnificent and royal palace, of which I have just spoken, his kingdom
was yet scarcely restored to peace. It was not yet time, therefore, for
forgetfulness of human frailty to creep upon him, which might provoke
the wrath of God, and expose him to dangers which might bring him to the
very verge of destruction. It is not unreasonable, therefore, to
suppose, that in this psalm he celebrates God’s favor to him in
restoring him to his former state. It was necessary again to dedicate
his house, which had been defiled by the incestuous whoredoms of
Absalom, and other wickednesses; and under this word seems to be denoted
a double blessing, both his restoration to life and to his kingdom: as
if he had said, that after settling the public affairs of his kingdom,
he sung this song, and solemnly dedicated his house to God that he might
live in his own family. But it must be briefly observed concerning this
ceremony of the law, that as we are very slow and cold in thinking of
God’s benefits, this exercise was enjoined upon his ancient people, that
they might understand that there is no pure and lawful use of any thing
without thanksgiving to God. As by offering the first-fruits to God,
therefore, they acknowledged that they received the increase of the
whole year from him, in like manner, by consecrating their houses to
God, they declared that they were God’s tenants, confessing that they
were strangers, and that it was he who lodged and gave them a habitation
there.  <span id="fr_619"></span>[620](#fn_619.md) If a levy for war,
therefore, took place, this was a just cause of exemption, when any one
alleged that he had not yet dedicated his house.  <span
id="fr_620"></span>[621](#fn_620.md) Besides, they were at the same time
admonished by this ceremony, that every one enjoyed his house aright and
regularly, only when he so regulated it that it was as it were a
sanctuary of God, and that true piety and the pure worship of God
reigned in it. The types of the law have now ceased, but we must still
keep to the doctrine of Paul, that whatever things God appoints for our
use, are still “sanctified by the word of God and prayer,” (<span
id="xxxvi-p6.2"></span>[1 Tim. 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#004.md),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#005)<span id="xxxvi-p6.2"></span>..md)

<span id="xxxvi.i"></span>

<span id="xxxvi.i-p1"></span><span id="xxxvi.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
30:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#001.md)<span id="xxxvi.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxxvi.i-p2"></span>**1.** I will extol thee, O Jehovah! for
thou hast lifted me up,  <span id="fr_621"></span>[622](#fn_621.md) and
hast not made my foes to rejoice over me. **2.** O Jehovah my God! I
have cried to thee, and thou hast healed me. **3.** O Jehovah! thou hast
brought up my soul from the grave; thou hast quickened me from among
those who go down  <span id="fr_622"></span>[623](#fn_622.md) into the pit.

<span id="xxxvi.i-p5"></span> 

<span id="xxxvi.i-p6"></span><span id="xxxvi.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxxvi.i-p7"></span>**1.** *I will extol thee, O Jehovah!* As
David had been brought, as it were, from the grave to the life-giving
air, he promises to extol the name of God. It is God who lifts us up
with his own hand when we have been plunged into a profound gulf; and
therefore it is our duty, on our part, to sing his praises with our
tongues. By *the foes* who, he says, obtained no matter of rejoicing
over him, we may understand both domestic and foreign enemies. Although
wicked and evil disposed persons flattered him with servile adulation,
they at the same time cherished secret hatred against him, and were
ready to insult him as soon as an opportunity should occur. In the
second verse, he concludes that he was preserved by the favor of God,
alleging in proof of this, that when he was at the very point of death
he directed his supplications to God alone, and that he immediately felt
that he had not done so in vain. When God hears our prayers, it is a
proof which enables us to conclude with certainty that he is the author
of our salvation, and of the deliverance which we obtain. As the Hebrew
word <span id="xxxvi.i-p7.1"></span>רפא, *rapha,* signifies *to heal,*
interpreters have been led, from this consideration, to restrict it to
sickness. But as it is certain, that it sometimes signifies *to
restore,* or *to set up again,* and is moreover applied to an altar or a
house when they are said to be repaired or rebuilt, it may properly
enough mean here any deliverance. The life of man is in danger in many
other ways than merely from disease; and we know that it is a form of
speech which occurs every where in the Psalms, to say that David was
restored to life whenever the Lord delivered him from any grievous and
extreme danger. For the sake of amplification, accordingly, he
immediately adds, *Thou hast brought up my soul from the grave* He
reckoned that he could not sufficiently express in words the magnitude
of the favor which God had conferred upon him, unless he compared the
darkness of that period to a grave and pit, into which he had been
forced to throw himself hastily, to protect his life by hiding, until
the flame of insurrection was quenched. As one restored to life,
therefore, he proclaims that he had been marvellously delivered from
present death, as if he had been restored to life after he had been
dead. And assuredly, it appears from sacred history, how completely he
was overwhelmed with despair on every side.

<span id="xxxvi.ii"></span>

<span id="xxxvi.ii-p1"></span><span id="xxxvi.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
30:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#004.md)<span id="xxxvi.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxxvi.ii-p2"></span>**4.** Sing unto Jehovah, O ye who are his
meek ones! and acknowledge the memorial of his holiness.  <span
id="fr_623"></span>[624](#fn_623.md) **5.** For his anger is only for a
moment  <span id="fr_624"></span>[625](#fn_624.md) but life  <span
id="fr_625"></span>[626](#fn_625.md) is in his favor; weeping will lodge in
the evening, and rejoicing shall come in the morning.

<span id="xxxvi.ii-p6"></span> 

<span id="xxxvi.ii-p7"></span><span id="xxxvi.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xxxvi.ii-p8"></span>**4.** *Sing unto Jehovah.* The better to
testify his gratitude, David calls upon all the saints to join with him
in singing the praises of God; and under one class he describes the
whole body. As he had been preserved beyond all expectation, and by this
instance had been instructed concerning God’s continual and infinite
goodness towards all the godly, he breaks forth into this exhortation,
in which he includes the general deliverance of the whole church as well
as his own. He rehearses not only what God had been to himself, but also
how bountifully and promptly he is accustomed to assist his people. In
short, confirmed by one particular instance he turns his thoughts to the
general truth. The meaning of the Hebrew term <span
id="xxxvi.ii-p8.1"></span>חסידים, *chasidim,* which we have translated
*meekness,* by which David often describes the faithful, has been
already shown in the sixteenth Psalm. Their heavenly adoption ought to
excite them to the exercise of beneficence, that they may imitate their
Father’s disposition,

<span id="xxxvi.ii-p9"></span>“who maketh his sun to rise on the evil
and on the good,” (<span id="xxxvi.ii-p9.1"></span>[Mt
5:45](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#045)<span id="xxxvi.ii-p9.1"></span>..md)

<span id="xxxvi.ii-p10"></span>There is nothing in which men resemble
God more truly than in doing good to others. *The memorial of his
holiness,* in the second clause of the verse, may refer to the
tabernacle; as if David had exhorted all the children of God to go
before the ark of the covenant, which was the memorial of God’s
presence. The Hebrew letter  <span id="fr_626"></span>[627](#fn_626.md)
<span id="xxxvi.ii-p11.2"></span>ל, *lamed,* often denotes a place. I
readily subscribe, however, to their opinion, who think that *memorial*
signifies the same thing as *name;* for God has assuredly rendered
himself worthy of remembrance by his works, which are a bright
representation of his glory, the sight of which should stir us up to
praise him.

<span id="xxxvi.ii-p12"></span><span id="xxxvi.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xxxvi.ii-p13"></span>**5.** *For his anger is only for a
moment.* It is beyond all controversy that *life* is opposed here to
*for a moment,* and consequently signifies long continuance, or the
constant progress of time from day to day. David thus intimates that if
God at any time chastise his people, he not only mitigates the rigour of
their punishment, but is immediately appeased, and moderates his anger;
whereas he prolongs his kindness and favor for a long time. And, as I
have already observed, he chose rather to couch his discourse in general
terms, than to speak particularly of himself, that the godly might all
perceive that this continued manifestation of God’s favor belongs to
them. We are hereby taught, however, with how much meekness of spirit,
and with what prompt obedience he submitted his back to God’s rod. We
know that from the very first bloom of youth, during almost his whole
life, he was so tried by a multiplied accumulation of afflictions, that
he might have been accounted miserable and wretched above all other men;
yet in celebrating the goodness of God, he acknowledges that he had been
lightly afflicted only for a short period, and as it were in passing.
Now, what inspired him with so great meekness and equanimity of mind
was, that he put a greater value upon God’s benefits, and submitted
himself more quietly to the endurance of the cross, than the world is
accustomed to do. If we are prosperous, we devour God’s blessings
without feeling that they are his, or, at least, we indolently allow
them to slip away; but if any thing sorrowful or adverse befall us, we
immediately complain of his severity, as if he had never dealt kindly
and mercifully with us. In short, our own fretfulness and impatience
under affliction makes every minute an age; while, on the other hand,
our repining and ingratitude lead us to imagine that God’s favor,
however long it may be exercised towards us, is but for a moment. It is
our own perversity, therefore, in reality, which hinders us from
perceiving that God’s anger is but of short duration, While his favor is
continued towards us during the whole course of our life. Nor does God
in vain so often declare that he is merciful and gracious to a thousand
generations, long-suffering, slow to anger, and ready to forgive. And as
what he says by the prophet Isaiah has a special reference to the
kingdom of Christ, it must be daily fulfilled,

<span id="xxxvi.ii-p14"></span>“For a small moment have I afflicted
thee, but with everlasting mercies will I gather thee,” (<span
id="xxxvi.ii-p14.1"></span>[Isa
54:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#007.md)<span
id="xxxvi.ii-p14.1"></span>.)

<span id="xxxvi.ii-p15"></span>Our condition in this world, I confess,
involves us in such wretchedness, and we are harassed by such a variety
of afflictions, that scarcely a day passes without some trouble or
grief. Moreover, amid so many uncertain events, we cannot be otherwise
than full of daily anxiety and fear. Whithersoever, therefore, men turn
themselves, a labyrinth of evils surrounds them. But however much God
may terrify and humble his faithful servants, with manifold signs of his
displeasure, he always be-sprinkles them with the sweetness of his favor
to moderate and assuage their grief. If they weigh, therefore his
*anger* and *his favor* in an equal balance, they will always find it
verified, that while the former is but for a moment, the latter
continues to the end of life; nay, it goes beyond it, for it were a
grievous mistake to confine the favor of God within the boundaries of
this transitory life. And it is unquestionably certain,  <span
id="fr_627"></span>[628](#fn_627.md) that none but those whose minds have
been raised above the world by a taste of heavenly life really
experience this perpetual and uninterrupted manifestation of the divine
favor, which enables them to bear their chastisements with cheerfulness.
Paul, accordingly, that he may inspire us with invincible patience,
refers to this in <span id="xxxvi.ii-p16.2"></span>[2Co
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#017.md)<span id="xxxvi.ii-p16.2"></span>,

<span id="xxxvi.ii-p17"></span>“For our light affliction, which is but
for a moment, worketh for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of
glory, while we look not at the things which are seen, but at the things
which are not seen.”

<span id="xxxvi.ii-p18"></span>In the meantime, it is to be observed
that God never inflicts such heavy and continued chastisements on his
people, without frequently mitigating them, and sweetening their
bitterness with some consolation. Whoever, therefore, directs his mind
to meditation upon the heavenly life, will never faint under his
afflictions, however long continued; and, comparing them with the
exceeding great and manifold favors of God towards him, he will put such
honor on the latter as to judge that God’s goodness, in his estimation,
outweighs his displeasure a hundred-fold. In the second clause, David
repeats the same thing figuratively: *Weeping will lodge in the evening,
and rejoicing shall come in the morning* He does not simply mean, that
the affliction would be only for one night, but that if the darkness of
adversity should fall upon the people of God, as it were, in the
evening, or at the setting of the sun, light would soon after arise upon
them, to comfort their sorrow-stricken spirits. The amount of David’s
instruction is, that were we not too headstrong, we would acknowledge
that the Lord, even when he appears to overwhelm us for a time with the
darkness of affliction, always seasonably ministers matter of joy, just
as the morning arises after the night.

<span id="xxxvi.iii"></span>

<span id="xxxvi.iii-p1"></span><span id="xxxvi.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
30:6-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#006.md)<span
id="xxxvi.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxxvi.iii-p2"></span>**6.** And in my tranquillity  <span
id="fr_628"></span>[629](#fn_628.md) I had said, I shall never be moved.
**7.** O Jehovah! in thy good pleasure thou hast established strength to
my mountain: thou hast hidden thy face, I have been terrified. **8.** O
Jehovah! I cried to thee, and to my Lord  <span
id="fr_629"></span>[630](#fn_629.md) I made my supplication. **9.** What
profit is there in my blood, when I go down into the pit?  <span
id="fr_630"></span>[631](#fn_630.md) Shall the dust praise thee? shall it
declare thy truth? **10.** Hear, O Jehovah! and have mercy upon me: O
Jehovah! Be thou my helper.

<span id="xxxvi.iii-p6"></span> 

<span id="xxxvi.iii-p7"></span><span id="xxxvi.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xxxvi.iii-p8"></span>**6.** *And in my tranquillity I had
said.* This is the confession which I formerly mentioned, in which David
acknowledges that he had been justly and deservedly punished for his
foolish and rash security, in forgetting his mortal and mutable
condition as a man, and in setting his heart too much on prosperity. By
the term *tranquillity,* he means the quiet and flourishing state of his
kingdom. Some translate the Hebrew word <span
id="xxxvi.iii-p8.1"></span>שלוה, *shiluah,* which we have rendered
*tranquillity,* by *abundance,* in which sense it is often used in other
places; but the word *tranquillity* agrees better with the context; as
if David had said, When fortune smiled upon me on every side, and no
danger appeared to occasion fear, my mind sunk as it were into a deep
sleep, and I flattered myself that my happy condition would continue,
and that things would always go on in the same course. This carnal
confidence frequently creeps upon the saints when they indulge
themselves in their prosperity, and so to speak, wallow upon their
dunghill.  <span id="fr_631"></span>[632](#fn_631.md) Hence Jeremiah (<span
id="xxxvi.iii-p9.2"></span>[Jer
31:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#018.md)<span
id="xxxvi.iii-p9.2"></span>) compares himself to a wild bullock before
the Lord tamed him and accustomed him to the yoke. This may at first
sight appear to be but a small crime, yet we may gather from its
punishment how much it is displeasing to God; nor will we wonder at this
when we consider the root from which it springs and the fruits which it
bears. As deaths innumerable continually hover before our eyes, and as
there are so many examples of change to awaken us to fear and caution,
those must be bewitched with devilish pride who persuade themselves that
their life is privileged above the common lot of the world. They see the
whole earth jumbled together in undistinguishing variety, and its
individual parts in a manner tossed hither and thither; and yet, as if
they did not belong to the human race, they imagine that they shall
always continue stable and liable to no changes. Hence that wantonness
of the flesh, with which they so licentiously indulge their lusts; hence
their pride and cruelty, and neglect of prayer. How indeed should those
flee to God, who have no sense of their need to instigate or move them
to that? The children of God have also a pious security of their own,
which preserves their minds in tranquillity amidst the troublesome
storms of the world; like David, who, although he had seen the whole
world made to shake, yet leaning upon the promise of God, was bound to
hope well concerning the continuance of his kingdom. But although the
faithful, when raised aloft on the wings of faith, despise adversity,
yet, as they consider themselves liable to the common troubles of life,
they lay their account with enduring them, — are every hour prepared to
receive wounds, — shake off their sluggishness, and exercise themselves
in the warfare to which they know that they were appointed, - and with
humility and fear put themselves under God’s protection; nor do they
consider themselves safe anywhere else than under his hand. It was
otherwise with David, who, when ensnared by the allurements of his
prosperous state, promised himself unbroken tranquillity not from the
word of God but from his own feelings. The same thing also occurred to
the pious King Hezekiah, who, although lately afflicted with a sore
disease, as soon as all was well and according to his wish, was hurried
by the vanity of the flesh to pride and vain boasting, (<span
id="xxxvi.iii-p9.3"></span>[2Ch
32:24](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#024.md)<span
id="xxxvi.iii-p9.3"></span>.) By this we are taught to be on our guard
when in prosperity, that Satan may not bewitch us with his flatteries.
The more bountifully God deals with any one, the more carefully ought he
to watch against such snares. It is not, indeed, probable that David had
become so hardened as to despise God and defy all misfortunes, like many
of the great men of this world, who, when immersed among their luxuries
and surfeitings, insolently scoff at all God’s judgments; but an
effeminate listlessness having come over his mind, he became more
lukewarm in prayer, nor did he depend on the favor of God; in short, he
put too much confidence in his uncertain and transitory prosperity.

<span id="xxxvi.iii-p10"></span><span id="xxxvi.iii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xxxvi.iii-p11"></span>**7.** *O Jehovah! of thy good
pleasure.* This verse describes the difference which exists between the
confidence which is founded upon the word of God and the carnal security
which springs from presumption. True believers, when they rely upon God,
are not on that account neglectful of prayer. On the contrary, looking
carefully at the multitude of dangers by which they are beset, and the
manifold instances of human frailty which pass before their eyes, they
take warning from them, and pour out their hearts before God. The
prophet now failed in duty as to this matter; because, by anchoring
himself on his present wealth and tranquillity, or spreading his sails
to the prosperous winds, he depended not on the free favor of God in
such a manner as to be ready at any time to resign into his hands the
blessings which he had bestowed upon him. The contrast should be
observed between that confidence of stability which arises from the
absence of trouble, and that which rests upon the gracious favor of God.
When David says that *strength was established to his mountain,* some
interpreters expound it of mount Zion. Others understand by it a
stronghold or fortified tower, because in old time fortresses were
usually built upon mountains and lofty places. I understand the word
metaphorically to signify a solid support, and therefore readily admit
that the prophet alludes to mount Zion. David thus blames his own folly,
because he considered not, as he ought to have done, that there was no
stability in the nest which he had formed for himself, but in God’s good
will alone.

<span id="xxxvi.iii-p12"></span>*Thou hast hidden thy face.* Here he
confesses, that, after he was deprived of God’s gifts, this served to
purge his mind as it were by medicine from the disease of perverse
confidence. A marvellous and incredible method surely, that God, by
hiding his face, and as it were bringing on darkness, should open the
eyes of his servant, who saw nothing in the broad light of prosperity.
But thus it is necessary that we be violently shaken, in order to drive
away the delusions which both stifle our faith and hinder our prayers,
and which absolutely stupify us with a soothing infatuation. And if
David had need of such a remedy, let us not presume that we are endued
with so good a state of heart as to render it unprofitable for us to be
in want, in order to remove from us this carnal confidence, which is as
it were diseased repletion which would otherwise suffocate us. We have,
therefore, no reason to wonder, though God often hides his face from us,
when the sight of it, even when it shines serenely upon us, makes us so
wretchedly blind.

<span id="xxxvi.iii-p13"></span><span id="xxxvi.iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xxxvi.iii-p14"></span>**8.** *O Jehovah! I cried unto thee.*
Now follows the fruit of David’s chastisement. He had been previously
sleeping profoundly, and fostering his indolence by forgetfulness; but
being now awakened all on a sudden with fear and terror, he begins to
cry to God. As the iron which has contracted rust cannot be put to any
use until it be heated again in the fire, and beaten with the hammer, so
in like manner, when carnal security has once got the mastery, no one
can give himself cheerfully to prayer, until he has been softened by the
cross, and thoroughly subdued. And this is the chief advantage of
afflictions, that while they make us sensible of our wretchedness, they
stimulate us again to supplicate the favor of God.

<span id="xxxvi.iii-p15"></span><span id="xxxvi.iii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xxxvi.iii-p16"></span>**9.** *What profit is there in my
blood?* Some explain the verse after this manner: What will it avail me
to have lived, unless thou prolongest my life till I shall have finished
the course of my vocation? But this exposition seems too strained,
especially as the term *blood* here signifies *death,* not *life:* as if
David had said, What profit wilt thou derive from my death? This
interpretation is farther confirmed by the following clause, where he
complains that his lifeless body will then be useless for celebrating
the praises of God. And he seems expressly to mention the *truth* of
God, to intimate that it would be unsuitable to the character of God to
take him out of the world by an untimely death, before God had
accomplished the promise which he had made to him concerning his future
heir. As there is a mutual relation between God’s promises and our
faith, truth is, as it were, the medium by which God openly shows that
he does not merely make liberal promises to us in words, to feed us with
empty hopes, and afterwards to disappoint us. Moreover, to obtain a
longer life, David draws an argument from the praises of God, to
celebrate which we are born and nourished: as if he had said, For what
purpose hast thou created me, O God! but that through the whole course
of my life I may be a witness and a herald of thy grace to set forth the
glory of thy name? But my death will cut short the continuance of this
exercise, and reduce me to eternal silence. A question, however, arises
here, Does not, it may be said, the death of true believers glorify God
as well as their life? We answer, David speaks not simply of death, but
adds a circumstance which I have already treated of in the sixth Psalm.
As God had promised him a successor, the hope of living longer being
taken from him, he had good reason to be afraid lest this promise should
be frustrated by his death, and was therefore compelled to exclaim,
*What profit is there in my blood?* It highly concerned the glory of God
that he should be preserved alive, until by obtaining his desire, he
should be able to bear witness to God’s faithfulness in completely
fulfilling his promise to him. By inquiring in the end of the verse,
*Shall the dust praise thee?* he does not mean that the dead are
altogether deprived of power to praise God, as I have already shown in
the sixth Psalm. If the faithful, while encumbered with a burden of
flesh, exercise themselves in this pious duty, how should they desist
from it when they are disencumbered, and set free from the restraints of
the body? It ought to be observed, therefore, that David does not
professedly treat of what the dead do, or how they are occupied, but
considers only the purpose for which we live in this world, which is
this, that we may mutually show forth to one another the glory of God.
Having been employed in this exercise to the end of our life, death at
length comes upon us and shuts our mouth.

<span id="xxxvi.iii-p17"></span><span id="xxxvi.iii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xxxvi.iii-p18"></span>**10.** *Hear, O Jehovah!* In this
clause the Psalmist softens and corrects his former complaint; for it
would have been absurd to expostulate with God like one who despaired of
safety, and to leave off in this fretful temper. Having asked,
therefore, with tears, what profit God would derive from his death, he
encourages himself to a more unconstrained manner of prayer, and,
conceiving new hope, calls upon God for mercy and help. He puts God’s
favor, however, in the first place, from whom alone he could expect the
help which he implored.

<span id="xxxvi.iv"></span>

<span id="xxxvi.iv-p1"></span><span id="xxxvi.iv-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
30:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#011.md)<span
id="xxxvi.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxxvi.iv-p2"></span>**11.** Thou hast turned my mourning into
dancing; thou hast loosed my sackcloth, and girded me with gladness.
**12.** That my glory may sing praise to thee, and not be silent: O
Jehovah my God! I will set forth thy praise for ever.

<span id="xxxvi.iv-p3"></span> 

<span id="xxxvi.iv-p4"></span><span id="xxxvi.iv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xxxvi.iv-p5"></span>**11.** *Thou hast turned my mourning into
dancing.* David concludes the psalm as he had begun it, with
thanksgiving. He affirms that it was by the help and blessing of God
that he had escaped safe; and he then adds, that the final object of his
escape was, that he might employ the rest of his life in celebrating the
praises of God. Moreover, he shows us that he was not insensible or
obdurate under his afflictions, but mourned in heaviness and sorrow; and
he also shows that his very mourning had been the means of leading him
to pray to God to deprecate his wrath. Both these points are most worthy
of our observation, in order, first, that we may not suppose that the
saints are guilty of stoical insensibility, depriving them of all
feeling of grief; and, secondly, that we may perceive that in their
mourning they were exercised to repentance. This latter he denotes by
the term *sackcloth.* It was a common practice among the ancients to
clothe themselves with sackcloth when mourning,  <span
id="fr_632"></span>[633](#fn_632.md) for no other reason, indeed, than that
like guilty criminals, they might approach their heavenly Judge,
imploring his forgiveness with all humility, and testifying by this
clothing their humiliation and dissatisfaction with themselves.  <span
id="fr_633"></span>[634](#fn_633.md) We know also that the orientals were
addicted beyond all others to ceremonies. We perceive, therefore, that
David, although he patiently submitted himself to God, was not free from
grief. We also see that his sorrow was “after a godly sort,” as Paul
speaks, (<span id="xxxvi.iv-p7.2"></span>[2Co
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#010)<span id="xxxvi.iv-p7.2"></span>;.md)
for to testify his penitence he clothed himself with sackcloth. By the
term *dancing,* he does not mean any wanton or profane leaping, but a
sober and holy exhibition of joy like that which sacred Scripture
mentions when David conveyed the ark of the covenant to its place,
(<span id="xxxvi.iv-p7.3"></span>[2Sa
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#016)<span id="xxxvi.iv-p7.3"></span>..md)
If we may conjecture, however, we may gather from this, that the great
danger of which David speaks in this psalm is by some improperly
restricted to sickness, as it was very improbable that he would put on
sackcloth when he was confined to a sick-bed. This, indeed, would not be
a sufficient reason of itself, but in a doubtful case, as this is, it is
not destitute of force. David therefore means, that, laying aside his
mourning apparel, he returned from a state of heaviness and sorrow to
joy; and this he ascribes to the grace of God alone, asserting that he
had been his deliverer.

<span id="xxxvi.iv-p8"></span><span id="xxxvi.iv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxxvi.iv-p9"></span>**12.** *That my glory may sing praise to
thee.* In this verse he more fully expresses his acknowledgement of the
purpose for which God had preserved him from death, and that he would be
careful to render him a proper return of gratitude. Some refer the word
*glory* to the body, and some to the soul, or the higher powers of the
mind. Others, as the pronoun *my,* which we have supplied, is not in the
Hebrew text, prefer to translate it in the accusative case, supplying
the word *every man,* in this way: *That every man may celebrate thy
glory;* as if the prophet had said, This is a blessing worthy of being
celebrated by the public praises of all men. But as all these
interpretations are strained, I adhere to the sense which I have given.
The Hebrew word <span id="xxxvi.iv-p9.1"></span>כבוד, *kebod,* which
signifies *glory,* it is well known, is sometimes employed
metaphorically to signify *the tongue,* as we have seen in <span
id="xxxvi.iv-p9.2"></span>[Ps
16:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#009.md)<span id="xxxvi.iv-p9.2"></span>.
And as David adds immediately after, *I will celebrate thy praise for
ever,* the context demands that he should particularly speak of his own
duty in this place. His meaning, therefore, is, O Lord, as I know that
thou hast preserved me for this purpose, that thy praises may resound
from my tongue, I will faithfully discharge this service to thee, and
perform my part even unto death. *To sing, and not be silent,* is a
Hebrew *amplification;* as if he had said, My tongue shall not be mute,
or deprive God of his due praise; it shall, on the contrary, devote
itself to the celebration of his glory.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_619"></span>[620](cc08035.htm#fr_619.md) <span
id="xxxvi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xxxvi-p5"></span> “<span id="xxxvi-p5.1"></span>Se
recognoissans estrangers, et que c’estoit luy qui les y logeoit et leur
bailloit demeurance.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_620"></span>[621](cc08035.htm#fr_620.md) <span
id="xxxvi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xxxvi-p6"></span> “<span id="xxxvi-p6.1"></span>Quand l’homme
allegoit qu’il n’avoit encores dedid sa maison.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_621"></span>[622](cc08035.htm#fr_621.md) <span
id="xxxvi.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxxvi.i-p3"></span> *Ainsworth* reads, “Thou hast drawn up
me,” which he explains to mean, “drawn as out of a pit of waters;”
“for,” says he, “this word is used for ‘drawing of waters,’ <span
id="xxxvi.i-p3.1"></span>[Ex 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#016.md)<span
id="xxxvi.i-p3.1"></span>; waters signifying troubles.” “<span
id="xxxvi.i-p3.2"></span>דליתבי, *Thou hast drawn me up as it were out
of a dungeon.”* — *Rogers’ Book of Psalms.*

<span id="fn_622"></span>[623](cc08035.htm#fr_622.md) <span
id="xxxvi.i-p3.3"></span>

<span id="xxxvi.i-p4"></span> “<span id="xxxvi.i-p4.1"></span>D’entre
ceux que descendent.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_623"></span>[624](cc08035.htm#fr_623.md) <span
id="xxxvi.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxxvi.ii-p3"></span> “<span id="xxxvi.ii-p3.1"></span>Ou
chantez afin qu’il soit memoire.” — Fr. *marg.* “Or sing, that he may be
remembered.”

<span id="fn_624"></span>[625](cc08035.htm#fr_624.md) <span
id="xxxvi.ii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xxxvi.ii-p4"></span> Literally, “There is but a moment in his
anger;” and this is also the literal rendering of the Hebrew.

<span id="fn_625"></span>[626](cc08035.htm#fr_625.md) <span
id="xxxvi.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xxxvi.ii-p5"></span> “<span id="xxxvi.ii-p5.1"></span>C’est,
un long temps.” — *Note, Fr. marg.* “That is, a long time.”

<span id="fn_626"></span>[627](cc08035.htm#fr_626.md) <span
id="xxxvi.ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xxxvi.ii-p11"></span> <span id="xxxvi.ii-p11.1"></span>לזכר*,
lezeker, at the memorial.*

<span id="fn_627"></span>[628](cc08035.htm#fr_627.md) <span
id="xxxvi.ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xxxvi.ii-p16"></span> “<span id="xxxvi.ii-p16.1"></span>Et de
faict, c’est un poinct tout resolu.” — Fr.

<span id="fn_628"></span>[629](cc08035.htm#fr_628.md) <span
id="xxxvi.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxxvi.iii-p3"></span> “<span id="xxxvi.iii-p3.1"></span>C’est,
en ma prosperite.” — *Note, Fr. marg.* “That is, in my prosperity.”

<span id="fn_629"></span>[630](cc08035.htm#fr_629.md) <span
id="xxxvi.iii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xxxvi.iii-p4"></span> Our author here uses <span
id="xxxvi.iii-p4.1"></span>*Dominus;* but in the Hebrew it is <span
id="xxxvi.iii-p4.2"></span>יהוה, *Yehovah*

<span id="fn_630"></span>[631](cc08035.htm#fr_630.md) <span
id="xxxvi.iii-p4.3"></span>

<span id="xxxvi.iii-p5"></span> The Septuagint has “<span
id="xxxvi.iii-p5.1"></span>Εἰς διαθοράν” — to corruption. The rendering
of *Jerome* is the same, “<span id="xxxvi.iii-p5.2"></span>In
corruptionem.”

<span id="fn_631"></span>[632](cc08035.htm#fr_631.md) <span
id="xxxvi.iii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xxxvi.iii-p9"></span> “<span id="xxxvi.iii-p9.1"></span>Qu’ils
se mignardent en leur prosperite, et par maniere de dire, croupessent
sur leur fumier. — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_632"></span>[633](cc08035.htm#fr_632.md) <span
id="xxxvi.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xxxvi.iv-p6"></span> This custom was not confined to the
Israelites. It was practiced also among the heathen nations. An instance
of this is recorded in <span id="xxxvi.iv-p6.1"></span>[Jon
3:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#005.md)<span id="xxxvi.iv-p6.1"></span>.
It appears from *Plutarch*, that this was also sometimes practiced among
the Greeks. The Hebrew word for *sackcloth* is <span
id="xxxvi.iv-p6.2"></span>שק, *sak;* and it is remarkable that the word
*sak* exists in various languages, denoting the same thing. It shows the
unaffected character of real sorrow, leading men to neglect the adorning
of their persons, when we find several nations manifesting it by wearing
the same dismal garb, and employing a word of the same sound to express
it.

<span id="fn_633"></span>[634](cc08035.htm#fr_633.md) <span
id="xxxvi.iv-p6.3"></span>

<span id="xxxvi.iv-p7"></span> “<span id="xxxvi.iv-p7.1"></span>Ne
monstrant qu’abjection et desplaisanee d’eux-mesmes. — *Fr.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 31](cc08036.md)
