[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc08003)  [Next](cc08005.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 8: Psalms, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v"></span>

<span id="v-p1"></span>THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY

<span id="v-p2"></span>\[PREFIXED TO THE ORIGINAL TRANSLAT10N, 1571.\]

<span id="v-p3"></span>To The Right Honorably And Verie Good Lord,

<span id="v-p4"></span>EDWARD DE VERE, ERLE OF OXINFORD,

<span id="v-p5"></span>Lord Great Chamberlain Of England, Vicount
Bulbecke, Etc.  <span id="fr_9"></span>[10](#fn_9.md)

<span id="v-p7"></span>ARTHUR GOLDING

<span id="v-p8"></span>Wisheth Increace Of Godly Knowldge,  
With Health, Honour, And Prosperitie.

<span id="v-p9"></span>IT may, peraduenture, be thought in respect of
the matter wherof this woork treateth, that it ought rather to haue bin
dedicated to som of my very good Lords, the Lords Spirituall, or to some
of the Clergie, all to whom such things seeme to perteine more
peculiarly, by reason of theyr charge and calling. Which opinions as I
purpose not to encounter, but rather most willingly submit my selfe and
my doings to the iudgement and reformation of such reuerend Fathers and
learned men, as God hath put ill trust with the care of his flock, and
the charge of his Church within this Realms euen so forasmuch as the
things which the Holy Ghost vttereth in the Sacred Scriptures belong
indifferently unto all men, of what estate, degrees sex, age, or
calling, so euer they be, without exception: I haue at this time set all
other respects and considerations aside, and only had an eye to my dutie
towards your Lordship.

<span id="v-p10"></span>And bicause my continuall troubles and sutes in
the Lawe (as yit vnended after more than three yeeres trauel) haue
bereft mee of the greatest part of my timer, so as I could not dispatch
things with such expedition as otherwise I might haue done; my care and
indeuer hath bin too recompence mine ouerlong silence with goodnes of
matter, that might redound to the furtherance of our Christen common
weale, and also be meete for your Lordship too looke vpon. But you,
perchaunce, according too the noble courage and disposition of your
yeeres, doo looke I should presente vntoo you some Historie of the
Conquestes and affaires of mightie Princes, some treatise of the
government of common weales, some description of the platte of the whole
Earth, or some discourse of chiualrie and feates of Armes. These things
are, in deede, meete studies for a noble manne, and in their season
right necessary for the common welth; but as nowe I present vntoo your
honor muche greater things that is, to wit, true Religyon, true
Godlynesse, true Vertue, wythout the whych, neyther force, policie, nor
freend ship, are of any value, neyther can any common weale any Cities
any householde, or any company, bee wel gouerned, or haue any stable and
long continuance. These be the things wherin your Lordship may do God,
your Prince, and your Cuntrie, best seruice, and which do giue true
nobilitie, or rather are the very nobilitie it self.

<span id="v-p11"></span>The greater that you are of birth and calling,
the more doo these things belong vnto you. The greater gifts of Nature,
the mo graces of mind, the mo worldly benefites that God hath bestowed
vppon you, the more are you bound to be thankful vnto him. But thankful
you cannot bee without the true knoweledge of him, neyther can you know
him rightly but by his woord. For his sword is the lanterne of your
feete, and the light of your steppes. Whosoeuer walked without it,
walketh but in darkenesse, though he were otherwise as sharpe sighted
*as Linceus* or *Argus*, and had all the sciences artes, conning,
eloquence, and wisedome of the worlde. No sound and substantiall truthe
is too bee founde any where els saue onely there. And, therfore, the
Holy Ghost, by the mouth of Moyses, willeth you that the lawe of God
(that is to say, his word and doctrine) shoulde not departe from your
mouth, but that you should bynde it about your wrists, imbroyder it vpon
your garments ingraue it vpon the postes of your house, and write it in
the tables of your hart. And Dauid, speaking by the same spirite,
exhorteth you by his owne example to set your whole delight in it, too
occupy your selfe in it day and night, too lay it vp in your hart, too
set more store by it than by riches, to be mindeful of it, to make it
your counsayler, to stick too it, too talke of it afore Kings and greate
men, to loue it, too make your songs of it, to remember it night and
day, too count it sweeter than Hony, too take it as an heritage, and too
make it the ioy of your hart. Neyther is it without cause that GOD
calleth so ofte vppon Magistrates and noble men by name, that they
should be diligent in his worde. For looke how muche the greater burthen
and charge lyeth vpon their shoulders and the greater accounte they haue
to make afore him; so muche the greater wisedome and knoweledge haue
they need of, which are not to be atteyned elsewhere than in his lawe. I
beseeche your Lordship consider how God hath placed you vpon a high
stage in the eyes of all men, as a guide, patterne, insample, and leader
vnto others if your vertues be vncounterfayted, if your religion be
sound and pure, if your doings be according to true godliness you shalbe
a stay to your cuntrie, a comforte too good men, a bridle too euil men,
a ioy too your freends, a corzie too your enemies, and an increace of
honor to your owne house. But if you should become eyther a counterfayt
Protestant, or a peruerse Papist, or a colde and carelesse newter,
(which God forbid,) the harme could not be expressed which you should do
to your natiue Cuntrie. For (as *Cicero,* no lesse truely than wisely
affirmeth, and as the sorrowfull dooings of our Present dayes do too
certeinly auouch) greate men hurt not the common weale so much by beeing
euil in respect of themselues, as by drawing others vnto euil by their
euil example. I assure your Lordshippe I write not these things as
though I suspected you to be digressed from that soundnes and sinceritie
wherein you were continually trayned and traded vnder that vigilant
*Vlisses* of our common welth, sometyme your Lordship’s carefull *Chyron
or Phoenix,* and nowe your faithful *Patroclus,* or *as* though I
mistrusted your Lordship to be degenerated from the excellent towardnes,
which by foreward proof hath giuen glad foretokens, and (I trust also)
luckye hansels of an honorable age too ensue; but bycause the loue that
I owe to God and his religion, the care that I haue of the church and my
natiue cuntrie, the dutie wherin Nature hath bound mee to your Lordship,
and (which is an occasion too make all good and honest men look about
them) the perilousnes of this present time, wherin all meanes possible
are practiced to ouerthrowe Christe’s kingdom and to abolishe all
faithfullnes from among men, make mee to feare and forecast, not so much
what is true, as what may bee noysome and hurtful; and, therfore, I seek
rather too profite by wholesome admonition, than to delight by pleasant
speeches. These be no dayes of daliance; for Sathan, the workmaster of
all mischeef, being greued that his own king dome draweth to an end, not
onely goeth about like a roring Lyon too *deuoure folke by* open force,
but also like a slie Serpent setteth snares and pitfalles innumerable,
to intrap men and bring them to destruction by policie laying wayt for
all men, but specially for such as are of high estate, as who alwayes
carye greatest nombers with them which waye so euer they incline. Hee
turneth himselfe intoo mo shapes than euer did *Proteus:* and suche as
himselfe is, suche are his ministers. First and foremost the obstinate
and stubborneharted *Papistes,* the sworne enemies of God, the pestilent
poyson of mankinde, and the very welsprings of all error, hipocrisie,
and vngraciousnes, (who, while they beare sway, bee more cruel than
Beares, Wolues, and Tigres; and when they bee kept vnder, more
deceitfull than *Cerastes* and *Crocodyles;* and at all times more
mischeuous than the Diuel himselfe,) labor with tooth and nayle too
winde their owne trash into credit with all men, and to bring the
heauenly doctrine of the Gospel in hatred.

<span id="v-p12"></span>Ageine, the *Atheistes,* which say in their
hartes there is no God; and the *Epicures,* which depriue God of his
prouidence in gouerning the world, as though hee eyther vnderstoode not
what is doone vppon Earth, or els cared not for mennes affaires: seeke
they not by all meanes possible too weede all Religion, all feare of
God, all remorse of conscience out of mennes harts? Out of these rootes
spring other impes, no lesse perniciouse than the stockes of whiche they
come, men of all Religions, Shippemen that canne sayle with all wethers,
Carpenters that can hewe with bothe handes, Laddes that canne holde with
the Hare and hunt with the Hounde, and (as the Scripture termeth them)
time-seruers and menpleasers. Of which torte be the picthank Preests of
*Hammon,* who, with the venemouse blaste of their filthie flattery,
corrupt the wel instructed mindes of our *Alexranders*, (that is to say,
of our noble men,) by bearing them in hand, that they bee the sonnes of
*Iupiter,* add making them beleeue themselues too bee Gods, yea,
sometimes before they be scarce men. These, after the maner of
*Panthers* and *Mermaides*, astonne the senses with a deadly sweetnes,
and work destruction by delighting. Moreouer, to the further withdrawing
of men’s minds from the estimation of the sound Religion, it falleth out
that euen in the outward face of the Church there be many Hipocrites,
many looce liuers, many Sectaries, and many wranglers, whiche pretending
the countenance of Chryste’s flock, but beeing in deede the Deuil’s
hirelings, confessing GOD with their mouth, but denying him in their
works, cause his holy, pure, and reuerend doctrine to bee slaundered and
ill-spoken of among the *Gentiles,* (that is, too wit, among the
*Papist* and worldlings,) and so alienate men from Christ.

<span id="v-p13"></span>The ignorant sort also deeming things vntowardly
by the outward shew, charge the Gospell with the faultes of men, which
it reprooueth and bringeth too lyght, as who would Say, that hee whiche
bewrayeth a Murtherer, or rebuketh an Adulterer, were too bee counted an
offender in the same caces, bicause hee discouereth their wickednesse,
too the intent too haue it punished or redressed. And these are
stumbling-blocks common to all sortes of men; but more peculiar to great
menne are those that I spake of in the third place, and also these
ensuing, namely, noblenesse of birth, renowne of Aunceters, fauor of
their Prince, freendship of their peeres, awe of their inferiours, great
alyances, greate retinewes depending vpon them, libertie aboue the
common rate, welth, honor, riches, ease, sumptuouse fare, costly
apparel, gorgeouse buildings, attendaunce of seruants, and suche other
like, whiche as they bee the singuler good giftes and benefites of God
bestowed vpon them for their comfort, to the end they should the more
loue him and imbrace his truthe: so Sathan abusing the infirmitie and
corruption of man’s nature, dooth in many menne wrest them all too a
contrary ende, namely, too the proude contempt and impugning, or at
leastwise to the carelesse neglecting of God’s true Religion and
seruice.

<span id="v-p14"></span>As for the fraylnesse of youth it self, the open
manaces and priuie practizes of *Antichrist,* the common hatred and
disdeine of the Worlde ageinst the sincere worshippers of God, the
hardnesse and aduersities which they endure in this life, and infinite
other by matters whiche are no small hinderances too the proceeding of
the Gospel, I wil not stand too intreat of them. For doubtlesse,
although *Antichrist* were abolished although Sathan were a sleepe,
although the world were at one with vs. although wicked counsel were
vtterly put too silence, although no euil example were giuen vs.
although no outwarde stumbling-blocke were cast in our waye; yit haue
wee one thing in our selues and of our selues, (euen originall sinne,
concupiscence, or lust,) which neuer ceaseth too egge vs and allure vs
from God, and too staine vs with all kinde of vnclennes, according as
Sainct Iames sayth: Every man is tempted of his owne lust. This is the
breth of the venemouse *Cockatrice* which hath infected the whole
offspring of *Adam.* This is the sting of that olde Serpent whose wounds
neither *Chyron, Aesculupius,* nor *Apollo,* can heale, no, nor any
wight in Heauen or Earth, saue onely God. This is the bitter fountaine
*Exampeus,* which with his brackishnesse marreth the sweete Riuer
*Hipanis,* that is to say, the flowing streame of all God’s graces,
benefited and gifts in vs.

<span id="v-p15"></span>Good cause haue we therfore to bee forewarned
and continually admonished to beware of the mischeef that is armed with
so many weapons and policies to anoy: specially considering how the
operation therof is to slea both bodie and soule, and to drown them
togither in to endles damnation. For this I dare be bolde to say vpon
the warrant of assured truthe, that whosoeuer is but lightly blasted
with the poyson of Papistrie, is the vnapter to all the duties of true
vertue and godlines, like as a Cripple or lame man is the vnmeeter and
vnabler for the affaires of this life. But as for him that is throughly
saped in it, and hathe digested it into his bowels, and hath setled the
roots of it in the bottome of his hart; depending vpon the *Antichrist*
of *Rome* as vpon the mouth of God, He can neyther be the faithful
seruant of God, nor a hartie Subiect too his Prince, nor a good and
sound member of the common welth, vntill hee haue done as the Snake
dooth when he commeth to engender with the Lamprey.

<span id="v-p16"></span>For the better manifestation of all the which
things I besech your good Lordship to peruse this present books, which
doubtlesse, for the exceellency therof, not onely deserueth more
singular commendation than man’s wit is able to yeeld, but also is
worthy too be had continually in all mennes hands, or rather too bee
printed in their hartes. For if you haue an eye too the Authors, it was
written by Prophets, Preestes, and Kinges, inspired with the Holye
Ghost, the fountaine of an vnderstanding, wysedom, and truth, and
auouched onto vs by Christie the Sonne of the euellasting God. Or if you
haue an eye to the matter, it conteineth a treatise of the Doctrine of
lyfe and euerlasting Saluation, the particulars wherof are as many as
are the points of true Religion and holinesse to Godward, or the points
of faithfull meening and honest dealing too manward. And these things
are common to it with the residue of holy Scripture.

<span id="v-p17"></span>The thing that is peculiar to it, is the maner
of the handling of the matters wherof it treateth. For whereas other
partes of holy writ (whither they be historicall, morall, iudiciall,
ceremoniall, or propheticall) do commonly set down their treatises in
open and plaine declarations; this parte consisting of them all,
wrappeth vp things in types and figures, describing them finder borowed
personages, and oftentimes winding in matters by preuention, speaking of
thinges too come as if they were past or present, and of things past as
if they were in dooing, and euery man is made a bewrayer of the secretes
of his owne hart. And forasmuche as it consisteth cheefly of prayer and
thanksgiving, or (which comprehendeth them bothe) of inuocation, whiche
is a communication with God, and requireth rather an earnest and deuout
lifting vp of the minde, than a loud or curious vtterance of the voice:
there be many vnperfect sentences, many broken speeches, and many
displaced words, according as the voice of the partie that prayed was
eyther preuented with the swiftnesse of his thoughtes, or interrupted
with vehemency of ioy or greef, or forced to surcease through
infirmities that hee might recouer newe strength and cheerfulnesse, by
interminding God’s former promises and benefites. Notwithstanding, the
obscuritie of those places is not so great but that it may be easely
ouercome, by such as, when they pray, doo vtterly sequester their mindes
from all earthly imaginations and fleshly conceits, and after a sort
forsaking their bodies for the time, do mount vppe aboue the world by
faith, and present themselues before the heauenly throne of grace, to
seek the vnspeakable and inestimable comfort of their soules.

<span id="v-p18"></span>Suche are the conteints, and suche is the maner
or disposition of the ground-worke of this booke, that is to say, of the
Psalmes themselues. Whervnto (for the better vnderstanding of them)
heere is added an exposition or Commentarie written in Latin by that
learned Clerk and faithful minister of Chryst in the church of *Geneua,*
Master *Iohn Caluin,* whose worthy praise and commendation, his owne
manifolde woorks moste peinfully, sincerely, and soundly set foorth too
the greate furtherance and profite of the whole Christen common weale,
doo better declare than my pen can vtter or my wit deuice. And among the
reste of them, it is thoughte of most learned men, that next vntoo his
Institutions, this presente volume beareth the Bel, bothe for varietie
of matter, substantialnes of doctrine, depth of iudgement, and
perfectnesse of penning. For it is not puffed vp with vaine sound of
emptie woords, nor with Rhetorical inlarging of painted sentences, but
it is stuffed with piththy and grounded matter, such as plainly sheweth
him too haue bin a man indued with the Spirite of God, and also well
practized and tryed in the affaires and troubles of this world.

<span id="v-p19"></span>What is to bee thought of the translation of it,
that I remitte to your Lordship’s fauourable acceptation, vnder whose
Antesigne it is my desire that it may fight in the defense and
maintenance of the true religion ageinst Antichrist and his wicked
members. Onely thus muche I may safely say of it, that in all pointes
(to the vttermoste of my power, and according to the abilitie which God
hath giuen me to edifie withall) I haue sincerely performed the dutie of
a faithfull Interpreter, rather indeuering too lay foorth things
plainlye (yea, and sometimes also homely and grossely) too the
vnderstanding of many, than too indyte things curyously too the pleasing
of a fewe. For in this and suche other workes, the rude and ignorant
haue more interest than the learned and skillful. If any thing be
amisse, (as I dare not presume too vpholde that nothing hath escaped mee
in so great a woorke,) my hartie desire is, that the same may be amended
by such as are of sound iudgement and knowledge in God’s woorde, so as
no inconuenience may ensue of it too the churche of Christ. And look
what I request in the behalfe of this present booke, the same do I
request for all other books whiche I haue or (by God’s grace and
permission) shall heerafter put foorth for the edifying of Chrystes
flock: for I knowe how suche things are the woork of God and not of man.

<span id="v-p20"></span>What remayneth then, but that your Lordship,
framing your selfe according to the rule of God’s most holy word, should
hie you apace to the atteinment of the true honor and immortall glory,
by subduing sinne, the world, and the Deuil, the *Hectors* that cannot
bee vanquished but by a christen *Achilles;* and by your good guyding
bring many vnto Christ, that in the end you may receiue the rewarde of
true and perfect blissednesse, euen the everlasting salvation of the
soule, whiche is the faire *Helen* for whose safetie it behooueth all
good men too endure, not tenne yeeres warre, but continuall warre all
their life long. To the furtherance wherof, God hath by householde
alyance lincked vnto your Lordship a long experienced *Nestor,* whose
counsaile and footsteps if you folowe, no doubte but you shalbee bothe
happie in your selfe, and singularly profitable to your common welth;
and moreouer, God shall blisse you with plentiful and godly issue by
your vertuous and deerbeloued Spouse, to continew the honor and renoavne
of your noble house after the happy knitting vp of bothe your yeeres,
which I pray God may bee many in vnseperable loue, like the loue of
*Ceix* and *Alcyonee,* to the glory of God, and the contentation of
bothe your desires.

<span id="v-p21"></span>Written at London, the 20th of  
October 1571.

<span id="v-p22"></span>Your good Lordship’s moste humlble to commaund,
*Arthur* *Goldling.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_9"></span>[10](cc08004.htm#fr_9.md) <span id="v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v-p6"></span> Edward de Vere, 17th Earl of Oxford, was highly
distinguished for his wit, valor, and Patriotism. In two several
tournaments he was honored by receiving the prize from the hand of his
mistress, Queen Elizabeth, baring been led armed, by two ladies, into
the Royal Presence Chamber. Walpole notes that he was an admired poet,
and reckoned the best waiter of comedy in his time. He died at a very
advanced age, June 24, 1604. It is extremely probable that Arthur
Golding, the old Translator, was related, perhaps not distantly, to this
nobleman. It appeals from Dugdale, and other authorities, that John,
16th Earl of Oxford, his father, married Margaret, daughter of John
Golding, and sister of Sir Edward Golding, for his second wife, by whom
he had Earl Edward, after whom it is likely he was named, and a
daughter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Author's Preface](cc08005.md)
