[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc08005)  [Next](cc08007.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 8: Psalms, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii"></span>

<span id="vii-p1"></span>Commentary

<span id="vii-p2"></span>upon the book of Psalms

<span id="vii-p3"></span>PSALM 1.

<span id="vii-p4"></span>He who collected the Psalms into one volume,
whether Ezra or some other person, appears to have placed this Psalm at
the beginning, by way of preface, in which he inculcates upon all the
godly the duty of meditating upon the law of God. The sum and substance
of the whole is, that they are blessed who apply their hearts to the
pursuit of heavenly wisdom; whereas the profane despisers of God,
although for a time they may reckon themselves happy, shall at length
have a most miserable end.

<span id="vii.i"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p1"></span><span id="vii.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
1:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md)<span id="vii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p2"></span>**1.** Blessed is the man who walketh not in
the counsel of the ungodly, nor standeth in the way of sinners, nor
sitteth in the seat of the scorner. **2.** But his delight is in the law
of Jehovah; and in his law doth he meditate day and night.

<span id="vii.i-p3"></span> 

<span id="vii.i-p4"></span><span id="vii.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p5"></span>**1.** *Blessed is the man.*  <span
id="fr_18"></span>[19](#fn_18.md) The meaning of the Psalmist, as I have
stated above, is, that it shall be always well with God’s devout
servants, whose constant endeavor it is to make progress in the study of
his law. The greater part of mankind being accustomed to deride the
conduct of the saints as mere simplicity, and to regard their labor as
entirely thrown away, it was of importance that the righteous should be
confirmed in the way of holiness, by the consideration of the miserable
condition of all men without the blessing of God, and the conviction
that God is favorable to none but those who zealously devote themselves
to the study of divine truth. Moreover, as corruption has always
prevailed in the world, to such a degree, that the general character of
men’s lives is nothing else but a continual departure from the law of
God, the Psalmist, before asserting the blessedness of the students of
the divine law, admonishes them to beware of being carried away by the
ungodliness of the multitude around them. Commencing with a declaration
of his abhorrence of the wicked, he teaches us how impossible it is for
any one to apply his mind to meditation upon God’s laws who has not
first withdrawn and separated himself from the society of the ungodly. A
needful admonition surely; for we see how thoughtlessly men will throw
themselves into the snares of Satan; at least, how few comparatively
there are who guard against the enticements of sin. That we may be fully
apprised of our danger, it is necessary to remember that the world is
fraught with deadly corruption, and that the first step to living well
is to renounce the company of the ungodly, otherwise it is sure to
infect us with its own pollution.

<span id="vii.i-p7"></span>As the prophet, in the first place, enjoins
the godly to beware of temptations to evil, we shall follow the same
order. His affirmation, that they are blessed who have no fellowship
with the ungodly, is what the common feeling and opinion of mankind will
scarcely admit; for while all men naturally desire and seek after
happiness, we see how securely they can indulge themselves in their
sins, yea, that those of them who have departed farthest from
righteousness, in the gratification of their lusts, are accounted happy,
because they obtain the desires of their heart. The prophet, on the
contrary, here teaches that no man can be duly animated to the fear and
service of God, and to the study of his law, until he is firmly
persuaded that all the ungodly are miserable, and that they who do not
withdraw from their company shall he involved in the same destruction
with them. But as it is no easy matter to shun the ungodly with whom we
are mingled in the world, so as to be wholly estranged from them, the
Psalmist, in order to give the greater emphasis to his exhortation,
employs a multiplicity of expressions.

<span id="vii.i-p8"></span>In the first place, he forbids us to *walk in
their counsel*; in the second place, to *stand in their way*; and,
lastly, to *sit in their seat*

<span id="vii.i-p9"></span>The sum of the whole is, that the servants of
God must endeavor utterly to abhor the life of ungodly men. But as it is
the policy of Satan to insinuate his deceits, in a very crafty way, the
prophet, in order that none may be insensibly deceived, shows how by
little and little men are ordinarily induced to turn aside from the
right path. They do not, at the first step, advance so far as a proud
contempt of God but having once begun to give ear to evil counsel, Satan
leads them, step by step, farther astray, till they rush headlong into
open transgression. The prophet, therefore, begins with counsel, by
which term I understand the wickedness which does not as yet show itself
openly. Then he speaks of the way, which is to be understood of the
customary mode or manner of living. And he places at the top of the
climax the seat, by which metaphorical expression he designates the
obduracy produced by the habit of a sinful life. In the same way, also,
ought the three phrases, to walk, to stand, and to sit, to be
understood. When a person willingly walks after the gratification of his
corrupt lusts, the practice of sinning so infatuates him, that,
forgetful of himself, he grows hardened in wickedness; and this the
prophet terms standing in the way of sinners. Then at length follows a
desperate obstinacy, which he expresses by the figure of sitting.
Whether there is the same gradation in the Hebrew words <span
id="vii.i-p9.1"></span>רשעים, *reshaim*, <span
id="vii.i-p9.2"></span>חטאים, *chataim*, and <span
id="vii.i-p9.3"></span>לצים, *letsim*, that is to say, a gradual
increase of evil, I leave to the judgment of others.  <span
id="fr_19"></span>[20](#fn_19.md) To me it does not appear that there is,
unless perhaps in the last word. For those are called scorners who,
having thrown off all fear of God, commit sin without restraint, in the
hope of escaping unpunished, and without compunction or fear sport at
the judgment of God, as if they would never be called to render up an
account to him. The Hebrew word <span id="vii.i-p10.2"></span>חטאים,
*chataim*, as it signifies the openly wicked, is very properly joined
with the term way, which signifies a professed and habitual manner of
living.  <span id="fr_20"></span>[21](#fn_20.md) And if, in the time of the
Psalmist, it was necessary for the devout worshippers of God to withdraw
themselves from the company of the ungodly, in order to frame their life
aright, how much more in the present day, when the world has become so
much more corrupt, ought we carefully to avoid all dangerous society
that we may be kept unstained by its impurities. The prophet, however,
not only commands the faithful to keep at a distance from the ungodly,
from the dread of being infected by them, but his admonition farther
implies, that every one should be careful not to corrupt himself, nor
abandon himself to impiety.  <span id="fr_21"></span>[22](#fn_21.md) A man
may not have contracted defilement from evil examples, and yet come to
resemble the wicked by spontaneously imitating their corrupt manners.

<span id="vii.i-p13"></span><span id="vii.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p14"></span>In the second verse, the Psalmist does not
simply pronounce those happy who fear God, as in other places, but
designates godliness *by the study of the law,* teaching us that God is
only rightly served when had law is obeyed. It is not left to every man
to frame a system of religion according to his own judgment, but the
standard of godliness is to be taken from the Word of God. When David
here speaks of *the law,* it ought not to be understood as if the other
parts of Scripture should be excluded, but rather, since the whole of
Scripture is nothing else than an exposition of the law, under it as the
head is comprehended the whole body. The prophet, therefore, in
commending the law, includes all the rest of the inspired writings. He
must, therefore, be understood as meaning to exhort the faithful to the
reading of the Psalms also. From his characterising the godly as
delighting in the law of the Lord, we may learn that forced or servile
obedience is not at all acceptable to God, and that those only are
worthy students of the law who come to it with a cheerful mind, and are
so delighted with its instructions, as to account nothing more desirable
or delicious than to make progress therein. From this love of the law
proceeds constant meditation upon it, which the prophet mentions on the
last clause of the verse; for all who are truly actuated by love to the
law must feel pleasure in the diligent study of it.

<span id="vii.ii"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p1"></span><span id="vii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#003.md)<span id="vii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p2"></span>**3.** He shall be like a tree planted by
the rivers of waters, that bringeth his fruit in his season; whose leaf
shall not wither; and whatsoever he doeth shall prosper.

<span id="vii.ii-p3"></span> 

<span id="vii.ii-p4"></span><span id="vii.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p5"></span>The Psalmist here illustrates, and, at the
same time, confirms by a metaphor the statement made in the preceding
verse; for he shows in what respect those who fear God are to be
accounted happy, namely, not because they enjoy an evanescent and empty
gladness, but because they are in a desirable condition. There is in the
words an implied contrast between the vigor of a tree planted in a
situation well watered, and the decayed appearance of one which,
although it may flourish beautifully for a time, yet soon withers on
account of the barrenness of the soil in which it is placed. With
respect to the ungodly, as we shall afterwards see, (<span
id="vii.ii-p5.1"></span>[Ps 37:35](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#035.md)<span
id="vii.ii-p5.1"></span>) they are sometimes like “the cedars of
Lebanon.” They have such an overflowing abundance of wealth and honors,
that nothing seems wanting to their present happiness. But however high
they may be raised, and however far and wide they may spread their
branches, yet having no root in the ground, nor even a sufficiency of
moisture from which they may derive nourishment, the whole of their
beauty by and by disappears, and withers away. It is, therefore, the
blessing of God alone which preserves any in a prosperous condition.
Those who explain the figure of the faithful bringing forth their fruit
in season, as meaning that they wisely discern when a thing ought to be
done so as to be done well, in my opinion, show more acuteness than
judgment, by putting a meaning upon the words of the prophet which he
never intended. He obviously meant nothing more than that the children
of God constantly flourish, and are always watered with the secret
influences of divine grace, so that whatever may befall them is
conducive to their salvation; while, on the other hand, the ungodly are
carried away by the sudden tempest, or consumed by the scorching heat.
And when he says, *he bringeth forth his fruit in season,*  <span
id="fr_22"></span>[23](#fn_22.md) he expresses the full maturity of the
fruit produced, whereas, although the ungodly may present the appearance
of precocious fruitfulness, yet they produce nothing that comes to
perfection.

<span id="vii.iii"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p1"></span><span id="vii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#004.md)<span id="vii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p2"></span>**4.** The ungodly are not so; but are like
the chaff which the wind driveth away.

<span id="vii.iii-p3"></span> 

<span id="vii.iii-p4"></span><span id="vii.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p5"></span>The Psalmist might, with propriety, have
compared the ungodly to a tree that speedily withers, as Jeremiah likens
them to the heath which grows in the wilderness, (<span
id="vii.iii-p5.1"></span>[Jer
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#006)<span id="vii.iii-p5.1"></span>.md)
But not reckoning this figure sufficiently strong, he debases them by
employing another, which represents them in a light still more
contemptible: and the reason is, that he does not keep his eye on the
prosperous condition of which they boast for a short time, but his mind
is seriously pondering on the destruction which awaits them, and will at
length overtake them. The meaning, therefore, is, although the ungodly
now live prosperously, yet by and by they shall be like chaff; for when
the Lord has brought them low, he shall drive them hither and thither
with the blast of his wrath. Besides, by this form of speech, the Holy
Spirit teaches us to contemplate with the eye of faith, what might
otherwise seem incredible; for although the ungodly man rise high, and
appear to great advantage, like a stately tree, we may rest assured that
he will be even as chaff or refuse, whenever God chooses to cast him
down from his high estate, with the breath of his mouth.

<span id="vii.iv"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p1"></span><span id="vii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
1:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#005.md)<span id="vii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p2"></span>**5.** Therefore the ungodly shall not stand
in the judgment, nor sinners in the congregation of the righteous.
**6.** For Jehovah knoweth the way of the righteous; but the way of the
ungodly shall perish.

<span id="vii.iv-p3"></span> 

<span id="vii.iv-p4"></span><span id="vii.iv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p5"></span>In the fifth verse, the prophet teaches that
a happy life depends on a good conscience, and that, therefore, it is
not wonderful, if the ungodly suddenly fall from the happiness of which
they fancied themselves in possession. And there is implied in the words
a kind of concession; the prophet tacitly acknowledges that the ungodly
please and enjoy themselves, and triumph during the reign of moral
disorder in the world; just as robbers revel in the woods and caves,
when beyond the reach of justice. But he assures us, that things will
not always remain in their present state of confusion, and that when
they shall have been reduced to proper order, these ungodly persons
shall be entirely deprived of their pleasures, and feel that they were
infatuated when they thought themselves happy. We now see how the
Psalmist pronounces the ungodly to be miserable, because happiness is
the inward blessing of a good conscience. He does not deny, that before
they are driven to judgment, all things succeed well with them; but he
denies that they are happy unless they have substantial and steadfast
integrity of character to sustain them: for the true integrity of the
righteous manifests itself when it comes at length to be tried. It is
indeed true, that the Lord daily executes judgment, by making a
distinction between the righteous and the wicked, but because this is
done only partially in this life, we must look higher if we desire to
behold *the assembly of the righteous,* of which mention is here made.

<span id="vii.iv-p6"></span><span id="vii.iv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p7"></span>Even in this world the prosperity of the
ungodly begins to pass away as often as God manifests the tokens of his
judgment; (for then, being awakened out of sleep, they are constrained
to acknowledge, whether they will or no, that they have no part with the
assembly of the righteous;) but because this is not accomplished always,
nor with respect to all men, in the present state, we must patiently
wait for the day of final revelation, in which Christ will separate the
sheep from the goats. At the same time, we must maintain it as a general
truth, that the ungodly are devoted to misery; for their own consciences
condemn them for their wickedness; and, as often as they are summoned to
give an account of their life, their sleep is broken, and they perceive
that they were merely dreaming when they imagined themselves to be
happy, without looking inward to the true state of their hearts.

<span id="vii.iv-p8"></span>Moreover, as things appear to be here driven
about at the mercy of chance, and as it is not easy for us, in the midst
of the prevailing confusion, to acknowledge the truth of what the
Psalmist had said, he therefore presents to our consideration the grand
principle, that God is the Judge of the world. Granting this, it follows
that it cannot but be well with the upright and the just, while, on the
other hand, the most terrible destruction must impend over the ungodly.
According to all outward appearance, the servants of God may derive no
advantage from their uprightness; but as it is the peculiar office of
God to defend them and take care of their safety, they must be happy
under his protection. And from this we may also conclude that, as he is
the certain avenger of wickedness, although, for a time, he may seem to
take no notice of the ungodly, yet at length he will visit them with
destruction. Instead, therefore, of allowing ourselves to be deceived
with their imaginary felicity, let us, in circumstances of distress,
have ever before our eyes the providence of God, to whom it belongs to
settle the affairs of the world, and to bring order out of confusion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_18"></span>[19](cc08006.htm#fr_18.md) <span
id="vii.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p6"></span> In the Septuangint, the reading is <span
id="vii.i-p6.2"></span>μακαριος ἀνηρ, blessed is the man. Both Calvin
and our English translators have adopted this rendering. But the Hebrew
word <span id="vii.i-p6.3"></span>אשרי, rendered blessed, is in the
plural number, and <span id="vii.i-p6.4"></span>האיש, *ha-ish*, the man,
in the singular. Accordingly, the words have been considered as an
exclamation, and may be literally rendered, O, the blessedness of the
man! A beautiful and emphatic form of expression.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[20](cc08006.htm#fr_19.md) <span
id="vii.i-p9.4"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p10"></span> <span id="vii.i-p10.1"></span>C’est a dire,
un accroissement de mal comme par degrez. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[21](cc08006.htm#fr_20.md) <span
id="vii.i-p10.3"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p11"></span> <span id="vii.i-p11.1"></span>Il est bien
conjoint avec le verbe signifiant une profession de vivre et un train
tout accoustume. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[22](cc08006.htm#fr_21.md) <span
id="vii.i-p11.2"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p12"></span> <span id="vii.i-p12.1"></span>Et s’adonner
de soy-mesme a impiete. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[23](cc08006.htm#fr_22.md) <span
id="vii.ii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p6"></span> “And it bringeth forth all its produce to
maturity.” — (*Street’s New Literal Version of the Psalms*.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 2](cc08007.md)
