[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc08017)  [Next](cc08019.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 8: Psalms, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xix"></span>

<span id="xix-p1"></span>PSALM 13.

<span id="xix-p2"></span>The subject of this psalm is almost the same as
that of the preceding. David, being afflicted, not only with the deepest
distress, but also feeling himself, as it were, overwhelmed by a long
succession of calamities and multiplied afflictions, implores the aid
and succor of God, the only remedy which remained for him; and, in the
close, taking courage, he entertains the assured hope of life from the
promise of God, even amidst the terrors of death.

<span id="xix-p3"></span>To the chief musician. A song of David.

<span id="xix.i"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p1"></span><span id="xix.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
13:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#001.md)<span id="xix.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p2"></span>**1.** How long, O Jehovah, wilt thou forget
me, for ever? How long wilt thou hide thy face from me? **2.** How long
shall I take counsel in my soul? and have sorrow in my heart daily? how
long shall mine enemy be exalted over me?

<span id="xix.i-p3"></span> 

<span id="xix.i-p4"></span><span id="xix.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p5"></span>**1.** *How long, O Jehovah.* It is very true
that David was so greatly hated by the generality of people, on account
of the calumnies and false reports which had been circulated against
him, that almost all men judged that God was not less hostile to him
than Saul  <span id="fr_269"></span>[270](#fn_269.md) and his other enemies
were. But here he speaks not so much according to the opinion of others,
as according to the feeling of his own mind, when he complains of being
neglected by God. Not that the persuasion of the truth of God’s promises
was extinguished in his heart, or that he did not repose himself on his
grace; but when we are for a long time weighed down by calamities, and
when we do not perceive any sign of divine aid, this thought unavoidably
forces itself upon us, that God has forgotten us. To acknowledge in the
midst of our afflictions that God has really a care about us, is not the
usual way with men, or what the feelings of nature would prompt; but by
faith we apprehend his invisible providence. Thus, it seemed to David,
so far as could be judged from beholding the actual state of his
affairs, that he was forsaken of God. At the same time, however, the
eyes of his mind, guided by the light of faith, penetrated even to the
grace of God, although it was hidden in darkness. When he saw not a
single ray of good hope to whatever quarter he turned, so far as human
reason could judge, constrained by grief, he cries out that God did not
regard him; and yet by this very complaint he gives evidence that faith
enabled him to rise higher, and to conclude, contrary to the judgment of
the flesh, that his welfare was secure in the hand of God. Had it been
otherwise, how could he direct his groanings and prayers to him?
Following this example, we must so wrestle against temptations as to be
assured by faith, even in the very midst of the conflict, that the
calamities which urge us to despair must be overcome; just as we see
that the infirmity of the flesh could not hinder David from seeking God,
and having recourse to him: and thus he has united in his exercise, very
beautifully, affections which are apparently contrary to each other. The
words, *How long, for ever?* are a defective form of expression; but
they are much more emphatic than if he had put the question according to
the usual mode of speaking, *Why for so long a time?* By speaking thus,
he gives us to understand, that for the purpose of cherishing his hope,
and encouraging himself in the exercise of patience, he extended his
view to a distance, and that, therefore, he does not complain of a
calamity of a few days’ duration, as the effeminate and the cowardly are
accustomed to do, who see only what is before their feet, and
immediately succumb at the first assault. He teaches us, therefore, by
his example, to stretch our view as far as possible into the future,
that our present grief may not entirely deprive us of hope.

<span id="xix.i-p7"></span><span id="xix.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p8"></span>**2.** *How long shall I take counsel in my
soul?* We know that men in adversity give way to discontent, and look
around them, first to one quarter, and then to another, in search of
remedies. Especially, upon seeing that they are destitute of all
resources, they torment themselves greatly, and are distracted by a
multitude of thoughts; and in great dangers, anxiety and fear compel
them to change their purposes from time to time, when they do not find
any plan upon which they can fix with certainty. David, therefore,
complains, that while thinking of different methods of obtaining relief,
and deliberating with himself now in one way, and now in another, he is
exhausted to no purpose with the multitude of suggestions which pass
through his mind; and by joining to this complaint the *sorrow* which he
felt daily, he points out the source of this disquietude. As in severe
sickness the diseased would desire to change their place every moment,
and the more acute the pains which afflict them are, the more fitful and
eager are they in shifting and changing; so, when sorrow seizes upon the
hearts of men, its miserable victims are violently agitated within, and
they find it more tolerable to torment themselves without obtaining
relief, than to endure their afflictions with composed and tranquil
minds. The Lord, indeed, promises to give to the faithful “the spirit of
counsels” (<span id="xix.i-p8.1"></span>[Isa
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#002)<span id="xix.i-p8.1"></span>.md) but
he does not always give it to them at the very beginning of any matter
in which they are interested, but suffers them for a time to be
embarrassed by long deliberation without coming to a determinate
decision,  <span id="fr_270"></span>[271](#fn_270.md) or to be perplexed,
as if they were entangled among thorns, not knowing whither to turn,
 <span id="fr_271"></span>[272](#fn_271.md) or what course to take. Some
explain the Hebrew word <span id="xix.i-p10.2"></span>יומם, *yomam,* as
meaning *all the day long.* But it seems to me, that by it is rather
meant another kind of continuance, namely, that his sorrow returned, and
was renewed every day. In the end of the verse he deplores another evil,
that his adversaries triumph over him the more boldly, when they see him
wholly enfeebled, and as it were wasted by continual languor. Now this
is an argument of great weight in our prayers; for there is nothing
which is more displeasing to God, and which he will less bear with, than
the cruel insolence which our enemies display, when they not only feast
themselves by beholding us in misery, but also rise up the higher
against us, and treat us the more disdainfully, the more they see us
oppressed and afflicted.

<span id="xix.ii"></span>

<span id="xix.ii-p1"></span><span id="xix.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
13:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#003.md)<span id="xix.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xix.ii-p2"></span>**3.** Behold, \[or look upon me,\] answer
me, O Jehovah my God; enlighten mine eyes, lest I sleep in death; **4.**
Lest my enemy say, I have prevailed against him; and those who afflict
me rejoice if I should fall.

<span id="xix.ii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xix.ii-p4"></span><span id="xix.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xix.ii-p5"></span>**3.** *Look upon me, answer me.* As when
God does not promptly afford assistance to his servants, it seems to the
eye of sense that he does not behold their necessities, David, for this
reason, asks God, in the first place, to look upon him, and, in the
second place, to succor him. Neither of these things, it is true, is
prior or posterior in respect of God; but it has been already stated in
a preceding psalm, and we will have occasion afterwards frequently to
repeat the statement, that the Holy Spirit purposely accommodates to our
understanding the models of prayer recorded in Scripture. If David had
not been persuaded that God had his eyes upon him, it would have availed
him nothing to cry to God; but this persuasion was the effect of faith.
In the meantime, until God actually puts forth his hand to give relief,
carnal reason suggests to us that he shuts his eyes, and does not behold
us. The manner of expression here employed amounts to the same thing as
if he had put the mercy of God in the first place, and then added to it
his assistance, because God then hears us, when, having compassion upon
us, he is moved and induced to succor us. *To enlighten the eyes*
signifies the same thing in the Hebrew language as to give the breath of
life, for the rigour of life appears chiefly in the eyes. In this sense
Solomon says,

<span id="xix.ii-p6"></span>“The poor and the deceitful man meet
together; the Lord lighteneth both their eyes.” (<span
id="xix.ii-p6.1"></span>[Pr 29:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#013.md)<span
id="xix.ii-p6.1"></span>)

<span id="xix.ii-p7"></span>And when Jonathan fainted for hunger, the
sacred history relates that his eyes were overcast with dimness; and
again, that when he had tasted of the honeycomb, his eyes were
enlightened, (<span id="xix.ii-p7.1"></span>[1Sa
14:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#027)<span id="xix.ii-p7.1"></span>..md)
The word *sleep,* as it is used in this passage, is a metaphor of a
similar kind, being put for death. In short, David confesses, that
unless God cause the light of life to shine upon him, he will be
immediately overwhelmed with the darkness of death, and that he is
already as a man without life, unless God breathe into him new vigor.
And certainly our confidence of life depends on this, that although the
world may threaten us with a thousand deaths, yet God is possessed of
numberless means of restoring us to life.  <span
id="fr_272"></span>[273](#fn_272.md)

<span id="xix.ii-p9"></span><span id="xix.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xix.ii-p10"></span>**4.** *Lest my enemy.* David again repeats
what he had a little before said concerning the pride of his enemies,
namely, how it would be a thing ill becoming the character of God were
he to abandon his servant to the mockery of the ungodly. David’s enemies
lay, as it were, in ambush watching the hour of his ruin, that they
might deride him when they saw him fall. And as it is the peculiar
office of God to repress the audacity and insolence of the wicked, as
often as they glory in their wickedness, David beseeches God to deprive
them of the opportunity of indulging in such boasting. It is, however,
to be observed, that he had in his conscience a sufficient testimony to
his own integrity, and that he trusted also in the goodness of his
cause, so that it would have been unbecoming and unreasonable had he
been left without succor in danger, and had he been overwhelmed by his
enemies. We can, therefore, with confidence pray for ourselves, in the
manner in which David here does for himself, only when we fight under
the standard of God, and are obedient to his orders, so that our enemies
cannot obtain the victory over us without wickedly triumphing over God
himself.

<span id="xix.iii"></span>

<span id="xix.iii-p1"></span><span id="xix.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#005.md)<span id="xix.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xix.iii-p2"></span>**5.** But I trust in thy goodness; my
heart shall exult in thy salvation. I will sing unto the Lord, because
he hath dealt bountifully with me.  <span
id="fr_273"></span>[274](#fn_273.md)

<span id="xix.iii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xix.iii-p5"></span><span id="xix.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xix.iii-p6"></span>The Psalmist does not as yet feel how much
he has profited by praying; but depending upon the hope of deliverance,
which the faithful promise of God enabled him to entertain, he makes use
of this hope as a shield to repel those temptations with the terror of
which he might be greatly distressed. Although, therefore, he is
severely afflicted, and a multiplicity of cares urge him to despair, he,
notwithstanding, declares it to be his resolution to continue firm in
his reliance upon the grace of God, and in the hope of salvation. With
the very same confidence ought all the godly to be furnished and
sustained, that they may duly persevere in prayer. Whence, also, we
gather what I have formerly adverted to, that it is by faith we
apprehend the grace of God, which is hidden from and unknown to the
understanding of the flesh. As the verbs which the Psalmist uses are not
put in the same tense, different meanings may be drawn from the
different tenses; but David, I have no doubt, here wishes to testify
that he continued firm in the hope of the deliverance promised to him,
and would continue so even to the end, however heavy the burden of
temptations which might press upon him. Accordingly, the word *exult* is
put in the future tense, to denote the continued exercise of the
affection spoken of, and that no affliction shall ever shake out of his
heart *the joy of faith.* It is to be observed, that he places the
goodness of God first in order, as being the cause of his deliverance, —
*I will sing unto the Lord* I translate this into the future tense.
David, it is true, had not yet obtained what he earnestly desired, but
being fully convinced that God was already at hand to grant him
deliverance, he pledges himself to give thanks to him for it. And surely
it becomes us to engage in prayer in such a frame of mind as at the same
time to be ready to sing the praises of God; a thing which is
impossible, unless we are fully persuaded that our prayers will not be
ineffectual. We may not be wholly free from sorrow, but it is
nevertheless necessary that this cheerfulness of faith rise above it,
and put into our mouth a song on account of the joy which is reserved
for us in the future although not as yet experienced by us;  <span
id="fr_274"></span>[275](#fn_274.md) just as we see David here preparing
himself to celebrate in songs the grace of God, before he perceives the
issue of his troubles. The word <span id="xix.iii-p7.2"></span>גמל,
*gamal*,  <span id="fr_275"></span>[276](#fn_275.md) which others render
*to reward,* signifies nothing else here than *to bestow a benefit from
pure grace,* and this is its meaning in many other passages of
Scripture. What kind of thanksgiving, I pray you to consider, would that
be, to say that God rewarded and rendered to his servant due recompense?
This is sufficient to refute the absurd and trifling sophism of those
who wrest this passage to prove the merit of works. In short, the only
thing which remains to be observed is, that David, in hastening with
promptitude of soul to sing of God’s benefits before he had received
them, places the deliverance, which was then apparently at a distance,
immediately before his eyes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_269"></span>[270](cc08018.htm#fr_269.md) <span
id="xix.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p6"></span> It was the opinion of *Theodoret* that this
psalm was composed by David, not during his persecution by Saul, but
when Absalom conspired against him; and the reason which he assigns for
this opinion is, “that the trouble which Saul gave him was before his
great sin, and so he was full of confidence; but that of Absalom was
after it, which made him cry out in this doleful manner.” — *Bishop*
*Patrick’s Paraphrase on the Book of Psalms.*

<span id="fn_270"></span>[271](cc08018.htm#fr_270.md) <span
id="xix.i-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p9"></span> “<span id="xix.i-p9.1"></span>Mais permet
que pour un temps ils s’entortillent en de longs discours sans venir au
poinct.” — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_271"></span>[272](cc08018.htm#fr_271.md) <span
id="xix.i-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p10"></span> “<span id="xix.i-p10.1"></span>Ne sachans
on se tourner.” — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_272"></span>[273](cc08018.htm#fr_272.md) <span
id="xix.ii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xix.ii-p8"></span> “<span id="xix.ii-p8.1"></span>Toutesfois
Dieu ha en main des moyens infohis de nous restablir ca vie.” — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_273"></span>[274](cc08018.htm#fr_273.md) <span
id="xix.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xix.iii-p3"></span> The Septuagint here add another line,
namely <span id="xix.iii-p3.1"></span>Και ψαλω τω ὀνοματι Κυριου του
ὑψιστου, “And I will sing to the name of Jehovah, the Most High.” This
line, which is the same with that which concludes the seventh psalm, has
probably been lost in the Hebrew copy. “The conclusion of the psalm,”
says *Lowth*, “is manifestly defective; it ends with an odd hemistich
wanting its correspondent. The LXX. have happily preserved it. That it
is not a double translation of the single hemistich, now in the Hebrew,
is apparent from the difference of the latter Greek hemistich, which
does not at all correspond with the words of the former.” — *Dr* *Lowth,
in Merrick’s note on this place.*

<span id="fn_274"></span>[275](cc08018.htm#fr_274.md) <span
id="xix.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xix.iii-p7"></span> “<span id="xix.iii-p7.1"></span>Qui ne
nous est point encore presente.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_275"></span>[276](cc08018.htm#fr_275.md) <span
id="xix.iii-p7.3"></span>

<span id="xix.iii-p8"></span> <span id="xix.iii-p8.1"></span>גמל
Signifies *“to return, to requite, to recompense,* in whatever manner,
whether evil for evil, good for evil, evil for good, or good for good.”
— *Parkhurst.* Those who argue from this passage for the merit of good
works, make the argument to rest on the notion of retribution attached
to the word. But although it uniformly mean, *to reward,* no conclusive
argument could here be drawn from this passage in support of that
doctrine. What God bestows upon his people is sometimes called *a
reward* in Scripture; not, however, because they can claim it as due to
them by justice, but to express God’s approbation of obedience, and the
connection between obedience and happiness. Besides, <span
id="xix.iii-p8.2"></span>גמל, also means *to deal kindly with,*
especially when applied to God, See <span id="xix.iii-p8.3"></span>[Ps
119:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#017.md)<span id="xix.iii-p8.3"></span>,
and <span id="xix.iii-p8.4"></span>[Ps
142:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa142.htm#007.md)<span id="xix.iii-p8.4"></span>.
The word has this meaning in Arabic; and that it is to be thus
understood in the passage before us is supported by the ancient
versions. The Septuagint reads <span
id="xix.iii-p8.5"></span>εὐεργετήσαντι; and the Vulgate, *bona tribuit,
hath bestowed upon me good.* The Arabic and Ethiopic adopt the same
reading.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 14](cc08019.md)
