[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc08012)  [Next](cc08014) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 8: Psalms, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiv"></span>

<span id="xiv-p1"></span>PSALM 8.

<span id="xiv-p2"></span>David, reflecting upon God’s fatherly
beneficence towards mankind, is not content with simply giving thanks
for it, but is enraptured by the contemplation of it.

<span id="xiv-p3"></span>To the chief musician upon Hagittith. A song of
David.

<span id="xiv.i"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p1"></span><span id="xiv.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#001)<span id="xiv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p2"></span>**1.** O Jehovah, our Lord!  <span
id="fr_126"></span>[127](#fn_126) How wonderful is thy name in all the
earth, to set  <span id="fr_127"></span>[128](#fn_127) thy glory above
the heavens!

<span id="xiv.i-p5"></span> 

<span id="xiv.i-p6"></span><span id="xiv.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p7"></span>Whether <span id="xiv.i-p7.1"></span>גתית,
*Gittith,* signifies a musical instrument or some particular tune, or
the beginning of some famous and well-known song, I do not take upon me
to determine. Those who think that the psalm is so called because it was
composed in the city of Gath, give a strained and far-fetched
explanation of the matter. Of the other three opinions, of which I have
spoken, it is not of much importance which is adopted. The principal
thing to be attended to is what the psalm itself contains, and what is
the design of it. David, it is true, sets before his eyes the wonderful
power and glory of God in the creation and government of the material
universe; but he only slightly glances at this subject, as it were, in
passing, and insists principally on the theme of God’s infinite goodness
towards us. There is presented to us in the whole order of nature, the
most abundant matter for showing forth the glory of God, but, as we are
unquestionably more powerfully affected with what we ourselves
experience, David here, with great propriety, expressly celebrates the
special favor which God manifests towards mankind; for this, of all the
subjects which come under our contemplation, is the brightest mirror in
which we can behold his glory. It is, however, strange why he begins the
psalm with an exclamation, when the usual way is first to give an
account of a thing, and then to magnify its greatness and excellence.
But if we remember what is said in other passages of Scripture,
respecting the impossibility of expressing in words the works of God, we
will not be surprised that David, by this exclamation, acknowledges
himself unequal to the task of recounting them. David, therefore, when
reflecting on the incomprehensible goodness which God has been
graciously pleased to bestow on the human race, and feeling all his
thoughts and senses swallowed up, and overwhelmed in the contemplation,
exclaims that it is a subject worthy of admiration, because it cannot be
set forth in words.  <span id="fr_128"></span>[129](#fn_128) Besides,
the Holy Spirit, who directed David’s tongue, doubtless intended, by his
instrumentality, to awaken men from the torpor and indifference which is
common to them, so that they may not content themselves with celebrating
the infinite love of God and the innumerable benefits which they receive
at his hand, in their sparing and frigid manner, but may rather apply
their whole hearts to this holy exercise, and put forth in it their
highest efforts. This exclamation of David implies, that when all the
faculties of the human mind are exerted to the utmost in meditation on
this subject,  <span id="fr_129"></span>[130](#fn_129) they yet come far
short of it.

<span id="xiv.i-p10"></span>The *name* of God, as I explain it, is here
to be understood of the knowledge of the character and perfections of
God, in so far as he makes himself known to us. I do not approve of the
subtle speculations of those who think the name of God means nothing
else but God himself. It ought rather to be referred to the works and
properties by which he is known, than to his essence. David, therefore,
says that the earth is full of the wonderful glory of God, so that the
fame or renown thereof not only reaches to the heavens, but ascends far
above them. The verb <span id="xiv.i-p10.1"></span>תנה, *tenah,* has
been rendered by some in the preterite tense, *hast set,* but in my
judgment, those give a more accurate translation who render it in the
infinitive mood, *to place* or *to set;* because the second clause is
just an amplification of the subject of the first; as if he had said,
the earth is too small to contain the glory or the wonderful
manifestations of the character and perfections of God. According to
this view, <span id="xiv.i-p10.2"></span>אשר, *asher,* will not be a
relative, but will have the meaning of the expletive or exegetic
particle *even,* which we use to explain what has preceded.  <span
id="fr_130"></span>[131](#fn_130)

<span id="xiv.ii"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p1"></span><span id="xiv.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#002)<span id="xiv.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p2"></span>**2.** Out of the mouth of babes and
sucklings thou hast founded thy strength, because of thy adversaries,
that thou mightest put to flight the enemy and avenger.

<span id="xiv.ii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xiv.ii-p4"></span><span id="xiv.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p5"></span>He now enters upon the proof of the subject
which he had undertaken to discourse upon,  <span
id="fr_131"></span>[132](#fn_131) declaring, that the providence of God,
in order to make itself known to mankind, does not wait till men arrive
at the age of maturity, but even from the very dawn of infancy shines
forth so brightly as is sufficient to confute all the ungodly, who,
through their profane contempt of God, would wish to extinguish his very
name.  <span id="fr_132"></span>[133](#fn_132)

<span id="xiv.ii-p8"></span>The opinion of some, who think that <span
id="xiv.ii-p8.1"></span>מפי, *mephi, out of the mouth,* signifies <span
id="xiv.ii-p8.2"></span>כפי, *kephi, in the mouth,* cannot be admitted,
because it improperly weakens the emphasis which David meant to give to
his language and discourse. The meaning, therefore, is, that God, in
order to commend his providence, has no need of the powerful eloquence
of rhetoricians,  <span id="fr_133"></span>[134](#fn_133) nor even of
distinct and formed language, because the tongues of infants, although
they do not as yet speak, are ready and eloquent enough to celebrate it.
But it may be asked, In what sense does he speak of children as the
proclaimers of the glory of God? In my judgment, those reason very
foolishly who think that this is done when children begin to articulate,
because then also the intellectual faculty of the soul shows itself.
Granting that they are called babes, or infants, even until they arrive
at their seventh year, how can such persons imagine that those who now
speak distinctly are still hanging on the breast? Nor is there any more
propriety in the opinion of those who say, that the words *for babes and
sucklings* are here put allegorically for the faithful, who, being born
again by the Spirit of God, no longer retain the old age of the flesh.
What need, then, is there to wrest the words of David, when their true
meaning is so clear and suitable? He says that babes and sucklings are
advocates sufficiently powerful to vindicate the providence of God. Why
does he not entrust this business to men, but to show that the tongues
of infants, even before they are able to pronounce a single word, speak
loudly and distinctly in commendation of God’s liberality towards the
human race? Whence is it that nourishment is ready for them as soon as
they are born, but because God wonderfully changes blood into milk?
Whence, also, have they the skill to suck, but because the same God has,
by a mysterious instinct, fitted their tongues for doing this? David,
therefore, has the best reason for declaring, that although the tongues
of all, who have arrived at the age of manhood, should become silent,
the speechless mouth of infants is sufficiently able to celebrate the
praise of God. And when he not only introduces babes as witnesses and
preachers of God’s glory, but also attributes *mature strength* to their
mouth, the expression is very emphatic. It means the same thing as if he
had said, These are invincible champions of God who, when it comes to
the conflict, can easily scatter and discomfit the whole host of the
wicked despisers of God, and those who have abandoned themselves to
impiety.  <span id="fr_134"></span>[135](#fn_134) We should observe
against whom he imposes upon infants the office of defending the glory
of God, namely, against the hardened despisers of God, who dare to rise
up against heaven to make war upon God, as the poets have said, in olden
time, of the giants.  <span id="fr_135"></span>[136](#fn_135)

<span id="xiv.ii-p12"></span>Since, therefore, these monsters,  <span
id="fr_136"></span>[137](#fn_136) with furious violence, pluck up by the
roots, and overthrow whatever godliness and the fear of God  <span
id="fr_137"></span>[138](#fn_137) there is in the world, and through
their hardihood endeavor to do violence to heaven itself, David in
mockery of them brings into the field of battle against them the mouths
of infants, which he says are furnished with armor of sufficient
strength, and endued with sufficient fortitude, to lay their intolerable
pride  <span id="fr_138"></span>[139](#fn_138) in the dust. He,
therefore, immediately subjoins, *On account of the adversaries* God is
not under the necessity of making war with great power to overcome the
faithful, who willingly hearken to his voice, and manifest a ready
obedience, as soon as he gives the smallest intimation of his will. The
providence of God, I confess, shines forth principally for the sake of
the faithful, because they only have eyes to behold it. But as they show
themselves willing to receive instruction, God teaches them with
gentleness; while, on the other hand, he arms himself against his
enemies, who never submit themselves to him but by constraint. Some take
the word *founded* as meaning, that, in the very birth or generation of
man, God lays foundations for manifesting his own glory. But this sense
is too restricted. I have no doubt that the word is put for *to
establish,* as if the prophet had said, God needs not strong military
forces to destroy the ungodly; instead of these, the mouths of children
are sufficient for his purpose.  <span id="fr_139"></span>[140](#fn_139)

<span id="xiv.ii-p17"></span>*To put to flight.* Interpreters differ
with respect to the word <span id="xiv.ii-p17.1"></span>השבית,
*hashebith.* It properly signifies, *to cause to cease;* for it is in
the conjugation *Hiphil* of the neuter verb <span
id="xiv.ii-p17.2"></span>שבת, *shabath,* which signifies *to cease.* But
it is often taken metaphorically for *to destroy,* or *to reduce to
nothing,* because destruction or death brings to an end. Others
translate it, *that thou mayest restrain,* as if David meant that they
were put to silence, so that they desisted from cursing or reviling God.
As, however, there is here a beautiful allusion to a hostile combat, as
I have a little before explained, I have preferred the military phrase,
*to put to flight.* But it is asked, How does God put to flight his
enemies, who, by their impious slanders and detractions, do not cease to
strike at, and violently to rush forward to oppose all the proofs of a
Divine Providence which daily manifest themselves?  <span
id="fr_140"></span>[141](#fn_140) I answer, They are not routed or
overthrown in respect of their being compelled to become more humble and
unassuming; but because, with all their blasphemies and canine barkings,
they continue in the state of abasement and confusion to which they have
been brought. To express the whole in a few words: so early as the
generation or birth of man the splendor of Divine Providence is so
apparent, that even infants, who hang upon their mothers’ breasts, can
bring down to the ground the fury of the enemies of God. Although his
enemies may do their utmost, and may even burst with rage a hundred
times, it is in vain for them to endeavor to overthrow the strength
which manifests itself in the weakness of infancy. A desire of revenge
reigns in all unbelievers, while, on the other hand, God governs his own
children by the spirit of meekness and benignity:  <span
id="fr_141"></span>[142](#fn_141) but, according to the scope of the
present passage, the prophet applies this epithet, *the avenger,* to the
despisers of God, who are not only cruel towards man, but who also burn
with frantic rage to make war even against God himself.

<span id="xiv.ii-p20"></span>I have now discharged the duty of a
faithful interpreter in opening up the mind of the prophet. There is
only one difficulty remaining, which is this, that Christ (<span
id="xiv.ii-p20.1"></span>[Mt
21:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#016)<span id="xiv.ii-p20.1"></span>)
seems to put upon this passage a different meaning, when he applies it
to children ten years old. But this difficulty is easily removed. Christ
reasons from the greater to the less in this manner; If God has
appointed children even in infancy the vindicators of his glory, there
is no absurdity in his making them the instruments of showing forth his
praise by their tongues after they have arrived at the age of seven
years and upwards.

<span id="xiv.iii"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p1"></span><span id="xiv.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
8:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#003)<span id="xiv.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p2"></span>**3.** When I see thy heavens, the works of
thy fingers; the moon and the stars which thou hast arranged: **4.**
What is man  <span id="fr_142"></span>[143](#fn_142) that thou art
mindful of him? and the son of man, that thou visitest him?  <span
id="fr_143"></span>[144](#fn_143)

<span id="xiv.iii-p5"></span> 

<span id="xiv.iii-p6"></span><span id="xiv.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p7"></span>As the Hebrew particle <span
id="xiv.iii-p7.1"></span>כי, *ki,* has often the same meaning as
*because* or *for,* and simply affirms a thing, both the Greek and the
Latin fathers have generally read the fourth verse as if it were a
complete sentence by itself. But it is, doubtless, closely connected
with the following verse; and, therefore, the two verses ought to be
joined together. The Hebrew word <span id="xiv.iii-p7.2"></span>כי*,
ki,* might be very properly translated into the disjunctive particle,
*although,* making the meaning to be this: Although the infinite majesty
of God shines forth in the heavenly bodies, and justly keeps the eyes of
men fixed on the contemplation of it, yet his glory is beheld in a
special manner, in the great favor which he bears to men, and in the
goodness which he manifests towards them. This interpretation would not
be at variance with the scope of the passage; but I choose rather to
follow the generally received opinion. My readers, however, must be
careful to mark the design of the Psalmist, which is to enhance, by this
comparison, the infinite goodness of God; for it is, indeed, a wonderful
thing that the Creator of heaven, whose glory is so surpassingly great
as to ravish us with the highest admiration, condescends so far as
graciously to take upon him the care of the human race. That the
Psalmist makes this contrast may be inferred from the Hebrew word, <span
id="xiv.iii-p7.3"></span>אנוש, *enosh,* which we have rendered *man,*
and which expresses the frailty of man rather than any strength or power
which he possesses.  <span id="fr_144"></span>[145](#fn_144) We see that
miserable men, in moving upon the earth, are mingled with the vilest
creatures; and, therefore, God, with very good reason, might despise
them and reckon them of no account if he were to stand upon the
consideration of his own greatness or dignity. The prophet, therefore,
speaking interrogatively, abases their condition, intimating that God’s
wonderful goodness is displayed the more brightly in that so glorious a
Creator, whose majesty shines resplendently in the heavens, graciously
condescends to adorn a creature so miserable and vile as man is with the
greatest glory, and to enrich him with numberless blessings. If he had a
mind to exercise his liberality towards any, he was under no necessity
of choosing men who are but dust and clay, in order to prefer them above
all other creatures, seeing he had a sufficient number in heaven towards
whom to show himself liberal.  <span id="fr_145"></span>[146](#fn_145)
Whoever, therefore, is not astonished and deeply affected at this
miracle, is more than ungrateful and stupid. When the Psalmist calls the
heavens *God’s heavens,* and *the works of his fingers,* he has a
reference to the same subject, and intends to illustrate it. How is it
that God comes forth from so noble and glorious a part of his works, and
stoops down to us, poor worms of the earth, if it is not to magnify and
to give a more illustrious manifestation of his goodness? From this,
also, we learn, that those are chargeable with a very presumptuous abuse
of the goodness of God, who take occasion from it to be proud of the
excellence which they possess, as if they had either obtained it by
their own skill, or as if they possessed it on account of their own
merit; whereas their origin should rather remind them that it has been
gratuitously conferred upon those who are otherwise vile and
contemptible creatures, and utterly unworthy of receiving any good from
God. Whatever estimable quality, therefore, we see in ourselves, let it
stir us up to celebrate the free and undeserved goodness of God in
bestowing it upon us.

<span id="xiv.iii-p12"></span>The verb, at the close of the third verse,
which others translate *to prepare,* or *to found,* or *to establish,* I
have thought proper to render *to arrange;* for the Psalmist seems to
have a reference to the very beautiful order by which God has so
appropriately distinguished the position of the stars, and daily
regulates their course. When it is said, *God is mindful of man,* it
signifies the same thing as that he bears towards him a fatherly love,
defends and cherishes him, and extends his providence towards him.
Almost all interpreters render <span id="xiv.iii-p12.1"></span>פקד*,
pakad,* the last word of this verse, *to visit;* and I am unwilling to
differ from them, since this sense suits the passage very well. But as
it sometimes signifies *to remember,* and as we will often find in the
Psalms the repetition of the same thought in different words, it may
here be very properly translated *to remember;* as if David had said,
This is a marvellous thing, that God thinks upon men, and remembers them
continually.

<span id="xiv.iv"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p1"></span><span id="xiv.iv-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
8:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#005)<span id="xiv.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p2"></span>**5.** For  <span
id="fr_146"></span>[147](#fn_146) thou hast made him little lower than
God.  <span id="fr_147"></span>[148](#fn_147) and hast crowned him with
glory and honor. **6.** Thou hast set him over the works of thy hands:
Thou hast put all things under his feet.

<span id="xiv.iv-p5"></span> 

<span id="xiv.iv-p6"></span><span id="xiv.iv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p7"></span>**5.** *Thou hast made him little lower.*
The Hebrew copulative <span id="xiv.iv-p7.1"></span>כי*, ki,* I have no
doubt, ought to be translated into the causal particle *for,* seeing the
Psalmist confirms what he has just now said concerning the infinite
goodness of God towards men, in showing himself near to them, and
mindful of them. In the first place, he represents them as adorned with
so many honors as to render their condition not far inferior to divine
and celestial glory. In the second place, he mentions the external
dominion and power which they possess over all creatures, from which it
appears how high the degree of dignity is to which God hath exalted
them. I have, indeed, no doubt but he intends, by the first,  <span
id="fr_148"></span>[149](#fn_148) the distinguished endowments which
clearly manifest that men were formed after the image of God, and
created to the hope of a blessed and immortal life. The reason with
which they are endued, and by which they can distinguish between good
and evil; the principle of religion which is planted in them; their
intercourse with each other, which is preserved from being broken up by
certain sacred bonds; the regard to what is becoming, and the sense of
shame which guilt awakens in them, as well as their continuing to be
governed by laws; all these things are clear indications of pre-eminent
and celestial wisdom. David, therefore, not without good reason,
exclaims that mankind are adorned with glory and honor. *To be crowned,*
is here taken metaphorically, as if David had said, he is clothed and
adorned with marks of honor, which are not far removed from the splendor
of the divine majesty. The Septuagint render <span
id="xiv.iv-p8.2"></span>אלהים, *Elohim,* by *angels,* of which I do not
disapprove, since this name, as is well known, is often given to angels,
and I explain the words of David as meaning the same thing as if he had
said, that the condition of men is nothing less than a divine and
celestial state. But as the other translation seems more natural, and as
it is almost universally adopted by the Jewish interpreters, I have
preferred following it. Nor is it any sufficient objection to this view,
that the apostle, in his Epistle to the Hebrews, (<span
id="xiv.iv-p8.3"></span>[Heb 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#007)<span
id="xiv.iv-p8.3"></span>) quoting this passage, says, *little less than
the angels,* and not *than God;*  <span
id="fr_149"></span>[150](#fn_149) for we know what freedoms the apostles
took in quoting texts of Scripture; not, indeed, to wrest them to a
meaning different from the true one but because they reckoned it
sufficient to show, by a reference to Scripture, that what they taught
was sanctioned by the word of God, although they did not quote the
precise words. Accordingly, they never had any hesitation in changing
the words, provided the substance of the text remained unchanged.

<span id="xiv.iv-p10"></span>There is another question which it is more
difficult to solve. While the Psalmist here discourses concerning the
excellency of men, and describes them, in respect of this, as coming
near to God, the apostle applies the passage to the humiliation of
Christ. In the first place, we must consider the propriety of applying
to the person of Christ what is here spoken concerning all mankind; and,
secondly, how we may explain it as referring to Christ’s being humbled
in his death, when he lay without form or beauty, and as it were
disfigured under the reproach and curse of the cross. What some say,
that what is true of the members may be properly and suitably
transferred to the head, might be a sufficient answer to the first
question; but I go a step farther, for Christ is not only the first
begotten of every creature, but also the restorer of mankind. What David
here relates belongs properly to the beginning of the creation, when
man’s nature was perfect.  <span id="fr_150"></span>[151](#fn_150) But
we know that, by the fall of Adam, all mankind fell from their primeval
state of integrity, for by this the image of God was almost entirely
effaced from us, and we were also divested of those distinguishing gifts
by which we would have been, as it were, elevated to the condition of
demigods; in short, from a state of the highest excellence, we were
reduced to a condition of wretched and shameful destitution. In
consequence of this corruption, the liberality of God, of which David
here speaks, ceased, so far, at least, as that it does not at all appear
in the brilliancy and splendor in which it was manifested when man was
in his unfallen state. True, it is not altogether extinguished; but,
alas! how small a portion of it remains amidst the miserable overthrow
and ruins of the fall. But as the heavenly Father hath bestowed upon his
Son an immeasurable fullness of all blessings, that all of us may draw
from this fountain, it follows that whatever God bestows upon us by him
belongs of fight to him in the highest degree; yea, he himself is the
living image of God, according to which we must be renewed, upon which
depends our participation of the invaluable blessings which are here
spoken of. If any person object that David first put the question, What
is man? because God has so abundantly poured forth his favor upon a
creature, so miserable, contemptible, and worthless; but that there is
no cause for such admiration of God’s favor for Christ, who is not an
ordinary man, but the only begotten Son of God. The answer is easy, and
it is this: What was bestowed upon Christ’s human nature was a free
gift; nay, more, the fact that a mortal man, and the son of Adam, is the
only Son of God, and the Lord of glory, and the head of angels, affords
a bright illustration of the mercy of God. At the same time, it is to be
observed, that whatever gifts he has received ought to be considered as
proceeding from the free grace of God, so much the more for this reason,
that they are intended principally to be conferred upon us. His
excellence and heavenly dignity, therefore, are extended to us also,
seeing it is for our sake he is enriched with them.

<span id="xiv.iv-p12"></span>What the apostle therefore says in that
passage concerning the abasement of Christ for a short time, is not
intended by him as an explanation of this text; but for the purpose of
enriching and illustrating the subject on which he is discoursing, he
introduces and accommodates to it what had been spoken in a different
sense. The same apostle did not hesitate, in <span
id="xiv.iv-p12.1"></span>[Ro 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#006)<span
id="xiv.iv-p12.1"></span>, in the same manner to enrich and to employ,
in a sense different from their original one, the words of Moses in
<span id="xiv.iv-p12.2"></span>[De
30:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#012)<span id="xiv.iv-p12.2"></span>:

<span id="xiv.iv-p13"></span>“Who shall go up for us to heaven and bring
it to us, that we may  
hear it and do it?”

<span id="xiv.iv-p14"></span>etc. The apostle, therefore, in quoting
this psalm, had not so much an eye to what David meant; but making an
allusion to these words, *Thou hast made him a little lower;* and again,
*Thou hast crowned him with honor,* he applies this diminution to the
death of Christ, and the glory and honor to his resurrection.  <span
id="fr_151"></span>[152](#fn_151) A similar account may be given of
Paul’s declaration in <span id="xiv.iv-p15.2"></span>[Eph
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#008)<span id="xiv.iv-p15.2"></span>, in
which he does not so much explain the meaning of the text, (<span
id="xiv.iv-p15.3"></span>[Ps
68:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#018)<span id="xiv.iv-p15.3"></span>)
as he devoutly applies it, by way of accommodation, to the person of
Christ.

<span id="xiv.iv-p16"></span><span id="xiv.iv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p17"></span>**6.** *Thou hast set him over.* David now
comes to the second point, which I have just now spoken of, namely, that
from the dominion over all things which God has conferred upon men, it
is evident how great is the love which he has borne towards them, and
how much account he has made of them. As he does not stand in need of
any thing himself, he has destined all the riches, both of heaven and
earth, for their use. It is certainly a singular honor, and one which
cannot be sufficiently estimated, that mortal man, as the representative
of God, has dominion over the world, as if it pertained to him by right,
and that to whatever quarter he turns his eyes, he sees nothing wanting
which may contribute to the convenience and happiness of his life. As
this passage is quoted by Paul in his First Epistle to the Corinthians,
(<span id="xiv.iv-p17.2"></span>[1Co
15:27](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#027)<span id="xiv.iv-p17.2"></span>)
where he discourses concerning the spiritual kingdom of Christ, some may
object and say, that the meaning he puts upon it is very different from
the sense which I have given. But it is easy to answer this objection,
and the answer which I give to it is this, That generally the whole
order of this world is arranged and established for the purpose of
conducing to the comfort and happiness of men. In what way the passage
may properly apply to Christ alone, I have already declared a little
before. The only thing which now remains to be considered is, how far
this declaration extends — that all things are subjected to men. Now,
there is no doubt, that if there is any thing in heaven or on earth
which is opposed to men, the beautiful order which God had established
in the world at the beginning is now thrown into confusion. The
consequence of this is, that mankind, after they were ruined by the fall
of Adam, were not only deprived of so distinguished and honorable an
estate, and dispossessed of their former dominion, but are also held
captive under a degrading and ignominious bondage. Christ, it is true,
is the lawful heir of heaven and earth, by whom the faithful recover
what they had lost in Adam; but he has not as yet actually entered upon
the full possession of his empire and dominion. Whence the apostle
concludes, that what is here said by David  <span
id="fr_152"></span>[153](#fn_152) will not be perfectly accomplished
until death be abolished. Accordingly, the apostle reasons in this
manner, “If all things are subdued to Christ, nothing ought to stand in
opposition to his people. But we see death still exercising his tyranny
against them. It follows then, that there remains the hope of a better
state than the present.” Now, this flows from the principle of which I
have spoken, that the world was originally created for this end, that
every part of it should tend to the happiness of man as its great
object. In another part of his writings, the apostle argues on the same
principle, when, in order to prove that we must all stand at the last
day before the judgment-seat of Christ, he brings forward the following
passage, Unto me every knee shall bow,” (<span
id="xiv.iv-p18.2"></span>[Ro
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#010)<span id="xiv.iv-p18.2"></span>.)
In this syllogism, what Logicians call the minor proposition must be
supplied,  <span id="fr_153"></span>[154](#fn_153) namely, that there
are still too many who proudly and obstinately cast off his yoke, and
are averse to bow the knee in token of their submission to him.

<span id="xiv.v"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p1"></span><span id="xiv.v-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
8:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#007)<span id="xiv.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p2"></span>**7.** All sheep and oxen, and also the
beasts of the fields; **8.** The birds of the air, and, the fish of the
sea, and whatsoever passeth through the paths of the seas. **9.** O
Jehovah, our Lord, how wonderful is thy name in all the earth!

<span id="xiv.v-p3"></span> 

<span id="xiv.v-p4"></span><span id="xiv.v-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p5"></span>The preceding question, with respect to the
extent of man’s dominion over the works of God, seems not yet to be
fully answered. If the prophet here declares, by way of exposition, to
what extent God has put all things in subjection to us, this subjection,
it seems, must be restricted to what contributes to the temporal comfort
and convenience of man while he continues in this world. To this
difficulty I answer, That the Psalmist does not intend in these verses
to give a complete enumeration of all the things which are subjected to
man’s dominion, and of which he had spoken generally in the preceding
verse, but he brings forward an example of this subjection only in one
part or particular; yea, he has especially chosen that part which
affords a clear and manifest evidence of the truth he intended to
establish, even to those whose minds are uncultivated and slow of
apprehension. There is no man of a mind so dull and stupid but may se if
he will be at the trouble to open his eyes, that it is by the wonderful
providence of God that horses and oxen yield their service to men, —
that sheep produce wool to clothe theme — and that all sorts of animals
supply them with food for their nourishment and support, even from their
own flesh. And the more that this dominion is apparent, the more ought
we to be affected with a sense of the goodness and grace of our God as
often as we either eat food, or enjoy any of the other comforts of life.
We are, therefore, not to understand David as meaning that it is a proof
that man is invested with dominion over *all* the works of God, because
he clothes himself with the wool and the skins of beasts, because he
lives upon their flesh, and because he employs their labor for his own
advantage; for this would be inconclusive reasoning. He only brings
forward this as an example, and as a mirror in which we may behold and
contemplate the dominion over the works of his hands, with which God has
honored man. The sum is this: God, in creating man, gave a demonstration
of his infinite grace and more than fatherly love towards him, which
ought justly to strike us with amazement; and although, by the fall of
man, that happy condition has been almost entirely ruined, yet there is
still in him some remains of the liberality which God then displayed
towards him, which should suffice to fill us with admiration. In this
mournful and wretched overthrow, it is true, the legitimate order which
God originally established no longer shines forth, but the faithful whom
God gathers to himself, under Christ their head, enjoy so much of the
fragments of the good things which they lost in Adam, as may furnish
them with abundant matter of wonder at the singularly gracious manner in
which God deals with them. David here confines his attention to God’s
temporal benefits, but it is our duty to rise higher, and to contemplate
the invaluable treasures of the kingdom of heaven which he has unfolded
in Christ, and all the gifts which belong to the spiritual life, that by
reflecting upon these our hearts may be inflamed with love to God, that
we may be stirred up to the practice of godliness, and that we may not
suffer ourselves to become slothful and remiss in celebrating his
praises.

<span id="xiv.v-p6"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_126"></span>[127](cc08013.htm#fr_126) <span
id="xiv.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p3"></span> This first word is the incommunicable name
of God; the next word, <span id="xiv.i-p3.1"></span>אדנינו, *Adonenu,
our Lord,* is derived from the root <span id="xiv.i-p3.2"></span>דן,
*dan,* which signifies *to rule, to judge, to support.*

<span id="fn_127"></span>[128](cc08013.htm#fr_127) <span
id="xiv.i-p3.3"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p4"></span> “<span id="xiv.i-p4.1"></span>Pourceque tu
as mis.” — *Fr*. “Because thou hast set.” “<span
id="xiv.i-p4.2"></span>Ou, qui as mis, ou que de mettre.” — *Fr.*
*Marg.* “Or, who hast set, or even to set.”

<span id="fn_128"></span>[129](cc08013.htm#fr_128) <span
id="xiv.i-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p8"></span> “<span id="xiv.i-p8.1"></span>Puisque langue
ne bouche ne la scauroit exprimer.” — *Fr*. “Because neither tongue nor
mouth can express it.”

<span id="fn_129"></span>[130](cc08013.htm#fr_129) <span
id="xiv.i-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p9"></span> “<span id="xiv.i-p9.1"></span>A louer les
graces de Dieu.” — *Fr.* “In praising the grace of God.”

<span id="fn_130"></span>[131](cc08013.htm#fr_130) <span
id="xiv.i-p10.3"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p11"></span> “<span id="xiv.i-p11.1"></span>Mais vaudra
autant cornroe Que, dont on use pour declarer ce qui a preced.“ — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_131"></span>[132](cc08013.htm#fr_131) <span
id="xiv.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p6"></span> The doctrine proposed to be illustrated in
this psalm is the excellence of God’s name, or his power, goodness, and
other perfections, as manifested in his providence and government of the
world; and this the Psalmist states in the first verse. He then proceeds
to establish and illustrate this doctrine: 1. From the case of infants;
2. From the starry heavens; and, 3. From God’s being mindful of man, and
visiting him, notwithstanding his unworthiness, sinfulness, and misery.

<span id="fn_132"></span>[133](cc08013.htm#fr_132) <span
id="xiv.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p7"></span> “<span id="xiv.ii-p7.1"></span>Qui
voudroyent que son nom fust totalement aboli de la memoire des hommes.”
— *Fr*. “Who would wish that his name were totally extinguished from the
memory of men.”

<span id="fn_133"></span>[134](cc08013.htm#fr_133) <span
id="xiv.ii-p8.3"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p9"></span> “<span id="xiv.ii-p9.1"></span>Que Dieu,
pour magnifier et exalter sa providence, n’a pas besoin de la rhetorique
et eloquence de grans orateurs.” — *Fr.* “That God, in order to magnify
and exalt his providence, has no need of the rhetoric and eloquence of
great orators.”

<span id="fn_134"></span>[135](cc08013.htm#fr_134) <span
id="xiv.ii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p10"></span> “<span id="xiv.ii-p10.1"></span>Et
desconfire toute l’armee des meschans contempteurs de Dieu, et gens
adonnez a impiete.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[136](cc08013.htm#fr_135) <span
id="xiv.ii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p11"></span> “<span id="xiv.ii-p11.1"></span>Comme les
poetes ont dit anciennement des geans.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_136"></span>[137](cc08013.htm#fr_136) <span
id="xiv.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p13"></span> “<span id="xiv.ii-p13.1"></span>Cyclopes.”
— *Latin version.* “<span id="xiv.ii-p13.2"></span>Ces monstres.” —
*French version.*

<span id="fn_137"></span>[138](cc08013.htm#fr_137) <span
id="xiv.ii-p13.3"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p14"></span> “<span id="xiv.ii-p14.1"></span>Et crainte
de Dieu.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[139](cc08013.htm#fr_138) <span
id="xiv.ii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p15"></span> “<span id="xiv.ii-p15.1"></span>Leur
orgueil intolerable.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_139"></span>[140](cc08013.htm#fr_139) <span
id="xiv.ii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p16"></span> “<span id="xiv.ii-p16.1"></span>Comme si
le prophete fust dit que Dieu se sert des bouches des petis enfans,
comme d’une puissante armee et bien duite a la guerre et qu’elles luy
suffisent pour destruire et exterminer les meschans.” — *Fr*. “As if the
prophet had said, God makes use of the mouths of little children as of a
powerful and well-fitted army, and these suffice him to destroy and
exterminate the wicked.”

<span id="fn_140"></span>[141](cc08013.htm#fr_140) <span
id="xiv.ii-p17.3"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p18"></span> “<span id="xiv.ii-p18.1"></span>Lesquels
par leurs mesdisances et detractions plenes de sacrilege ne cessent de
heurter et choquer impetueusement encontre tout ce en quoy la providence
de Dieu se manifeste journellement.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_141"></span>[142](cc08013.htm#fr_141) <span
id="xiv.ii-p18.3"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p19"></span> “<span id="xiv.ii-p19.1"></span>De douceur
et benignite.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_142"></span>[143](cc08013.htm#fr_142) <span
id="xiv.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p3"></span> “<span id="xiv.iii-p3.1"></span>Alors je
pense, Qu’est-ce de l’homme?” — *Fr.* “Then I think, what is man?”

<span id="fn_143"></span>[144](cc08013.htm#fr_143) <span
id="xiv.iii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p4"></span> “<span id="xiv.iii-p4.1"></span>Ou, as
sourchance de luy?” — *Fr*. *marg.* “Or, art mindful of him?”

<span id="fn_144"></span>[145](cc08013.htm#fr_144) <span
id="xiv.iii-p7.4"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p8"></span> The other phrase by which man is
described, <span id="xiv.iii-p8.1"></span>בן אדם, *ben Adam,* is
literally *the son of Adam,* — *man,* the son of Adam, and who, like
him, is formed of the dust of the ground, as the name *Adam* implies,
man, the son of apostate and fallen Adam, and who is depraved and guilty
like him. As before, men are called *Enosh* for their doleful estate by
sin, so are they called *Adam* and *sons of Adam,* that is, *earthly,*
to put them in mind of their original and end, who were made of
*Adamah,* the earth, even of the dust, and to dust shall return again,
<span id="xiv.iii-p8.2"></span>[Gen.
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#007), [Gen.
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#019)<span id="xiv.iii-p8.2"></span>.”
— *Ainsworth.* Some are of opinion that this expression, *ben Adam,*
means man in his most exalted state, and that it is contrasted with the
former, <span id="xiv.iii-p8.3"></span>אנוש, *enosh,* which represents
man in a frail, weak, and miserable condition. *Dr Rye Smith* renders
the words thus:

<span id="xiv.iii-p9"></span>“What is man, that thou art mindful of
him?  
Even the \[noblest\] son of man, that thou visitest him?”

<span id="xiv.iii-p10"></span>And adds, in a foot note, “Our language
has no single terms to mark the distinction so beautifully expressed by
<span id="xiv.iii-p10.1"></span>אנוש, *frail, miserable man,*<span
id="xiv.iii-p10.2"></span> βροτὸς and <span
id="xiv.iii-p10.3"></span>אדם, *man at his best estate,* <span
id="xiv.iii-p10.4"></span>ανθρωπος I have endeavored to approach the
idea by the insertion of an epithet.” — *Scripture Testimony to the
Messiah,* volume a. p. 217. *Bishop Patrick* observes, that “Ben *Adam*
and *bene ish, the son of man* and *the sons of men,* are phrases which
belong in the Scripture language to princes, and sometimes the greatest
of princes;” and he explains the phrase, *the son of man,* as here
meaning: ”the greatest of men;” “the greatest prince in the world.” —
*Preface to his Paraphrase on the Book of Psalms.*

<span id="fn_145"></span>[146](cc08013.htm#fr_145) <span
id="xiv.iii-p10.5"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p11"></span> “<span id="xiv.iii-p11.1"></span>Veu
qu’il avoit assez au ciel envers qui se monstrer liberal.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_146"></span>[147](cc08013.htm#fr_146) <span
id="xiv.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p3"></span> “<span id="xiv.iv-p3.1"></span>Ou, Et tu
l’as.” — *Fr*. *marg.* “Or, And thou hast.”

<span id="fn_147"></span>[148](cc08013.htm#fr_147) <span
id="xiv.iv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p4"></span> “<span id="xiv.iv-p4.1"></span>Ou, les
anges.” — *Fr*. *marg.* “Or, the angels.”

<span id="fn_148"></span>[149](cc08013.htm#fr_148) <span
id="xiv.iv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p8"></span> “<span id="xiv.iv-p8.1"></span>Qu’il
n’entende par la premier.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_149"></span>[150](cc08013.htm#fr_149) <span
id="xiv.iv-p8.4"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p9"></span> Certainly the fact that Paul uses the word
*angels* instead of *God,* does not prove the inaccuracy of Calvin’s
rendering. As the Septuagint version was in general use among the Jews
in the time of Paul, he very naturally quotes from it just as we do from
our English version. And this was sufficient for his purpose. His object
was, to answer an objection which the Jews brought against the Christian
dispensation, as being inferior to the Mosaic, inasmuch as angels were
mediators of the latter, while the mediator or head of the former was in
their estimation but a man. This objection he answers from their own
Scriptures, and quotes this psalm to show, that Christ, in his human
nature, was little inferior to the angels, and that he is exalted far
above them in respect of the glory and dominion with which he is
crowned. If the apostle had quoted from the Hebrew Scriptures, and used
<span id="xiv.iv-p9.2"></span>אלהים, *Elohim,* God, meaning the Most
High, his argument in support of the dignity of Christ in human nature
would have been still stronger. - See *Stuart’s Commentary on the
Hebrews,* vol. 2, pp. 68-71.

<span id="fn_150"></span>[151](cc08013.htm#fr_150) <span
id="xiv.iv-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p11"></span> “<span id="xiv.iv-p11.1"></span>Lorsque la
nature de l’humain n’estoit point encore corrompue.” — *Fr*. “When the
nature of man was not yet corrupted.”

<span id="fn_151"></span>[152](cc08013.htm#fr_151) <span
id="xiv.iv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p15"></span> “<span id="xiv.iv-p15.1"></span>Tu l’as
fait un peu moindre; puis Tu l’as couronne d’honneur, il approprie ceste
diminution a la mort de Christ, et la gloire et bonneur a la
resurrection.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_152"></span>[153](cc08013.htm#fr_152) <span
id="xiv.iv-p17.3"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p18"></span> “<span id="xiv.iv-p18.1"></span>Que ce qui
est yci dit par David.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_153"></span>[154](cc08013.htm#fr_153) <span
id="xiv.iv-p18.3"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p19"></span> “<span id="xiv.iv-p19.1"></span>Car il
faut suppleer en ceste argument la proposition que les Dialecticiens
appellent.” — *Fr*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 9](cc08014)
