[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc08009)  [Next](cc08011.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 8: Psalms, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xi"></span>

<span id="xi-p1"></span>PSALM 5.

<span id="xi-p2"></span>David being grievously oppressed by the cruelty
of his enemies, and apprehending still more mischief, earnestly
beseeches God for help. And the more easily to obtain what he asks,
after having, by the earnestness of his prayers, manifested the
greatness of his grief, he first brings forward the intolerable malice
of his enemies, showing how inconsistent it would be with the character
of God, were they to be left unpunished. He next speaks of his own faith
and patience, and even comfort; having no doubt whatever of a happy
issue. Finally, he concludes, that when he shall be delivered, the
benefits resulting from his deliverance would not be limited to himself,
but would extend to all the godly.

<span id="xi-p3"></span>To the chief musician upon Nehiloth. A psalm of
David.

<span id="xi-p4"></span>Some translate the Hebrew word *Nehiloth,
heritages,* and others, *armies.* The former assign this reason for
their opinion, that David prayed for the welfare of the twelve tribes,
whom he calls *heritages.*  <span id="fr_63"></span>[64](#fn_63.md) The
latter assert in support of their view, that being besieged by a vast
multitude of men, he betook himself to God for succor; and, according to
this sense, the word *upon* will signify *against.* But not approving of
the conjectures of many who speak upon these inscriptions of The Psalms
as if they were riddles,  <span id="fr_64"></span>[65](#fn_64.md) I adopt
the opinion of those who hold that it was either a musical instrument or
a tune; but of what particular kind I consider it of little importance
to ascertain.

<span id="xi.i"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p1"></span><span id="xi.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
5:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#001.md)<span id="xi.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p2"></span>**1.** Give ear unto my words, O Jehovah;
attend to my speech. **2.** Hearken to the voice of my cry, my King and
my God: for unto thee will I pray.

<span id="xi.i-p3"></span> 

<span id="xi.i-p4"></span><span id="xi.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p5"></span>I presume not positively to determine whether
David, in this psalm, bewails the wrongs which he suffered from his
enemies at some particular time, or whether he complains generally of
the various persecutions with which, for a long time, he was harassed
under Saul. Some of the Jewish commentators apply the psalm even to
Absalom; because, by *the bloody and deceitful man*, they think Doeg and
Ahithophel are pointed out. To me, however, it appears more probable,
that when David, after the death of Saul, had got peaceable possession
of the kingdoms he committed to writing the prayers which he had
meditated in his afflictions and dangers. But to come to the words:—
First, he expresses one thing in three different ways; and this
repetition denotes the strength of his affection, and his long
perseverance in prayer. For he was not so fond of many words as to
employ different forms of expression, which had no meaning; but being
deeply engaged in prayer, he represented, by these various expressions,
the variety of his complaints.  <span id="fr_65"></span>[66](#fn_65.md) It
therefore signifies, that he prayed neither coldly nor only in few
words; but that, according as the vehemence of his grief urged him, he
was earnest in bewailing his calamities before God; and that since it
did not immediately appear what would be their issue, he persevered in
repeating the same complaints. Again, he does not expressly state what
he desires to ask from God:  <span id="fr_66"></span>[67](#fn_66.md) but
there is a greater force in this kind of suppression, than if he had
spoken distinctly. By not uttering the desires of his heart, he shows
more emphatically that his inward feelings, which he brought with him
before God, were such that language was insufficient to express them.
Again, the word *cry*, which signifies a loud and sonorous utterance of
the voice, serves to mark the earnestness of his desire. David did not
cry out as it were into the ears of one who was deaf; but the vehemence
of his grief and his inward anguish, burst forth into this cry. The verb
<span id="xi.i-p7.2"></span> הגה*hagah,* from which the noun <span
id="xi.i-p7.3"></span>הגיג, *hagig, speech,* which the prophet here
uses, is derived, means both *to speak distinctly,* and *to whisper or
to mutter.* But the second sense seems better suited to this passage.
 <span id="fr_67"></span>[68](#fn_67.md) After David has said in general,
that God hears his words, he seems, immediately after, for the purpose
of being more specific, to divide them into two kinds, calling the one
obscure or indistinct moanings, and the other loud crying.  <span
id="fr_68"></span>[69](#fn_68.md) By the first he means a confused
muttering, such as is described in the Song of Hezekiah, when sorrow
hindered him from speaking distinctly, and making his voice to be heard.
“Like a crane, or a swallow, so did I chatter; I did mourn as a dove,”
(<span id="xi.i-p9.2"></span>[Isa
38:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#014)<span id="xi.i-p9.2"></span>..md)
 <span id="fr_69"></span>[70](#fn_69.md) If, then, at any time we are
either backward to pray, or our devout affections begin to lose their
fervor, we must here seek for arguments to quicken and urge us forward.
And as by calling God *his King* and *his God,* he intended to stir up
himself to entertain more lively and favorable hopes with respect to the
issue of his afflictions, let us learn to apply these titles to a
similar use, namely, for the purpose of making ourselves more familiar
with God. At the close, he testifies that he does not sullenly gnaw the
bit, as unbelievers are accustomed to do; but directs his groaning to
God: for they who, disregarding God, either fret inwardly or utter their
complaints to men, are not worthy of being regarded by him. Some
translate the last clause thus, *When I pray to thee;* but to me it
seems rather to be the reason which David assigns for what he had said
immediately before, and that his purpose is, to encourage himself to
trust in God, by assuming this as a general principle that whoever call
upon God in their calamities never meet with a repulse from him.

<span id="xi.ii"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p1"></span><span id="xi.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#003.md)<span id="xi.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p2"></span>**3.** O that thou wouldst hear my voice in
the morning; O Jehovah, in the morning will I direct unto thee, and I
will keep watch.

<span id="xi.ii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xi.ii-p4"></span><span id="xi.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p5"></span>The first sentence may also be read in the
future tense of the indicative mood, *Thou shalt hear my prayer.* But,
in my opinion, the verb is rather in the optative mood, as I have
translated it. Having besought God to grant his requests, he now
entreats him to make haste. Some think he alludes to the morning prayers
which were wont to be joined with the daily sacrifices in the temple,
according to the appointment of the law. Although I do not disapprove of
this opinion, yet I have no doubt but that, constrained by the weariness
of a somewhat lengthened delay, he wishes his deliverance to be
hastened; as if he had said, “As soon as I awaken this will be the first
subject of my thoughts. Therefore, O Lord, delay no longer the help of
which I stand in need, but grant immediately my desires.” The
expression, *To direct unto God,* I take to signify the same thing as
directly to approach to God. Many, as if the language were elliptical,
supply the words, *my prayer.* But in my judgment, David rather intends
to declare that he was not turned hither and thither, nor drawn
different ways by the temptations to which he was exposed, but that to
betake himself to God was the settled order of his life. There is, in
the words, an implied contrast between the rambling and uncertain
movements of those who look around them for worldly helps, or depend on
their own counsels and the direct leading of faith, by which all the
godly are withdrawn from the vain allurements of the world, and have
recourse to God alone. The Hebrew word <span id="xi.ii-p5.1"></span>ערך,
*arac,* signifies to set in order or dispose, and sometimes to dress or
make fit. This sense is very suitable to the passage, in which David
plainly declares it to be his determination not to be drawn away in any
degree from his orderly course into the indirect and circuitous paths of
error and sin, but to come directly to God. By the word, *watch,* he
conveys the idea of hope and patience as well as of anxiety. As <span
id="xi.ii-p5.2"></span>צפה, *tsapah,* in Hebrew means, *to wait for,* as
well as *to look for,* David, I have no doubt, intended to say, that
after he had disburdened his cares into the bosom of God, he would, with
an anxious mind, look out, as it were, like a sentinel, until it should
appear, that in very deed God had heard him. No doubt, in the exercise
of longing, there is always implied some degree of uneasiness; but he
who is looking out for the grace of God with anxious desire, will
patiently wait for it. This passages therefore, teaches us the
uselessness of those prayers to which there is not added that hope which
may be said to elevate the minds of the petitioners into a watch-tower.

<span id="xi.iii"></span>

<span id="xi.iii-p1"></span><span id="xi.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
5:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#004.md)<span id="xi.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iii-p2"></span>**4.** For thou art not a God that hath
pleasure in wickedness;  <span id="fr_70"></span>[71](#fn_70.md) evil shall
not dwell Smith thee. **5.** The foolish shall not stand in thy sight;
thou hatest all that commit iniquity. **6.** Thou shalt destroy them
that speak falsehood; Jehovah will abhor the blood-thirsty  <span
id="fr_71"></span>[72](#fn_71.md) and deceitful man.

<span id="xi.iii-p5"></span> 

<span id="xi.iii-p6"></span><span id="xi.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iii-p7"></span>Here David makes the malice and wickedness
of his enemies an argument to enforce his prayer for the divine favor
towards him. The language is indeed abrupt, as the saints in prayer will
often stammer; but this stammering is more acceptable to God than all
the figures of rhetoric, be they ever so fine and glittering. Besides,
the great object which David has in view, is to show, that since the
cruelty and treachery of his enemies had reached their utmost height, it
was impossible but that God would soon arrest them in their course. His
reasoning is grounded upon the nature of God. Since righteousness and
upright dealing are pleasing to him, David, from this, concludes that he
will take vengeance on all the unjust and wicked. And how is it possible
for them to escape from his hand unpunished, seeing he is the judge of
the world? The passage is worthy of our most special attention. For we
know how greatly we are discouraged by the unbounded insolence of the
wicked. If God does not immediately restrain it, we are either stupified
and dismayed, or cast down into despair. But David, from this, rather
finds matter of encouragement and confi-dence. The greater the
lawlessness with which his enemies proceeded against him, the more
earnestly did he supplicate preservation from God, whose office it is to
destroy all the wicked, because he hates all wickedness. Let all the
godly, therefore, learn, as often as they have to contend against
violence, deceit, and injustice, to raise their thoughts to God in order
to encourage themselves in the certain hope of deliverance, according as
Paul also exhorts them in <span id="xi.iii-p7.1"></span>[2Th
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#005.md)<span id="xi.iii-p7.1"></span>,
“Which is,” says he, “a manifest token of the righteous judgment of God,
that ye may be counted worthy of the kingdom of God, for which ye also
suffer: seeing it is a righteous thing with God to recompense
tribulation to them that trouble you; and to you who are troubled, rest
with us.” And assuredly he would not be the judge of the world if there
were not laid up in store with him a recompense for all the ungodly. One
use, then, which may be made of this doctrine is this, — when we see the
wicked indulging themselves in their lusts, and when, in consequence,
doubts steal into our minds as to whether God takes any care of us, we
should learn to satisfy ourselves with the consideration that God, who
hates and abhors all iniquity, will not permit them to pass unpunished,
and although he bear with them for a time, he will at length ascend into
the judgment-seat, and show himself an avenger, as he is the protector
and defender of his people.  <span id="fr_72"></span>[73](#fn_72.md) Again,
we may infer from this passage the common doctrine, that God, although
he works by Satan and by the ungodly, and makes use of their malice for
executing his judgments, is not, on this account, the author of sin, nor
is pleased with it because the end which he purposes is always
righteous; and he justly condemns and punishes those who, by his
mysterious providence, are driven whithersoever he pleases.

<span id="xi.iii-p9"></span>In the 4th verse some take <span
id="xi.iii-p9.1"></span>רע, *ra*, in the masculine gender, for a wicked
man; but I understand it rather of wickedness itself David declares
simply, that there is no agreement between God and unrighteousness. He
immediately after proceeds to speak of the men themselves, saying, *the
foolish shall not stand in thy sight;* and it is a very just inference
from this, that iniquity its hateful to God, and that, therefore, he
will execute just punishment upon all the wicked. He calls those
*fools,* according to a frequent use of the term in Scripture, who,
impelled by blind passion, rush headlong into sin. Nothing is more
foolish, than for the ungodly to cast away the fear of God, and suffer
the desire of doing mischief to be their ruling principle; yea, there is
no madness worse than the contempt of God, under the influence of which
men pervert all right. David sets this truth before himself for his own
comfort; but we also may draw from it doctrine very useful in training
us to the fear of God; for the Holy Spirit, by declaring God to be the
avenger of wickedness, puts a bridle upon us, to restrain us from
committing sin, in the vain hope of escaping with impunity.

<span id="xi.iv"></span>

<span id="xi.iv-p1"></span><span id="xi.iv-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#007.md)<span id="xi.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iv-p2"></span>**7.** And I, in the multitude \[or
abundance\] of thy mercy, will enter into thy house; I will worship in
thy holy temple in thy fear.

<span id="xi.iv-p3"></span> 

<span id="xi.iv-p4"></span><span id="xi.iv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iv-p5"></span>Some think that the word *and, by* which this
sentence is joined to the preceding, is put for but; as if David,
comparing himself with the ungodly, declared and assured himself that
God would be merciful to him, while he abhorred and would destroy the
wicked. But I leave it to my readers to judge whether it does not suit
the passage better to consider this verse as an inference from what goes
before, which might be put in this form: ”O Lord, thou canst not bear
with the wicked; when, therefore, I am saved out of their hands by thy
power, I will come to present myself before thee in thy temple, to give
thee thanks for the deliverance which thou hast vouchsafed to me.” If
the former interpretation be preferred, then the prophet, by simply
commending his own piety towards God, separates himself from the class
of whom he spoke. The scope of the passage leads us to understand him as
promising to give thanks to God. He had before spoken of his enemies as
hated of God; and now, being persuaded that God will keep him in safety,
he calls himself to the exercise of gratitude. *I* *will come into thy
temples* says he, in *the multitude of thy mercy;* as if he had said, I
may now seem to be in a condition almost desperate, but by the favor of
God, I shall be kept in perfect safety. This passage, therefore, teaches
us, that when we are afflicted by the most distressing temptations, we
ought to set the grace of God before our eyes, in order thereby to be
supported with the hope of the divine interposition amidst the greatest
dangers. Farther, as our carnal minds either wickedly undervalue the
grace of God, or put the low estimate upon it which is commonly put by
the world, let us learn to extol its wonderful greatness, which is
sufficient to enable us to overcome all fears. The primary object of
David was to encourage himself in the assured hope of preservation from
the mercy of God; but at the same time he shows, that upon obtaining
deliverance, he will be grateful to God for it, and keep it in
remembrance. And as hypocrites, in giving thanks to God, do nothing else
but profane his name, inasmuch as they themselves are unholy and
polluted, he therefore resolves to come in *the fear of God,* in order
to worship him with a sincere and upright heard. Again, we may hence
draw the general truth, that it is only through the goodness of God that
we have access to him; and that no man prays aright but he who, having
experienced his grace, believes and is fully persuaded that he will be
merciful to him. The fear of God is at the same time added, in order to
distinguish genuine and godly trust from the vain confidence of the
flesh.

<span id="xi.v"></span>

<span id="xi.v-p1"></span><span id="xi.v-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
5:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#008.md)<span id="xi.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.v-p2"></span>**8.** O Jehovah, lead me forth in thy
righteousness, because of mine adversaries: make thy way straight before
my face. **9.** For there is no faithfulness in their mouth; their
inward parts are very wickedness; their throat is an open sepulcher;
with their tongues they deal deceitfully **10.** Cause them to err, O
God; let them fall from their counsels; destroy them in the multitude
 <span id="fr_73"></span>[74](#fn_73.md) of their transgressions; for they
have rebelled against thee.

<span id="xi.v-p4"></span> 

<span id="xi.v-p5"></span><span id="xi.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xi.v-p6"></span>**8.** *O Jehovah, lead me forth, etc.* Some
explain these words thus: Show me what is right, and make me wholly
devoted to the practice of that righteousness which adorns thy
character; and do this because of my adversaries; for the saints,
impelled by the wicked practice and deceitful arts of the ungodly, are
in danger of turning aside from the right way. This meaning is
unquestionably a pious and a useful one. But the other interpretation is
more suitable, which views the words as a prayer that God would lead his
servant in safety through the midst of the snares of his enemies, and
open up to him a way of escape, even when, to all appearance, he was
caught and surrounded on every side. *The righteousness of God,*
therefore, in this passage, as in many others, is to be understood of
his faithfulness and mercy which he shows in defending and preserving
his people. Consequently, in *thy righteousness* means the same thing as
*for* or *according to thy righteousness.* David, desiring to have God
as the guide of his path, encourages himself in the hope of obtaining
his request, because God is righteous; as if he had said, Lord, as thou
art righteous, defend me with thine aid, that I may escape from the
wicked plots of my enemies. Of the same import is the last clause of the
verse, where he prays that *the way of God may be made straight before
his face,* in other words, that he might be delivered by the power of
God from the distresses with which he was so completely surrounded,
that, according to the judgment of the flesh, he never expected to find
a way of escape. And thus he acknowledges how impossible it was for him
to avoid being entangled in the snares of his enemies,  <span
id="fr_74"></span>[75](#fn_74.md) unless God both gave him wisdom, and
opened up for him a way where no way is. It becomes us, after his
example, to do the same thing; so that distrusting ourselves when
counsel fails us, and the malice and wickedness of our enemies prevail,
we may betake ourselves speedily to God, in whose hands are the issues
of death, as we shall see afterwards, (<span id="xi.v-p7.2"></span>[Ps
69:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#001)<span id="xi.v-p7.2"></span>..md)

<span id="xi.v-p8"></span><span id="xi.v-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xi.v-p9"></span>**9.** *For there is no faithfulness in their
mouth.* He still repeats the same complaints which he made before, in
order thereby to render his enemies the more odious in the sight of God,
and to call forth in his own behalf the mercy of God, who has promised
to succor those who are unjustly oppressed. And this is to be
particularly attended to, that the more our enemies manifest their
cruelty against us, or the more wickedly they vex us, we ought, with so
much the greater confidence, to send up our groanings to heaven, because
God will not suffer their rage to proceed to the uttermost, but will
bring forth their malice and wicked devices to the light. In the first
place, he accuses them of treachery, because they speak nothing
uprightly, or in sincerity; and the cause which he assigns for this is,
that inwardly they are full of iniquity. He next compares them to
sepulchres, *their throat is an open sepulcher;* as if he had said, they
are devouring gulfs;  <span id="fr_75"></span>[76](#fn_75.md) meaning by
this, their insatiable desire of shedding blood. In the close of the
verse, he again speaks of their deceitfulness. From all this we
conclude, that the wrongs with which he was tried were of no ordinary
kind, but that he had to contend with enemies the most wickedly who had
neither humanity nor moderation. Being so miserably oppressed, he not
only perseveres in prayer, but finds ground of hope even from the
confusion and apparent hopelessness of his outward condition.

<span id="xi.v-p11"></span>When Paul, (<span id="xi.v-p11.1"></span>[Ro
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#013)<span id="xi.v-p11.1"></span>,.md) in
quoting this passage, extends it to all mankind, both Jews and Gentiles,
he does not give to it a meaning of greater latitude than the Holy
Spirit intended to give. Since he takes it as an undeniable point, that
under the person of David, there is here described to us the church,
both in the person of Christ, who is the head, and in his members, it
follows that all those ought to be reckoned among the number of his
enemies, who have not been regenerated by the Spirit of God, whether
they are without the pale of the visible church, or within it. For
David, in this passage, does not summons either the Assyrians or the
Egyptians to the judgment-seat of God, but the degenerate Jews, who,
being circumcised in the flesh, gloried in their descent from the holy
lineage of Abraham. Paul, therefore, does not wrest these words from
their genuine meaning when he applies them to all mankind, but asserts,
with truth, that David showed in them what is the character of the whole
human family by nature.

<span id="xi.v-p12"></span><span id="xi.v-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xi.v-p13"></span>**10.** *Cause them to err.* As the Hebrew
word <span id="xi.v-p13.1"></span>אשם *asam,* signifies *to cut up or to
destroy,* as well as *to sin,* and is taken metaphorically for *to err,*
or *be deceived,* either of these senses is suitable in this passage;
but, as David immediately after subjoins, *Let them fall from their
counsels,* I have no doubt but this first prayer is allied and similar
to the second. I therefore join these two clauses together, as the cause
and the effect. In the first, he prays that God would deprive them of
their understanding, and drive them into error; and in the second, he
prays that, as the effect of this, their counsels might come to nought,
in other words, that their undertakings might prove unsuccessful.  <span
id="fr_76"></span>[77](#fn_76.md) For how is it that the ungodly take
counsel in vain, and are carried hither and thither without
consideration or judgment, and become so basely obstinate, if it is not
because the Lord takes them unawares in their own craftiness, breaks
their artful schemes, intoxicates them with the spirit of phrenzy and
giddiness, so that they act foolishly even in the smallest matters? If,
therefore, we are afraid of the snares and deceits of men, and if we
find those who desire to do us mischief to be clear-headed and
sharp-witted persons, let us remember, that it is the continual office
of God to strike with stupidity and madness those who are wise to commit
iniquity. Thus it will come to pass, that although we may be asleep the
Lord will dissipate with the breath of his mouth their devices, be they
never so subtle, and, in the end, expose them to the mockery of the
whole world. In short, David wishes God to lay his hand upon his
enemies, and to put a stop to their wicked deliberations. And in fact it
is necessary that God bring to nothing the schemes which the wicked
cunningly devise, since it is Satan, the contriver of all deceits, who
suggests to them all their methods of doing mischief. By praying *Let
them fall from their counsels* he means that they may not obtain or
accomplish what they had determined. Again, he prays to God to punish
them as they deserved, because, in wrongfully and wickedly making war
against an innocent person, they *rebelled against God.* The proud,
indeed, never think of this, that the poor, whom they afflict and
despise, are of such estimation in the sight of God, that he feels
himself insulted and injured in their persons: for they do not imagine
that the blows aimed at them are struck against heaven, any more than if
they trampled a little dust or clay under their feet. But God bestows
upon his servants the inestimable reward of taking their cause into his
own hand. Whoever, therefore, has an approving conscience, and does not
turn aside from his uprightness, although troubled wrongfully, has no
reason to doubt of his warrant to improve God as a buckler against his
enemies.

<span id="xi.vi"></span>

<span id="xi.vi-p1"></span><span id="xi.vi-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
5:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#011.md)<span id="xi.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.vi-p2"></span>**11.** And let all rejoice who put their
trust in thee, yea, let them rejoice for ever; and cover thou them, and
let those that love thy name delight in thee.  <span
id="fr_77"></span>[78](#fn_77.md) **12.** For thou, O Jehovah, shalt bless
the righteous, thou shalt encompass them with thy loving kindness as
with a shield.

<span id="xi.vi-p4"></span> 

<span id="xi.vi-p5"></span><span id="xi.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xi.vi-p6"></span>**11.** *And let all rejoice, etc* It makes
little difference as to the sense, whether we read these words in the
future tense, *All shall rejoice, etc.,* or in the optative mood, *Let
all rejoice, etc.;* for in both ways the meaning of the prophet will be
the same; namely, that if God deliver him, the fruit of this deliverance
will be common to all the godly; as if he had said Lord, if thou
succourest me, the goodness which thou conferrest upon me will not rest
on me alone, but will extend to all thy servants: for this will serve
the more to confirm their faith, and make them praise thy name the more.
In order, therefore, to induce God to grant him deliverance, he employs
as an argument the end or effect which it would produce, inasmuch as it
would stir up all the godly to exercise greater trust in God, and
encourage them to give praise and thanks to him. This passage teaches
us, that we are ungrateful to God if we do not take encouragement and
comfort from whatever blessings he confers upon our neighbours, since by
these he testifies that he will always be ready to bestow his goodness
upon all the godly in common. Accordingly the reason of this joy is
added, *because the Lord will cover* or *protect them.* As often as God
bestows any blessings upon any of the faithful, the rest, as I have said
before, ought to conclude that he will show himself beneficent towards
them. Again, this passage teaches us, that true joy proceeds from no
other source than from the protection of God. We may be exposed to a
thousand deaths, but this one consideration ought abundantly to suffice
us, that we are covered and defended by the hand of God. And this will
be the case, if the vain shadows of this world do not so beguile us as
to excite us to take shelter under them. We ought also particularly to
notice the statement, that those who trust in the Lord *love his name.*
The remembrance of God must be sweet to us, and fill our hearts with
joy, or rather ravish us with love to him, after he has caused us to
taste of his goodness; as, on the other hand, all unbelievers wish the
name of God to be buried, and shun the remembrance of him with horror.

<span id="xi.vi-p7"></span><span id="xi.vi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xi.vi-p8"></span>**12.** *For thou, Jehovah, wilt bless the
righteous.* The Psalmist here confirms the concluding sentence of the
preceding verse, namely, that all the servants of God in common will
take support to their faith from what he had experienced, for he would
have us from one example to form our judgment of the immutability and
perpetuity of God’s grace towards all the godly. Again, by this he
teaches us that there is no true and right joy but that which is derived
from the sense of God’s fatherly love. The word, *to bless,* in Hebrew,
(when we speak of this as the act of men,) signifies to wish happiness
and prosperity to any one, and to pray for him;  <span
id="fr_78"></span>[79](#fn_78.md) but when it is spoken of as the act of
God, it signifies the same thing as to prosper a man, or to enrich him
abundantly with all good things; for since the favor of God is
efficacious, his blessing of itself produces an abundance of every good
thing. The name *righteous* is not restricted to any one man, but
signifies in general all the servants of God. Those, however, who are
called righteous in Scripture, are not so called on account of the merit
of their works, but because they aspire after righteousness; for after
God has received them into his favor, by not imputing their sins to
them, he accepts their upright endeavors for perfect righteousness. What
follows is of the same import as the preceding clause, *Thou wilt crown
them with thy free favor,* or good will, *as with a shield* The
Psalmist’s meaning is, that the faithful shall be completely defended on
all sides, since he will, in no case, withhold from them his grace,
which is to them an invincible fortress, and brings along with it
certain safety. The word, *to crown,* which the Psalmist employs, often
denotes in Hebrew, *ornament* or *glory;* but as there is added the
similitude of a shield, I have no doubt but he uses it metaphorically
for, *to fortify* or *to compass about.*  <span
id="fr_79"></span>[80](#fn_79.md) The meaning, therefore, is, that however
great and various may be the dangers which besiege the righteous, they
shall, notwithstanding, escape, and be saved, because God is favorable
to them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_63"></span>[64](cc08010.htm#fr_63.md) <span
id="xi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xi-p5"></span> “<span id="xi-p5.1"></span>Qu’il appelle
Heritages.” — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_64"></span>[65](cc08010.htm#fr_64.md) <span
id="xi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xi-p6"></span> “<span id="xi-p6.1"></span>Mais pource que je
n’approuve point ce que devinent plusieurs parlans comme par enigmes sur
ces inscriptions des Pseaumes.” — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_65"></span>[66](cc08010.htm#fr_65.md) <span
id="xi.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p6"></span> “<span id="xi.i-p6.1"></span>Il a aussi
represente et exprime ses gemissemens qui estoyent en grand nombre et de
beaucoup de sortes.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[67](cc08010.htm#fr_66.md) <span
id="xi.i-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p7"></span> “<span id="xi.i-p7.1"></span>Ce qu’il vent
requerir a Dieu.” —*Fr*.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[68](cc08010.htm#fr_67.md) <span
id="xi.i-p7.4"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p8"></span> Bishop Horne beautifully renders the word,
“dove-like mournings,” and Bishop Horsley, “sighing.” “The word,” says
Hammond, “regularly signifies *sighing* or *cry*, not *a loud, sonorous
voice,* but such as complaints are made in.”

<span id="fn_68"></span>[69](cc08010.htm#fr_68.md) <span
id="xi.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p9"></span> “<span id="xi.i-p9.1"></span>Il semble que
puis apres, pour mieux specifier, it en met deux sortes appelant les
unes Complaintes obscures, et les autres Cri.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[70](cc08010.htm#fr_69.md) <span
id="xi.i-p9.3"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p10"></span> “<span id="xi.i-p10.1"></span>Quand la
douleur l’empesche de parler distinctement et faire entendre sa voix.” —
*Fr*.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[71](cc08010.htm#fr_70.md) <span
id="xi.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iii-p3"></span> “<span id="xi.iii-p3.1"></span>Ou le
mauvais.” — Fr. *Marg. “*Or the wicked.”

<span id="fn_71"></span>[72](cc08010.htm#fr_71.md) <span
id="xi.iii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xi.iii-p4"></span> The words in the original are <span
id="xi.iii-p4.1"></span>איש דמים, *ish damim,* literally, *the man of
bloods.* The plural number is used, probably to teach us, that the man
who thirsts for human blood is rarely satisfied with one victim.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[73](cc08010.htm#fr_72.md) <span
id="xi.iii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xi.iii-p8"></span> “<span id="xi.iii-p8.1"></span>Comme il est
protecteur et defenseur des siens.” — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_73"></span>[74](cc08010.htm#fr_73.md) <span
id="xi.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xi.v-p3"></span> “<span id="xi.v-p3.1"></span>Pour la
multitude.”—*Fr*. “For the multitude.”

<span id="fn_74"></span>[75](cc08010.htm#fr_74.md) <span
id="xi.v-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xi.v-p7"></span> “<span id="xi.v-p7.1"></span>Par ainsi il
confesse n’avoir ne dexterite ne force, ne mesme aucun moyen pour eviter
les embusches des ennemis.” — *Fr*. “Thus he confesses that he has
neither skill nor power, nor any means whatever, by which to avoid the
snares of his enemies.”

<span id="fn_75"></span>[76](cc08010.htm#fr_75.md) <span
id="xi.v-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xi.v-p10"></span> “<span id="xi.v-p10.1"></span>Gouffres qui
devorent tout.” — *Fr*. “Gulfs which devour all.”

<span id="fn_76"></span>[77](cc08010.htm#fr_76.md) <span
id="xi.v-p13.2"></span>

<span id="xi.v-p14"></span> “<span id="xi.v-p14.1"></span>C’est a dire,
ne vienent a bout de leurs enterprises.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[78](cc08010.htm#fr_77.md) <span
id="xi.vi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xi.vi-p3"></span> In the older Latin editions, and in the
French edition, the verbs for *rejoice* and *delight* are rendered, on
the margin, in the future tense, thus:— “And all who trust in thee shall
rejoice; yea, they shall rejoice for ever; and cover thou them, and
those that love thy name shall delight in thee.”

<span id="fn_78"></span>[79](cc08010.htm#fr_78.md) <span
id="xi.vi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xi.vi-p9"></span> “<span id="xi.vi-p9.1"></span>Signifie,
souhaitter bien et prosperite a quelquun et prier pour luy.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[80](cc08010.htm#fr_79.md) <span
id="xi.vi-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xi.vi-p10"></span> Bishop Horsley thinks <span
id="xi.vi-p10.1"></span>כצנה, *katsinah, as with a shield,* should be
construed with <span id="xi.vi-p10.2"></span>רצונ *ratson, favor* or
*good will,* and translates the words thus: ”Like a shield of good will,
thou wilt stand guard around him.” The reading of the Septuagint is the
same: <span id="xi.vi-p10.3"></span>Ως ὁπλω εὐδοκιας, *as with a shield
of good will.* The word <span id="xi.vi-p10.5"></span>צנה *tsinah,*
means that kind of shield, from the middle of which there arose a large
boss, surmounted by a dagger and which was highly useful both as a
defensive and an offensive weapon in ancient warfare.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 6](cc08011.md)
