[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc08000)  [Next](cc08002) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 8: Psalms, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii"></span>

<span id="ii-p1"></span>INTRODUCTORY NOTICE

<span id="ii-p2"></span>The Book Of Psalms, viewed merely as a poetical
composition, has very high claims on our attention. Men of the most
refined and cultivated taste have often been attracted to the study of
it from the poetical beauties with which it abounds, and have admitted,
in this respect, the superiority of its claims. The greatest of our
English poets  <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) thus speaks of these
sacred songs: ”Not in their divine argument alone, but in the very
critical art of composition, they may be easily made appear over all the
kinds of lyric poesy to be incomparable.” Another elegant scholar  <span
id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1) speaking on the same subject, says, “In
lyric flow and fire, in crushing force and majesty, that seems still to
echo the awful sounds once heard beneath the thunder clouds of Sinai,
the poetry of the ancient Scriptures is the most superb that ever burned
within the breast of man.”

<span id="ii-p5"></span>But the intrinsic excellence of this Book gives
it still higher claims on our attention. written under the influence of
the Spirit of inspiration, its subject-matter is worthy of its celestial
origin. In general, it contains details of the national history of the
Jewish people, records of particular portions of the life and experience
of individuals, and predictions of future events. Each of these heads
embraces a wide field, and they include illustrations of every religions
truth which it is necessary for us to know, exemplifications of every
devout feeling which it is our duty to cherish, and examples of every
spiritual conflict which it is possible for us to experience. We meet
with many disclosures of the greatness, majesty, and perfections of the
only true God; his government of the world; and his special care over
his chosen people. We meet with the varied exercises of the regenerated
soul, and behold it at one time offering up fervent supplications to the
Hearer of prayer, at another celebrating his perfections and works; at
one time giving utterance to the ardent breathings of love to God, and
trust in him, at another struggling with unbelief and corruption; at one
time mourning under the divine chastisement on account of sin, at
another rejoicing in a sense of forgiving mercy, and enjoying the peace
which passeth all understanding. We have presented to us many wonderful
predictions concerning the Messiah, his humiliation, sufferings, death,
resurrection, and ascension to his Fatherright hand; his work in heaven
as the intercessor of his people, and his authority as universal King;
the effusion of the influences of the Holy Spirit, and the conversion of
all nations to the faith of the Gospel. In short, we have unfolded to
our view the final judgment, the gathering of all the righteous to God,
and the eternal exclusion of the wicked from happiness and from hope.

<span id="ii-p6"></span>These and similar topics which are set forth in
the noblest strains of poetry, and in a diction whose magnificence and
sublimity correspond to the importance and grandeur of the sentiments,
constitute the materials of this Book; and while they afford an
incontestable proof that it Is inspired, that it does not consist of the
creations of mere human genius, but is an emanation from heaven, they
show that its character and tendency are altogether different from the
character and tendency of the most admired poetry, which the genius of
heathen nations has ever produced. It ministers to no depraved passion;
it fosters no fictitious virtue; it disdains to offer its delicious
incense at the shrine of degrading superstition. It teaches the most
exalted piety, and the purest morality. It tends only to refine and
exalt the nature of man, to elevate the soul to God, and inspire it with
the admiration and love of his character, to curb the passions, purify
the affections, and excite to the cultivation of whatsoever things are
true, honest, just, pure, lovely, and of good report. It has guided the
saint in doubt and difficulty; it has nerved him for self-denial and
suffering; it has imparted support and comfort to him in the hour of
death. This Book has accordingly been highly appreciated by the best of
men in every age, and they have labored to find expressions in which to
set forth its excellence. Athanasius styles it, “An epitome of the whole
Scriptures;” Basil, “A compendium of all theology;” Luther, “A little
Bible, and the summary of the Old Testament;” Melancthon, “The most
elegant work extant in the world;” and for Calvin’s estimate of its
value we refer to the excellent preface with which he introduces this
department of his labors to the attention of the reader.

<span id="ii-p7"></span>Calvin’s Commentary On The Psalms, a new
Translation of which is now in course of being presented to the English
reader, is distinguished by many of the excellencies which have acquired
for his Commentaries on other parts of Scripture so great reputation. In
this, as in his other Commentaries, his first and great object is to
ascertain the mind of the Holy Spirit. To ascertain this, he proceeds on
the principle laid down by Melancthon, “that Scripture cannot be
understood theologically, unless it be first understood grammatically.”
Before his time the mystical and allegorical method of explaining the
Scriptures was very prevalent; according to which, the interpreter,
dwelling very little or not at all upon the literal sense, sought for
hidden and allegorical meanings. But rejecting this mode of
interpretation, which contributed little to the right understanding of
the word of God, and according to which the meaning was made to depend
entirely upon the fancy of the interpreter, Calvin set himself to the
investigation of the grammatical and literal sense, by a careful
examination of the Hebrew test, and by a diligent attention to the drift
and intention of the writer’s discourse.

<span id="ii-p8"></span>This principle of interpretation cannot be too
highly commended. It should first engage the attention of the
commentator; and when it is neglected, the fundamental principle of
sacred criticism is violated. Calvin was deeply alive to its importance.
His only defect lies in his acting upon it too exclusively. Many of the
Psalms, in addition to the literal meaning, have a prophetical,
evangelical, and spiritual sense. While referring primarily to David and
the nation of Israel, they have, at the same time, a reference to Christ
and the New Testament Church, founded on the fact that the former were
typical of the latter. Calvin, indeed, explains some of the Psalms on
this principle. But he applies the principle less frequently than he
might have done, without contravening the canons of sound hermeneutics.
His great aversion to the mystical method of interpretation, and to the
absurd and extravagant lengths to which it was carried by the Fathers,
perhaps made him err on the other extreme of confining his attention too
much to the literal meanings and directing his attention too little to
the prophetical and spiritual character of the Book, and to the
reference which it has to Christ and the Church. In consequence of this,
his expositions have less unction, and contain less of rich evangelical
sentiment, than would otherwise have distinguished them. There are,
however, two principles of evangelical truth which he is at pains to
inculcates whenever a fit opportunity presents itself —the doctrine of
justification by faith in Christ without the works of the Law; and the
necessity of personal holiness in order to salvation.

<span id="ii-p9"></span>Another excellence of this commentary is its
practical character. The author does not confine himself to the dry and
lifeless detail of mere grammatical praxis, as if he had been commenting
on a Greek or Roman classic. He turns all his explanations to practical
account, and thus his work exhibits a happy combination of critical and
philological remark with practical exposition.

<span id="ii-p10"></span>Here, again, we find displayed the sound and
penetrating judgment for which Calvin has been universally admired. This
is manifest in the judicious selection which he makes from amongst a
variety of interpretations of that which is evidently the true one, or
which appears to be the most probable. Sometimes he pronounces a certain
interpretation to be meagre and unsatisfactory. At other times, he
simply states hit preference of one interpretation to another, when,
after careful examinations it appeared to him to have the balance of
arguments in its favor; without, however, expressing any decided
opposition to the other, when the view which he preferred to it was
supported only bit a slight preponderance of evidence. At other times,
he does not decide between different interpretations, showing that with
respect to certain words and expressions he had not come to a fixed
opinion. In all these instances,  <span id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2) he
generally shows much penetration and judgment. He is, no doubt,
sometimes mistaken in his interpretation of particular passages. But
when it is considered that the Scriptures had long been a sealed book,
and that his helps were few and imperfect compared with those which we
now possess, the wonder is, that he should have succeeded so well in
bringing out their true meaning. This was chiefly owing to vigor and
acuteness of intellects combined with a sound and discriminating
judgment. These, indeed, were the mental qualities by which he was
peculiarly distinguished. We meet with no flashes of poetry, no
brilliant coruscation of fancy, giving evidence of a powerful
imagination. The eloquent passages which occur are the eloquence of
reason, not the bursts of imagination. But his strength of thought, the
vigor and perspicacity of his intellect, the extraordinary power of his
judgment, command our willing admiration.

<span id="ii-p15"></span>Since this commentary was first published, a
great number of Translations of The Psalms, as well as numerous critical
and explanatory works upon them, have made their appearance, while much
new light has been thrown upon many passages from more extensive
philological research, from an attention to the parallelism of Hebrew
poetry,  <span id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3) and from the fuller
information which we now possess, by the discoveries of modern
travelers, of the natural history, customs, and mannered of the East, to
which frequent allusion is made in The Psalms. But such id the acuteness
of judgment, and success in discovering the mind of the Spirit which
distinguish these prelections, that they are not superseded by any
modern Commentary on the same subject: and though it is nearly three
centuries since they were written, there are few separate works on The
Psalms from which the student of the present day, who wishes critically
to examine them, will derive more important assistance.

<span id="ii-p17"></span>Nor is Calvin’s impartiality and integrity as
an interpreter less apparent in this Work than his judgment. It being
his first and leading object to ascertain the mind of the Holy Spirit,
he came to the Word of God not for the purpose of finding arguments to
establish some preconceived opinion or theory, but in the humble
character of a learner, and we never find him perverting or twisting a
passage to support even those doctrines which he most deeply cherished.
So far from doing this, he not infrequently gives up a text which has
been explained by other commentators as a proof of some important
doctrine, and which he would have viewed in the same light had it not
been for his aversion to put on Scripture a forced construction, and his
determination rigidly to adhere to the principles of fair and logical
interpretation. For example, these words in <span
id="ii-p17.1"></span>[Ps 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#007)<span
id="ii-p17.1"></span>,

<span id="ii-p18"></span>“Jehovah hath said unto me,  
Thou art my Son; this day have I begotten thee,”

<span id="ii-p19"></span>have been quoted by Augustine and many other
eminent divines, in proof of the eternal generation of the Son of God.
But as Paul, in <span id="ii-p19.1"></span>[Ac
13:33](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#033)<span id="ii-p19.1"></span>,
explains them as receiving their fulfillment in the resurrection of
Christ, Calvin sets them aside from the class of proofs which support
the doctrine of an eternal generation, although he held that doctrine,
 <span id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4) and considers them as referring
merely to the manifestation afforded of Christ’s Sonship by his
resurrection from the dead.  <span id="fr_5"></span>[6](#fn_5) Again,
<span id="ii-p21.2"></span>[Ps
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#005)<span id="ii-p21.2"></span>, etc.,

<span id="ii-p22"></span>“Thou hast made him a little lower than God,
and hast crowned him with glory and honor,” etc.,

<span id="ii-p23"></span>has been often explained as prophetic of the
temporary humiliation and subsequent exaltation of Christ, an opinion
which is supported by reasons far from contemptible; but Calvin, judging
from the scope of the passage, considers it as exclusively referring to
man, and that when Paul quotes it in <span id="ii-p23.1"></span>[Heb
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#007)<span id="ii-p23.1"></span>, and
applies it to Christ, he applies it to him only by way of accommodation.
 <span id="fr_6"></span>[7](#fn_6) Again, these words in <span
id="ii-p24.2"></span>[Ps 33:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#006)<span
id="ii-p24.2"></span>,

<span id="ii-p25"></span>“By the word of Jehovah were the heavens
established, and all the host of them by the spirit of his mouth,”

<span id="ii-p26"></span>have been viewed by many judicious divines as a
proof of the Trinity, “Jehovah,” denoting the Father, “the word of
Jehovah,” the Son, and “the spirit of Jehovah’s mouth,” the Holy Spirit;
but while Calvin admits that the “word of Jehovah” means the Eternal
Word, the only begotten Son of God, yet reasoning from the sense which
the phrase, “the spirit of Jehovah’s mouth,” ordinarily bears in
Scripture, he argues that it does not there mean the third person of the
adorable Trinity, but simply *sermo, speech,* although there were no
truths which he held more firmly, and regarded as more essential to the
Christian system, than the doctrines of the Trinity and of the Divinity
of the Holy Spirit.  <span id="fr_7"></span>[8](#fn_7) “It is very
possible,” says Tholuck, “that in following this direction of mind, he
may have unnecessarily sacrificed this and the other proof text; still
the principle upon which he proceeded is in all cases to be approved.”
This commentary, again, bears evident marks of the learning of its
author. His intimate acquaintance with the Hebrew language, the
knowledge of which is of so much importance to the interpretation of the
Old Testament Scriptures, is everywhere apparent. Father Simon, whom the
acrimony of controversy led to indulge too much in depreciating and
abusing those who differed from him, asserts, indeed, that Calvin was so
ignorant of the Hebrew language, that he knew nothing more than the
letters. But we have only to examine his Commentary on The Psalms, not
to speak of his Commentaries on other parts of the Old Testament, to be
convinced that his knowledge of the Hebrew language was accurate and
minute, considering the age in which he lived He frequently enters into
a critical examination of the original text, and manifests by his
philological remarks, brief though they be, an intimate acquaintance
with that language; arriving, in his interpretations, at the same
results to which a more profound exegesis and a more minute attention to
philology have conducted modern critics. Often, when he does not
professedly criticise the Hebrew text, or make his statements in the
form of criticisms the Hebrew scholar will perceive that his remarks are
founded upon a close attention to the strict meaning of the Hebrew
words, and that he frequently states their precise import with much
force, felicity, and delicacy of expression. Nor is proof wanting, from
this Commentary, that Calvin had traveled over the whole field of
knowledge, in so far as it had been explored in his day. From ancient
and modern systems of philosophy, from civil and ecclesiastical history,
as well as from the Greek and Roman classical he draws materials, and
shows how he could employ with ease and power, and yet without the least
ostentation or pedantry, his varied acquisitions for the illustration of
sacred truth.

<span id="ii-p28"></span>In short this Work is pervaded by earnest piety
and much Christian experience. Its whole tone evinces it to be the fruit
of a soul which felt the deep workings of piety; of a Soul in which the
love of God was extreme, which sought its rest and happiness in him
alone, which recognised his hand and providence in every event, which
confided in him in all circumstances, which looked to him as a Father
and a friend for every blessing, and which, in all its powers, was
consecrated with entire devotedness to Christ and the Gospel. It
everywhere, too, bespeaks the man of large religious experience. Whether
the author comments on the plaintive songs in which grief pours forth
its bitterness, or on the triumphant and joyful songs in which the
perfections and providence of God, individual and national deliverances
are celebrated; whether he speaks of David’s religious exercises, or of
the trials of his life, or of his inward conflicts, we perceive a mind
which had itself experienced much of what it illustrates. This
experience eminently qualified Calvin to be an interpreter of The
Psalms. Placed often in circumstances similar to those of David, as he
graphically describes in his Preface, he was thus enabled accurately to
conceive of David’s train of thinking, to see things as it were with his
eyes, to trace the complexion and character of his feelings, and thus to
portray them in so just and natural a manner, that we are almost ready
to think, in perusing the description of them, that they are described
by David himself.

<span id="ii-p29"></span>This Work has been translated from the original
Latin, and collated with the French version, which was written by the
author himself. The French edition which has been used, and which was
doubtless the last corrected under the author’s eye, was printed in
1563, and is described on the title-page as “So carefully revised, and
so faithfully compared with the Latin version, that it may be considered
a new translation.” While the Translator has made the Latin version his
text book, he has throughout carefully collated it with the French
version, by which he has been greatly aided in giving a clearer and
fuller representation of his author’s meaning. The French version having
made its appearance after the Latin, and being written in Calvin’s
native tongue, in which he might be expected to write with greater ease
than in a dead language, admired though his Latin works are for the
purity of their classic diction, it contains numerous expansions of
thought and expression, by which he removes the occasional obscurities
of the Latin version, which is written in a style more compressed and
concise. Sometimes, though not often, we meet with a complete sentence
in the French version which is not to be found in the Latin; but the
cases are of frequent occurrence, in which, by inserting into the French
version a clause at the beginning, the middle, or the end of a sentence,
which does not occur in the Latin, he explains what is obscure in the
latter version, or introduces a new thought or expresses his meaning
with greater clearness and with greater copiousness of language. These
additional clauses the Translator has introduced into the text in their
Proper place, and indicated them by adding the original French in the
form of notes at the foot of the page. He, however, sometimes translates
from the French version where it seems fuller and more perspicuous than
the Latin, without indicating this by foot-notes. In a few instances,
where the expression in the two versions is different, he has given the
expression of both, retaining that of the Latin version in the texts and
transferring that of the French to the foot of the page.

<span id="ii-p30"></span>With respect to the principle on which he has
proceeded in the task of translating, it is sufficient simply to state,
that he has endeavored to express the meaning of his author in language
as true to the original as possible, avoiding being too literal on the
one hand, and too loose on the other; as this, in his apprehension, is
the method by which a translator can best succeed in faithfully
representing to the reader the sense as well as the style and manner of
his author.

<span id="ii-p31"></span>Calvin’s version of the Sacred Text has been
given in preference to that of our English Bible, as this was necessary
to the clear understanding of his illustrations. The two versions,
however, nearly resemble each other: often our English version is an
accurate translation of Calvin’s, at other times the marginal readings
which are in some of our English Bibles. He, however, not infrequently
differs from both; and in some instances, though not in all, where he
does differ, his translation appears to be superior in accuracy, and
places the sentiment of the original in a clearer light, and with
greater effect than is done in our English version. The Scriptural
quotations which he makes have been given in the words of our English
Bible, except in those cases in which his argument required his own
translation of the passage to be retained.

<span id="ii-p32"></span>This Work was translated into English some
years after its first appearance by Arthur Golding, whose translation
was published at London in 1571. Arthur Golding, who was of a
gentleman’s family and a native of London, was one of the most
distinguished translators of the Roman classics in the age of Queen
Elizabeth, when the translation of these valuable works of antiquity
into the English language employed every pen. He translated Justin’s
History, Caesar’s Commentaries, Ovid’s Metamorphoses, Seneca’s Benefits,
and other classic authors; as well as various modern French and Latin
works, among which are a number of Calvin’s writings, besides The
Psalms. His only original work appears to have been, “A Discourse upon
the Earthquake that happened through the Realme of Englande, and other
places of Christendom, the sixt of Aprill 1580,” published in 16mo. “It
is to be regretted,” says Warton, “that he gave so much of his time to
translation.”  <span id="fr_8"></span>[9](#fn_8) Golding was no doubt a
good classical scholar, and well acquainted with the style of Calvin;
but as his translation was executed nearly three hundred years ago, it
every where abounds with words and phrases which are become antiquated
and obsolete, from the great change which the English language has
undergone since that period. Being on this account frequently very
obscure, often unintelligible, it fails in giving a just representation
to an English reader of the present day of Calvin’s work, and leads him
to form a less favorable estimate of its value than is due to its high
merits. Besides, Golding does not appear to have seen the French
version, which affords to a translator so much assistance in the
faithful representation of Calvin’s meaning.

<span id="ii-p34"></span>With respect to the Notes with which this
Translation is accompanied, they are intended to enable the reader
clearly to understand the meaning of such of Calvin’s philological
remarks and criticisms as are obscure, from the brevity with which they
are stated; or to exhibit Calvin’s merits as a commentator, by showing
how frequently his interpretations are adopted and supported by the most
eminent Biblical critics, or to illustrate the Sacred Text, by showing
the precise meaning of the Hebrew words, or by explaining some portion
of natural history, or some eastern custom or manner to which there is
an allusion. The ancient versions afford important assistance in the
explanation of difficult passages, and their rendering of particular
texts has been occasionally given when this contributes to elucidate
them, or to throw light on Calvin’s observations. Of these versions the
Septuagint, the Vulgate, and Jerome’s, are the only ones which he
appears to have consulted, and to the first he frequently refers.

<span id="ii-p35"></span>As the Translations of The Calvin Society are
intended for the whole Christian community, it has been deemed out of
place to enter upon theological questions on which difference of opinion
exists among the various denominations of the Christian community. In
making these Notes, the Editor has often compared Calvin’s translation
of the Sacred Text with the original Hebrew, and with the Septuagint,
Vulgate, and Jerome’s versions. He has also consulted a considerable
number of critical works on The Psalms by some of the most eminent
Biblical scholars who have written on this book, either as a separate
undertaking, or in common with the other books of Scripture. Of the rich
stores of erudition thus supplied he has freely made use; as in the
course of the work he has carefully marked his authorities, as this will
give greater weight to his statements. Many of the authors who are
quoted were men of distinguished learning, judgment, and piety,
possessed a profound acquaintance with the Hebrew language, and had
devoted years of laborious study to the investigation of the meaning of
this sacred book; and it is wonderful to find how closely the results of
Calvin’s investigations, even on the most difficult passages harmonise
with the results to which modern critics guided by the principles of
accurate hermeneutics, have arrived. This has often forced itself upon
the attention of the Editor, and the more he has compared Calvin’s
criticisms and interpretations with the labors of these learned men, the
higher has been raised his admiration of the ingenuity, penetration,
learning, and critical acumen of this great commentator. Not a few,
indeed, of the most beautiful interpretations which are to be found in
Commentaries and critical works were first given forth by Calvin,
although the source in which they originated has been forgotten. It may
here be stated that the examination of the philology of the Sacred Text,
and of critical works on the subject, has led the Editor to observe how
closely Calvin often adheres in his interpretations to the import of the
original Hebrew, and enabled him in many cases in the course of the
translation to represent the meaning of his author more correctly than
he could otherwise have done as well as to avoid mistakes into which
Golding has sometimes fallen, evidently from his not being acquainted
with the philology of the passage, or the criticism which Calvin briefly
states or refers took and which it is difficult for the reader clearly
to understand, unless he find it more fully stated in some other
critical work.

<span id="ii-p36"></span>The Editor has to express his obligations to
two of his friends who materially aided in the preparation of the latter
part of this volume,—the late Revelation Alexander Duncan, A.M.,
formerly of Dundee, and the Revelation James M’lean, whose able
translation of several of the Psalms left him little more to do than the
labor of revision and annotation. The Editor and the Society have also
been much indebted to the Revelation Thomas M’crie, Professor of
Divinity, Edinburgh, not only in general for the benefit of his
experience, but also for the trouble he has taken in examining the
sheets of this Volume while passing through the press, and for many
important suggestions. The Editor has great satisfaction in thus
publicly acknowledging his obligations.

<span id="ii-p37"></span>*A facsimile* of the Title-Page of the French
version which we have used, and of the title-page of Arthur Golding’s
translation, together with his Dedication, are prefixed to this Volume.

<span id="ii-p38"></span>It remains only to be added, that the last
Volume will contain copious Indices of the principal matters contained
in the Commentary and Notes, of the passages of Scripture more or less
illustrated, and of the Hebrew words referred to or explained.

<span id="ii-p39"></span>J. A.  
Edinburgh, June 1845.

<span id="ii-p40"></span>\[IT has been thought proper to preserve The
Dedication which is prefixed to the English Translation by Arthur
Golding in the original orthography. Besides affording a vivid idea of
the style and phraseology of this Translator, the slightest inspection
of this singular composition will demonstrate how very unsuitable the
publication of such a version would have been for general use in these
times.

<span id="ii-p41"></span>The only liberty which has been taken in
reprinting this Dedication, is in reference to the supplying of modern
punctuation, and the division of it into paragraphs; but in other
respects it is given *verbatim et literatim*. There is only *one*
paragraph in the whole of Golding’s Dedication. It is dated 20th October
1571.

<span id="ii-p42"></span>Golding’s version of Calvin’s Commentary On The
Psalms is throughout equally obscure and quaint; and it may justly be
characterised as being wholly unfit for the perusal of all classes of
readers of the present day, who do not happen to be minutely acquainted
with the language and idiom of the sixteenth century its most uncouth
and repulsive form.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[1](cc08001.htm#fr_0) <span id="ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii-p3"></span> Milton

<span id="fn_1"></span>[2](cc08001.htm#fr_1) <span id="ii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii-p4"></span> Sir David K. Sandford

<span id="fn_2"></span>[3](cc08001.htm#fr_2) <span id="ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii-p11"></span> From the variety of interpretations of the
same passages which we meet with in Calvin’s Commentary, and of which we
have still more numerous specimens in Poole’s Synopsis Criticorum, it is
by no means to be supposed that the meaning of the language of Scripture
is vague, uncertain, and unsettled. Had the professed interpreters of
Scripture always performed their task with judgment, as well as learning
and talent, and been guided by the rules of sound hermeneutics, the
reader would not have been bewildered with so many different and
contradictory interpretations. Still, however, there are words and
sentences, the exact import of which is more or less doubtful and
uncertain, so that it is difficult to determine between different senses
which have been put upon them. The reasons of this are so well stated by
Cresswell, in his preface to The Book of Psalms with Notes, (pp. 14, 15,
16,) and the passage has so direct a bearing on a number of the various
interpretations, which Calvin deals with in this Commentary, that we
shall quote it entire though it is long.

<span id="ii-p12"></span>“The Hebrew is not only a dead language, but
the oldest of all dead languages; it is, moreover, the language of a
people that lived under institutions and in a climate very different
from those of our own country, so that the idioms with which it abounds
cannot but be strange to our habits of thinking and our modes of speech;
nor have we any book but the Bible itself to consult for an illustration
of these phraseological peculiarities. The paucity of the words also
contained in that ancient tongue is such, that the same Hebrew term very
often bears a great variety of significations, the connection of which
with each other cannot always be satisfactorily ascertained: and, again,
there are words, each of which is found but once in the whole volume of
Scripture, so that their meanings can only be conjectured, either from
their affinity to other words, or from the purport of the passage
wherein they occur.”

<span id="ii-p13"></span>“The following are amongst the many grammatical
Hebraisms which we meet with in The Book of Psalms. The future and past
tenses are put almost indiscriminately, the one for the other, and the
former of them is used occasionally to designate not that which will
happen, but that which is accustomed to happen. The infinitive is put
for every other mood, and also for nouns even in the accusative case.
The future tense is sometimes expressed by a verb in the imperative
mood. Two substantives are put instead of a substantive and an
adjective; a substantive is frequently used adverbially; and the same
substantive repeated denotes multitude When the negative particle occurs
in the first member of a sentence, it is sometimes to be understood, and
must be supplied, in the following members. Hebrew sentences are also in
other respects very often elliptical, broken, and imperfect; and in the
same sentence there is in many instances a change of person in the
speaker, without any express intimation of it.”

<span id="ii-p14"></span>“From the peculiarities above mentioned, and
especially from the different ways in which an ellipse may be supplied,
it is plain that the text of Scripture must needs admit of a
considerable latitude of interpretation; so that although none of its
important doctrines whether they relate to faith or morals, are thereby
left doubtful, yet does it contain passages the exact meanings of which
are more or less uncertain. The candid and pious reader, however, will
with Augustine gladly acknowledge that all which he fully comprehends in
the sacred volume is most excellent; whilst he looks with feelings of
veneration upon that smaller portion of it which he less perfectly
understands, but which the diligence and erudition of future times may,
through divine aid, be enabled to elucidate.”

<span id="fn_3"></span>[4](cc08001.htm#fr_3) <span id="ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ii-p16"></span> Parallelism is the distinguishing
characteristic of Hebrew poetry, and an attention to it, it must be
admitted, affords much assistance in elucidating obscure, and explaining
difficult passages. Some modern translations of The Psalms, as French
and Skinner’s, have the lines so arranged as to make the parallelisms
apparent to the eye; which enables the reader to discover at a glance
niceties both of structure and of meaning, which, in the ordinary mode
of printing, might pass unnoticed after frequent and even close perusal.
For a full investigation of this subject, the reader is referred to Dr
Lowth’s elegant Lectures on Sacred Poetry, and his Preliminary
Dissertation prefixed to his translation of the prophet Isaiah, works
which created a new era in sacred literature, by the light which they
cast on the character of Hebrew poetry, with respect to which the
learned world were previously unsettled and perplexed, from the
obscurity which rested on the subject. Bishop Jebb, in his “Sacred
Literature,” has also investigated the parallelism of Hebrew poetry with
much ability, and successfully controverted some of Bishop Lowth’s
positions.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[5](cc08001.htm#fr_4) <span id="ii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ii-p20"></span> That Calvin held this doctrine is evident from
his Commentary on <span id="ii-p20.2"></span>[Acts
13:33](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#033)<span id="ii-p20.2"></span>,
where, after stating that the words of the second Psalm, above quoted,
refer to the unequivocal evidence by which the Father proved that Christ
was his Son in raising him from the dead, he observes “This, however, is
no objection to the doctrine that Christ, the personal Word, was
begotten by the eternal Father before time; but that generation is an
inscrutable mystery.“ With respect to those who argue from this passage
in support of that doctrine, he says, “I know that Augustine, and the
greatest number of commentators, are better pleased with the subtile
speculation that ‘to-day‘ denotes a continued or an eternal act. But
when the Spirit of God himself is his own interpreter, and explains by
the mouth of Paul what was spoken by David, we are not warranted to
invent and put upon the words any other meaning.“

<span id="fn_5"></span>[6](cc08001.htm#fr_5) <span id="ii-p20.3"></span>

<span id="ii-p21"></span> P. 118

<span id="fn_6"></span>[7](cc08001.htm#fr_6) <span id="ii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ii-p24"></span> Pp. 103-105

<span id="fn_7"></span>[8](cc08001.htm#fr_7) <span id="ii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ii-p27"></span> P. 543

<span id="fn_8"></span>[9](cc08001.htm#fr_8) <span id="ii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="ii-p33"></span> See Biographica Dramatica; Lowndes’
Biographer’s Manual of English Literature; and Warton’s History of
English Poetry, vol. in. pp. 409-414.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Facsimile of the Title Page to the 1563 French Translation by
John Calvin](cc08002)
