[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc08038)  [Next](cc08040.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 8: Psalms, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xl"></span>

<span id="xl-p1"></span>PSALM 34.

<span id="xl-p2"></span>A Psalm of David, when he changed his
countenance before Abimelech, who banished him from his presence, and he
departed from him.

<span id="xl-p3"></span>David gives thanks to God for a signal
deliverance, and takes occasion from it to celebrate his perpetual grace
towards all the saints, and to exhort them both to trust in him, and to
the study of godliness; affirming, that the only way to pass through
life happily, is to walk holily and harmlessly in the world, in the
service and fear of God. It is obvious from the title what particular
instance of God’s favor he here celebrates. When he was driven to King
Achish, as recorded in <span id="xl-p3.1"></span>[1Sa
27:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1027.htm#002.md)<span id="xl-p3.1"></span>,  <span
id="fr_682"></span>[683](#fn_682.md) whom, with the exception of Saul, he
accounted the deadliest of all his enemies, it was not probable that he
would ever be able to make his escape from him. The only means,
therefore, he had of saving his life was to feign himself mad by
frothing at the mouth, looking fiercely, and disfiguring his
countenance. Nor is this to be wondered at; for Achish, being
disappointed of the confident hope of victory which he had, and
attributing to David alone both the loss which he had sustained and the
dishonor which he had received, burned with implacable hatred against
him. In allowing him to escape, therefore, contrary to his own
expectation, and the expectation of all other men, David acknowledges
that there had been exhibited a memorable instance of God’s favor
towards him, which may be serviceable for the general instruction of the
whole Church. Instead of Achish,  <span
id="fr_683"></span>[684](#fn_683.md) Abimelech is here employed; and it is
probable that the latter name had been the common designation of the
monarchs of the Philistines, as Pharaoh was the common name of the
monarchs of Egypt, and Caesar that of the Roman Emperors, which was
borrowed from the name of Julius Caesar, who had first seized the
imperial power among the Romans. We know that many ages before David was
born, the kings who reigned in Gerar in the time of Abraham were called
Abimelech. It is not, therefore, to be wondered at, that this name
should be handed down from age to age among their posterity, and become
the common name of all the kings of Palestine. The Hebrew word <span
id="xl-p5.1"></span>טעם, *taäm,* which I have translated *countenance,*
signifies also *tasting, understanding,*  <span
id="fr_684"></span>[685](#fn_684.md) and therefore might be pertinently
interpreted in this manner, that he appeared foolish and without taste.
The verb from which it is derived properly signifies *to taste,* and
therefore is often transferred to reason, understanding, and all the
senses. Accordingly, David having feigned himself mad, the term
*understanding* is very appropriate. Now, although he escaped by this
subtle device, he doubts not that he was delivered by the hand of God;
nor does he ascribe the praise of his safety to the pretense of madness,
but rather acknowledges that the cruelty of his enemy had been softened
by the secret influence of God, so that he who formerly burned with rage
against him had been pacified by an artifice. Certainly it was not to be
expected that Achish would have driven away in contempt from him so
brave a man, whom he had found a dangerous enemy to his whole kingdom,
and from whom he had suffered such severe losses. This gives rise to the
question, Whether David feigned himself mad under the guidance of the
Holy Spirit? For by his appearing to connect together these two things,
- the pretense of madness and the happy result of this pretense, it
might be inferred that the same Spirit by whom this psalm was dictated
suggested this stratagem  <span id="fr_685"></span>[686](#fn_685.md) to the
mind of David, and directed him in deceiving King Achish. I answer, that
although God sometimes delivers his people, while at the same time they
err in choosing the means, or even fall into sin in adopting them, yet
there is nothing inconsistent in this. The deliverance, therefore, was
the work of God, but the intermediate sin, which is on no account to be
excused, ought to be ascribed to David. In this way Jacob obtained the
blessing by the favor and good pleasure of God; and yet the subtlety of
the mother, with which the obtaining of it was mixed up, was, we know,
sinful on her part. It may then sometimes happen that the event shall be
brought to pass by the Spirit of God, and yet the saints whom he may
employ as instruments shall swerve from the path of duty. It would
therefore be a superfluous task to endeavor to exculpate David, who is
rather to be blamed, because, by not committing his life entirely to
God, he exposed himself and the grace of the Spirit, by whom he was
governed, to the derision of the ungodly. I would not positively assert
it, but there appears in this deception some token of infirmity. If it
should be said that David here magnifies the grace of God, because by
changing his countenance and his speech he escaped death, I again reply,
that David expressly mentions this circumstance, in order to render the
grace of God still more illustrious, in that his fault was not laid to
his charge.

<span id="xl.i"></span>

<span id="xl.i-p1"></span><span id="xl.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
34:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#001.md)<span id="xl.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xl.i-p2"></span>**1.** I will bless Jehovah at all times: his
praise shall always be in my mouth. **2.** My soul shall make her boast
in Jehovah: the humble shall hear of it, and be glad. **3.** Magnify
Jehovah with me, and let us exalt his name together. **4.** I sought
Jehovah, and he answered me, and delivered me from all my fears. **5.**
They shall look to him, and shall flow to him; and their faces shall not
be ashamed. **6.** This poor man cried, and Jehovah heard him, and
delivered him from all his troubles.

<span id="xl.i-p3"></span> 

<span id="xl.i-p4"></span><span id="xl.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xl.i-p5"></span>**1.** *I will bless Jehovah at all times.*
 <span id="fr_686"></span>[687](#fn_686.md) David here extols the greatness
of God, promising to keep in remembrance during his whole life the
goodness which he had bestowed upon him. God assists his people daily,
that they may continually employ themselves in praising him; yet it is
certain that the blessing which is said to be worthy of everlasting
remembrance is distinguished by this mark from other benefits which are
ordinary and common. This, therefore, is a rule which should be observed
by the saints — they should often call into remembrance whatever good
has been bestowed upon them by God; but if at any time he should display
his power more illustriously in preserving them from some danger, so
much the more does it become them earnestly to testify their gratitude.
Now if by one benefit alone God lays us under obligation to himself all
our life, so that we may never lawfully cease from setting forth his
praises, how much more when he heaps upon us innumerable benefits?
 <span id="fr_687"></span>[688](#fn_687.md) In order to distinguish the
praise which he had before said would be continually in his mouth from
the empty sound of the tongue, in which many hypocrites boast, he adds,
in the beginning of the second verse, that it would proceed from the
heart.

<span id="xl.i-p8"></span><span id="xl.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xl.i-p9"></span>**2.** *My soul shall make her boast in
Jehovah.* The term *soul* in this place signifies not the vital spirit,
but the seat of the affections; as if David had said, I shall always
have ground of boasting with my whole heart in God alone, so that I
shall never suffer myself to fall into forgetfulness of so great a
deliverance. In the second clause he specifies this as the fruit of his
thanksgiving, that the afflicted and miserable shall derive from it
ground of hope. The Hebrew word <span id="xl.i-p9.1"></span>ענוים,
*anavim,* which we have rendered *humble,* signifies not all the
afflicted  <span id="fr_688"></span>[689](#fn_688.md) in general, but those
who, being humbled and subdued by afflictions, instead of breathing the
spirit of pride, are cast down, and ready to abase themselves to the
very dust. These, he says, shall be partakers of his joy; but not, as
some have coldly explained it, simply from a feeling of sympathy, but
because, being persuaded that in the example of David, God had given
them a general testimony of his grace, their hearts would recover from
sorrow, and would be lifted up on high. Accordingly, he says that this
joy shall spring from hope, because, having received a pledge of their
deliverance, they shall cheerfully have recourse to God.

<span id="xl.i-p11"></span><span id="xl.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xl.i-p12"></span>**3.** *Magnify Jehovah with me.* The
Psalmist shows still another fruit which would be the result of his
giving thanks to God, namely, that he shall induce others by his example
to the same exercise of devotion; nay more, he calls upon all the godly
to unite with him in this exercise, inviting and exhorting them heartily
and with one consent to extol the Lord. Let us therefore learn, from the
many instances in which God may have given helps to any of his people,
to abound in hope; and when each recites the personal benefits which he
has received, let all be animated unitedly and in a public manner to
give praise to God. We give thanks publicly to God, not only that men
may be witnesses of our gratitude, but also that they may follow our
example.

<span id="xl.i-p13"></span><span id="xl.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xl.i-p14"></span>**4.** *I sought Jehovah, and he answered
me.* The Psalmist here explains more plainly and more fully what he had
said concerning joy. In the first place, he tells us that his prayers
had been heard. This he applies to all the godly, that, encouraged by a
testimony so precious, they might stir themselves up to prayer. What is
implied in *seeking God* is evident from the following clause. In some
places it is to be understood in a different sense, namely, to bend the
mind in earnest application to the service of God, and to have all its
thoughts directed to him. Here it simply means to have recourse to him
for help; for it immediately follows that God answered him; and he is
properly said to answer prayer and supplication. By *his fears* the
Psalmist means, taking the effect for the cause, the dangers which
sorely disquieted his mind; yet doubtless he confesses that he had been
terrified and agitated by fears. He did not look upon his dangers with a
calm and untroubled mind, as if he viewed them at a distance and from
some elevated position, but being grievously tormented with innumerable
cares, he might justly speak of his fears and terrors. Nay more, by the
use of the plural number, he shows that he had been greatly terrified
not only in one way, but that he had been distracted by a variety of
troubles. On the one hand, he saw a cruel death awaiting him; while on
the other, his mind may have been filled with fear, lest Achish should
send him to Saul for his gratification, as the ungodly are wont to make
sport to themselves of the children of God. And since he had already
been detected and betrayed once, he might well conclude, even if he
should escape, that the hired assassins of Saul would lay wait for him
on all sides. The hatred too which Achish had conceived against him,
both for the death of Goliath and the destruction of his own army, might
give rise to many fears; especially considering that his enemy might
instantly wreak his vengeance upon him, and that he had good reason to
think that his cruelty was such as would not be appeased by subjecting
him to some mild form of death.  <span id="fr_689"></span>[690](#fn_689.md)
We ought to mark this particularly, in order that, if at any time we are
terrified because of the dangers which surround us, we may not be
prevented by our effeminacy from calling upon God. Even David, who is
known to have surpassed others in heroism and bravery, had not such a
heart of iron as to repel all fears and alarms, but was sometimes
greatly disquieted and smitten with fear.

<span id="xl.i-p16"></span><span id="xl.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xl.i-p17"></span>**5.** *They shall look to him, and shall
flow to him.* I have already intimated, that this verse and the
following should be read in connection with the preceding verse. In
relating his own experience David has furnished an example to others,
that they should freely and without fear approach God in order to
present their prayers before him. Now, he says that they shall come, and
this too with a happy issue. The first two verbs are expressed in the
past time in the Hebrew; but I have, notwithstanding, no doubt that the
sentence ought to be explained thus: When they shall have looked to him,
and flowed to him, their faces shall not be ashamed. I have therefore
translated them in the future tense. David is not relating things which
had happened, but is commending the fruit of the favor which had been
manifested to himself. Some interpreters, I know, refer the words *to
him* to David,  <span id="fr_690"></span>[691](#fn_690.md) because
immediately after he speaks of himself in the third person. Others with
greater propriety explain it; of God himself. A difference of opinion
also exists as to the Hebrew verb <span id="xl.i-p18.1"></span>נהרו*,
naharu,* which some, supposing it to be derived from the root <span
id="xl.i-p18.2"></span>אור, *or,* render *to be enlightened.*  <span
id="fr_691"></span>[692](#fn_691.md) But, in my opinion, the natural
signification of the word appears very appropriate to this place; as if
he had said, There shall now be a mirror set forth, in which men may
behold the face of God serene and merciful; and therefore the poor and
afflicted shall henceforth dare to lift up their eyes to God, and to
resort to him with the utmost freedom, because no uncertainty shall any
longer retard them or render them slothful. If, however, any one should
prefer the word *enlighten,* the meaning will be, They who formerly
languished in darkness shall lift up their eyes to God, as if a light
had suddenly appeared unto them, and they who were cast down and
overwhelmed with shame, shall again clothe their countenances with
cheerfulness. But as the meaning in either case is substantially the
same, I am not much disposed to contend which of the two interpretations
ought to be preferred.

<span id="xl.i-p22"></span><span id="xl.i-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xl.i-p23"></span>**6.** *This poor man cried, and Jehovah
heard him.* David here introduces all the godly speaking of himself, the
more emphatically to express how much weight there is in his example to
encourage them. This poor man, say they, cried; therefore God invites
all the poor to cry to him. They contemplate in David what belongs to
the common benefit of all the godly; for God is as willing and ready at
this day to hear all the afflicted who direct their sighs, wishes, and
cries, to him with the same faith, as he was at that time to hear David.

<span id="xl.ii"></span>

<span id="xl.ii-p1"></span><span id="xl.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
34:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#007.md)<span id="xl.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xl.ii-p2"></span>**7.** The angel of Jehovah encampeth  <span
id="fr_692"></span>[693](#fn_692.md) round about them that fear him, and
will deliver them. **8.** Taste and see that Jehovah is good: blessed is
the man who trusteth in him. **9.** Fear Jehovah, ye his saints, for
there is no want to them that fear him. **10.** The young lions are
destitute and famished: but they who fear Jehovah shall not want any
good thing.

<span id="xl.ii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xl.ii-p5"></span><span id="xl.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xl.ii-p6"></span>**7.** *The angel of Jehovah encampeth round
about them that fear him.* David here discourses in general of God’s
fatherly favor towards all the godly; and as the life of man is exposed
to innumerable dangers, he at the same time teaches us that God is able
to deliver them. The faithful especially, who are as sheep in the midst
of wolves, beset as it were with death in every form, are constantly
harassed with the dread of some approaching danger. David therefore
affirms, that the servants of God are protected and defended by angels.
The design of the Psalmist is to show, that although the faithful are
exposed to many dangers, yet they may rest assured that God will be the
faithful guardian of their life. But in order to confirm them the more
in this hope, he adds at the same time, and not without reason, that
those whom God would preserve in safety he defends by the power and
ministration of angels. The power of God alone would indeed be
sufficient of itself to perform this; but in mercy to our infirmity he
vouchsafes to employ angels as his ministers. It serves not a little for
the confirmation of our faith to know that God has innumerable legions
of angels who are always ready for his service as often as he is pleased
to aid us; nay, more, that the angels too, who are called principalities
and powers, are ever intent upon the preservation of our life, because
they know that this duty is intrusted to them. God is indeed designated
with propriety the wall of his Church, and every kind of fortress and
place of defense  <span id="fr_693"></span>[694](#fn_693.md) to her; but in
accommodation to the measure and extent of our present imperfect state,
he manifests the presence of his power to aid us through the
instrumentality of his angels. Moreover, what the Psalmist here says of
one angel in the singular number, ought to be applied to all the other
angels: for they are distinguished by the general appellation of

<span id="xl.ii-p8"></span>“ministering spirits sent forth to minister
to them who shall be the heirs of salvation,” (<span
id="xl.ii-p8.1"></span>[Heb 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#014.md)<span
id="xl.ii-p8.1"></span>;)

<span id="xl.ii-p9"></span>and the Scriptures in other places teach us,
that whenever it pleases God, and whenever he knows it to be for their
benefit, many angels are appointed to take care of each of his people,
(<span id="xl.ii-p9.1"></span>[2Ki
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#015.md)<span id="xl.ii-p9.1"></span>;
<span id="xl.ii-p9.2"></span>[Ps
91:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#011.md)<span id="xl.ii-p9.2"></span>;
<span id="xl.ii-p9.3"></span>[Lu
16:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#022)<span id="xl.ii-p9.3"></span>..md)
The amount then of what has been said is, that however great the number
of our enemies and the dangers by which we are surrounded may be, yet
the angels of God, armed with invincible power, constantly watch over
us, and array themselves on every side to aid and deliver us from all
evil.

<span id="xl.ii-p10"></span><span id="xl.ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xl.ii-p11"></span>**8.** *Taste and see that Jehovah is good.*
In this verse the Psalmist indirectly reproves men for their dulness in
not perceiving the goodness of God, which ought to be to them more than
matter of simple knowledge. By the word *taste* he at once shows that
they are without taste; and at the same time he assigns the reason of
this to be, that they devour the gifts of God without relishing them, or
through a vitiated loathing ungratefully conceal them. He, therefore,
calls upon them to stir up their senses, and to bring a palate endued
with some capacity of tasting, that God’s goodness may become known to
them, or rather, be made manifest to them. The words literally rendered
are, *Taste and see, for the Lord is good;* but the particle <span
id="xl.ii-p11.1"></span>כי, *ki*, *for,* is taken exegetically. David’s
meaning, therefore, is, that there is nothing on the part of God to
prevent the godly, to whom he particularly speaks in this place, from
arriving at the knowledge of his goodness by actual experience. From
this it follows, that they also are infected with the common malady of
dulness. This doctrine is confirmed by the promise immediately added,
*Blessed is the man who trusteth in him;* for God never disappoints the
expectations of those who seek his favor. Our own unbelief is the only
impediment which prevents him from satisfying us largely and bountifully
with abundance of all good things.

<span id="xl.ii-p12"></span><span id="xl.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xl.ii-p13"></span>**9.** *Fear Jehovah, ye his saints.* Here
the people of God are exhorted to the pursuit of holiness and
righteousness, that they may open up a channel for divine blessings. We
know that men are accustomed to provide for their wants, by resorting to
fraud, plunder, and even to wrongful violence. Nor is it possible but
that the faithful must feel some stirrings of a desire to imitate the
wicked, and envy them in some degree in their prosperity, so that they
permit themselves sometimes to howl among the wolves. And although they
voluntarily abstain from all wrongful *violence,* yet the common way of
living among those around them carries them away like a tempest; and, in
the meantime, they think that the plea of necessity is sufficient to
excuse them. David represses, as with a bridle, these temptations,
promising that all will be well with the people of God, provided they
keep themselves in the fear of God, which he opposes to all wicked and
deceitful counsels; because the greater part of men reckon those to be
fools who aim at simplicity, since in so doing they do not consult their
own interests and profit. While, therefore, ungodly men are afraid of
poverty, and carnal reason urges them to attempt whatever their fancy
may suggest for keeping themselves from it, David here testifies that
God takes care of the godly, so that he never suffers them to be in
want. Let no fear or distrust, says he, withdraw you from the pursuit of
what is right, because God never forsakes those who walk righteously
before him. The Psalmist, therefore, bids them yield to God the honor of
expecting more from him alone than the wicked expect from their
deceitful traffic and unlawful practices. Moreover, as iniquity rages
with unbridled fury everywhere throughout the world, he calls expressly
upon the saints to be on their guard, because he would be of no service
to the promiscuous multitude. It is a sentiment contrary to the
generally received opinion among men, that while the integrity of the
good and simple is exposed to the will of the wicked, there should yet
be greater security in integrity than in all the resources of fraud and
injustice. There is, therefore, no inconsistency in his admonishing the
saints who, of their own accord, are endeavoring to walk uprightly, not
to depart from the fear of God; for we know how easily the light of
piety may be obscured and extinguished, when there appears no hope of
living happily and prosperously, except in the pursuit of the world and
its enticing pleasures.

<span id="xl.ii-p14"></span><span id="xl.ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xl.ii-p15"></span>The Psalmist illustrates this doctrine by a
very apposite comparison, namely, that God provides every thing
necessary for his people, and relieves their wants, whilst the lions,
which surpass in ferocity all the wild beasts of the earth, prowl about
in a famishing condition for their prey. Some think, that under the name
of *lions,* those men who are addicted to violence and plunder are
metaphorically described; but this, in my opinion, is too refined. David
simply asserts, that those who guard against all unrighteousness should
profit more by so doing than by rapine and plunder; because the Lord
feeds his people, while even the lions and other beasts of prey often
suffer hunger. What he says, then, is, that sooner shall the lions
perish with hunger and want, than God will disappoint of their necessary
food the righteous and sincere, who, content with his blessing alone,
seek their food only from his hand. Whoever, therefore, shall in this
way cast his cares upon God, and confide implicitly in his paternal
goodness and bounty, shall live quietly and peaceably among men, and
suffer no injury. If it is objected, that the good and the virtuous are
not always exempted from penury, I answer, that the hand of God is
stretched out to succor them in due season, when they are reduced to the
greatest straits, and know not to what side to turn,  <span
id="fr_694"></span>[695](#fn_694.md) so that the issue always shows that we
seek not in vain from him whatever is necessary to the sustenance of
life.

<span id="xl.iii"></span>

<span id="xl.iii-p1"></span><span id="xl.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
34:11-14](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#011.md)<span id="xl.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xl.iii-p2"></span>**11.** Come, children, hearken unto me, I
will teach you the fear of Jehovah. **12.** Who is the man who desireth
life, loving days in which he may see good? **13.** Keep thy tongue from
evil, and thy lips from speaking deceit. **14.** Turn away from evil,
and do good; seek peace, and pursue it.

<span id="xl.iii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xl.iii-p4"></span><span id="xl.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xl.iii-p5"></span>**11.** *Come, children,*  <span
id="fr_695"></span>[696](#fn_695.md) *hearken unto me.* The Psalmist
continues, with increased earnestness, to exhort the faithful, that they
may know that nothing can be more profitable for them than to conduct
themselves justly and harmlessly towards all men. As the greater part of
men imagine that the best and the shortest way to attain a life of
happiness and ease consists in striving to surpass other men in
violence, fraud, injustice, and other means of mischief, it is necessary
frequently to repeat this doctrine. Moreover, as it is necessary that
the minds of men should be brought to a chastened and humble state, by
calling them *his children,* he endeavors, by this gentle and courteous
appellation, to allay all froward affections. None will stand unmoved
amidst so many assaults, but those who have been endued by the Spirit of
meekness with the greatest modesty. The prophet, therefore, tells them
at the outset, that the rule of life which he prescribes can be observed
and obeyed by those only who are meek and submissive. To the same
purpose is the word *come,* and the command *to hearken;* and they
imply, that men laying aside all wilfulness of spirit, and having
subdued the ardor and impetuosity of their minds, should become docile
and meek. He has put *the fear of the Lord* for the rule of a pious and
holy life: as if he had said, Whilst virtue and righteousness are in
every man’s mouth, there are few who lead a holy life, and live as they
ought; because they know not what it is to serve God.

<span id="xl.iii-p7"></span><span id="xl.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xl.iii-p8"></span>**12.** *Who is the man who desireth life?*
The prophet does not inquire if there be any man so disposed, as if all
men voluntarily brought upon themselves the miseries which befall them;
for we know that all men without exception desire to live in the
enjoyment of happiness. But he censures severely the blindness and folly
which men exhibit in the frowardness of their desires, and the vanity of
their endeavors to obtain happiness; for while all men are seeking, and
eagerly intent upon acquiring what is for their profit, there will be
found scarcely one in a hundred who studies to purchase peace, and a
quiet and desirable state of life, by just and equitable means. The
prophet therefore admonishes his disciples, that nearly the whole world
are deceived and led astray by their own folly, while they promise
themselves a happy life from any other source than the divine blessing,
which God bestows only upon the sincere and upright in heart. But there
is in this exclamation still greater vehemence, the more effectually to
awaken dull and drowsy minds to the course of this world; as if he had
said, Since all men earnestly desire happiness, how comes it to pass,
that scarcely any one sets himself to obtain it, and that every man, by
his own fault, rather brings upon himself various troubles?

<span id="xl.iii-p9"></span><span id="xl.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xl.iii-p10"></span>**13.** *Keep thy tongue from evil* The
precept which David here delivers relates to a virtue which is very
rare, namely, that we should be truthful and free from deceit in our
discourse. Some, indeed, understand it in a much more extended sense,
supposing that slander is condemned in this first clause. But it seems
to me more simple, and more to the purpose, to understand this as of the
same import with what he repeats in the second clause, that we should
not speak *deceitfully* with our neighbors, so as that our words may
prove the means of ensnaring them. And since nothing is more difficult
than to regulate our discourse in such a manner as that our speech may
be a true representation of our hearts, David calls upon us to exercise
over it a strict and watchful control, not suffering it to run riot,
lest it should prove the occasion of our deceiving others.

<span id="xl.iii-p11"></span><span id="xl.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xl.iii-p12"></span>**14.** *Turn away from evil, and do good.*
Here the Psalmist commands the children of God to abstain from all evil,
and to devote themselves to the work of doing good to their neighbors.
This verse is generally quoted as if David here treated of the two parts
of repentance. The first step in the work of repentance is, that the
sinner forsake the vices to which he is addicted, and renounce his
former manner of life; and the second, that he frame his behavior
according to righteousness. But in this place we are more especially
taught how we ought to deal with our neighbors. As it often happens,
that the man who is not only liberal, but also prodigal towards some,
or, at least, helps many by acts of kindness, wrongs others by
defrauding and injuring them, David, with much propriety, begins by
saying, that those who desire to have their life approved before God,
ought to abstain from doing evil. On the other hand, since many think,
that provided they have neither defrauded, nor wronged, nor injured any
man, they have discharged the duty which God requires from them, he has
added, with equal propriety, the other precept concerning doing good to
our neighbors. It is not the will of God that his servants should be
idle, but rather that they should aid one another, desiring each other’s
welfare and prosperity, and promoting it as far as in them lies. David
next inculcates the duty of maintaining peace: *Seek peace, and pursue
it.* Now we know that this is maintained by gentleness and forbearance.
But as we have often to do with men of a fretful, or factious, or
stubborn spirit, or with such as are always ready to stir up strife upon
the slightest occasion; and as also many wicked persons irritate us; and
as others by their own wickedness alienate, as much as in them lies, the
minds of good men from them, and others industriously strive to find
grounds of contention; he teaches us not merely that we ought to seek
peace, but if at any time it shall seem to flee from us, he bids us use
our every effort without ceasing in pursuing it. This, however, must be
understood with some limitation. It will often happen, that when good
and humble men have done every thing in their power to secure peace, so
far from softening the hearts of the wicked, or inclining them to
uprightness, they rather excite their malice. Their impiety, also, often
constrains us to separate from them, and to avoid them; nay, when they
defy God, by proclaiming, as it were, open war against him, it would be
disloyalty and treason on our part not to oppose and resist them. But
here David means only that in our own personal affairs we should be meek
and condescending, and endeavor, as far as in us lies, to maintain
peace, though its maintenance should prove to us a source of much
trouble and inconvenience.

<span id="xl.iv"></span>

<span id="xl.iv-p1"></span><span id="xl.iv-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
15](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#000.md)<span id="xl.iv-p1.1"></span>-17

<span id="xl.iv-p2"></span>**15.** The eyes of Jehovah are upon the
righteous, and his ears are open to their cry. **16.** The face of
Jehovah  <span id="fr_696"></span>[697](#fn_696.md) is upon them that do
evil, to cut off their remembrance from the earth. **17.** They cried,
and Jehovah heard them, and delivered them from all their troubles.

<span id="xl.iv-p4"></span> 

<span id="xl.iv-p5"></span><span id="xl.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xl.iv-p6"></span>**15.** *The eyes of Jehovah are upon the
righteous.* The best support of our patience is a firm persuasion that
God regards us, and that according as every man perseveres in a course
of uprightness and equity, so shall he be preserved in peace and safety
under his protection. In order, therefore, that the faithful may not
think that they are exposed to the caprice of the world, while they are
endeavoring to keep themselves innocent, and that they may not, under
the influence of this fear, go astray from the right path, David exhorts
them to reflect upon the providence of God, and to rest assured that
they are safe under his wings. He says, then, that *the eyes of the Lord
are upon the righteous,* to preserve them, in order that the good and
simple may persevere the more cheerfully in their uprightness. At the
same time, he encourages them to supplication and prayer, if at any time
the world should unjustly persecute them. In saying that *the ears of
the Lord are open to their cry,* he teaches that the man who is wantonly
and unjustly persecuted, will find a ready and suitable remedy in all
afflictions, by calling upon God as his avenger. On the other hand, he
declares, that although God sometimes appears to wink at the misdeeds of
men, and seems to overlook them, because he does not inflict immediate
punishment upon them, yet nothing escapes his inspection. Whilst the
wicked, says he, by reason of their impunity harden themselves in sin,
God is watching, that he may *cut off their remembrance from the earth,*
(<span id="xl.iv-p6.1"></span>[1Pe
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#010)<span id="xl.iv-p6.1"></span>..md) He
speaks particularly of this kind of punishment, because the ungodly not
only expect that they shall be happy during their whole life, but also
imagine that they shall enjoy immortality in this world. Peter, in his
First Epistle,  <span id="fr_697"></span>[698](#fn_697.md) applies this
passage very judiciously, for the purpose of assuaging our sorrows and
appeasing our impatience, as often as the pride and arrogance of the
wicked may carry us beyond due limits. Nothing is more useful for
preserving our moderation than to depend upon God’s help, and having the
testimony of a good conscience, to rely upon his judgment. If it is
objected, that good men experience the contrary, who, after having been
long afflicted, at length find no help or comfort; I reply, that the aid
which God affords to the righteous is not always made manifest, nor
bestowed in the same measure; and yet he so alleviates their troubles as
never to forsake them. Besides, even the best of men often deprive
themselves of the help of God; for scarcely one in a hundred perseveres
in such a course of integrity as not, by his own fault, to deserve the
infliction of some evil upon himself. But as soon as they fall, lest sin
should take root in them, God chastises them, and often punishes them
more severely than the reprobate, whom he spares to utter destruction.
 <span id="fr_698"></span>[699](#fn_698.md) And yet, however much things
may appear to be mingled and confused in the world, good men will find
that God has not promised them help in vain against the violence and
injuries of the wicked.

<span id="xl.iv-p9"></span><span id="xl.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xl.iv-p10"></span>**17.** *They*  <span
id="fr_699"></span>[700](#fn_699.md) *cried, and Jehovah heard them.* The
Psalmist’s meaning is, that they are heard as often as they cry. This is
a doctrine applicable to all times; and David does not merely relate
what God has done once or twice, but what he is accustomed to do. It is
also a confirmation of the preceding sentence, where he had said that
the ears of the Lord are open to the cry of the righteous; for he now
demonstrates by the effect, that God is not deaf when we lay our
complaints and groanings before him. By the word *cry* we are taught,
that although God defend the righteous, they are not exempt from
adversity. He regulates the protection which he affords them in such a
wonderful manner, as that he notwithstanding exercises them by various
trials. In like manner, when we here see that deliverance is promised
only to those who call upon God, this ought to prove no small
encouragement to us to pray to him; for it is not his will that the
godly should so regard his providence as to indulge in idleness, but
rather that, being firmly persuaded that he is the guardian of their
safety, they should direct their prayers and supplications to him.

<span id="xl.v"></span>

<span id="xl.v-p1"></span><span id="xl.v-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
34:18-22](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#018.md)<span id="xl.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xl.v-p2"></span>**18.** Jehovah is nigh to those who are
broken of heart; he will save those who are bruised of spirit. **19.**
Many are the afflictions of the righteous; but Jehovah will deliver him
from them all. **20.** He keepeth all his bones: not one of them is
broken  <span id="fr_700"></span>[701](#fn_700.md) **21.** But malice shall
slay the wicked; and those who hate the righteous shall be destroyed.
**22.** Jehovah redeemeth the soul of his servants, and those who trust
in him shall not perish.

<span id="xl.v-p4"></span> 

<span id="xl.v-p5"></span><span id="xl.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xl.v-p6"></span>**18.** *Jehovah is nigh to those who are
broken of heart.* David here exemplifies and extends still more the
preceding doctrine, that God is the deliverer of his people, even when
they are brought very low, and when they are, as it were, half-dead. It
is a very severe trial, when the grace of God is delayed, and all
experience of it so far withdrawn, as that our spirits begin to fail;
nay more, to say that God is nigh to the faithful, even when their
hearts faint and fall them, and they are ready to die, is altogether
incredible to human sense and reason. But by this means his power shines
forth more clearly, when he raises us up again from the grave. Moreover,
it is meet that the faithful should be thus utterly cast down and
afflicted, that they may breathe again in God alone. From this we also
learn, that nothing is more opposed to true patience than the loftiness
of heart of which the Stoics boast; for we are not accounted truly
humbled until true affliction of heart has abased us before God, so
that, having prostrated ourselves in the dust before him, he may raise
us up. It is a doctrine full of the sweetest consolation, that God
departs not from us, even when we are overwhelmed by a succession of
miseries, and, as it were, almost deprived of life.

<span id="xl.v-p7"></span><span id="xl.v-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xl.v-p8"></span>**19.** *Many are the afflictions of the
righteous.* The Psalmist here anticipates the thought which often arises
in the mind, “How can it be that God has a care about the righteous, who
are continually harassed with so many calamities and trials? for what
purpose does the protection of God serve, unless those who are peaceably
inclined enjoy peace and repose? and what is more unreasonable, than
that those who cause trouble to no one should themselves be tormented
and afflicted in all variety of ways?” That, therefore, the temptations
by which we are continually assailed may not shake our belief in the
providence of God, we ought to remember this lesson of instruction, that
although God governs the righteous, and provides for their safety, they
are yet subject and exposed to many miseries, that, being tested by such
trials, they may give evidence of their invincible constancy, and
experience so much the more that God is their deliverer. If they were
exempted from every kind of trial, their faith would languish, they
would cease to call upon God, and their piety would remain hidden and
unknown. It is, therefore, necessary that they should be exercised with
various trials, and especially for this end, that they may acknowledge
that they have been wonderfully preserved by God amidst numberless
deaths. If this should seldom happen, it might appear to be fortuitous,
or the result of chance; but when innumerable and interminable evils
come upon them in succession, the grace of God cannot be unknown, when
he always stretches forth his hand to them. David, therefore, admonishes
the faithful never to lose their courage, whatever evils may threaten
them; since God, who can as easily deliver them a thousand times as once
from death, will never disappoint their expectation. What he adds
concerning *their bones,* seems not a little to illustrate the truth of
this doctrine, and to teach us that those who are protected by God shall
be free from all danger. He therefore declares, that God will take care
that not one of their bones shall be broken; in which sense Christ also
says, that

<span id="xl.v-p9"></span>“the very hairs of our head are all numbered,”
(<span id="xl.v-p9.1"></span>[Lu
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#007)<span id="xl.v-p9.1"></span>..md)

<span id="xl.v-p10"></span><span id="xl.v-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xl.v-p11"></span>**21.** *But malice shall slay the wicked.*
The Hebrew word <span id="xl.v-p11.1"></span>רעה, *raäh,* which I have
translated *malice,* some would rather render *misery,* so that the
meaning would be, that the ungodly shall perish miserably, because in
the end they shall be overwhelmed with calamities. The other
translation, however, is more expressive, namely, that their wickedness,
with which they think themselves fortified, shall fall upon their own
heads. As David therefore taught before, that there was no defense
better than a just and blameless life, so now he declares, that all the
wicked enterprises of the wicked, even though no one should in any thing
oppose them, shall turn to their own destruction. In the second clause
of the verse he states, that it is for the sake of the righteous that it
is ordered, that the ungodly are themselves the cause and instruments of
their own destruction. *Those,* says he, *who hate the righteous shall
be destroyed* Let this, therefore, be to us as a wall of brass and sure
defense; that however numerous the enemies which beset us may be, we
should not be afraid, because they are already devoted to destruction.
The same thing David confirms in the last verse, in which he says, that
*Jehovah redeems the soul of his servants* How could they be preserved
in safety, even for a moment, among so many dangers, unless God
interposed his power for their defense? But by the word *redeem* there
is expressed a kind of preservation which is repugnant to the flesh. For
it is necessary that we should first be adjudged or doomed to death,
before God should appear as our redeemer. From this it follows, that
those who hurry forward too precipitately, and are unable to realize
God’s power unless he appear speedily, working deliverance for them,
intercept the communication of his grace. Moreover, that none might form
their judgment of the servants of God by moral or philosophic virtue
only, as it is called, David specifies this as a principal mark by which
they may be known, that they trust in God, on whom also their salvation
depends.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_682"></span>[683](cc08039.htm#fr_682.md) <span
id="xl-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xl-p4"></span> It should be <span id="xl-p4.1"></span>[1 Sam.
21:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1021.htm#011.md),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1021.htm#012.md)<span id="xl-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_683"></span>[684](cc08039.htm#fr_683.md) <span
id="xl-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xl-p5"></span> Achish may have been his particular name, while
Abimelech was the common title of the Kings of Gath. The word
*Abimelech* signifies *Father* — *King.*

<span id="fn_684"></span>[685](cc08039.htm#fr_684.md) <span
id="xl-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xl-p6"></span> *Ainsworth* reads, *His behavior,* or *his
sense, reason;* and observes, that it is “properly *the taste,* as in
verse 9, <span id="xl-p6.1"></span>[Job
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#006.md)<span id="xl-p6.1"></span>, and
often elsewhere, which is used both for one’s in ward sense or reason,
and outward gesture and demeanour, (as the Gr. here translateth it,
*face,)* because by it a man is discerned and judged to be wise or
foolish, as meats are discerned by the taste.”

<span id="fn_685"></span>[686](cc08039.htm#fr_685.md) <span
id="xl-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xl-p7"></span> “<span id="xl-p7.1"></span>Luy melt aussi au
coeur ceste finesse.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_686"></span>[687](cc08039.htm#fr_686.md) <span
id="xl.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xl.i-p6"></span> “That is, in all circumstances; in every
posture of my affairs.” — *Horsley.*

<span id="fn_687"></span>[688](cc08039.htm#fr_687.md) <span
id="xl.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xl.i-p7"></span> “<span id="xl.i-p7.1"></span>Quand il ne
cesse de nous bien-faire?” — *Fr.* “When he never ceases from doing us
good?”

<span id="fn_688"></span>[689](cc08039.htm#fr_688.md) <span
id="xl.i-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xl.i-p10"></span> The word <span id="xl.i-p10.1"></span>ענוים,
*anavim,* may also be rendered *the afflicted.* Our author in his
exposition combines both the ideas of *humble* and *afflicted.*

<span id="fn_689"></span>[690](cc08039.htm#fr_689.md) <span
id="xl.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xl.i-p15"></span> “<span id="xl.i-p15.1"></span>Et qu’il avoit
bien occasion de penser que la cruaute d’iceluy ne se pourroit pas
appaiser a le faire mourir de quelque legere mort.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_690"></span>[691](cc08039.htm#fr_690.md) <span
id="xl.i-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xl.i-p18"></span> Those who take this view explain the words
as meaning that the humble or afflicted, upon looking to David, saw how
graciously God had dealt with him, and were enlightened, revived, and
encouraged. They also consider, as Calvin himself does, the humble or
afflicted as the persons who speak in the sixth verse, where, pointing
as it were with the finger to David, they say, “This poor man cried,”
etc.

<span id="fn_691"></span>[692](cc08039.htm#fr_691.md) <span
id="xl.i-p18.3"></span>

<span id="xl.i-p19"></span> This is the rendering adopted by *Horsley*,
who understands by the expression the illumination of the soul by the
light of Divine truth. He reads the verb in the imperative mood, and his
translation of the entire verse is as follows:

<span id="xl.i-p20"></span>“Look towards him, and thou shalt be
enlightened;  
And your faces shall never be ashamed.”

<span id="xl.i-p21"></span>This reading is sanctioned by the Septuagint.
It supposes two alterations on the text. First, that instead of <span
id="xl.i-p21.1"></span>הביטו*, they looked,* we should read <span
id="xl.i-p21.2"></span>הביטו, *habitu, look ye;* and this last reading
is supported by several of *Dr Kennicott’s* and *De Rossi’s* MSS. The
other alteration is, that instead of <span
id="xl.i-p21.3"></span>ופניהש*, upeneyhem, their faces,* we should read
<span id="xl.i-p21.4"></span>ופניכש*, upeneykem, your faces. Poole*, in
defense of reading *your* instead of *their,* observes, “that the change
of persons is very frequent in this book.”

<span id="fn_692"></span>[693](cc08039.htm#fr_692.md) <span
id="xl.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xl.ii-p3"></span> This description seems to have been
suggested by Jacob’s vision of angels, recorded in <span
id="xl.ii-p3.1"></span>[Gen. 32:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#001.md),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#002.md)<span id="xl.ii-p3.1"></span>, “And
Jacob went on his way, and the angels of God met him. And when Jacob saw
them he said, This is God’s host; and he called the name of that place
Mahanaim,” *(i.e., encampments.)*

<span id="fn_693"></span>[694](cc08039.htm#fr_693.md) <span
id="xl.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xl.ii-p7"></span> “<span id="xl.ii-p7.1"></span>Toute sorte de
forteresse et lieu de defense.” — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_694"></span>[695](cc08039.htm#fr_694.md) <span
id="xl.ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xl.ii-p16"></span> “<span id="xl.ii-p16.1"></span>Et ne
s’avent plus de quel cost a se tourner.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_695"></span>[696](cc08039.htm#fr_695.md) <span
id="xl.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xl.iii-p6"></span> By this affectionate appellation, Hebrew
teachers were wont to address their scholars.

<span id="fn_696"></span>[697](cc08039.htm#fr_696.md) <span
id="xl.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xl.iv-p3"></span> That is, the anger of God. The *face* of God
is often put for the *anger* of God, because this passion manifests
itself particularly in the face. Thus in <span
id="xl.iv-p3.1"></span>[La 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#016.md)<span
id="xl.iv-p3.1"></span>, we read, “The anger \[literally *faces*\] of
the Lord hath divided them.” And in <span id="xl.iv-p3.2"></span>[Le
20:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#003.md)<span id="xl.iv-p3.2"></span>, we
read, “I will set my face \[that is, *my anger*\] against that man.”

<span id="fn_697"></span>[698](cc08039.htm#fr_697.md) <span
id="xl.iv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xl.iv-p7"></span> In his First Epistle, (<span
id="xl.iv-p7.1"></span>[1 Pet. 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#010.md),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#011.md),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#012)<span id="xl.iv-p7.1"></span>,.md) he
quotes the 12, 13, 14, 15, and 16 verses of this psalm. He quotes from
the Septuagint.

<span id="fn_698"></span>[699](cc08039.htm#fr_698.md) <span
id="xl.iv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xl.iv-p8"></span> “<span id="xl.iv-p8.1"></span>Lesquels il
espargne pour un temps, afin de les ruiner eternellement.” — “Whom he
spares for a time, to destroy them eternally.” — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_699"></span>[700](cc08039.htm#fr_699.md) <span
id="xl.iv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xl.iv-p11"></span> It is wicked men who are spoken of in the
immediately preceding verse; but *they* here evidently refers not to
them, but to the righteous, mentioned in the fifteenth verse; and,
accordingly, in all the ancient versions, and in our English Bible, the
words *the righteous* are supplied. It is supposed by those who make
this supplement, that the word <span id="xl.iv-p11.1"></span>צדיקים,
*tsaddikim,* has been lost out of the text. But if we read the 16th
verse as a parenthesis, it will not be necessary to make any supplement,
and the words may be read exactly as they are in the Hebrew, *They
cried.*

<span id="fn_700"></span>[701](cc08039.htm#fr_700.md) <span
id="xl.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xl.v-p3"></span> The last clause of this verse is applied in
the Gospel of John (<span id="xl.v-p3.1"></span>[Joh
19:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#036)<span id="xl.v-p3.1"></span>.md) to
Christ, and represented as receiving its fulfillment in him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 35](cc08040.md)
