[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe24079)  [Next](sbe24081) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402156081/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Pahlavi Texts, Part III (SBE24)*, E.W. West, tr. \[1885\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

### CHAPTER X.

1\. Another subject is about the deliberating of the deliberators on
unity, from which even the preparation of the duality is manifested.

2\. It should be known, that whoever wishes to understand a creator,
except when he gives trouble to his own life, (3) should meditate
reverently <span id="fr_799"></span>[1](#fn_791). 4. First, he fully
understands his own body and soul, (5) that is, who produced *them*, out
of what, and for what purpose? 6. Also, who is his accuser and
adversary; (7) and who is his friend and helper? 8. Likewise, who
instigates him to commit crime, (9) of what nature *is he*, (10) and how
is it possible to escape him?

11\. Then *he* is not able to understand him <span
id="fr_800"></span>[2](#fn_792) *as* the creator through his nature and
his coming to himself. 12. For when he bore the name of creator, then,
with it, he brought these three creations <span
id="fr_801"></span>[3](#fn_793):—(13) creation, religion, and soul. 14.
Because the name of creator is known from the occurrence of creation.
15. This *implies* that the creator of the creation created the
creations for duty, (16) but does not release *them* from duty. 17. And
the duty of the creatures is to understand *and* perform the will of the
creator, (18) *and* to abstain from *what is* disliked *by him*. 19. To
act by the will of the creator, and to abstain from *what is* disliked
by him, is to preserve the soul. 20. The will of the creator is not
understood,

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

except from the religion of the creator. 21. *And* the religion is
appointed by the creator free from doubt.

22\. Now it is expedient to know that the sacred being appointed the
religion for the understanding of his will, (23) and from the
understanding of his will for the preservation of the soul are
manifested the compassion and mercifulness of the sacred being. 24. From
the preservativeness of the religion for the soul are manifested the
grandeur and valuableness of the religion; (25) from the necessity of
preserving the soul are manifested the defilement and delusion <span
id="fr_802"></span>[1](#fn_794) of the soul; (26) *and* from the
defilement and delusion of the soul is manifested a defiler and deluder
of the thoughts, words, *and* deeds of mankind. 27. On the whole a
corrupter of souls is manifest.

28\. And now it is expedient for us to well recognise <span
id="fr_803"></span>[2](#fn_795) and know, as to that defiler who is a
corrupter of souls, of what nature *he is*. 29. Because, if the creation
*and* achievement of the sacred being are said *to be* of a like nature,
then how did the sacred being appoint the religion for the preservation
of the soul? 30. That is not expedient for him—*if* a defiler and
deluder of souls—to produce <span id="fr_804"></span>[3](#fn_796) as his
own creation and will <span id="fr_805"></span>[4](#fn_797). 31. For if
he be himself the creator, and be himself the defiler and corrupter of
souls, *and* nothing occurs except by his will, (32)

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

then, when it is necessary for us to write of preservation from the
sacred being <span id="fr_806"></span>[1](#fn_798), whom *shall* we make
*as* a refuge <span id="fr_807"></span>[2](#fn_799)?

33\. Now it is necessary *for* every intelligent person to understand
*and* to know thus much, (34) that is, from whom it is necessary for us
to flee and to abstain, (35) and with whom is the hope, and with whom
the maintenance, of our protection. 36. The method for this acquisition
is nothing else but to understand the sacred being in *his* nature, (37)
because, as I wrote above <span id="fr_808"></span>[3](#fn_800), *it* is
not only to know *his* existence, but it is necessary to understand
*his* nature and his will.

38\. And I *have* observed, in the world, the sectarian belief of all
maintainers of sects who hold \[the two fundamental *doctrines*\] <span
id="fr_809"></span>[4](#fn_801). 39. One is that which asserts that all
the good and evil, which are in the world, are owing to the sacred
being. 40. *And* one is that which asserts that all the good of the
world, besides the hope of preserving the soul, is owing to the sacred
being; (41) and the cause of all evil of the body, besides the risk of
the soul, is owing to Aharman; (42) *and* all *things* have started from
appointment *by* these two origins into various formations *and* various
subdivisions.

43\. Now I have been an enquirer everywhere, for understanding the
sacred being, as written above <span id="fr_810"></span>[5](#fn_802),

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

fervent-minded in the investigation of his religion and will; (44) as
likewise I have wandered, for the sake of investigation, to the region
without and the land of the Hindûs, and *to* many different races. 45.
Because, *as to* religion, I did not admire that which *was* in
supremacy <span id="fr_811"></span>[1](#fn_803), (46) but *I* sought
that which *was* more steadfast and more acceptable in wisdom and
testimony. 47. I went also into association with many different races,
(48) until a time (49) when, owing to the compassion of the sacred
beings, and the strength, glory, and power of the good religion, I
escaped from much gloomy depth and ill-solvable doubt.

50\. By the united power of knowledge of the religion (51) and the
well-reflecting writing of the wise, (52) the marvellous
allegorical <span id="fr_812"></span>[2](#fn_804) writings of the
learned Âtûr-pâ*d*îyâvand <span id="fr_813"></span>[3](#fn_805), (53)
and by that writing which the glorified Rôshan <span
id="fr_814"></span>[4](#fn_806), son of Âtûr-frôbag, prepared—(54) for
which he appointed the name of the Rôshan manuscript (nipîk)—(55) *and*
likewise that *for* which the supremely learned *and* righteous
Âtûr-frôbag <span id="fr_815"></span>[5](#fn_807), son of Farukh-zâ*d*,
(56) who *was* the

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

leader of those of the good religion, (57) appointed the name of the
Dînka*rd* manuscript—owing to *its* explaining the religion <span
id="fr_816"></span>[1](#fn_808)—(58) I am saved from the many doubts,
delusions, deceits, and follies of sects, (59) and, especially, from
those of the deceivers, the very great *and* very mighty, very
evil-teaching *and* empty-skulled <span id="fr_817"></span>[2](#fn_809)
Manicheans <span id="fr_818"></span>[3](#fn_810), (60) whose devotion is
witchcraft, *whose* religion is deceitfulness, and *whose* teaching is
folly and intricate secret proceedings.

61\. I have been deliberately confirmed by the power of wisdom and the
strength of knowledge of the religion, (62) not through obstinate
faith <span id="fr_819"></span>[4](#fn_811), but by the pure revelation
opposed to the demon <span id="fr_820"></span>[5](#fn_812), which is the
decision of Aûha*r*ma*zd* (63) that *was* taught by the creator
Aûha*r*ma*zd* to the righteous Zaratû*s*t <span
id="fr_821"></span>[6](#fn_813).

64\. Zaratû*s*t came alone, on a true mission, to the lofty portal of
Kaî Gu*s*tâsp <span id="fr_822"></span>[7](#fn_814), (65) and the
religion was taught by him, with a powerful tongue, to Kaî Gu*s*tâsp and
the learned, through the speech of wisdom, through manual gestures,
through definite words, through explanation of many doubts, and through
presentation of the visible testimony of the

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

archangels, *together* with many miracles. 66. And a greatness in power
which is not the destiny of worldly existences was theirs who saw him of
the vehement guardian spirit. 67. And Kaî Spend-dâ*d* <span
id="fr_823"></span>[1](#fn_815) and Zargar <span
id="fr_824"></span>[2](#fn_816) and other *royal* sons (zâ*d*ak),
instigating the many conflicts and shedding the blood of those of the
realm, accepted the religion as a yoke <span
id="fr_825"></span>[3](#fn_817), (68) while they even wandered to
Arûm <span id="fr_826"></span>[4](#fn_818) and the Hindûs, outside the
realm, in propagating the religion.

69\. Owing to *progress* onwards it came in succession to the
descendants of the divinities <span id="fr_827"></span>[5](#fn_819), the
rulers who *were* those of the Kayân race who *were* exalted ones. 70.
*And* still onwards even until the achievement with melted metal pouring
upon the chest of the glorified Âtûr-pâ*d* <span
id="fr_828"></span>[6](#fn_820), son of Mâraspend, in the reign of that
divinity (bagh) Shâhpûr, the king of kings who *was the son of*
Aûha*r*ma*zd* <span id="fr_829"></span>[7](#fn_821), in a controversy
with apostates of different species of many kinds. 71. *He was*
preserved from those most

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

mighty apostates, who are called even by *the name of* their
desires <span id="fr_830"></span>[1](#fn_822).

72\. And the Arûmans <span id="fr_831"></span>[2](#fn_823), who have
been, at various periods, termed untruthful <span
id="fr_832"></span>[3](#fn_824), *have* asked many ill-solvable
questions of this religion; (73) *but there has* been no doubtfulness of
any question that is explained by this religion, (74) and the learned of
the country of Irân have always been sustainers of victory among them.
75. Not like other sects whose religion is secretly progressive and
deceiving, delusively for the deceived, *and* undutifully among the
customs and assemblages of the less-informed, unintelligent, and
demon-natured whose information was nothing whatever of knowledge and
understanding of wisdom. 76. Then, so far as the assemblages that are
very secretly deceived and deluded by them, nobody is presented for
detection (â*s*kârâkîh); (77) *but* afterwards, owing to the capture of
the many of little knowledge and unintelligent opinions who are deluded
by them, it is discovered they are *provided* with much mutually
afflicting speech, falsehood, *and* disconnection, which are their
religion.

78\. So that I here <span id="fr_833"></span>[4](#fn_825) notice *some*
of *their* much inconsistency and disconnection, for informing the
judgment of new learners, (79) for the reason that when the writings of
the learned ancients have specially minutely and reverently <span
id="fr_834"></span>[5](#fn_826) discoursed of

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

*what is* most astute in evil, to impel *one* to good knowledge, (80)
you *should* observe with kind regards *what is* ordered.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_791"></span>[166:1](sbe24080.htm#fr_799) See Chap. VIII,
137 n.

<span id="fn_792"></span>[166:2](sbe24080.htm#fr_800) His accuser and
instigator.

<span id="fn_793"></span>[166:3](sbe24080.htm#fr_801) All MSS. have 'he
bore these three names;' but Nêr. has evidently misread *s*em, 'name,'
instead of dâm, 'creature,' both words being written alike in Pahlavi.

<span id="fn_794"></span>[167:1](sbe24080.htm#fr_802) Pâz. vyâwãnî (see
Chap. III, 22 n).

<span id="fn_795"></span>[167:2](sbe24080.htm#fr_803) Assuming that Pâz.
huzvârdan (Sans. sa*ms*odhayitum) is a misreading of Pahl.
hû-zinhâr*d*anŏ.

<span id="fn_796"></span>[167:3](sbe24080.htm#fr_804) Sans. 'to
announce.'

<span id="fn_797"></span>[167:4](sbe24080.htm#fr_805) Because it (the
religion) is opposed to his supposed work as a deluder.

<span id="fn_798"></span>[168:1](sbe24080.htm#fr_806) As it would be, if
he were the corrupter of souls.

<span id="fn_799"></span>[168:2](sbe24080.htm#fr_807) The exclamation of
the wicked soul after death, derived from Yas. XLV, 1 (see Mkh. II,
159).

<span id="fn_800"></span>[168:3](sbe24080.htm#fr_808) See Chap. V, 6-9.

<span id="fn_801"></span>[168:4](sbe24080.htm#fr_809) The words in
brackets are omitted in AK, PB3, MH19, but occur in Sans. and the later
MSS.

<span id="fn_802"></span>[168:5](sbe24080.htm#fr_810) Chap. I. 36, 37.

<span id="fn_803"></span>[169:1](sbe24080.htm#fr_811) Probably a guarded
allusion to Muhammadanism which it was then unsafe to disparage openly,
as is evident from the rarity of its name in Pahlavi writings.

<span id="fn_804"></span>[169:2](sbe24080.htm#fr_812) Or 'the
miracle-resembling.'

<span id="fn_805"></span>[169:3](sbe24080.htm#fr_813) See Chap. IV, 106.

<span id="fn_806"></span>[169:4](sbe24080.htm#fr_814) A commentator
whose opinions are often quoted in Pahlavi writings (see Sls. I, 4 n).
His father was probably the early editor of the Dînka*rd* mentioned in
§§ 55-57, though it is hazardous to rely upon a single name for
identifying an individual. In that case he must have been a younger
brother of the Zaratû*s*t-î Âtûr-frôbagân who succeeded his father as
'leader of the good religion,' and revised the Dînka*rd*, as mentioned
in the last paragraphs of its third book.

<span id="fn_807"></span>[169:5](sbe24080.htm#fr_815) See Chap: IV, 107.

<span id="fn_808"></span>[170:1](sbe24080.htm#fr_816) The probable
meaning of dînka*rd* is 'acts of the religion.' See also Chap. IV, 107
n.

<span id="fn_809"></span>[170:2](sbe24080.htm#fr_817) Reading
rat-mastarg. For rat Nêr. has read ra*d*, 'pontiff,' which is written in
the same manner; his translation being Sans. guru, while his Pâz. ra*d*
has become raê in AK, PB3, MH19, but has again become ra*d* in JE.

<span id="fn_810"></span>[170:3](sbe24080.htm#fr_818) See Chap. XVI.

<span id="fn_811"></span>[170:4](sbe24080.htm#fr_819) Assuming that Pâz.
sakht-vîrôda*s*nihâ stands for Pahl. sakht-virôyi*s*nîhâ.

<span id="fn_812"></span>[170:5](sbe24080.htm#fr_820) That is, the
Vendîdâ*d*.

<span id="fn_813"></span>[170:6](sbe24080.htm#fr_821) See Mkh. I, 10.

<span id="fn_814"></span>[170:7](sbe24080.htm#fr_822) See Mkh. XIII, 14,
XXVII, 68-76.

<span id="fn_815"></span>[171:1](sbe24080.htm#fr_823) Misread Spudâkht
by Nêr. He was a son of Kaî Gu*s*tâsp, and called Spe*n*tô-dâta in the
Avesta, and Isfendiyâr in Persian.

<span id="fn_816"></span>[171:2](sbe24080.htm#fr_824) Av. Zairivairi,
Pers. Zarîr, a brother of Kaî Gu*s*tâsp (see Bd. XXXI, 29).

<span id="fn_817"></span>[171:3](sbe24080.htm#fr_825) Literally 'for the
neck,' assuming that Pâz. ô-*k*a ôi is an erroneous reading of Pahl.
va*l* *k*avarman, as in Mkh. XXXIX, 30.

<span id="fn_818"></span>[171:4](sbe24080.htm#fr_826) Asia Minor was so
called from having been a portion of the Roman empire in Sasanian times.

<span id="fn_819"></span>[171:5](sbe24080.htm#fr_827) Pâz. bayãnã,
(Sans. mahat) is evidently a misreading of Pahl. bagânân, a term
referring to the Sasanian kings who adopted the title of bagî,
'divinity,' in their inscriptions (see also § 70), and claimed to be
descended from the old dynasty of Kayân kings.

<span id="fn_820"></span>[171:6](sbe24080.htm#fr_828) The supreme
high-priest and prime minister of king Shâhpûr II (A.D. 309-379), who
underwent the ordeal of melted metal for the sake of proving the truth
of the religion.

<span id="fn_821"></span>[171:7](sbe24080.htm#fr_829) King Aûha*r*ma*zd*
II (A.D. 300-309).

<span id="fn_822"></span>[172:1](sbe24080.htm#fr_830) That is, they are
called âshmôg (Av. ashemaogha, 'perplexing righteousness').

<span id="fn_823"></span>[172:2](sbe24080.htm#fr_831) The Greeks of the
eastern empire of the Romans.

<span id="fn_824"></span>[172:3](sbe24080.htm#fr_832) Pâz. anâst may be
either 'irreverent,' or else stand for Pahl. a*r*âst, 'untruthful.'
Sans. has 'atheistical.'

<span id="fn_825"></span>[172:4](sbe24080.htm#fr_833) In the next
chapter.

<span id="fn_826"></span>[172:5](sbe24080.htm#fr_834) Or, perhaps,
'modestly' (see Chap. VIII, 137 n).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI](sbe24081)
