[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe24006)  [Next](sbe24008) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402156081/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Pahlavi Texts, Part III (SBE24)*, E.W. West, tr. \[1885\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

# DÎNÂ-Î MAÎNÔG-Î KHIRA*D*

THROUGH the name and power and assistance of the creator Aûha*r*ma*zd*,
the archangels *who are* good rulers and good performers, and all the
angels of the spiritual and the angels of the worldly *existences*, by a
happy dispensation (dahi*s*n) and well-omened we write the Opinions of
the Spirit of Wisdom through the will of the sacred beings <span
id="fr_33"></span>[1](#fn_32).

### CHAPTER I <span id="fr_34"></span>[2](#fn_33).

\[1. In the name and *for* the propitiation of the all-benefiting
creator Aûha*r*ma*zd*, (2) of all the angels of the spiritual and
worldly creations, (3) *and* of the learning of learnings, the
Ma*zd*a-worshipping

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

religion, (4) forth from which this, *which* is such a source of wisdom,
is a selector <span id="fr_35"></span>[1](#fn_34). 5. Through the glory
and will of the creator Aûha*r*ma*zd*—*who is* promoting the prosperity
of the two existences <span id="fr_36"></span>[2](#fn_35)—(6) and of all
the greatly powerful angels, (7) and *through* the completely calm
repose of the sacred beings, the princely <span
id="fr_37"></span>[3](#fn_36), purpose-fulfilling sages, (8)
presentations of various novelties for the appropriation of wisdom, (9)
through largely acquiring reasoning thought <span
id="fr_38"></span>[4](#fn_37), are most wholesome for the body and soul
*in* the two existences.

10\. As in the pure marvel of marvels, the unquestionable and
well-betokened good religion of the Mazda-worshippers, by the words of
the creator, Aûha*r*ma*zd*, and Zaratû*s*t the Spîtamân <span
id="fr_39"></span>[5](#fn_38), it is in

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

many places decided, (11) that he, who is the all-good creator, created
these creatures through wisdom, (12) and his maintenance of the
invisible revolutions <span id="fr_40"></span>[1](#fn_39) is through
wisdom; (13) and the imperishable and undisturbed *state*, in that which
is immortality *for* ever and everlasting, he reserves for himself by
means of the most deliberative <span id="fr_41"></span>[2](#fn_40) means
of wisdom. 14. For the same reason *it* is declared, (15) that *there*
was a sage who said, (16) that 'if this be known, that the religion of
the sacred beings (ya*zd*ân) is truth, and *its* law is virtue, and *it*
is desirous of welfare and compassionate as regards the creatures, (17)
wherefore are *there* mostly many sects, many beliefs, and many original
evolutions <span id="fr_42"></span>[3](#fn_41) of mankind? 18. And,
especially, that which is a sect, law, and belief, causing harm to the
property (khêl) of the sacred beings <span
id="fr_43"></span>[4](#fn_42), and is not good? 19, 20 <span
id="fr_44"></span>[5](#fn_43). And this, too, *one has* to consider,
that, in order to become a chooser in this matter, trouble is to be
undergone; (21) and it is necessary to become acquainted with this
matter, (22) because, in the end, the body is mingled with the dust, and
reliance is on the soul. 23. And every one is to undergo trouble for the
soul, (24) and is to become acquainted with duty and good works; (25)
because that good work which a man does unwittingly is little of a good
work, (26) and that sin which a man

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

commits unwittingly amounts to a sin in *its* origin <span
id="fr_45"></span>[1](#fn_44). 27. And *it* is declared by the
Avesta <span id="fr_46"></span>[2](#fn_45) (28) thus:\] <span
id="fr_47"></span>[3](#fn_46)" Nothing *was* taken by him by whom the
soul *was* not taken (29) hitherto, and he takes nothing who does not
take the soul (30) henceforward likewise <span
id="fr_48"></span>[4](#fn_47); (31) because the spiritual and worldly
*existences* are such-like as <span id="fr_49"></span>[5](#fn_48) two
strongholds, (32) one *it* is declared certain that they shall capture,
and one it is not possible to capture."'

33\. After *being* replete *with* those good actions *of* <span
id="fr_50"></span>[6](#fn_49) which *it* is declared certain that it is
not possible to capture, (34) and when he <span
id="fr_51"></span>[7](#fn_50) surveyed the incitement for this, (35) he
started forth (fravaftŏ), in search of wisdom, into the various
countries and various districts of this world; (36) and of the
many <span id="fr_52"></span>[8](#fn_51) religions and beliefs of those
people who are superior in their wisdom he thought and enquired, and he
investigated and came upon *their* origin <span
id="fr_53"></span>[9](#fn_52). 37. And when he saw that they are so
mutually afflicting (hanbêshin) and inimical among

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

one another, (38) he then knew that these religions and beliefs and
diverse customs, which are so mutually afflicting among one another in
this world, are not worthy to be from the appointment of the sacred
beings; (39) because the religion of the sacred beings is truth, and
*its* law is virtue. 40. And through this he became without doubt that,
*as to* whatever <span id="fr_54"></span>[1](#fn_53) is not in this pure
religion, *there* is then doubtfulness for them in everything, (41) and.
in every cause they see distraction.

42\. After that he became more diligent in the enquiry and practice of
religion; (43) and he enquired of the high-priests who have become wiser
in <span id="fr_55"></span>[2](#fn_54) this religion and more acquainted
*with* the religion, (44) thus: 'For the maintenance of the body *and*
preservation of the soul what thing <span id="fr_56"></span>[3](#fn_55)
is good and more perfect?'

45\. And they \[spoke <span id="fr_57"></span>[4](#fn_56)\], through the
statement \[from revelation, (46) thus: 'Of the <span
id="fr_58"></span>[5](#fn_57) benefit which happens to men\] wisdom is
good; (47) because it is possible to manage the worldly *existence*
through wisdoms, (48) and it is possible to provide also the spiritual
existence for oneself through the power of wisdom <span
id="fr_59"></span>[6](#fn_58). 49. And this, too, is declared, that
Aûha*r*ma*zd* has produced these creatures and creation, which are in
the worldly *existence*, through innate

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

wisdom <span id="fr_60"></span>[1](#fn_59); (50) and the management of
the worldly and spiritual *existences* is also through wisdom.'

51\. And when, in that manner, he saw the great advantage and
preciousness of wisdom, he became more thankful unto Aûha*r*ma*zd*, the
lord, and the archangels of <span id="fr_61"></span>[2](#fn_60) the
spirit of wisdom; (52) and he took <span id="fr_62"></span>[3](#fn_61)
the spirit of wisdom as a protection. 53. For the spirit of wisdom *one*
is to perform more homage and service than *for* the remaining
archangels. 54. And this, too, he knew, that it is possible to do for
oneself every duty and good work and proper action through the power of
wisdom; (55) and it is necessary to be diligent for the satisfaction of
the spirit of wisdom. 56. And, thenceforward, he became more diligent in
performing <span id="fr_63"></span>[4](#fn_62) the ceremonial of the
spirit of wisdom.

57\. After that the spirit of wisdom, on account of the thoughts and
wishes of that sage, displayed *his* person unto him. 58. And he spoke
to him (59) thus: 'O friend *and* glorifier! good from perfect
righteousness! (60) seek advancement from me, the spirit of wisdom, (61)
that I may become thy guide to the satisfaction of the sacred beings and

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

the good <span id="fr_64"></span>[1](#fn_63), and *to* the maintenance
of the body in the worldly *existence* and the preservation of the soul
in the spiritual *one*.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_32"></span>[3:1](sbe24007.htm#fr_33) This heading is
prefixed to the original Pahlavi text in K43, a facsimile of which was
published by Andreas in 1882; as, however, the text which follows it, in
that codex, begins in the middle of Chap. I, 28, this heading must have
been composed by some copyist, after the first folio of the text had
been lost from some previous copy. It is, therefore, doubtful whether
the name he gives to the work, 'Opinions (or decisions) of the Spirit of
Wisdom,' be the original title, or not; but it is, at any rate,
preferable to the modern appellation, 'the Spirit of Wisdom.' In Pâzand
this title is Mainyô-i Khard; but regarding the Pahlavi word maînôg, see
the Introduction.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[3:2](sbe24007.htm#fr_34) The beginning of this
chapter, enclosed in brackets, as far as § 28 (being lost from the
Pahlavi text of K43, and no copy of it from TD2 being available) is here
taken from the Pâzand version contained in L19. The division into
sections, adopted throughout, is that of the alternating Pâz.-Sans. text
of Nêryôsang.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[4:1](sbe24007.htm#fr_35) That is, this work is
a selection of wisdom from the religion. The Pâz. va*s* is a misreading
of Pahl. a*g*a*s*, 'from it,' which is identical in form with Pahl.
afa*s*, the correct equivalent of Pâz. va*s*.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[4:2](sbe24007.htm#fr_36) This world and the
next.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[4:3](sbe24007.htm#fr_37) The angels are here
compared to the vâspûharakân, the highest class of Sasanian nobles,
called barbêtân, 'sons of the house,' in Huzvâri*s* (see Nŏldeke's
Gesch. Pers. Sas. pp. 71, 501). As these nobles ranked next to the royal
house, so do the archangels and angels rank next to Aûha*r*ma*zd*. The
title vâspûhar is evidently connected with the ancient Pers. equivalent
of Av. vîsô puthra, 'son of the village or town,' which, as Darmesteter
points out (Études Iraniennes, II, p. 140), is used in Vend. VII, 114 as
the title of a person who has to pay the same medical fees as the
za*n*tu-paiti, 'tribe-ruler,' mentioned in the earlier § 108, and who
must, therefore, have been a man of equal rank.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[4:4](sbe24007.htm#fr_38) Reading vîrmat, both
here and in § 13, instead of the Pâz. nîrma*d*, which is a misreading of
the same letters.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[4:5](sbe24007.htm#fr_39) Av. Zarathu*s*tra
Spitama, the great apostle of the Ma*zd*a-worshippers, whose
conversations with Ahura Ma*zd*a (Pahl. Aûha*r*ma*zd*) constitute a
considerable portion of the Avesta, or scripture of the
Ma*zd*a-worshippers.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[5:1](sbe24007.htm#fr_40) Of the spheres, or
firmaments, which are supposed to carry along the heavenly bodies.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[5:2](sbe24007.htm#fr_41) Reading
vîrmat-hômandtûm.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[5:3](sbe24007.htm#fr_42) Reading bûn ga*s*t
(see Sg. IV, 73 n).

<span id="fn_42"></span>[5:4](sbe24007.htm#fr_43) It may be questioned
whether this allusion to a heterodox religion injuring the property of
the orthodox faith is sufficient to identify the former with
Muhammadanism.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[5:5](sbe24007.htm#fr_44) These two sections are
improperly separated by Nêryôsang.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[6:1](sbe24007.htm#fr_45) The original text was,
no doubt, vinâs pavan bûn va*l* yehevûnê*d*, which would be gunâh pa bun
ô bahô*d* in Pâzand; but L19 has omitted the p in pa, and Nêr. has
mistaken the preposition va*l* for the pronoun valman, which blunders
have misled the writers of later MSS. into a variety of inconsistent
readings.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[6:2](sbe24007.htm#fr_46) The sacred literature
of the Parsis in its original language.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[6:3](sbe24007.htm#fr_47) The extant Pahlavi
text of K43 commences at this point.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[6:4](sbe24007.htm#fr_48) By this division of §§
28-30 Nêr. found himself compelled to add another Sanskrit clause in
explanation, which would have been unnecessary if he had separated them
as here pointed.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[6:5](sbe24007.htm#fr_49) K43 omits 'as.'

<span id="fn_49"></span>[6:6](sbe24007.htm#fr_50) L19 has 'after those
good actions of a store.'

<span id="fn_50"></span>[6:7](sbe24007.htm#fr_51) The sage mentioned in
§ 15.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[6:8](sbe24007.htm#fr_52) L19 has 'every.'

<span id="fn_52"></span>[6:9](sbe24007.htm#fr_53) L19 omits 'origin,'
having merely va*g*ôst, 'investigated,' instead of bun *g*ûstŏ,
'investigated the origin.'

<span id="fn_53"></span>[7:1](sbe24007.htm#fr_54) L19 has 'every one
who,' having read ko*l*â mûn instead of ko*l*â maman. The meaning,
however, is that all details of foreign faiths that are not found in the
Ma*zd*a-worshipping religion are doubtful.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[7:2](sbe24007.htm#fr_55) K43 has 'of,' by
omitting pavan, 'in.'

<span id="fn_55"></span>[7:3](sbe24007.htm#fr_56) L19 has 'what one
thing.'

<span id="fn_56"></span>[7:4](sbe24007.htm#fr_57) K43 omits the words in
brackets, by mistake.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[7:5](sbe24007.htm#fr_58) Sans. has 'this.'

<span id="fn_58"></span>[7:6](sbe24007.htm#fr_59) L19 has 'through the
power of wisdom.'

<span id="fn_59"></span>[8:1](sbe24007.htm#fr_60) The âsnô khira*d*ŏ
(Av. âsnô khratu*s*) is 'the durable or innate wisdom' supposed to be
implanted in one's nature, as distinguished from the Av. gaoshô-srûtô
khratu*s*, 'the ear-heard or acquired wisdom,' obtained by experience.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[8:2](sbe24007.htm#fr_61) That is, 'produced by'
this spirit, as mentioned in § 49 regarding the world, and here extended
to the archangels. L19 omits the particle î, so as to convert this
spirit into the wisdom of Aûha*r*ma*zd* and the archangels. It is very
probable, however, that we ought to read 'and the spirit of wisdom.'

<span id="fn_61"></span>[8:3](sbe24007.htm#fr_62) L19 has 'made;' these
two verbs being written alike in Huzvâri*s*.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[8:4](sbe24007.htm#fr_63) L19 has 'to perform,'
by omitting 'in.'

<span id="fn_63"></span>[9:1](sbe24007.htm#fr_64) Meaning, specially,
the priests.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II](sbe24008)
