[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020372)  [Next](0020374) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.iv.xxii"></span>

### <span id="vi.iv.iv.xxii-p0.1"></span>Elucidations.

##### <span id="vi.iv.iv.xxii-p0.2"></span>I.

<span id="vi.iv.iv.xxii-p1"></span>(The Lord’s Discipline, book iv. cap.
vi. p. 413.)

<span id="vi.iv.iv.xxii-p2"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.iv.xxii-p2.1"></span>ἡ κυριακὴ ἄσκησις</span>. Casaubon
explains this as *Dominica exercitatio* (the *religion* which the Lord
taught), and quotes the apostolic canons (li. and lii.), which, using
this word (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.iv.xxii-p2.2"></span>ἄσκησις</span>), ordain certain fasts *on
account of pious exercise*. Baronius, *more suo*, grasps at this word
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.iv.xxii-p2.3"></span>ἄσκησις</span>,
as a peg to hang the system of monkery upon. Casaubon answers: “If so,
then all the early Christians were monks and nuns; as this word is
always used by the Fathers for the Christian discipline, or Christianity
itself.” Such are the original *ascetics,* nothing more. The Christian
Fathers transferred the word from heathen use to that of the Church, to
signify the training to which *all the faithful* should subject
themselves, in obedience to St. Paul ([1 Cor. ix.
24-27](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#024)<span
id="vi.iv.iv.xxii-p2.4"></span>). See Isaaci Casauboni, *De Annalibus
Baronianis Exercitationes*, p. 171.

##### <span id="vi.iv.iv.xxii-p2.5"></span>II.

<span id="vi.iv.iv.xxii-p3"></span>(Theano, cap. xix. p. 431.)

<span id="vi.iv.iv.xxii-p4"></span>The translator has not been happy in
this rendering, but I retain it as in the Edinburgh Edition, which
leaves one in doubt whether this second saying was Theano’s; for,
possibly, the translator meant to leave it so. But the Migne note is
very good: “Jamblichus mentions two Theanos, one the wife of Brontinus,
or Brotinus, and the other of Pythagoras. Both alike were devoted to the
Pythagorean philosophy; and it is not certain, therefore, to which of
them these *dicta* belong.” <span id="page_442">p. 442</span> <span
id="vi.iv.iv.xxii-Page_442"></span>Theodoret quotes both, but decides
not this doubt. Hoffman says, “There were many of the name;” and he
mentions five different ones. Suidas makes mention of Theano of Crotona
as the wife of Pythagoras, “the first woman who philosophized and wrote
poetry;” and Hoffman doubts not this lady is the one quoted by Clement.
She seems to have presided over the school of her husband after his
death. Of the beauty and morality of the second *dictum*, I have spoken
already (p. 348, Elucidation XI.); and I think it worth whole volumes of
casuistry on a subject which (<span
id="vi.iv.iv.xxii-p4.2"></span>naturâ duce, sub lege Logi) the Gospel
modestly leaves to natural decency and enlightened conscience. (See
Clement’s fine remarks, on p. 435.

##### <span id="vi.iv.iv.xxii-p4.3"></span>III.

<span id="vi.iv.iv.xxii-p5"></span>(St. Paul, note 4, p. 434.)

<span id="vi.iv.iv.xxii-p6"></span>Better rendered, “Paul is more recent
(or later) in respect of time.” This seems a strangely apologetic way to
speak of this glorious apostle; though the reference may be to his own
words ([1 Cor. xv. 8](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#008)<span
id="vi.iv.iv.xxii-p6.1"></span>), “as of one born out of due time.” And
it suggests to me, that, among the Alexandrian Christians, there were
many Jewish converts who said, “I am of Apollos,” and with whom the name
of the great apostle of the Gentiles was still unsavoury. This goes to
confirm the Pauline origin of the Epistle to the Hebrews, so far as it
accounts for (what is testified by Eusebius, vi. 14) his omission of his
own name from his treatise, lest it should prejudice his argument with
his Hebrew kinsmen. Apollos may have sent it to Alexandria.

##### <span id="vi.iv.iv.xxii-p6.2"></span>IV.

<span id="vi.iv.iv.xxii-p7"></span>(Socrates, cap. xxii. p. 436.)

<span id="vi.iv.iv.xxii-p8"></span>Who can read the *Phædo*, and think
of Plato and Socrates, without hope that the mystery of redemption
applies to them in some effectual way, under St. Paul’s maxims ([Rom.
ii. 26](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#026)<span
id="vi.iv.iv.xxii-p8.1"></span>)? It would torture me in reading such
sayings as are quoted here, were I not able reverently to indulge such
hope, and then *to desist from speculation*. Cannot we be silent where
Scripture is silent, and leave all to Him who loved the Gentiles, and
died for them on the cross? I suspect the itch of our times, on this and
like subjects, to be presumption ([2 Cor. x.
5](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#005)<span
id="vi.iv.iv.xxii-p8.2"></span>) “against the obedience of Christ.” As
if our own concern for the heathen were greater than His who died for
the unjust, praying for His murderers! Why not leave the ransomed world
to the world’s Redeemer? The cross bore the inscription in Greek, and
Latin also; for the Jews scorned it in Hebrew: and who can doubt that
those outstretched arms embraced all mankind?

##### <span id="vi.iv.iv.xxii-p8.3"></span>V.

<span id="vi.iv.iv.xxii-p9"></span>(Basilides answered, cap. xxiv. p.
437.)

<span id="vi.iv.iv.xxii-p10"></span>Note the pith and point of this
chapter, and the beauty of Clement’s *dictum*, “So it would be, were it
a man and not God that justifies! As it is written, Thou thoughtest that
I was altogether such an one as thyself.” (Compare [Matt. xx.
14](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#014)<span
id="vi.iv.iv.xxii-p10.1"></span>.) But let us not overlook his
exposition of the ends and purposes of chastisement. The great principle
which he lays down destroys the whole Trent theology about penance, and
annihilates the logical base of its figment about “Purgatory.”
“Punishment does not avail to him who has sinned, to undo his sin.” The
precious blood of Christ “speaketh better things.”

##### <span id="vi.iv.iv.xxii-p10.2"></span>VI.

<span id="vi.iv.iv.xxii-p11"></span>(Sin after Baptism, cap. xxiv. p.
438.)

<span id="vi.iv.iv.xxii-p12"></span>Not to broach any opinion of my own,
it is enough to remark, that this reference to primitive discipline
shows that a defined penitential system in the early Church was aimed at
by the Montanists, <span id="page_443">p. 443</span> <span
id="vi.iv.iv.xxii-Page_443"></span>and inspired their deadly animosity,
not merely as a theory, but as a system. Although differing on many
points with Dr. Bunsen (he is both Baron and Doctor, and I give him the
more honourable title of the two), I feel it due to my contract with the
reader of this series to refer him to what he says of the baptismal vow,
etc. (*Hippol*., iii. p. 187), as furnishing a valuable commentary on
the text, and on the whole plan of Alexandrian teaching and discipline.

##### <span id="vi.iv.iv.xxii-p12.1"></span>VII.

<span id="vi.iv.iv.xxii-p13"></span>(Jubilee, cap. xxv. p. 438.)

<span id="vi.iv.iv.xxii-p14"></span>Here the reader may feel that an
Elucidation is requisite to any intelligent idea of what Clement means
to say. “We wish he would explain his explanation” of Ezekiel. Let me
give a brief rendering of the annotations in Migne, as all that can here
be furnished. (1) The *tabernacle* is the body, as St. Paul uses the
word ([2 Cor. v. 1-4](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#001)<span
id="vi.iv.iv.xxii-p14.1"></span>), and St. Peter (2 Ep. i. 13, 14). (2)
The *seven periods* are the Sabbatical weeks of years leading up to the
year of Jubilee. (3) The <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.iv.xxii-p14.2"></span>ἀπλανὴς χώρα</span> refers to the old
system of astronomy, and its division of the heavens into an octave of
*spheres,* of which the seven inner spheres are those of the seven
planets; the fixt stars being in the eighth, which “borders on the
intellectual world,”—the abode of spirits, according to Clement.

<span id="vi.iv.iv.xxii-p15"></span>The Miltonic student will recall the
perplexity with which, perhaps, in early years, he first read:—

> <span id="vi.iv.iv.xxii-p15.1"></span> “They pass the planets seven,
> and pass the fixt,  
> And that crystalline sphere whose balance weighs  
> The trepidation talked, and that first moved.  

<span id="vi.iv.iv.xxii-p16"></span>*Paradise Lost*, book iii. 481.

<span id="vi.iv.iv.xxii-p17"></span>The Copernican system was, even in
Milton’s time, not generally accepted; but, for one who had personally
conversed with Galileo, this seems incorrigibly bad. The true system
would have given greater dignity, and in fact a better topography, to
his great poem.

##### <span id="vi.iv.iv.xxii-p17.1"></span>VIII.

<span id="vi.iv.iv.xxii-p18"></span>(Rebecca, p. 439.)

<span id="vi.iv.iv.xxii-p19"></span>Le Nourry, as well as Barbeyrac (see
Kaye, pp. 109 and 473), regards Clement as ignorant of the Hebrew
language. Kaye, though he shows that some of the attempts to demonstrate
this are fanciful, inclines to the same opinion; remarking that he
borrows his interpretations from Philo. On the passage here under
consideration, he observes, that, “having said repeatedly <span
id="fr_2941"></span>[2942](#fn_2941) that Rebekah in Hebrew is
equivalent to <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.iv.xxii-p20.1"></span>ὑπομονὴ</span> in Greek, he now makes it
equivalent to <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.iv.xxii-p20.2"></span>Θεοῦ δόξα</span>. He elsewhere refers
our Saviour’s exclamation, Eli, Eli, etc., to the Greek word <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.iv.xxii-p20.3"></span>ἡλιος</span>, and
the name Jesus to <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.iv.xxii-p20.4"></span>ἰᾶσθαι</span>.”

##### <span id="vi.iv.iv.xxii-p20.5"></span>IX.

<span id="vi.iv.iv.xxii-p21"></span>(Plato’s City, cap. xxvi. p. 441.)

<span id="vi.iv.iv.xxii-p22"></span>This is worth quoting from the
*Republic* (book ix. p. 423, Jowett): “In heaven there is laid up a
pattern of such a city; and he who desires may behold this, and,
beholding, govern himself accordingly; He will act according to the laws
of that city, and of no other.” Sublime old Gentile! Did not the apostle
of the Gentiles think of Socrates, when he wrote [Heb. xii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#028)<span
id="vi.iv.iv.xxii-p22.1"></span>, and xiii. 14? On this noble passage,
of which Clement has evidently thought very seriously, Schleiermacher’s
remarks seem to me cold and unsatisfactory. (See his *Introductions*,
translated by Dobson; ed. Cambridge, 1836.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2941"></span>[443:2942](0020373.htm#fr_2941) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.xxii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.xxii-p20"></span> e.g., this vol., p. 309.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book V](0020374)
