[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020316)  [Next](0020318.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxiv"></span>

##### <span id="vi.iv.i.xxiv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXIV.—How Moses Discharged the Part of a Military Leader.

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxiv-p1"></span>Our Moses then is a prophet, a
legislator, skilled in military tactics and strategy, a politician, a
philosopher. And in what sense he was a prophet, shall be by and by
told, when we come to treat of prophecy. Tactics belong to military
command, and the ability to command an army is among the attributes of
kingly rule. Legislation, again, is also one of the functions of the
kingly office, as also judicial authority.

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxiv-p2"></span>Of the kingly office one kind is
divine,—that which is according to God and His holy Son, by whom both
the good things which are of the earth, and external and perfect
felicity too, are supplied. “For,” it is said, “seek what is great, and
the little things shall be added.” <span
id="fr_2105"></span>[2106](#fn_2105.md) And there is a second kind of
royalty, inferior to that administration which is purely rational and
divine, which brings to the task of government merely the high mettle of
the soul; after which fashion Hercules ruled the Argives, and Alexander
the Macedonians. The third kind is what aims after one thing—merely to
conquer and overturn; but to turn conquest either to a good or a bad
purpose, belongs not to such rule. Such was the aim of the Persians in
their campaign against Greece. For, on the one hand, fondness for strife
is solely the result of passion, and acquires power solely for the sake
of domination; while, on the other, the love of good is characteristic
of a soul which uses its high spirit for noble ends. The fourth, the
worst of all, is the sovereignty which acts according to the promptings
of the passions, as that of Sardanapalus, and those who propose to
themselves as their end the gratification of the passions to the utmost.
But the instrument of regal sway—the instrument at once of that which
overcomes by virtue, and that which does so by force—is the power of
managing (or tact). And it varies according to the nature and the
material. In the case of arms and of fighting animals the ordering power
is the soul and mind, by means animate and inanimate; and in the case of
the passions of the soul, which we master by virtue, reason is the
ordering power, by affixing the seal of continence and self-restraint,
along with holiness, and sound knowledge with truth, making the result
of the whole to terminate in piety towards God. For it is wisdom which
regulates <span id="page_337">p. 337</span> <span
id="vi.iv.i.xxiv-Page_337"></span>in the case of those who so practice
virtue; and divine things are ordered by wisdom, and human affairs by
politics—all things by the kingly faculty. He is a king, then, who
governs according to the laws, and possesses the skill to sway willing
subjects. Such is the Lord, who receives all who believe on Him and by
Him. For the Father has delivered and subjected all to Christ our King,
“that at the name of Jesus every knee may bow, of things in heaven, and
things in earth, and things under the earth, and every tongue confess
that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father.” <span
id="fr_2106"></span>[2107](#fn_2106.md)

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxiv-p5"></span>Now, generalship involves three ideas:
caution, enterprise, and the union of the two. And each of these
consists of three things, acting as they do either by word, or by deeds,
or by both together. And all this can be accomplished either by
persuasion, or by compulsion, or by inflicting harm in the way of taking
vengeance on those who ought to be punished; and this either by doing
what is right, or by telling what is untrue, or by telling what is true,
or by adopting any of these means conjointly at the same time.

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxiv-p6"></span>Now, the Greeks had the advantage of
receiving from Moses all these, and the knowledge of how to make use of
each of them. And, for the sake of example, I shall cite one or two
instances of leadership. Moses, on leading the people forth, suspecting
that the Egyptians would pursue, left the short and direct route, and
turned to the desert, and marched mostly by night. For it was another
kind of arrangement by which the Hebrews were trained in the great
wilderness, and for a protracted time, to belief in the existence of one
God alone, being inured by the wise discipline of endurance to which
they were subjected. The strategy of Moses, therefore, shows the
necessity of discerning what will be of service before the approach of
dangers, and so to encounter them. It turned out precisely as he
suspected, for the Egyptians pursued with horses and chariots, but were
quickly destroyed by the sea breaking on them and overwhelming them with
their horses and chariots, so that not a remnant of them was left.
Afterwards the pillar of fire, which accompanied them (for it went
before them as a guide), conducted the Hebrews by night through an
untrodden region, training and bracing them, by toils and hardships, to
manliness and endurance, that after their experience of what appeared
formidable difficulties, the benefits of the land, to which from the
trackless desert he was conducting them, might become apparent.
Furthermore, he put to flight and slew the hostile occupants of the
land, falling upon them from a desert and rugged line of march (such was
the excellence of his generalship). For the taking of the land of those
hostile tribes was a work of skill and strategy.

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxiv-p7"></span>Perceiving this, Miltiades, the
Athenian general, who conquered the Persians in battle at Marathon,
imitated it in the following fashion. Marching over a trackless desert,
he led on the Athenians by night, and eluded the barbarians that were
set to watch him. For Hippias, who had deserted from the Athenians,
conducted the barbarians into Attica, and seized and held the points of
vantage, in consequence of having a knowledge of the ground. The task
was then to elude Hippias. Whence rightly Miltiades, traversing the
desert and attacking by night the Persians commanded by Dates, led his
soldiers to victory.

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxiv-p8"></span>But further, when Thrasybulus was
bringing back the exiles from Phyla, and wished to elude observation, a
pillar became his guide as he marched over a trackless region. To
Thrasybulus by night, the sky being moonless and stormy, a fire appeared
leading the way, which, having conducted them safely, left them near
Munychia, where is now the altar of the light-bringer (Phosphorus).

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxiv-p9"></span>From such an instance, therefore, let
our accounts become credible to the Greeks, namely, that it was possible
for the omnipotent God to make the pillar of fire, which was their guide
on their march, go before the Hebrews by night. It is said also in a
certain oracle,—

> <span id="vi.iv.i.xxiv-p9.1"></span> “A pillar to the Thebans is
> joy-inspiring Bacchus,”  

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxiv-p10"></span>from the history of the Hebrews. Also
Euripides says, in *Antiope*,—

> <span id="vi.iv.i.xxiv-p10.1"></span> “In the chambers within, the
> herdsman,  
> With chaplet of ivy, pillar of the Evœan god.”  

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxiv-p11"></span>The pillar indicates that God cannot
be portrayed. The pillar of light, too, in addition to its pointing out
that God cannot be represented, shows also the stability and the
permanent duration of the Deity, and His unchangeable and inexpressible
light. Before, then, the invention of the forms of images, the ancients
erected pillars, and reverenced them as statues of the Deity.
Accordingly, he who composed the *Phoronis* writes,—

> <span id="vi.iv.i.xxiv-p11.1"></span> “Callithoe, key-bearer of the
> Olympian queen:  
> Argive Hera, who first with fillets and with fringes  
> The queen’s tall column all around adorned.”  

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxiv-p12"></span>Further, the author of *Europia*
relates that the statue of Apollo at Delphi was a pillar in these
words:—

> <span id="vi.iv.i.xxiv-p12.1"></span> “That to the god first-fruits
> and tithes we may  
> On sacred pillars and on lofty column hang.”  

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxiv-p13"></span>Apollo, interpreted mystically by
“privation of <span id="page_338">p. 338</span> <span
id="vi.iv.i.xxiv-Page_338"></span>many,” <span
id="fr_2107"></span>[2108](#fn_2107.md) means the one God. Well, then, that
fire like a pillar, and the fire in the desert, is the symbol of the
holy light which passed through from earth and returned again to heaven,
by the wood \[of the cross\], by which also the gift of intellectual
vision was bestowed on us.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2105"></span>[336:2106](0020317.htm#fr_2105.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xxiv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxiv-p3"></span> Not in Scripture. The reference may
be to [Matt. vi. 33](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#033.md)<span
id="vi.iv.i.xxiv-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2106"></span>[337:2107](0020317.htm#fr_2106.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xxiv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxiv-p4"></span> [Phil.
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#010.md),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#011.md)<span
id="vi.iv.i.xxiv-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2107"></span>[338:2108](0020317.htm#fr_2107.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xxiv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxiv-p14"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.i.xxiv-p14.1"></span>ἀ</span> privative, and <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.i.xxiv-p14.2"></span>πολλοί</span>, many.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXV.—Plato an Imitator of Moses in Framing
Laws.](0020318.md)
