[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020183)  [Next](0020185.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.ii.xiv"></span>

##### <span id="v.ii.xiv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XIV.—Inconsistency of Those Who Accuse the Christians.

<span id="v.ii.xiv-p1"></span>Then, as to the other complaint, that we
do not pray to and believe in the same gods as the cities, it is an
exceedingly silly one. Why, the very men who charge us with atheism for
not admitting the same gods as they acknowledge, are not agreed among
themselves concerning the gods. The Athenians have set up as gods Celeus
and Metanira: the Lacedæmonians Menelaus; and they offer sacrifices and
hold festivals to him, while the men of Ilium cannot endure the very
sound of his name, and pay their adoration to Hector. The Ceans worship
Aristæus, considering him to be the same as Zeus and Apollo; the
Thasians Theagenes, a man who committed murder at the Olympic games; the
Samians Lysander, notwithstanding all the slaughters and all the crimes
perpetrated by him; Alcman and Hesiod Medea, and the Cilicians Niobe;
the Sicilians Philip the son of Butacides; the Amathusians Onesilus; the
Carthaginians Hamilcar. Time would fail me to enumerate the whole. When,
therefore, they differ among themselves concerning their gods, why do
they bring the charge against us of not agreeing with them? Then look at
the practices prevailing among the Egyptians: are they not perfectly
ridiculous? For in the temples at their solemn festivals they beat their
breasts as for the dead, and sacrifice to the same beings as gods; and
no wonder, when they look upon the brutes as gods, and shave themselves
when they die, and bury them in temples, and make public lamentation.
If, then, we are guilty of impiety because we do not practice a piety
corresponding with theirs, then all cities and all nations are guilty of
impiety, for they do not all acknowledge the same gods.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XV.—The Christians Distinguish God from Matter.](0020185.md)
