[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020411)  [Next](0020413.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.vii.ii"></span>

##### <span id="vi.iv.vii.ii-p0.1"></span>Chapter II.—The Son the Ruler and Saviour of All.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.ii-p1"></span>To know <span
id="fr_3511"></span>[3512](#fn_3511.md) God is, then, the first step of
faith; then, through confidence in the teaching of the Saviour, to
consider the doing of wrong in any way as not suitable to the knowledge
of God.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.ii-p3"></span>So the best thing on earth is the most
pious man; and the best thing in heaven, the nearer in place and purer,
is an angel, the partaker of the eternal and blessed life. But the
nature of the Son, which is nearest to Him who is alone the Almighty
One, is the most perfect, and most holy, and most potent, and most
princely, and most kingly, and most beneficent. This is the highest
excellence, which orders all things in accordance with the Father’s
will, and holds the helm of the universe in the best way, with unwearied
and tireless power, working all things in which it operates, keeping in
view its hidden designs. For from His own point of view the Son of God
is never displaced; not being divided, not severed, not passing from
place to place; being always everywhere, and being contained nowhere;
complete mind, the complete paternal light; all eyes, seeing all things,
hearing all things, knowing all things, by His power scrutinizing the
powers. To Him is placed in subjection all the host of angels and gods;
He, the paternal Word, exhibiting <span
id="fr_3512"></span>[3513](#fn_3512.md) a the holy administration for Him
who put \[all\] in subjection to Him.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.ii-p5"></span>Wherefore also all men are His; some
through knowledge, and others not yet so; and some as friends, some as
faithful servants, some as servants merely. This is the Teacher, who
trains the Gnostic by mysteries, and the believer by good hopes, and the
hard of heart by corrective discipline through sensible operation.
Thence His providence is in private, in public, and everywhere.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.ii-p6"></span>And that He whom we call Saviour and
Lord is the Son of God, the prophetic Scriptures explicitly prove. So
the Lord of all, of Greeks and of Barbarians, persuades those who are
willing. For He does not compel him <span
id="fr_3513"></span>[3514](#fn_3513.md) who (through choosing and
fulfilling, from Him, what pertains to laying hold of it the hope) is
able to receive salvation from Him.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.ii-p8"></span>It is He who also gave philosophy to
the Greeks by means of the inferior angels. For by an ancient and divine
order the angels are distributed among the nations. <span
id="fr_3514"></span>[3515](#fn_3514.md) But the glory of those who believe
is “the Lord’s portion.” For either the Lord does not care for all men;
and this is the case either because He is unable (which is not to be
thought, for it would be a proof of weakness), or because He is
unwilling, which is not the attribute of a good being. And He who for
our sakes assumed flesh capable of suffering, is far from being
luxuriously indolent. Or He does care for all, which is befitting for
Him who has become Lord of all. For He is Saviour; not \[the Saviour\]
of some, and of others not. But in proportion to the adaptation
possessed by each, He has dispensed His beneficence both to Greeks and
Barbarians, even to those of them that were predestinated, and in due
time called, the faithful and elect. Nor can He who called all equally,
and assigned special honours to those who have believed in a specially
excellent way, ever envy any. Nor can He who is the Lord of all, and
serves above all the will of the good and almighty Father, ever be
hindered <span id="page_525">p. 525</span> <span
id="vi.iv.vii.ii-Page_525"></span>by another. But neither does envy
touch the Lord, who without beginning was impassible; nor are the things
of men such as to be envied by the Lord. But it is another, he whom
passion hath touched, who envies. And it cannot be said that it is from
ignorance that the Lord is not willing to save humanity, because He
knows not how each one is to be cared for. For ignorance applies not to
the God who, before the foundation of the world, was the counsellor of
the Father. For He was the Wisdom “in which” the Sovereign God
“delighted.” <span id="fr_3515"></span>[3516](#fn_3515.md) For the Son is
the power of God, as being the Father’s most ancient Word before the
production of all things, and His Wisdom. He is then properly called the
Teacher of the beings formed by Him. Nor does He ever abandon care for
men, by being drawn aside from pleasure, who, having assumed flesh,
which by nature is susceptible of suffering, trained it to the condition
of impassibility.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.ii-p11"></span>And how is He Saviour and Lord, if
not the Saviour and Lord of all? But He is the Saviour of those who have
believed, because of their wishing to know; and the Lord of those who
have not believed, till, being enabled to confess him, they obtain the
peculiar and appropriate boon which comes by Him.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.ii-p12"></span>Now the energy of the Lord has a
reference to the Almighty; and the Son is, so to speak, an energy of the
Father. Therefore, a hater of man, the Saviour can never be; who, for
His exceeding love to human flesh, despising not its susceptibility to
suffering, but investing Himself with it, came for the common salvation
of men; for the faith of those who have chosen it, is common. Nay more,
He will never neglect His own work, because man alone of all the other
living creatures was in his creation endowed with a conception of God.
Nor can there be any other better and more suitable government for men
than that which is appointed by God.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.ii-p13"></span>It is then always proper for the one
who is superior by nature to be over the inferior, and for him who is
capable of managing aught well to have the management of it assigned to
him. Now that which truly rules and presides is the Divine Word and His
providence, which inspects all things, and despises the care of nothing
belonging to it.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.ii-p14"></span>Those, then, who choose to belong to
Him, are those who are perfected through faith. He, the Son, is, by the
will of the Almighty Father, the cause of all good things, being the
first efficient cause of motion—a power incapable of being apprehended
by sensation. For what He was, was not seen by those who, through the
weakness of the flesh, were incapable of taking in \[the reality\]. But,
having assumed sensitive flesh, He came to show man what was possible
through obedience to the commandments. Being, then, the Father’s power,
He easily prevails in what He wishes, leaving not even the minutest
point of His administration unattended to. For otherwise the whole would
not have been well executed by Him.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.ii-p15"></span>But, as I think, characteristic of
the highest power is the accurate scrutiny of all the parts, reaching
even to the minutest, terminating in the first Administrator of the
universe, who by the will of the Father directs the salvation of all;
some overlooking, who are set under others, who are set over them, till
you come to the great High Priest. For on one original first Principle,
which acts according to the \[Father’s\] will, the first and the second
and the third depend. Then at the highest extremity of the visible world
is the blessed band of angels; <span
id="fr_3516"></span>[3517](#fn_3516.md) and down to ourselves there are
ranged, some under others, those who, from One and by One, both are
saved and save.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.ii-p17"></span>As, then, the minutest particle of
steel is moved by the spirit of the Heraclean stone, <span
id="fr_3517"></span>[3518](#fn_3517.md) when diffused <span
id="fr_3518"></span>[3519](#fn_3518.md) over many steel rings; so also,
attracted by the Holy Spirit, the virtuous are added by affinity to the
first abode, and the others in succession down to the last. But those
who are bad from infirmity, having fallen from vicious insatiableness
into a depraved state, neither controlling nor controlled, rush round
and round, whirled about by the passions, and fall down to the ground.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.ii-p20"></span>For this was the law from the first,
that virtue should be the object of voluntary choice. Wherefore also the
commandments, according to the Law, and before the Law, not given to the
upright (for the law is not appointed for a righteous man <span
id="fr_3519"></span>[3520](#fn_3519) .md), ordained that he should receive
eternal life and the blessed prize, who chose them.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.ii-p22"></span>But, on the other hand, they allowed
him who had been delighted with vice to consort with the objects of his
choice; and, on the other hand, that the soul, which is ever improving
in the acquisition <span id="fr_3520"></span>[3521](#fn_3520.md) of virtue
and the increase of righteousness, should obtain a better place in the
universe, as tending in each step of advancement towards the habit of
impassibility, till “it come to a perfect man,” <span
id="fr_3521"></span>[3522](#fn_3521.md) to the excellence at once of
knowledge and of inheritance.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.ii-p25"></span>These salutary revolutions, in
accordance with the order of change, are distinguished both by times,
and places, and honours, and cognitions, and heritages, and ministries,
according to the <span id="page_526">p. 526</span> <span
id="vi.iv.vii.ii-Page_526"></span>particular order of each change, up to
the transcendent and continual contemplation of the Lord in eternity.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.ii-p26"></span>Now that which is lovable leads, to
the contemplation of itself, each one who, from love of knowledge,
applies himself entirely to contemplation. Wherefore also the Lord,
drawing the commandments, both the first which He gave, and the second,
from one fountain, neither allowed those who were before the law to be
without law, nor permitted those who were unacquainted with the
principles of the Barbarian philosophy to be without restraint. For,
having furnished the one with the commandments, and the other with
philosophy, He shut up unbelief to the Advent. Whence <span
id="fr_3522"></span>[3523](#fn_3522.md) every one who believes not is
without excuse. For by a different process of advancement, both Greek
and Barbarian, He leads to the perfection which is by faith. <span
id="fr_3523"></span>[3524](#fn_3523.md)

<span id="vi.iv.vii.ii-p29"></span>And if any one of the Greeks, passing
over the preliminary training of the Hellenic philosophy, proceeds
directly to the true teaching, he distances others, though an unlettered
man, by choosing <span id="fr_3524"></span>[3525](#fn_3524.md) the
compendious process of salvation by faith to perfection.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.ii-p31"></span>Everything, then, which did not
hinder a man’s choice from being free, He made and rendered auxiliary to
virtue, in order that there might be revealed somehow or other, even to
those capable of seeing but dimly, the one only almighty, good God—from
eternity to eternity saving by His Son.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.ii-p32"></span>And, on the other hand, He is in no
respect whatever the cause of evil. For all things are arranged with a
view to the salvation of the universe by the Lord of the universe, both
generally and particularly. It is then the function of the righteousness
of salvation to improve everything as far as practicable. For even minor
matters are arranged with a view to the salvation of that which is
better, and for an abode suitable for people’s character. Now everything
that is virtuous changes for the better; having as the proper <span
id="fr_3525"></span>[3526](#fn_3525.md) cause of change the free choice of
knowledge, which the soul has in its own power. But necessary
corrections, through the goodness of the great overseeing Judge, both by
the attendant angels, and by various acts of anticipative judgment, and
by the perfect judgment, compel egregious sinners to repent.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3511"></span>[524:3512](0020412.htm#fr_3511.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.ii-p2"></span> The sentence has been thus rendered
by Sylburgius and by Bp. Kaye. Lowth, however, suggests the supplying of
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.vii.ii-p2.1"></span>ἐνεργεῖ</span>,
or something similar, to govern <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vii.ii-p2.2"></span>πεποιθησιν</span>, confidence.

<span id="fn_3512"></span>[524:3513](0020412.htm#fr_3512.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.ii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.ii-p4"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vii.ii-p4.1"></span>Αναδεδειγμένῳ</span>. Instead of this,
<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vii.ii-p4.2"></span>ἀναδεδεγμένῳ</span>, “ having received,”
has been suggested by Sylburgius.

<span id="fn_3513"></span>[524:3514](0020412.htm#fr_3513.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.ii-p7"></span> By omitting “him” (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.vii.ii-p7.1"></span>τόν</span>), as
Sylburgius does, the translation would run this: “for He compels no one
to receive salvation from Him, because he is able to choose and fulfil
from himself what pertains to the laying hold of the hope.”

<span id="fn_3514"></span>[524:3515](0020412.htm#fr_3514.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.ii-p9"></span> [Deut.
32:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#008.md),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#009.md)<span
id="vi.iv.vii.ii-p9.1"></span>, Septuagint, quoted already more than
once.

<span id="fn_3515"></span>[525:3516](0020412.htm#fr_3515.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.ii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.ii-p10"></span> [Prov. viii.
30](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#030.md)<span
id="vi.iv.vii.ii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3516"></span>[525:3517](0020412.htm#fr_3516.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.ii-p16"></span> \[So called from *Heraclea* in
Lydia.\]

<span id="fn_3517"></span>[525:3518](0020412.htm#fr_3517.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.ii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.ii-p18"></span> The magnet. \[So called from the
Lydian Magnesia.\]

<span id="fn_3518"></span>[525:3519](0020412.htm#fr_3518.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.ii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.ii-p19"></span> Lowth here reads <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.vii.ii-p19.1"></span>ἐκτεινομένῳ</span>,
agreeing with <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vii.ii-p19.2"></span>πνεύματι</span>, instead of <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.vii.ii-p19.3"></span>ἐκτεινομένη</span>,
as in the Oxford text.

<span id="fn_3519"></span>[525:3520](0020412.htm#fr_3519.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.ii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.ii-p21"></span> [1 Tim. i.
9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#009.md)<span
id="vi.iv.vii.ii-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3520"></span>[525:3521](0020412.htm#fr_3520.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.ii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.ii-p23"></span> Instead of <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vii.ii-p23.1"></span>ἐπίγησιν</span>, the corrupt reading of
the text, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vii.ii-p23.2"></span>ἐπίκτησιν</span> (as above), <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.vii.ii-p23.3"></span>ἐπίδοσιν</span>, and
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.vii.ii-p23.4"></span>ἐπ᾽
ἐξήγησιν</span> have been proposed.

<span id="fn_3521"></span>[525:3522](0020412.htm#fr_3521.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.ii-p23.5"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.ii-p24"></span> [Eph. iv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#013.md)<span
id="vi.iv.vii.ii-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3522"></span>[526:3523](0020412.htm#fr_3522.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.ii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.ii-p27"></span> The text has <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.vii.ii-p27.1"></span>ὅτε</span> but the
sense seems to require, as Sylburgius suggests, <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.vii.ii-p27.2"></span>ὅθεν</span> or <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.vii.ii-p27.3"></span>ὥστε</span>.

<span id="fn_3523"></span>[526:3524](0020412.htm#fr_3523.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.ii-p27.4"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.ii-p28"></span> \[The salvability of the heathen
through Christ, is everywhere conspicuous in our author’s system; but
there is a solemn dignity in the concluding paragraphs of this chapter,
which deserves reflection. It would not be becoming for me to express my
own views upon the subject here, but it is one assuming fresh importance
in our day.\]

<span id="fn_3524"></span>[526:3525](0020412.htm#fr_3524.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.ii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.ii-p30"></span> Instead of <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vii.ii-p30.1"></span>ἑλόμενος</span>, Sylburgius proposes
<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vii.ii-p30.2"></span>ἁλάμενος</span>, making a leap by faith
to perfection.

<span id="fn_3525"></span>[526:3526](0020412.htm#fr_3525.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.ii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.ii-p33"></span> The reading varies here. For <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.vii.ii-p33.1"></span>οἰκήσεις</span> of
the text, Heinsius and the Latin translator adopt <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.vii.ii-p33.2"></span>οἰκείαν</span>,
which, on the whole, seems preferable to <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vii.ii-p33.3"></span>οἴ´κησιν</span> or <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.vii.ii-p33.4"></span>ἡκούσης</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III.—The Gnostic Aims at the Nearest Likeness Possible to
God and His Son.](0020413.md)
