[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020052)  [Next](0020054) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.xvii"></span>

##### <span id="iii.ii.xvii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XVII.—They Falsely Promise Health to Their Votaries.

<span id="iii.ii.xvii-p1"></span>Concerning the sympathies and
antipathies of Democritus what can we say but this, that, according to
the common saying, the man of Abdera is Abderiloquent? But, as he who
gave the name to the city, a friend of Hercules as it is said, was
devoured by the horses of Diomedes, so he who boasted of the Magian
Ostanes <span id="fr_472"></span>[473](#fn_472) will be delivered up in
the day of consummation <span id="fr_473"></span>[474](#fn_473) as fuel
for the eternal fire. And you, if you do not cease from your laughter,
will gain the same punishment as the jugglers. Wherefore, O Greeks,
hearken to me, addressing you as from an eminence, nor in mockery
transfer your own want of reason to the herald of the truth. A diseased
affection (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.xvii-p3.2"></span>πάθος</span>) is not destroyed by a
counter-affection (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.xvii-p3.3"></span>ἀντιπάθεια</span>), nor is a maniac cured
by hanging little amulets of leather upon him. There are visitations of
demons; and he who is sick, and he who says he is in love, and he who
hates, and he who wishes to be revenged, accept them as helpers. And
this is the method of their operation: just as the forms of alphabetic
letters and the lines composed of them cannot of themselves indicate
what is meant, but men have invented for themselves signs of their
thoughts, knowing by their peculiar combination what the order of the
letters was intended to express; so, in like manner, the various kinds
of roots and the mutual relation of the sinews and bones can effect
nothing of themselves, but are the elemental matter with which the
depravity of the demons works, who have determined for what purpose each
of them is available. And, when they see that men consent to be served
by means of such things, they take them and make them their slaves. But
how can it be honourable to minister to adulteries? How can it be noble
to stimulate men in hating one another? Or how is it becoming to ascribe
to matter the relief of the insane, and not to God? For by their art
they turn men aside from the pious acknowledgment of God, leading them
to place confidence in herbs and roots. <span
id="fr_474"></span>[475](#fn_474) But God, if He had prepared these
things to effect just what men wish, would be a Producer of evil things;
whereas He Himself produced everything which has good qualities, but the
profligacy of the demons has made use of the productions of nature for
evil purposes, and the appearance of evil which these wear is from them,
and not from the perfect God. For how comes it to pass that when alive I
was in no wise evil, but that now I am dead and can do nothing, my
remains, which are incapable of motion or even sense, should effect
something cognizable by the senses? And how shall he who has died by the
most miserable death be able to assist in avenging any one? If this were
possible, much more might he defend <span id="page_73">p. 73</span>
<span id="iii.ii.xvii-Page_73"></span>himself from his own enemy; being
able to assist others, much more might he constitute himself his own
avenger.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_472"></span>[72:473](0020053.htm#fr_472) <span
id="iii.ii.xvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xvii-p2"></span> Democritus. \[The Paris editors add,
*vide Lærtium*. As to *Ostanes*, see that invaluable thesaurus,
*Hofmann’s Lex. Universale*, vol. ii. p. 6. Leyden, 1698.\]

<span id="fn_473"></span>[72:474](0020053.htm#fr_473) <span
id="iii.ii.xvii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xvii-p3"></span> \[Comp. cap. vi. note 6, *supra*. p.
67.\]

<span id="fn_474"></span>[72:475](0020053.htm#fr_474) <span
id="iii.ii.xvii-p3.4"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xvii-p4"></span> \[*Naviget Anticyras*. On hellebore,
see otherwise useless learning but illustrative of this place, in
Burton, *Anat. Melanchol.*, p. 400. Ed. New York, 1847.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVIII. They Deceive, Instead of Healing.](0020054)
