[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020095)  [Next](0020097.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.i.xiii"></span>

##### <span id="iv.ii.i.xiii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XIII.—The Resurrection Proved by Examples.

<span id="iv.ii.i.xiii-p1"></span>Then, as to your denying that the dead
are raised—for you say, <span id="fr_542"></span>[543](#fn_542.md) “Show me
even one who has been raised from the dead, that seeing I may
believe,”—first, what great thing is it if you believe when you have
seen the thing done? Then, again, you believe that Hercules, who burned
himself, lives; and that Æsculapius, who was <span id="page_93">p.
93</span> <span id="iv.ii.i.xiii-Page_93"></span>struck with lightning,
was raised; and do you disbelieve the things that are told you by God?
But, suppose I should show you a dead man raised and alive, even this
you would disbelieve. God indeed exhibits to you many proofs that you
may believe Him. For consider, if you please, the dying of seasons, and
days, and nights, how these also die and rise again. And what? Is there
not a resurrection going on of seeds and fruits, and this, too, for the
use of men? A seed of wheat, for example, or of the other grains, when
it is cast into the earth, first dies and rots away, then is raised, and
becomes a stalk of corn. And the nature of trees and fruit-trees,—is it
not that according to the appointment of God they produce their fruits
in their seasons out of what has been unseen and invisible? Moreover,
sometimes also a sparrow or some of the other birds, when in drinking it
has swallowed a seed of apple or fig, or something else, has come to
some rocky hillock or tomb, and has left the seed in its droppings, and
the seed, which was once swallowed, and has passed though so great a
heat, now striking root, a tree has grown up. And all these things does
the wisdom of God effect, in order to manifest even by these things,
that God is able to effect the general resurrection of all men. And if
you would witness a more wonderful sight, which may prove a resurrection
not only of earthly but of heavenly bodies, consider the resurrection of
the moon, which occurs monthly; how it wanes, dies, and rises again.
Hear further, O man, of the work of resurrection going on in yourself,
even though you are unaware of it. For perhaps you have sometimes fallen
sick, and lost flesh, and strength, and beauty; but when you received
again from God mercy and healing, you picked up again in flesh and
appearance, and recovered also your strength. And as you do not know
where your flesh went away and disappeared to, so neither do you know
whence it grew, Or whence it came again. But you will say, “From meats
and drinks changed into blood.” Quite so; but this, too, is the work of
God, who thus operates, and not of any other.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_542"></span>[92:543](0020096.htm#fr_542.md) <span
id="iv.ii.i.xiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.i.xiii-p2"></span> \[This is the famous challenge which
affords Gibbon (cap. xv.) a most pleasing opportunity for his cavils.
But our author was not asserting that the dead was raised in his day,
but only that they should be at the las day.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV.—Theophilus an Example of Conversion.](0020097.md)
