[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020223)  [Next](0020225) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iii.xvi"></span>

##### <span id="v.iii.xvi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XVI—Analogy of Death and Sleep, and Consequent Argument for the Resurrection.

<span id="v.iii.xvi-p1"></span>And let no one think it strange that we
call by the name of life a continuance of being which is interrupted by
death and corruption; but let him consider rather that this word has not
one meaning only, nor is there only one measure of continuance, because
the nature also of the things that continue is not one. For if each of
the things that continue has its continuance according to its peculiar
nature, neither in the case of those who are wholly incorruptible and
immortal shall we find the continuance like ours, because the natures of
superior beings do not take the level of such as are inferior; nor in
men is it proper to look for a continuance invariable and unchangeable;
inasmuch as the former are from the first created immortal, and continue
to exist without end by the simple will of their Maker, and men, in
respect of the soul, have from their first origin an unchangeable
continuance, but in respect of the body obtain immortality by means of
change. This is what is meant by the doctrine of the resurrection; and,
looking to this, we both await the dissolution of the body, as the
sequel to a life of want and corruption, and after this we hope for a
continuance with immortality, <span id="fr_842"></span>[843](#fn_842)
not putting either our death <span id="page_158">p. 158</span> <span
id="v.iii.xvi-Page_158"></span>on a level with the death of the
irrational animals, or the continuance of man with the continuance of
immortals, lest we should unawares in this way put human nature and life
on a level with things with which it is not proper to compare them. It
ought not, therefore, to excite dissatisfaction, if some inequality
appears to exist in regard to the duration of men; nor, because the
separation of the soul from the members of the body and the dissolution
of its parts interrupts the continuity of life, must we therefore
despair of the resurrection. For although the relaxation of the senses
and of the physical powers, which naturally takes place in sleep, seems
to interrupt the sensational life when men sleep at equal intervals of
time, and, as it were, come back to life again, yet we do not refuse to
call it life; and for this reason, I suppose, some call sleep the
brother of death, <span id="fr_843"></span>[844](#fn_843) not as
deriving their origin from the same ancestors and fathers, but because
those who are dead and those who sleep are subject to similar states, as
regards at least the stillness and the absence of all sense of the
present or the past, or rather of existence itself and their own life.
If, therefore, we do not refuse to call by the name of life the life of
men full of such inequality from birth to dissolution, and interrupted
by all those things which we have before mentioned, neither ought we to
despair of the life succeeding to dissolution, such as involves the
resurrection, although for a time it is interrupted by the separation of
the soul from the body.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_842"></span>[157:843](0020224.htm#fr_842) <span
id="v.iii.xvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xvi-p2"></span> \[[Job xix.
25](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#025)<span id="v.iii.xvi-p2.1"></span>.
On which see St. Jerome, *Ad Paulinum*, cap. 10, tom. iv. 569, ed.
Bened. And, on the text itself, see Pusey on *Daniel*, p. 504, London,
1864. A fine passage in Calvin, *ad locum:* “En igitur qualis debate
esse nostra Fides,” etc. *Opp*., tom. ii. p. 260, ed. Amsterdam, 1676.\]

<span id="fn_843"></span>[158:844](0020224.htm#fr_843) <span
id="v.iii.xvi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xvi-p3"></span> \[Homer, *Iliad*, b. xiv. 231, and
Virgil, Æn., vi. 278.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVII.—The Series of Changes We Can Now Trace in Man
Renders a Resurrection Probable.](0020225)
