[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020416)  [Next](0020418.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.vii.vii"></span>

##### <span id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p0.1"></span>Chapter VII.—What Sort of Prayer the Gnostic Employs, and How It is Heard by God.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p1"></span>Now we are commanded to reverence and
to honour the same one, being persuaded that He is Word, Saviour, and
Leader, and by Him, the Father, not on special days, as some others, but
doing this continually in our whole life, and in every way. Certainly
the elect race justified by the precept says, “Seven times a day have I
praised Thee.” <span id="fr_3561"></span>[3562](#fn_3561.md) Whence not in
a specified place, <span id="fr_3562"></span>[3563](#fn_3562.md) or
selected temple, or at certain festivals and on appointed days, but
during his whole life, the Gnostic in every place, even if he be alone
by himself, and wherever he has any of those who have exercised the like
faith, honours God, <span id="page_533">p. 533</span> <span
id="vi.iv.vii.vii-Page_533"></span>that is, acknowledges his gratitude
for the knowledge of the way to live.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p4"></span>And if the presence of a good man,
through the respect and reverence which he inspires, always improves him
with whom he associates, with much more reason does not he who always
holds uninterrupted converse with God by knowledge, life, and
thanksgiving, grow at every step superior to himself in all respects—in
conduct, in words, in disposition? Such an one is persuaded that God is
ever beside him, and does not suppose that He is confined in certain
limited places; so that under the idea that at times he is without Him,
he may indulge in excesses night and day.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p5"></span>Holding festival, then, in our whole
life, persuaded that God is altogether on every side present, we
cultivate our fields, praising; we sail the sea, hymning; in all the
rest of our conversation we conduct ourselves according to rule. <span
id="fr_3563"></span>[3564](#fn_3563.md) The Gnostic, then, is very closely
allied to God, being at once grave and cheerful in all things,—grave on
account of the bent of his soul towards the Divinity, and cheerful on
account of his consideration of the blessings of humanity which God hath
given us.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p7"></span>Now the excellence of knowledge is
evidently presented by the prophet when he says, “Benignity, and
instruction, and knowledge teach me,” <span
id="fr_3564"></span>[3565](#fn_3564.md) magnifying the supremacy of
perfection by a climax.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p9"></span>He is, then, the truly kingly man; he
is the sacred high priest of God. And this is even now observed among
the most sagacious of the Barbarians, in advancing the sacerdotal caste
to the royal power. He, therefore, never surrenders himself to the
rabble that rules supreme over the theatres, and gives no admittance
even in a dream to the things which are spoken, done, and seen for the
sake of alluring pleasures; neither, therefore, to the pleasures of
sight, nor the various pleasures which are found in other enjoyments, as
costly incense and odours, which bewitch the nostrils, or preparations
of meats, and indulgences in different wines, which ensnare the palate,
or fragrant bouquets of many flowers, which through the senses
effeminate the soul. But always tracing up to God the grave enjoyment of
all things, he offers the first-fruits of food, and drink, and unguents
to the Giver of all, acknowledging his thanks in the gift and in the use
of them by the Word given to him. He rarely goes to convivial banquets
of all and sundry, unless the announcement to him of the friendly and
harmonious character of the entertainment induce him to go. For he is
convinced that God knows and perceives all things—not the words only,
but also the thought; since even our sense of hearing, which acts
through the passages of the body, has the apprehension \[belonging to
it\] not through corporeal power, but through a psychical perception,
and the intelligence which distinguishes significant sounds. God is not,
then, possessed of human form, so as to hear; nor needs He senses, as
the Stoics have decided, “especially hearing and sight; for He could
never otherwise apprehend.” But the susceptibility of the air, and the
intensely keen perception of the angels, <span
id="fr_3565"></span>[3566](#fn_3565.md) and the power which reaches the
soul’s consciousness, by ineffable power and without sensible hearing,
know all things at the moment of thought. And should any one say that
the voice does not reach God, but is rolled downwards in the air, yet
the thoughts of the saints cleave not the air only, but the whole world.
And the divine power, with the speed of light, sees through the whole
soul. Well! Do not also volitions speak to God, uttering their voice?
And are they not conveyed by conscience? And what voice shall He wait
for, who, according to His purpose, knows the elect already, even before
his birth, knows what is to be as already existent? Does not the light
of power shine down to the very bottom of the whole soul; “the lamp of
knowledge,” as the Scripture says, searching “the recesses”? God is all
ear and all eye, if we may be permitted to use these expressions.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p11"></span>In general, then, an unworthy
opinion of God preserves no piety, either in hymns, or discourses, or
writings, or dogmas, but diverts to grovelling and unseemly ideas and
notions. Whence the commendation of the multitude differs nothing from
censure, in consequence of their ignorance of the truth. The objects,
then, of desires and aspirations, and, in a word, of the mind’s
impulses, are the subjects of prayers. Wherefore, no man desires a
draught, but to drink what is drinkable; and no man desires an
inheritance, but to inherit. And in like manner no man desires
knowledge, but to know; or a right government, but to take part in the
government. The subjects of our prayers, then, are the subjects of our
requests, and the subjects of requests are the objects of desires.
Prayer, then, and desire, follow in order, with the view of possessing
the blessings and advantages offered.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p12"></span>The Gnostic, then, who is such by
possession, makes his prayer and request for the truly good things which
appertain to the soul, and prays, he himself also contributing his
efforts to attain to the habit of goodness, so as no longer to have the
things that are good as certain lessons belonging to him, but to be
good.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p13"></span>Wherefore also it is most incumbent
on such <span id="page_534">p. 534</span> <span
id="vi.iv.vii.vii-Page_534"></span>to pray, knowing as they do the
Divinity rightly, and having the moral excellence suitable to him; who
know what things are really good, and what are to be asked, and when and
how in each individual case. It is the extremest stupidity to ask of
them who are no gods, as if they were gods; or to ask those things which
are not beneficial, begging evils for themselves under the appearance of
good things.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p14"></span>Whence, as is right, there being
only one good God, that some good things be given from Him alone, and
that some remain, we and the angels pray. But not similarly. For it is
not the same thing to pray that the gift remain, and to endeavour to
obtain it for the first time.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p15"></span>The averting of evils is a species
of prayer; but such prayer is never to be used for the injury of men,
except that the Gnostic, in devoting attention to righteousness, may
make use of this petition in the case of those who are past feeling.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p16"></span>Prayer is, then, to speak more
boldly, converse with God. Though whispering, consequently, and not
opening the lips, we speak in silence, yet we cry inwardly. <span
id="fr_3566"></span>[3567](#fn_3566.md) For God hears continually all the
inward converse. So also we raise the head and lift the hands to heaven,
and set the feet in motion <span id="fr_3567"></span>[3568](#fn_3567.md) at
the closing utterance of the prayer, following the eagerness of the
spirit directed towards the intellectual essence; and endeavouring to
abstract the body from the earth, along with the discourse, raising the
soul aloft, winged with longing for better things, we compel it to
advance to the region of holiness, magnanimously despising the chain of
the flesh. For we know right well, that the Gnostic willingly passes
over the whole world, as the Jews certainly did over Egypt, showing
clearly, above all, that he will be as near as possible to God.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p19"></span>Now, if some assign definite hours
for prayer—as, for example, the third, and sixth, and ninth—yet the
Gnostic prays throughout his whole life, endeavouring by prayer to have
fellowship with God. <span id="fr_3568"></span>[3569](#fn_3568.md) And,
briefly, having reached to this, he leaves behind him all that is of no
service, as having now received the perfection of the man that acts by
love. But the distribution of the hours into a threefold division,
honoured with as many prayers, those are acquainted with, who know the
blessed triad of the holy abodes. <span
id="fr_3569"></span>[3570](#fn_3569.md)

<span id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p22"></span>Having got to this point, I
recollect the doctrines about there being no necessity to pray,
introduced by certain of the heterodox, that is, the followers of the
heresy of Prodicus. That they may not then be inflated with conceit
about this godless wisdom of theirs, as if it were strange, let them
learn that it was embraced before by the philosophers called
Cyrenaics. <span id="fr_3570"></span>[3571](#fn_3570.md) Nevertheless, the
unholy knowledge (*gnosis*) of those falsely called \[Gnostics\] shall
meet with confutation at a fitting time; so that the assault on them, by
no means brief, may not, by being introduced into the commentary, break
the discourse in hand, in which we are showing that the only really holy
and pious man is he who is truly a Gnostic according to the rule of the
Church, to whom alone the petition made in accordance with the will of
God is granted, <span id="fr_3571"></span>[3572](#fn_3571.md) on asking and
on thinking. For as God can do all that He wishes, so the Gnostic
receives all that he asks. For, universally, God knows those who are and
those who are not worthy of good things; whence He gives to each what is
suitable. Wherefore to those that are unworthy, though they ask often,
He will not give; but He will give to those who are worthy.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p25"></span>Nor is petition superfluous, though
good things are given without claim.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p26"></span>Now thanksgiving and request for the
conversion of our neighbours is the function of the Gnostic; as also the
Lord prayed, giving thanks for the accomplishment of His ministry,
praying that as many as possible might attain to knowledge; that in the
saved, by salvation, through knowledge, God might be glorified, and He
who is alone good and alone Saviour might be acknowledged through the
Son from age to age. But also faith, that one will receive, is a species
of prayer gnostically laid up in store.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p27"></span>But if any occasion of converse with
God becomes prayer, no opportunity of access to God ought to be omitted.
Without doubt, the holiness of the Gnostic, in union with \[God’s\]
blessed Providence, exhibits in voluntary confession the perfect
beneficence of God. For the holiness of the Gnostic, and the reciprocal
benevolence of the friend of God, are a kind of corresponding movement
of providence. For neither is God involuntarily good, as the fire is
warming; but in Him the imparting of good things is voluntary, even if
He receive the request previously. Nor shall he who is saved be saved
against his will, for he is not inanimate; but he will above all
voluntarily and of free choice speed to salvation. Wherefore also man
received the commandments in order that he might be self-impelled, to
whatever he wished of things to be chosen and to be avoided. Wherefore
God does not do good by necessity, but from His free choice benefits
those <span id="page_535">p. 535</span> <span
id="vi.iv.vii.vii-Page_535"></span>who spontaneously turn. For the
Providence which extends to us from God is not ministerial, as that
service which proceeds from inferiors to superiors. But in pity for our
weakness, the continual dispensations of Providence work, as the care of
shepherds towards the sheep, and of a king towards his subjects; we
ourselves also conducting ourselves obediently towards our superiors,
who take the management of us, as appointed, in accordance with the
commission from God with which they are invested.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p28"></span>Consequently those who render the
most free and kingly service, which is the result of a pious mind and of
knowledge, are servants and attendants of the Divinity. Each place,
then, and time, in which we entertain the idea of God, is in reality
sacred.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p29"></span>When, then, the man who chooses what
is right, and is at the same time of thankful heart, makes his request
in prayer, he contributes to the obtaining of it, gladly taking hold in
prayer of the thing desired. For when the Giver of good things perceives
the susceptibility on our part, all good things follow at once the
conception of them. Certainly in prayer the character is sifted, how it
stands with respect to duty.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p30"></span>But if voice and expression are
given us, for the sake of understanding, how can God not hear the soul
itself, and the mind, since assuredly soul hears soul, and mind, mind?
Whence God does not wait for loquacious tongues, as interpreters among
men, but knows absolutely the thoughts of all; and what the voice
intimates to us, that our thought, which even before the creation He
knew would come into our mind, speaks to God. Prayer, then, may be
uttered without the voice, by concentrating the whole spiritual nature
within on expression by the mind, in un-distracted turning towards God.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p31"></span>And since the dawn is an image of
the day of birth, and from that point the light which has shone forth at
first from the darkness increases, there has also dawned on those
involved in darkness a day of the knowledge of truth. In correspondence
with the manner of the sun’s rising, prayers are made looking towards
the sunrise in the east. Whence also the most ancient temples looked
towards the west, that people might be taught to turn to the east when
facing the images. <span id="fr_3572"></span>[3573](#fn_3572.md) “Let my
prayer be directed before Thee as incense, the uplifting of my hands as
the evening sacrifice,” <span id="fr_3573"></span>[3574](#fn_3573.md) say
the Psalms.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p34"></span>In the case of wicked men,
therefore, prayer is most injurious, not to others alone, but to
themselves also. If, then, they should ask and receive what they call
pieces of good fortune, these injure them after they receive them, being
ignorant how to use them. For they pray to possess what they have not,
and they ask things which seem, but are not, good things. <span
id="fr_3574"></span>[3575](#fn_3574.md) But the Gnostic will ask the
permanence of the things he possesses, adaptation for what is to take
place, and the eternity of those things which he shall receive. And the
things which are really good, the things which concern the soul, he
prays that they may belong to him, and remain with him. And so he
desires not anything that is absent, being content with what is present.
For he is not deficient in the good things which are proper to him;
being already sufficient for himself, through divine grace and
knowledge. But having become sufficient in himself, he stands in no want
of other things. But knowing the sovereign will, and possessing as soon
as he prays, being brought into close contact with the almighty power,
and earnestly desiring to be spiritual, through boundless love, he is
united to the Spirit.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p36"></span>Thus he, being magnanimous,
possessing, through knowledge, what is the most precious of all, the
best of all, being quick in applying himself to contemplation, retains
in his soul the permanent energy of the objects of his contemplation,
that is the perspicacious keenness of knowledge. And this power he
strives to his utmost to acquire, by obtaining command of all the
influences which war against the mind; and by applying himself without
intermission to speculation, by exercising himself in the training of
abstinence from pleasures, and of right conduct in what he does; and
besides, furnished with great experience both in study and in life, he
has freedom of speech, not the power of a babbling tongue, but a power
which employs plain language, and which neither for favour nor fear
conceals aught of the things which may be worthily said at the fitting
time, in which it is highly necessary to say them. He, then, having
received the things respecting God from the mystic choir of the truth
itself, employs language which urges the magnitude of virtue in
accordance with its worth; and shows its results with an inspired
elevation of prayer, being associated gnostically, as far as possible,
with intellectual and spiritual objects.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p37"></span>Whence he is always mild and meek,
accessible, affable, long-suffering, grateful, endued with a good
conscience. Such a man is rigid, not alone so as not to be corrupted,
but so as not to be tempted. For he never exposes his soul to
submission, or capture at the hands of Pleasure and Pain. If the Word,
who is Judge, call; he, having grown inflexible, and not indulging a
whit the passions, walks unswervingly where justice advises him to go;
being very well persuaded that all things are managed consummately well,
<span id="page_436">p. 436</span> <span
id="vi.iv.vii.vii-Page_436"></span>and that progress to what is better
goes on in the case of souls that have chosen virtue, till they come to
the Good itself, to the Father’s vestibule, so to speak, close to the
great High Priest. Such is our Gnostic, faithful, persuaded that the
affairs of the universe are managed in the best way. Particularly, he is
well pleased with all that happens. In accordance with reason, then, he
asks for none of those things in life required for necessary use; being
persuaded that God, who knows all things, supplies the good with
whatever is for their benefit, even though they do not ask.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p38"></span>For my view is, that as all things
are supplied to the man of art according to the rules of art, and to the
Gentile in a Gentile way, so also to the Gnostic all things are supplied
gnostically. And the man who turns from among the Gentiles will ask for
faith, while he that ascends to knowledge will ask for the perfection of
love. And the Gnostic, who has reached the summit, will pray that
contemplation may grow and abide, as the common man will for continual
good health.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p39"></span>Nay, he will pray that he may never
fall from virtue; giving his most strenuous co-operation in order that
he may become infallible. For he knows that some of the angels, through
carelessness, were hurled to the earth, not having yet quite reached
that state of oneness, by extricating themselves from the propensity to
that of duality.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p40"></span>But him, who from this has trained
himself to the summit of knowledge and the elevated height of the
perfect man, all things relating to time and place help on, now that he
has made it his choice to live infallibly, and subjects himself to
training in order to the attainment of the stability of knowledge on
each side. But in the case of those in whom there is still a heavy
corner, leaning downwards, even that part which has been elevated by
faith is dragged down. In him, then, who by gnostic training has
acquired virtue which cannot be lost, habit becomes nature. And just as
weight in a stone, so the knowledge of such an one is incapable of being
lost. Not without, but through the exercise of will, and by the force of
reason, and knowledge, and Providence, is it brought to become incapable
of being lost. Through care it becomes incapable of being lost. He will
employ caution so as to avoid sinning, and consideration to prevent the
loss of virtue.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p41"></span>Now knowledge appears to produce
consideration, by teaching to perceive the things that are capable of
contributing to the permanence of virtue. The highest thing is, then,
the knowledge of God; wherefore also by it virtue is so preserved as to
be incapable of being lost. And he who knows God is holy and pious. The
Gnostic has consequently been demonstrated by us to be the only pious
man.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p42"></span>He rejoices in good things present,
and is glad on account of those promised, as if they were already
present. For they do not elude his notice, as if they were still absent,
because he knows by anticipation what sort they are. Being then
persuaded by knowledge how each future thing shall be, he possesses it.
For want and defect are measured with reference to what appertains to
one. If, then, he possesses wisdom, and wisdom is a divine thing, he who
partakes of what has no want will himself have no want. For the
imparting of wisdom does not take place by activity and receptivity
moving and stopping each other, or by aught being abstracted or becoming
defective. Activity is therefore shown to be undiminished in the act of
communication. So, then, our Gnostic possesses all good things, as far
as possible; but not likewise in number; since otherwise he would be
incapable of changing his place through the due inspired stages of
advancement and acts of administration.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p43"></span>Him God helps, by honouring him with
closer oversight. For were not all things made for the sake of good men,
for their possession and advantage, or rather salvation? He will not
then deprive, of the things which exist for the sake of virtue, those
for whose sake they were created. For, evidently in honour of their
excellent nature and their holy choice, he inspires those who have made
choice of a good life with strength for the rest of their salvation;
exhorting some, and helping others, who of themselves have become
worthy. For all good is capable of being produced in the Gnostic; if
indeed it is his aim to know and do everything intelligently. And as the
physician ministers health to those who co-operate with him in order to
health, so also God ministers eternal salvation to those who co-operate
for the attainment of knowledge and good conduct; and since what the
commandments enjoin are in our own power, along with the performance of
them, the promise is accomplished.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p44"></span>And what follows seems to me to be
excellently said by the Greeks. An athlete of no mean reputation among
those of old, having for a long time subjected his body to thorough
training in order to the attainment of manly strength, on going up to
the Olympic games, cast his eye on the statue of the Pisæan Zeus, and
said: “O Zeus, if all the requisite preparations for the contest have
been made by me, come, give me the victory, as is right.” For so, in the
case of the Gnostic, who has unblameably and with a good conscience
fulfilled all that depends on him, in the direction of learning, and
training, and well-doing, and pleasing God, the whole contributes to
carry salvation on to perfection. From us, then, are demanded the things
which <span id="page_537">p. 537</span> <span
id="vi.iv.vii.vii-Page_537"></span>are in our own power, and of the
things which pertain to us, both present and absent, the choice, and
desire, and possession, and use, and permanence.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p45"></span>Wherefore also he who holds converse
with God must have his soul immaculate and stainlessly pure, it being
essential to have made himself perfectly good.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p46"></span>But also it becomes him to make all
his prayers gently with the good. For it is a dangerous thing to take
part in others’ sins. Accordingly the Gnostic will pray along with those
who have more recently believed, for those things in respect of which it
is their duty to act together. And his whole life is a holy
festival. <span id="fr_3575"></span>[3576](#fn_3575.md) His sacrifices are
prayers, and praises, and readings in the Scriptures before meals, and
psalms and hymns during meals and before bed, and prayers also again
during night. By these he unites himself to the divine choir, from
continual recollection, engaged in contemplation which has everlasting
remembrance.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p48"></span>And what? Does he not also know the
other kind of sacrifice, which consists in the giving both of doctrines
and of money to those who need? Assuredly. But he does not use wordy
prayer by his mouth; having learned to ask of the Lord what is
requisite. In every place, therefore, but not ostensibly and visibly to
the multitude, he will pray. But while engaged in walking, in
conversation, while in silence, while engaged in reading and in works
according to reason, he in every mood prays. <span
id="fr_3576"></span>[3577](#fn_3576.md) If he but form the thought in the
secret chamber of his soul, and call on the Father “with unspoken
groanings,” <span id="fr_3577"></span>[3578](#fn_3577.md) He is near, and
is at his side, while yet speaking. Inasmuch as there are but three ends
of all action, he does everything for its excellence and utility; but
doing aught for the sake of pleasure, <span
id="fr_3578"></span>[3579](#fn_3578.md) he leaves to those who pursue the
common life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3561"></span>[532:3562](0020417.htm#fr_3561.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p2"></span> [Ps. cxix.
164](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#164.md)<span
id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p2.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3562"></span>[532:3563](0020417.htm#fr_3562.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p3"></span> \[It is hardly needful to say that
our author means “*not merely* in a specified place,” etc. See p. 290,
*supra*, as to time and place.\]

<span id="fn_3563"></span>[533:3564](0020417.htm#fr_3563.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p6"></span> \[See p. 200, this volume; also,
*infra*, this chapter, p. 537.\]

<span id="fn_3564"></span>[533:3565](0020417.htm#fr_3564.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p8"></span> [Ps. cxix.
66](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#066.md)<span
id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3565"></span>[533:3566](0020417.htm#fr_3565.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p10"></span> \[Pious men have been strict in
their conduct when quite alone, from a devout conviction of the presence
of angelic guardians.\]

<span id="fn_3566"></span>[534:3567](0020417.htm#fr_3566.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p17"></span> \[[1 Sam. i.
13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#013.md)<span
id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p17.2"></span>. See this same chapter, *infra*, p.
535.\]

<span id="fn_3567"></span>[534:3568](0020417.htm#fr_3567.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p17.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p18"></span> \[This is variously explained. It
seems to refer to some change of position in Christian assemblies, at
the close of worship or in ascriptions of praise.\]

<span id="fn_3568"></span>[534:3569](0020417.htm#fr_3568.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p20"></span> \[See, *supra*, cap. vii. note 8,
p. 532.\]

<span id="fn_3569"></span>[534:3570](0020417.htm#fr_3569.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p21"></span> \[The *third*, *sixth*, and *ninth*
hours were deemed sacred to the three persons of the Trinity,
respectively. Also they were honoured as the hours of the beginning,
middle, and close of our Lord’s passion.\]

<span id="fn_3570"></span>[534:3571](0020417.htm#fr_3570.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p23"></span> \[Of these, see ed. Migne, *ad
locum*.\]

<span id="fn_3571"></span>[534:3572](0020417.htm#fr_3571.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p24"></span> According to Heinsius’ reading, who
substitutes <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p24.1"></span>ἀπονενεμημέῃ</span> for <span
class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p24.2"></span>ἀπονενεμημένῳ</span>.

<span id="fn_3572"></span>[535:3573](0020417.htm#fr_3572.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p32"></span> \[Christians adopted this habit at
an early period, on various grounds, as will hereafter appear in this
series.\]

<span id="fn_3573"></span>[535:3574](0020417.htm#fr_3573.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p33"></span> [Ps. cxli.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#002.md)<span
id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3574"></span>[535:3575](0020417.htm#fr_3574.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p35"></span> \[[Jas. iv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#003.md)<span
id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p35.1"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_3575"></span>[537:3576](0020417.htm#fr_3575.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p46.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p47"></span> \[See, *supra*, this chapter, p.
533, note 1.\]

<span id="fn_3576"></span>[537:3577](0020417.htm#fr_3576.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p48.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p49"></span> \[*Supra*, p. 535, also note 1 p.
534.\]

<span id="fn_3577"></span>[537:3578](0020417.htm#fr_3577.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p49.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p50"></span> [Rom. viii.
26](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#026.md)<span
id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3578"></span>[537:3579](0020417.htm#fr_3578.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p50.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p51"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p51.1"></span>τὸ δὲ ἐπιτελεῖν διὰ τὸν δύσοιστον κοινὸν
βίον</span> is the reading of the text; which Potter amends, so as to
bring out what is plainly the idea of the author, the reference to
pleasure as the third end of actions, and the end pursued by ordinary
men, by changing <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p51.2"></span>διά</span> into <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p51.3"></span>ἡδέα</span>, which
is simple, and leaves <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p51.4"></span>δύσοιστον</span> (intolerable) to stand.
Sylburgius notes that the Latin translator renders as if he read <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.vii.vii-p51.5"></span>διὰ τὴν
ἡδονήν</span>, which is adopted above.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII.—The Gnostic So Addicted to Truth as Not to Need to
Use an Oath.](0020418.md)
