[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020309)  [Next](0020311.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.i.xvii"></span>

##### <span id="vi.iv.i.xvii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XVII.—On the Saying of the Saviour, “All that Came Before Me Were Thieves and Robbers.” <span id="fr_1984"></span>[1985](#fn_1984.md)

<span id="vi.iv.i.xvii-p2"></span>But, say they, it is written, “All who
were before the Lord’s advent are thieves and robbers.” All, then, who
are in the Word (for it is these that were previous to the incarnation
of the Word) are understood generally. But the <span id="page_319">p.
319</span> <span id="vi.iv.i.xvii-Page_319"></span>prophets, being sent
and inspired by the Lord, were not thieves, but servants. The Scripture
accordingly says, “Wisdom sent her servants, inviting with loud
proclamation to a goblet of wine.” <span
id="fr_1985"></span>[1986](#fn_1985.md)

<span id="vi.iv.i.xvii-p4"></span>But philosophy, it is said, was not
sent by the Lord, but came stolen, or given by a thief. It was then some
power or angel that had learned something of the truth, but abode not in
it, that inspired and taught these things, not without the Lord’s
knowledge, who knew before the constitution of each essence the issues
of futurity, but without His prohibition.

<span id="vi.iv.i.xvii-p5"></span>For the theft which reached men then,
had some advantage; not that he who perpetrated the theft had utility in
his eye, but Providence directed the issue of the audacious deed to
utility. I know that many are perpetually assailing us with the
allegation, that not to prevent a thing happening, is to be the cause of
it happening. For they say, that the man who does not take precaution
against a theft, or does not prevent it, is the cause of it: as he is
the cause of the conflagration who has not quenched it at the beginning;
and the master of the vessel who does not reef the sail, is the cause of
the shipwreck. Certainly those who are the causes of such events are
punished by the law. For to him who had power to prevent, attaches the
blame of what happens. We say to them, that causation is seen in doing,
working, acting; but the not preventing is in this respect inoperative.
Further, causation attaches to activity; as in the case of the
shipbuilder in relation to the origin of the vessel, and the builder in
relation to the construction of the house. But that which does not
prevent is separated from what takes place. Wherefore the effect will be
accomplished; because that which could have prevented neither acts nor
prevents. For what activity does that which prevents not exert? Now
their assertion is reduced to absurdity, if they shall say that the
cause of the wound is not the dart, but the shield, which did not
prevent the dart from passing through; and if they blame not the thief,
but the man who did not prevent the theft. Let them then say, that it
was not Hector that burned the ships of the Greeks, but Achilles;
because, having the power to prevent Hector, he did not prevent him; but
out of anger (and it depended on himself to be angry or not) did not
keep back the fire, and was a concurring cause. Now the devil, being
possessed of free-will, was able both to repent and to steal; and it was
he who was the author of the theft, not the Lord, who did not prevent
him. But neither was the gift hurtful, so as to require that prevention
should intervene.

<span id="vi.iv.i.xvii-p6"></span>But if strict accuracy must be
employed in dealing with them, let them know, that that which does not
prevent what we assert to have taken place in the theft, is not a cause
at all; but that what prevents is involved in the accusation of being a
cause. For he that protects with a shield is the cause of him whom he
protects not being wounded; preventing him, as he does, from being
wounded. For the demon of Socrates was a cause, not by not preventing,
but by exhorting, even if (strictly speaking) he did not exhort. And
neither praises nor censures, neither rewards nor punishments, are
right, when the soul has not the power of inclination and
disinclination, but evil is involuntary. Whence he who prevents is a
cause; while he who prevents not judges justly the soul’s choice. So in
no respect is God the author of evil. But since free choice and
inclination originate sins, and a mistaken judgment sometimes prevails,
from which, since it is ignorance and stupidity, we do not take pains to
recede, punishments are rightly inflicted. For to take fever is
involuntary; but when one takes fever through his own fault, from
excess, we blame him. Inasmuch, then, as evil is involuntary,—for no one
prefers evil as evil; but induced by the pleasure that is in it, and
imagining it good, considers it desirable;—such being the case, to free
ourselves from ignorance, and from evil and voluptuous choice, and above
all, to withhold our assent from those delusive phantasies, depends on
ourselves. The devil is called “thief and robber;” having mixed false
prophets with the prophets, as tares with the wheat. “All, then, that
came before the Lord, were thieves and robbers;” not absolutely all men,
but all the false prophets, and all who were not properly sent by Him.
For the false prophets possessed the prophetic name dishonestly, being
prophets, but prophets of the liar. For the Lord says, “Ye are of your
father the devil; and the lusts of your father ye will do. He was a
murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the truth, because there
is no truth in him. When he speaketh a lie, he speaketh of his own; for
he is a liar, and the father of it.” <span
id="fr_1986"></span>[1987](#fn_1986.md)

<span id="vi.iv.i.xvii-p8"></span>But among the lies, the false prophets
also told some true things. And in reality they prophesied “in an
ecstasy,” as <span id="fr_1987"></span>[1988](#fn_1987.md) the servants of
the apostate. And the Shepherd, the angel of repentance, says to Hermas,
of the false prophet: “For he speaks some truths. For the devil fills
him with his own spirit, if perchance he may be able to cast down any
one from what is right.” All things, therefore, are dispensed from
heaven for good, “that by the Church may be made known the manifold
wisdom of God, according <span id="page_320">p. 320</span> <span
id="vi.iv.i.xvii-Page_320"></span>to the eternal foreknowledge, <span
id="fr_1988"></span>[1989](#fn_1988.md) which He purposed in Christ.” <span
id="fr_1989"></span>[1990](#fn_1989.md) Nothing withstands God: nothing
opposes Him: seeing He is Lord and omnipotent. Further, the counsels and
activities of those who have rebelled, being partial, proceed from a bad
disposition, as bodily diseases from a bad constitution, but are guided
by universal Providence to a salutary issue, even though the cause be
productive of disease. It is accordingly the greatest achievement of
divine Providence, not to allow the evil, which has sprung from
voluntary apostasy, to remain useless, and for no good, and not to
become in all respects injurious. For it is the work of the divine
wisdom, and excellence, and power, not alone to do good (for this is, so
to speak, the nature of God, as it is of fire to warm and of light to
illumine), but especially to ensure that what happens through the evils
hatched by any, may come to a good and useful issue, and to use to
advantage those things which appear to be evils, as also the testimony
which accrues from temptation.

<span id="vi.iv.i.xvii-p12"></span>There is then in philosophy, though
stolen as the fire by Prometheus, a slender spark, capable of being
fanned into flame, a trace of wisdom and an impulse from God. Well, be
it so that “the thieves and robbers” are the philosophers among the
Greeks, who from the Hebrew prophets before the coming of the Lord
received fragments of the truth, not with full knowledge, and claimed
these as their own teachings, disguising some points, treating others
sophistically by their ingenuity, and discovering other things, for
perchance they had “the spirit of perception.” <span
id="fr_1990"></span>[1991](#fn_1990.md) Aristotle, too, assented to
Scripture, and declared sophistry to have stolen wisdom, as we intimated
before. And the apostle says, “Which things we speak, not in the words
which man’s wisdom teacheth, but which the Holy Ghost teacheth.” <span
id="fr_1991"></span>[1992](#fn_1991.md) For of the prophets it is said, “We
have all received of His fulness,” <span
id="fr_1992"></span>[1993](#fn_1992.md) that is, of Christ’s. So that the
prophets are not thieves. “And my doctrine is not Mine,” saith the Lord,
“but the Father’s which sent me.” And of those who steal He says: “But
he that speaketh of himself, seeketh his own glory.” <span
id="fr_1993"></span>[1994](#fn_1993.md) Such are the Greeks, “lovers of
their own selves, and boasters.” <span
id="fr_1994"></span>[1995](#fn_1994.md) Scripture, when it speaks of these
as wise, does not brand those who are really wise, but those who are
wise in appearance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1984"></span>[318:1985](0020310.htm#fr_1984.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xvii-p0.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xvii-p1"></span> [John x.
8](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#008.md)<span id="vi.iv.i.xvii-p1.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1985"></span>[319:1986](0020310.htm#fr_1985.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xvii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xvii-p3"></span> [Prov. ix.
3](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#003.md)<span id="vi.iv.i.xvii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1986"></span>[319:1987](0020310.htm#fr_1986.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xvii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xvii-p7"></span> [John viii.
44](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#044.md)<span
id="vi.iv.i.xvii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1987"></span>[319:1988](0020310.htm#fr_1987.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xvii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xvii-p9"></span> \[The devil can quote Scripture.
Hermas, p. 27, this volume. See, on this important chapter, Elucidation
XIII., *infra*.\]

<span id="fn_1988"></span>[320:1989](0020310.htm#fr_1988.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xvii-p9.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xvii-p10"></span> Clement reads <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.i.xvii-p10.1"></span>πρόγνωσιν</span> for
<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.i.xvii-p10.2"></span>πρόθεσιν</span>.

<span id="fn_1989"></span>[320:1990](0020310.htm#fr_1989.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xvii-p10.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xvii-p11"></span> [Eph.
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#010.md),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#011.md)<span
id="vi.iv.i.xvii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1990"></span>[320:1991](0020310.htm#fr_1990.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xvii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xvii-p13"></span> [Ex. xxviii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#003.md)<span
id="vi.iv.i.xvii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1991"></span>[320:1992](0020310.htm#fr_1991.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xvii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xvii-p14"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#013.md)<span
id="vi.iv.i.xvii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1992"></span>[320:1993](0020310.htm#fr_1992.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xvii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xvii-p15"></span> [John i.
16](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#016.md)<span
id="vi.iv.i.xvii-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1993"></span>[320:1994](0020310.htm#fr_1993.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xvii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xvii-p16"></span> [John
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#016.md),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#018.md)<span
id="vi.iv.i.xvii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1994"></span>[320:1995](0020310.htm#fr_1994.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xvii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xvii-p17"></span> [2 Tim. iii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#002.md)<span
id="vi.iv.i.xvii-p17.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVIII.—He Illustrates the Apostle’s Saying, “I Will
Destroy the Wisdom of the Wise.”](0020311.md)
