[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020221)  [Next](0020223) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iii.xiv"></span>

##### <span id="v.iii.xiv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XIV.—The Resurrection Does Not Rest Solely on the Fact of a Future Judgment.

<span id="v.iii.xiv-p1"></span>The proof <span
id="fr_838"></span>[839](#fn_838) of the several doctrines of which the
truth consists, or of any matter whatsoever proposed for examination, if
it is to produce an unwavering confidence in what is said, must begin,
not from anything without, nor from what certain persons think or have
thought, <span id="fr_839"></span>[840](#fn_839) but from the common and
natural notion <span id="fr_840"></span>[841](#fn_840) of the matter, or
from the connection of secondary truths with primary ones. For the
question relates either to primary beliefs, and then all that is
necessary is reminiscence, so as to stir up the natural notion; or to
things which naturally follow from the first and to their natural
sequence. And in these things we must observe order, showing what
strictly follows from the first truths, or from those which are placed
first, so as neither to be unmindful of the truth, or of our certainty
respecting it, nor to confound the things arranged by nature and
distinguished from each other, or break up the natural order. Hence I
think it behoves those who desire to handle the subject with fairness,
and who wish to form an intelligent judgment whether there is a
resurrection or not, first to consider attentively the force of the
arguments contributing to the proof of this, and what place each of them
holds—which is first, which second, which third, and which last. And in
the arrangement of these they should place first the cause of the
creation of men,—namely, the purpose of the Creator in making man; and
then connect with this, as is suitable, the nature of the men so
created; not as being second in order, but because we are unable to pass
our judgment on both at the same time, although they have the closest
natural connection with each other, and are of equal force in reference
to the subject before us. But while from these proofs as the primary
ones, and as being derived from the work of creation, the resurrection
is clearly demonstrated, none the less can we gain conviction respecting
it from the arguments taken from providence,—I mean from the reward or
punishment due to each man in accordance with just judgment, and from
the end of human existence. For many, in discussing the subject of the
resurrection, have rested the whole cause on the third argument alone,
deeming that the cause of the resurrection is the judgment. But the
fallacy of this is very clearly shown, from the fact that, although all
human beings who die rise again, yet not all who rise again are to be
judged: for if only a just judgment were the cause of the resurrection,
it would of course follow that those who had done neither evil nor
good—namely, very young children <span id="fr_841"></span>[842](#fn_841)
—would not rise again; but seeing that all are to rise again, those who
have died in infancy as well as others, they too justify our conclusion
that the resurrection takes place not for the sake of the judgment as
the primary reason, but in consequence of the purpose of God in forming
men, and the nature of the beings so formed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_838"></span>[156:839](0020222.htm#fr_838) <span
id="v.iii.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xiv-p2"></span> \[This chapter of itself establishes the
fact that Christians have a right to demand the evidence for what they
are required to believe. It refutes the idea that what any single bishop
or saint has said or thought is doctrine, for that reason only; but it
leaves the fact that concurrent testimony is evidence, on certain
conditions, in all its force.\]

<span id="fn_839"></span>[156:840](0020222.htm#fr_839) <span
id="v.iii.xiv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xiv-p3"></span> \[Not strong enough for the force of the
original: <span class="Greek"><span id="v.iii.xiv-p3.1"></span>ουδ᾽ ἐκ
τῶν τισί δοκοὐντων ῆ δεδογμένων</span>.\]

<span id="fn_840"></span>[156:841](0020222.htm#fr_840) <span
id="v.iii.xiv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xiv-p4"></span> \[From the natural common sense of the
thing.\]

<span id="fn_841"></span>[156:842](0020222.htm#fr_841) <span
id="v.iii.xiv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xiv-p5"></span> \[A beautiful and cogent argument for
his proposition, and a precious testimony to the innocence of babes
falling asleep in Christ. See Kaye, 190.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XV.—Argument for the Resurrection from the Nature of
Man.](0020223)
