[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020036)  [Next](0020038.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.i"></span>

##### <span id="iii.ii.i-p0.1"></span>Chapter I.—The Greeks Claim, Without Reason, the Invention of the Arts.

<span id="iii.ii.i-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iii.ii.i-p1.1"></span>Be</span> not, O Greeks, so very hostilely
disposed towards the Barbarians, nor look with ill will on their
opinions. For which of your institutions has not been derived from the
Barbarians? The most eminent of the Telmessians invented the art of
divining by dreams; the Carians, that of prognosticating by the stars;
the Phrygians and the most ancient Isaurians, augury by the flight of
birds; the Cyprians, the art of inspecting victims. To the Babylonians
you owe astronomy; to the Persians, magic; to the Egyptians, geometry;
to the Phœnicians, instruction by alphabetic writing. Cease, then, to
miscall these imitations inventions of your own. Orpheus, again, taught
you poetry and song; from him, too, you learned the mysteries. The
Tuscans taught you the plastic art; from the annals of the Egyptians you
learned to write history; you acquired the art of playing the flute from
Marsyas and Olympus,—these two rustic Phrygians constructed the harmony
of the shepherd’s pipe. The Tyrrhenians invented the trumpet; the
Cyclopes, the smith’s art; and a woman who was formerly a queen of the
Persians, as Hellanicus tells us, the method of joining together
epistolary tablets: <span id="fr_421"></span>[422](#fn_421.md) her name was
Atossa. Wherefore lay aside this conceit, and be not ever boasting of
your elegance of diction; for, while you applaud yourselves, your own
people will of course side with you. But it becomes a man of sense to
wait for the testimony of others, and it becomes men to be of one accord
also in the pronunciation of their language. But, as matters stand, to
you alone it has happened not to speak alike even in common intercourse;
for the way of speaking among the Dorians is not the same as that of the
inhabitants of Attica, nor do the Æolians speak like the Ionians. And,
since such a discrepancy exists where it ought not to be, I am at a loss
whom to call a Greek. And, what is strangest of all, you hold in honour
expressions not of native growth, and by the intermixture of barbaric
words have made your language a medley. On this account we have
renounced your wisdom, though I was once a great proficient in it; for,
as the comic poet <span id="fr_422"></span>[423](#fn_422.md) says,—

> <span id="iii.ii.i-p3.1"></span> These are gleaners’ grapes and small
> talk,—  
> Twittering places of swallows, corrupters of art.  

<span id="iii.ii.i-p4"></span>Yet those who eagerly pursue it shout
lustily, and croak like so many ravens. You have, too, contrived the art
of rhetoric to serve injustice and slander, selling the free power of
your speech for hire, and often representing the same thing at one time
as right, at another time as not good. The poetic art, again, you employ
to describe battles, and the amours of the gods, and the corruption of
the soul.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_421"></span>[65:422](0020037.htm#fr_421.md) <span
id="iii.ii.i-p1.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.i-p2"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.i-p2.1"></span>ἐπιστολας συντάττειν</span> , i.e., for
transmission by letter-carriers.—<span class="sc"><span
id="iii.ii.i-p2.2"></span>Otto</span>.

<span id="fn_422"></span>[65:423](0020037.htm#fr_422.md) <span
id="iii.ii.i-p2.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.i-p3"></span> Aristoph., *Ranæ*, 92, 93.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. The Vices and Errors of the Philosophers.](0020038.md)
