[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020210)  [Next](0020212) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iii.iii"></span>

##### <span id="v.iii.iii-p0.1"></span>Chapter III.—He Who Could Create, Can Also Raise Up the Dead.

<span id="v.iii.iii-p1"></span>Moreover also, that His power is
sufficient for the raising of dead bodies, is shown by the creation of
these same bodies. For if, when they did not exist, He made at their
first formation the bodies of men, and their original elements, He will,
when they are dissolved, in whatever manner that may take place, raise
them again with equal ease: for this, too, is equally possible to Him.
And it is no damage to the argument, if some suppose the first
beginnings to be from matter, or the bodies of men at least to be
derived from the elements as the first materials, or from seed. For that
power which could give shape to what is regarded by them as shapeless
matter, and adorn it, when destitute of form and order, with many and
diverse forms, and gather into one the several portions of the elements,
and divide the seed which was one and simple into many, and organize
that which was unorganized, and give life to that which had no
life,—that same power can reunite what is dissolved, and raise up what
is prostrate, and restore the dead to life again, and put the
corruptible into a state of incorruption. And to the same Being it will
belong, and to the same power and skill, to separate that which has been
broken up and distributed among a multitude of animals of all kinds
which are wont to have recourse to such bodies, and glut their appetite
upon them,—to separate this, I say, and unite it again with the proper
members and parts of members, whether it has passed into some one of
those animals, or into many, or thence into others, or, after being
dissolved along with these, has been carried back again to the original
elements, resolved into these according to a natural law—a matter this
<span id="page_151">p. 151</span> <span
id="v.iii.iii-Page_151"></span>which seems to have exceedingly
confounded some, even of those admired for wisdom, who, I cannot tell
why, think those doubts worthy of serious attention which are brought
forward by the many.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV.—Objection from the Fact that Some Human Bodies Have
Become Part of Others.](0020212)
