[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020266)  [Next](0020268) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.ii.iii"></span>

##### <span id="vi.iii.ii.iii-p0.1"></span>Chapter III.—On Costly Vessels.

<span id="vi.iii.ii.iii-p1"></span>And so the use of cups made of silver
and gold, and of others inlaid with precious stones, is out of place,
being only a deception of the vision. For if you pour any warm liquid
into them, the vessels becoming hot, to touch them is painful. On the
other hand, if you pour in what is cold, the material changes its
quality, injuring the mixture, and the rich potion is hurtful. Away,
then, with Thericleian cups and <span id="page_247">p. 247</span> <span
id="vi.iii.ii.iii-Page_247"></span>Antigonides, and Canthari, and
goblets, and Lepastæ, <span id="fr_1390"></span>[1391](#fn_1390) and the
endless shapes of drinking vessels, and wine-coolers, and wine-pourers
also. For, on the whole, gold and silver, both publicly and privately,
are an invidious possession when they exceed what is necessary, seldom
to be acquired, difficult to keep, and not adapted for use. The
elaborate vanity, too, of vessels in glass chased, more apt to break on
account of the art, teaching us to fear while we drink, is to be
banished from our well-ordered constitution. And silver couches, and
pans and vinegar-saucers, and trenchers and bowls; and besides these,
vessels of silver and gold, some for serving food, and others for other
uses which I am ashamed to name, of easily cleft cedar and thyine wood,
and ebony, and tripods fashioned of ivory, and couches with silver feet
and inlaid with ivory, and folding-doors of beds studded with gold and
variegated with tortoise-shell, and bed-clothes of purple and other
colours difficult to produce, proofs of tasteless luxury, cunning
devices of envy and effeminacy,—are all to be relinquished, as having
nothing whatever worth our pains. “For the time is short,” as says the
apostle. This then remains that we do not make a ridiculous figure, as
some are seen in the public spectacles outwardly anointed strikingly for
imposing effect, but wretched within. Explaining this more clearly, he
adds, “It remains that they that have wives be as though they had none,
and they that buy as though they possessed not.” <span
id="fr_1391"></span>[1392](#fn_1391) And if he speaks thus of marriage,
in reference to which God says, “Multiply,” how do you not think that
senseless display is by the Lord’s authority to be banished? Wherefore
also the Lord says, “Sell what thou hast, and give to the poor; and
come, follow me.” <span id="fr_1392"></span>[1393](#fn_1392)

<span id="vi.iii.ii.iii-p5"></span>Follow God, stripped of arrogance,
stripped of fading display, possessed of that which is thine, which is
good, what alone cannot be taken away—faith towards God, confession
towards Him who suffered, beneficence towards men, which is the most
precious of possessions. For my part, I approve of Plato, who plainly
lays it down as a law, that a man is not to labour for wealth of gold or
silver, nor to possess a useless vessel which is not for some necessary
purpose, and moderate; so that the same thing may serve for many
purposes, and the possession of a variety of things may be done away
with. Excellently, therefore, the Divine Scripture, addressing boasters
and lovers of their own selves, says, “Where are the rulers of the
nations, and the lords of the wild beasts of the earth, who sport among
the birds of heaven, who treasured up silver and gold, in whom men
trusted, and there was no end of their substance, who fashioned silver
and gold, and were full of care? There is no finding of their works.
They have vanished, and gone down to Hades.” <span
id="fr_1393"></span>[1394](#fn_1393) Such is the reward of display. For
though such of us as cultivate the soil need a mattock and plough, none
of us will make a pickaxe of silver or a sickle of gold, but we employ
the material which is serviceable for agriculture, not what is costly.
What prevents those who are capable of considering what is similar from
entertaining the same sentiments with respect to household utensils, of
which let use, not expense, be the measure? For tell me, does the
table-knife not cut unless it be studded with silver, and have its
handle made of ivory? Or must we forge Indian steel in order to divide
meat, as when we call for a weapon for the fight? What if the basin be
of earthenware? will it not receive the dirt of the hands? or the
footpan the dirt of the foot? Will the table that is fashioned with
ivory feet be indignant at bearing a three-halfpenny loaf? Will the lamp
not dispense light because it is the work of the potter, not of the
goldsmith? I affirm that truckle-beds afford no worse repose than the
ivory couch; and the goatskin coverlet being amply sufficient to spread
on the bed, there is no need of purple or scarlet coverings. Yet to
condemn, notwithstanding, frugality, through the stupidity of luxury,
the author of mischief, what a prodigious error, what senseless conceit!
See. The Lord ate from a common bowl, and made the disciples recline on
the grass on the ground, and washed their feet, girded with a linen
towel—He, the lowly-minded God, and Lord of the universe. He did not
bring down a silver foot-bath from heaven. He asked to drink of the
Samaritan woman, who drew the water from the well in an earthenware
vessel, not seeking regal gold, but teaching us how to quench thirst
easily. For He made use, not extravagance His aim. And He ate and drank
at feasts, not digging metals from the earth, nor using vessels of gold
and silver, that is, vessels exhaling the odour of rust—such fumes as
the rust of smoking <span id="fr_1394"></span>[1395](#fn_1394) metal
gives off.

<span id="vi.iii.ii.iii-p8"></span>For in fine, in food, and clothes,
and vessels, and everything else belonging to the house, I say
comprehensively, that one must follow the institutions of the
Christian <span id="fr_1395"></span>[1396](#fn_1395) man, as is
serviceable and suitable to one’s person, age, pursuits, time of life.
For it becomes those that are servants of one God, that their
possessions and furniture should exhibit the tokens of one
beautiful <span id="fr_1396"></span>[1397](#fn_1396) life; and that each
individually should be seen in faith, which shows no difference,
practising all other things which are conformable to <span
id="page_248">p. 248</span> <span
id="vi.iii.ii.iii-Page_248"></span>this uniform mode of life, and
harmonious with this one scheme.

<span id="vi.iii.ii.iii-p11"></span>What we acquire without difficulty,
and use with ease, we praise, keep easily, and communicate freely. The
things which are useful are preferable, and consequently cheap things
are better than dear. In fine, wealth, when not properly governed, is a
stronghold of evil, about which many casting their eyes, they will never
reach the kingdom of heaven, sick for the things of the world, and
living proudly through luxury. But those who are in earnest about
salvation must settle this beforehand in their mind, “that all that we
possess is given to us for use, and use for sufficiency, which one may
attain to by a few things.” For silly are they who, from greed, take
delight in what they have hoarded up. “He that gathereth wages,” it is
said, “gathereth into a bag with holes.” <span
id="fr_1397"></span>[1398](#fn_1397) Such is he who gathers corn and
shuts it up; and he who giveth to no one, becomes poorer.

<span id="vi.iii.ii.iii-p13"></span>It is a farce, and a thing to make
one laugh outright, for men to bring in silver urinals and crystal
*<span id="vi.iii.ii.iii-p13.1"></span>vases de nuit*, as they usher in
their counsellors, and for silly rich women to get gold receptacles for
excrements made; so that being rich, they cannot even ease themselves
except in superb way. I would that in their whole life they deemed gold
fit for dung.

<span id="vi.iii.ii.iii-p14"></span>But now love of money is found to be
the stronghold of evil, which the apostle says “is the root of all
evils, which, while some coveted, they have erred from the faith, and
pierced themselves through with many sorrows.” <span
id="fr_1398"></span>[1399](#fn_1398)

<span id="vi.iii.ii.iii-p16"></span>But the best riches is poverty of
desires; and the true magnanimity is not to be proud of wealth, but to
despise it. Boasting about one’s plate is utterly base. For it is
plainly wrong to care much about what any one who likes may buy from the
market. But wisdom is not bought with coin of earth, nor is it sold in
the market-place, but in heaven. And it is sold for true coin, the
immortal Word, the regal gold.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1390"></span>[247:1391](0020267.htm#fr_1390) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.iii-p2"></span> Limpet-shaped cups. \[On this
chapter consult Kaye, p. 74.\]

<span id="fn_1391"></span>[247:1392](0020267.htm#fr_1391) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.iii-p3"></span> [1 Cor.
7:29](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#029),
[30](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#030)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.iii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1392"></span>[247:1393](0020267.htm#fr_1392) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.iii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.iii-p4"></span> [Matt. xix.
21](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#021)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.iii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1393"></span>[247:1394](0020267.htm#fr_1393) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.iii-p6"></span> [Baruch iii.
16-19](../../../bib/apo/bar003.htm#016)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.iii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1394"></span>[247:1395](0020267.htm#fr_1394) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.iii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.iii-p7"></span> Or, proud.

<span id="fn_1395"></span>[247:1396](0020267.htm#fr_1395) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.iii-p9"></span> \[See Elucidation I. <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iii.ii.iii-p9.1"></span>ἐνστάσεσιν τοῦ
Χριστιανοῦ</span>.\]

<span id="fn_1396"></span>[247:1397](0020267.htm#fr_1396) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.iii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.iii-p10"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iii.ii.iii-p10.1"></span>καλοῦ</span>.

<span id="fn_1397"></span>[248:1398](0020267.htm#fr_1397) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.iii-p12"></span> [Hag. i.
6](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#006)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.iii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1398"></span>[248:1399](0020267.htm#fr_1398) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.iii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.iii-p15"></span> [1 Tim. vi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#010)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.iii-p15.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV.—How to Conduct Ourselves at Feasts.](0020268)
