[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020069)  [Next](0020071.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.xxxiv"></span>

##### <span id="iii.ii.xxxiv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXXIV.—Ridicule of the Statues Erected by the Greeks.

<span id="iii.ii.xxxiv-p1"></span>Worthy of very great honour,
certainly, was the tyrant Bhalaris, who devoured sucklings, and
accordingly is exhibited by the workmanship of Polystratus the
Ambraciot, even to this day, as a very wonderful man! The Agrigentines
dreaded to look on that countenance of his, because of his cannibalism;
but people of culture now make it their boast that they behold him in
his statue! Is it not shameful that fratricide is honoured by you who
look on the statues of Polynices and Eteocles, and that you have not
rather buried them with their maker Pythagoras? Destroy these memorials
of iniquity! Why should I contemplate with admiration the figure of the
woman who bore thirty children, merely for the sake of the artist
Periclymenus? One ought to turn away with disgust from one who bore off
the fruits of great incontinence, and whom the Romans compared to a sow,
which also on a like account, they say, was deemed worthy of a mystic
worship. Ares committed adultery with Aphrodité, and Andron made an
image of their offspring Harmonia. Sophron, who committed to writing
trifles and absurdities, was more celebrated for his skill in casting
metals, of which specimens exist even now. And not only have his tales
kept the fabulist Æsop in everlasting remembrance, but also the plastic
art of Aristodemus has increased his celebrity. How is it then that you,
who have so many poetesses whose productions are mere trash, and
innumerable courtezans, and worthless men, are not ashamed to slander
the reputation of our women? What care I to know that Euanthé gave birth
to an infant in the Peripatus, or to gape with wonder at the art of
Callistratus, or to fix my gaze on the Neæra of Calliades? For she was a
courtezan. Laïs was a prostitute, and Turnus made her a monument of
prostitution. Why are you not ashamed of the fornication of Hephæstion,
even though Philo has represented him very artistically? And for what
reason do you honour the hermaphrodite Ganymede by Leochares, as if you
possessed something admirable? Praxiteles even made a statue of a woman
with the stain of impurity upon it. It behoved you, repudiating
everything of this kind, to seek what is truly worthy of attention, and
not to turn with disgust from our mode of life while receiving with
approval the shameful productions of Philænis and Elephantis.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXV. Tatian Speaks as an Eye-Witness.](0020071.md)
