[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020197)  [Next](0020199.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.ii.xxviii"></span>

##### <span id="v.ii.xxviii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXVIII.—The Heathen Gods Were Simply Men.

<span id="v.ii.xxviii-p1"></span>But it is perhaps necessary, in
accordance with what has already been adduced, to say a little about
their names. Herodotus, then, and Alexander the son of Philip, in his
letter to his mother (and each of them is said to have conversed with
the priests at Heliopolis, and Memphis, and Thebes), affirm that they
learnt from them that the gods had been men. Herodotus speaks thus: “Of
such a nature were, they said, the beings represented by these images,
they were very far indeed from being gods. However, in the times
anterior to them it was otherwise; then <span id="page_144">p.
144</span> <span id="v.ii.xxviii-Page_144"></span>Egypt had gods for its
rulers, who dwelt upon the earth with men, one being always supreme
above the rest. The last of these was Horus the son of Osiris, called by
the Greeks Apollo. He deposed Typhon, and ruled over Egypt as its last
god-king. Osiris is named Dionysus (Bacchus) by the Greeks.” <span
id="fr_800"></span>[801](#fn_800.md) “Almost all the names of the gods came
into Greece from Egypt.” <span id="fr_801"></span>[802](#fn_801.md) Apollo
was the son of Dionysus and Isis, as Herodotus likewise affirms:
“According to the Egyptians, Apollo and Diana are the children of
Bacchus and Isis; while Latona is their nurse and their
preserver.” <span id="fr_802"></span>[803](#fn_802.md) These beings of
heavenly origin they had for their first kings: partly from ignorance of
the true worship of the Deity, partly from gratitude for their
government, they esteemed them as gods together with their wives. “The
male kine, if clean, and the male calves, are used for sacrifice by the
Egyptians universally; but the females, they are not allowed to
sacrifice, since they are sacred to Isis. The statue of this goddess has
the form of a woman but with horns like a cow, resembling those of the
Greek representations of Io.” <span id="fr_803"></span>[804](#fn_803.md)
And who can be more deserving of credit in making these statements, than
those who in family succession son from father, received not only the
priesthood, but also the history? For it is not likely that the priests,
who make it their business to commend the idols to men’s reverence,
would assert falsely that they were men. If Herodotus alone had said
that the Egyptians spoke in their histories of the gods as of men, when
he says, “What they told me concerning their religion it is not my
intention to repeat, except only the names of their deities, things of
very trifling importance,” <span id="fr_804"></span>[805](#fn_804.md) it
would behove us not to credit even Herodotus as being a fabulist. But as
Alexander and Hermes surnamed Trismegistus, who shares with them in the
attribute of eternity, and innumerable others, not to name them
individually, \[declare the same\], no room is left even for doubt that
they, being kings, were esteemed gods. That they were men, the most
learned of the Egyptians also testify, who, while saying that ether,
earth, sun, moon, are gods, regard the rest as mortal men, and the
temples as their sepulchres. Apollodorus, too, asserts the same thing in
his treatise concerning the gods. But Herodotus calls even their
sufferings mysteries. “The ceremonies at the feast of Isis in the city
of Busiris have been already spoken of. It is there that the whole
multitude, both of men and women, many thousands in number, beat
themselves at the close of the sacrifice in honour of a god whose name a
religious scruple forbids me to mention.” <span
id="fr_805"></span>[806](#fn_805.md) If they are gods, they are also
immortal; but if people are beaten for them, and their sufferings are
mysteries, they are men, as Herodotus himself says: “Here, too, in this
same precinct of Minerva at Saïs, is the burial-place of one whom I
think it not right to mention in such a connection. It stands behind the
temple against the back wall, which it entirely covers. There are also
some large stone obelisks in the enclosure, and there is a lake near
them, adorned with an edging of stone. In form it is circular, and in
size, as it seemed to me, about equal to the lake at Delos called the
Hoop. On this lake it is that the Egyptians represent by night his
sufferings whose name I refrain from mentioning, and this representation
they call their mysteries.” <span id="fr_806"></span>[807](#fn_806.md) And
not only is the sepulchre of Osiris shown, but also his embalming: “When
a body is brought to them, they show the bearer various models of
corpses made in wood, and painted so as to resemble nature. The most
perfect is said to be after the manner of him whom I do not think it
religious to name in connection with such a matter.” <span
id="fr_807"></span>[808](#fn_807.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_800"></span>[144:801](0020198.htm#fr_800.md) <span
id="v.ii.xxviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xxviii-p2"></span> ii. 144. Mr. Rawlinson’s translation
is used in the extracts from Herodotus.

<span id="fn_801"></span>[144:802](0020198.htm#fr_801.md) <span
id="v.ii.xxviii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xxviii-p3"></span> ii. 50.

<span id="fn_802"></span>[144:803](0020198.htm#fr_802.md) <span
id="v.ii.xxviii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xxviii-p4"></span> ii. 156.

<span id="fn_803"></span>[144:804](0020198.htm#fr_803.md) <span
id="v.ii.xxviii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xxviii-p5"></span> ii. 41.

<span id="fn_804"></span>[144:805](0020198.htm#fr_804.md) <span
id="v.ii.xxviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xxviii-p6"></span> ii. 3. The text is here uncertain, and
differs from that of Herodotus. \[Herodotus, initiated in Egyptian
mysteries, was doubtless sworn to maintain certain secrets of the
priests of Osiris.\]

<span id="fn_805"></span>[144:806](0020198.htm#fr_805.md) <span
id="v.ii.xxviii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xxviii-p7"></span> ii. 61. \[The name of Osiris.\]

<span id="fn_806"></span>[144:807](0020198.htm#fr_806.md) <span
id="v.ii.xxviii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xxviii-p8"></span> ii. 170.

<span id="fn_807"></span>[144:808](0020198.htm#fr_807.md) <span
id="v.ii.xxviii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xxviii-p9"></span> ii. 86.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIX.—Proof of the Same from the Poets.](0020199.md)
