[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020345)  [Next](0020347.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xxii"></span>

##### <span id="vi.iv.ii.xxii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXII.—Plato’s Opinion, that the Chief Good Consists in Assimilation to God, and Its Agreement with Scripture.

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xxii-p1"></span>Further, Plato the philosopher says
that the end is twofold: that which is communicable, and exists first in
the ideal forms themselves, which he also calls “the good;” and that
which partakes of it, and receives its likeness from it, as is the case
in the men who appropriate virtue and true philosophy. Wherefore also
Cleanthes, in the second book, *On Pleasure*, says that Socrates
everywhere teaches that the just man and the happy are one and the same,
and execrated the first man who separated the just from the useful, as
having done an impious thing. For those are in truth impious who
separate the useful from that which is right according to the law. Plato
himself says that happiness <span id="page_376">p. 376</span> <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xxii-Page_376"></span>(<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.ii.xxii-p1.1"></span>εὐδαιμονία</span>) is to possess rightly
the dæmon, and that the ruling faculty of the soul is called the dæmon;
and he terms happiness (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.ii.xxii-p1.2"></span>εὐδαιμονία</span>) the most perfect and
complete good. Sometimes he calls it a consistent and harmonious life,
sometimes the highest perfection in accordance with virtue; and this he
places in the knowledge of the Good, and in likeness to God,
demonstrating likeness to be justice and holiness with wisdom. For is it
not thus that some of our writers have understood that man straightway
on his creation received what is “according to the image,” but that what
is according “to the likeness” he will receive afterwards on his
perfection? Now Plato, teaching that the virtuous man shall have this
likeness accompanied with humility, explains the following: “He that
humbleth himself shall be exalted.” <span
id="fr_2410"></span>[2411](#fn_2410.md) He says, accordingly, in *The
Laws:* “God indeed, as the ancient saying has it, occupying the
beginning, the middle, and the end of all things, goes straight through
while He goes round the circumference. And He is always attended by
Justice, the avenger of those who revolt from the divine law.” You see
how he connects fear with the divine law. He adds, therefore: “To which
he, who would be happy, cleaving, will follow lowly and beautified.”
Then, connecting what follows these words, and admonishing by fear, he
adds: “What conduct, then, is dear and conformable to God? That which is
characterized by one word of old date: *Like will be dear to like*, as
to what is in proportion; but things out of proportion are neither dear
to one another, nor to those which are in proportion. And that therefore
he that would be dear to God, must, to the best of his power, become
such as He is. And in virtue of the same reason, our self-controlling
man is dear to God. But he that has no self-control is unlike and
diverse.” In saying that it was an ancient dogma, he indicates the
teaching which had come to him from the law. And having in the
*Theatœtus* admitted that evils make the circuit of mortal nature and of
this spot, he adds: “Wherefore we must try to flee hence as soon as
possible. For flight is likeness to God as far as possible. And likeness
is to become holy and just with wisdom.” Speusippus, the nephew of
Plato, says that happiness is a perfect state in those who conduct
themselves in accordance with nature, or the state of the good: for
which condition all men have a desire, but the good only attained to
quietude; consequently the virtues are the authors of happiness. And
Xenocrates the Chalcedonian defines happiness to be the possession of
virtue, strictly so called, and of the power subservient to it. Then he
clearly says, that the seat in which it resides is the soul; that by
which it is effected, the virtues; and that of these as parts are formed
praiseworthy actions, good habits and dispositions, and motions, and
relations; and that corporeal and external objects are not without
these. For Polemo, the disciple of Xenocrates, seems of the opinion that
happiness is sufficiency of all good things, or of the most and
greatest. He lays down the doctrine, then, that happiness never exists
without virtue; and that virtue, apart from corporeal and external
objects, is sufficient for happiness. Let these things be so. The
contradictions to the opinions specified shall be adduced in due time.
But on us it is incumbent to reach the unaccomplished end, obeying the
commands—that is, God—and living according to them, irreproachably and
intelligently, through knowledge of the divine will; and assimilation as
far as possible in accordance with right reason is the end, and
restoration to perfect adoption by the Son, which ever glorifies the
Father by the great High Priest who has deigned to call us brethren and
fellow-heirs. And the apostle, succinctly describing the end, writes in
the Epistle to the Romans: “But now, being made free from sin, and
become servants to God, ye have your fruit unto holiness, and the end
everlasting life.” <span id="fr_2411"></span>[2412](#fn_2411.md) And
viewing the hope as twofold—that which is expected, and that which has
been received—he now teaches the end to be the restitution of the hope.
“For patience,” he says, “worketh experience, and experience hope: and
hope maketh not ashamed; because the love of God is shed abroad in our
hearts by the Holy Spirit that is given to us.” <span
id="fr_2412"></span>[2413](#fn_2412.md) On account of which love and the
restoration to hope, he says, in another place, “*which rest* is laid up
for us.” <span id="fr_2413"></span>[2414](#fn_2413.md) You will find in
Ezekiel the like, as follows: “The soul that sinneth, it shall die. And
the man who shall be righteous, and shall do judgment and justice, who
has not eaten on the mountains, nor lifted his eyes to the idols of the
house of Israel, and hath not defiled his neighbour’s wife, and hath not
approached to a woman in the time of her uncleanness (for he does not
wish the seed of man to be dishonoured), and will not injure a man; will
restore the debtor’s pledge, and will not take usury; will turn away his
hand from wrong; will do true judgment between a man and his neighbour;
will walk in my ordinances, and keep my commandments, so as to do the
truth; he is righteous, he shall surely live, saith Adonai the
Lord.” <span id="fr_2414"></span>[2415](#fn_2414.md) Isaiah too, in
exhorting him that hath not believed to gravity of life, and the Gnostic
to attention, proving that man’s virtue and God’s are not the same,
speaks thus: “Seek the Lord, and on finding Him call on Him. And when
<span id="page_377">p. 377</span> <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xxii-Page_377"></span>He shall draw near to you, let the
wicked forsake his ways, and the unrighteous man his ways; and let him
return to the Lord, and he shall obtain mercy,” down to “and your
thoughts from my thoughts.” <span id="fr_2415"></span>[2416](#fn_2415.md)
“We,” then, according to the noble apostle, “wait for the hope of
righteousness by faith. For in Christ neither circumcision availeth
anything, nor uncircumcision, but faith which worketh by love.” <span
id="fr_2416"></span>[2417](#fn_2416.md) And we desire that every one of you
show the same diligence to the full assurance of hope,” down to “made an
high priest for ever, after the order of Melchizedek.” <span
id="fr_2417"></span>[2418](#fn_2417.md) Similarly with Paul “the
All-virtuous Wisdom” says, “H, that heareth me shall dwell trusting in
hope.” <span id="fr_2418"></span>[2419](#fn_2418.md) For the restoration of
hope is called by the same term “hope.” To the expression “will dwell”
it has most beautifully added “trusting,” showing that such an one has
obtained rest, having received the hope for which he hoped. Wherefore
also it is added, “and shall be quiet, without fear of any evil.” And
openly and expressly the apostle, in the first Epistle to the
Corinthians says, “Be ye followers of me, as also I am of Christ,” <span
id="fr_2419"></span>[2420](#fn_2419.md) in order that that may take place.
If ye are of me, and I am of Christ, then ye are imitators of Christ,
and Christ of God. *Assimilation to God, then, so that as far as
possible a man becomes righteous and holy with wisdom* he lays down as
the aim of faith, and the end to be that restitution of the promise
which is effected by faith. From these doctrines gush the fountains,
which we specified above, of those who have dogmatized about “the end.”
But of these enough.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2410"></span>[376:2411](0020346.htm#fr_2410.md) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xxii-p1.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xxii-p2"></span> [Luke xiv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#011.md)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xxii-p2.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2411"></span>[376:2412](0020346.htm#fr_2411.md) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xxii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xxii-p3"></span> [Rom. vi.
22](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#022.md)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xxii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2412"></span>[376:2413](0020346.htm#fr_2412.md) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xxii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xxii-p4"></span> [Rom.
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#004.md),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#005.md)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xxii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2413"></span>[376:2414](0020346.htm#fr_2413.md) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xxii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xxii-p5"></span> Probably [Heb.
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#008.md),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#009.md)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xxii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2414"></span>[376:2415](0020346.htm#fr_2414.md) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xxii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xxii-p6"></span> [Ezek. xviii.
4-9](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#004.md)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xxii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2415"></span>[377:2416](0020346.htm#fr_2415.md) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xxii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xxii-p7"></span> [Isa.
55:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#006.md),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#007.md),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#009.md)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xxii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2416"></span>[377:2417](0020346.htm#fr_2416.md) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xxii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xxii-p8"></span> [Gal.
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#005.md),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#006.md)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xxii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2417"></span>[377:2418](0020346.htm#fr_2417.md) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xxii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xxii-p9"></span> [Heb. vi.
11-20](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#011.md)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xxii-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2418"></span>[377:2419](0020346.htm#fr_2418.md) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xxii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xxii-p10"></span> [Prov. i.
33](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#033.md)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xxii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2419"></span>[377:2420](0020346.htm#fr_2419.md) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xxii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xxii-p11"></span> [1 Cor. xi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#001.md)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xxii-p11.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIII.—On Marriage.](0020347.md)
