[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020192)  [Next](0020194.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.ii.xxiii"></span>

##### <span id="v.ii.xxiii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXIII.—Opinions of Thales and Plato.

<span id="v.ii.xxiii-p1"></span>You may say, however, since you excel
all men in understanding, How comes it to pass, then, that some of the
idols manifest power, if those to whom we erect the statues are not
gods? For it is not likely that images destitute of life and motion can
of themselves do anything without a mover. That in various places,
cities, and nations, certain effects are brought about in the name of
idols, we are far from denying. None the more, however, if some have
received benefit, and others, on the contrary, suffered harm, shall we
deem those to be gods who have produced the effects in either <span
id="page_141">p. 141</span> <span id="v.ii.xxiii-Page_141"></span>case.
But I have made careful inquiry, both why it is that you think the idols
to have this power, and who they are that, usurping their names, produce
the effects. It is necessary for me, however, in attempting to show who
they are that produce the effects ascribed to the idols, and that they
are not gods, to have recourse to some witnesses from among the
philosophers. First Thales, as those who have accurately examined his
opinions report, divides \[superior beings\] into God, demons, and
heroes. God he recognises as the Intelligence (<span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ii.xxiii-p1.1"></span>νοῦς</span>) of the world; by demons he
understands beings possessed of soul (<span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ii.xxiii-p1.2"></span>ψυχικαί</span>); and by heroes the separated
souls of men, the good being the good souls, and the bad the worthless.
Plato again, while withholding his assent on other points, also divides
\[superior beings\] into the uncreated God and those produced by the
uncreated One for the adornment of heaven, the planets, and the fixed
stars, and into demons; concerning which demons, while he does not think
fit to speak himself, he thinks that those ought to be listened to who
have spoken about them. “To speak concerning the other demons, and to
know their origin, is beyond our powers; but we ought to believe those
who have before spoken, the descendants of gods, as they say—and surely
they must be well acquainted with their own ancestors: it is impossible,
therefore, to disbelieve the sons of gods, even though they speak
without probable or convincing proofs; but as they profess to tell of
their own family affairs, we are bound, in pursuance of custom, to
believe them. In this way, then, let us hold and speak as they do
concerning the origin of the gods themselves. Of Gê and Ouranos were
born Oceanus and Tethys; and of these Phorcus, Kronos, and Rhea, and the
rest; and of Kronos and Rhea, Zeus, Hera, and all the others, who, we
know, are all called their brothers; besides other descendants again of
these.” <span id="fr_782"></span>[783](#fn_782.md) Did, then, he who had
contemplated the eternal Intelligence and God who is apprehended by
reason, and declared His attributes—His real existence, the simplicity
of His nature, the good that flows forth from Him that is truth, and
discoursed of primal power, and how “all things are about the King of
all, and all things exist for His sake, and He is the cause of all;” and
about two and three, that He is “the second moving about the seconds,
and the third about the thirds;” <span id="fr_783"></span>[784](#fn_783.md)
—did this man think, that to learn the truth concerning those who are
said to have been produced from sensible things, namely earth and
heaven, was a task transcending his powers? It is not to be believed for
a moment. But because he thought it impossible to believe that gods
beget and are brought forth, since everything that begins to be is
followed by an end, and (for this is much more difficult) to change the
views of the multitude, who receive the fables without examination, on
this account it was that he declared it to be beyond his powers to know
and to speak concerning the origin of the other demons, since he was
unable either to admit or teach that gods were begotten. And as regards
that saying of his, “The great sovereign in heaven, Zeus, driving a
winged car, advances first, ordering and managing all things, and there
follow him a host of gods and demons,” <span
id="fr_784"></span>[785](#fn_784.md) this does not refer to the Zeus who is
said to have sprung from Kronos; for here the name is given to the Maker
of the universe. This is shown by Plato himself: not being able to
designate Him by another title that should be suitable, he availed
himself of the popular name, not as peculiar to God, but for
distinctness, because it is not possible to discourse of God to all men
as fully as one might; and he adds at the same time the epithet “Great,”
so as to distinguish the heavenly from the earthly, the uncreated from
the created, who is younger than heaven and earth, and younger than the
Cretans, who stole him away, that he might not be killed by his father.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_782"></span>[141:783](0020193.htm#fr_782.md) <span
id="v.ii.xxiii-p1.3"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xxiii-p2"></span> *Tim*., p. 40, D.E.

<span id="fn_783"></span>[141:784](0020193.htm#fr_783.md) <span
id="v.ii.xxiii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xxiii-p3"></span> Pseudo-Plat., *Epist*., ii. p. 312,
D.E. The meaning is very obscure.

<span id="fn_784"></span>[141:785](0020193.htm#fr_784.md) <span
id="v.ii.xxiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xxiii-p4"></span> Plat., *Phœdr.*, p. 246, E.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIV.—Concerning the Angels and Giants.](0020194.md)
