[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020250)  [Next](0020252) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.i.i"></span>

##### <span id="vi.iii.i.i-p0.1"></span>Chapter I. The Office of the Instructor.

<span id="vi.iii.i.i-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="vi.iii.i.i-p1.1"></span>As</span> there are these three things in
the case of man, habits, actions, and passions; habits are the
department appropriated by *hortatory* discourse the guide to piety,
which, like the ship’s keel, is laid beneath for the building up of
faith; in which, rejoicing exceedingly, and abjuring our old opinions,
through salvation we renew our youth, singing with the hymning prophecy,
“How good is God to Israel, to such as are upright in heart!” <span
id="fr_1033"></span>[1034](#fn_1033) All actions, again, are the
province of *preceptive* discourse; while *persuasive* discourse applies
itself to heal the passions. It is, however, one and the self-same word
which rescues man from the custom of this world in which he has been
reared, and trains him up in the one salvation of faith in God.

<span id="vi.iii.i.i-p3"></span>When, then, the heavenly guide, the
Word, was inviting <span id="fr_1034"></span>[1035](#fn_1034) men to
salvation, the appellation of *hortatory* was properly applied to Him:
his same word was called rousing (the whole from a part). For the whole
of piety is hortatory, engendering in the kindred faculty of reason a
yearning after true life now and to come. But now, being at once
curative and preceptive, following in His own steps, He makes what had
been prescribed the subject of persuasion, promising the cure of the
passions within us. Let us then designate this Word appropriately by the
one name *Tutor* (or *Pædagogue*, or *Instructor*).

<span id="vi.iii.i.i-p5"></span>The Instructor being practical, not
theoretical, His aim is thus to improve the soul, not to teach, and to
train it up to a virtuous, not to an intellectual life. Although this
same word is didactic, but not in the present instance. For the word
which, in matters of doctrine, explains and reveals, is that whose
province it is to teach. But our Educator <span
id="fr_1035"></span>[1036](#fn_1035) being practical, first exhorts to
the attainment of right dispositions and character, and then persuades
us to the energetic practice of our duties, enjoining on us pure
commandments, and exhibiting to such as come after representations of
those who formerly wandered in error. Both are of the highest
utility,—that which assumes the form of counselling to obedience, and
that which is presented in the form of example; which latter is of two
kinds, corresponding to the former duality,—the one having for its
purpose that we should choose and imitate the good, and the other that
we should reject and turn away from the opposite.

<span id="vi.iii.i.i-p7"></span>Hence accordingly ensues the healing of
our passions, in consequence of the assuagements of those examples; the
Pædagogue strengthening our souls, and by His benign commands, as by
gentle medicines, guiding the sick to the perfect knowledge of the
truth.

<span id="vi.iii.i.i-p8"></span>There is a wide difference between
health and knowledge; for the latter is produced by learning, the former
by healing. One, who is ill, will not therefore learn any branch of
instruction till he is quite well. For neither to learners nor to the
sick is each injunction invariably expressed similarly; but to the
former in such a way as to lead to knowledge, and to the latter to
health. As, then, for those of us who are diseased in body a physician
is required, so also those who are diseased in soul require a pædagogue
to cure our maladies; and then a teacher, to train and guide the soul to
all requisite knowledge when it is made able to admit the revelation of
the Word. Eagerly desiring, then, to perfect us by a gradation conducive
to salvation, suited for efficacious discipline, a beautiful arrangement
is observed by the all-benignant Word, who first exhorts, then trains,
and finally teaches.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1033"></span>[209:1034](0020251.htm#fr_1033) <span
id="vi.iii.i.i-p1.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.i.i-p2"></span> [Ps. lxxiii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#001)<span id="vi.iii.i.i-p2.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1034"></span>[209:1035](0020251.htm#fr_1034) <span
id="vi.iii.i.i-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.i.i-p4"></span> \[See *Exhortation to the Heathen*,
cap. xi. p. 203, *supra*.\]

<span id="fn_1035"></span>[209:1036](0020251.htm#fr_1035) <span
id="vi.iii.i.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.i.i-p6"></span> The pædagogus. \[This word seems to be
used by Clement, with frequent alusion, at least, to its original idea,
of one who leads the child to his instructor; which is the true idea, I
suppose, in [Gal. iii. 24](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#024)<span
id="vi.iii.i.i-p6.1"></span>.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II.—Our Instructor’s Treatment of Our Sins.](0020252)
