[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020384)  [Next](0020386.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.v.xi"></span>

##### <span id="vi.iv.v.xi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XI.—Abstraction from Material Things Necessary in Order to Attain to the True Knowledge of God.

<span id="vi.iv.v.xi-p1"></span>Now the sacrifice which is acceptable to
God is unswerving abstraction from the body and its passions. This is
the really true piety. And is not, on this account, philosophy rightly
called by Socrates the practice of Death? For he who neither employs his
eyes in the exercise of thought, nor draws aught from his other senses,
but with pure mind itself applies to objects, practices the true
philosophy. This is, then, the import of the silence of five years
prescribed by Pythagoras, which he enjoined on his disciples; that,
abstracting themselves from the objects of sense, they might with the
mind alone contemplate the Deity. It was from Moses that the chief of
the Greeks drew these philosophical tenets. <span
id="fr_3069"></span>[3070](#fn_3069.md) For he commands holocausts to be
skinned and divided into parts. For the gnostic soul must be consecrated
to the light, stript of the integuments of matter, devoid of the
frivolousness of the body and of all the passions, which are acquired
through vain and lying opinions, and divested of the lusts of the flesh.
But the most of men, clothed with what is perishable, like cockles, and
rolled all round in a ball in their excesses, like hedgehogs, entertain
the same ideas of the blessed and incorruptible God as of themselves.
But it has escaped their notice, though they be near us, that God has
bestowed on us ten thousand things in which He does not share: birth,
being Himself unborn; food, He wanting nothing; and growth, He being
always equal; and long life and immortality, He being immortal and
incapable of growing old. Wherefore let no one imagine that hands, and
feet, and mouth, and eyes, and going in and coming out, and resentments
and threats, are said by the Hebrews to be attributes of God. By no
means; but that certain of these appellations are used more sacredly in
an allegorical sense, which, as the discourse proceeds, we shall explain
at the proper time.

<span id="vi.iv.v.xi-p3"></span>“Wisdom of all medicines is the
Panacea,” <span id="fr_3070"></span>[3071](#fn_3070.md) writes Callimachus
in the *Epigrams*. “And one becomes wise from another, both in past
times and at present,” says Bacchylides in the *Pœans;* “for it is not
very easy to find the portals of unutterable words.” Beautifully,
therefore, Isocrates writes in the *Panathenaic*, having put the
question, “Who, then, are well trained?” adds, “First, those who manage
well the things which occur each day, whose opinion jumps with
opportunity, and is able for the most part to hit on what is beneficial;
then those who behave becomingly and rightly to those who approach them,
who take lightly and easily annoyances <span id="page_461">p. 461</span>
<span id="vi.iv.v.xi-Page_461"></span>and molestations offered by
others, but conduct themselves as far as possible, to those with whom
they have intercourse, with consummate care and moderation; further,
those who have the command of their pleasures, and are not too much
overcome by misfortunes, but conduct themselves in the midst of them
with manliness, and in a way worthy of the nature which we share;
fourth—and this is the greatest—those who are not corrupted by
prosperity, and are not put beside themselves, or made haughty, but
continue in the class of sensible people.” Then he puts on the top-stone
of the discourse: “Those who have the disposition of their soul well
suited not to one only of these things, but to them all—those I assert
to be wise and perfect men, and to possess all the virtues.”

<span id="vi.iv.v.xi-p5"></span>Do you see how the Greeks deify the
gnostic life (though not knowing how to become acquainted with it)? And
what knowledge it is, they know not even in a dream. If, then, it is
agreed among us that knowledge is the food of reason, “blessed truly are
they,” according to the Scripture, “who hunger and thirst after truth:
for they shall be filled” with everlasting food. In the most wonderful
harmony with these words, Euripides, the philosopher of the drama, is
found in the following words,—making allusion, I know not how, at once
to the Father and the Son:—

> <span id="vi.iv.v.xi-p5.1"></span> “To thee, the Lord of all, I
> bring  
> Cakes and libations too, O Zeus,  
> Or Hades would’st thou choose be called;  
> Do thou accept my offering of all fruits,  
> Rare, full, poured forth.”  

<span id="vi.iv.v.xi-p6"></span>For a whole burnt-offering and rare
sacrifice for us is Christ. And that unwittingly he mentions the
Saviour, he will make plain, as he adds:—

> <span id="vi.iv.v.xi-p6.1"></span> “For thou who, ’midst the heavenly
> gods,  
> Jove’s sceptre sway’st, dost also share  
> The rule of those on earth.”  

<span id="vi.iv.v.xi-p7"></span>Then he says expressly:—

> <span id="vi.iv.v.xi-p7.1"></span> “Send light to human souls that
> fain would know  
> Whence conflicts spring, and what the root of ills,  
> And of the blessed gods to whom due rites  
> Of sacrifice we needs must pay, that so  
> We may from troubles find repose.”  

<span id="vi.iv.v.xi-p8"></span>It is not then without reason that in
the mysteries that obtain among the Greeks, lustrations hold the first
place; as also the laver among the Barbarians. After these are the
minor <span id="fr_3071"></span>[3072](#fn_3071.md) mysteries, which have
some foundation of instruction and of preliminary preparation for what
is to come after; and the great mysteries, in which nothing remains to
be learned of the universe, but only to contemplate and comprehend
nature and things.

<span id="vi.iv.v.xi-p10"></span>We shall understand the mode of
purification by confession, and that of contemplation by analysis,
advancing by analysis to the first notion, beginning with the properties
underlying it; abstracting from the body its physical properties, taking
away the dimension of depth, then that of breadth, and then that of
length. For the point which remains is a unit, so to speak, having
position; from which if we abstract position, there is the conception of
unity.

<span id="vi.iv.v.xi-p11"></span>If, then, abstracting all that belongs
to bodies and things called incorporeal, we cast ourselves into the
greatness of Christ, and thence advance into immensity by holiness, we
may reach somehow to the conception of the Almighty, knowing not what He
is, but what He is not. And form and motion, or standing, or a throne,
or place, or right hand or left, are not at all to be conceived as
belonging to the Father of the universe, although it is so written. But
what each of these means will be shown in its proper place. The First
Cause is not then in space, but above both space, and time, and name,
and conception.

<span id="vi.iv.v.xi-p12"></span>Wherefore also Moses says, “Show
Thyself to me,” <span id="fr_3072"></span>[3073](#fn_3072.md) —intimating
most clearly that God is not capable of being taught by man, or
expressed in speech, but to be known only by His own power. For inquiry
was obscure and dim; but the grace of knowledge is from Him by the Son.
Most clearly Solomon shall testify to us, speaking thus: “The prudence
of man is not in me: but God giveth me wisdom, and I know holy
things.” <span id="fr_3073"></span>[3074](#fn_3073.md) Now Moses,
describing allegorically the divine prudence, called it the tree of life
planted in Paradise; which Paradise may be the world in which all things
proceeding from creation grow. In it also the Word blossomed and bore
fruit, being “made flesh,” and gave life to those “who had tasted of His
graciousness;” since it was not without the wood of the tree that He
came to our knowledge. For our life was hung on it, in order that we
might believe. And Solomon again says: “She is a tree of immortality to
those who take hold of her.” <span id="fr_3074"></span>[3075](#fn_3074.md)
“Behold, I set before thy face life and death, to love the <span
class="sc"><span id="vi.iv.v.xi-p15.2"></span>Lord</span> thy God, and
to walk in His ways, and hear His voice, and trust in life. But if ye
transgress the statutes and the judgments which I have given you, ye
shall be destroyed with destruction. For this is life, and the length of
thy days, to love the <span class="sc"><span
id="vi.iv.v.xi-p15.3"></span>Lord</span> thy God.” <span
id="fr_3075"></span>[3076](#fn_3075.md)

<span id="vi.iv.v.xi-p17"></span>Again: “Abraham, when he came to the
place which God told him of on the third day, looking up, saw the place
afar off.” <span id="fr_3076"></span>[3077](#fn_3076.md) For the <span
id="page_462">p. 462</span> <span id="vi.iv.v.xi-Page_462"></span>first
day is that which is constituted by the sight of good things; and the
second is the soul’s <span id="fr_3077"></span>[3078](#fn_3077.md) best
desire; on the third, the mind perceives spiritual things, the eyes of
the understanding being opened by the Teacher who rose on the third day.
The three days may be the mystery of the seal, <span
id="fr_3078"></span>[3079](#fn_3078.md) in which God is really believed. It
is consequently afar off that he sees the place. For the region of God
is hard to attain; which Plato called the region of ideas, having
learned from Moses that it was a place which contained all things
universally. But it is seen by Abraham afar off, rightly, because of his
being in the realms of generation, and he is forthwith initiated by the
angel. Thence says the apostle: “Now we see as through a glass, but then
face to face,” by those sole pure and incorporeal applications of the
intellect. In reasoning, it is possible to divine respecting God, if one
attempt without any of the senses, by reason, to reach what is
individual; and do not quit the sphere of existences, till, rising up to
the things which transcend it, he apprehends by the intellect itself
that which is good, moving in the very confines of the world of thought,
according to Plato.

<span id="vi.iv.v.xi-p21"></span>Again, Moses, not allowing altars and
temples to be constructed in many places, but raising one temple of God,
announced that the world was only-begotten, as Basilides says, and that
God is one, as does not as yet appear to Basilides. And since the
gnostic Moses does not circumscribe within space Him that cannot be
circumscribed, he set up no image in the temple to be worshipped;
showing that God was invisible, and incapable of being circumscribed;
and somehow leading the Hebrews to the conception of God by the honour
for His name in the temple. Further, the Word, prohibiting the
constructing of temples and all sacrifices, intimates that the Almighty
is not contained in anything, by what He says: “What house will ye build
to Me? saith the <span class="sc"><span
id="vi.iv.v.xi-p21.1"></span>Lord</span>. Heaven is my throne,” <span
id="fr_3079"></span>[3080](#fn_3079.md) and so on. Similarly respecting
sacrifices: “I do not desire the blood of bulls and the fat of
lambs,” <span id="fr_3080"></span>[3081](#fn_3080.md) and what the Holy
Spirit by the prophet in the sequel forbids.

<span id="vi.iv.v.xi-p24"></span>Most excellently, therefore, Euripides
accords with these, when he writes:—

> <span id="vi.iv.v.xi-p24.1"></span> “What house constructed by the
> workmen’s hands,  
> With folds of walls, can clothe the shape divine?”  

<span id="vi.iv.v.xi-p25"></span>And of sacrifices he thus speaks:—

> <span id="vi.iv.v.xi-p25.1"></span> “For God needs nought, if He is
> truly God.  
> These of the minstrels are the wretched myths.”  

<span id="vi.iv.v.xi-p26"></span>“For it was not from need that God made
the world; that He might reap honours from men and the other gods and
demons, winning a kind of revenue from creation, and from us, fumes, and
from the gods and demons, their proper ministries,” says Plato. Most
instructively, therefore, says Paul in the Acts of the Apostles: “The
God that made the world, and all things in it, being the Lord of heaven
and earth, dwelleth not in temples made with hands; neither is
worshipped by men’s hands, as if He needed anything; seeing that it is
He Himself that giveth to all breath, and life, and all things.” <span
id="fr_3081"></span>[3082](#fn_3081.md) And Zeno, the founder of the Stoic
sect, says in this book of the *Republic*, “that we ought to make
neither temples nor images; for that no work is worthy of the gods.” And
he was not afraid to write in these very words: “There will be no need
to build temples. For a temple is not worth much, and ought not to be
regarded as holy. For nothing is worth much, and holy, which is the work
of builders and mechanics.” Rightly, therefore, Plato too, recognising
the world as God’s temple, pointed out to the citizens a spot in the
city where their idols were to be laid up. “Let not, then, any one
again,” he says, “consecrate temples to the gods. For gold and silver in
other states, in the case of private individuals and in the temples, is
an invidious possession; and ivory, a body which has abandoned the life,
is not a sacred votive offering; and steel and brass are the instruments
of wars; but whatever one wishes to dedicate, let it be wood of one
tree, as also stone for common temples.” Rightly, then, in the great
Epistle he says: “For it is not capable of expression, like other
branches of study. But as the result of great intimacy with this
subject, and living with it, a sudden light, like that kindled by a
coruscating fire, arising in the soul, feeds itself.” Are not these
statements like those of Zephaniah the prophet? “And the Spirit of the
Lord took me, and brought me up to the fifth heaven, and I beheld angels
called Lords; and their diadem was set on in the Holy Spirit; and each
of them had a throne sevenfold brighter than the light of the rising
sun; and they dwelt in temples of salvation, and hymned the ineffable,
Most High God.” <span id="fr_3082"></span>[3083](#fn_3082.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3069"></span>[460:3070](0020385.htm#fr_3069.md) <span
id="vi.iv.v.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.xi-p2"></span> \[See p. 316, note 4, *supra*.\]

<span id="fn_3070"></span>[460:3071](0020385.htm#fr_3070.md) <span
id="vi.iv.v.xi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.xi-p4"></span> \[Analogies in Bunsen, *Hippol*., iii.
75, and notes, p. 123.\]

<span id="fn_3071"></span>[461:3072](0020385.htm#fr_3071.md) <span
id="vi.iv.v.xi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.xi-p9"></span> \[Analogies in Bunsen, *Hippol*., iii.
75, and notes, p. 123.\]

<span id="fn_3072"></span>[461:3073](0020385.htm#fr_3072.md) <span
id="vi.iv.v.xi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.xi-p13"></span> [Ex. xxxiii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#018.md)<span id="vi.iv.v.xi-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3073"></span>[461:3074](0020385.htm#fr_3073.md) <span
id="vi.iv.v.xi-p13.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.xi-p14"></span> [Prov. xxx.
2](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#002.md)<span id="vi.iv.v.xi-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3074"></span>[461:3075](0020385.htm#fr_3074.md) <span
id="vi.iv.v.xi-p14.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.xi-p15"></span> [Prov. iii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#018.md)<span id="vi.iv.v.xi-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3075"></span>[461:3076](0020385.htm#fr_3075.md) <span
id="vi.iv.v.xi-p15.4"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.xi-p16"></span> [Deut.
30:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#015.md),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#016.md)<span
id="vi.iv.v.xi-p16.1"></span>, etc.

<span id="fn_3076"></span>[461:3077](0020385.htm#fr_3076.md) <span
id="vi.iv.v.xi-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.xi-p18"></span> [Gen.
22:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#003.md),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#004.md)<span id="vi.iv.v.xi-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3077"></span>[462:3078](0020385.htm#fr_3077.md) <span
id="vi.iv.v.xi-p18.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.xi-p19"></span> Or, “the desire of a very good soul,”
according to the text which reads <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.v.xi-p19.1"></span>Ἡ ψυχῆς ἀρίστης</span>. The other reading
is <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.v.xi-p19.2"></span>ἀρίστη</span>.

<span id="fn_3078"></span>[462:3079](0020385.htm#fr_3078.md) <span
id="vi.iv.v.xi-p19.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.xi-p20"></span> Baptism. \[Into the Triad.\]

<span id="fn_3079"></span>[462:3080](0020385.htm#fr_3079.md) <span
id="vi.iv.v.xi-p21.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.xi-p22"></span> [Isa. lxvi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#001.md)<span id="vi.iv.v.xi-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3080"></span>[462:3081](0020385.htm#fr_3080.md) <span
id="vi.iv.v.xi-p22.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.xi-p23"></span> [Ps. l.
13](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#013.md)<span id="vi.iv.v.xi-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3081"></span>[462:3082](0020385.htm#fr_3081.md) <span
id="vi.iv.v.xi-p26.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.xi-p27"></span> [Acts
17:24](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#024.md),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#025.md)<span
id="vi.iv.v.xi-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3082"></span>[462:3083](0020385.htm#fr_3082.md) <span
id="vi.iv.v.xi-p27.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.xi-p28"></span> From some apocryphal writing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII.—God Cannot Be Embraced in Words or by the
Mind.](0020386.md)
