[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020113)  [Next](0020115.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.ii.xvi"></span>

##### <span id="iv.ii.ii.xvi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XVI.—Of the Fifth Day.

<span id="iv.ii.ii.xvi-p1"></span>On the fifth day the living creatures
which proceed from the waters were produced, through which also is
revealed the manifold wisdom of God in these things; for who could count
their multitude and very various kinds? Moreover, the things proceeding
from the waters were blessed by God, that this also might be a sign of
men’s being destined to receive repentance and remission of sins,
through the water and laver of regeneration,—as many as come to the
truth, and are born again, and receive blessing from God. But the
monsters of the deep and the birds of prey are a similitude of covetous
men and transgressors. For as the fish and the fowls are of one
nature,—some indeed abide in their natural state, and do no harm to
those weaker than themselves, but keep the law of God, and eat of the
seeds of the earth; others of them, again, transgress the law of God,
and eat flesh, and injure those weaker than themselves: thus, too, the
righteous, keeping the law of God, bite and injure none, but live holily
and righteously. But robbers, and murderers, and godless persons are
like monsters of the deep, and wild beasts, and birds of prey; for they
virtually devour those weaker than themselves. The race, then, of fishes
and of creeping things, though partaking of God’s blessing, received no
very distinguishing property.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVII.—Of the Sixth Day.](0020115.md)
