[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020226)  [Next](0020228) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iii.xix"></span>

##### <span id="v.iii.xix-p0.1"></span>Chapter XIX.—Man Would Be More Unfavourably Situated Than the Beasts If There Were No Resurrection.

<span id="v.iii.xix-p1"></span>In replying, then, to those who
acknowledge a divine superintendence, and admit the same principles as
we do, yet somehow depart from their own admissions, one may use such
arguments as those which have been adduced, and many more than these,
should he be disposed to amplify what has been said only concisely and
in a cursory manner. But in dealing with those who differ from us
concerning primary truths, it will perhaps be well to lay down another
principle antecedent to these, joining with them in doubting of the
things to which their opinions relate, and examining the matter along
with them in this manner—whether the life of men, and their entire
course of existence, is overlooked, and a sort of dense darkness is
poured down upon the earth, hiding in ignorance and silence both the men
themselves and their actions; or whether it is much safer to be of
opinion that the Maker presides over the things which He Himself has
made, inspecting all things whatsoever which exist, or come into
existence, Judge of both deeds and purposes. For if no judgment whatever
were to be passed on the actions of men, men would have no advantage
over the irrational creatures, but rather would fare worse than these
do, inasmuch as they keep in subjection their passions, and concern
themselves about piety, and righteousness, and the other virtues; and a
life after the manner of brutes would be the best, virtue would be
absurd, the threat of judgment a matter for broad laughter, indulgence
in every kind of pleasure the highest good, and the common resolve of
all these and their one law would be that maxim, so dear to the
intemperate and lewd, “Let us eat and drink, for to-morrow we die.” For
the termination of such a life is not even pleasure, as some suppose,
but utter insensibility. But if the Maker of men takes any concern about
His own works, and the distinction is anywhere to be found between those
who have lived well and ill, it must be either in the present life,
while men are still living who have conducted themselves virtuously or
viciously, <span id="page_160">p. 160</span> <span
id="v.iii.xix-Page_160"></span>or after death, when men are in a state
of separation and dissolution. But according to neither of these
suppositions can we find a just judgment taking place; for neither do
the good in the present life obtain the rewards of virtue, nor yet do
the bad receive the wages of vice. I pass over the fact, that so long as
the nature we at present possess is preserved, the moral nature is not
able to bear a punishment commensurate with the more numerous or more
serious faults. For the robber, or ruler, or tyrant, who has unjustly
put to death myriads on myriads, could not by one death make restitution
for these deeds; and the man who holds no true opinion concerning God,
but lives in all outrage and blasphemy, despises divine things, breaks
the laws, commits outrage against boys and women alike, razes cities
unjustly, burns houses with their inhabitants, and devastates a country,
and at the same time destroys inhabitants of cities and peoples, and
even an entire nation—how in a mortal body could he endure a penalty
adequate to these crimes, since death prevents the deserved punishment,
and the mortal nature does not suffice for any single one of his deeds?
It is proved, therefore, that neither in the present life is there a
judgment according to men’s deserts, nor after death.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XX.—Man Must Be Possessed Both of a Body and Soul
Hereafter, that the Judgment Passed Upon Him May Be Just.](0020228)
