[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020270)  [Next](0020272) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.ii.vii"></span>

##### <span id="vi.iii.ii.vii-p0.1"></span>Chapter VII.—Directions for Those Who Live Together.

<span id="vi.iii.ii.vii-p1"></span>Let us keep away from us jibing, the
originator of insult, from which strifes and contentions and enmities
burst forth. Insult, we have said, is the servant of drunkenness. A man
is judged, not from his deeds alone, but from his words. “In a banquet,”
it is said, “reprove not thy neighbour, nor say to him a word of
reproach.” <span id="fr_1434"></span>[1435](#fn_1434) For if we are
enjoined especially to associate with saints, it is a sin to jibe at a
saint: “For from the mouth of the foolish,” says the Scripture, “is a
staff of insult,” <span id="fr_1435"></span>[1436](#fn_1435) —meaning by
staff the prop of insult, on which insult leans and rests. Whence I
admire the apostle, who, in reference to this, exhorts us not to utter
“scurrilous nor unsuitable words.” <span
id="fr_1436"></span>[1437](#fn_1436) For if the assemblies at festivals
take place on account of affection, and the end of a banquet is
friendliness towards those who meet, and meat and drink accompany
affection, how should not conversation be conducted in a rational
manner, and puzzling people with questions be avoided from affection?
For if we meet together for the purpose of increasing our good-will to
each other, why should we stir up enmity by jibing? It is better to be
silent than to contradict, and thereby add sin to ignorance. “Blessed,”
in truth, “is the man who has not made a slip with his mouth, and has
not been pierced by the pain of sin;” <span
id="fr_1437"></span>[1438](#fn_1437) or has repented of what he has said
amiss, or has spoken so as to wound no one. On the whole, let young men
and young women altogether keep away from such festivals, that they may
not make a slip in respect to what is unsuitable. For things to which
their ears are unaccustomed, and unseemly sights, inflame the mind,
while faith within them is still wavering; and the instability of their
age conspires to make them easily carried away by lust. Sometimes also
they are the cause of others stumbling, by <span id="page_252">p.
252</span> <span id="vi.iii.ii.vii-Page_252"></span>displaying the
dangerous charms of their time of life. For Wisdom appears to enjoin
well: “Sit not at all with a married woman, and recline not on the elbow
with her;” <span id="fr_1438"></span>[1439](#fn_1438) that is, do not
sup nor eat with her frequently. Wherefore he adds, “And do not join
company with her in wine, lest thy heart incline to her, and by thy
blood slide to ruin.” <span id="fr_1439"></span>[1440](#fn_1439) For the
licence of intoxication is dangerous, and prone to deflower. And he
names “a married woman,” because the danger is greater to him who
attempts to break the connubial bond.

<span id="vi.iii.ii.vii-p8"></span>But if any necessity arises,
commanding the presence of married women, let them be well
clothed—without by raiment, within by modesty. But as for such as are
unmarried, it is the extremest scandal for them to be present at a
banquet of men, especially men under the influence of wine. And let the
men, fixing their eyes on the couch, and leaning without moving on their
elbows, be present with their ears alone; and if they sit, let them not
have their feet crossed, nor place one thigh on another, nor apply the
hand to the chin. For it is vulgar not to bear one’s self without
support, and consequently a fault in a young man. And perpetually moving
and changing one’s position is a sign of frivolousness. It is the part
of a temperate man also, in eating and drinking, to take a small
portion, and deliberately, not eagerly, both at the beginning and during
the courses, and to leave off betimes, and so show his indifference.
“Eat,” it is said, “like a man what is set before you. Be the first to
stop for the sake of regimen; and, if seated in the midst of several
people, do not stretch out your hand before them.” <span
id="fr_1440"></span>[1441](#fn_1440) You must never rush forward under
the influence of gluttony; nor must you, though desirous, reach out your
hand till some time, inasmuch as by greed one shows an uncontrolled
appetite. Nor are you, in the midst of the repast, to exhibit yourselves
hugging your food like wild beasts; nor helping yourselves to too much
sauce, for man is not by nature a sauce-consumer, but a bread-eater. A
temperate man, too, must rise before the general company, and retire
quietly from the banquet. “For at the time for rising,” it is said, “be
not the last; haste home.” <span id="fr_1441"></span>[1442](#fn_1441)
The twelve, having called together the multitude of the disciples, said,
“It is not meet for us to leave the word of God and serve tables.” <span
id="fr_1442"></span>[1443](#fn_1442) If they avoided this, much more did
they shun gluttony. And the apostles themselves, writing to the brethren
at Antioch, and in Syria and Cilicia, said: “It seemed good to the Holy
Ghost, and to us, to lay upon you no other burden than these necessary
things, to abstain from things offered to idols, and from blood, and
from things strangled, and from fornication, from which, if you keep
yourselves, ye shall do well.” <span
id="fr_1443"></span>[1444](#fn_1443) But we must guard against
drunkenness as against hemlock; for both drag down to death. We must
also check excessive laughter and immoderate tears. For often people
under the influence of wine, after laughing immoderately, then are, I
know not how, by some impulse of intoxication moved to tears; for both
effiminacy and violence are discordant with the word. And elderly
people, looking on the young as children, may, though but very rarely,
be playful with them, joking with them to train them in good behaviour.
For example, before a bashful and silent youth, one might by way of
pleasantry speak thus: “This son of mine (I mean one who is silent) is
perpetually talking.” For a joke such as this enhances the youth’s
modesty, by showing the good qualities that belong to him playfully, by
censure of the bad quantities, which do not. For this device is
instructive, confirming as it does what is present by what is not
present. Such, certainly, is the intention of him who says that a
water-drinker and a sober man gets intoxicated and drunk. But if there
are those who like to jest at people, we must be silent, and dispense
with superfluous words like full cups. For such sport is dangerous. “The
mouth of the impetuous approaches to contrition.” <span
id="fr_1444"></span>[1445](#fn_1444) “Thou shalt not receive a foolish
report, nor shall thou agree with an unjust person to be an unjust
witness,” <span id="fr_1445"></span>[1446](#fn_1445) neither in
calumnies nor in injurious speeches, much less evil practices. I also
should think it right to impose a limit on the speech of rightly
regulated persons, who are impelled to speak to one who maintains a
conversation with them. “For silence is the excellence of women, and the
safe prize of the young; but good speech is characteristic of
experienced, mature age. Speak, old man, at a banquet, for it is
becoming to you. But speak without embarrassment, and with accuracy of
knowledge. Youth, Wisdom also commands thee. Speak, if you must, with
hesitation, on being twice asked; sum up your discourse in a few
words.” <span id="fr_1446"></span>[1447](#fn_1446) But let both speakers
regulate their discourse according to just proportion. For loudness of
utterance is most insane; while an inaudible utterance is characteristic
of a senseless man, for people will not hear: the one is the mark of
pusillanimity, the other of arrogance. Let contentiousness in words, for
the sake of a useless triumph, be banished; for our aim is to be free
from perturbation. <span id="page_253">p. 253</span> <span
id="vi.iii.ii.vii-Page_253"></span>Such is the meaning of the
phrase, <span id="fr_1447"></span>[1448](#fn_1447) “Peace to thee.”
Answer not a word before you hear. An enervated voice is the sign of
effeminacy. But modulation in the voice is characteristic of a wise man,
who keeps his utterance from loudness, from drawling, from rapidity,
from prolixity. For we ought not to speak long or much, nor ought we to
speak frivolously. Nor must we converse rapidly and rashly. For the
voice itself, so to speak, ought to receive its just dues; and those who
are vociferous and clamorous ought to be silenced. For this reason, the
wise Ulysses chastised Thersites with stripes:—

> <span id="vi.iii.ii.vii-p16.2"></span> “Only Thersites, with
> unmeasured words,  
> Of which he had good store, to rate the chiefs,  
> Not over-seemly, but wherewith he thought  
> To move the crowd to laughter, brawled aloud.” <span
> id="fr_1448"></span>[1449](#fn_1448)  

<span id="vi.iii.ii.vii-p18"></span>“For dreadful in his destruction is
a loquacious man.” <span id="fr_1449"></span>[1450](#fn_1449) And it is
with triflers as with old shoes: all the rest is worn away by evil; the
tongue only is left for destruction. Wherefore Wisdom gives these most
useful exhortations: “Do not talk trifles in the multitude of the
elders.” Further, eradicating frivolousness, beginning with God, it lays
down the law for our regulation somewhat thus: “Do not repeat your words
in your prayer.” <span id="fr_1450"></span>[1451](#fn_1450) Chirruping
and whistling, and sounds made through the fingers, by which domestics
are called, being irrational signs, are to be given up by rational men.
Frequent spitting, too, and violent clearing of the throat, and wiping
one’s nose at an entertainment, are to be shunned. For respect is
assuredly to be had to the guests, lest they turn in disgust from such
filthiness, which argues want of restraint. For we are not to copy oxen
and asses, whose manger and dunghill are together. For many wipe their
noses and spit even whilst supping.

<span id="vi.iii.ii.vii-p21"></span>If any one is attacked with
sneezing, just as in the case of hiccup, he must not startle those near
him with the explosion, and so give proof of his bad breeding; but the
hiccup is to be quietly transmitted with the expiration of the breath,
the mouth being composed becomingly, and not gaping and yawning like the
tragic masks. So the disturbance of hiccup may be avoided by making the
respirations gently; for thus the threatening symptoms of the ball of
wind will be dissipated in the most seemly way, by managing its egress
so as also to conceal anything which the air forcibly expelled may bring
up with it. To wish to add to the noises, instead of diminishing them,
is the sign of arrogance and disorderliness. Those, too, who scrape
their teeth, bleeding the wounds, are disagreeable to themselves and
detestable to their neighbours. Scratching the ears and the irritation
of sneezing are swinish itchings, and attend unbridled fornication. Both
shameful sights and shameful conversation about them are to be shunned.
Let the look be steady, and the turning and movement of the neck, and
the motions of the hands in conversation, be decorous. In a word, the
Christian is characterized by composure, tranquillity, calmness, and
peace. <span id="fr_1451"></span>[1452](#fn_1451)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1434"></span>[251:1435](0020271.htm#fr_1434) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.vii-p2"></span> [Ecclus. xxxi.
31](../../../bib/apo/sir031.htm#031)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.vii-p2.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1435"></span>[251:1436](0020271.htm#fr_1435) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.vii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.vii-p3"></span> [Prov. xiv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#003)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.vii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1436"></span>[251:1437](0020271.htm#fr_1436) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.vii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.vii-p4"></span> [Eph. v.
4](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#004)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.vii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1437"></span>[251:1438](0020271.htm#fr_1437) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.vii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.vii-p5"></span> [Ecclus. xiv.
1](../../../bib/apo/sir014.htm#001)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.vii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1438"></span>[252:1439](0020271.htm#fr_1438) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.vii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.vii-p6"></span> [Ecclus. ix.
9](../../../bib/apo/sir009.htm#009)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.vii-p6.1"></span>. \[i.e., reclining at the table.\]

<span id="fn_1439"></span>[252:1440](0020271.htm#fr_1439) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.vii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.vii-p7"></span> [Ecclus. ix.
9](../../../bib/apo/sir009.htm#009)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.vii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1440"></span>[252:1441](0020271.htm#fr_1440) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.vii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.vii-p9"></span> [Ecclus. xxxi.
16-18](../../../bib/apo/sir031.htm#016)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.vii-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1441"></span>[252:1442](0020271.htm#fr_1441) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.vii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.vii-p10"></span> [Ecclus. xxxii.
11](../../../bib/apo/sir032.htm#011)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.vii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1442"></span>[252:1443](0020271.htm#fr_1442) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.vii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.vii-p11"></span> [Acts. vi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#002)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.vii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1443"></span>[252:1444](0020271.htm#fr_1443) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.vii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.vii-p12"></span> [Acts
15:23](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#023),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#028),
[29](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#029)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.vii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1444"></span>[252:1445](0020271.htm#fr_1444) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.vii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.vii-p13"></span> [Prov. x.
14](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#014)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.vii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1445"></span>[252:1446](0020271.htm#fr_1445) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.vii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.vii-p14"></span> [Prov. xxiv.
28](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#028)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.vii-p14.1"></span>; [Ex. xxiii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#001)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.vii-p14.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_1446"></span>[252:1447](0020271.htm#fr_1446) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.vii-p14.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.vii-p15"></span> [Sir.
32:3](../../../bib/apo/sir032.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/apo/sir032.htm#004),
[8](../../../bib/apo/sir032.htm#008)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.vii-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1447"></span>[253:1448](0020271.htm#fr_1447) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.vii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.vii-p16"></span> \[A primitive form of Christian
salutation, borrowed from the great Example. [John xx.
19](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#019)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.vii-p16.1"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_1448"></span>[253:1449](0020271.htm#fr_1448) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.vii-p16.7"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.vii-p17"></span> *Iliad*, ii. 213.

<span id="fn_1449"></span>[253:1450](0020271.htm#fr_1449) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.vii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.vii-p19"></span> [Ecclus. ix.
18](../../../bib/apo/sir009.htm#018)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.vii-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1450"></span>[253:1451](0020271.htm#fr_1450) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.vii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.vii-p20"></span> [Ecclus. ix.
15](../../../bib/apo/sir009.htm#015)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.vii-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1451"></span>[253:1452](0020271.htm#fr_1451) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.vii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.vii-p22"></span> \[“Against such there is no law.”
*<span id="vi.iii.ii.vii-p22.1"></span>Emollit Mores*, etc.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII.—On the Use of Ointments and Crowns.](0020272)
