[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020108)  [Next](0020110.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.ii.xi"></span>

##### <span id="iv.ii.ii.xi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XI.—The Six Days’ Work Described.

<span id="iv.ii.ii.xi-p1"></span>Now, the beginning of the creation is
light; since light manifests the things that are created. Wherefore it
is said: “And God said, Let light be, <span
id="fr_571"></span>[572](#fn_571.md) and light was; and God saw the light,
that it was good,” manifestly made good for man. “And God divided the
light from the darkness; and God called the light Day, and the darkness
He called Night. And the evening and the morning were the first day. And
God said, Let there be a firmament in the midst of the waters, and let
it divide the waters from the waters: and it was so. And God made the
firmament, and divided the waters which were under the firmament from
the waters which were above the firmament. And God called the firmament
Heaven: and God saw that it was good. And the evening and the morning
were the second day. And God said, Let the water under the heaven be
gathered into one place, and let the dry land appear: and it was so. And
the waters were gathered together into their places, and the dry land
appeared. And God called the dry land Earth, and the gathering together
of the waters He called Seas: and God saw that it was good. And God
said, Let the earth bring forth grass, the herb yielding seed after his
kind and in his likeness, and the fruit-tree yielding fruit after his
kind, whose seed is in itself, in his likeness: and it was so. And the
earth brought forth grass, the herb yielding seed after his kind, and
the fruit-tree yielding fruit, whose seed was in itself, after his kind,
on the earth: and God saw that it was good. And the evening and the
morning were the third day. And God said, Let there be lights in the
firmament of the heaven, to give light on earth, to divide the day from
the night; and let them be for signs, and for seasons, and for days, and
for years; and let them be for lights in the firmament of the heaven, to
give light upon the earth: and it was so. And God made two great lights;
the greater light to rule the day, and the lesser light to rule the
night: He made the stars also. And God set them in the firmament of the
heaven to give light upon the earth, and to rule over the day and over
the night, and to divide the light from the darkness: and God saw that
it was good. And the evening and the morning were the fourth day. And
God said, Let the waters bring forth the creeping things that have life,
and fowl flying over the earth in the firmament of <span id="page_99">p.
99</span> <span id="iv.ii.ii.xi-Page_99"></span>heaven: and it was so.
And God created great whales, and every living creature that creepeth,
which the waters brought forth after their kind, and every winged fowl
after his kind: and God saw that it was good. And God blessed them,
saying, Increase and multiply, and fill the waters of the sea, and let
fowl multiply in the earth. And the evening and the morning were the
fifth day. And God said, Let the earth bring forth the living creature
after his kind, cattle, and creeping thing, and beast of the earth after
his kind: and it was so. And God made the beasts of the earth after
their kind, and the cattle after their kind, and all the creeping things
of the earth. And God said, Let us make man in our image, after our
likeness; and let them have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over
the fowl of the heaven, and over the cattle, and over all the earth, and
over every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth. And God created
man: in the image of God created He him; male and female created He
them. And God blessed them, saying, Be fruitful, and multiply, and
replenish the earth, and subdue it, and have dominion over the fish of
the sea, and over the fowl of the heaven, and over all cattle, and over
all the earth, and over all the creeping things that creep upon the
earth. And God said, Behold I have given you every herb bearing seed,
which is upon the face of all the earth, and every tree in the which is
the fruit of a tree yielding seed; to you it shall be for meat, and to
all the beasts of the earth, and to all the fowls of heaven, and to
every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth, which has in it the
breath of life; every green herb for meat: and it was so. And God saw
everything that He had made, and, behold, it was very good. And the
evening and the morning were the sixth day. And the heaven and the earth
were finished, and all the host of them. And on the sixth day God
finished His works which He made, and rested on the seventh day from all
His works which He made. And God blessed the seventh day, and sanctified
it; because in it He rested from all His works which God began to
create.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_571"></span>[98:572](0020109.htm#fr_571.md) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.xi-p2"></span> The words, “and light was; and God saw
the light, that it was good,” are omitted in the two best <span
class="sc"><span id="iv.ii.ii.xi-p2.1"></span>mss</span>. and in some
editions; but they seem to be necessary, and to have fallen out by the
mistake of transcribers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII.—The Glory of the Six Days’ Work.](0020110.md)
