[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020029)  [Next](0020031) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.viii"></span>

#### <span id="ii.iv.viii-p0.1"></span>Similitude Eighth.

##### <span id="ii.iv.viii-p0.2"></span>The Sins of the Elect and of the Penitent are of Many Kinds, But All Will Be Rewarded According to the Measure of Their Repentance and Good Works.

##### <span id="ii.iv.viii-p0.3"></span>Chap. I.

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p1"></span>He showed me a large willow tree
overshadowing plains and mountains, and under the shade of this willow
had assembled all those who were called by the name of the Lord. And a
glorious angel of the Lord, who was very tall, was standing beside the
willow, having a large pruning-knife, and he was cutting little twigs
from the willow and distributing them among the people that were
overshadowed by the willow; and the twigs which he gave them were small,
about a cubit, as it were, in length. And after they had all received
the twigs, the angel laid down the pruning-knife, and that tree was
sound, as I had seen it at first. And I marvelled within myself, saying,
“How is the tree sound, after so many branches have been cut off?” And
the Shepherd said to me, “Do not be surprised if the tree remains sound
after so many branches were lopped off; \[but wait, <span
id="fr_308"></span>[309](#fn_308) \] and when you shall have seen
everything, then it will be explained to you what it means.” The angel
who had distributed the branches among the people again asked them from
them, and in the order in which they had received them were they
summoned to him, and each one of them returned his branch. And the angel
of the Lord took and looked at them. From some he received the branches
withered and moth-eaten; those who returned branches in that state the
angel of the Lord ordered to stand apart. Others, again, returned them
withered, but not moth-eaten; and these he ordered to stand apart. And
others returned them half-withered, and these stood apart; and others
returned their branches half-withered and having cracks in them, and
these stood apart. \[And others returned their branches green and having
cracks in them; and these stood apart. <span
id="fr_309"></span>[310](#fn_309) \] And others returned their branches,
one-half withered and the other green; and these stood apart. And others
brought their branches two-thirds green and the remaining third
withered; and these stood apart. And others returned them two-thirds
withered and one-third green; and these stood apart. And others returned
their branches nearly all green, the smallest part only, the top, being
withered, but they had cracks in them; and these stood apart. And of
others very little was green, but the remaining parts withered; and
these stood apart. And others came bringing their branches green, as
they had received them from the angel. And the majority of the crowd
returned branches of that kind, and with these the angel was exceedingly
pleased; and these stood apart. \[And others returned their branches
green and having offshoots; and these stood apart, and with these the
angel was exceedingly delighted. <span id="fr_310"></span>[311](#fn_310)
\] And others returned their branches green and with offshoots, and the
offshoots had some fruit, as it were; <span
id="fr_311"></span>[312](#fn_311) and those men whose branches were
found to be of that kind were exceedingly joyful. And the angel was
exultant because of them; and the Shepherd also rejoiced greatly because
of them.

##### <span id="ii.iv.viii-p5.4"></span>Chap. II.

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p6"></span>And the angel of the Lord ordered crowns
to be brought; <span id="fr_312"></span>[313](#fn_312) and there were
brought crowns, formed, as it were, of palms; and he crowned the men who
had returned the branches which had offshoots and some fruit, and sent
them away into the tower. And the others also he sent into the tower,
those, namely, who had returned branches that were green and had
offshoots but no fruit, having given them seals. <span
id="fr_313"></span>[314](#fn_313) And all who went into the tower had
the same <span id="page_40">p. 40</span> <span
id="ii.iv.viii-Page_40"></span>clothing—white as snow. <span
id="fr_314"></span>[315](#fn_314) And those who returned their branches
green, as they had received them, he set free, giving them clothing and
seals. Now after the angel had finished these things, he said to the
Shepherd, “I am going away, and you will send these away within the
walls, according as each one is worthy to have his dwelling. And examine
their branches carefully, and so dismiss them; but examine them with
*care.* See that no one escape you,” he added; “and if any escape you, I
will try them at the altar.” <span id="fr_315"></span>[316](#fn_315)
Having said these words to the Shepherd, he departed. And after the
angel had departed, the Shepherd said to me, “Let us take the branches
of all these and plant them, and see if any of them will live.” I said
to him, “Sir, how can these withered branches live?” He answered, and
said, “This tree is a willow, and of a kind that is very tenacious of
life. If, therefore, the branches be planted, and receive a little
moisture, many of them will live. And now let us try, and pour
water <span id="fr_316"></span>[317](#fn_316) upon them; and if any of
them live I shall rejoice with them, and if they do not I at least will
not be found neglectful.” And the Shepherd bade me call them as each one
was placed. And they came, rank by rank, and gave their branches to the
Shepherd. And the Shepherd received the branches, and planted them in
rows; and after he had planted them he poured much water upon them, so
that the branches could not be seen for the water; and after the
branches had drunk it in, he said to me, “Let us go, and return after a
few days, and inspect all the branches; for He who created this tree
wishes all those to live who received branches <span
id="fr_317"></span>[318](#fn_317) from it. And I also hope that the
greater part of these branches which received moisture and drank of the
water will live.”

##### <span id="ii.iv.viii-p12.2"></span>Chap. III.

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p13"></span>I said to him, “Sir, explain to me what
this tree means, for I am perplexed about it, because, after so many
branches have been cut off, it continues sound, and nothing appears to
have been cut away from it. By this, now, I am perplexed.” “Listen,” he
said: “This great tree <span id="fr_318"></span>[319](#fn_318) that
casts its shadow over plains, and mountains, and all the earth, is the
law of God that was given to the whole world; and this law is the Son of
God, <span id="fr_319"></span>[320](#fn_319) proclaimed to the ends of
the earth; and the people who are under its shadow are they who have
heard the proclamation, and have believed upon Him. And the great and
glorious angel Michael is he who has authority over this people, and
governs them; <span id="fr_320"></span>[321](#fn_320) for this is he who
gave them the law <span id="fr_321"></span>[322](#fn_321) into the
hearts of believers: he accordingly superintends them to whom he gave
it, to see if they have kept the same. And you see the branches of each
one, for the branches are the law. You see, accordingly, many branches
that have been rendered useless, and you will know them all—those who
have not kept the law; and you will see the dwelling of each one.” I
said to him, “Sir, why did he dismiss some into the tower, and leave
others to you?” “All,” he answered, “who transgressed the law which they
received from him, he left under my power for repentance; but all who
have satisfied the law, and kept it, he retains under his own
authority.” “Who, then,” I continued, “are they who were crowned, and
who go to the tower?” “These are they who have suffered on account of
the law; but the others, and they who returned their branches green, and
with offshoots, but without fruit, are they who have been afflicted on
account of the law, but who have not suffered nor denied <span
id="fr_322"></span>[323](#fn_322) their law; and they who returned their
branches green as they had received them, are the venerable, and the
just, and they who have walked carefully in a pure heart, and have kept
the commandments of the Lord. And the rest you will know when I have
examined those branches which have been planted and watered.”

##### <span id="ii.iv.viii-p18.1"></span>Chap. IV.

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p19"></span>And after a few days we came to the
place, and the Shepherd sat down in the angel’s place, and I stood
beside him. And he said to me, “Gird yourself with pure, undressed linen
made of sackcloth;” and seeing me girded, and ready to minister to him,
“Summon,” he said, “the men to whom belong the branches that were
planted, according to the order in which each one gave them in.” So I
went away to the plain, and summoned them all, and they all stood in
their ranks. He said to them, “Let each one pull out his own branch, and
bring it to me.” The first to give in were those who had them withered
and cut; and <span id="fr_323"></span>[324](#fn_323) because they were
found to be thus withered and cut, he commanded them to stand apart. And
next they gave them in who had them withered, but not cut. And some of
them gave in their branches green, and some withered and eaten as by a
moth. Those that gave them in green, accordingly, he ordered to stand
apart; and those who gave them in dry and cut, he ordered to stand along
with the first. Next they gave them <span id="page_41">p. 41</span>
<span id="ii.iv.viii-Page_41"></span>in who had them half-withered and
cracked; <span id="fr_324"></span>[325](#fn_324) and many of them gave
them in green and without cracks; and some green and with offshoots and
fruits upon the offshoots, such as they had who went, after being
crowned, into the tower. And some handed them in withered and eaten, and
some withered and uneaten; and some as they were, half-withered and
cracked. And he commanded them each one to stand apart, some towards
their own rows, and others apart from them.

##### <span id="ii.iv.viii-p21.1"></span>Chap. V.

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p22"></span>Then they gave in their branches who
had them green, but cracked: all these gave them in green, and stood in
their own row. And the Shepherd was pleased with these, because they
were all changed, and had lost their cracks. <span
id="fr_325"></span>[326](#fn_325) And they also gave them in who had
them half-green and half-withered: of some, accordingly, the branches
were found completely green; of others, half-withered; of others,
withered and eaten; of others, green, and having offshoots. All these
were sent away, each to his own row. \[Next they gave in who had them
two parts green and one-third withered. Many of them gave them
half-withered; and others withered and rotten; and others half-withered
and cracked, and a few green. These all stood in their own row. <span
id="fr_326"></span>[327](#fn_326) \] And they gave them in who had them
green, but to a very slight extent withered and cracked. <span
id="fr_327"></span>[328](#fn_327) Of these, some gave them in green, and
others green and with offshoots. And these also went away to their own
row. Next they gave them who had a very small part green and the other
parts withered. Of these the branches were found for the most part green
and having offshoots, and fruit upon the offshoots, and others
altogether green. With these branches the Shepherd was exceedingly
pleased, because they were found in this state. And these went away,
each to his own row.

##### <span id="ii.iv.viii-p25.1"></span>Chap. VI.

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p26"></span>After the Shepherd had examined the
branches of them all, he said to me, “I told you that this tree was
tenacious of life. You see,” he continued, “how many repented and were
saved.” “I see, sir,” I replied. “That you may behold,” he added, “the
great mercy of the Lord, that it is great and glorious, and that He has
given His Spirit to those who are worthy of repentance.” “Why then,
sir,” I said, “did not all these repent?” He answered, “To them whose
heart He saw would become pure, and obedient to Him, He gave power to
repent with the whole heart. But to them whose deceit and wickedness He
perceived, and saw that they intended to repent hypocritically, He did
not grant repentance, <span id="fr_328"></span>[329](#fn_328) lest they
should again profane His name.” I said to him, “Sir, show me now, with
respect to those who gave in the branches, of what sort they are, and
their abode, in order that they hearing it who believed, and received
the seal, and broke it, and did not keep it whole, may, on coming to a
knowledge of their deeds, repent, and receive from you a seal, and may
glorify the Lord because He had compassion upon them, and sent you to
renew their spirits.” “Listen,” he said: “they whose branches were found
withered and moth-eaten are the apostates and traitors of the Church,
who have blasphemed the Lord in their sins, and have, moreover, been
ashamed of the name of the Lord by which they were called. <span
id="fr_329"></span>[330](#fn_329) These, therefore, at the end were lost
unto God. And you see that not a single one of them repented, although
they heard the words which I spake to them, which I enjoined upon you.
From such life departed. <span id="fr_330"></span>[331](#fn_330) And
they who gave them in withered and undecayed, these also were near to
them; for they were hypocrites, and introducers of strange doctrines,
and subverters of the servants of God, especially of those who had
sinned, not allowing them to repent, but persuading them by foolish
doctrines. <span id="fr_331"></span>[332](#fn_331) These, accordingly,
have a hope of repentance. And you see that many of them also have
repented since I spake to them, and they will still repent. But all who
will not repent have lost their lives; and as many of them as repented
became good, and their dwelling was appointed within the first walls;
and some of them ascended even into the tower. You see, then,” he said,
“that repentance involves life to sinners, but non-repentance death.”

##### <span id="ii.iv.viii-p30.1"></span>Chap. VII.

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p31"></span>“And as many as gave in the branches
half-withered and cracked, hear also about them. They whose branches
were half-withered to the same extent are the wavering; for they neither
live, nor are they dead. And they who have them half-withered and
cracked are both waverers and slanderers, \[railing against the
absent,\] and never at peace with one another, but always at variance.
And yet to these also,” he continued, “repentance is possible. You see,”
he said, “that some of them have repented, and there is still remaining
in them,” he continued, “a hope of repentance. And as many of them,” he
added, “as have repented, shall have their <span id="page_42">p.
42</span> <span id="ii.iv.viii-Page_42"></span>dwelling in the tower.
And those of them who have been slower in repenting shall dwell within
the walls. And as many as do not repent at all, but abide in their
deeds, shall utterly perish. And they who gave in their branches green
and cracked were always faithful and good, though emulous of each other
about the foremost places, and about fame: <span
id="fr_332"></span>[333](#fn_332) now all these are foolish, in
indulging in such a rivalry. Yet they also, being naturally good, <span
id="fr_333"></span>[334](#fn_333) on hearing my commandments, purified
themselves, and soon repented. Their dwelling, accordingly, was in the
tower. But if any one relapse into strife, he will be east out of the
tower, and will lose his life. <span id="fr_334"></span>[335](#fn_334)
Life is the possession of all who keep the commandments of the Lord; but
in the commandments there is no rivalry in regard to the first places,
or glory of any kind, but in regard to patience and personal humility.
Among such persons, then, is the life of the Lord, but amongst the
quarrelsome and transgressors, death.”

##### <span id="ii.iv.viii-p34.2"></span>Chap. VIII.

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p35"></span>“And they who gave in their branches
half-green and half-withered, are those who are immersed in business,
and do not cleave to the saints. For this reason, the one half of them
is living, and the other half dead. <span
id="fr_335"></span>[336](#fn_335) Many, accordingly, who heard my
commands repented, and those at least who repented had their dwelling in
the tower. But some of them at last fell away: these, accordingly, have
not repentance, for on account of their business they blasphemed the
Lord, and denied Him. They therefore lost their lives through the
wickedness which they committed. And many of them doubted. These still
have repentance in their power, if they repent speedily; and their abode
will be in the tower. But if they are slower in repenting, they will
dwell within the walls; and if they do not repent, they too have lost
their lives. And they who gave in their branches two-thirds withered and
one-third green, are those who have denied \[the Lord\] in various ways.
Many, however, repented, but some of them hesitated and were in doubt.
These, then, have repentance within their reach, if they repent quickly,
and do not remain in their pleasures; <span
id="fr_336"></span>[337](#fn_336) but if they abide in their deeds,
these, too, work to themselves death.”

##### <span id="ii.iv.viii-p37.2"></span>Chap. IX.

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p38"></span>“And they who returned their branches
two-thirds withered and one-third green, are those that were faithful
indeed; but after acquiring wealth, and becoming distinguished amongst
the heathen, they clothed themselves with great pride, and became
lofty-minded, and deserted the truth, and did not cleave to the
righteous, but lived with the heathen, and this way of life became more
agreeable to them. <span id="fr_337"></span>[338](#fn_337) They did not,
however, depart from God, but remained in the faith, although not
working the works of faith. Many of them accordingly repented, and their
dwelling was in the tower. And others continuing to live until the end
with the heathen, and being corrupted by their vain glories, \[departed
from God, serving the works and deeds of the heathen. <span
id="fr_338"></span>[339](#fn_338) \] These were reckoned with the
heathen. But others of them hesitated, not hoping to be saved on account
of the deeds which they had done; while others were in doubt, and caused
divisions among themselves. To those, therefore, who were in doubt on
account of their deeds, repentance is still open; but their repentance
ought to be speedy, that their dwelling may be in the tower. And to
those who do not repent, but abide in their pleasures, death is near.”

##### <span id="ii.iv.viii-p40.1"></span>Chap. X.

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p41"></span>“And they who give in their branches
green, but having the tips withered and cracked, these were always good,
and faithful, and distinguished before God; but they sinned a very
little through indulging small desires, and finding little faults with
one another. But on hearing my words the greater part of them quickly
repented, and their dwelling was upon the tower. Yet some of them were
in doubt; and certain of them who were in doubt wrought greater
dissension. Among these, therefore, is hope of repentance, because they
were always good; and with difficulty will any one of them perish. And
they who gave up their branches withered, <span
id="fr_339"></span>[340](#fn_339) but having a very small part green,
are those who believed only, yet continue working the works of iniquity.
They never, however, departed from God, but gladly bore His name, and
joyfully received His servants into their houses. <span
id="fr_340"></span>[341](#fn_340) Having accordingly heard of this
repentance, they unhesitatingly repented, and practice all virtue and
righteousness; and some of them even \[suffered, being willingly put to
death <span id="fr_341"></span>[342](#fn_341) \], knowing their deeds
which they had done. Of all these, therefore, the dwelling shall be in
the tower.”

##### <span id="ii.iv.viii-p44.1"></span>Chap. XI.

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p45"></span>And after he had finished the
explanations of <span id="page_43">p. 43</span> <span
id="ii.iv.viii-Page_43"></span>all the branches, he said to me, “Go and
tell them to every one, that they may repent, and they shall live unto
God. <span id="fr_342"></span>[343](#fn_342) Because the Lord, having
had compassion on all men, has sent me to give repentance, although some
are not worthy of it on account of their works; but the Lord, being
long-suffering, desires those who were called by His Son to be
saved.” <span id="fr_343"></span>[344](#fn_343) I said to him, “Sir, I
hope that all who have heard them will repent; for I am persuaded that
each one, on coming to a knowledge of his own works, and fearing the
Lord, will repent.” He answered me, and said, “All who with their whole
heart shall purify themselves from their wickedness before enumerated,
and shall add no more to their sins, will receive healing from the Lord
for their former transgressions, if they do not hesitate at these
commandments; and they will live unto God. But do you walk in my
commandments, and live.” Having shown me these things, and spoken all
these words, he said to me, “And the rest I will show you after a few
days.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_308"></span>[39:309](0020030.htm#fr_308) <span
id="ii.iv.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p2"></span> Omitted by Lips.

<span id="fn_309"></span>[39:310](0020030.htm#fr_309) <span
id="ii.iv.viii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p3"></span> Omitted in Lips. and Vat.

<span id="fn_310"></span>[39:311](0020030.htm#fr_310) <span
id="ii.iv.viii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p4"></span> Omitted in Lips.

<span id="fn_311"></span>[39:312](0020030.htm#fr_311) <span
id="ii.iv.viii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p5"></span> [Num. xvii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/num017.htm#008)<span id="ii.iv.viii-p5.1"></span>.
\[Willows are chosen, perhaps, with reference to [Isa. xliv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#004)<span id="ii.iv.viii-p5.2"></span>;
but Ezekiel’s willow supplies the thought here ([Ezek.
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#006)<span
id="ii.iv.viii-p5.3"></span>).\]

<span id="fn_312"></span>[39:313](0020030.htm#fr_312) <span
id="ii.iv.viii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p7"></span> [2 Esdras ii.
43](../../../bib/apo/es2002.htm#043)<span id="ii.iv.viii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_313"></span>[39:314](0020030.htm#fr_313) <span
id="ii.iv.viii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p8"></span> \[[Eph. i.
13](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#013)<span id="ii.iv.viii-p8.1"></span>,
iv. 30.\]

<span id="fn_314"></span>[40:315](0020030.htm#fr_314) <span
id="ii.iv.viii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p9"></span> \[[Rev. xix.
8](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#008)<span id="ii.iv.viii-p9.1"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_315"></span>[40:316](0020030.htm#fr_315) <span
id="ii.iv.viii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p10"></span> \[[Rev. viii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#003)<span id="ii.iv.viii-p10.1"></span>;
[Num. xvii. 7](../../../bib/kjv/num017.htm#007)<span
id="ii.iv.viii-p10.2"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_316"></span>[40:317](0020030.htm#fr_316) <span
id="ii.iv.viii-p10.3"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p11"></span> \[[Ezek. xxxix.
29](../../../bib/kjv/eze039.htm#029)<span
id="ii.iv.viii-p11.1"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_317"></span>[40:318](0020030.htm#fr_317) <span
id="ii.iv.viii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p12"></span> \[[Rom. xi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#016)<span
id="ii.iv.viii-p12.1"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_318"></span>[40:319](0020030.htm#fr_318) <span
id="ii.iv.viii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p14"></span> \[[Matt. xiii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#032)<span
id="ii.iv.viii-p14.1"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_319"></span>[40:320](0020030.htm#fr_319) <span
id="ii.iv.viii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p15"></span> “And by this law the Son of God was
preached to all the ends of the earth.”—*Vat*. \[Hermas again introduces
here the name which he made his base in Vision ii. 2.\]

<span id="fn_320"></span>[40:321](0020030.htm#fr_320) <span
id="ii.iv.viii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p16"></span> \[[Dan. x.
21](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#021)<span id="ii.iv.viii-p16.1"></span>,
xii 1; [Rev. xii. 7](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#007)<span
id="ii.iv.viii-p16.2"></span>. It is not necessary to accept this
statement as doctrine, but the idea may be traced to these texts.\]

<span id="fn_321"></span>[40:322](0020030.htm#fr_321) <span
id="ii.iv.viii-p16.3"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p17"></span> \[That is, the New Law, the gospel of
the Son of God.\]

<span id="fn_322"></span>[40:323](0020030.htm#fr_322) <span
id="ii.iv.viii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p18"></span> \[Vision ii. 2. Denying the Son.\]

<span id="fn_323"></span>[40:324](0020030.htm#fr_323) <span
id="ii.iv.viii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p20"></span> *And … cut*, omitted in Pal.

<span id="fn_324"></span>[41:325](0020030.htm#fr_324) <span
id="ii.iv.viii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p21"></span> \[Wake reads “cleft.”\]

<span id="fn_325"></span>[41:326](0020030.htm#fr_325) <span
id="ii.iv.viii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p23"></span> \[Clefts.\]

<span id="fn_326"></span>[41:327](0020030.htm#fr_326) <span
id="ii.iv.viii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p24"></span> Omitted in Lips. Translation is made
from Vat.

<span id="fn_327"></span>[41:328](0020030.htm#fr_327) <span
id="ii.iv.viii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p25"></span> The versions vary in some of the
minute particulars.

<span id="fn_328"></span>[41:329](0020030.htm#fr_328) <span
id="ii.iv.viii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p27"></span> \[The by-gone quarrels about
foreknowledge and predestination are innocently enough anticipated
here.\]

<span id="fn_329"></span>[41:330](0020030.htm#fr_329) <span
id="ii.iv.viii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p28"></span> \[[Jas. ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#007)<span
id="ii.iv.viii-p28.1"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_330"></span>[41:331](0020030.htm#fr_330) <span
id="ii.iv.viii-p28.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p29"></span> \[[Heb. x.
39](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#039)<span
id="ii.iv.viii-p29.1"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_331"></span>[41:332](0020030.htm#fr_331) <span
id="ii.iv.viii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p30"></span> \[Here is a note of Hermas’ time. Not
only does it imply the history of heresies as of some progress, but it
marks the Montanist refusal to receive penitent lapsers.\]

<span id="fn_332"></span>[42:333](0020030.htm#fr_332) <span
id="ii.iv.viii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p32"></span> \[He has in view the passages [Matt.
xx. 23](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#023)<span
id="ii.iv.viii-p32.1"></span>, [Luke xxii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#024)<span id="ii.iv.viii-p32.2"></span>,
and hence is lenient in judgment.\]

<span id="fn_333"></span>[42:334](0020030.htm#fr_333) <span
id="ii.iv.viii-p32.3"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p33"></span> \[Why “naturally”? Latin, “de ipsis
tamen qui boni fuerunt.” Greek, <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.viii-p33.2"></span>ἀγαθοὶ ὄντες</span>. Gebhardt and Harnack,
Lips. 1877.\]

<span id="fn_334"></span>[42:335](0020030.htm#fr_334) <span
id="ii.iv.viii-p33.3"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p34"></span> \[[Jas. iii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#016)<span
id="ii.iv.viii-p34.1"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_335"></span>[42:336](0020030.htm#fr_335) <span
id="ii.iv.viii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p36"></span> \[[Jas. ii.
26](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#026)<span
id="ii.iv.viii-p36.1"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_336"></span>[42:337](0020030.htm#fr_336) <span
id="ii.iv.viii-p36.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p37"></span> \[[1 Tim. v.
6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#006)<span
id="ii.iv.viii-p37.1"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_337"></span>[42:338](0020030.htm#fr_337) <span
id="ii.iv.viii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p39"></span> \[A note of the time of composing *The
Shepherd*. This chapter speaks of experiences of life among heathen and
of wordly Christians, inconsistent with the times of Clement.\]

<span id="fn_338"></span>[42:339](0020030.htm#fr_338) <span
id="ii.iv.viii-p39.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p40"></span> Omitted in Lips.; supplied from Vat.

<span id="fn_339"></span>[42:340](0020030.htm#fr_339) <span
id="ii.iv.viii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p42"></span> “Withered, all but their tops, which
alone were green.”—*Vat*. and *Pal.*

<span id="fn_340"></span>[42:341](0020030.htm#fr_340) <span
id="ii.iv.viii-p42.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p43"></span> \[[Matt. x.
40-42](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#040)<span
id="ii.iv.viii-p43.1"></span> influences this judgment of Hermas.\]

<span id="fn_341"></span>[42:342](0020030.htm#fr_341) <span
id="ii.iv.viii-p43.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p44"></span> Omitted in Lips., which has, instead,
“are afraid.”

<span id="fn_342"></span>[43:343](0020030.htm#fr_342) <span
id="ii.iv.viii-p45.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p46"></span> \[A cheering conclusion of his severe
judgments, and aimed at the despair created by Montanist prophesyings.\]

<span id="fn_343"></span>[43:344](0020030.htm#fr_343) <span
id="ii.iv.viii-p46.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p47"></span> Literally, “the calling that was made
by His Son to be saved.” The Vatican renders this, “He wishes to
preserve the invitation made by His Son.” The Pal. has, “wishes to save
His Church, which belongs to His Son.” In the text, <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iv.viii-p47.1"></span>κλῆσις</span> is taken
as = <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.viii-p47.2"></span>κλητοί</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Similitude Ninth. The Great Mysteries in the Building of the
Militant and Triumphant Church.](0020031)
