[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020247)  [Next](0020249) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.ii.xii"></span>

##### <span id="vi.ii.xii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XII.—Exhortation to Abandon Their Old Errors and Listen to the Instructions of Christ.

<span id="vi.ii.xii-p1"></span>Let us then avoid custom as we would a
dangerous headland, or the threatening Charybdis, or the mythic sirens.
It chokes man, turns him away from truth, leads him away from life:
custom is a snare, a gulf, a pit, a mischievous winnowing fan.

> <span id="vi.ii.xii-p1.1"></span> “Urge the ship beyond that smoke and
> billow.” <span id="fr_1023"></span>[1024](#fn_1023)  

<span id="vi.ii.xii-p3"></span>Let us shun, fellow-mariners, let us shun
this billow; it vomits forth fire: it is a wicked island, heaped with
bones and corpses, and in it sings a fair courtesan, Pleasure,
delighting with music for the common ear.

> <span id="vi.ii.xii-p3.1"></span> “Hie thee hither, far-famed Ulysses,
> great glory of the Achæans;  
> Moor the ship, that thou mayest hears diviner voice.” <span
> id="fr_1024"></span>[1025](#fn_1024)  

<span id="vi.ii.xii-p5"></span>She praises thee, O mariner, and calls
the eillustrious; and the courtesan tries to win to herself the glory of
the Greeks. Leave her to prey on the dead; a heavenly spirit comes to
thy help: pass by Pleasure, she beguiles.

> <span id="vi.ii.xii-p5.1"></span> “Let not a woman with flowing train
> cheat you of your senses,  
> With her flattering prattle seeking your hurt.”  

<span id="vi.ii.xii-p6"></span>Sail past the song; it works death. Exert
your will only, and you have overcome ruin; bound to the wood of the
cross, thou shalt be freed from destruction: the word of God will be thy
pilot, and the Holy Spirit will bring thee to anchor in the haven of
heaven. Then shalt thou see my God, and be initiated into the sacred
mysteries, and come to the fruition of those things which are laid up in
heaven reserved for me, which “ear hath not heard, nor have they entered
into the heart of any.” <span id="fr_1025"></span>[1026](#fn_1025)

> <span id="vi.ii.xii-p7.2"></span> “And in sooth methinks I see two
> suns,  
> And a double Thebes,” <span id="fr_1026"></span>[1027](#fn_1026)  

<span id="vi.ii.xii-p9"></span>said one frenzy-stricken in the worship
of idols, intoxicated with mere ignorance. I would pity him in his
frantic intoxication, and thus frantic I would invite him to the
sobriety of salvation; for the Lord welcomes a sinner’s repentance, and
not his death.

<span id="vi.ii.xii-p10"></span>Come, O madman, not leaning on the
thyrsus, not crowned with ivy; throw away the mitre, throw away the
fawn-skin; come to thy senses. I will show thee the Word, and the
mysteries of the Word, expounding them after thine own fashion. This is
the mountain beloved of God, not the subject of tragedies like Cithæron,
but consecrated to dramas of the truth,—a mount of sobriety, shaded with
forests of purity; and there revel on it not the Mænades, the sisters of
Semele, who was struck by the thunderbolt, practising in their
initiatory rites unholy division of flesh, but the daughters of God, the
fair lambs, who celebrate the holy rites of the Word, raising a sober
choral dance. The righteous are the chorus; the music is a hymn of the
King of the universe. The maidens strike the lyre, the angels praise,
the prophets speak; the sound of music issues forth, they run and pursue
the jubilant band; those that are called make haste, eagerly desiring to
receive the Father.

<span id="vi.ii.xii-p11"></span>Come thou also, O aged man, leaving
Thebes, and casting away from thee both divination and Bacchic frenzy,
allow thyself to be led to the truth. I give thee the staff \[of the
cross\] on which to lean. Haste, Tiresias; believe, and thou wilt see.
Christ, by whom the eyes of the blind recover sight, will shed on thee a
light brighter than the sun; night will flee from thee, fire will fear,
death will be gone; thou, old man, who saw not Thebes, shalt see the
heavens. O truly sacred mysteries! O stainless light! My way is lighted
with torches, and I survey the heavens and God; I become holy whilst I
am initiated. The Lord is the hierophant, and seals while illuminating
him who is initiated, and presents to the Father him who believes, to be
kept safe for ever. Such are the reveries of my mysteries. If it is thy
wish, be thou also initiated; and thou shall join the choir along with
angels around the unbegotten and indestructible and the only true God,
the Word of God, raising the hymn with us. <span
id="fr_1027"></span>[1028](#fn_1027) This Jesus, who is eternal, the one
great High Priest of the one God, and of His Father, prays for and
exhorts men.

<span id="vi.ii.xii-p13"></span>“Hear, ye myriad tribes, rather whoever
among men are endowed with reason, both barbarians and Greeks. I call on
the whole race of men, whose Creator I am, by the will of the Father.
Come to Me, that you may be put in your due rank under the one God and
the one Word of God; and do not only have the advantage of the
irrational creatures in the possession of reason; for to you of all
mortals I grant the enjoyment of immortality. For I want, I want to
impart to you this grace, bestowing on you the perfect boon of
immortality; and I confer on you both the Word and the knowledge of God,
My complete self. This am I, this God wills, this is symphony, this the
harmony of the Father, this is the Son, this is Christ, this the Word of
God, the arm of the Lord, the power of the universe, the will of the
Father; of which things there were images of old, but not all adequate.
I desire to restore you according to the original model, that ye may
become also like Me. I anoint you with the ungent of faith, by which you
throw off corruption, <span id="page_206">p. 206</span> <span
id="vi.ii.xii-Page_206"></span>and show you the naked form of
righteousness by which you ascend to God. Come to Me, all ye that labour
and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take My yoke upon you,
and learn of Me; for I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall find
rest to your souls. For My yoke is easy, and My burden light.” <span
id="fr_1028"></span>[1029](#fn_1028)

<span id="vi.ii.xii-p15"></span>Let us haste, let us run, my
fellow-men—us, who are God-loving and God-like images of the Word. Let
us haste, let us run, let us take His yoke, let us receive, to conduct
us to immortality, the good charioteer of men. Let us love Christ. He
led the colt with its parent; and having yoked the team of humanity to
God, directs His chariot to immortality, hastening clearly to fulfil, by
driving now into heaven, what He shadowed forth before by riding into
Jerusalem. A spectacle most beautiful to the Father is the eternal Son
crowned with victory. <span id="fr_1029"></span>[1030](#fn_1029) Let us
aspire, then, after what is good; let us become God-loving men, and
obtain the greatest of all things which are incapable of being
harmed—God and life. Our helper is the Word; let us put confidence in
Him; and never let us be visited with such a craving for silver and
gold, and glory, as for the Word of truth Himself. For it will not, it
will not be pleasing to God Himself if we value least those things which
are worth most, and hold in the highest estimation the manifest
enormities and the utter impiety of folly, and ignorance, and
thoughtlessness, and idolatry. For not improperly the sons of the
philosophers consider that the foolish are guilty of profanity and
impiety in whatever they do; and describing ignorance itself as a
species of madness, allege that the multitude are nothing but madmen.
There is therefore no room to doubt, the Word will say, whether it is
better to be sane or insane; but holding on to truth with our teeth, we
must with all our might follow God, and in the exercise of wisdom regard
all things to be, as they are, His; and besides, having learned that we
are the most excellent of His possessions, let us commit ourselves to
God, loving the Lord God, and regarding this as our business all our
life long. And if what belongs to friends be reckoned common property,
and man be the friend of God—for through the mediation of the Word has
he been made the friend of God—then accordingly all things become man’s,
because all things are God’s, and the common property of both the
friends, God and man.

<span id="vi.ii.xii-p17"></span>It is time, then, for us to say that the
pious Christian alone is rich and wise, and of noble birth, and thus
call and believe him to be God’s image, and also His likeness, <span
id="fr_1030"></span>[1031](#fn_1030) having become righteous and holy
and wise by Jesus Christ, and so far already like God. Accordingly this
grace is indicated by the prophet, when he says, “I said that ye are
gods, and all sons of the Highest.” <span
id="fr_1031"></span>[1032](#fn_1031) For us, yea us, He has adopted, and
wishes to be called the Father of us alone, not of the unbelieving. Such
is then our position who are the attendants of Christ.

> <span id="vi.ii.xii-p19.2"></span> “As are men’s wishes, so are their
> words;  
> As are their words, so are their deeds;  
> And as their works, such is their life.”  

<span id="vi.ii.xii-p20"></span>Good is the whole life of those who have
known Christ.

<span id="vi.ii.xii-p21"></span>Enough, methinks, of words, though,
impelled by love to man, I might have gone on to pour out what I had
from God, that I might exhort to what is the greatest of
blessings—salvation. <span id="fr_1032"></span>[1033](#fn_1032) For
discourses concerning the life which has no end, are not readily brought
to the end of their disclosures. To you still remains this conclusion,
to choose which will profit you most—judgment or grace. For I do not
think there is even room for doubt which of these is the better; nor is
it allowable to compare life with destruction.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1023"></span>[205:1024](0020248.htm#fr_1023) <span
id="vi.ii.xii-p1.3"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.xii-p2"></span> *Odyss.*, xii. 219.

<span id="fn_1024"></span>[205:1025](0020248.htm#fr_1024) <span
id="vi.ii.xii-p3.4"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.xii-p4"></span> *Odyss.*, xii. 184.

<span id="fn_1025"></span>[205:1026](0020248.htm#fr_1025) <span
id="vi.ii.xii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.xii-p7"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#009)<span id="vi.ii.xii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1026"></span>[205:1027](0020248.htm#fr_1026) <span
id="vi.ii.xii-p7.5"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.xii-p8"></span> Eurip., *Bacch.,* 918.

<span id="fn_1027"></span>[205:1028](0020248.htm#fr_1027) <span
id="vi.ii.xii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.xii-p12"></span> \[Here are references to baptism and
the Eucharist, and to the *Trisagion*, “Therefore with angels and
archangels,” which was universally diffused in the Christian Church.
Bunsen, *Hippol.*, iii. 63.\]

<span id="fn_1028"></span>[206:1029](0020248.htm#fr_1028) <span
id="vi.ii.xii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.xii-p14"></span> [Matt.
11:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#028),
[29](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#029),
[30](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#030)<span id="vi.ii.xii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1029"></span>[206:1030](0020248.htm#fr_1029) <span
id="vi.ii.xii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.xii-p16"></span> \[“Who is this that cometh from Edom,”
seems to be in mind. [Isa. lxiii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#001)<span id="vi.ii.xii-p16.1"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_1030"></span>[206:1031](0020248.htm#fr_1030) <span
id="vi.ii.xii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.xii-p18"></span> Clement here draws a distinction,
frequently made by early Christian writers, between the image and the
likeness of God. Man never loses the image of God; but as the likeness
consists in moral resemblance, he may lose it, and he recovers it only
when he becomes righteous, holy, and wise.

<span id="fn_1031"></span>[206:1032](0020248.htm#fr_1031) <span
id="vi.ii.xii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.xii-p19"></span> [Ps. lxxxii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#006)<span id="vi.ii.xii-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1032"></span>[206:1033](0020248.htm#fr_1032) <span
id="vi.ii.xii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.xii-p22"></span> \[Let me quote from an excellent
author: “We ought to give the Fathers credit for knowing what arguments
were best calculated to affect the minds of those whom they were
addressing. It was unnecessary for them to establish, by a long train of
reasoning, the *probability* that a revelation may be made from heaven
to man, or to prove the credibility of miracles . . . The majority, both
of the learned and unlearned, were fixed in the belief that the Deity
exercised an immediate control over the human race, and consequently
felt no predisposition to reject that which purported to be a
communication of His will. . . . Accustomed as they were, however, to
regard the various systems proposed by philosophers as matters of
curious speculation, designed to exercise the understanding, *not to
influence* the conduct, the chief difficulty of the advocate of
Christianity was to prevent them from treating it *with the same
levity*, and to induce them to view it in its true light as a revelation
declaring truths of the highest practical importance.”

<span id="vi.ii.xii-p23"></span>This remark of Bishop Kaye is a hint of
vast importance in our study of the early Apologists. It is taken from
that author’s *Account of the Writings of Clement of Alexandria*
(London, 1835), to which I would refer the student, as the best
introduction to these works that I know of. It is full of valuable
comment and exposition I make only sparing reference to it, however, in
these pages, as otherwise I should hardly know what to omit, or to
include.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Instructor](0020249)
