[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020425)  [Next](0020427.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xvi"></span>

##### <span id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XVI.—Scripture the Criterion by Which Truth and Heresy are Distinguished. <span id="fr_3663"></span>[3664](#fn_3663.md)

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p2"></span>But those who are ready to toil in
the most excellent pursuits, will not desist from the search after
truth, till they get the demonstration from the Scriptures themselves.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p3"></span>There are certain criteria common to
men, as the senses; and others that belong to those who have employed
their wills and energies in what is true,—the methods which are pursued
by the mind and reason, to distinguish between true and false
propositions.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p4"></span>Now, it is a very great thing to
abandon opinion, by taking one’s stand between accurate knowledge and
the rash wisdom of opinion, and to know that he who hopes for
everlasting rest knows also that the entrance to it is toilsome “and
strait.” And let him who has once received the Gospel, even in the very
hour in which he has come to the knowledge of salvation, “not turn back,
like Lot’s wife,” as is said; and let him not go back either to his
former life, which adheres to the things of sense, or to heresies. For
they form the character, not knowing the true God. “For he that loveth
father or mother more than Me,” the Father and Teacher of the truth, who
regenerates and creates anew, and <span id="page_551">p. 551</span>
<span id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-Page_551"></span>nourishes the elect soul, “is
not worthy of Me”—He means, to be a son of God and a disciple of God,
and at the same time also to be a friend, and of kindred nature. “For no
man who looks back, and puts his hand to the plough, is fit for the
kingdom of God.” <span id="fr_3664"></span>[3665](#fn_3664.md)

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p6"></span>But, as appears, many even down to
our own time regard Mary, on account of the birth of her child, as
having been in the puerperal state, although she was not. For some say
that, after she brought forth, she was found, when examined, to be a
virgin. <span id="fr_3665"></span>[3666](#fn_3665.md)

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p8"></span>Now such to us are the Scriptures of
the Lord, which gave birth to the truth and continue virgin, in the
concealment of the mysteries of the truth. “And she brought forth, and
yet brought not forth,” <span id="fr_3666"></span>[3667](#fn_3666.md) says
the Scripture; as having conceived of herself, and not from conjunction.
Wherefore the Scriptures have conceived to Gnostics; but the heresies,
not having learned them, dismissed them as not having conceived.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p10"></span>Now all men, having the same
judgment, some, following the Word speaking, frame for themselves
proofs; while others, giving themselves up to pleasures, wrest
Scripture, in accordance with their lusts. <span
id="fr_3667"></span>[3668](#fn_3667.md) And the lover of truth, as I think,
needs force of soul. For those who make the greatest attempts must fail
in things of the highest importance; unless, receiving from the truth
itself the rule of the truth, they cleave to the truth. But such people,
in consequence of falling away from the right path, err in most
individual points; as you might expect from not having the faculty for
judging of what is true and false, strictly trained to select what is
essential. For if they had, they would have obeyed the Scriptures. <span
id="fr_3668"></span>[3669](#fn_3668.md)

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p13"></span>As, then, if a man should, similarly
to those drugged by Circe, become a beast; so he, who has spurned the
ecclesiastical tradition, and darted off to the opinions of heretical
men, has ceased to be a man of God and to remain faithful to the Lord.
But he who has returned from this deception, on hearing the Scriptures,
and turned his life to the truth, is, as it were, from being a man made
a god.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p14"></span>For we have, as the source of
teaching, the Lord, both by the prophets, the Gospel, and the blessed
apostles, “in divers manners and at sundry times,” <span
id="fr_3669"></span>[3670](#fn_3669.md) leading from the beginning of
knowledge to the end. But if one should suppose that another
origin <span id="fr_3670"></span>[3671](#fn_3670.md) was required, then no
longer truly could an origin be preserved.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p17"></span>He, then, who of himself believes
the Scripture and voice of the Lord, which by the Lord acts to the
benefiting of men, is rightly \[regarded\] faithful. Certainly we use it
as a criterion in the discovery of things. <span
id="fr_3671"></span>[3672](#fn_3671.md) What is subjected to criticism is
not believed till it is so subjected; so that what needs criticism
cannot be a first principle. Therefore, as is reasonable, grasping by
faith the indemonstrable first principle, and receiving in abundance,
from the first principle itself, demonstrations in reference to the
first principle, we are by the voice of the Lord trained up to the
knowledge of the truth.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p19"></span>For we may not give our adhesion to
men on a bare statement by them, who might equally state the opposite.
But if it is not enough merely to state the opinion, but if what is
stated must be confirmed, we do not wait for the testimony of men, but
we establish the matter that is in question by the voice of the Lord,
which is the surest of all demonstrations, or rather is the only
demonstration; in which knowledge those who have merely tasted the
Scriptures are believers; while those who, having advanced further, and
become correct expounders of the truth, are Gnostics. Since also, in
what pertains to life, craftsmen are superior to ordinary people, and
model what is beyond common notions; so, consequently, we also, giving a
complete exhibition of the Scriptures from the Scriptures themselves,
from faith persuade by demonstration. <span
id="fr_3672"></span>[3673](#fn_3672.md)

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p21"></span>And if those also who follow
heresies venture to avail themselves of the prophetic Scriptures; in the
first place they will not make use of all the Scriptures, and then they
will not quote them entire, nor as the body and texture of prophecy
prescribe. But, selecting ambiguous expressions, they wrest them to
their own opinions, gathering a few expressions here and there; not
looking to the sense, but making use of the mere words. For in almost
all the quotations they make, you will find that they attend to the
names alone, while they alter the meanings; neither knowing, as they
affirm, nor using the quotations they adduce, according to their true
nature.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p22"></span>But the truth is not found by
changing the meanings (for so people subvert all true teaching), but in
the consideration of what perfectly belongs to and becomes the Sovereign
God, and in establishing each one of the points demonstrated in the
Scriptures again from similar Scriptures. Neither, then, do they want to
turn to the <span id="page_552">p. 552</span> <span
id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-Page_552"></span>truth, being ashamed to abandon the
claims of self-love; nor are they able to manage their opinions, by
doing violence to the Scriptures. But having first promulgated false
dogmas to men; plainly fighting against almost the whole Scriptures, and
constantly confuted by us who contradict them; for the rest, even now
partly they hold out against admitting the prophetic Scriptures, and
partly disparage us as of a different nature, and incapable of
understanding what is peculiar to them. And sometimes even they deny
their own dogmas, when these are confuted, being ashamed openly to own
what in private they glory in teaching. For this may be seen in all the
heresies, when you examine the iniquities of their dogmas. For when they
are overturned by our clearly showing that they are opposed to the
Scriptures, <span id="fr_3673"></span>[3674](#fn_3673.md) one of two things
may be seen to have been done by those who defend the dogma. For they
either despise the consistency of their own dogmas, or despise the
prophecy itself, or rather their own hope. And they invariably prefer
what seems to them to be more evident to what has been spoken by the
Lord through the prophets and by the Gospel, and, besides, attested and
confirmed by the apostles.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p24"></span>Seeing, therefore, the danger that
they are in (not in respect of one dogma, but in reference to the
maintenance of the heresies) of not discovering the truth; for while
reading the books we have ready at hand, they despise them as useless,
but in their eagerness to surpass common faith, they have diverged from
the truth. For, in consequence of not learning the mysteries of
ecclesiastical knowledge, and not having capacity for the grandeur of
the truth, too indolent to descend to the bottom of things, reading
superficially, they have dismissed the Scriptures. <span
id="fr_3674"></span>[3675](#fn_3674.md) Elated, then, by vain opinion, they
are incessantly wrangling, and plainly care more to *seem* than to *be*
philosophers. Not laying as foundations the necessary first principles
of things; and influenced by human opinions, then making the end to suit
them, by compulsion; on account of being confuted, they spar with those
who are engaged in the prosecution of the true philosophy, and undergo
everything, and, as they say, ply every oar, even going the length of
impiety, by disbelieving the Scriptures, <span
id="fr_3675"></span>[3676](#fn_3675.md) rather than be removed from the
honours of the heresy and the boasted first seat in their churches; on
account of which also they eagerly embrace that convivial couch of
honour in the Agape, falsely so called.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p27"></span>The knowledge of the truth among us
from what is already believed, produces faith in what is not yet
believed; which \[faith\] is, so to speak, the essence of demonstration.
But, as appears, no heresy has at all ears to hear what is useful, but
opened only to what leads to pleasure. Since also, if one of them would
only obey the truth, he would be healed.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p28"></span>Now the cure of self-conceit (as of
every ailment) is threefold: the ascertaining of the cause, and the mode
of its removal; and thirdly, the training of the soul, and the
accustoming it to assume a right attitude to the judgments come to. For,
just like a disordered eye, so also the soul that has been darkened by
unnatural dogmas cannot perceive distinctly the light of truth, but even
overlooks what is before it.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p29"></span>They say, then, that in muddy water
eels are caught by being blinded. And just as knavish boys bar out the
teacher, so do these shut out the prophecies from their Church,
regarding them with suspicion by reason of rebuke and admonition. In
fact, they stitch together a multitude of lies and figments, that they
may appear acting in accordance with reason in not admitting the
Scriptures. So, then, they are not pious, inasmuch as they are not
pleased with the divine commands, that is, with the Holy Spirit. And as
those almonds are called empty in which the contents are worthless, not
those in which there is nothing; so also we call those heretics empty,
who are destitute of the counsels of God and the traditions of Christ;
bitter, in truth, like the wild almond, their dogmas originating with
themselves, with the exception of such truths as they could not, by
reason of their evidence, discard and conceal.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p30"></span>As, then, in war the soldier must
not leave the post which the commander has assigned him, so neither must
we desert the post assigned by the Word, whom we have received as the
guide of knowledge and of life. But the most have not even inquired, if
there is one that we ought to follow, and who this is, and how he is to
be followed. For as is the Word, such also must the believer’s life be,
so as to be able to follow God, who brings all things to end from the
beginning by the right course.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p31"></span>But when one has transgressed
against the Word, and thereby against God; if it is through becoming
powerless in consequence of some impression being suddenly made, he
ought to see to have the impressions of reasons at hand. And if it is
that he has become “common,” as the Scripture <span
id="fr_3676"></span>[3677](#fn_3676.md) says, in consequence of being
overcome the habits which formerly had sway by over him, the habits must
be entirely put a stop to, and the soul trained to oppose them. And if
it appears that conflicting dogmas draw some away, these must be taken
out of the way, <span id="page_553">p. 553</span> <span
id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-Page_553"></span>and recourse is to be had to those
who reconcile dogmas, and subdue by the charm of the Scriptures such of
the untutored as are timid, by explaining the truth by the connection of
the Testaments. <span id="fr_3677"></span>[3678](#fn_3677.md)

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p34"></span>But, as appears, we incline to ideas
founded on opinion, though they be contrary, rather than to the truth.
For it is austere and grave. Now, since there are three states of the
soul—ignorance, opinion, knowledge—those who are in ignorance are the
Gentiles, those in knowledge, the true Church, and those in opinion, the
Heretics. Nothing, then, can be more clearly seen than those, who know,
making affirmations about what they know, and the others respecting what
they hold on the strength of opinion, as far as respects affirmation
without proof.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p35"></span>They accordingly despise and laugh
at one another. And it happens that the same thought is held in the
highest estimation by some, and by others condemned for insanity. And,
indeed, we have learned that voluptuousness, which is to be attributed
to the Gentiles, is one thing; and wrangling, which is preferred among
the heretical sects, is another; and joy, which is to be appropriated to
the Church, another; and delight, which is to be assigned to the true
Gnostic, another. And as, if one devote himself to Ischomachus, he will
make him a farmer; and to Lampis, a mariner; and to Charidemus, a
military commander; and to Simon, an equestrian; and to Perdices, a
trader; and to Crobylus, a cook; and to Archelaus, a dancer; and to
Homer, a poet; and to Pyrrho, a wrangler; and to Demosthenes, an orator;
and to Chrysippus, a dialectician; and to Aristotle, a naturalist; and
to Plato, a philosopher: so he who listens to the Lord, and follows the
prophecy given by Him, will be formed perfectly in the likeness of the
teacher—made a god going about in flesh. <span
id="fr_3678"></span>[3679](#fn_3678.md)

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p37"></span>Accordingly, those fall from this
eminence who follow not God whither He leads. And He leads us in the
inspired Scriptures.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p38"></span>Though men’s actions are ten
thousand in number, the sources of all sin are but two, ignorance and
inability. And both depend on ourselves; inasmuch as we will not learn,
nor, on the other hand, restrain lust. And of these, the one is that, in
consequence of which people do not judge well, and the other that, in
consequence of which they cannot comply with right judgments. For
neither will one who is deluded in his mind be able to act rightly,
though perfectly able to do what he knows; nor, though capable of
judging what is requisite, will he keep himself free of blame, if
destitute of power in action. Consequently, then, there are assigned two
kinds of correction applicable to both kinds of sin: for the one,
knowledge and clear demonstration from the testimony of the Scriptures;
and for the other, the training according to the Word, which is
regulated by the discipline of faith and fear. And both develop into
perfect love. For the end of the Gnostic here is, in my judgment,
twofold,—partly scientific contemplation, partly action.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p39"></span>Would, then, that these heretics
would learn and be set right by these notes, and turn to the sovereign
God! But if, like the deaf serpents, they listen not to the song called
new, though very old, may they be chastised by God, and undergo paternal
admonitions previous to the Judgment, till they become ashamed and
repent, but not rush through headlong unbelief, and precipitate
themselves into judgment.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p40"></span>For there are partial corrections,
which are called chastisements, which many of us who have been in
transgression incur, by falling away from the Lord’s people. But as
children are chastised by their teacher, or their father, so are we by
Providence. But God does not punish, for punishment is retaliation for
evil. He chastises, however, for good to those who are chastised,
collectively and individually.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p41"></span>I have adduced these things from a
wish to avert those, who are eager to learn, from the liability to fall
into heresies, and out of a desire to stop them from superficial
ignorance, or stupidity, or bad disposition, or whatever it should be
called. And in the attempt to persuade and lead to the truth those who
are not entirely incurable, I have made use of these words. For there
are some who cannot bear at all to listen to those who exhort them to
turn to the truth; and they attempt to trifle, pouring out blasphemies
against the truth, claiming for themselves the knowledge of the greatest
things in the universe, without having learned, or inquired, or
laboured, or discovered the consecutive train of ideas,—whom one should
pity rather than hate for such perversity.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p42"></span>But if one is curable, able to bear
(like fire or steel) the outspokenness of the truth, which cuts away and
burns their false opinions, let him lend the ears of the soul. And this
will be the case, unless, through the propensity to sloth, they push
truth away, or through the desire of fame, endeavour to invent
novelties. For those are slothful who, having it in their power to
provide themselves with proper proofs for the divine Scriptures from the
Scriptures themselves, select only what contributes to their own
pleasures. And those have a craving for glory who voluntarily evade, by
arguments of a diverse sort, the things delivered by the blessed
apostles and teachers, which are wedded to inspired words; opposing the
divine tradition by human teachings, <span id="page_554">p. 554</span>
<span id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-Page_554"></span>in order to establish the
heresy. <span id="fr_3679"></span>[3680](#fn_3679.md) For, in truth, what
remained to be said—in ecclesiastical knowledge I mean—by such men,
Marcion, for example, or Prodicus, and such like, who did not walk in
the right way? For they could not have surpassed their predecessors in
wisdom, so as to discover anything in addition to what had been uttered
by them; for they would have been satisfied had they been able to learn
the things laid down before.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p44"></span>Our Gnostic then alone, having grown
old in the Scriptures, and maintaining apostolic and ecclesiastic
orthodoxy in doctrines, lives most correctly in accordance with the
Gospel, and discovers the proofs, for which he may have made search
(sent forth as he is by the Lord), from the law and the prophets. For
the life of the Gnostic, in my view, is nothing but deeds and words
corresponding to the tradition of the Lord. But “all have not knowledge.
For I would not have you to be ignorant, brethren,” says the apostle,
“that all were under the cloud, and partook of spiritual meat and
drink;” <span id="fr_3680"></span>[3681](#fn_3680.md) clearly affirming
that all who heard the word did not take in the magnitude of knowledge
in deed and word. Wherefore also he added: “But with all of them He was
not well pleased.” Who is this? He who said, “Why do you call Me Lord,
and do not the will of My Father?” <span
id="fr_3681"></span>[3682](#fn_3681.md) That is the Saviour’s teaching,
which to us is spiritual food, and drink that knows no thirst, the water
of gnostic life. Further it is said, knowledge is said “to puff up.” To
whom we say: Perchance seeming knowledge is said to puff up, if
one <span id="fr_3682"></span>[3683](#fn_3682.md) suppose the expression
means “to be swollen up.” But if, as is rather the case, the expression
of the apostle means, “to entertain great and true sentiments,” the
difficulty is solved. Following, then, the Scriptures, let us establish
what has been said: “Wisdom,” says Solomon, “has inflated her children.”
For the Lord did not work conceit by the particulars of His teaching;
but He produces trust in the truth and expansion of mind, in the
knowledge that is communicated by the Scriptures, and contempt for the
things which drag into sin, which is the meaning of the expression
“inflated.” It teaches the magnificence of the wisdom implanted in her
children by instruction. Now the apostle says, “I will know not the
speech of those that are puffed up, but the power;” <span
id="fr_3683"></span>[3684](#fn_3683.md) if ye understand the Scriptures
magnanimously (which means truly; for nothing is greater than truth).
For in that lies the power of the children of wisdom who are puffed up.
He says, as it were, I shall know if ye rightly entertain great thoughts
respecting knowledge. “For God,” according to David, “is known in
Judea,” that is, those that are Israelites according to knowledge. For
Judea is interpreted “Confession.” It is, then, rightly said by the
apostle, “This *Thou, shall not commit adultery, Thou shall not steal,
Thou shalt not covet;* and if there be any other commandment, it is
comprehended in this word, *Thou shalt love thy neighbour as
thyself*.” <span id="fr_3684"></span>[3685](#fn_3684.md)

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p50"></span>For we must never, as do those who
follow the heresies, adulterate the truth, or steal the canon of the
Church, by gratifying our own lusts and vanity, by defrauding our
neighbours; whom above all it is our duty, in the exercise of love to
them, to teach to adhere to the truth. It is accordingly expressly said,
“Declare among the heathen His statutes,” that they may not be judged,
but that those who have previously given ear may be converted. But those
who speak treacherously with their tongues have the penalties that are
on record. <span id="fr_3685"></span>[3686](#fn_3685.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3663"></span>[550:3664](0020426.htm#fr_3663.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p0.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p1"></span> \[One of the most important
testimonies of primitive antiquity. Elucidation III.\]

<span id="fn_3664"></span>[551:3665](0020426.htm#fr_3664.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p5"></span> [Luke ix.
62](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#062.md)<span
id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3665"></span>[551:3666](0020426.htm#fr_3665.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p7"></span> \[A reference to the sickening and
profane history of an apocryphal book, hereafter to be noted. But this
language is most noteworthy as an absolute refutation of modern
Mariolatry.\]

<span id="fn_3666"></span>[551:3667](0020426.htm#fr_3666.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p9"></span> Tertullian, who treats of the
above-mentioned topic, attributes these words to Ezekiel: but they are
sought for in vain in Ezekiel, or in any other part of Scripture. \[The
*words* are not found in Ezekiel, but such was his understanding of
[Ezek. xliv. 2](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#002.md)<span
id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p9.1"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_3667"></span>[551:3668](0020426.htm#fr_3667.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p11"></span> \[2 Pet. iii. 16.\]

<span id="fn_3668"></span>[551:3669](0020426.htm#fr_3668.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p12"></span> \[Nothing is Catholic dogma,
according to our author, that is not proved by the Scriptures.\]

<span id="fn_3669"></span>[551:3670](0020426.htm#fr_3669.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p15"></span> [Heb. i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#001.md)<span
id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3670"></span>[551:3671](0020426.htm#fr_3670.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p15.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p16"></span> \[Absolutely exclusive of any other
source of dogma, than “the faith once delivered to the saints.” [Jude
3](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#003.md)<span
id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p16.1"></span>; [Gal. i.
6-9](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#006.md)<span
id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p16.2"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_3671"></span>[551:3672](0020426.htm#fr_3671.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p18"></span> \[<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p18.1"></span>τῆ κυριακῇ γραφῆ</span> … <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p18.2"></span>αὐτῇ χρώμεθα
κριτηρίῳ</span>. Can anything be more decisive, save what follows?\]

<span id="fn_3672"></span>[551:3673](0020426.htm#fr_3672.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p20"></span> \[An absolute demonstration of the
rule of Catholic faith against the Trent dogmas.\]

<span id="fn_3673"></span>[552:3674](0020426.htm#fr_3673.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p23"></span> \[Opposition to the Scriptures is
the self-refutation of false dogma.\]

<span id="fn_3674"></span>[552:3675](0020426.htm#fr_3674.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p24.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p25"></span> \[See, e.g., *Epochs of the
Papacy*, p. 469. New York, 1883.\]

<span id="fn_3675"></span>[552:3676](0020426.htm#fr_3675.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p25.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p26"></span> \[See, e.g., *Epochs of the
Papacy*, p. 469. New York, 1883.\]

<span id="fn_3676"></span>[552:3677](0020426.htm#fr_3676.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p31.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p32"></span> An apocryphal Scripture probably.

<span id="fn_3677"></span>[553:3678](0020426.htm#fr_3677.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p32.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p33"></span> \[At every point in this chapter,
the student may recognise the primitive rule of faith clearly
established.\]

<span id="fn_3678"></span>[553:3679](0020426.htm#fr_3678.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p35.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p36"></span> \[Strong as this language is, it is
based on 2 Pet. i. 4.\]

<span id="fn_3679"></span>[554:3680](0020426.htm#fr_3679.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p42.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p43"></span> \[The divine tradition is here
identified with “things delivered by the blessed apostles.”\]

<span id="fn_3680"></span>[554:3681](0020426.htm#fr_3680.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p44.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p45"></span> [1 Cor.
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#001.md),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#003.md),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#004.md)<span
id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3681"></span>[554:3682](0020426.htm#fr_3681.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p45.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p46"></span> [Luke vi.
46](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#046.md)<span
id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p46.1"></span>, combined with [Matt. vii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#021.md)<span
id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p46.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_3682"></span>[554:3683](0020426.htm#fr_3682.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p46.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p47"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p47.1"></span>εἔ τις</span> instead of <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p47.2"></span>ἥτις</span>.

<span id="fn_3683"></span>[554:3684](0020426.htm#fr_3683.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p47.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p48"></span> [1 Cor. iv.
19](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#019.md)<span
id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3684"></span>[554:3685](0020426.htm#fr_3684.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p48.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p49"></span> [Rom. xiii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#009.md)<span
id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3685"></span>[554:3686](0020426.htm#fr_3685.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p50.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p51"></span> \[When we reach *The Commonitory*
of Vincent of Lerins (<span class="sc"><span
id="vi.iv.vii.xvi-p51.1"></span>a.d.</span> 450), we shall find a strict
adherence to what is taught by Clement.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVII.—The Tradition of the Church Prior to that of the
Heresies.](0020427.md)
