[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020276)  [Next](0020278) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xiii"></span>

##### <span id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XIII—Against Excessive Fondness for Jewels and Gold Ornaments.

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p1"></span>It is childish to admire excessively
dark or green stones, and things cast out by the sea on foreign shores,
particles of the earth. <span id="fr_1553"></span>[1554](#fn_1553) For
to rush after stones that are pellucid and of peculiar colours, and
stained glass, is only characteristic of silly people, who are attracted
by things that have a striking show. Thus children, on seeing the fire,
rush to it, attracted by its brightness; not understanding through
senselessness the danger of touching it. Such is the case with the
stones which silly women wear fastened to chains and set in necklaces,
amethysts, ceraunites, jaspers, topaz, and the Milesian

> <span id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p2.1"></span> “Emerald, most precious
> ware.”  

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p3"></span>And the highly prized pearl has
invaded the woman’s apartments to an extravagant extent. This is
produced in a kind of oyster like mussels, and is about the bigness of a
fish’s eye of large size. And the wretched creatures are not ashamed at
having bestowed the greatest pains about this little oyster, when they
might adorn themselves with the sacred jewel, the Word of God, whom the
Scripture has somewhere called a pearl, the pure and pellucid Jesus, the
eye that watches in the flesh,—the transparent Word, by whom the flesh,
regenerated by water, becomes precious. For that oyster that is in <span
id="page_268">p. 268</span> <span
id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-Page_268"></span>the water covers the flesh all
round, and out of it is produced the pearl.

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p4"></span>We have heard, too, that the
Jerusalem above is walled with sacred stones; and we allow that the
twelve gates of the celestial city, by being made like precious stones,
indicate the transcendent grace of the apostolic voice. For the colours
are laid on in precious stones, and these colours are precious; while
the other parts remain of earthy material. With these symbolically, as
is meet, the city of the saints, which is spiritually built, is walled.
By that brilliancy of stones, therefore, is meant the inimitable
brilliancy of the spirit, the immortality and sanctity of being. But
these women, who comprehend not the symbolism of Scripture, gape all
they can for jewels, adducing the astounding apology, “Why may I not use
what God hath exhibited?” and, “I have it by me, why may I not enjoy
it?” and, “For whom were these things made, then, if not for us?” Such
are the utterances of those who are totally ignorant of the will of God.
For first necessaries, such as water and air, He supplies free to all;
and what is not necessary He has hid in the earth and water. Wherefore
ants dig, and griffins guard gold, and the sea hides the pearl-stone.
But ye busy yourselves about what you need not. Behold, the whole heaven
is lighted up, and ye seek not God; but gold which is hidden, and
jewels, are dug up by those among us who are condemned to death.

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p5"></span>But you also oppose Scripture,
seeing it expressly cries “Seek first the kingdom of heaven, and all
these things shall be added unto you.” <span
id="fr_1554"></span>[1555](#fn_1554) But if all things have been
conferred on you, and all things allowed you, and “if all things are
lawful, yet all things are not expedient,” <span
id="fr_1555"></span>[1556](#fn_1555) says the apostle. God brought our
race into communion by first imparting what was His own, when He gave
His own Word, common to all, and made all things for all. All things
therefore are common, and not for the rich to appropriate an undue
share. That expression, therefore, “I possess, and possess in abundance:
why then should I not enjoy?” is suitable neither to the man, nor to
society. But more worthy of love is that: “I have: why should I not give
to those who need?” For such an one—one who fulfils the command, “Thou
shalt love thy neighbour as thyself”—is perfect. For this is the true
luxury—the treasured wealth. But that which is squandered on foolish
lusts is to be reckoned waste, not expenditure. For God has given to us,
I know well, the liberty of use, but only so far as necessary; and He
has determined that the use should be common. And it is monstrous for
one to live in luxury, while many are in want. How much more glorious is
it to do good to many, than to live sumptuously! How much wiser to spend
money on human being, <span id="fr_1556"></span>[1557](#fn_1556) than on
jewels and gold! How much more useful to acquire decorous friends, than
lifeless ornaments! Whom have lands ever benefited so much as conferring
favours has? It remains for us, therefore, to do away with this
allegation: Who, then, will have the more sumptuous things, if all
select the simpler? Men, I would say, if they make use of them
impartially and indifferently. But if it be impossible for all to
exercise self-restraint, yet, with a view to the use of what is
necessary, we must seek after what can be most readily procured, bidding
a long farewell to these superfluities.

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p9"></span>In fine, they must accordingly
utterly cast off ornaments as girls’ gewgaws, rejecting adornment itself
entirely. For they ought to be adorned within, and show the inner woman
beautiful. For in the soul alone are beauty and deformity shown.
Wherefore also only the virtuous man is really beautiful and good. And
it is laid down as a dogma, that only the beautiful is good. And
excellence alone appears through the beautiful body, and blossoms out in
the flesh, exhibiting the amiable comeliness of self-control, whenever
the character like a beam of light gleams in the form. For the beauty of
each plant and animal consists in its individual excellence. And the
excellence of man is righteousness, and temperance, and manliness, and
godliness. The beautiful man is, then, he who is just, temperate, and in
a word, good, not he who is rich. But now even the soldiers wish to be
decked with gold, not having read that poetical saying:—

> <span id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p9.1"></span> “With childish folly to the war
> he came,  
> Laden with store of gold.” <span
> id="fr_1557"></span>[1558](#fn_1557)  

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p11"></span>But the love of ornament, which is
far from caring for virtue, but claims the body for itself, when the
love of the beautiful has changed to empty show, is to be utterly
expelled. For applying things unsuitable to the body, as if they were
suitable, begets a practice of lying and a habit of falsehood; and shows
not what is decorous, simple, and truly childlike, but what is pompous,
luxurious, and effeminate. But these women obscure true beauty, shading
it with gold. And they know not how great is their transgression, in
fastening around themselves ten thousand rich chains; as they say that
among the barbarians malefactors are bound with gold. The women seem to
me to emulate these rich prisoners. For is not the golden necklace a
collar, and do not the necklets which they call catheters <span
id="fr_1558"></span>[1559](#fn_1558) occupy the place of chains? and
indeed <span id="page_269">p. 269</span> <span
id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-Page_269"></span>among the Attics they are called by
this very name. The ungraceful things round the feet of women, Philemon
in the *Synephebus* called ankle-fetters:—

> <span id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p12.5"></span> “Conspicuous garments, and a
> kind of a golden fetter.”  

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p13"></span>What else, then, is this coveted
adorning of yourselves, O ladies, but the exhibiting of yourselves
fettered? For if the material does away with the reproach, the endurance
\[of your fetters\] is a thing indifferent. To me, then, those who
voluntarily put themselves into bonds seem to glory in rich calamities.

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p14"></span>Perchance also it is such chains
that the poetic fable says were thrown around Aphrodite when committing
adultery, referring to ornaments as nothing but the badge of adultery.
For Homer called those, too, golden chains. But new women are not
ashamed to wear the most manifest badges of the evil one. For as the
serpent deceived Eve, so also has ornament of gold maddened other women
to vicious practices, using as a bait the form of the serpent, and by
fashioning lampreys and serpents for decoration. Accordingly the comic
poet Nicostratus says, “Chains, collars, rings, bracelets, serpents,
anklets, earrings.” <span id="fr_1559"></span>[1560](#fn_1559)

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p16"></span>In terms of strongest censure,
therefore, Aristophanes in the *Thesmophoriazousæ* exhibits the whole
array of female ornament in a catalogue:—

> <span id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p16.1"></span> “Snoods, fillets, natron, and
> steel;  
> Pumice-stone, band, back-band,  
> Back-veil, paint, necklaces,  
> Paints for the eyes, soft garment, hair-net,  
> Girdle, shawl, fine purple border,  
> Long robe, tunic, Barathrum, round tunic.”  

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p17"></span>But I have not yet mentioned the
principal of them. Then what?

> <span id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p17.1"></span> “Ear-pendants, jewelry,
> ear-rings;  
> Mallow-coloured cluster-shaped anklets;  
> Buckles, clasps, necklets,  
> Fetters, seals, chains, rings, powders,  
> Bosses, bands, olisbi, Sardian stones,  
> Fans, helicters.”  

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p18"></span>I am weary and vexed at enumerating
the multitude of ornaments; <span id="fr_1560"></span>[1561](#fn_1560)
and I am compelled to wonder how those who bear such a burden are not
worried to death. O foolish trouble! O silly craze for display! They
squander meretriciously wealth on what is disgraceful; and in their love
for ostentation disfigure God’s gifts, emulating the art of the evil
one. The rich man hoarding up in his barns, and saying to himself, “Thou
hast much goods laid up for many years; eat, drink, be merry,” the Lord
in the Gospel plainly called “fool.” “For this night they shall take of
thee thy soul; whose then shall those things which thou hast prepared
be?” <span id="fr_1561"></span>[1562](#fn_1561)

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p21"></span>Apelles, the painter, seeing one of
his pupils painting a figure loaded with gold colour to represent Helen,
said to him, “Boy, being incapable of painting her beautiful, you have
made her rich.”

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p22"></span>Such Helens are the ladies of the
present day, not truly beautiful, but richly got up. To these the Spirit
prophesies by Zephaniah: “And their silver and their gold shall not be
able to deliver them in the day of the <span class="sc"><span
id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p22.1"></span>Lord</span>’s anger.” <span
id="fr_1562"></span>[1563](#fn_1562)

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p24"></span>But for those women who have been
trained under Christ, it is suitable to adorn themselves not with gold,
but with the Word, through whom alone the gold comes to light. <span
id="fr_1563"></span>[1564](#fn_1563)

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p26"></span>Happy, then, would have been the
ancient Hebrews, had they cast away their women’s ornaments, or only
melted them; but having cast their gold into the form of an ox, and paid
it idolatrous worship, they consequently reap no advantage either from
their art or their attempt. But they taught our women most expressively
to keep clear of ornaments. The lust which commits fornication with gold
becomes an idol, and is tested by fire; for which alone luxury is
reserved, as being an idol, not a reality. <span
id="fr_1564"></span>[1565](#fn_1564) Hence the Word, upbraiding the
Hebrews by the prophet, says, “They made to Baal things of silver and
gold,” that is, ornaments. And most distinctly threatening, He says, “I
will punish her for the days of Baalim, in which they offered sacrifice
for her, and she put on her earrings and her necklaces.” <span
id="fr_1565"></span>[1566](#fn_1565) And He subjoined the cause of the
adornment, when He said, “And she went after her lovers, but forgot Me,
saith the <span class="sc"><span
id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p28.2"></span>Lord</span>. <span
id="fr_1566"></span>[1567](#fn_1566)

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p30"></span>Resigning, therefore, these baubles
to the wicked master of cunning himself, let us not take part in this
meretricious adornment, nor commit idolatry through a specious pretext.
Most admirably, therefore, the blessed Peter <span
id="fr_1567"></span>[1568](#fn_1567) says, “In like manner also, that
women adorn themselves not with braids, or gold, or costly array, but
(which becometh women professing godliness) with good works.” For it is
with reason that he bids decking of themselves to be kept far from them.
For, granting that they are beautiful, nature suffices. Let not art
contend against nature; that is, let not falsehood strive with truth.
And if they are by nature ugly, they are convicted, by the things they
apply to themselves, of what they do not possess \[i.e., of the want of
beauty\]. It is <span id="page_270">p. 270</span> <span
id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-Page_270"></span>suitable, therefore, for women who
serve Christ to adopt simplicity. For in reality simplicity provides for
sanctity, by reducing redundancies to equality, and by furnishing from
whatever is at hand the enjoyment sought from superfluities. For
simplicity, as the name shows, is not conspicuous, is not inflated or
puffed up in aught, but is altogether even, and gentle, and equal, and
free of excess, and so is sufficient. And sufficiency is a condition
which reaches its proper end without excess or defect. The mother of
these is Justice, and their nurse “Independence;” and this is a
condition which is satisfied with what is necessary, and by itself
furnishes what contributes to the blessed life.

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p32"></span>Let there, then, be in the fruits
of thy hands, sacred order, liberal communication, and acts of economy.
“For he that giveth to the poor, lendeth to God.” <span
id="fr_1568"></span>[1569](#fn_1568) “And the hands of the manly shall
be enriched.” <span id="fr_1569"></span>[1570](#fn_1569) Manly He calls
those who despise wealth, and are free in bestowing it. And on your
feet <span id="fr_1570"></span>[1571](#fn_1570) let active readiness to
well-doing appear, and a journeying to righteousness. Modesty and
chastity are collars and necklaces; such are the chains which God
forges. “Happy is the man who hath found wisdom, and the mortal who
knows understanding,” says the Spirit by Solomon: “for it is better to
buy her than treasures of gold and silver; and she is more valuable than
precious stones.” <span id="fr_1571"></span>[1572](#fn_1571) For she is
the true decoration.

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p37"></span>And let not their ears be pierced,
contrary to nature, in order to attach to them ear-rings and ear-drops.
For it is not right to force nature against her wishes. Nor could there
be any better ornament for the ears than true instruction, which finds
its way naturally into the passages of hearing. And eyes anointed by the
Word, and ears pierced for perception, make a man a hearer and
contemplator of divine and sacred things, the Word truly exhibiting the
true beauty “which eye hath not seen nor ear heard before.” <span
id="fr_1572"></span>[1573](#fn_1572)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1553"></span>[267:1554](0020277.htm#fr_1553) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p2"></span> \[Amber is referred to, and the
extravagant values attributed to it. The mysterious enclosure of bees
and other insects in amber, gave it superstitious importance. Clement
may have fancied these to be remnants of a pre-adamite earth.\]

<span id="fn_1554"></span>[268:1555](0020277.htm#fr_1554) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p6"></span> [Matt. vi.
33](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#033)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1555"></span>[268:1556](0020277.htm#fr_1555) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p7"></span> [1 Cor. x.
23](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#023)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1556"></span>[268:1557](0020277.htm#fr_1556) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p8"></span> \[Chrysostom enlarges on this
Christian thought most eloquently, in several of his homilies: e.g., on
the First Epistle to the Corinthians. Hom. xxi. tom. x. p. 178. *Opp*.,
ed. Migne.\]

<span id="fn_1557"></span>[268:1558](0020277.htm#fr_1557) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p9.4"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p10"></span> *Iliad*, ii. 872.

<span id="fn_1558"></span>[268:1559](0020277.htm#fr_1558) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p12"></span> \[The necklace called <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p12.1"></span>κάθεμα</span> or
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p12.2"></span>κάθημα</span>
seems to be referred to. [Ezek. xvi.
11](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#011)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p12.3"></span>, and [Isa. iii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#019)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p12.4"></span>, *Sept*.\]

<span id="fn_1559"></span>[269:1560](0020277.htm#fr_1559) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p15"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p15.1"></span>Ἐλλόβιον</span> by conjecture, as more
suitable to the connection than <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p15.2"></span>Ἐλλέβορον</span> or <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p15.3"></span>Ἐλέβορον</span>.
Hellebore of the <span class="sc"><span
id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p15.4"></span>ms.</span>, though Hellebore may be
intended as a comic ending.

<span id="fn_1560"></span>[269:1561](0020277.htm#fr_1560) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p19"></span> \[The Greek satirist seems to have
borrowed Isaiah’s catalogue. cap. iii. 18–23.\]

<span id="fn_1561"></span>[269:1562](0020277.htm#fr_1561) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p20"></span> [Luke
12:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#019),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#020)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1562"></span>[269:1563](0020277.htm#fr_1562) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p23"></span> [Zeph. i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#018)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1563"></span>[269:1564](0020277.htm#fr_1563) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p25"></span> Logos is identified with reason;
and it is by reason, or the ingenuity of man, that gold is discovered
and brought to light. \[But here he seems to have in view the
comparisons between gold and wisdom, in [Job
xxviii.](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#000)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p25.1"></span>\]

<span id="fn_1564"></span>[269:1565](0020277.htm#fr_1564) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p27"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p27.1"></span>εἴ´δωλον</span>, an appearance, an
image.

<span id="fn_1565"></span>[269:1566](0020277.htm#fr_1565) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p28"></span> [Hos. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#008)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1566"></span>[269:1567](0020277.htm#fr_1566) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p28.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p29"></span> [Hos. ii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#013)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1567"></span>[269:1568](0020277.htm#fr_1567) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p31"></span> By mistake for Paul. Clement
quotes here, as often, from memory ([1 Tim.
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#010)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p31.1"></span>).

<span id="fn_1568"></span>[270:1569](0020277.htm#fr_1568) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p33"></span> [Prov. xix.
17](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#017)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1569"></span>[270:1570](0020277.htm#fr_1569) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p33.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p34"></span> [Prov. x.
4](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#004)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1570"></span>[270:1571](0020277.htm#fr_1570) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p34.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p35"></span> \[[Eph. vi.
15](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#015)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p35.1"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_1571"></span>[270:1572](0020277.htm#fr_1571) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p35.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p36"></span> [Prov. iii.
13-15](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#013)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1572"></span>[270:1573](0020277.htm#fr_1572) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p38"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#009)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.xiii-p38.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book III](0020278)
