[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020410)  [Next](0020412.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.vii.i"></span>

##### <span id="vi.iv.vii.i-p0.1"></span>Chapter I.—The Gnostic a True Worshipper of God, and Unjustly Calumniated by Unbelievers as an Atheist.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.i-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="vi.iv.vii.i-p1.1"></span>It</span> is now time to show the Greeks
that the Gnostic alone is truly pious; so that the philosophers,
learning of what description the true Christian is, may condemn their
own stupidity in rashly and inconsiderately persecuting the
\[Christian\] name, and without reason calling those impious who know
the true God. And clearer arguments must be employed, I reckon, with the
philosophers, so that they may be able, from the exercise they have
already had through their own training, to understand, although they
have not yet shown themselves worthy to partake of the power of
believing.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.i-p2"></span>The prophetic sayings we shall not at
present advert to, as we are to avail ourselves of the Scriptures
subsequently at the proper places. But we shall point out summarily the
points indicated by them, in our delineation of Christianity, so that by
taking the Scriptures at once (especially as they do not yet comprehend
their utterances), we may not interrupt the continuity of the discourse.
But after pointing out the things indicated, proofs shall be shown in
abundance to those who have believed.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.i-p3"></span>But if the assertions made by us appear
to certain of the multitude to be different from the Scriptures of the
Lord, let it be known that it is from that source that they have breath
and life; and taking their rise from them, they profess to adduce the
sense only, not the words. For further treatment, not being seasonable,
will rightly appear superfluous. Thus, not to look at what is urgent
would be excessively indolent and defective; and “blessed, in truth, are
they who, investigating the testimonies of the <span class="sc"><span
id="vi.iv.vii.i-p3.1"></span>Lord</span>, shall seek Him with their
whole heart.” <span id="fr_3506"></span>[3507](#fn_3506.md) And the law and
the prophets witness of the Lord.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.i-p5"></span>It is, then, our purpose to prove that
the Gnostic alone is holy and pious, and worships the true God in a
manner worthy of Him; and that worship meet for God is followed by
loving and being loved by God. He accordingly judges all excellence to
be honourable according to its worth; and judges that among the objects
perceived by our senses, we are to esteem rulers, and parents, and every
one advanced in years; and among subjects of instruction, the most
ancient philosophy and primeval prophecy; and among intellectual ideas,
what is oldest in origin, the timeless and unoriginated First Principle,
and Beginning of existences—the Son—from whom we are to learn the
remoter Cause, the Father, of the universe, the most ancient and the
most beneficent of all; not capable of expression by the voice, but to
be reverenced with reverence, and silence, and holy wonder, and
supremely venerated; declared by the Lord, as far as those who learned
were capable of comprehending, and understood by those chosen by the
Lord to acknowledge; “whose senses,” says the apostle, “were
exercised.” <span id="fr_3507"></span>[3508](#fn_3507.md)

<span id="vi.iv.vii.i-p7"></span>The service of God, then, in the case
of the Gnostic, is his soul’s continual study <span
id="fr_3508"></span>[3509](#fn_3508.md) and occupation, bestowed on the
Deity in ceaseless love. For of the service bestowed on men, one kind is
that whose aim is improvement, the other ministerial. The improvement of
the body is the object of the medical art, of the soul of philosophy.
Ministerial service is rendered to parents by children, to rulers by
subjects.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.i-p9"></span>Similarly, also, in the Church, the
elders attend to the department which has improvement for its object;
and the deacons to the ministerial. In both these ministries the
angels <span id="fr_3509"></span>[3510](#fn_3509.md) serve God, in the
management of earthly affairs; and the Gnostic himself ministers to God,
and <span id="page_524">p. 524</span> <span
id="vi.iv.vii.i-Page_524"></span>exhibits to men the scheme of
improvement, in the way in which he has been appointed to discipline men
for their amendment. For he is alone pious that serves God rightly and
unblameably in human affairs. For as that treatment of plants is best
through which their fruits are produced and gathered in, through
knowledge and skill in husbandry, affording men the benefit accruing
from them; so the piety of the Gnostic, taking to itself the fruits of
the men who by his means have believed, when not a few attain to
knowledge and are saved by it, achieves by his skill the best harvest.
And as Godliness (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vii.i-p10.1"></span>θεοπρέπεια</span>) is the habit which
preserves what is becoming to God, the godly man is the only lover of
God, and such will he be who knows what is becoming, both in respect of
knowledge and of the life which must be lived by him, who is destined to
be divine (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vii.i-p10.2"></span>θεῷ</span>), and is already being
assimilated to God. So then he is in the first place a lover of God. For
as he who honours his father is a lover of his father, so he who honours
God is a lover of God.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.i-p11"></span>Thus also it appears to me that there
are three effects of gnostic power: the knowledge of things; second, the
performance of whatever the Word suggests; and the third, the capability
of delivering, in a way suitable to God, the secrets veiled in the
truth.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.i-p12"></span>He, then, who is persuaded that God is
omnipotent, and has learned the divine mysteries from His only-begotten
Son, how can he be an atheist (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vii.i-p12.1"></span>ἄθπεος</span>)? Foa he is an atheist who
thinks that God does not exist. And he is superstitious who dreads the
demons; who deifies all things, both wood and stone; and reduces to
bondage spirit, and man who possesses the life of reason. <span
id="fr_3510"></span>[3511](#fn_3510.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3506"></span>[523:3507](0020411.htm#fr_3506.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.i-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.i-p4"></span> [Ps. cxix.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#002.md)<span id="vi.iv.vii.i-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3507"></span>[523:3508](0020411.htm#fr_3507.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.i-p6"></span> [Heb. v.
14](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#014.md)<span id="vi.iv.vii.i-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3508"></span>[523:3509](0020411.htm#fr_3508.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.i-p8"></span> Or, as rendered by the Latin
translator, “continual care for his soul and occupation, bestowed on the
Deity,” etc.

<span id="fn_3509"></span>[523:3510](0020411.htm#fr_3509.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.i-p10"></span> \[Book vi. cap. 13, *supra*.\]

<span id="fn_3510"></span>[524:3511](0020411.htm#fr_3510.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.i-p12.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.i-p13"></span> Potter’s text has <span
class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vii.i-p13.1"></span>καταδεδουλωμένον</span>—which Lowth
changes into <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vii.i-p13.2"></span>καταδεδουλωμένος</span>, nominative; and
this has been adopted in the translation. The thought is the same as in
*Exhortation to the Heathen* \[cap. ii. p. 177, *supra*.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II.—The Son the Ruler and Saviour of All.](0020412.md)
