[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020401)  [Next](0020403.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xii"></span>

##### <span id="vi.iv.vi.xii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XII.—Human Nature Possesses an Adaptation for Perfection; The Gnostic Alone Attains It.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xii-p1"></span>By which consideration <span
id="fr_3363"></span>[3364](#fn_3363.md) is solved the question propounded
to us by the heretics, Whether Adam was created perfect or imperfect?
Well, if imperfect, how could the work of a perfect God—above all, that
work being man—be imperfect? And if perfect, how did he transgress the
commandments? For they shall hear from us that he was not perfect in his
creation, but adapted to the reception of virtue. For it is of great
importance in regard to virtue to be made fit for its attainment. And it
is intended that we should be saved by ourselves. This, then, is the
nature of the soul, to move of itself. Then, as we are rational, and
philosophy being rational, we have some affinity with it. Now an
aptitude is a movement towards virtue, not virtue itself. All, then, as
I said, are naturally constituted for the acquisition of virtue.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xii-p3"></span>But one man applies less, one more, to
learning and training. Wherefore also some have been competent to attain
to perfect virtue, and others have attained to a kind of it. And some,
on the other hand, through negligence, although in other respects of
good dispositions, have turned to the opposite. Now much more is that
knowledge which excels all branches of culture in greatness and in
truth, most difficult to acquire, and is attained with much toil. “But,
as seems, they know not the mysteries of God. For God created man for
immortality, and made him an image of His own nature;” <span
id="fr_3364"></span>[3365](#fn_3364.md) according to which nature of Him
who knows all, he who is a Gnostic, and righteous, and holy with
prudence, hastes to reach the measure of perfect manhood. For not only
are actions and thoughts, but words also, pure in the case of the
Gnostic: “Thou hast proved mine heart; Thou hast visited me by night,”
it is said; “Thou hast subjected me to the fire, and unrighteousness was
not found in me: so that my mouth shall not speak the works of
men.” <span id="fr_3365"></span>[3366](#fn_3365.md)

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xii-p6"></span>And why do I say the works of men? He
recognises sin itself, which is not brought forward in order to
repentance (for this is common to all believers); but what sin is. Nor
does he condemn this or that sin, but simply all sin; nor is it what one
has done ill that he brings up, but what ought not to be done. Whence
also repentance is twofold: that which is common, on account of having
transgressed; and that which, from learning the nature of sin,
persuades, in the first instance, to keep from sinning, the result of
which is not sinning.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xii-p7"></span>Let them not then say, that he who
does wrong and sins transgresses through the agency of demons; for then
he would be guiltless. But by choosing the same things as demons, by
sinning; being unstable, and light, and fickle in his desires, like a
demon, he becomes a demoniac man. Now he who is bad, having become,
through evil, sinful by nature, becomes depraved, having what he has
chosen; and being sinful, sins also in his actions. And again, the good
man does right. Wherefore we call not only the virtues, but also right
actions, good. And of things that are <span id="page_503">p. 503</span>
<span id="vi.iv.vi.xii-Page_503"></span>good we know that some are
desirable for themselves, as knowledge; for we hunt for nothing from it
when we have it, but only \[seek\] that it be with us, and that we be in
uninterrupted contemplation, and strive to reach it for its own sake.
But other things are desirable for other considerations, such as faith,
for escape from punishment, and the advantage arising from reward, which
accrue from it. For, in the case of many, fear is the cause of their not
sinning; and the promise is the means of pursuing obedience, by which
comes salvation. Knowledge, then, desirable as it is for its own sake,
is the most perfect good; and consequently the things which follow by
means of it are good. And punishment is the cause of correction to him
who is punished; and to those who are able to see before them he becomes
an example, to prevent them falling into the like.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xii-p8"></span>Let us then receive knowledge, not
desiring its results, but embracing itself for the sake of knowing. For
the first advantage is the habit of knowledge (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vi.xii-p8.1"></span>γνωστική</span>), which furnishes harmless
pleasures and exultation both for the present and the future. And
exultation is said to be gladness, being a reflection of the virtue
which is according to truth, through a kind of exhilaration and
relaxation of soul. And the acts which partake of knowledge are good and
fair actions. For abundance in the actions that are according to virtue,
is the true riches, and destitution in decorous <span
id="fr_3366"></span>[3367](#fn_3366.md) desires is poverty. For the use and
enjoyment of necessaries are not injurious in quality, but in quantity,
when in excess. Wherefore the Gnostic circumscribes his desires in
reference both to possession and to enjoyment, not exceeding the limit
of necessity. Therefore, regarding life in this world as necessary for
the increase of science (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vi.xii-p9.3"></span>ἐπιστήμη</span>) and the acquisition of
knowledge (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vi.xii-p9.4"></span>γνῶσις</span>), he will value highest, not
living, but living well. He will therefore prefer neither children, nor
marriage, nor parents, to love for God, and righteousness in life. To
such an one, his wife, after conception, is as a sister, and is judged
as if of the same father; then only recollecting her husband, when she
looks on the children; as being destined to become a sister in reality
after putting off the flesh, which separates and limits the knowledge of
those who are spiritual by the peculiar characteristics of the sexes.
For souls, themselves by themselves, are equal. Souls are neither male
nor female, when they no longer marry nor are given in marriage. And is
not woman translated into man, when she is become equally unfeminine,
and manly, and perfect? Such, then, was the laughter of Sarah <span
id="fr_3367"></span>[3368](#fn_3367.md) when she received the good news of
the birth of a son; not, in my opinion, that she disbelieved the angel,
but that she felt ashamed of the intercourse by means of which she was
destined to become the mother of a son.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xii-p11"></span>And did not Abraham, when he was in
danger on account of Sarah’s beauty, with the king of Egypt, properly
call her sister, being of the same father, but not of the same
mother? <span id="fr_3368"></span>[3369](#fn_3368.md)

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xii-p13"></span>To those, then, who have repented and
not firmly believed, God grants their requests through their
supplications. But to those who live sinlessly and gnostically, He
gives, when they have but merely entertained the thought. For example,
to Anna, on her merely conceiving the thought, conception was vouchsafed
of the child Samuel. <span id="fr_3369"></span>[3370](#fn_3369.md) “Ask,”
says the Scripture, “and I will do. Think, and I will give.” For we have
heard that God knows the heart, not judging <span
id="fr_3370"></span>[3371](#fn_3370.md) the soul from \[external\]
movement, as we men; nor yet from the event. For it is ridiculous to
think so. Nor was it as the architect praises the work when accomplished
that God, on making the light and then seeing it, called it good. But
He, knowing before He made it what it would be, praised that which was
made, He having potentially made good, from the first by His purpose
that had no beginning, what was destined to be good actually. Now that
which has future He already said beforehand was good, the phrase
concealing the truth by hyperbaton. Therefore the Gnostic prays in
thought during every hour, being by love allied to God. And first he
will ask forgiveness of sins; and after, that he may sin no more; and
further, the power of well-doing and of comprehending the whole creation
and administration by the Lord, that, becoming pure in heart through the
knowledge, which is by the Son of God, he may be initiated into the
beatific vision face to face, having heard the Scripture which says,
“Fasting with prayer is a good thing.” <span
id="fr_3371"></span>[3372](#fn_3371.md)

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xii-p17"></span>Now fastings signify abstinence from
all evils whatsoever, both in action and in word, and in thought itself.
As appears, then, righteousness is quadrangular; <span
id="fr_3372"></span>[3373](#fn_3372.md) on all sides equal and like in
word, in deed, in abstinence from evils, in beneficence, in gnostic
perfection; nowhere, and in no respect halting, so that he does not
appear unjust and unequal. As one, then, is righteous, so certainly is
he a believer. But as he is a believer, he is not yet also righteous—I
mean according <span id="page_504">p. 504</span> <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xii-Page_504"></span>to the righteousness of progress and
perfection, according to which the Gnostic is called righteous.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xii-p19"></span>For instance, on Abraham becoming a
believer, it was reckoned to him for righteousness, he having advanced
to the greater and more perfect degree of faith. For he who merely
abstains from evil conduct is not just, unless he also attain besides
beneficence and knowledge; and for this reason some things are to be
abstained from, others are to be done. “By the armour of righteousness
on the right hand and on the left,” <span
id="fr_3373"></span>[3374](#fn_3373.md) the apostle says, the righteous man
is sent on to the inheritance above,—by some \[arms\] defended, by
others putting forth his might. For the defence of his panoply alone,
and abstinence from sins, are not sufficient for perfection, unless he
assume in addition the work of righteousness—activity in doing good.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xii-p21"></span>Then our dexterous man and Gnostic is
revealed in righteousness already even here, as Moses, glorified in the
face of the soul, <span id="fr_3374"></span>[3375](#fn_3374.md) as we have
formerly said, the body bears the stamp of the righteous soul. For as
the mordant of the dyeing process, remaining in the wool, produces in it
a certain quality and diversity from other wool; so also in the soul the
pain is gone, but the good remains; and the sweet is left, but the base
is wiped away. For these are two qualities characteristic of each soul,
by which is known that which is glorified, and that which is condemned.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xii-p23"></span>And as in the case of Moses, from his
righteous conduct, and from his uninterrupted intercourse with God, who
spoke to him, a kind of glorified hue settled on his face; so also a
divine power of goodness clinging to the righteous soul in contemplation
and in prophecy, and in the exercise of the function of governing,
impresses on it something, as it were, of intellectual radiance, like
the solar ray, as a visible sign of righteousness, uniting the soul with
light, through unbroken love, which is God-bearing and God-borne. Thence
assimilation to God the Saviour arises to the Gnostic, as far as
permitted to human nature, he being made perfect “as the Father who is
in heaven.” <span id="fr_3375"></span>[3376](#fn_3375.md)

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xii-p25"></span>It is He Himself who says, “Little
children, a little while I am still with you.” <span
id="fr_3376"></span>[3377](#fn_3376.md) Since also God Himself remains
blessed and immortal, neither molested nor molesting another; <span
id="fr_3377"></span>[3378](#fn_3377.md) not in consequence of being by
nature good, but in consequence of doing good in a manner peculiar to
Himself. God being essentially, and proving Himself actually, both
Father and good, continues immutably in the self-same goodness. For what
is the use of good that does not act and do good?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3363"></span>[502:3364](0020402.htm#fr_3363.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xii-p2"></span> i.e., that mentioned in the last
sentence of chap xi., which would more appropriately be transferred to
chap. xii.

<span id="fn_3364"></span>[502:3365](0020402.htm#fr_3364.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xii-p4"></span> [Wis.
2:22](../../../bib/apo/wis002.htm#022.md),
[25](../../../bib/apo/wis002.htm#025.md)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3365"></span>[502:3366](0020402.htm#fr_3365.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xii-p5"></span> [Ps.
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#003.md),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#004.md)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3366"></span>[503:3367](0020402.htm#fr_3366.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xii-p9"></span> Sylburgius proposes <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.vi.xii-p9.1"></span>κοσμικάς</span>,
worldly, instead of <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vi.xii-p9.2"></span>κοσμίας</span>, decorous; in which case
the sentence would read: “and \[true\] poverty, destitution in worldly
desires.”

<span id="fn_3367"></span>[503:3368](0020402.htm#fr_3367.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xii-p9.5"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xii-p10"></span> [Gen. xviii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#012.md)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3368"></span>[503:3369](0020402.htm#fr_3368.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xii-p12"></span> The reading of the text has, “not of
the same mother, much less of the same father,” which contradicts [Gen.
xx. 12](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#012.md)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xii-p12.1"></span>, and has been therefore amended as
above.

<span id="fn_3369"></span>[503:3370](0020402.htm#fr_3369.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xii-p14"></span> [1 Sam. i.
13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#013.md)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3370"></span>[503:3371](0020402.htm#fr_3370.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xii-p15"></span> Or, “judging from the motion of the
soul;” the text reading here <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vi.xii-p15.1"></span>οὐ κινήματος ψυχῆς</span>, for which, as
above, is proposed, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vi.xii-p15.2"></span>οὐκ ἐκ κινήματος ψυχῆν</span>.

<span id="fn_3371"></span>[503:3372](0020402.htm#fr_3371.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xii-p15.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xii-p16"></span> [Tob. xii.
8](../../../bib/apo/tob012.htm#008.md)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3372"></span>[503:3373](0020402.htm#fr_3372.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xii-p18"></span> Metaphorical expression for perfect.
The phrase “a quadrangular man” is found in Plato and Aristotle. \[The
proverbial <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vi.xii-p18.1"></span>τετρἀγονος ἄνευ ψόγου</span>, of the
*Nicomach. Ethics*, i. 10, and of Plato in the *Protagoras*, p. 154.
*Ed*. Bipont, 1782.\]

<span id="fn_3373"></span>[504:3374](0020402.htm#fr_3373.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xii-p20"></span> [2 Cor. vi.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#007.md)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xii-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3374"></span>[504:3375](0020402.htm#fr_3374.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xii-p22"></span> [Ex. xxxiv.
29](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#029.md)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xii-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3375"></span>[504:3376](0020402.htm#fr_3375.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xii-p24"></span> [Matt. v.
48](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#048.md)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xii-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3376"></span>[504:3377](0020402.htm#fr_3376.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xii-p26"></span> [John xiii.
33](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#033.md)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xii-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3377"></span>[504:3378](0020402.htm#fr_3377.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xii-p27"></span> This is cited by Diogenes Laertius
as the first dictum of Epicurus. It is also referred to as such by
Cicero, *De Natura Deorum*, and by others.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII.—Degrees of Glory in Heaven Corresponding with the
Dignities of the Church Below.](0020403.md)
