[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020220)  [Next](0020222) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iii.xiii"></span>

##### <span id="v.iii.xiii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XIII.—Continuation of the Argument.

<span id="v.iii.xiii-p1"></span> <span id="fr_836"></span>[837](#fn_836)
Confident of these things, no less than of those which have already come
to pass, and reflecting on our own nature, we are content with a life
associated with neediness and corruption, as suited to our present state
of existence, and <span id="page_156">p. 156</span> <span
id="v.iii.xiii-Page_156"></span>we stedfastly hope for a continuance of
being in immortality; and this we do not take without foundation from
the inventions of men, feeding ourselves on false hopes, but our belief
rests on a most infallible guarantee—the purpose of Him who fashioned
us, according to which He made man of an immortal soul <span
id="fr_837"></span>[838](#fn_837) and a body, and furnished him with
understanding and an innate law for the preservation and safeguard of
the things given by Him as suitable to an intelligent existence and a
rational life: for we know well that He would not have fashioned such a
being, and furnished him with everything belonging to perpetuity, had He
not intended that what was so created should continue in perpetuity. If,
therefore, the Maker of this universe made man with a view to his
partaking of an intelligent life, and that, having become a spectator of
His grandeur, and of the wisdom which is manifest in all things, he
might continue always in the contemplation of these; then, according to
the purpose of his Author, and the nature which he has received, the
cause of his creation is a pledge of his continuance for ever, and this
continuance is a pledge of the resurrection, without which man could not
continue. So that, from what has been said, it is quite clear that the
resurrection is plainly proved by the cause of man’s creation, and the
purpose of Him who made him. Such being the nature of the cause for
which man has been brought into this world, the next thing will be to
consider that which immediately follows, naturally or in the order
proposed; and in our investigation the cause of their creation is
followed by the nature of the men so created, and the nature of those
created by the just judgment of their Maker upon them, and all these by
the end of their existence. Having investigated therefore the point
placed first in order, we must now go on to consider the nature of men.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_836"></span>[155:837](0020221.htm#fr_836) <span
id="v.iii.xiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xiii-p2"></span> \[The calm sublimity of this paragraph
excels all that ever came from an Athenian before. In the Phœdon we have
conjectures: here is certain hope and patient submission as our
resonable service.\]

<span id="fn_837"></span>[156:838](0020221.htm#fr_837) <span
id="v.iii.xiii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xiii-p3"></span> \[Kaye, p. 199. Compare *Embassy*, cap.
xxvii., *supra*, p. 143.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV.—The Resurrection Does Not Rest Solely on the Fact of
a Future Judgment.](0020222)
