[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020019)  [Next](0020021) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iii.xi"></span>

#### <span id="ii.iii.xi-p0.1"></span>Commandment Eleventh.

##### <span id="ii.iii.xi-p0.2"></span>The Spirit and Prophets to Be Tried by Their Works; Also of the Two Kinds of Spirit.

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p1"></span>He pointed out to me some men sitting on
a seat, and one man sitting on a chair. And he says to me, “Do you see
the persons sitting on the seat?” “I do, sir,” said I. “These,” says he,
“are the faithful, and he who sits on the chair is a false prophet,
ruining the minds of the servants of God. <span
id="fr_218"></span>[219](#fn_218) It is the doubters, not the faithful,
that he ruins. These doubters then go to him as to a soothsayer, and
inquire of him what will happen to them; and he, the false prophet, not
having the power of a Divine Spirit in him, answers them according to
their inquiries, and according to their wicked desires, and fills their
souls with expectations, according to their own wishes. For being
himself empty, he gives empty answers to empty inquirers; for every
answer is made to the emptiness of man. Some true words he does
occasionally utter; for the devil fills him with his own spirit, in the
hope that he may be able to overcome some of the righteous. As many,
then, as are strong in the faith of the Lord, and are clothed with
truth, have no connection with such spirits, but keep away from them;
but as many as are of doubtful minds and frequently repent, betake
themselves to soothsaying, even as the heathen, and bring greater sin
upon themselves by their idolatry. For he who inquires of a false
prophet in regard to any action is an idolater, and devoid of the truth,
and foolish. For no spirit given by God requires to be asked; but such a
spirit having the power of Divinity speaks all things of itself, for it
proceeds from above from the power of the Divine Spirit. But the spirit
which is asked and speaks according to the desires of men is
earthly, <span id="fr_219"></span>[220](#fn_219) light, and powerless,
and it is altogether silent if it is not questioned.” “How then, sir,”
say I, “will a man know which of them is the prophet, and which the
false prophet?” “I will tell you,” says he, “about both the prophets,
and then you can try the true and the false prophet according to my
directions. Try the man who has the Divine Spirit by his life. First, he
who has the Divine Spirit proceeding from above is meek, and peaceable,
and humble, and refrains from all iniquity and the vain desire of this
world, and contents himself with fewer wants than those of other men,
and when asked he makes no reply; nor does he speak privately, nor when
man wishes the spirit to speak does the Holy Spirit speak, but it speaks
only when God wishes it to speak. When, then, a man having the Divine
Spirit comes into an assembly of righteous men who <span id="page_28">p.
28</span> <span id="ii.iii.xi-Page_28"></span>have faith in the Divine
Spirit, and this assembly of men offers up prayer to God, then the angel
of the prophetic Spirit, <span id="fr_220"></span>[221](#fn_220) who is
destined for him, fills the man; and the man being filled with the Holy
Spirit, speaks to the multitude as the Lord wishes. Thus, then, will the
Spirit of Divinity become manifest. Whatever power therefore comes from
the Spirit of Divinity belongs to the Lord. Hear, then,” says he, “in
regard to the spirit which is earthly, and empty, and powerless, and
foolish. First, the man <span id="fr_221"></span>[222](#fn_221) who
seems to have the Spirit exalts himself, and wishes to have the first
seat, and is bold, and impudent, and talkative, and lives in the midst
of many luxuries and many other delusions, and takes rewards for his
prophecy; and if he does not receive rewards, he does not prophesy. Can,
then, the Divine Spirit take rewards and prophesy? It is not possible
that the prophet of God should do this, but prophets of this character
are possessed by an earthly spirit. Then it never approaches an assembly
of righteous men, but shuns them. And it associates with doubters and
the vain, and prophesies to them in a corner, and deceives them,
speaking to them, according to their desires, mere empty words: for they
are empty to whom it gives its answers. For the empty vessel, when
placed along with the empty, is not crushed, but they correspond to each
other. When, therefore, it comes into an assembly of righteous men who
have a Spirit of Divinity, and they offer up prayer, that man is made
empty, and the earthly spirit tees from him through fear, and that man
is made dumb, and is entirely crushed, being unable to speak. For if you
pack closely a storehouse with wine or oil, and put an empty jar in the
midst of the vessels of wine or oil, you will find that jar empty as
when you placed it, if you should wish to clear the storehouse. So also
the empty prophets, when they come to the spirits of the righteous, are
found \[on leaving\] to be such as they were when they came. This, then,
is the mode of life of both prophets. Try by his deeds and his life the
man who says that he is inspired. But as for you, trust the Spirit which
comes from God, and has power; but the spirit which is earthly and empty
trust not at all, for there is no power in it: it comes from the devil.
Hear, then, the parable which I am to tell you. Take a stone, and throw
it to the sky, and see if you can touch it. Or again, take a squirt of
water and squirt into the sky, and see if you can penetrate the sky.”
“How, sir,” say I, “can these things take place? for both of them are
impossible.” “As these things,” says he, “are impossible, so also are
the earthly spirits powerless and pithless. But look, on the other hand,
at the power which comes from above. Hail is of the size of a very small
grain, yet when it falls on a man’s head how much annoyance it gives
him! Or, again, take the drop which falls from a pitcher to the ground,
and yet it hollows a stone. <span id="fr_222"></span>[223](#fn_222) You
see, then, that the smallest things coming from above have great power
when they fall upon the earth. <span id="fr_223"></span>[224](#fn_223)
Thus also is the Divine Spirit, which comes from above, powerful. Trust,
then, that Spirit, but have nothing to do with the other.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_218"></span>[27:219](0020020.htm#fr_218) <span
id="ii.iii.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p2"></span> *Is … God*. He who sits in the chair is
a terrestrial spirit.—*Vat*. And then follows the dislocation of
sentences noticed above.

<span id="fn_219"></span>[27:220](0020020.htm#fr_219) <span
id="ii.iii.xi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p3"></span> *The spirit of all men is earthly*, etc.
This passage, down to “it is not possible that the prophet of God should
do this,” is found in the Vat. and other <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iii.xi-p3.1"></span>mss.</span> of the common translation, with
the exception of the Lambeth, in Command Twelfth. \[Consult Wake upon
omissions and transpositions in this and the former Commandment. And
note, especially, his valuable caution against confounding what is here
said, so confusedly, of the Spirit in man, and of the Spirit of God in
his essence ([1 Cor. 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#012)<span id="ii.iii.xi-p3.2"></span>).

<span id="fn_220"></span>[28:221](0020020.htm#fr_220) <span
id="ii.iii.xi-p3.3"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p4"></span> *Angel of the prophetic Spirit*. The
holy messenger (angel) of Divinity.—*Vat*. \[[1 Cor.
xiv.](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#000)<span id="ii.iii.xi-p4.1"></span>
*passim*.\]

<span id="fn_221"></span>[28:222](0020020.htm#fr_221) <span
id="ii.iii.xi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p5"></span> \[Here is a caution against divers
Phrygian *prophesyings*.\]

<span id="fn_222"></span>[28:223](0020020.htm#fr_222) <span
id="ii.iii.xi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p6"></span> \[This proverb is found in many
languages. Hermas may have been familiar with Ovid, or with the Greek of
the poetaster Chœrilus, from whom Ovid, with other Latin poets,
condenscended to borrow it.\]

<span id="fn_223"></span>[28:224](0020020.htm#fr_223) <span
id="ii.iii.xi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p7"></span> *Earth.* After this the Vatican reads:
Join yourself, therefore, to that which has power, and withdraw from
that one which is empty. \[Hermas seems to apply to the Spirit, in
carrying out his figure, those words of the Psalmist, lxxii. 6.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Commandment Twelfth. On the Twofold Desire. The Commandments of
God Can Be Kept, and Believers Ought Not to Fear the Devil.](0020021)
