[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020357)  [Next](0020359) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.iv.vii"></span>

##### <span id="vi.iv.iv.vii-p0.1"></span>Chapter VIII.—Women as Well as Men, Slaves as Well as Freemen, Candidates for the Martyr’s Crown.

<span id="vi.iv.iv.vii-p1"></span>Since, then, not only the Æsopians,
and Macedonians, and the Lacedæmonians endured when subjected to
torture, as Eratosthenes says in his work, *On Things Good and Evil;*
but also Zeno of Elea, when subjected to compulsion to divulge a secret,
held out against the tortures, and confessed nothing; who, when
expiring, bit out his tongue and spat it at the tyrant, whom some term
Nearchus, and some Demulus. Theodotus the Pythagorean acted also
similarly, and Paulus the friend of Lacydes, as Timotheus of Pergamus
says in his work on *The Fortitude of Philosophers*, and Achaicus in
*The Ethics*. Posthumus also, the Roman, when captured by Peucetion, did
not divulge a single secret; but putting his hand on the fire, held it
to it as if to a piece of brass, without moving a muscle of his face. I
omit the case of Anaxarchus, who exclaimed, “Pound away at the sack
which holds Anaxarchus, for it is not Anaxarchus you are pounding,” when
by the tyrant’s orders he was being pounded with iron pestles. Neither,
then, the hope of happiness nor the love of God takes what befalls ill,
but remains free, although thrown among the wildest beasts or into the
all-devouring fire; though racked with a tyrant’s tortures. Depending as
it does on the divine favour, it ascends aloft unenslaved, surrendering
the body to those who can touch it alone. A barbarous nation, not
cumbered with philosophy, select, it is said, annually an ambassador to
the hero Zamolxis. Zamolxis was one of the disciples of Pythagoras. The
one, then, who is judged of the most sterling worth is put to death, to
the distress of those who have practiced philosophy, but have not been
selected, at being reckoned unworthy of a happy service.

<span id="vi.iv.iv.vii-p2"></span>So the Church is full of those, as
well chaste women as men, who all their life have contemplated the death
which rouses up to Christ. <span id="fr_2767"></span>[2768](#fn_2767)
For the individual whose life is framed as ours is, may philosophize
without Learning, whether barbarian, whether Greek, whether
slave—whether an old man, or a boy, or a woman. <span
id="fr_2768"></span>[2769](#fn_2768) For self-control is common to all
human beings who have made choice of it. And we admit that the same
nature exists in every race, and the same virtue. As far as respects
human nature, the woman does not possess one nature, and the man exhibit
another, but the same: so also with virtue. If, consequently, a
self-restraint and righteousness, and whatever qualities are regarded as
<span id="page_420">p. 420</span> <span
id="vi.iv.iv.vii-Page_420"></span>following them, is the virtue of the
male, it belongs to the male alone to be virtuous, and to the woman to
be licentious and unjust. But it is offensive even to say this.
Accordingly woman is to practice self-restraint and righteousness, and
every other virtue, as well as man, both bond and free; since it is a
fit consequence that the same nature possesses one and the same
virtue. <span id="fr_2769"></span>[2770](#fn_2769) We do not say that
woman’s nature is the same as man’s, as she is woman. For undoubtedly it
stands to reason that some difference should exist between each of them,
in virtue of which one is male and the other female. Pregnancy and
parturition, accordingly, we say belong to woman, as she is woman, and
not as she is a human being. But if there were no difference between man
and woman, both would do and suffer the same things. As then there is
sameness, as far as respects the soul, she will attain to the same
virtue; but as there is difference as respects the peculiar construction
of the body, she is destined for child-bearing and housekeeping. “For I
would have you know,” says the apostle, “that the head of every man is
Christ; and the head of the woman is the man: for the man is not of the
woman, but the woman of the man. For neither is the woman without the
man, nor the man without the woman, in the Lord.” <span
id="fr_2770"></span>[2771](#fn_2770) For as we say that the man ought to
be continent, and superior to pleasures; so also we reckon that the
woman should be continent and practiced in fighting against pleasures.
“But I say, Walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfil the lusts of the
flesh,” counsels the apostolic command; “for the flesh lusteth against
the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh. These, then, are contrary”
(not as good to evil, but as fighting advantageously), he adds
therefore, so that ye cannot do the things that ye would. Now the works
of the flesh are manifest, which are, fornication uncleanness,
profligacy, idolatry, witchcrafts, enmities, strifes, jealousies, wrath,
contentions, dissensions, heresies, envyings, drunkenness, revellings,
and such like; of which I tell you before, as I have also said before,
that they which do such things shall not inherit the kingdom of God. But
the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness,
temperance, goodness, faith, meekness.” <span
id="fr_2771"></span>[2772](#fn_2771) He calls sinners, as I think,
“flesh,” and the righteous “spirit.” Further, manliness is to be assumed
in order to produce confidence and forbearance, so as “to him that
strikes on the one cheek, to give to him the other; and to him that
takes away the cloak, to yield to him the coat also,” strongly,
restraining anger. For we do not train our women like Amazons to
manliness in war; since we wish the men even to be peaceable. I hear
that the Sarmatian women practice war no less than the men; and the
women of the Sacæ besides, who shoot backwards, feigning flight as well
as the men. I am aware, too, that the women near Iberia practice manly
work and toil, not refraining from their tasks even though near their
delivery; but even in the very struggle of her pains, the woman, on
being delivered, taking up the infant, carries it home. Further, the
females no less than the males manage the house, and hunt, and keep the
flocks:—

> <span id="vi.iv.iv.vii-p7.2"></span> “Cressa the hound ran keenly in
> the stag’s track.”  

<span id="vi.iv.iv.vii-p8"></span>Women are therefore to philosophize
equally with men, though the males are preferable at everything, unless
they have become effeminate. <span id="fr_2772"></span>[2773](#fn_2772)
To the whole human race, then, discipline and virtue are a necessity, if
they would pursue after happiness. And how recklessly Euripides writes
sometimes this and sometimes that! On one occasion, “For every wife is
inferior to her husband, though the most excellent one marry her that is
of fair fame.” And on another:—

> <span id="vi.iv.iv.vii-p9.1"></span> “For the chaste is her husband’s
> slave,  
> While she that is unchaste in her folly despises her consort.  
> .  .  .  .  For nothing is better and more excellent,  
> Than when as husband and wife ye keep house,  
> Harmonious in your sentiments.”  

<span id="vi.iv.iv.vii-p10"></span>The ruling power is therefore the
head. And if “the Lord is head of the man, and the man is head of the
woman,” the man, “being the image and glory of God, is lord of the
woman.” <span id="fr_2773"></span>[2774](#fn_2773) Wherefore also in the
Epistle to the Ephesians it is written, “Subjecting yourselves one to
another in the fear of God. Wives, submit yourselves to your own
husbands, as to the Lord. For the husband is head of the wife, as also
Christ is the head of the Church; and He is the Saviour of the body.
Husbands, love your wives, as also Christ loved the Church. So also
ought men to love their wives as their own bodies: he that loveth his
wife loveth himself. For no man ever yet hated his own flesh.” <span
id="fr_2774"></span>[2775](#fn_2774) And in that to the Colossians it is
said, “Wives, submit yourselves to your own husbands, as is fit in the
Lord. <span id="fr_2775"></span>[2776](#fn_2775) Husbands, love your
wives, and be not bitter against them. Children, obey your parents in
all things; for this is well pleasing to the Lord. Fathers, provoke not
your children to anger, lest they be discouraged. Servants, be obedient
in all things to those who <span id="page_421">p. 421</span> <span
id="vi.iv.iv.vii-Page_421"></span>are your masters according to the
flesh; not with eye-service, as men-pleasers; but with singleness of
heart, fearing the Lord. And whatsoever ye do, do it heartily, as
serving the Lord and not men; knowing that of the Lord ye shall receive
the reward of the inheritance: for ye serve the Lord Christ. For the
wrongdoer shall receive the wrong, which he hath done; and there is no
respect of persons. Masters, render to your servants justice and equity;
knowing that ye also have a Master in heaven, where there is neither
Greek nor Jew, circumcision and uncircumcision, barbarian, Scythian,
bond, free: but Christ is all, and in all.” <span
id="fr_2776"></span>[2777](#fn_2776) And the earthly Church is the image
of the heavenly, as we pray also “that the will of God may be done upon
the earth as in heaven.” <span id="fr_2777"></span>[2778](#fn_2777)
“Putting on, therefore, bowels of mercy, gentleness, humbleness,
meekness, long-suffering; forbearing one another, and forgiving one
another, if one have a quarrel against any man; as also Christ hath
forgiven us, so also let us. And above all these things put on charity,
which is the bond of perfectness. And let the peace of God rule in your
hearts, to which ye are called in one body; and be thankful.” <span
id="fr_2778"></span>[2779](#fn_2778) For there is no obstacle to
adducing frequently the same Scripture in order to put Marcion <span
id="fr_2779"></span>[2780](#fn_2779) to the blush, if perchance he be
persuaded and converted; by learning that the faithful ought to be
grateful to God the Creator, who hath called us, and who preached the
Gospel in the body. From these considerations the unity of the faith is
clear, and it is shown who is the perfect man; so that though some are
reluctant, and offer as much resistance as they can, though menaced with
punishments at the hand of husband or master, both the domestic and the
wife will philosophize. Moreover, the free, though threatened with death
at a tyrant’s hands, and brought before the tribunals, and all his
substances imperilled, will by no means abandon piety; nor will the wife
who dwells with a wicked husband, or the son if he has a bad father, or
the domestic if he has a bad master, ever fail in holding nobly to
virtue. But as it is noble for a man to die for virtue, and for liberty,
and for himself, so also is it for a woman. For this is not peculiar to
the nature of males, but to the nature of the good. Accordingly, both
the old man, the young, and the servant will live faithfully, and if
need be die; which will be to be made alive by death. So we know that
both children, and women, and servants have often, against their
fathers’, and masters’, and husbands’ will, reached the highest degree
of excellence. Wherefore those who are determined to live piously ought
none the less to exhibit alacrity, when some seem to exercise compulsion
on them; but much more, I think, does it become them to show eagerness,
and to strive with uncommon vigour, lest, being overcome, they abandon
the best and most indispensable counsels. For it does not, I think,
admit of comparison, whether it be better to be a follower of the
Almighty than to choose the darkness of demons. For the things which are
done by us on account of others we are to do always, endeavouring to
have respect to those for whose sake it is proper that they be done,
regarding the gratification rendered in their case, as what is to be our
rule; but the things which are done for our own sake rather than that of
others, are to be done with equal earnestness, whether they are like to
please certain people or not. If some indifferent things have obtained
such honour as to appear worthy of adoption, though against the will of
some; much more is virtue to be regarded by us as worth contending for,
looking the while to nothing but what can be rightly done, whether it
seem good to others or not. Well then, Epicurus, writing to Menœceus,
says, “Let not him who is young delay philosophizing, and let not the
old man grow weary of philosophizing; for no one is either not of age or
past age for attending to the health of his soul. And he who says that
the time for philosophizing is not come or is past, is like the man who
says that the time for happiness is not come or has gone. So that
young <span id="fr_2780"></span>[2781](#fn_2780) as well as old ought to
philosophize: the one, in order that, while growing old, he may grow
young in good things out of favour accruing from what is past; and the
other, that he may be at once young and old, from want of fear for the
future.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2767"></span>[419:2768](0020358.htm#fr_2767) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.vii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.vii-p3"></span> \[The Edin. Translator says
“*courted* the death;” but surely (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.iv.vii-p3.1"></span>μελετησάντων</span>) the original merely
states the condition of Christians in the second century, “dying daily,”
and accepting in daily contemplation the very probable death “by which
they should glorify God.”\]

<span id="fn_2768"></span>[419:2769](0020358.htm#fr_2768) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.vii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.vii-p4"></span> \[Note the Catholic democracy of
Christianity, which levels up and not downward.\]

<span id="fn_2769"></span>[420:2770](0020358.htm#fr_2769) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.vii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.vii-p5"></span> \[This vindication of the equality of
the sexes is a comment on what the Gospel found woman’s estate, and on
what it created for her among Christians.\]

<span id="fn_2770"></span>[420:2771](0020358.htm#fr_2770) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.vii-p6"></span> [1 Cor.
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#003),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#008),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#011)<span
id="vi.iv.iv.vii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2771"></span>[420:2772](0020358.htm#fr_2771) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.vii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.vii-p7"></span> \[[Gal.
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#017),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#019)<span
id="vi.iv.iv.vii-p7.1"></span>–23. S.\]

<span id="fn_2772"></span>[420:2773](0020358.htm#fr_2772) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.vii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.vii-p9"></span> \[The Edin. Trans. has “best at
everything,” but I have corrected it in closer accord with the
comparative degree in the Greek.\]

<span id="fn_2773"></span>[420:2774](0020358.htm#fr_2773) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.vii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.vii-p11"></span> [1 Cor.
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#003),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#007)<span
id="vi.iv.iv.vii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2774"></span>[420:2775](0020358.htm#fr_2774) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.vii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.vii-p12"></span> [Eph. v.
21-29](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#021)<span
id="vi.iv.iv.vii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2775"></span>[420:2776](0020358.htm#fr_2775) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.vii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.vii-p13"></span> \[It is a sad token of our times
that some women resent this law of the Christian family. In every
society there must be presidency even among equals; and even Christ,
though “equal to the Father,” in the Catholic theology, is yet
subordinate. See Bull, *Defens. Fid., Nicæn. Works*, vol. v. p. 685.\]

<span id="fn_2776"></span>[421:2777](0020358.htm#fr_2776) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.vii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.vii-p14"></span> [Col. iii.
18-25](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#018)<span
id="vi.iv.iv.vii-p14.1"></span>, iv. 1, iii. 11.

<span id="fn_2777"></span>[421:2778](0020358.htm#fr_2777) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.vii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.vii-p15"></span> [Matt. vi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#010)<span
id="vi.iv.iv.vii-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2778"></span>[421:2779](0020358.htm#fr_2778) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.vii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.vii-p16"></span> [Col. iii.
12-15](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#012)<span
id="vi.iv.iv.vii-p16.1"></span>. \[Again let us note this Catholic
democracy of the Christian brotherhood (see p. 416, *supra*), for which
indeed we should be thankful as Christ’s freemen.\]

<span id="fn_2779"></span>[421:2780](0020358.htm#fr_2779) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.vii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.vii-p17"></span> \[Book iii. cap. iii., *supra*.\]

<span id="fn_2780"></span>[421:2781](0020358.htm#fr_2780) <span
id="vi.iv.iv.vii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv.vii-p18"></span> \[He who studies the Sapiential
books of the Bible and Apocrypha and the Sermon on the Mount, is a
philosopher of the sort here commended.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX.—Christ’s Sayings Respecting Martyrdom.](0020359)
