[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020138)  [Next](0020140) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.iii.ii"></span>

##### <span id="iv.ii.iii.ii-p0.1"></span>Chapter II.—Profane Authors Had No Means of Knowing the Truth.

<span id="iv.ii.iii.ii-p1"></span>For it was fit that they who wrote
should themselves have been eye-witnesses of those things concerning
which they made assertions, or should accurately have ascertained them
from those who had seen them; for they who write of things unascertained
beat the air. For what did it profit Homer to have composed the Trojan
war, and to have deceived many; or Hesiod, the register of the theogony
of those whom he calls gods; or Orpheus, the three hundred and
sixty-five gods, whom in the end of his life he rejects, maintaining in
his precepts that there is one God? What profit did the sphærography of
the world’s circle confer on Aratus, or those who held the same doctrine
as he, except glory among men? And not even that did they reap as they
deserved. And what truth did they utter? Or what good did their
tragedies do to Euripides and Sophocles, or the other tragedians? Or
their comedies to Menander and Aristophanes, and the other comedians? Or
their histories to Herodotus and Thucydides? Or the shrines <span
id="fr_637"></span>[638](#fn_637) and the pillars of Hercules to
Pythagoras, or the Cynic philosophy to Diogenes? What good did it do
Epicurus to maintain that there is no providence; or Empedocles to teach
atheism; or Socrates to swear by the dog, and the goose, and the
plane-tree, and Æsculapius struck by lightning, and the demons whom he
invoked? And why did he willingly die? What reward, or of what kind, did
he expect to receive after death? What did Plato’s system of culture
profit him? Or what benefit did the *rest* of the philosophers derive
from their doctrines, not to enumerate the whole of them, since they are
numerous? But these things we say, for the purpose of exhibiting their
useless and godless opinions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_637"></span>[111:638](0020139.htm#fr_637) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.ii-p2"></span> While in Egypt, Pythagoras was
admitted to the penetralia of the temples and the arcana of religion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III.—Their Contradictions.](0020140)
