[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020047)  [Next](0020049) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.xii"></span>

##### <span id="iii.ii.xii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XII.—The Two Kinds of Spirits.

<span id="iii.ii.xii-p1"></span>We recognise two varieties of spirit,
one of which is called the soul <span id="fr_455"></span>[456](#fn_455)
(<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.ii.xii-p2.1"></span>ψυχή</span>), but
the other is greater than the soul, an image and likeness of God: both
existed in the first men, that in one sense they might be material
(<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.ii.xii-p2.2"></span>ὑλικοί</span>),
and in another superior to matter. The case stands thus: we can see that
the whole structure of the world, and the whole creation, has been
produced from matter, and the matter itself brought into existence <span
id="fr_456"></span>[457](#fn_456) by God; so that on the one hand it may
be regarded as rude and unformed before it was separated into parts, and
on the other as arranged in beauty and order after the separation was
made. Therefore in that separation the heavens were made of matter, and
the stars that are in them; and the earth and all that is upon it has a
similar constitution: so that there is a common origin of all things.
But, while such is the case, there yet are certain differences in the
things made of matter, so that one is more beautiful, and another is
beautiful but surpassed by something better. For as the constitution of
the body is under one management, and is engaged in doing that which is
the cause of its having been made, <span
id="fr_457"></span>[458](#fn_457) yet though this is the case, there are
certain differences of dignity in it, and the eye is one thing, and
another the ear, and another the arrangement of the hair and the
distribution of the intestines, and the compacting together of the
marrow and the bones and the tendons; and though one part differs from
another, there is yet all the harmony of a concert of music in their
arrangement;—in like manner the world, according to the power of its
Maker containing some things of superior splendour, but some unlike
these, received by the will of the Creator a material spirit. And these
things severally it is possible for him to perceive who does not
conceitedly reject those most divine explanations which in the course of
time have been consigned to writing, and make those who study them great
lovers of God. Therefore the demons, <span
id="fr_458"></span>[459](#fn_458) as you call them, having received
their structure from matter and obtained the spirit which inheres in it,
became intemperate and greedy; some few, indeed, turning to what was
purer, but others choosing what was inferior in matter, and conforming
their manner of life to it. These beings, produced from matter, but very
remote from right conduct, you, O Greeks, worship. For, being turned by
their own folly to vaingloriousness, and shaking off the reins \[of
authority\], they have been forward to become robbers of Deity; and the
Lord of all has suffered them to besport themselves, till the world,
coming to an end, be dissolved, and the Judge appear, and all those men
who, while assailed by the demons, strive after the knowledge of the
perfect God obtain as the result of their conflicts a more perfect
testimony in the day of judgment. There is, then, a spirit in the stars,
a spirit in angels, a spirit in plants and the waters, a spirit in men,
a spirit in animals; but, though one and the same, it has differences in
itself. <span id="fr_459"></span>[460](#fn_459) And while we say these
things not from mere hearsay, nor from probable conjectures and
sophistical reasoning, but using words of a certain diviner speech, do
you who are willing hasten to learn. And you who do not reject with
contempt the Scythian Anacharsis, do not disdain to be taught by those
who follow a barbaric code of laws. Give at least as favourable a
reception to our tenets as you would to the prognostications of the
Babylonians. Hearken to us when we speak, if only as you would to an
oracular oak. And yet the things just referred to are the trickeries of
frenzied demons, while the doctrines we inculcate are far beyond the
apprehension of the world.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_455"></span>[70:456](0020048.htm#fr_455) <span
id="iii.ii.xii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xii-p2"></span> \[See cap. xv., *infra*.\]

<span id="fn_456"></span>[70:457](0020048.htm#fr_456) <span
id="iii.ii.xii-p2.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xii-p3"></span> Literally, “brought forth” or
“forward.” The word does not imply that matter was created by God.

<span id="fn_457"></span>[70:458](0020048.htm#fr_457) <span
id="iii.ii.xii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xii-p4"></span> Tatian’s words are somewhat obscure. We
have given substantially the opinion of Worth, as expressed in his
translation. The sense is: The body is evidently a unity in its
organization and its activity, and the ultimate end which it serves in
creation is that with which it is occupied, yet there are differences in
respect of the parts. Otto renders: “For as the constitution of the body
is of one plan, and in reference to the body the cause of its origin is
occupied.”

<span id="fn_458"></span>[70:459](0020048.htm#fr_458) <span
id="iii.ii.xii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xii-p5"></span> \[*Demons.* The Paris editors have a
note here, bidding us to read with caution; as our author seems rashly
to imagine the demons to be material creatures. p. 151, ed. 1615.\]

<span id="fn_459"></span>[70:460](0020048.htm#fr_459) <span
id="iii.ii.xii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xii-p6"></span> \[“Which, though one and the same, is
thus variously modified.” Kaye’s rendering in his *Justin*, p. 184.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII. Theory of the Soul’s Immortality.](0020049)
