[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020293)  [Next](0020295) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.i.i"></span>

##### <span id="vi.iv.i.i-p0.1"></span>Chapter I.—Preface—The Author’s Object—The Utility of Written Compositions. <span id="fr_1796"></span>[1797](#fn_1796)

<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p2"></span>\[*Wants the beginning*\] .  .  .  .  . 
.  .  .  .  .  that you may read them under your hand, and may be able
to preserve them. Whether written compositions are not to be left behind
at all; or if they are, by whom? And if the former, what need there is
for written compositions? and if the latter, is the composition of them
to be assigned to earnest men, or the opposite? It were certainly
ridiculous for one to disapprove of the writing of earnest men, and
approve of those, who are not such, engaging in the work of composition.
Theopompus and Timæus, who composed fables and slanders, and Epicurus
the leader of atheism, and Hipponax and Archilochus, are to be allowed
to write in their own shameful manner. But he who proclaims the truth is
to be prevented from leaving behind him what is to benefit posterity. It
is a good thing, I reckon, to leave to posterity good children. This is
the case with children of our bodies. But words are the progeny of the
soul. Hence we call those who have instructed us, fathers. Wisdom is a
communicative and philanthropic thing. Accordingly, Solomon says, “My
son, if thou receive the saying of my commandment, and hide it with
thee, thine ear shall hear wisdom.” <span
id="fr_1797"></span>[1798](#fn_1797) He points out that the word that is
sown is hidden in the soul of the learner, as in the earth, and this is
spiritual planting. Wherefore also he adds, “And thou shalt apply thine
heart to understanding, and apply it for the admonition of thy son.” For
soul, methinks, joined with soul, and spirit with spirit, in the sowing
of the word, will make that which is sown grow and germinate. And every
one who is instructed, is in respect of subjection the son of his
instructor. “Son,” says he, “forget not my laws.” <span
id="fr_1798"></span>[1799](#fn_1798)

<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p5"></span>And if knowledge belong not to all (set
an ass to the lyre, as the proverb goes), yet written compositions are
for the many. “Swine, for instance, delight in dirt more than in clean
water.” “Wherefore,” says the Lord, “I speak to them in parables:
because seeing, they see not; and hearing, they hear not, and do not
understand;” <span id="fr_1799"></span>[1800](#fn_1799) not as if the
Lord caused the ignorance: for it were impious to think so. But He
prophetically exposed this ignorance, that existed in them, and
intimated that they would not understand the things spoken. And now the
Saviour shows Himself, out of His abundance, dispensing goods to His
servants according to the ability of the recipient, that they may
augment them by exercising activity, and then returning to reckon with
them; when, approving of those that had increased His money, those
faithful in little, and commanding them to have the charge over many
things, He bade them enter into the joy of the Lord. But to him who had
hid the money, entrusted to him to be given out at interest, and had
given it back as he had received it, without increase, He said, “Thou
wicked and slothful servant, thou oughtest to have given my money to the
bankers, and at my coming I should have received mine own.” Wherefore
the useless servant “shall be cast into outer darkness.” <span
id="fr_1800"></span>[1801](#fn_1800) “Thou, therefore, be strong,” says
Paul, “in the grace that is in Christ Jesus. And the things which thou
hast heard of me among many witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful
men, who shall be able to teach others also.” <span
id="fr_1801"></span>[1802](#fn_1801) And again: “Study to show thyself
approved unto God, a workman that needeth not to be ashamed, rightly
dividing the word of truth.”

<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p9"></span>If, then, both proclaim the Word—the one
<span id="page_300">p. 300</span> <span
id="vi.iv.i.i-Page_300"></span>by writing, the other by speech—are not
both then to be approved, making, as they do, faith active by love? It
is by one’s own fault that he does not choose what is best; God is free
of blame. As to the point in hand, it is the business of some to lay out
the word at interest, and of others to test it, and either choose it or
not. And the judgment is determined within themselves. But there is that
species of knowledge which is characteristic of the herald, and that
which is, as it were, characteristic of a messenger, and it is
serviceable in whatever way it operates, both by the hand and tongue.
“For he that soweth to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap life
everlasting. And let us not be weary in well-doing.” <span
id="fr_1802"></span>[1803](#fn_1802) On him who by Divine Providence
meets in with it, it confers the very highest advantages,—the beginning
of faith, readiness for adopting a right mode of life, the impulse
towards the truth, a movement of inquiry, a trace of knowledge; in a
word, it gives the means of salvation. And those who have been rightly
reared in the words of truth, and received provision for eternal life,
wing their way to heaven. Most admirably, therefore, the apostle says,
“In everything approving ourselves as the servants of God; as poor, and
yet making many rich; as having nothing, yet possessing all things. Our
mouth is opened to you.” <span id="fr_1803"></span>[1804](#fn_1803) “I
charge thee,” he says, writing to Timothy, “before God, and Christ
Jesus, and the elect angels, that thou observe these things, without
preferring one before another, doing nothing by partiality.” <span
id="fr_1804"></span>[1805](#fn_1804)

<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p13"></span>Both must therefore test themselves: the
one, if he is qualified to speak and leave behind him written records;
the other, if he is in a right state to hear and read: as also some in
the dispensation of the Eucharist, according to <span
id="fr_1805"></span>[1806](#fn_1805) custom enjoin that each one of the
people individually should take his part. One’s own conscience is best
for choosing accurately or shunning. And its firm foundation is a right
life, with suitable instruction. But the imitation of those who have
already been proved, and who have led correct lives, is most excellent
for the understanding and practice of the commandments. “So that
whosoever shall eat the bread and drink the cup of the Lord unworthily,
shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord. But let a man examine
himself, and so let him eat of the bread and drink of the cup.” <span
id="fr_1806"></span>[1807](#fn_1806) It therefore follows, that every
one of those who undertake to promote the good of their neighbours,
ought to consider whether he has betaken himself to teaching rashly and
out of rivalry to any; if his communication of the word is out of
vainglory; if the the only reward he reaps is the salvation of those who
hear, and if he speaks not in order to win favour: if so, he who speaks
by writings escapes the reproach of mercenary motives. “For neither at
any time used we flattering words, as ye know,” says the apostle, “nor a
cloak of covetousness. God is witness. Nor of men sought we glory,
neither of you, nor yet of others, when we might have been burdensome as
the apostles of Christ. But we were gentle among you, even as a nurse
cherisheth her children.” <span id="fr_1807"></span>[1808](#fn_1807)

<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p17"></span>In the same way, therefore, those who
take part in the divine words, ought to guard against betaking
themselves to this, as they would to the building of cities, to examine
them out of curiosity; that they do not come to the task for the sake of
receiving worldly things, having ascertained that they who are
consecrated to Christ are given to communicate the necessaries of life.
But let such be dismissed as hypocrites. But if any one wishes not to
seem, but to be righteous, to him it belongs to know the things which
are best. If, then, “the harvest is plenteous, but the labourers few,”
it is incumbent on us “to pray” that there may be as great abundance of
labourers as possible. <span id="fr_1808"></span>[1809](#fn_1808)

<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p19"></span>But the husbandry is twofold,—the one
unwritten, and the other written. And in whatever way the Lord’s
labourer sow the good wheat, and grow and reap the ears, he shall appear
a truly divine husbandman. “Labour,” says the Lord, “not for the meat
which perisheth, but for that which endureth to everlasting life.” <span
id="fr_1809"></span>[1810](#fn_1809) And nutriment is received both by
bread and by words. And truly “blessed are the peace-makers,” <span
id="fr_1810"></span>[1811](#fn_1810) who instructing those who are at
war in their life and errors here, lead them back to the peace which is
in the Word, and nourish for the life which is according to God, by the
distribution of the bread, those “that hunger after righteousness.” For
each soul has its own proper nutriment; some growing by knowledge and
science, and others feeding on the Hellenic philosophy, the whole of
which, like nuts, is not eatable. “And he that planteth and he that
watereth,” “being ministers” of Him “that gives the increase, are one”
in the ministry. “But every one shall receive his own reward, according
to his own work. For we are God’s husbandmen, God’s husbandry. Ye are
God’s building,” <span id="fr_1811"></span>[1812](#fn_1811) according to
the apostle. Wherefore the hearers are not permitted to apply the test
of comparison. Nor is the word, given for investigation, to be committed
to those who have been reared in the arts of all kinds of words, and in
the power of inflated attempts at proof; whose <span id="page_301">p.
301</span> <span id="vi.iv.i.i-Page_301"></span>minds are already
pre-occupied, and have not been previously emptied. But whoever chooses
to banquet on faith, is stedfast for the reception of the divine words,
having acquired already faith as a power of judging, according to
reason. Hence ensues to him persuasion in abundance. And this was the
meaning of that saying of prophecy, “If ye believe not, neither shall ye
understand.” <span id="fr_1812"></span>[1813](#fn_1812) “As, then, we
have opportunity, let us do good to all, especially to the household of
faith.” <span id="fr_1813"></span>[1814](#fn_1813) And let each of
these, according to the blessed David, sing, giving thanks. “Thou shalt
sprinkle me with hyssop, and I shall be cleansed. Thou shalt wash me,
and I shall be whiter than the snow. Thou shalt make me to hear gladness
and joy, and the bones which have been humbled shall rejoice. Turn Thy
face from my sins. Blot out mine iniquities. Create in me a clean heart,
O God, and renew a right spirit in my inward parts. Cast me not away
from Thy face, and take not Thy Holy Spirit from me. Restore to me the
joy of Thy salvation, and establish me with Thy princely spirit.” <span
id="fr_1814"></span>[1815](#fn_1814)

<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p26"></span>He who addresses those who are present
before him, both tests them by time, and judges by his judgment, and
from the others distinguishes him who can hear; watching the words, the
manners, the habits, the life, the motions, the attitudes, the look, the
voice; the road, the rock, the beaten path, the fruitful land, the
wooded region, the fertile and fair and cultivated spot, that is able to
multiply the seed. But he that speaks through books, consecrates himself
before God, crying in writing thus: Not for gain, not for vainglory, not
to be vanquished by partiality, nor enslaved by fear nor elated by
pleasure; but only to reap the salvation of those who read, which he
does, not at present participate in, but awaiting in expectation the
recompense which will certainly be rendered by Him, who has promised to
bestow on the labourers the reward that is meet. But he who is enrolled
in the number of men <span id="fr_1815"></span>[1816](#fn_1815) ought
not to desire recompense. For he that vaunts his good services, receives
glory as his reward. And he who does any duty for the sake of
recompense, is he not held fast in the custom of the world, either as
one who has done well, hastening to receive a reward, or as an evil-doer
avoiding retribution? We must, as far as we can, imitate the Lord. And
he will do so, who complies with the will of God, receiving freely,
giving freely, and receiving as a worthy reward the citizenship itself.
“The hire of an harlot shall not come into the sanctuary,” it is said:
accordingly it was forbidden to bring to the altar the price of a dog.
And in whomsoever the eye of the soul has been blinded by ill-nurture
and teaching, let him advance to the true light, to the truth, which
shows by writing the things that are unwritten. “Ye that thirst, go to
the waters,” <span id="fr_1816"></span>[1817](#fn_1816) says Esaias. And
“drink water from thine own vessels,” <span
id="fr_1817"></span>[1818](#fn_1817) Solomon exhorts. Accordingly in
“The Laws,” the philosopher who learned from the Hebrews, Plato,
commands husbandmen not to irrigate or take water from others, until
they have first dug down in their own ground to what is called the
virgin soil, and found it dry. For it is right to supply want, but it is
not well to support laziness. For Pythagoras said that, “although it be
agreeable to reason to take a share of a burden, it is not a duty to
take it away.”

<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p30"></span>Now the Scripture kindles the living
spark of the soul, and directs the eye suitably for contemplation;
perchance inserting something, as the husbandman when he ingrafts, but,
according to the opinion of the divine apostle, exciting what is in the
soul. “For there are certainly among us many weak and sickly, and many
sleep. But if we judge ourselves, we shall not be judged.” <span
id="fr_1818"></span>[1819](#fn_1818) Now this work of mine in writing is
not artfully constructed for display; but my memoranda are stored up
against old age, as a remedy against forgetfulness, truly an image and
outline of those vigorous and animated discourses which I was privileged
to hear, and of blessed and truly remarkable men.

<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p32"></span>Of these the one, in Greece, an
Ionic; <span id="fr_1819"></span>[1820](#fn_1819) the other in Magna
Græcia: the first of these from Cœle-Syria, the second from Egypt, and
others in the East. The one was born in the land of Assyria, and the
other a Hebrew in Palestine.

<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p34"></span>When I came upon the last <span
id="fr_1820"></span>[1821](#fn_1820) (he was the first in power), having
tracked him out concealed in Egypt, I found rest. He, the true, the
Sicilian bee, gathering the spoil of the flowers of the prophetic and
apostolic meadow, engendered in the souls of his hearers a deathless
element of knowledge.

<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p36"></span>Well, they preserving the tradition of
the blessed doctrine derived directly from the holy apostles, Peter,
James, John, and Paul, the sons receiving it from the father (but few
were like the fathers), came by God’s will to us also to deposit those
ancestral and apostolic seeds. And well I know that they will exult; I
do not mean delighted with this tribute, but solely on account of the
preservation of the truth, according as they delivered it. For such a
sketch as this, will, I think, be agreeable to a soul desirous of
preserving from escape the blessed tradition. <span
id="fr_1821"></span>[1822](#fn_1821) <span id="page_302">p. 302</span>
<span id="vi.iv.i.i-Page_302"></span>“In a man who loves wisdom the
father will be glad.” <span id="fr_1822"></span>[1823](#fn_1822) Wells,
when pumped out, yield purer water; and that of which no one partakes,
turns to putrefaction. Use keeps steel brighter, but disuse produces
rust in it. For, in a word, exercise produces a healthy condition both
in souls and bodies. “No one lighteth a candle, and putteth it under a
bushel, but upon a candlestick, that it may give light to those who are
regarded worthy of the feast.” <span
id="fr_1823"></span>[1824](#fn_1823) For what is the use of wisdom, if
it makes not him who can hear it wise? For still the Saviour saves, “and
always works, as He sees the Father.” <span
id="fr_1824"></span>[1825](#fn_1824) For by teaching, one learns more;
and in speaking, one is often a hearer along with his audience. For the
teacher of him who speaks and of him who hears is one—who waters both
the mind and the word. Thus the Lord did not hinder from doing good
while keeping the Sabbath; <span id="fr_1825"></span>[1826](#fn_1825)
but allowed us to communicate of those divine mysteries, and of that
holy light, to those who are able to receive them. He did not certainly
disclose to the many what did not belong to the many; but to the few to
whom He knew that they belonged, who were capable of receiving and being
moulded according to them. But secret things are entrusted to speech,
not to writing, as is the case with God. <span
id="fr_1826"></span>[1827](#fn_1826)

<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p43"></span>And if one say that it is written,
“There is nothing secret which shall not be revealed, nor hidden which
shall not be disclosed,” <span id="fr_1827"></span>[1828](#fn_1827) let
him also hear from us, that to him who hears secretly, even what is
secret shall be manifested. This is what was predicted by this oracle.
And to him who is able secretly to observe what is delivered to him,
that which is veiled shall be disclosed as truth; and what is hidden to
the many, shall appear manifest to the few. For why do not all know the
truth? why is not righteousness loved, if righteousness belongs to all?
But the mysteries are delivered mystically, that what is spoken may be
in the mouth of the speaker; rather not in his voice, but in his
understanding. “God gave to the Church, some apostles, and some
prophets, and some evangelists, and some pastors and teachers, for the
perfecting of the saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying
of the body of Christ.” <span id="fr_1828"></span>[1829](#fn_1828)

<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p46"></span>The writing of these memoranda of mine,
I well know, is weak when compared with that spirit, full of grace,
which I was privileged to hear. <span
id="fr_1829"></span>[1830](#fn_1829) But it will be an image to recall
the archetype to him who was struck with the thyrsus. For “speak,” it is
said, “to a wise man, and he will grow wiser; and to him that hath, and
there shall be added to him.” And we profess not to explain secret
things sufficiently—far from it—but only to recall them to memory,
whether we have forgot aught, or whether for the purpose of not
forgetting. Many things, I well know, have escaped us, through length of
time, that have dropped away unwritten. Whence, to aid the weakness of
my memory, and provide for myself a salutary help to my recollection in
a systematic arrangement of chapters, I necessarily make use of this
form. There are then some things of which we have no recollection; for
the power that was in the blessed men was great. <span
id="fr_1830"></span>[1831](#fn_1830) There are also some things which
remained unnoted long, which have now escaped; and others which are
effaced, having faded away in the mind itself, since such a task is not
easy to those not experienced; these I revive in my commentaries. Some
things I purposely omit, in the exercise of a wise selection, afraid to
write what I guarded against speaking: not grudging—for that were
wrong—but fearing for my readers, lest they should stumble by taking
them in a wrong sense; and, as the proverb says, we should be found
“reaching a sword to a child.” For it is impossible that what has been
written should not escape, although remaining unpublished by me. But
being always revolved, using the one only voice, that of writing, they
answer nothing to him that makes inquiries beyond what is written; for
they require of necessity the aid of some one, either of him who wrote,
or of some one else who has walked in his footsteps. Some things my
treatise will hint; on some it will linger; some it will merely mention.
It will try to speak imperceptibly, to exhibit secretly, and to
demonstrate silently. The dogmas taught by remarkable sects will be
adduced; and to these will be opposed all that ought to be premised in
accordance with the profoundest contemplation of the knowledge, which,
as we proceed to the renowned and venerable canon of tradition, from the
creation of the world, <span id="fr_1831"></span>[1832](#fn_1831) will
advance to our view; setting before us what according to natural
contemplation necessarily has to be treated of beforehand, and clearing
off what stands in the way of this arrangement. So that we may have our
ears ready for the reception of the tradition of true knowledge; the
soil being previously cleared of the thorns and of every weed by the
husbandman, in order to the planting of the vine. For there is a
contest, and the prelude to the contest; and there are some mysteries
before other mysteries.

<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p50"></span>Our book will not shrink from making use
of what is best in philosophy and other preparatory <span
id="page_303">p. 303</span> <span
id="vi.iv.i.i-Page_303"></span>instruction. “For not only for the
Hebrews and those that are under the law,” according to the apostle, “is
it right to become a Jew, but also a Greek for the sake of the Greeks,
that we may gain all.” <span id="fr_1832"></span>[1833](#fn_1832) Also
in the Epistle to the Colossians he writes, “Admonishing every man, and
teaching every man in all wisdom, that we may present every man perfect
in Christ.” <span id="fr_1833"></span>[1834](#fn_1833) The nicety of
speculation, too, suits the sketch presented in my commentaries. In this
respect the resources of learning are like a relish mixed with the food
of an athlete, who is not indulging in luxury, but entertains a noble
desire for distinction.

<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p53"></span>By music we harmoniously relax the
excessive tension of gravity. And as those who wish to address the
people, do so often by the herald, that what is said may be better
heard; so also in this case. For we have the word, that was spoken to
many, before the common tradition. Wherefore we must set forth the
opinions and utterances which cried individually to them, by which those
who hear shall more readily turn.

<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p54"></span>And, in truth, to speak briefly: Among
many small pearls there is the one; and in a great take of fish there is
the beauty-fish; and by time and toil truth will gleam forth, if a good
helper is at hand. For most benefits are supplied, from God, through
men. All of us who make use of our eyes see what is presented before
them. But some look at objects for one reason, others for another. For
instance, the cook and the shepherd do not survey the sheep similarly:
for the one examines it if it be fat; the other watches to see if it be
of good breed. Let a man milk the sheep’s milk if he need sustenance:
let him shear the wool if he need clothing. And in this way let me
produce the fruit of the Greek erudition. <span
id="fr_1834"></span>[1835](#fn_1834)

<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p56"></span>For I do not imagine that any
composition can be so fortunate as that no one will speak against it.
But that is to be regarded as in accordance with reason, which nobody
speaks against, with reason. And that course of action and choice is to
be approved, not which is faultless, but which no one rationally finds
fault with. For it does not follow, that if a man accomplishes anything
not purposely, he does it through force of circumstances. But he will do
it, managing it by wisdom divinely given, and in accommodation to
circumstances. For it is not he who has virtue that needs the way to
virtue, any more than he, that is strong, needs recovery. For, like
farmers who irrigate the land beforehand, so we also water with the
liquid stream of Greek learning what in it is earthy; so that it may
receive the spiritual seed cast into it, and may be capable of easily
nourishing it. The *Stromata* will contain the truth mixed up in the
dogmas of philosophy, or rather covered over and hidden, as the edible
part of the nut in the shell. For, in my opinion, it is fitting that the
seeds of truth be kept for the husbandmen of faith, and no others. I am
not oblivious of what is babbled by some, who in their ignorance are
frightened at every noise, and say that we ought to occupy ourselves
with what is most necessary, and which contains the faith; and that we
should pass over what is beyond and superfluous, which wears out and
detains us to no purpose, in things which conduce nothing to the great
end. Others think that philosophy was introduced into life by an evil
influence, for the ruin of men, by an evil inventor. But I shall show,
throughout the whole of these *Stromata*, that evil has an evil nature,
and can never turn out the producer of aught that is good; indicating
that philosophy is in a sense a work of Divine Providence. <span
id="fr_1835"></span>[1836](#fn_1835)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1796"></span>[299:1797](0020294.htm#fr_1796) <span
id="vi.iv.i.i-p0.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p1"></span> \[It is impossible to illustrate the
*Stromata* by needed notes, on the plan of this publication. It would
double the size of the work, and require time and such scholorship as
belongs to experts. Important matters are briefly discussed at the end
of each book. Elucidation I.\]

<span id="fn_1797"></span>[299:1798](0020294.htm#fr_1797) <span
id="vi.iv.i.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p3"></span> [Prov.
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#002)<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1798"></span>[299:1799](0020294.htm#fr_1798) <span
id="vi.iv.i.i-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p4"></span> [Prov. iii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#001)<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1799"></span>[299:1800](0020294.htm#fr_1799) <span
id="vi.iv.i.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p6"></span> [Matt. xiii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#013)<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1800"></span>[299:1801](0020294.htm#fr_1800) <span
id="vi.iv.i.i-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p7"></span> [Matt. xviii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#032)<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p7.1"></span>;
[Luke xix. 22](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#022)<span
id="vi.iv.i.i-p7.2"></span>; [Matt. xxv.
30](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#030)<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p7.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_1801"></span>[299:1802](0020294.htm#fr_1801) <span
id="vi.iv.i.i-p7.4"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p8"></span> [2 Tim.
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#002)<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1802"></span>[300:1803](0020294.htm#fr_1802) <span
id="vi.iv.i.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p10"></span> [Gal.
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#009)<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1803"></span>[300:1804](0020294.htm#fr_1803) <span
id="vi.iv.i.i-p10.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p11"></span> [2 Cor.
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#004),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#011)<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1804"></span>[300:1805](0020294.htm#fr_1804) <span
id="vi.iv.i.i-p11.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p12"></span> [1 Tim. v.
21](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#021)<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1805"></span>[300:1806](0020294.htm#fr_1805) <span
id="vi.iv.i.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p14"></span> \[To be noted as apparently allowed,
yet exceptionally so.\]

<span id="fn_1806"></span>[300:1807](0020294.htm#fr_1806) <span
id="vi.iv.i.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p15"></span> [1 Cor.
11:27](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#027),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#028)<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1807"></span>[300:1808](0020294.htm#fr_1807) <span
id="vi.iv.i.i-p15.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p16"></span> [1 Thess.
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#007)<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1808"></span>[300:1809](0020294.htm#fr_1808) <span
id="vi.iv.i.i-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p18"></span> [Matt.
9:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#037),
[38](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#038)<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p18.1"></span>;
[Luke x. 2](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#002)<span
id="vi.iv.i.i-p18.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_1809"></span>[300:1810](0020294.htm#fr_1809) <span
id="vi.iv.i.i-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p20"></span> [John vi.
27](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#027)<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1810"></span>[300:1811](0020294.htm#fr_1810) <span
id="vi.iv.i.i-p20.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p21"></span> [Matt. v.
9](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#009)<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1811"></span>[300:1812](0020294.htm#fr_1811) <span
id="vi.iv.i.i-p21.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p22"></span> [1 Cor.
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#009)<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1812"></span>[301:1813](0020294.htm#fr_1812) <span
id="vi.iv.i.i-p22.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p23"></span> [Isa. vii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#009)<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1813"></span>[301:1814](0020294.htm#fr_1813) <span
id="vi.iv.i.i-p23.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p24"></span> [Gal. vi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#010)<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1814"></span>[301:1815](0020294.htm#fr_1814) <span
id="vi.iv.i.i-p24.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p25"></span> [Ps. li.
7-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#007)<span
id="vi.iv.i.i-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1815"></span>[301:1816](0020294.htm#fr_1815) <span
id="vi.iv.i.i-p26.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p27"></span> i.e., perfect men.

<span id="fn_1816"></span>[301:1817](0020294.htm#fr_1816) <span
id="vi.iv.i.i-p27.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p28"></span> [Isa. lv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#001)<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1817"></span>[301:1818](0020294.htm#fr_1817) <span
id="vi.iv.i.i-p28.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p29"></span> [Prov. v.
15](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#015)<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1818"></span>[301:1819](0020294.htm#fr_1818) <span
id="vi.iv.i.i-p30.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p31"></span> [1 Cor.
11:31](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#031),
[32](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#032)<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p31.1"></span>.
“You” is the reading of New Testament.

<span id="fn_1819"></span>[301:1820](0020294.htm#fr_1819) <span
id="vi.iv.i.i-p32.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p33"></span> The first probably Tatian, the second
Theodotus.

<span id="fn_1820"></span>[301:1821](0020294.htm#fr_1820) <span
id="vi.iv.i.i-p34.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p35"></span> Most likely Pantænus, master of the
catechetical school in Alexandria, and the teacher of Clement.
\[Elucidation II.\]

<span id="fn_1821"></span>[301:1822](0020294.htm#fr_1821) <span
id="vi.iv.i.i-p36.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p37"></span> \[See Elucidation III., *infra*.\]

<span id="fn_1822"></span>[302:1823](0020294.htm#fr_1822) <span
id="vi.iv.i.i-p37.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p38"></span> [Prov. xxix.
3](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#003)<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1823"></span>[302:1824](0020294.htm#fr_1823) <span
id="vi.iv.i.i-p38.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p39"></span> [Matt. v.
15](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#015)<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p39.1"></span>;
[Mark. iv. 21](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#021)<span
id="vi.iv.i.i-p39.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_1824"></span>[302:1825](0020294.htm#fr_1824) <span
id="vi.iv.i.i-p39.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p40"></span> [John
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#017),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#019)<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1825"></span>[302:1826](0020294.htm#fr_1825) <span
id="vi.iv.i.i-p40.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p41"></span> \[This reference to the Jewish Sabbath
to be noted in connection with what Clement says elsewhere.\]

<span id="fn_1826"></span>[302:1827](0020294.htm#fr_1826) <span
id="vi.iv.i.i-p41.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p42"></span> \[See Elucidation IV., *infra*.\]

<span id="fn_1827"></span>[302:1828](0020294.htm#fr_1827) <span
id="vi.iv.i.i-p43.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p44"></span> [Luke viii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#017)<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p44.1"></span>,
xii. 2.

<span id="fn_1828"></span>[302:1829](0020294.htm#fr_1828) <span
id="vi.iv.i.i-p44.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p45"></span> [Eph.
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#012)<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1829"></span>[302:1830](0020294.htm#fr_1829) <span
id="vi.iv.i.i-p46.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p47"></span> \[An affectionate reference to Pantænus
and his other masters.\]

<span id="fn_1830"></span>[302:1831](0020294.htm#fr_1830) <span
id="vi.iv.i.i-p47.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p48"></span> \[An affectionate reference to Pantænus
and his other masters.\]

<span id="fn_1831"></span>[302:1832](0020294.htm#fr_1831) <span
id="vi.iv.i.i-p48.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p49"></span> \[See Elucidation V., *infra*.\]

<span id="fn_1832"></span>[303:1833](0020294.htm#fr_1832) <span
id="vi.iv.i.i-p50.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p51"></span> [1 Cor.
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#021)<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1833"></span>[303:1834](0020294.htm#fr_1833) <span
id="vi.iv.i.i-p51.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p52"></span> [Col. i.
28](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#028)<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1834"></span>[303:1835](0020294.htm#fr_1834) <span
id="vi.iv.i.i-p54.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p55"></span> \[Every reference of our author to his
use of Greek learning and (eclectic) philosophy, is important in
questions about his orthodoxy.\]

<span id="fn_1835"></span>[303:1836](0020294.htm#fr_1835) <span
id="vi.iv.i.i-p56.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.i-p57"></span> \[Every reference of our author to his
use of Greek learning and (eclectic) philosophy, is important in
questions about his orthodoxy.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II.—Objection to the Number of Extracts from
Philosophical Writings in These Books Anticipated and
Answered.](0020295)
