[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020307)  [Next](0020309) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.i.xv"></span>

##### <span id="vi.iv.i.xv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XV.—The Greek Philosophy in Great Part Derived from the Barbarians.

<span id="vi.iv.i.xv-p1"></span>These are the times of the oldest wise
men and philosophers among the Greeks. And that the most of them were
barbarians by extraction, and were trained among barbarians, what need
is there to say? Pythagoras is shown to have been either a Tuscan or a
Tyrian. And Antisthenes was a Phrygian. And Orpheus was an Odrysian or a
Thracian. The most, too, show Homer to have been an Egyptian. Thales was
a Phœnician by birth, and was said to have consorted with the prophets
of the Egyptians; as also Pythagoras did with the same persons, by whom
he was circumcised, that he might enter the adytum and learn from the
Egyptians the mystic philosophy. He held converse with the chief of the
Chaldeans and the Magi; and he gave a hint of the church, now so called,
in the common hall <span id="fr_1959"></span>[1960](#fn_1959) which he
maintained.

<span id="vi.iv.i.xv-p3"></span>And Plato does not deny that he procured
all that is most excellent in philosophy from the barbarians; and he
admits that he came into Egypt. Whence, writing in the Phœdo that the
philosopher can receive aid from all sides, he said: “Great indeed is
Greece, O Cebes, in which everywhere there are good men, and many are
the races of the barbarians.” <span id="fr_1960"></span>[1961](#fn_1960)
Thus Plato thinks that some of the barbarians, too, are philosophers.
But Epicurus, on the other hand, supposes that only Greeks can
philosophise. And in the *Symposium*, Plato, landing the barbarians as
practising philosophy with conspicuous excellence, <span
id="fr_1961"></span>[1962](#fn_1961) truly says: “And in many other
instances both among Greeks and barbarians, whose temples reared for
such sons are already numerous.” And it is clear that the barbarians
signally honoured their lawgivers and teachers, designating them gods.
For, according to Plato, “they think that good souls, on quitting the
super-celestial region, submit to come to this Tartarus; and assuming a
body, share in all the ills which are involved in birth, from their
solicitude for the race of men;” and these make laws and publish
philosophy, “than which no greater boon ever came from the gods to the
race of men, or will come.” <span id="fr_1962"></span>[1963](#fn_1962)

<span id="vi.iv.i.xv-p7"></span>And as appears to me, it was in
consequence of perceiving the great benefit which is conferred through
wise men, that the men themselves were honoured and philosophy
cultivated publicly by all the Brahmins, and the Odrysi, and the Getæ.
And such were strictly deified by the race of the Egyptians, by the
Chaldeans and the Arabians, called the Happy, and those that inhabited
Palestine, by not the least portion of the Persian race, and by
innumerable other races besides these. And it is well known that Plato
is found perpetually celebrating the barbarians, remembering that both
himself and Pythagoras learned the most and the noblest of their dogmas
among the barbarians. Wherefore he also called the races of the
barbarians, “races of barbarian philosophers,” recognising, in the
Phœdrus, the Egyptian king, and shows him to us wiser than Theut, whom
he knew to be Hermes. But in the Charmides, it is manifest that he knew
certain Thracians who were said to make the soul immortal. And
Pythagoras is reported to have been a disciple of Sonches the Egyptian
arch-prophet; and Plato, of Sechnuphis of Heliopolis; and Eudoxus, of
Cnidius of Konuphis, who was also an Egyptian. And in his book, *On the
Soul,* <span id="fr_1963"></span>[1964](#fn_1963) Plato again manifestly
recognises prophecy, when he introduces a prophet announcing <span
id="page_316">p. 316</span> <span id="vi.iv.i.xv-Page_316"></span>the
word of Lachesis, uttering predictions to the souls whose destiny is
becoming fixed. And in the *Timæus* he introduces Solon, the very wise,
learning from the barbarian. The substance of the declaration is to the
following effect: “O Solon, Solon, you Greeks are always children. And
no Greek is an old man. For you have no learning that is hoary with
age.” <span id="fr_1964"></span>[1965](#fn_1964)

<span id="vi.iv.i.xv-p10"></span>Democritus appropriated the Babylonian
ethic discourses, for he is said to have combined with his own
compositions a translation of the column of Acicarus. <span
id="fr_1965"></span>[1966](#fn_1965) And you may find the distinction
notified by him when he writes, “Thus says Democritus.” About himself,
too, where, pluming himself on his erudition, he says, “I have roamed
over the most ground of any man of my time, investigating the most
remote parts. I have seen the most skies and lands, and I have heard of
learned men in very great numbers. And in composition no one has
surpassed me; in demonstration, not even those among the Egyptians who
are called Arpenodaptæ, with all of whom I lived in exile up to eighty
years.” For he went to Babylon, and Persis, and Egypt, to learn from the
Magi and the priests.

<span id="vi.iv.i.xv-p12"></span>Zoroaster the Magus, Pythagoras showed
to be a Persian. Of the secret books of this man, those who follow the
heresy of Prodicus boast to be in possession. Alexander, in his book *On
the Pythagorean Symbols*, relates that Pythagoras was a pupil of
Nazaratus the Assyrian <span id="fr_1966"></span>[1967](#fn_1966) (some
think that he is Ezekiel; but he is not, as will afterwards be shown),
and will have it that, in addition to these, Pythagoras was a hearer of
the Galatæ and the Brahmins. Clearchus the Peripatetic says that he knew
a Jew who associated with Aristotle. <span
id="fr_1967"></span>[1968](#fn_1967) Heraclitus says that, not humanly,
but rather by God’s aid, the Sibyl spoke. <span
id="fr_1968"></span>[1969](#fn_1968) They say, accordingly, that at
Delphi a stone was shown beside the oracle, on which, it is said, sat
the first Sibyl, who came from Helicon, and had been reared by the
Muses. But some say that she came from Milea, being the daughter of
Lamia of Sidon. <span id="fr_1969"></span>[1970](#fn_1969) And Serapion,
in his epic verses, says that the Sibyl, even when dead, ceased not from
divination. And he writes that, what proceeded from her into the air
after her death, was what gave oracular utterances in voices and omens;
and on her body being changed into earth, and the grass as natural
growing out of it, whatever beasts happening to be in that place fed on
it exhibited to men an accurate knowledge of futurity by their entrails.
He thinks also, that the face seen in the moon is her soul. So much for
the Sibyl.

<span id="vi.iv.i.xv-p17"></span>Numa the king of the Romans was a
Pythagorean, and aided by the precepts of Moses, prohibited from making
an image of God in human form, and of the shape of a living creature.
Accordingly, during the first hundred and seventy years, though building
temples, they made no cast or graven image. For Numa secretly showed
them that the Best of Beings could not be apprehended except by the mind
alone. Thus philosophy, a thing of the highest utility, flourished in
antiquity among the barbarians, shedding its light over the nations. And
afterwards it came to Greece. First in its ranks were the prophets of
the Egyptians; and the Chaldeans among the Assyrians; and the Druids
among the Gauls; and the Samanæans among the Bactrians; and the
philosophers of the Celts; and the Magi of the Persians, who foretold
the Saviour’s birth, and came into the land of Judæa guided by a star.
The Indian gymnosophists are also in the number, and the other barbarian
philosophers. And of these there are two classes, some of them called
Sarmanæ, <span id="fr_1970"></span>[1971](#fn_1970) and others Brahmins.
And those of the Sarmanæ who are called Hylobii <span
id="fr_1971"></span>[1972](#fn_1971) neither inhabit cities, nor have
roofs over them, but are clothed in the bark of trees, feed on nuts, and
drink water in their hands. Like those called Encratites in the present
day, they know not marriage nor begetting of children.

<span id="vi.iv.i.xv-p20"></span>Some, too, of the Indians obey the
precepts of Buddha; <span id="fr_1972"></span>[1973](#fn_1972) whom, on
account of his extraordinary sanctity, they have raised to divine
honours.

<span id="vi.iv.i.xv-p22"></span>Anacharsis was a Scythian, and is
recorded to have excelled many philosophers among the Greeks. And the
Hyperboreans, Hellanicus relates, dwelt beyond the Riphæan mountains,
and inculcated justice, not eating flesh, but using nuts. Those who are
sixty years old they take without the gates, and do away with. There are
also among the Germans those called sacred women, who, by inspecting the
whirlpools of rivers and the eddies, and observing the noises of
streams, presage and predict future events. <span
id="fr_1973"></span>[1974](#fn_1973) These did not allow the men to
fight against Cæsar till the new moon shone.

<span id="vi.iv.i.xv-p24"></span>Of all these, by far the oldest is the
Jewish race; and that their philosophy committed to writing has the
precedence of philosophy among the Greeks, the Pythagorean Philo <span
id="fr_1974"></span>[1975](#fn_1974) shows at large; and, besides him,
Aristobulus the Peripatetic, and several others, not to waste time, in
<span id="page_317">p. 317</span> <span
id="vi.iv.i.xv-Page_317"></span>going over them by name. Very clearly
the author Megasthenes, the contemporary of Seleucus Nicanor, writes as
follows in the third of his books, *On Indian Affairs:* “All that was
said about nature by the ancients is said also by those who philosophise
beyond Greece: some things by the Brahmins among the Indians, and others
by those called Jews in Syria.” Some more fabulously say that certain of
those called the Idæan Dactyli were the first wise men; to whom are
attributed the invention of what are called the “Ephesian letters,” and
of numbers in music. For which reason dactyls in music received their
name. And the Idæan Dactyli were Phrygians and barbarians. Herodotus
relates that Hercules, having grown a sage and a student of physics,
received from the barbarian Atlas, the Phrygian, the columns of the
universe; the fable meaning that he received by instruction the
knowledge of the heavenly bodies. And Hermippus of Berytus calls Charon
the Centaur wise; about whom, he that wrote *The Battle of the Titans*
says, “that he first led the race of mortals to righteousness, by
teaching them the solemnity of the oath, and propitiatory sacrifices and
the figures of Olympus.” By him Achilles, who fought at Troy, was
taught. And Hippo, the daughter of the Centaur, who dwelt with Æolus,
taught him her father’s science, the knowledge of physics. Euripides
also testifies of Hippo as follows:—

> <span id="vi.iv.i.xv-p25.1"></span> “Who first, by oracles,
> presaged,  
> And by the rising stars, events divine.”  

<span id="vi.iv.i.xv-p26"></span>By this Æolus, Ulysses was received as
a guest after the taking of Troy. Mark the epochs by comparison with the
age of Moses, and with the high antiquity of the philosophy promulgated
by him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1959"></span>[315:1960](0020308.htm#fr_1959) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xv-p2"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.i.xv-p2.1"></span>όμακοεῖον</span>.

<span id="fn_1960"></span>[315:1961](0020308.htm#fr_1960) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xv-p4"></span> Greece is ample, O Cebes, in which
everywhere there are good men; and many are the races of the barbarians,
over all of whom you must search, seeking such a physician, sparing
neither money nor pains.—*Phædo*, p. 78 A.

<span id="fn_1961"></span>[315:1962](0020308.htm#fr_1961) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xv-p5"></span> This sense is obtained by the omission
of <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.i.xv-p5.1"></span>μόνους</span>
from the text, which may have crept in in consequence of occuring in the
previous text, to make it agree with what Plato says, which is, “And
both among Greeks and barbarians, there are many who have shown many and
illustrious deeds, generating virtue of every kind, to whom many temples
on account of such sons are raised.”—*Symp*., p. 209 E.

<span id="fn_1962"></span>[315:1963](0020308.htm#fr_1962) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xv-p6"></span> Plato, *Timæus*, p. 47 A.

<span id="fn_1963"></span>[315:1964](0020308.htm#fr_1963) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xv-p8"></span> A mistake of Clement for *The
Republic*.

<span id="fn_1964"></span>[316:1965](0020308.htm#fr_1964) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xv-p9"></span> *Timæus*, p. 22 B.

<span id="fn_1965"></span>[316:1966](0020308.htm#fr_1965) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xv-p11"></span> About which the learned have tortured
themselves greatly. The reference is doubtless here to some pillar
inscribed with what was deemed a writing of importance. But as to
Acicarus nothing is known.

<span id="fn_1966"></span>[316:1967](0020308.htm#fr_1966) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xv-p13"></span> Otherwise Zaratus, or Zabratus, or
Zaras, who, Huet says, was Zoroaster.

<span id="fn_1967"></span>[316:1968](0020308.htm#fr_1967) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xv-p14"></span> \[Direct testimony, establishing one
important fact in the history of philosophy.\]

<span id="fn_1968"></span>[316:1969](0020308.htm#fr_1968) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xv-p14.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xv-p15"></span> Adopting Lowth’s emendation, <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.i.xv-p15.1"></span>Σιβύλλην φἀναι</span>.

<span id="fn_1969"></span>[316:1970](0020308.htm#fr_1969) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xv-p15.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xv-p16"></span> Or, according to the reading in
Pausanias, and the statement of Plutarch, “who was the daughter of
Poseidon.”

<span id="fn_1970"></span>[316:1971](0020308.htm#fr_1970) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xv-p18"></span> Or Samanæi.

<span id="fn_1971"></span>[316:1972](0020308.htm#fr_1971) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xv-p19"></span> Altered for <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.i.xv-p19.1"></span>Ἀλλόβιοι</span> in accordance with the note
of Montacutius, who cites Strabo as an authority for the existence of a
sect of Indian sages called Hylobii, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.i.xv-p19.2"></span>ὑλόβιοι</span>—Silvicolæ.

<span id="fn_1972"></span>[316:1973](0020308.htm#fr_1972) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xv-p21"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.i.xv-p21.1"></span>Βούττα</span>

<span id="fn_1973"></span>[316:1974](0020308.htm#fr_1973) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xv-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xv-p23"></span> Cæsar, *Gallic War*, book i. chap. 50.

<span id="fn_1974"></span>[316:1975](0020308.htm#fr_1974) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xv-p24.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xv-p25"></span> Sozomen also calls Philo a
Pythagorean.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI.—That the Inventors of Other Arts Were Mostly
Barbarians.](0020309)
