[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020327)  [Next](0020329.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.ii.iv"></span>

##### <span id="vi.iv.ii.iv-p0.1"></span>Chapter IV.—Faith the Foundation of All Knowledge.

<span id="vi.iv.ii.iv-p1"></span>But we, who have heard by the
Scriptures that self-determining choice and refusal have been given by
the Lord to men, rest in the infallible criterion of faith, manifesting
a willing spirit, since we have chosen life and believe God through His
voice. And he who has believed the Word knows the matter to be true; for
the Word is <span id="page_350">p. 350</span> <span
id="vi.iv.ii.iv-Page_350"></span>truth. But he who has disbelieved Him
that speaks, has disbelieved God.

<span id="vi.iv.ii.iv-p2"></span>“By faith we understand that the worlds
were framed by the word of God, so that what is seen was not made of
things which appear,” says the apostle. “By faith Abel offered to God a
fuller sacrifice than Cain, by which he received testimony that he was
righteous, God giving testimony to him respecting his gifts; and by it
he, being dead, yet speaketh,” and so forth, down to “than enjoy the
pleasures of sin for a season.” <span
id="fr_2178"></span>[2179](#fn_2178.md) Faith having, therefore, justified
these before the law, made them heirs of the divine promise. Why then
should I review and adduce any further testimonies of faith from the
history in our hands? “For the time would fail me were I to tell of
Gideon, Barak, Samson, Jephtha, David, and Samuel, and the prophets,”
and what follows. <span id="fr_2179"></span>[2180](#fn_2179.md) Now,
inasmuch as there are four things in which the truth resides—Sensation,
Understanding, Knowledge, Opinion,—intellectual apprehension is first in
the order of nature; but in our case, and in relation to ourselves,
Sensation is first, and of Sensation and Understanding the essence of
Knowledge is formed; and evidence is common to Understanding and
Sensation. Well, Sensation is the ladder to Knowledge; while Faith,
advancing over the pathway of the objects of sense, leaves Opinion
behind, and speeds to things free of deception, and reposes in the
truth.

<span id="vi.iv.ii.iv-p5"></span>Should one say that Knowledge is
founded on demonstration by a process of reasoning, let him hear that
first principles are incapable of demonstration; for they are known
neither by art nor sagacity. For the latter is conversant about objects
that are susceptible of change, while the former is practical solely,
and not theoretical. <span id="fr_2180"></span>[2181](#fn_2180.md) Hence it
is thought that the first cause of the universe can be apprehended by
faith alone. For all knowledge is capable of being taught; and what is
capable of being taught is founded on what is known before. But the
first cause of the universe was not previously known to the Greeks;
neither, accordingly, to Thales, who came to the conclusion that water
was the first cause; nor to the other natural philosophers who succeeded
him, since it was Anaxagoras who was the first who assigned to Mind the
supremacy over material things. But not even he preserved the dignity
suited to the efficient cause, describing as he did certain silly
vortices, together with the inertia and even foolishness of Mind.
Wherefore also the Word says, “Call no man master on earth.” <span
id="fr_2181"></span>[2182](#fn_2181.md) For knowledge is a state of mind
that results from demonstration; but faith is a grace which from what is
indemonstrable conducts to what is universal and simple, what is neither
with matter, nor matter, nor under matter. But those who believe not, as
to be expected, drag all down from heaven, and the region of the
invisible, to earth, “absolutely grasping with their hands rocks and
oaks,” according to Plato. For, clinging to all such things, they
asseverate that that alone exists which can be touched and handled,
defining body and essence to be identical: disputing against themselves,
they very piously defend the existence of certain intellectual and
bodiless forms descending somewhere from above from the invisible world,
vehemently maintaining that there is a true essence. “Lo, I make new
things,” saith the Word, “which eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, nor
hath it entered into the heart of man.” <span
id="fr_2182"></span>[2183](#fn_2182.md) With a new eye, a new ear, a new
heart, whatever can be seen and heard is to be apprehended, by the faith
and understanding of the disciples of the Lord, who speak, hear, and act
spiritually. For there is genuine coin, and other that is spurious;
which no less deceives unprofessionals, that it does not the
money-changers; who know through having learned how to separate and
distinguish what has a false stamp from what is genuine. So the
money-changer only says to the unprofessional man that the coin is
counterfeit. But the reason why, only the banker’s apprentice, and he
that is trained to this department, learns.

<span id="vi.iv.ii.iv-p9"></span>Now Aristotle says that the judgment
which follows knowledge is in truth faith. Accordingly, faith is
something superior to knowledge, and is its criterion. Conjecture, which
is only a feeble supposition, counterfeits faith; as the flatterer
counterfeits a friend, and the wolf the dog. And as the workman sees
that by learning certain things he becomes an artificer, and the
helmsman by being instructed in the art will be able to steer; he does
not regard the mere wishing to become excellent and good enough, but he
must learn it by the exercise of obedience. But to obey the Word, whom
we call Instructor, is to believe Him, going against Him in nothing. For
how can we take up a position of hostility to God? Knowledge,
accordingly, is characterized by faith; and faith, by a kind of divine
mutual and reciprocal correspondence, becomes characterized by
knowledge.

<span id="vi.iv.ii.iv-p10"></span>Epicurus, too, who very greatly
preferred pleasure to truth, supposes faith to be a preconception of the
mind; and defines preconception to be a grasping at something evident,
and at the clear understanding of the thing; and asserts that, without
preconception, no one can either inquire, or doubt, or judge, or even
argue. How <span id="page_351">p. 351</span> <span
id="vi.iv.ii.iv-Page_351"></span>can one, without a preconceived idea of
what he is aiming after, learn about that which is the subject of his
investigation? He, again, who has learned has already turned his
preconception <span id="fr_2183"></span>[2184](#fn_2183.md) into
comprehension. And if he who learns, learns not without a preconceived
idea which takes in what is expressed, that man has ears to hear the
truth. And happy is the man that speaks to the ears of those who hear;
as happy certainly also is he who is a child of obedience. Now to hear
is to understand. If, then, faith is nothing else than a preconception
of the mind in regard to what is the subject of discourse, and obedience
is so called, and understanding and persuasion; no one shall learn aught
without faith, since no one \[learns aught\] without preconception.
Consequently there is a more ample demonstration of the complete truth
of what was spoken by the prophet, “Unless ye believe, neither will ye
understand.” Paraphrasing this oracle, Heraclitus of Ephesus says, “If a
man hope not, he will not find that which is not hoped for, seeing it is
inscrutable and inaccessible.” Plato the philosopher, also, in *The
Laws*, says, “that he who would be blessed and happy, must be straight
from the beginning a partaker of the truth, so as to live true for as
long a period as possible; for he is a man of faith. But the unbeliever
is one to whom voluntary falsehood is agreeable; and the man to whom
involuntary falsehood is agreeable is senseless; <span
id="fr_2184"></span>[2185](#fn_2184.md) neither of which is desirable. For
he who is devoid of friendliness, is faithless and ignorant.” And does
he not enigmatically say in *Euthydemus,* that this is “the regal
wisdom”? In *The Statesman* he says expressly, “So that the knowledge of
the true king is kingly; and he who possesses it, whether a prince or
private person, shall by all means, in consequence of this act, be
rightly styled royal.” Now those who have believed in Christ both are
and are called *Chrestoi* (good), <span
id="fr_2185"></span>[2186](#fn_2185.md) as those who are cared for by the
true king are kingly. For as the wise are wise by their wisdom, and
those observant of law are so by the law; so also those who belong to
Christ the King are kings, and those that are Christ’s Christians. Then,
in continuation, he adds clearly, “What is right will turn out to be
lawful, law being in its nature right reason, and not found in writings
or elsewhere.” And the stranger of Elea pronounces the kingly and
statesmanlike man “*a living law.*” Such is he who fulfils the law,
“doing the will of the Father,” <span
id="fr_2186"></span>[2187](#fn_2186.md) inscribed on a lofty pillar, and
set as an example of divine virtue to all who possess the power of
seeing. The Greeks are acquainted with the staves of the Ephori at
Lacedæmon, inscribed with the law on wood. But my law, as was said
above, is both royal and living; and it is right reason. “Law, which is
king of all—of mortals and immortals,” as the Bœotian Pindar sings. For
Speusippus, <span id="fr_2187"></span>[2188](#fn_2187.md) in the first book
against Cleophon, seems to write like Plato on this wise: “For if
royalty be a good thing, and the wise man the only king and ruler, the
law, which is right reason, is good;” <span
id="fr_2188"></span>[2189](#fn_2188.md) which is the case. The Stoics teach
what is in conformity with this, assigning kinghood, priesthood,
prophecy, legislation, riches, true beauty, noble birth, freedom, to the
wise man alone. But that he is exceedingly difficult to find, is
confessed even by them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2178"></span>[350:2179](0020328.htm#fr_2178.md) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.iv-p3"></span> [Heb.
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#003.md),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#004.md),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#025.md)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.iv-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2179"></span>[350:2180](0020328.htm#fr_2179.md) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.iv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.iv-p4"></span> [Heb. xi.
32](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#032.md)<span id="vi.iv.ii.iv-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2180"></span>[350:2181](0020328.htm#fr_2180.md) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.iv-p6"></span> Instead of <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.ii.iv-p6.1"></span>μονονουχί</span>, Petavius and Lowth read
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.ii.iv-p6.2"></span>μόνον
οὐχί</span>, as above.

<span id="fn_2181"></span>[350:2182](0020328.htm#fr_2181.md) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.iv-p6.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.iv-p7"></span> [Matt. xxiii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#009.md)<span id="vi.iv.ii.iv-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2182"></span>[350:2183](0020328.htm#fr_2182.md) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.iv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.iv-p8"></span> [Isa. lxiv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#004.md)<span id="vi.iv.ii.iv-p8.1"></span>;
[1 Cor. ii. 9](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#009.md)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.iv-p8.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_2183"></span>[351:2184](0020328.htm#fr_2183.md) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.iv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.iv-p11"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.ii.iv-p11.1"></span>κατάληψιν ποιεῖ τῆν πρόληψιν</span>.

<span id="fn_2184"></span>[351:2185](0020328.htm#fr_2184.md) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.iv-p11.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.iv-p12"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.ii.iv-p12.1"></span>οὐ ζῶον</span> is here interpolated into
the text, not being found in Plato.

<span id="fn_2185"></span>[351:2186](0020328.htm#fr_2185.md) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.iv-p12.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.iv-p13"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.ii.iv-p13.1"></span>Χριστός</span> and <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.ii.iv-p13.2"></span>χρηστός</span> are
very frequently compared in the patristic authors.

<span id="fn_2186"></span>[351:2187](0020328.htm#fr_2186.md) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.iv-p13.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.iv-p14"></span> [Matt. xxi.
31](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#031.md)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.iv-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2187"></span>[351:2188](0020328.htm#fr_2187.md) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.iv-p14.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.iv-p15"></span> Plato’s sister’s son and successor.

<span id="fn_2188"></span>[351:2189](0020328.htm#fr_2188.md) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.iv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.iv-p16"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.ii.iv-p16.1"></span>σπουδαῖος</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V.—He Proves by Several Examples that the Greeks Drew
from the Sacred Writers.](0020329.md)
