[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020054)  [Next](0020056.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.xix"></span>

##### <span id="iii.ii.xix-p0.1"></span>Chapter XIX.—Depravity Lies at the Bottom of Demon-Worship.

<span id="iii.ii.xix-p1"></span>But do you, who have not the perception
of these things, be instructed by us who know them: though you do
profess to despise death, and to be sufficient of yourselves for
everything. But this is a discipline in which your philosophers are so
greatly deficient, that some of them receive from the king of the Romans
600<span id="iii.ii.xix-p1.1"></span> aurei yearly, for no useful
service they perform, but that they may not even wear a long beard
without being paid for it! Crescens, who made his nest in the great
city, surpassed all men in unnatural love (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.xix-p1.2"></span>παιδεραστία</span>), and was strongly
addicted to the love of money. Yet this man, who professed to despise
death, was so afraid of death, that he endeavoured to inflict on Justin,
and indeed on me, the punishment of death, as being an evil, because by
proclaiming the truth he convicted the philosophers of being gluttons
and cheats. But whom of the philosophers, save you only, was he
accustomed to inveigh against? If you say, in agreement with our tenets,
that death is not to be dreaded, do not court death from an insane love
of fame among men, like Anaxagoras, but become despisers of death by
reason of the knowledge of God. The construction of the world is
excellent, but the life men live in it is bad; and we may see those
greeted with applause as in a solemn assembly who know not God. For what
is divination? and why are ye deceived by it? It is a minister to thee
of worldly lusts. You wish to make war, and you take Apollo as a
counsellor of slaughter. You want to carry off a maiden by force, and
you select a divinity to be your accomplice. You are ill by your own
fault; and, as Agamemnon <span id="fr_477"></span>[478](#fn_477.md) wished
for ten councillors, so you wish to have gods with you. Some woman by
drinking water gets into a frenzy, and loses her senses by the fumes of
frankincense, and you say that she has the gift of prophecy. Apollo was
a prognosticator and a teacher of soothsayers: in the matter of Daphne
he deceived himself. An oak, forsooth, is oracular, and birds utter
presages! And so you are inferior to animals and plants! It would surely
be a fine thing for you to become a divining rod, or to assume the wings
of a bird! He who makes you fond of money also foretells your getting
rich; he who excites to seditions and wars also predicts victory in war.
If you are superior to the passions, you will despise all worldly
things. Do not abhor us who have made this attainment, but, repudiating
the demons, <span id="fr_478"></span>[479](#fn_478.md) follow the one God.
“All things <span id="fr_479"></span>[480](#fn_479.md) were made by Him,
and without Him not one thing was made.” If there is poison in natural
productions, this has supervened through our sinfulness. I am able to
show the perfect truth of these things; only do you hearken, and he who
believes will understand.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_477"></span>[73:478](0020055.htm#fr_477.md) <span
id="iii.ii.xix-p1.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xix-p2"></span> Comp. Hom. *Il.*, ii. 372.

<span id="fn_478"></span>[73:479](0020055.htm#fr_478.md) <span
id="iii.ii.xix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xix-p3"></span> \[The baptismal renunciation.\]

<span id="fn_479"></span>[73:480](0020055.htm#fr_479.md) <span
id="iii.ii.xix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xix-p4"></span> [John i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003.md)<span id="iii.ii.xix-p4.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XX. Thanks are Ever Due to God.](0020056.md)
