[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020057)  [Next](0020059) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.xxii"></span>

##### <span id="iii.ii.xxii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXII.—Ridicule of the Solemnities of the Greeks.

<span id="iii.ii.xxii-p1"></span>And of what sort are your teachings?
Who must not treat with contempt your solemn festivals, which, being
held in honour of wicked demons, cover men with infamy? I have often
<span id="page_75">p. 75</span> <span
id="iii.ii.xxii-Page_75"></span>seen a man <span
id="fr_485"></span>[486](#fn_485) —and have been amazed to see, and the
amazement has ended in contempt, to think how he is one thing
internally, but outwardly counterfeits what he is not—giving himself
excessive airs of daintiness and indulging in all sorts of effeminacy;
sometimes darting his eyes about; sometimes throwing his hands hither
and thither, and raving with his face smeared with mud; sometimes
personating Aphrodité, sometimes Apollo; a solitary accuser of all the
gods, an epitome of superstition, a vituperator of heroic deeds, an
actor of murders, a chronicler of adultery, a storehouse of madness, a
teacher of cynædi, an instigator of capital sentences;—and yet such a
man is praised by all. But I have rejected all his falsehoods, his
impiety, his practices,—in short, the man altogether. But you are led
captive by such men, while you revile those who do not take a part in
your pursuits. I have no mind to stand agape at a number of singers, nor
do I desire to be affected in sympathy with a man when he is winking and
gesticulating in an unnatural manner. What wonderful or extraordinary
thing is performed among you? They utter ribaldry in affected tones, and
go through indecent movements; your daughters and your sons behold them
giving lessons in adultery on the stage. Admirable places, forsooth, are
your lecture-rooms, where every base action perpetrated by night is
proclaimed aloud, and the hearers are regaled with the utterance of
infamous discourses! Admirable, too, are your mendacious poets, who by
their fictions beguile their hearers from the truth!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_485"></span>[75:486](0020058.htm#fr_485) <span
id="iii.ii.xxii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xxii-p2"></span> Tatian here describes an actor. \[And
in America heathenism has returned upon us in most of the indecencies
here exposed. Are we Christians?\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIII. Of the Pugilists and Gladiators.](0020059)
