[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020377)  [Next](0020379) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.v.iv"></span>

##### <span id="vi.iv.v.iv-p0.1"></span>Chapter IV.—Divine Things Wrapped Up in Figures Both in the Sacred and in Heathen Writers.

<span id="vi.iv.v.iv-p1"></span>But since they will believe neither in
what is good justly nor in knowledge unto salvation, we ourselves
reckoning what they claim as belonging to us, because all things are
God’s; and especially since what is good proceeded from us to the
Greeks, let us handle those things as they are capable of hearing. For
intelligence or rectitude this great crowd estimates not by truth, but
by what they are delighted with. And they will be pleased not more with
other things than with what is like themselves. For he who is still
blind and dumb, not having understanding, or the undazzled and keen
vision of the contemplative soul, which the Saviour confers, like the
uninitiated at the mysteries, or the unmusical at dances, not being yet
pure and worthy of the pure truth, but still discordant and disordered
and material, must stand outside of the divine choir. “For we compare
spiritual things with spiritual.” <span
id="fr_2994"></span>[2995](#fn_2994) Wherefore, in accordance with the
method of concealment, the truly sacred Word, truly divine and most
necessary for us, deposited in the shrine of truth, was by the Egyptians
indicated by what were called among them *adyta,* and by the Hebrews by
the veil. Only the consecrated—that is, those devoted to God,
circumcised in the desire of the passions for the sake of love to that
which is alone divine—were allowed access to them. For Plato also
thought it not lawful for “the impure to touch the pure.”

<span id="vi.iv.v.iv-p3"></span>Thence the prophecies and oracles are
spoken in enigmas, and the mysteries are not exhibited incontinently to
all and sundry, but only after certain purifications and previous
instructions.

> <span id="vi.iv.v.iv-p3.1"></span> “For the Muse was not then  
> Greedy of gain or mercenary;  
> Nor were Terpsichore’s sweet,  
> Honey-toned, silvery soft-voiced  
> Strains made merchandise of.”  

<span id="vi.iv.v.iv-p4"></span>Now those instructed among the Egyptians
learned first of all that style of the Egyptian letters which is called
Epistolographic; and second, the Hieratic, which the sacred scribes
practice; and finally, and last of all, the Hieroglyphic, of which one
kind which is by the first elements is literal (Kyriologic), and the
other Symbolic. Of the Symbolic, one kind speaks literally by imitation,
and another writes as it were figuratively; and another is quite
allegorical, using certain enigmas.

<span id="vi.iv.v.iv-p5"></span>Wishing to express Sun in writing, they
makea circle; and Moon, a figure like the Moon, like its proper shape.
But in using the figurative style, by transposing and transferring, by
changing and by transforming in many ways as suits them, they draw
characters. In relating the praises of the kings in theological myths,
they write in anaglyphs. <span id="fr_2995"></span>[2996](#fn_2995) Let
the following stand as a specimen of the third species—the Enigmatic.
For the rest of the stars, on account of their oblique course, they have
figured like the bodies of serpents; but the sun, like that of a beetle,
because it makes a round figure of ox-dung, <span
id="fr_2996"></span>[2997](#fn_2996) and rolls it before its face. And
they say that this creature lives six months under ground, and the other
division of the year above ground, and emits its seed into the ball, and
brings forth; and that there is not a female beetle. All then, in a
word, who have spoken of divine things, both Barbarians and Greeks, have
veiled the first principles of things, and delivered the truth in
enigmas, and symbols, and allegories, and metaphors, and such like
tropes. <span id="fr_2997"></span>[2998](#fn_2997) Such also are the
oracles among the Greeks. And the Pythian Apollo is called Loxias. Also
the maxims of those among the Greeks called wise men, in a few sayings
indicate the unfolding of matter of considerable importance. Such
certainly is that maxim, “Spare Time:” either because life is short, and
we ought not to expend this time in vain; or, on the other hand, it bids
you spare your personal expenses; so that, though you live many years,
necessaries may not fail you. Similarly also the maxim “*Know thyself*”
shows many things; both that thou art mortal, and that thou wast born a
human being; and also that, in comparison with the other excellences of
life, thou art of no account, because thou sayest that thou art rich or
renowned; or, on the other hand, that, being rich or renowned, you are
not honoured on account of your advantages alone. And it says, Know for
what thou wert born, and whose image thou art; and what is thy essence,
and what thy creation, and what thy relation to God, and the like. And
the Spirit says by Isaiah the prophet, “I will give thee treasures,
hidden, dark.” <span id="fr_2998"></span>[2999](#fn_2998) Now wisdom,
hard to hunt, is the treasures of God and unfailing riches. But those,
taught in theology by those prophets, the poets, philosophize much by
way of a hidden sense. I mean Orpheus, Linus, Musæus, Homer, and <span
id="page_450">p. 450</span> <span
id="vi.iv.v.iv-Page_450"></span>Hesiod, and those in this fashion wise.
The persuasive style of poetry is for them a veil for the many. Dreams
and signs are all more or less obscure to men, not from jealousy (for it
were wrong to conceive of God as subject to passions), but in order that
research, introducing to the understanding of enigmas, may haste to the
discovery of truth. Thus Sophocles the tragic poet somewhere says:—

> <span id="vi.iv.v.iv-p9.2"></span> “And God I know to be such an
> one,  
> Ever the revealer of enigmas to the wise,  
> But to the perverse bad, although a teacher in few words,”—  

<span id="vi.iv.v.iv-p10"></span>putting bad instead of simple.
Expressly then respecting all our Scripture, as if spoken in a parable,
it is written in the Psalms, “Hear, O My people, My law: incline your
ear to the words of My mouth. I will open My mouth in parables, I will
utter My problems from the beginning.” <span
id="fr_2999"></span>[3000](#fn_2999) Similarly speaks the noble apostle
to the following effect: “Howbeit we speak wisdom among those that are
perfect; yet not the wisdom of this world, nor of the princes of this
world, that come to nought. But we speak the wisdom of God hidden in a
mystery; which none of the princes of this world knew. For had they
known it, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory.” <span
id="fr_3000"></span>[3001](#fn_3000)

<span id="vi.iv.v.iv-p13"></span>The philosophers did not exert
themselves in contemning the appearance of the Lord. It therefore
follows that it is the opinion of the wise among the Jews which the
apostle inveighs against. Wherefore he adds, “But we preach, as it is
written, what eye hath not seen, and ear hath not heard, and hath not
entered into the heart of man, what God hath prepared for them that love
Him. For God hath revealed it to us by the Spirit. For the Spirit
searcheth all things, even the deep things of God.” <span
id="fr_3001"></span>[3002](#fn_3001) For he recognises the spiritual man
and the Gnostic as the disciple of the Holy Spirit dispensed by God,
which is the mind of Christ. “But the natural man receiveth not the
things of the Spirit, for they are foolishness to him.” <span
id="fr_3002"></span>[3003](#fn_3002) Now the apostle, in
contradistinction to gnostic perfection, calls the common faith <span
id="fr_3003"></span>[3004](#fn_3003) *the foundation,* and sometimes
*milk,* writing on this wise: “Brethren, I could not speak to you as to
spiritual, but as to carnal, to babes in Christ. I have fed you with
milk, not with meat: for ye were not able. Neither yet are ye now able.
For ye are yet carnal: for whereas there is among you envy and strife,
are ye not carnal, and walk as men?” <span
id="fr_3004"></span>[3005](#fn_3004) Which things are the choice of
those men who are sinners. But those who abstain from these things give
their thoughts to divine things, and partake of gnostic food. “According
to the grace,” it is said, “given to me as a wise master builder, I have
laid the foundation. And another buildeth on it gold and silver,
precious stones.” <span id="fr_3005"></span>[3006](#fn_3005) Such is the
gnostic superstructure on the foundation of faith in Christ Jesus. But
“the stubble, and the wood, and the hay,” are the additions of heresies.
“But the fire shall try every man’s work, of what sort it is.” In
allusion to the gnostic edifice also in the Epistle to the Romans, he
says, “For I desire to see you, that I may impart unto you a spiritual
gift, that ye may be established.” <span
id="fr_3006"></span>[3007](#fn_3006) It was impossible that gifts of
this sort could be written without disguise.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2994"></span>[449:2995](0020378.htm#fr_2994) <span
id="vi.iv.v.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.iv-p2"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#013)<span id="vi.iv.v.iv-p2.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2995"></span>[449:2996](0020378.htm#fr_2995) <span
id="vi.iv.v.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.iv-p6"></span> Bas relief.

<span id="fn_2996"></span>[449:2997](0020378.htm#fr_2996) <span
id="vi.iv.v.iv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.iv-p7"></span> \[Elucidation II.\]

<span id="fn_2997"></span>[449:2998](0020378.htm#fr_2997) <span
id="vi.iv.v.iv-p7.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.iv-p8"></span> \[[Prov. i.
6](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#006)<span id="vi.iv.v.iv-p8.1"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_2998"></span>[449:2999](0020378.htm#fr_2998) <span
id="vi.iv.v.iv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.iv-p9"></span> [Isa. xlv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#003)<span id="vi.iv.v.iv-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2999"></span>[450:3000](0020378.htm#fr_2999) <span
id="vi.iv.v.iv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.iv-p11"></span> [Ps.
78:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#002)<span id="vi.iv.v.iv-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3000"></span>[450:3001](0020378.htm#fr_3000) <span
id="vi.iv.v.iv-p11.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.iv-p12"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
6-8](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#006)<span
id="vi.iv.v.iv-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3001"></span>[450:3002](0020378.htm#fr_3001) <span
id="vi.iv.v.iv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.iv-p14"></span> [1 Cor.
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#010)<span
id="vi.iv.v.iv-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3002"></span>[450:3003](0020378.htm#fr_3002) <span
id="vi.iv.v.iv-p14.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.iv-p15"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#014)<span id="vi.iv.v.iv-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3003"></span>[450:3004](0020378.htm#fr_3003) <span
id="vi.iv.v.iv-p15.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.iv-p16"></span> \[See cap. i. p. 444, note 6,
*supra*.\]

<span id="fn_3004"></span>[450:3005](0020378.htm#fr_3004) <span
id="vi.iv.v.iv-p16.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.iv-p17"></span> [1 Cor. iii.
1-3](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#001)<span
id="vi.iv.v.iv-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3005"></span>[450:3006](0020378.htm#fr_3005) <span
id="vi.iv.v.iv-p17.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.iv-p18"></span> [1 Cor. iii.
10-13](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#010)<span
id="vi.iv.v.iv-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3006"></span>[450:3007](0020378.htm#fr_3006) <span
id="vi.iv.v.iv-p18.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.iv-p19"></span> [Rom. i.
11](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#011)<span id="vi.iv.v.iv-p19.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V.—On the Symbols of Pythagoras.](0020379)
