[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020208)  [Next](0020210.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iii.i"></span>

##### <span id="v.iii.i-p0.1"></span>Chapter I.—Defence of the Truth Should Precede Discussions Regarding It. <span id="fr_834"></span>[835](#fn_834.md)

<span id="v.iii.i-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="v.iii.i-p2.1"></span>By</span> the side of every opinion and
doctrine which agrees with the truth of things, there springs up some
falsehood; and it does so, not because it takes its rise naturally from
some fundamental principle, or from some cause peculiar to the matter in
hand, but because it is invented on purpose by men who set a value on
the spurious seed, for its tendency to corrupt the truth. This is
apparent, in the first place, from those who in former times addicted
themselves to such inquiries, and their want of agreement with their
predecessors and contemporaries, and then, not least, from the very
confusion which marks the discussions that are now going on. For such
men have left no truth free from their calumnious attacks—not the being
of God, not His knowledge, not His operations, not those books which
follow by a regular and strict sequence from these, and delineate for us
the doctrines of piety. On the contrary, some of them utterly, and once
for all, give up in despair the truth concerning these things, and some
distort it to suit their own views, and some of set purpose doubt even
of things which are palpably evident. Hence I think that those who
bestow attention on such subjects should adopt two lines of argument,
one in defence of the truth, another concerning the truth: that in
defence of the truth, for disbelievers and doubters; that concerning the
truth, for such as are candid and receive the truth with readiness.
Accordingly it behoves those who wish to investigate these matters, to
keep in view that which the necessity of the case in each instance
requires, and to regulate their discussion by this; to accommodate the
order of their treatment of these subjects to what is suitable to the
occasion, and not for the sake of appearing always to preserve the same
method, to disregard fitness and the place which properly belongs to
each topic. For, so far as proof and the natural order are concerned,
dissertations concerning the truth always take precedence of those in
defence of it; but, for the purpose of greater utility, the order must
be reversed, and arguments in defence of it precede those concerning it.
For the farmer could not properly cast the seed into the ground, unless
he first extirpated the wild wood, and whatever would be hurtful to the
good seed; nor the physician introduce any wholesome medicines into the
body that needed his care, if he did not previously remove the disease
within, or stay that which was approaching. Neither surely can he who
wishes to teach the truth persuade any one by speaking about it, so long
as there is a false opinion lurking in the mind of his hearers, and
barring the entrance of his arguments. And, therefore, from regard to
greater utility, I myself sometimes place arguments in defence of the
truth before those concerning the truth; and on the present occasion it
appears to me, looking at the requirements of the case, not without
advantage to follow the same method in treating of the resurrection. For
in regard to this subject also we find some utterly disbelieving, and
some others doubting, and even among those who have accepted the first
principles some who are as much at a loss what to believe as those who
doubt; the most unaccountable thing of all being, that they are in this
state of mind without having any ground whatsoever in the matters
themselves for their disbelief, or finding it possible to assign any
<span id="page_150">p. 150</span> <span
id="v.iii.i-Page_150"></span>reasonable cause why they disbelieve or
experience any perplexity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_834"></span>[149:835](0020209.htm#fr_834.md) <span
id="v.iii.i-p0.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii.i-p1"></span> \[This argument was adapted to the times,
and to those to whom it was addressed, with great rhetorical art and
concealment of art. Its faults arise from the defective science of the
age, and from the habits of thought and of public instruction then in
fashion. He does not address himself to believers, but to sceptics, and
meets them on their highest levels of speech and of reason.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II.—A Resurrection is Not Impossible.](0020210.md)
