[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020281)  [Next](0020283.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.iii.iv"></span>

##### <span id="vi.iii.iii.iv-p0.1"></span>Chapter IV.—With Whom We are to Associate.

<span id="vi.iii.iii.iv-p1"></span>But really I have unwittingly
deviated in spirit from the order, to which I must now revert, and must
find fault with having large numbers of domestics. For, avoiding working
with their own <span id="page_278">p. 278</span> <span
id="vi.iii.iii.iv-Page_278"></span>hands and serving themselves, men
have recourse to servants, purchasing a great crowd of fine cooks, and
of people to lay out the table, and of others to divide the meat
skilfully into pieces. And the staff of servants is separated into many
divisions; some labour for their gluttony, carvers and seasoners, and
the compounders and makers of sweetmeats, and honey-cakes, and custards;
others are occupied with their too numerous clothes; others guard the
gold, like griffins; others keep the silver, and wipe the cups, and make
ready what is needed to furnish the festive table; others rub down the
horses; and a crowd of cup-bearers exert themselves in their service,
and herds of beautiful boys, like cattle, from whom they milk away their
beauty. And male and female assistants at the toilet are employed about
the ladies—some for the mirrors, some for the head-dresses, others for
the combs. Many are eunuchs; and these panders serve without suspicion
those that wish to be free to enjoy their pleasures, because of the
belief that they are unable to indulge in lust. But a true eunuch is not
one who is unable, but one who is unwilling, to indulge in pleasure. The
Word, testifying by the prophet Samuel to the Jews, who had transgressed
when the people asked for a king, promised not a loving lord, but
threatened to give them a self-willed and voluptuous tyrant, “who
shall,” He says, “take your daughters to be perfumers, and cooks, and
bakers,” <span id="fr_1615"></span>[1616](#fn_1615.md) ruling by the law of
war, not desiring a peaceful administration. And there are many Celts,
who bear aloft on their shoulders women’s litters. But workers in wool,
and spinners, and weavers, and female work and housekeeping, are
nowhere.

<span id="vi.iii.iii.iv-p3"></span>But those who impose on the women,
spend the day with them, telling them silly amatory stories, and wearing
out body and soul with their false acts and words. “Thou shalt not be
with many,” it is said, “for evil, nor give thyself to a
multitude;” <span id="fr_1616"></span>[1617](#fn_1616.md) for wisdom shows
itself among few, but disorder in a multitude. But it is not for grounds
of propriety, on account of not wishing to be seen, that they purchase
bearers, for it were commendable if out of such feelings they put
themselves under a covering; but it is out of luxuriousness that they
are carried on their domestics’ shoulders, and desire to make a show.

<span id="vi.iii.iii.iv-p5"></span>So, opening the curtain, and looking
keenly round on all that direct their eyes towards them, they show their
manners; and often bending forth from within, disgrace this superficial
propriety by their dangerous restlessness. “Look not round,” it is said,
“in the streets of the city, and wander not in its lonely places.” <span
id="fr_1617"></span>[1618](#fn_1617.md) For that is, in truth, a lonely
place, though there be a crowd of the licentious in it, where no wise
man is present.

<span id="vi.iii.iii.iv-p7"></span>And these women are carried about
over the temples, sacrificing and practising divination day by day,
spending their time with fortune-tellers, and begging priests, and
disreputable old women; and they keep up old wives’ whisperings over
their cups, learning charms and incantations from soothsayers, to the
ruin of the nuptial bonds. And some men they keep; by others they are
kept; and others are promised them by the diviners. They know not that
they are cheating themselves, and giving up themselves as a vessel of
pleasure to those that wish to indulge in wantonness; and exchanging
their purity for the foulest outrage, they think what is the most
shameful ruin a great stroke of business. And there are many ministers
to this meretricious licentiousness, insinuating themselves, one from
one quarter, another from another. For the licentious rush readily into
uncleanness, like swine rushing to that part of the hold of the ship
which is depressed. Whence the Scripture most strenuously exhorts,
“Introduce not every one into thy house, for the snares of the crafty
are many.” <span id="fr_1618"></span>[1619](#fn_1618.md) And in another
place, “Let just men be thy guests, and in the fear of the Lord let thy
boast remain.” <span id="fr_1619"></span>[1620](#fn_1619.md) Away with
fornication. “For know this well,” says the apostle, “that no
fornicator, or unclean person, or covetous man, who is an idolater, hath
any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and of God.” <span
id="fr_1620"></span>[1621](#fn_1620.md)

<span id="vi.iii.iii.iv-p11"></span>But these women delight in
intercourse with the effeminate. And crowds of abominable creatures
(<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iii.iii.iv-p11.1"></span>κιναίδες</span>) flow in, of unbridled
tongue, filthy in body, filthy in language; men enough for lewd offices,
ministers of adultery, giggling and whispering, and shamelessly making
through their noses sounds of lewdness and fornication to provoke lust,
endeavouring to please by lewd words and attitudes, inciting to
laughter, the precursor of fornication. And sometimes, when inflamed by
any provocation, either these fornicators, or those that follow the
rabble of abominable creatures to destruction, make a sound in their
nose like a frog, as if they had got anger dwelling in their nostrils.
But those who are more refined than these keep Indian birds and Median
pea-fowls, and recline with peak-headed <span
id="fr_1621"></span>[1622](#fn_1621.md) creatures; playing with satyrs,
delighting in monsters. They laugh when they hear Thersites; and these
women, purchasing Thersiteses highly valued, pride themselves not in
their husbands, but in those wretches which are a burden on the earth,
and overlook the chaste widow, who is of far higher value than a
Melitæan pup, and look <span id="page_279">p. 279</span> <span
id="vi.iii.iii.iv-Page_279"></span>askance at a just old man, who is
lovelier in my estimation than a monster purchased for money. And though
maintaining parrots and curlews, they do not receive the orphan
child; <span id="fr_1622"></span>[1623](#fn_1622.md) but they expose
children that are born at home, and take up the young of birds, and
prefer irrational to rational creatures; although they ought to
undertake the maintenance of old people with a character for sobriety,
who are fairer in my mind than apes, and capable of uttering something
better than nightingales; and to set before them that saying, “He that
pitieth the poor lendeth to the <span class="sc"><span
id="vi.iii.iii.iv-p13.1"></span>Lord</span>;” <span
id="fr_1623"></span>[1624](#fn_1623.md) and this, “Inasmuch as ye have done
it unto the least of these My brethren, ye have done it to Me.” <span
id="fr_1624"></span>[1625](#fn_1624.md) But these, on the other hand,
prefer ignorance to wisdom, turning their wealth into stone, that is,
into pearls and Indian emeralds. And they squander and throw away their
wealth on fading dyes, and bought slaves; like crammed fowls scraping
the dung of life. “Poverty,” it is said, “humbles a man.” <span
id="fr_1625"></span>[1626](#fn_1625.md) By poverty is meant that
niggardliness by which the rich are poor, having nothing to give away.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1615"></span>[278:1616](0020282.htm#fr_1615.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.iv-p2"></span> [1 Sam. viii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#013.md)<span
id="vi.iii.iii.iv-p2.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1616"></span>[278:1617](0020282.htm#fr_1616.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.iv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.iv-p4"></span> [Ex. xxiii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#002.md)<span
id="vi.iii.iii.iv-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1617"></span>[278:1618](0020282.htm#fr_1617.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.iv-p6"></span> [Ecclus. ix.
7](../../../bib/apo/sir009.htm#007.md)<span
id="vi.iii.iii.iv-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1618"></span>[278:1619](0020282.htm#fr_1618.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.iv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.iv-p8"></span> [Ecclus. xi.
29](../../../bib/apo/sir011.htm#029.md)<span
id="vi.iii.iii.iv-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1619"></span>[278:1620](0020282.htm#fr_1619.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.iv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.iv-p9"></span> [Ecclus. ix.
16](../../../bib/apo/sir009.htm#016.md)<span
id="vi.iii.iii.iv-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1620"></span>[278:1621](0020282.htm#fr_1620.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.iv-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.iv-p10"></span> [Eph. v.
5](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#005.md)<span
id="vi.iii.iii.iv-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1621"></span>[278:1622](0020282.htm#fr_1621.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.iv-p11.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.iv-p12"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iii.iii.iv-p12.1"></span>φοξός</span>, in allusion to Thersites,
to which Homer applies this epithet.

<span id="fn_1622"></span>[279:1623](0020282.htm#fr_1622.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.iv-p12.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.iv-p13"></span> \[The wasting on pet dogs, pups,
and other animals, expense and pains which might help an orphan child,
is a sin not yet uprooted. Here Clement’s plea for widows, orphans, and
aged men, prepares the way for Christian institutions in behalf of these
classes. The same arguments should prevail with Christians in America.\]

<span id="fn_1623"></span>[279:1624](0020282.htm#fr_1623.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.iv-p13.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.iv-p14"></span> [Prov. xix.
17](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#017.md)<span
id="vi.iii.iii.iv-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1624"></span>[279:1625](0020282.htm#fr_1624.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.iv-p14.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.iv-p15"></span> [Matt. xxv.
40](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#040.md)<span
id="vi.iii.iii.iv-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1625"></span>[279:1626](0020282.htm#fr_1625.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.iv-p15.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.iv-p16"></span> [Prov. x.
4](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#004.md)<span
id="vi.iii.iii.iv-p16.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V.—Behaviour in the Baths.](0020283.md)
