[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020222)  [Next](0020224.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iii.xv"></span>

##### <span id="v.iii.xv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XV.—Argument for the Resurrection from the Nature of Man.

<span id="v.iii.xv-p1"></span>But while the cause discoverable in the
creation of men is of itself sufficient to prove that the resurrection
follows by natural sequence on <span id="page_157">p. 157</span> <span
id="v.iii.xv-Page_157"></span>the dissolution of bodies, yet it is
perhaps right not to shrink from adducing either of the proposed
arguments, but, agreeably to what has been said, to point out to those
who are not able of themselves to discern them, the arguments from each
of the truths evolved from the primary; and first and foremost, the
nature of the men created, which conducts us to the same notion, and has
the same force as evidence of the resurrection. For if the whole nature
of men in general is composed of an immortal soul and a body which was
fitted to it in the creation, and if neither to the nature of the soul
by itself, nor to the nature of the body separately, has God assigned
such a creation or such a life and entire course of existence as this,
but to men compounded of the two, in order that they may, when they have
passed through their present existence, arrive at one common end, with
the same elements of which they are composed at their birth and during
life, it unavoidably follows, since one living-being is formed from the
two, experiencing whatever the soul experiences and whatever the body
experiences, doing and performing whatever requires the judgment of the
senses or of the reason, that the whole series of these things must be
referred to some one end, in order that they all, and by means of
all,—namely, man’s creation, man’s nature, man’s life, man’s doings and
sufferings, his course of existence, and the end suitable to his
nature,—may concur in one harmony and the same common experience. But if
there is some one harmony and community of experience belonging to the
whole being, whether of the things which spring from the soul or of
those which are accomplished by means of the body, the end for all these
must also be one. And the end will be in strictness one, if the being
whose end that end is remains the same in its constitution; and the
being will be exactly the same, if all those things of which the being
consists as parts are the same. And they will be the same in respect of
their peculiar union, if the parts dissolved are again united for the
constitution of the being. And the constitution of the same men of
necessity proves that a resurrection will follow of the dead and
dissolved bodies; for without this, neither could the same parts be
united according to nature with one another, nor could the nature of the
same men be reconstituted. And if both understanding and reason have
been given to men for the discernment of things which are perceived by
the understanding, and not of existences only, but also of the goodness
and wisdom and rectitude of their Giver, it necessarily follows that,
since those things continue for the sake of which the rational judgment
is given, the judgment given for these things should also continue. But
it is impossible for this to continue, unless the nature which has
received it, and in which it adheres, continues. But that which has
received both understanding and reason is man, not the soul by itself.
Man, therefore, who consists of the two parts, must continue for ever.
But it is impossible for him to continue unless he rise again. For if no
resurrection were to take place, the nature of men as men would not
continue. And if the nature of men does not continue, in vain has the
soul been fitted to the need of the body and to its experiences; in vain
has the body been fettered so that it cannot obtain what it longs for,
obedient to the reins of the soul, and guided by it as with a bridle; in
vain is the understanding, in vain is wisdom, and the observance of
rectitude, or even the practice of every virtue, and the enactment and
enforcement of laws,—to say all in a word, whatever is noble in men or
for men’s sake, or rather the very creation and nature of men. But if
vanity is utterly excluded from all the works of God, and from all the
gifts bestowed by Him, the conclusion is unavoidable, that, along with
the interminable duration of the soul, there will be a perpetual
continuance of the body according to its proper nature.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI—Analogy of Death and Sleep, and Consequent Argument
for the Resurrection.](0020224.md)
