[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020239)  [Next](0020241) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.ii.iv"></span>

##### <span id="vi.ii.iv-p0.1"></span>Chapter IV.—The Absurdity and Shamefulness of the Images by Which the Gods are Worshipped.

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p1"></span>If, in addition, I take and set before you
for inspection these very images, you will, as you go over them, find
how truly silly is the custom in which you have been reared, of
worshipping the senseless works of men’s hands.

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p2"></span>Anciently, then, the Scythians worshipped
their sabres, the Arabs stones, the Persians rivers. And some, belonging
to other races still more ancient, set up blocks of wood in conspicuous
situations, and erected pillars of stone, which were called Xoana, from
the carving of the material of which they were made. The image of
Artemis in Icarus was doubtless unwrought wood, and that of the
Cithæronian Here was a felled tree-trunk; and that of the Samian Here,
as Æthlius says, was at first a plank, and was afterwards during the
government of Proclus carved into human shape. And when the Xoana began
to be made in the likeness of men, they got the name of Brete,—a term
derived from Brotos (man). In Rome, the historian Varro says that in
ancient times the Xoaron of Mars—the idol by which he was worshipped—was
a spear, artists not having yet applied themselves to this specious
pernicious art; but when art flourished, error increased. That of stones
and stocks—and, to speak briefly, of dead matter—you have made images of
human form, by which you have produced a counterfeit of piety, and
slandered the truth, is now as clear as can be; but such proof as the
point may demand must not be declined.

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p3"></span>That the statue of Zeus at Olympia, and
that of Polias at Athens, were executed of gold and ivory by Phidias, is
known by everybody; and that the image of Here in Samos was formed by
the chisel of Euclides, Olympichus relates in his *Samiaca*. Do not,
then, entertain any doubt, that of the gods called at Athens venerable,
Scopas made two of the stone called Lychnis, and Calos the one which
they are reported to have had placed between them, as Polemon shows in
the fourth of his books addressed to <span id="page_185">p. 185</span>
<span id="vi.ii.iv-Page_185"></span>Timæus. Nor need you doubt
respecting the images of Zeus and Apollo at Patara, in Lycia, which
Phidias executed, as well as the lions that recline with them; and if,
as some say, they were the work of Bryxis, I do not dispute,—you have in
him another maker of images. Whichever of these you like, write down.
Furthermore, the statues nine cubits in height of Poseidon and
Amphitrite, worshipped in Tenos, are the work of Telesius the Athenian,
as we are told by Philochorus. Demetrius, in the second book of his
*Argolics*, writes of the image of Here in Tiryns, both that the
material was pear-tree and the artist was Argus.

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p4"></span>Many, perhaps, may be surprised to learn
that the Palladium which is called the Diopetes—that is, fallen from
heaven—which Diomede and Ulysses are related to have carried off from
Troy and deposited at Demophoon, was made of the bones of Pelops, as the
Olympian Jove of other bones—those of the Indian wild beast. I adduce as
my authority Dionysius, who relates this in the fifth part of his
*Cycle*. And Apellas, in the *Delphics*, says that there were two
Palladia, and that both were fashioned by men. But that one may suppose
that I have passed over them through ignorance, I shall add that the
image of Dionysus Morychus at Athens was made of the stones called
Phellata, and was the work of Simon the son of Eupalamus, as Polemo says
in a letter. There were also two other sculptors of Crete, as I think:
they were called Scyles and Dipoenus; and these executed the statues of
the Dioscuri in Argos, and the image of Hercules in Tiryns, and the
effigy of the Munychian Artemis in Sicyon. Why should I linger over
these, when I can point out to you the great deity himself, and show you
who he was,—whom indeed, conspicuously above all, we hear to have been
considered worthy of veneration? Him they have dared to speak of as made
without hands—I mean the Egyptian Serapis. For some relate that he was
sent as a present by the people of Sinope to Ptolemy Philadelphus, king
of the Egyptians, who won their favour by sending them corn from Egypt
when they were perishing with famine; and that this idol was an image of
Pluto; and Ptolemy, having received the statue, placed it on the
promontory which is now called Racotis; where the temple of Serapis was
held in honour, and the sacred enclosure borders on the spot; and that
Blistichis the courtesan having died in Canopus, Ptolemy had her
conveyed there, and buried beneath the forementioned shrine.

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p5"></span>Others say that the Serapis was a Pontic
idol, and was transported with solemn pomp to Alexandria. Isidore alone
says that it was brought from the Seleucians, near Antioch, who also had
been visited with a dearth of corn, and had been fed by Ptolemy. But
Athenodorns the son of Sandon, while wishing to make out the Serapis to
be ancient, has somehow slipped into the mistake of proving it to be an
image fashioned by human hands. He says that Sesostris the Egyptian
king, having subjugated the most of the Hellenic races, on his return to
Egypt brought a number of craftsmen with him. Accordingly he ordered a
statue of Osiris, his ancestor, to be executed in sumptuous style; and
the work was done by the artist Bryaxis, not the Athenian, but another
of the same name, who employed in its execution a mixture of various
materials. For he had filings of gold, and silver, and lead, and in
addition, tin; and of Egyptian stones not one was wanting, and there
were fragments of sapphire, and hematite, and emerald, and topaz. Having
ground down and mixed together all these ingredients, he gave to the
composition a blue colour, whence the darkish hue of the image; and
having mixed the whole with the colouring matter that was left over from
the funeral of Osiris and Apis, moulded the Serapis, the name of which
points to its connection with sepulture and its construction from
funeral materials, compounded as it is of Osiris and Apis, which
together make Osirapis.

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p6"></span>Another new deity was added to the number
with great religious pomp in Egypt, and was near being so in Greece by
the king of the Romans, who deified Antinous, whom he loved as Zeus
loved Ganymede, and whose beauty was of a very rare order: for lust is
not easily restrained, destitute as it is of fear; and men now observe
the sacred nights of Antinous, the shameful character of which the lover
who spent them with him knew well. Why reckon him among the gods, who is
honoured on account of uncleanness? And why do you command him to be
lamented as a son? And why should you enlarge on his beauty? Beauty
blighted by vice is loathsome. Do not play the tyrant, O man, over
beauty, nor offer foul insult to youth in its bloom. Keep beauty pure,
that it may be truly fair. Be king over beauty, not its tyrant. Remain
free, and then I shall acknowledge thy beauty, because thou hast kept
its image pure: then will I worship that true beauty which is the
archetype of all who are beautiful. Now the grave of the debauched boy
is the temple and town of Antinous. For just as temples are held in
reverence, so also are sepulchres, and pyramids, and mausoleums, and
labyrinths, which are temples of the dead, as the others are sepulchres
of the gods. As teacher on this point, I shall produce to you the Sibyl
prophetess:—

> <span id="vi.ii.iv-p6.1"></span> “Not the oracular lie of Phœbus,  
> Whom silly men called God, and falsely termed Prophet;  
> But the oracles of the great God, who was not made by men’s hands,  
> Like dumb idols of Sculptured stone.” <span
> id="fr_906"></span>[907](#fn_906)  

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span> <span id="vi.ii.iv-Page_186"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p8"></span>She also predicts the ruin of the temple,
foretelling that that of the Ephesian Artemis would be engulphed by
earthquakes and rents in the ground, as follows:—

> <span id="vi.ii.iv-p8.1"></span> “Prostrate on the ground Ephesus
> shall wail, weeping by the shore,  
> And seeking a temple that has no longer an inhabitant.”  

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p9"></span>She says also that the temple of Isis and
Serapis would be demolished and burned:—

> <span id="vi.ii.iv-p9.1"></span> “Isis, thrice-wretched goddess, thou
> shalt linger by the streams of the Nile;  
> Solitary, frenzied, silent, on the sands of Acheron.”  

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p10"></span>Then she proceeds:—

> <span id="vi.ii.iv-p10.1"></span> “And thou, Serapis, covered with a
> heap of white stones,  
> Shalt lie a huge ruin in thrice-wretched Egypt.”  

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p11"></span>But if you attend not to the prophetess,
hear at least your own philosopher, the Ephesian Heraclitus, upbraiding
images with their senselessness: “And to these images they pray, with
the same result as if one were to talk to the walls of his house.” For
are they not to be wondered at who worship stones, and place them before
the doors, as if capable of activity? They worship Hermes as a god, and
place Aguieus as a doorkeeper. For if people upbraid them with being
devoid of sensation, why worship them as gods? And if they are thought
to be endowed with sensation, why place them before the door? The
Romans, who ascribed their greatest successes to Fortune, and regarded
her as a very great deity, took her statue to the privy, and erected it
there, assigning to the goddess as a fitting temple—the necessary. But
senseless wood and stone, and rich gold, care not a whit for either
savoury odour, or blood, or smoke, by which, being at once honoured and
fumigated, they are blackened; no more do they for honour or insult. And
these images are more worthless than any animal. I am at a loss to
conceive how objects devoid of sense were deified, and feel compelled to
pity as miserable wretches those that wander in the mazes of this folly:
for if some living creatures have not all the senses, as worms and
caterpillars, and such as even from the first appear imperfect, as moles
and the shrew-mouse, which Nicander says is blind and uncouth; yet are
they superior to those utterly senseless idols and images. For they have
some one sense,—say, for example, hearing, or touching, or something
analogous to smell or taste; while images do not possess even one sense.
There are many creatures that have neither sight, nor hearing, nor
speech, such as the genus of oysters, which yet live and grow, and are
affected by the changes of the moon. But images, being motionless,
inert, and senseless, are bound, nailed, glued,—are melted, filed,
sawed, polished, carved. The senseless earth is dishonoured by the
makers of images, who change it by their art from its proper nature, and
induce men to worship it; and the makers of gods worship not gods and
demons, but in my view earth and art, which go to make up images. For,
in sooth, the image is only dead matter shaped by the craftsman’s hand.
But *we* have no sensible image of sensible matter, but an image that is
perceived by the mind alone,—God, who alone is truly God. <span
id="fr_907"></span>[908](#fn_907)

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p13"></span>And again, when involved in calamities,
the superstitious worshippers of stones, though they have learned by the
event that senseless matter is not to be worshipped, yet, yielding to
the pressure of misfortune, become the victims of their superstition;
and though despising the images, yet not wishing to appear wholly to
neglect them, are found fault with by those gods by whose names the
images are called.

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p14"></span>For Dionysius the tyrant, the younger,
having stripped off the golden mantle from the statue of Jupiter in
Sicily, ordered him to be clothed in a woollen one, remarking
facetiously that the latter was better than the golden one, being
lighter in summer and warmer in winter. And Antiochus of Cyzicus, being
in difficulties for money, ordered the golden statue of Zeus, fifteen
cubits in height, to be melted; and one like it, of less valuable
material, plated with gold, to be erected in place of it. And the
swallows and most birds fly to these statues, and void their excrement
on them, paying no respect either to Olympian Zeus, or Epidaurian
Asclepius, or even to Athene Polias, or the Egyptian Serapis; but not
even from them have you learned the senselessness of images. <span
id="fr_908"></span>[909](#fn_908) But it has happened that miscreants or
enemies have assailed and set fire to temples, and plundered them of
their votive gifts, and melted even the images themselves, from base
greed of gain. And if a Cambyses or a Darius, or any other madman, has
made such attempts, and if one has killed the Egyptian Apis, I laugh at
him killing their god, while pained at the outrage being perpetrated for
the sake of gain. I will therefore willingly forget such villany,
looking on acts like these more as deeds of covetousness, than as a
proof of the impotence of idols. But fire and earthquakes are shrewd
enough not to feel shy or frightened at either demons or idols, any more
than at pebbles heaped by the waves on the shore.

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p16"></span>I know fire to be capable of exposing and
curing superstition. If thou art willing to abandon this folly, the
element of fire shall light thy way. This same fire burned the temple in
Argos, with Chrysis the priestess; and that of Artemis in Ephesus the
second time after the Amazons. <span id="page_187">p. 187</span> <span
id="vi.ii.iv-Page_187"></span>And the Capitol in Rome was often wrapped
in flames; nor did the fire spare the temple of Serapis, in the city of
the Alexandrians. At Athens it demolished the temple of the Eleutherian
Dionysus; and as to the temple of Apollo at Delphi, first a storm
assailed it, and then the discerning fire utterly destroyed it. This is
told as the preface of what the fire promises. And the makers of images,
do they not shame those of you who are wise into despising matter? The
Athenian Phidias inscribed on the finger of the Olympian Jove,
Pantarkes <span id="fr_909"></span>[910](#fn_909) is beautiful. It was
not Zeus that was beautiful in his eyes, but the man he loved. And
Praxiteles, as Posidippus relates in his book about Cnidus, when he
fashioned the statue of Aphrodite of Cnidus, made it like the form of
Cratine, of whom he was enamoured, that the miserable people might have
the paramour of Praxiteles to worship. And when Phryne the courtesan,
the Thespian, was in her bloom, all the painters made their pictures of
Aphrodite copies of the beauty of Phryne; as, again, the sculptors at
Athens made their Mercuries like Alcibiades. It remains for you to judge
whether you ought to worship courtesans. Moved, as I believe, by such
facts, and despising such fables, the ancient kings unblushingly
proclaimed themselves gods, as this involved no danger from men, and
thus taught that on account of their glory they were made immortal.
Ceux, the son of Eolus, was styled Zeus by his wife Alcyone; Alcyone,
again, being by her husband styled Hera. Ptolemy the Fourth was called
Dionysus; and Mithridates of Pontus was also called Dionysus; and
Alexander wished to be considered the son of Ammon, and to have his
statue made horned by the sculptors—eager to disgrace the beauty of the
human form by the addition of a horn. And not kings only, but private
persons dignified themselves with the names of deities, as Menecrates
the physician, who took the name of Zeus. What need is there for me to
instance Alexarchus? He, having been by profession a grammarian, assumed
the character of the sun-god, as Aristus of Salamis relates. And why
mention Nicagorus? He was a native of Zela \[in Pontus\], and lived in
the days of Alexander. Nicagorus was styled Hermes, and used the dress
of Hermes, as he himself testifies. And whilst whole nations, and cities
with all their inhabitants, sinking into self-flattery, treat the myths
about the gods with contempt, at the same time men themselves, assuming
the air of equality with the gods, and being puffed up with vainglory,
vote themselves extravagant honours. There is the case of the Macedonian
Philip of Pella, the son of Amyntor, to whom they decreed divine worship
in Cynosargus, although his collar-bone was broken, and he had a lame
leg, and had one of his eyes knocked out. And again that of Demetrius,
who was raised to the rank of the gods; and where he alighted from his
horse on his entrance into Athens is the temple of Demetrius *the
Alighter;* and altars were raised to him everywhere, and nuptials with
Athene assigned to him by the Athenians. But he disdained the goddess,
as he could not marry the statue; and taking the courtesan Lamia, he
ascended the Acropolis, and lay with her on the couch of Athene, showing
to the old virgin the postures of the young courtesan.

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p18"></span>There is no cause for indignation, then,
at Hippo, who immortalized his own death. For this Hippo ordered the
following elegy to be inscribed on his tomb:—

> <span id="vi.ii.iv-p18.1"></span> “This is the sepulchre of Hippo,
> whom Destiny  
> Made, through death, equal to the immortal gods.”  

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p19"></span>Well done, Hippo! thou showest to us the
delusion of men. If they did not believe thee speaking, now that thou
art dead, let them become thy disciples. This is the oracle of Hippo;
let us consider it. The objects of your worship were once men, and in
process of time died; and fable and time have raised them to honour. For
somehow, what is present is wont to be despised through familiarity; but
what is past, being separated through the obscurity of time from the
temporary censure that attached to it, is invested with honour by
fiction, so that the present is viewed with distrust, the past with
admiration. Exactly in this way is it, then, that the dead men of
antiquity, being reverenced through the long prevalence of delusion
respecting them, are regarded as gods by posterity. As grounds of your
belief in these, there are your mysteries, your solemn assemblies, bonds
and wounds, and weeping deities.

> <span id="vi.ii.iv-p19.1"></span> “Woe, woe! that fate decrees my
> best-belov’d,  
> Sarpedon, by Patroclus’ hand to fall.” <span
> id="fr_910"></span>[911](#fn_910)  

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p21"></span>The will of Zeus was overruled; and Zeus
being worsted, laments for Sarpedon. With reason, therefore, have you
yourselves called them shades and demons, since Homer, paying Athene and
the other divinities sinister honour, has styled them demons:—

> <span id="vi.ii.iv-p21.1"></span> “She her heavenward course pursued  
> To join the immortals in the abode of Jove.” <span
> id="fr_911"></span>[912](#fn_911)  

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p23"></span>How, then, can shades and demons be still
reckoned gods, being in reality unclean and impure spirits, acknowledged
by all to be of an earthly and watery nature, sinking downwards by their
own weight, and flitting about graves and tombs, about which they appear
dimly, being but <span id="page_188">p. 188</span> <span
id="vi.ii.iv-Page_188"></span>shadowy phantasms? Such things are your
gods—shades and shadows; and to these add those maimed, wrinkled,
squinting divinities the Litæ, daughters of Thersites rather than of
Zeus. So that Bion—wittily, as I think—says, How in reason could men
pray Zeus for a beautiful progeny,—a thing he could not obtain for
himself?

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p24"></span>The incorruptible being, as far as in you
lies, you sink in the earth; and that pure and holy essence you have
buried in the grave, robbing the divine of its true nature.

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p25"></span>Why, I pray you, have you assigned the
prerogatives of God to what are no gods? Why, let me ask, have you
forsaken heaven to pay divine honour to earth? What else is gold, or
silver, or steel, or iron, or brass, or ivory, or precious stones? Are
they not earth, and of the earth?

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p26"></span>Are not all these things which you look
on the progeny of one mother—the earth?

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p27"></span>Why, then, foolish and silly men (for I
will repeat it), have you, defaming the supercelestial region, dragged
religion to the ground, by fashioning to yourselves gods of earth, and
by going after those created objects, instead of the uncreated Deity,
have sunk into deepest darkness?

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p28"></span>The Parian stone is beautiful, but it is
not yet Poseidon. The ivory is beautiful, but it is not yet the Olympian
Zeus. Matter always needs art to fashion it, but the deity needs
nothing. Art has come forward to do its work, and the matter is clothed
with its shape; and while the preciousness of the material makes it
capable of being turned to profitable account, it is only on account of
its form that it comes to be deemed worthy of veneration. Thy image, if
considered as to its origin, is gold, it is wood, it is stone, it is
earth, which has received shape from the artist’s hand. But I have been
in the habit of walking on the earth, not of worshipping it. For I hold
it wrong to entrust my spirit’s hopes to things destitute of the breath
of life. We must therefore approach as close as possible to the images.
How peculiarly inherent deceit is in them, is manifest from their very
look. For the forms of the images are plainly stamped with the
characteristic nature of demons. If one go round and inspect the
pictures and images, he will at a glance recognise your gods from their
shameful forms: Dionysus from his robe; Hephæstus from his art; Demeter
from her calamity; Ino from her head-dress; Poseidon from his trident;
Zeus from the swan; the pyre indicates Heracles; and if one sees a
statue of a naked woman without an inscription, he understands it to be
the golden Aphrodite. Thus that Cyprian Pygmalion became enamoured of an
image of ivory: the image was Aphrodite, and it was nude. The Cyprian is
made a conquest of by the mere shape, and embraces the image. This is
related by Philostephanus. A different Aphrodite in Cnidus was of stone,
and beautiful. Another person became enamoured of it, and shamefully
embraced the stone. Posidippus relates this. The former of these
authors, in his book on Cyprus, and the latter in his book on Cnidus. So
powerful is art to delude, by seducing amorous men into the pit. Art is
powerful, but it cannot deceive reason, nor those who live agreeably to
reason. The doves on the picture were represented so to the life by the
painter’s art, that the pigeons flew to them; and horses have neighed to
well-executed pictures of mares. They say that a girl became enamoured
of an image, and a comely youth of the statue at Cnidus. But it was the
eyes of the spectators that were deceived by art; for no one in his
senses ever would have embraced a goddess, or entombed himself with a
lifeless paramour, or become enamoured of a demon and a stone. But it is
with a different kind of spell that art deludes you, if it leads you not
to the indulgence of amorous affections: it leads you to pay religious
honour and worship to images and pictures.

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p29"></span>The picture is like. Well and good! Let
art receive its meed of praise, but let it not deceive man by passing
itself off for truth. The horse stands quiet; the dove flutters not, its
wing is motionless. But the cow of Dædalus, made of wood, allured the
savage bull; and art having deceived him, compelled him to meet a woman
full of licentious passion. Such frenzy have mischief-working arts
created in the minds of the insensate. On the other hand, apes are
admired by those who feed and care for them, because nothing in the
shape of images and girls’ ornaments of wax or clay deceives them. You
then will show yourselves inferior to apes by cleaving to stone, and
wood, and gold, and ivory images, and to pictures. Your makers of such
mischievous toys—the sculptors and makers of images, the painters and
workers in metal, and the poets—have introduced a motley crowd of
divinities: in the fields, Satyrs and Pans; in the woods, Nymphs, and
Oreads, and Hamadryads; and besides, in the waters, the rivers, and
fountains, the Naiads; and in the sea the Nereids. And now the Magi
boast that the demons are the ministers of their impiety, reckoning them
among the number of their domestics, and by their charms compelling them
to be their slaves. Besides, the nuptials of the deities, their
begetting and bringing forth of children that are recounted, their
adulteries celebrated in song, their carousals represented in comedy,
and bursts of laughter over their cups, which your authors introduce,
urge me to cry out, though I would fain be silent. Oh the godlessness!
You have turned heaven into a stage; <span id="page_189">p. 189</span>
<span id="vi.ii.iv-Page_189"></span>the Divine has become a drama; and
what is sacred you have acted in comedies under the masks of demons,
travestying true religion by your demon-worship \[superstition\].

> <span id="vi.ii.iv-p29.1"></span> “But he, striking the lyre, began to
> sing beautifully.” <span id="fr_912"></span>[913](#fn_912)  

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p31"></span>Sing to us, Homer, that beautiful song

> <span id="vi.ii.iv-p31.1"></span> “About the amours of Ares and Venus
> with the beautiful crown:  
> How first they slept together in the palace of Hephæstus  
> Secretly; and he gave many gifts, and dishonoured the bed and chamber
> of king Hephæstus.”  

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p32"></span>Stop, O Homer, the song! It is not
beautiful; it teaches adultery, and we are prohibited from polluting our
ears with hearing about adultery for we are they who bear about with us,
in this living and moving image of our human nature, the likeness of
God,—a likeness which dwells with us, takes counsel with us, associates
with us, is a guest with us, feels with us, feels for us. We have become
a consecrated offering to God for Christ’s sake: we are the chosen
generation, the royal priesthood, the holy nation, the peculiar people,
who once were not a people, but are now the people of God; who,
according to John, are not of those who are beneath, but have learned
all from Him who came from above; who have come to understand the
dispensation of God; who have learned to walk in newness of life. But
these are not the sentiments of the many; but, casting off shame and
fear, they depict in their houses the unnatural passions of the demons.
Accordingly, wedded to impurity, they adorn their bed-chambers with
painted tablets <span id="fr_913"></span>[914](#fn_913) hung up in them,
regarding licentiousness as religion; and lying in bed, in the midst of
their embraces, they look on that Aphrodite locked in the embrace of her
paramour. And in the hoops of their rings they cut a representation of
the amorous bird that fluttered round Leda,—having a strong predilection
for representations of effeminacy,—and use a seal stamped with an
impression of the licentiousness of Zeus. Such are examples of your
voluptuousness, such are the theologies of vice, such are the
instructions of your gods, who commit fornication along with you; for
what one wishes, that he thinks, according to the Athenian orator. And
of what kind, on the other hand, are your other images? Diminutive Pans,
and naked girls, and drunken Satyrs, and phallic tokens, painted naked
in pictures disgraceful for filthiness. And more than this: you are not
ashamed in the eyes of all to look at representations of all forms of
licentiousness which are portrayed in public places, but set them up and
guard them with scrupulous care, consecrating these pillars of
shamelessness at home, as if, forsooth, they were the images of your
gods, depicting on them equally the postures of Philænis and the labours
of Heracles. Not only the use of these, but the sight of them, and the
very hearing of them, we denounce as deserving the doom of oblivion.
Your ears are debauched, your eyes commit fornication, your looks commit
adultery before you embrace. O ye that have done violence to man, and
have devoted to shame what is divine in this handiwork of God, you
disbelieve everything that you may indulge your passions, and that ye
may believe in idols, because you have a craving after their
licentiousness, but disbelieve God, because you cannot bear a life of
self-restraint. You have hated what was better, and valued what was
worse, having been spectators indeed of virtue, but actors of vice.
Happy, therefore, so to say, alone are all those with one accord,—

> <span id="vi.ii.iv-p33.1"></span> “Who shall refuse to look on any
> temples  
> And altars, worthless seats of dumb stones,  
> And idols of stone, and images made by hands,  
> Stained with the life’s-blood, and with sacrifices  
> Of quadrupeds, and bipeds, and fowls, and butcheries of wild
> beasts.” <span id="fr_914"></span>[915](#fn_914)  

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p35"></span>For we are expressly prohibited from
exercising a deceptive art: “For thou shalt not make,” says the prophet,
“the likeness of anything which is in heaven above or in the earth
beneath.” <span id="fr_915"></span>[916](#fn_915)

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p37"></span>For can we possibly any longer suppose
the Demeter, and the Core, and the mystic Iacchus of Praxiteles, to be
gods, and not rather regard the art of Leucippus, or the hands of
Apelles, which clothed the material with the form of the divine glory,
as having a better title to the honour? But while you bestow the
greatest pains that the image may be fashioned with the most exquisite
beauty possible, you exercise no care to guard against your becoming
like images for stupidity. Accordingly, with the utmost clearness and
brevity, the prophetic word condemns this practice: “For all the gods of
the nations are the images of demons; but God made the heavens, and what
is in heaven.” <span id="fr_916"></span>[917](#fn_916) Some, however,
who have fallen into error, I know not how, worship God’s work instead
of God Himself,—the sun and the moon, and the rest of the starry
choir,—absurdly imagining these, which are but instruments for measuring
time, to be gods; “for by His word they were established, and all their
host by the breath of His mouth.” <span
id="fr_917"></span>[918](#fn_917)

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p40"></span>Human art, moreover, produces houses, and
ships, and cities, and pictures. But how shall I tell what God makes?
Behold the whole universe; it is His work: and the heaven, and <span
id="page_190">p. 190</span> <span id="vi.ii.iv-Page_190"></span>the sun,
and angels, and men, are the works of His fingers. <span
id="fr_918"></span>[919](#fn_918) How great is the power of God! His
bare volition was the creation of the universe. For God alone made it,
because He alone is truly God. By the bare exercise of volition He
creates; His mere willing was followed by the springing into being of
what He willed. Consequently the choir of philosophers are in error, who
indeed most nobly confess that man was made for the contemplation of the
heavens, but who worship the objects that appear in the heavens and are
apprehended by sight. For if the heavenly bodies are not the works of
men, they were certainly created for man. Let none of you worship the
sun, but set his desires on the Maker of the sun; nor deify the
universe, but seek after the Creator of the universe. The only refuge,
then, which remains for him who would reach the portals of salvation is
divine wisdom. From this, as from a sacred asylum, the man who presses
after salvation, can be dragged by no demon.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_906"></span>[185:907](0020240.htm#fr_906) <span
id="vi.ii.iv-p6.6"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p7"></span> Vulg., *Sibyllini*, p. 253.

<span id="fn_907"></span>[186:908](0020240.htm#fr_907) <span
id="vi.ii.iv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p12"></span> \[The Trent Creed makes the saints and
*their images* objects of worship. It is evident that Clement never
imagined the existence of an image among Christians. See p. 188,
*infra*.\]

<span id="fn_908"></span>[186:909](0020240.htm#fr_908) <span
id="vi.ii.iv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p15"></span> \[The Trent Creed makes the saints and
*their images* objects of worship. It is evident that Clement never
imagined the existence of an image among Christians. See p. 188,
*infra*.\]

<span id="fn_909"></span>[187:910](0020240.htm#fr_909) <span
id="vi.ii.iv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p17"></span> Pantarkes is said to have been the name
of a boy loved by Phidias: but as the word signifies “all-assisting,”
“all-powerful,” it might also be made to apply to Zeus.

<span id="fn_910"></span>[187:911](0020240.htm#fr_910) <span
id="vi.ii.iv-p19.4"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p20"></span> *Iliad*, xvi. 433.

<span id="fn_911"></span>[187:912](0020240.htm#fr_911) <span
id="vi.ii.iv-p21.4"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p22"></span> *Iliad*, i. 221; <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.ii.iv-p22.1"></span>μετὰ δαίμονας
αλλους</span>.

<span id="fn_912"></span>[189:913](0020240.htm#fr_912) <span
id="vi.ii.iv-p29.3"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p30"></span> *Odyss*., viii. 266.

<span id="fn_913"></span>[189:914](0020240.htm#fr_913) <span
id="vi.ii.iv-p32.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p33"></span> \[Is not this a rebuke to many of the
figures and pictures which vulgarize abodes of wealth in America?\]

<span id="fn_914"></span>[189:915](0020240.htm#fr_914) <span
id="vi.ii.iv-p33.7"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p34"></span> Sibyl. Justin Martyr, *Cohort. ad
Græcos*, p. 81. See p. 280, vol. i of this series.

<span id="fn_915"></span>[189:916](0020240.htm#fr_915) <span
id="vi.ii.iv-p35.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p36"></span> [Ex. xx.
4](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#004)<span id="vi.ii.iv-p36.1"></span>.
\[Clement even regards the art of painters and sculptors as unlawful for
Christians.\]

<span id="fn_916"></span>[189:917](0020240.htm#fr_916) <span
id="vi.ii.iv-p37.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p38"></span> [Ps. xcvi.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#005)<span id="vi.ii.iv-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_917"></span>[189:918](0020240.htm#fr_917) <span
id="vi.ii.iv-p38.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p39"></span> [Ps. xxxiii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#006)<span id="vi.ii.iv-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_918"></span>[190:919](0020240.htm#fr_918) <span
id="vi.ii.iv-p40.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p41"></span> [Ps. viii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#003)<span id="vi.ii.iv-p41.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V.—The Opinions of the Philosophers Respecting
God.](0020241)
