[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020109)  [Next](0020111.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.ii.xii"></span>

##### <span id="iv.ii.ii.xii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XII.—The Glory of the Six Days’ Work.

<span id="iv.ii.ii.xii-p1"></span>Of this six days’ work no man can give
a worthy explanation and description of all its parts, not though he had
ten thousand tongues and ten thousand mouths; nay, though he were to
live ten thousand years, sojourning in this life, not even so could he
utter anything worthy of these things, on account of the exceeding
greatness and riches of the wisdom of God which there is in the six
days’ work above narrated. Many writers indeed have imitated \[the
narration\], and essayed to give an explanation of these things; yet,
though they thence derived some suggestions, both concerning the
creation of the world and the nature of man, they have emitted no
slightest spark of truth. And the utterances of the philosophers, and
writers, and poets have an appearance of trustworthiness, on account of
the beauty of their diction; but their discourse is proved to be foolish
and idle, because the multitude of their nonsensical frivolities is very
great; and not a stray morsel of truth is found in them. For even if any
truth seems to have been uttered by them, it has a mixture of error. And
as a deleterious drug, when mixed with honey or wine, or some other
thing, makes the whole \[mixture\] hurtful and profitless; so also
eloquence is in their case found to be labour in vain; yea, rather an
injurious thing to those who credit it. Moreover, \[they spoke\]
concerning the seventh day, which all men acknowledge; but the most know
not that what among the Hebrews is called the “Sabbath,” is translated
into Greek the “Seventh” (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ii.ii.xii-p1.1"></span>ἑβδομάς</span>), a name which is adopted
by every nation, although they know not the reason of the appellation.
And as for what the poet Hesiod says of Erebus being produced from
chaos, as well as the earth and love which lords it over *his*
\[Hesiod’s\] gods and men, his dictum is shown to be idle and frigid,
and quite foreign to the truth. For it is not meet that God be conquered
by pleasure; since even men of temperance abstain from all base pleasure
and wicked lust.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII.—Remarks on the Creation of the World.](0020111.md)
