[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020171)  [Next](0020173.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.ii.ii"></span>

##### <span id="v.ii.ii-p0.1"></span>Chapter II.—Claim to Be Treated as Others are When Accused.

<span id="v.ii.ii-p1"></span>If, indeed, any one can convict us of a
crime, be it small or great, we do not ask to be excused from
punishment, but are prepared to undergo the sharpest and most merciless
inflictions. But if the accusation relates merely to our name—and it is
undeniable, that up to the present time the stories told about us rest
on nothing better than the common undiscriminating popular talk, nor has
any Christian <span id="fr_702"></span>[703](#fn_702.md) been convicted of
crime—it will devolve on you, illustrious and benevolent and most
learned sovereigns, to remove by law this despiteful treatment, so that,
as throughout the world both individuals and cities partake of your
beneficence, we also may feel grateful to you, exulting that we are no
longer the victims of false accusation. For it does not comport with
your justice, that others when charged with crimes should not be
punished till they are convicted, but that in our case the name we bear
should have more force than the evidence adduced on the trial, when the
judges, instead of inquiring whether the person arraigned have committed
any crime, vent their insults on the name, as if that were itself a
crime. <span id="fr_703"></span>[704](#fn_703.md) But no name in and by
itself is reckoned either good or bad; names appear bad or good
according as the actions underlying them are bad or good. You, however,
have yourselves a clear knowledge of this, since you are well instructed
in philosophy and all learning. For this reason, too, those who are
brought before you for trial, though they may be arraigned on the
gravest charges, have no fear, because they know that you will inquire
respecting their previous life, and not be influenced by names if they
mean nothing, nor by the charges contained in the indictments if they
should be false: they accept with equal satisfaction, as regards its
fairness, the sentence whether of condemnation or acquittal. What,
therefore, is conceded as the common right of all, we claim for
ourselves, that we shall not be hated and punished because we are called
Christians (for what has the name <span
id="fr_704"></span>[705](#fn_704) to do with our being bad men?.md), but be
tried on any charges which may be brought against us, and either be
released on our disproving them, or punished if convicted of crime—not
for the name (for no Christian is a bad man unless he falsely profess
our doctrines), but for the wrong which has been done. It is thus that
we see the philosophers judged. None of them before trial is deemed by
the judge either good or bad on account of his science or art, but if
found guilty of wickedness he is punished, without thereby affixing any
stigma on philosophy (for he is a bad man for not cultivating philosophy
in a lawful manner, but science is blameless), while if he refutes the
false charges he is acquitted. Let this equal justice, then, be done to
us. Let the life of the accused persons be investigated, but let the
name stand free from all imputation. I must at the outset of my defence
entreat you, illustrious emperors, to listen to me impartially: not to
be carried away by the common irrational talk and prejudge the case, but
to apply your desire of knowledge and love of truth to the examination
of our doctrine also. Thus, while you on your part will not err through
ignorance, we also, by disproving the charges arising out of the
undiscerning rumour of the multitude, shall cease to be assailed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_702"></span>[130:703](0020172.htm#fr_702.md) <span
id="v.ii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.ii-p2"></span> \[Kaye, 154.\]

<span id="fn_703"></span>[130:704](0020172.htm#fr_703.md) <span
id="v.ii.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.ii-p3"></span> \[Tatian, cap. xxvii., *supra*, p. 76.\]

<span id="fn_704"></span>[130:705](0020172.htm#fr_704.md) <span
id="v.ii.ii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.ii-p4"></span> \[Tatian, cap. xxvii., *supra*, p. 76.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III.—Charges Brought Against the Christians.](0020173.md)
