[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020339)  [Next](0020341.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xvi"></span>

##### <span id="vi.iv.ii.xvi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XVI.—How We are to Explain the Passages of Scripture Which Ascribe to God Human Affections.

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xvi-p1"></span>Here again arise the cavillers, who
say that joy and pain are passions of the soul: for they define joy as a
rational elevation and exultation, as rejoicing on account of what is
good; and pity as pain for one who suffers undeservedly; and that such
affections are moods and passions of the soul. But we, as would appear,
do not cease in such matters to understand the Scriptures carnally; and
starting from our own affections, interpret the will of the impassible
Deity similarly to our perturbations; and as we are capable of hearing;
so, supposing the same to be the case with the Omnipotent, err
impiously. For the Divine Being cannot be declared as it exists: but as
we who are fettered in the flesh were able to listen, so the prophets
spake to us; the Lord savingly accommodating Himself to the weakness of
men. <span id="fr_2325"></span>[2326](#fn_2325.md) Since, then, it is the
will of God that he, who is obedient to the commands and repents of his
sins should be saved, and we rejoice on account of our salvation, the
Lord, speaking by the prophets, appropriated our joy to Himself; <span
id="page_364">p. 364</span> <span id="vi.iv.ii.xvi-Page_364"></span>as
speaking lovingly in the Gospel He says, “I was hungry, and ye gave Me
to eat: I was thirsty, and ye gave Me to drink. For inasmuch as ye did
it to one of the least of these, ye did it to Me.” <span
id="fr_2326"></span>[2327](#fn_2326.md) As, then, He is nourished, though
not personally, by the nourishing of one whom He wishes nourished; so He
rejoices, without suffering change, by reason of him who has repented
being in joy, as He wished. And since God pities richly, being good, and
giving commands by the law and the prophets, and more nearly still by
the appearance of his Son, saving and pitying, as was said, those who
have found mercy; and properly the greater pities the less; and a man
cannot be greater than man, being by nature man; but God in everything
is greater than man; if, then, the greater pities the less, it is God
alone that will pity us. For a man is made to communicate by
righteousness, and bestows what he received from God, in consequence of
his natural benevolence and relation, and the commands which he obeys.
But God has no natural relation to us, as the authors of the heresies
will have it; neither on the supposition of His having made us of
nothing, nor on that of having formed us from matter; since the former
did not exist at all, and the latter is totally distinct from God unless
we shall dare to say that we are a part of Him, and of the same essence
as God. And I know not how one, who knows God, can bear to hear this
when he looks to our life, and sees in what evils we are involved. For
thus it would turn out, which it were impiety to utter, that God sinned
in \[certain\] portions, if the portions are parts of the whole and
complementary of the whole; and if not complementary, neither can they
be parts. But God being by nature rich in pity, in consequence of His
own goodness, cares for us, though neither portions of Himself, nor by
nature His children. And this is the greatest proof of the goodness of
God: that such being our relation to Him, and being by nature wholly
estranged, He nevertheless cares for us. For the affection in animals to
their progeny is natural, and the friendship of kindred minds is the
result of intimacy. But the mercy of God is rich toward us, who are in
no respect related to Him; I say either in our essence or nature, or in
the peculiar energy of our essence, but only in our being the work of
His will. And him who willingly, with discipline and teaching, accepts
the knowledge of the truth, He calls to adoption, which is the greatest
advancement of all. “Transgressions catch a man; and in the cords of his
own sins each one is bound.” <span id="fr_2327"></span>[2328](#fn_2327.md)
And God is without blame. And in reality, “blessed is the man who
feareth alway through piety.” <span id="fr_2328"></span>[2329](#fn_2328.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2325"></span>[363:2326](0020340.htm#fr_2325.md) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xvi-p2"></span> \[This *anthropopathy* is a figure by
which God is interpreted to us after the intelligible forms of humanity.
Language framed by human usage makes this figure necessary to
revelation.\]

<span id="fn_2326"></span>[364:2327](0020340.htm#fr_2326.md) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xvi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xvi-p3"></span> [Matt.
25:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#035.md),
[40](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#040.md)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xvi-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2327"></span>[364:2328](0020340.htm#fr_2327.md) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xvi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xvi-p4"></span> [Prov. v.
22](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#022.md)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xvi-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2328"></span>[364:2329](0020340.htm#fr_2328.md) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xvi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xvi-p5"></span> [Prov. xxviii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#014.md)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xvi-p5.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVII.—On the Various Kinds of Knowledge.](0020341.md)
