[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020274)  [Next](0020276) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xi"></span>

##### <span id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XI. <span id="fr_1517"></span>[1518](#fn_1517) —On Clothes.

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p2"></span>Wherefore neither are we to provide
for ourselves costly clothing any more than variety of food. The Lord
Himself, therefore, dividing His precepts into what relates to the body,
the soul, and thirdly, external things, counsels us to provide external
things on account of the body; and manages the body by the soul (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p2.1"></span>ψυκή</span>), and
disciplines the soul, saying, “Take no thought for your life (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p2.2"></span>ψυκῆ</span>) what ye
shall eat; nor yet for your body, what ye shall put on; for the life is
more than meat, and the body more than raiment.” <span
id="fr_1518"></span>[1519](#fn_1518) And He adds a plain example of
instruction: “Consider the ravens: for they neither sow nor reap, which
have neither storehouse nor barn; and God feedeth them.” <span
id="fr_1519"></span>[1520](#fn_1519) “Are ye not better than the
fowls?” <span id="fr_1520"></span>[1521](#fn_1520) Thus far as to food.
Similarly He enjoins with respect to clothing, which belongs to the
third division, that of things external, saying, “Consider the lilies,
how they spin not, nor weave. But I say unto you, that <span
id="page_264">p. 264</span> <span id="vi.iii.ii.xi-Page_264"></span>not
even Solomon was arrayed as one of these.”” <span
id="fr_1521"></span>[1522](#fn_1521) And Solomon the king plumed himself
exceedingly on his riches.

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p7"></span>What, I ask, more graceful, more
gay-coloured, than flowers? What, I say, more delightful than lilies or
roses? “And if God so clothe the grass, which is to-day in the field,
and to-morrow is cast into the oven, how much more will He clothe you, O
ye of little faith!” <span id="fr_1522"></span>[1523](#fn_1522) Here the
particle *what* (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p8.2"></span>τί</span>) banishes variety in food. For
this is shown from the Scripture, “Take no thought what things ye shall
eat, or what things ye shall drink.” For to take thought of these things
argues greed and luxury. Now eating, considered merely by itself, is the
sign of necessity; repletion, as we have said, of want. Whatever is
beyond that, is the sign of superfluity. And what is superfluous,
Scripture declares to be of the devil. The subjoined expression makes
the meaning plain. For having said, “Seek not what ye shall eat, or what
ye shall drink,” He added, “Neither be ye of doubtful (or lofty) <span
id="fr_1523"></span>[1524](#fn_1523) mind.” Now pride and luxury make
men waverers (or raise them aloft) from the truth; and the
voluptuousness, which indulges in superfluities, leads away from the
truth. Wherefore He says very beautifully, “And all these things do the
nations of the world seek after.” <span
id="fr_1524"></span>[1525](#fn_1524) The nations are the dissolute and
the foolish. And what are these things which He specifies? Luxury,
voluptuousness, rich cooking, dainty feeding, gluttony. These are the
“What?” And of bare sustenance, dry and moist, as being necessaries, He
says, “Your Father knoweth that ye need these.” And if, in a word, we
are naturally given to seeking, let us not destroy the faculty of
seeking by directing it to luxury, but let us excite it to the discovery
of truth. For He says, “Seek ye the kingdom of God, and the materials of
sustenance shall be added to you.”

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p11"></span>If, then, He takes away anxious care
for clothes and food, and superfluities in general, as unnecessary; what
are we to imagine ought to be said of love of ornament, and dyeing of
wool, and variety of colours, and fastidiousness about gems, and
exquisite working of gold, and still more, of artificial hair and
wreathed curls; and furthermore, of staining the eyes, and plucking out
hairs, and painting with rouge and white lead, and dyeing of the hair,
and the wicked arts that are employed in such deceptions? May we not
very well suspect, that what was quoted a little above respecting the
grass, has been said of those unornamental lovers of ornaments? For the
field is the world, and we who are bedewed by the grace of God are the
grass; and though cut down, we spring up again, as will be shown at
greater length in the book *On the Resurrection.* But hay figuratively
designates the vulgar rabble, attached to ephemeral pleasure,
flourishing for a little, loving ornament, loving praise, and being
everything but truth-loving, good for nothing but to be burned with
fire. “There was a certain man,” said the Lord, narrating, “very rich,
who was clothed in purple and scarlet, enjoying himself splendidly every
day.” This was the hay. “And a certain poor man named Lazarus was laid
at the rich man’s gate, full of sores, desiring to be filled with the
crumbs which fell from the rich man’s table.” This is the grass. Well,
the rich man was punished in Hades, being made partaker of the fire;
while the other flourished again in the Father’s bosom. I admire that
ancient city of the Lacedæmonians which permitted harlots alone to wear
flowered clothes, and ornaments of gold, interdicting respectable women
from love of ornament, and allowing courtesans alone to deck themselves.
On the other hand, the archons of the Athenians, who affected a polished
mode of life, forgetting their manhood, wore tunics reaching to the
feet, and had on the crobulus—a kind of knot of the hair—adorned with a
fastening of gold grasshoppers, to show their origin from the soil,
forsooth, in the ostentation of licentiousness. Now rivalry of these
archons extended also to the other Ionians, whom Homer, to show their
effeminancy, calls “Long-robed.” Those, therefore, who are devoted to
the image of the beautiful, that is, love of finery, not the beautiful
itself, and who under a fair name again practice idolatry, are to be
banished far from the truth, as those who by opinion, <span
id="fr_1525"></span>[1526](#fn_1525) not knowledge, dream of the nature
of the beautiful; and so life here is to them only a deep sleep of
ignorance; from which it becomes us to rouse ourselves and haste to that
which is truly beautiful and comely, and desire to grasp this alone,
leaving the ornaments of earth to the world, and bidding them farewell
before we fall quite asleep. I say, then, that man requires clothes for
nothing else than the covering of the body, for defence against excess
of cold and intensity of heat, lest the inclemency of the air injure us.
And if this is the object of clothing, see that one kind be not assigned
to men and another to women. For it is common to both to be covered, as
it is to eat and drink. The necessity, then, being common, we judge that
the provision ought to be similar. For as it is common to both to
require things to cover them, so also their coverings ought to be
similar; although such a covering ought to be assumed <span
id="page_265">p. 265</span> <span id="vi.iii.ii.xi-Page_265"></span>as
is requisite for covering the eyes of women. For if the female sex, on
account of their weakness, desire more, we ought to blame the habit of
that evil training, by which often men reared up in bad habits become
more effeminate than women. But this must not be yielded to. And if some
accommodation is to be made, they may be permitted to use softer
clothes, provided they put out of the way fabrics foolishly thin, and of
curious texture in weaving; bidding farewell to embroidery of gold and
Indian silks and elaborate Bombyces (silks), which is at first a worm,
then from it is produced a hairy caterpillar; after which the creature
suffers a new transformation into a third form which they call larva,
from which a long filament is produced, as the spider’s thread from the
spider. For these superfluous and diaphanous materials are the proof of
a weak mind, covering as they do the shame of the body with a slender
veil. For luxurious clothing, which cannot conceal the shape of the
body, is no more a covering. For such clothing, falling close to the
body, takes its form more easily, and adhering as it were to the flesh,
receives its shape, and marks out the woman’s figure, so that the whole
make of the body is visible to spectators, though not seeing the body
itself. <span id="fr_1526"></span>[1527](#fn_1526)

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p14"></span>Dyeing of clothes is also to be
rejected. For it is remote both from necessity and truth, in addition to
the fact that reproach in manners spring from it. <span
id="fr_1527"></span>[1528](#fn_1527) For the use of colours is not
beneficial, for they are of no service against cold; nor has it anything
for covering more than other clothing, except the opprobrium alone. And
the agreeableness of the colour afflicts greedy eyes, inflaming them to
senseless blindness. But for those who are white and unstained within,
it is most suitable to use white and simple garments. Clearly and
plainly, therefore, Daniel the prophet says, “Thrones were set, and upon
them sat one like the Ancient of days, and His vesture was white as
snow.” <span id="fr_1528"></span>[1529](#fn_1528) The Apocalypse says
also that the Lord Himself appeared wearing such a robe. It says also,
“I saw the souls of those that had witnessed, beneath the altar, and
there was given to each a white robe.” <span
id="fr_1529"></span>[1530](#fn_1529) And if it were necessary to seek
for any other colour, the natural colour of truth should suffice. <span
id="fr_1530"></span>[1531](#fn_1530) But garments which are like flowers
are to be abandoned to Bacchic fooleries, and to those of the rites of
initiation, along with purple and silver plate, as the comic poet says:—

> <span id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p18.1"></span> “Useful for tragedians, not far
> life.”  

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p19"></span>And our life ought to be anything
rather than a pageant. Therefore the dye of Sardis, and another of
olive, and another green, a rose-coloured, and scarlet, and ten thousand
other dyes, have been invented with much trouble for mischievous
voluptuousness. Such clothing is for looking at, not for covering.
Garments, too, variegated with gold, and those that are purple, and that
piece of luxury which has its name from beasts (figured on it), and that
saffron-coloured ointment-dipped robe, and those costly and
many-coloured garments of flaring membranes, we are to bid farewell to,
with the art itself. “For what prudent thing can these women have done,”
says the comedy, “who sit covered with flowers, wearing a
saffron-coloured dress, <span id="fr_1531"></span>[1532](#fn_1531)
painted?”

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p21"></span>The Instructor expressly admonishes,
“Boast not of the clothing of your garment, and be not elated on account
of any glory, as it is unlawful.” <span
id="fr_1532"></span>[1533](#fn_1532)

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p23"></span>Accordingly, deriding those who are
clothed in luxurious garments, He says in the Gospel: “Lo, they who live
in gorgeous apparel and luxury are in earthly palaces.” <span
id="fr_1533"></span>[1534](#fn_1533) He says in perishable palaces,
where are love of display, love of popularity, and flattery and deceit.
But those that wait at the court of heaven around the King of all, are
sanctified in the immortal vesture of the Spirit, that is, the flesh,
and so put on incorruptibility.

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p25"></span>As therefore she who is unmarried
devotes herself to God alone, and her care is not divided, but the
chaste married woman divides her life between God and her husband, while
she who is otherwise disposed is devoted entirely to marriage, that is,
to passion: in the same way I think the chaste wife, when she devotes
herself to her husband, sincerely serves God; but when she becomes fond
of finery, she falls away from God and from chaste wedlock, exchanging
her husband for the world, after the fashion of that Argive courtesan, I
mean Eriphyle,—

> <span id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p25.1"></span> “Who received gold prized above
> her dear husband.”  

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p26"></span>Wherefore I admire the Ceian
sophist, <span id="fr_1534"></span>[1535](#fn_1534) who delineated like
and suitable images of Virtue and Vice, representing the former of
these, viz. Virtue, standing simply, white-robed and pure, adorned with
modesty alone (for such ought to be the true wife, dowered with
modesty). But the other, viz. Vice, on the contrary, he introduces
dressed in superfluous attire, brightened up with colour not her own;
and her gait and mien are depicted as studiously framed to give
pleasure, forming a sketch of wanton women.

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p28"></span>But he who follows the Word will not
addict <span id="page_266">p. 266</span> <span
id="vi.iii.ii.xi-Page_266"></span>himself to any base pleasure;
wherefore also what is useful in the article of dress is to be
preferred. And if the Word, speaking of the Lord by David, sings, “The
daughters of kings made Thee glad by honour; the queen stood at Thy
right hand, clad in cloth of gold, girt with golden fringes,” it is not
luxurious raiment that he indicates; but he shows the immortal
adornment, woven of faith, of those that have found mercy, that is, the
Church; in which the guileless Jesus shines conspicuous as gold, and the
elect are the golden tassels. And if such must be woven <span
id="fr_1535"></span>[1536](#fn_1535) for the women, let us weave apparel
pleasant and soft to the touch, not flowered, like pictures, to delight
the eye. For the picture fades in course of time, and the washing and
steeping in the medicated juices of the dye wear away the wool, and
render the fabrics of the garments weak; and this is not favourable to
economy. It is the height of foolish ostentation to be in a flutter
about peploi, and xystides, and ephaptides, <span
id="fr_1536"></span>[1537](#fn_1536) and “cloaks,” and tunics, and “what
covers shame,” says Homer. For, in truth, I am ashamed when I see so
much wealth lavished on the covering of the nakedness. For primeval man
in Paradise provided a covering for his shame of branches and leaves;
and now, since sheep have been created for us, let us not be as silly as
sheep, but trained by the Word, let us condemn sumptuousness of
clothing, saying, “Ye are sheep’s wool.” Though Miletus boast, and Italy
be praised, and the wool, about which many rave, be protected beneath
skins, <span id="fr_1537"></span>[1538](#fn_1537) yet are we not to set
our hearts on it.

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p32"></span>The blessed John, despising the locks
of sheep as savouring of luxury, chose “camel’s hair,” and was clad in
it, making himself an example of frugality and simplicity of life. For
he also “ate locusts and wild honey,” <span
id="fr_1538"></span>[1539](#fn_1538) sweet and spiritual fare;
preparing, as he was, the lowly and chaste ways of the Lord. For how
possibly could he have worn a purple robe, who turned away from the pomp
of cities, and retired to the solitude of the desert, to live in
calmness with God, far from all frivolous pursuits—from all false show
of good—from all meanness? Elias used a sheepskin mantle, and fastened
the sheepskin with a girdle made of hair. <span
id="fr_1539"></span>[1540](#fn_1539) And Esaias, another prophet, was
naked and barefooted, <span id="fr_1540"></span>[1541](#fn_1540) and
often was clad in sackcloth, the garb of humility. And if you call
Jeremiah, he had only “a linen girdle.” <span
id="fr_1541"></span>[1542](#fn_1541)

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p37"></span>For as well-nurtured bodies, when
stripped, show their vigour more manifestly, so also beauty of character
shows its magnanimity, when not involved in ostentatious fooleries. But
to drag one’s clothes, letting them down to the soles of his feet, is a
piece of consummate foppery, impeding activity in walking, the garment
sweeping the surface dirt of the ground like a broom; since even those
emasculated creatures the dancers, who transfer their dumb shameless
profligacy to the stage, do not despise the dress which flows away to
such indignity; whose curious vestments, and appendages of fringes, and
elaborate motions of figures, show the trailing of sordid
effeminacy. <span id="fr_1542"></span>[1543](#fn_1542)

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p39"></span>If one should adduce the garment of
the Lord reaching down to the foot, that many-flowered coat <span
id="fr_1543"></span>[1544](#fn_1543) shows the flowers of wisdom, the
varied and unfading Scriptures, the oracles of the Lord, resplendent
with the rays of truth. In such another robe the Spirit arrayed the Lord
through David, when he sang thus: “Thou wert clothed with confession and
comeliness, putting on light as a garment.” <span
id="fr_1544"></span>[1545](#fn_1544)

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p42"></span>As, then, in the fashioning of our
clothes, we must keep clear of all strangeness, so in the use of them we
must beware of extravagance. For neither is it seemly for the clothes to
be above the knee, as they say was the case with the Lacedæmonian
virgins; <span id="fr_1545"></span>[1546](#fn_1545) nor is it becoming
for any part of a woman to be exposed. Though you may with great
propriety use the language addressed to him who said, “Your arm is
beautiful; yes, but it is not for the public gaze. Your thighs are
beautiful; but, was the reply, for my husband alone. And your face is
comely. Yes; but only for him who has married me.” But I do not wish
chaste women to afford cause for such praises to those who, by praises,
hunt after grounds of censure; and not only because it is prohibited to
expose the ankle, but because it has also been enjoined that the head
should be veiled and the face covered; for it is a wicked thing for
beauty to be a snare to men. Nor is it seemly for a woman to wish to
make herself conspicuous, by using a purple veil. Would it were possible
to abolish purple in dress, so as not to turn the eyes of spectators on
the face of those that wear it! But the women, in the manufacture of all
the rest of their dress, have made everything of purple, thus inflaming
the lusts. And, in truth, those women who are crazy <span
id="page_267">p. 267</span> <span
id="vi.iii.ii.xi-Page_267"></span>about these stupid and luxurious
purples, “purple (dark) death has seized,” <span
id="fr_1546"></span>[1547](#fn_1546) according to the poetic saying. On
account of this purple, then, Tyre and Sidon, and the vicinity of the
Lacedæmonian Sea, are very much desired; and their dyers and
purple-fishers, and the purple fishes themselves, because their blood
produces purple, are held in high esteem. But crafty women and
effeminate men, who blend these deceptive dyes with dainty fabrics,
carry their insane desires beyond all bounds, and export their fine
linens no longer from Egypt, but some other kinds from the land of the
Hebrews and the Cilicians. I say nothing of the linens made of
Amorgos <span id="fr_1547"></span>[1548](#fn_1547) and Byssus. Luxury
has outstripped nomenclature.

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p46"></span>The covering ought, in my judgment,
to show that which is covered to be better than itself, as the image is
superior to the temple, the soul to the body, and the body to the
clothes. <span id="fr_1548"></span>[1549](#fn_1548) But now, quite the
contrary, the body of these ladies, if sold, would never fetch a
thousand Attic drachms. Buying, as they do, a single dress at the price
of ten thousand talents, they prove themselves to be of less use and
less value than cloth. Why in the world do you seek after what is rare
and costly, in preference to what is at hand and cheap? It is because
you know not what is really beautiful, what is really good, and seek
with eagerness shows instead of realities from fools who, like people
out of their wits, imagine black to be white.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1517"></span>[263:1518](0020275.htm#fr_1517) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p0.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p1"></span> Chap. xi. is not a separate chapter
in the Greek, but appears as part of chap. x.

<span id="fn_1518"></span>[263:1519](0020275.htm#fr_1518) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p2.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p3"></span> [Luke
12:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#022),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#023)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1519"></span>[263:1520](0020275.htm#fr_1519) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p4"></span> [Luke xii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#024)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1520"></span>[263:1521](0020275.htm#fr_1520) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p5"></span> [Luke xii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#024)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1521"></span>[264:1522](0020275.htm#fr_1521) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p6"></span> [Luke xii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#027)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1522"></span>[264:1523](0020275.htm#fr_1522) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p8"></span> [Luke xii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#028)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1523"></span>[264:1524](0020275.htm#fr_1523) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p8.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p9"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p9.1"></span>μετέωρος</span>

<span id="fn_1524"></span>[264:1525](0020275.htm#fr_1524) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p10"></span> [Matt. vi.
32](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#032)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1525"></span>[264:1526](0020275.htm#fr_1525) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p12"></span> Clement uses here Platonic language,
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p12.1"></span>δόξα</span>
meaning opinion established on no scientific basis, which may be true or
may be false, and <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p12.2"></span>ἐπιστήμη</span> knowledge sure and
certain, because based on the reasons of things.

<span id="fn_1526"></span>[265:1527](0020275.htm#fr_1526) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p12.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p13"></span> \[Martial, *Epigrams*, *passim*.\]

<span id="fn_1527"></span>[265:1528](0020275.htm#fr_1527) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p15"></span> \[The reproach and opprobrium of
foppery.\]

<span id="fn_1528"></span>[265:1529](0020275.htm#fr_1528) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p16"></span> [Dan. vii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#009)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1529"></span>[265:1530](0020275.htm#fr_1529) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p16.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p17"></span> [Rev.
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#009),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#011)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1530"></span>[265:1531](0020275.htm#fr_1530) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p17.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p18"></span> \[This refers to the natural tint of
unbleached linen, or to wool not whitened by the art of the fuller.
Hermas speaks of “*pure* undressed linen.” Book iii. 4, p. 40,
*supra*.\]

<span id="fn_1531"></span>[265:1532](0020275.htm#fr_1531) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p20"></span> \[The colour (probably, for <span
class="sc"><span id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p20.1"></span>mss.</span> differ)
reprehended as the dress of the false shepherd in Hermas. See note 10,
book iii. Simil. 6. cap. ii. p. 36, this volume.\]

<span id="fn_1532"></span>[265:1533](0020275.htm#fr_1532) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p22"></span> [Ecclus. xi.
4](../../../bib/apo/sir011.htm#004)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1533"></span>[265:1534](0020275.htm#fr_1533) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p23.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p24"></span> [Luke vii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#025)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1534"></span>[265:1535](0020275.htm#fr_1534) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p26.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p27"></span> Prodicus, of the island Ceus.

<span id="fn_1535"></span>[266:1536](0020275.htm#fr_1535) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p28.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p29"></span> Or by a conjectural emendation of
the text, “If in this we must relax somewhat in the case of women.”

<span id="fn_1536"></span>[266:1537](0020275.htm#fr_1536) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p29.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p30"></span> Various kinds of robes. \[The
*peplus*, or shawl of fine wool, seems to be specified in condemning the
boast below, which asserts real wool and no imitation.\]

<span id="fn_1537"></span>[266:1538](0020275.htm#fr_1537) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p30.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p31"></span> Alluding to the practice of covering
the fleeces of sheep with skins, when the wool was very fine, to prevent
it being soiled by exposure.

<span id="fn_1538"></span>[266:1539](0020275.htm#fr_1538) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p32.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p33"></span> [Mark i.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#006)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1539"></span>[266:1540](0020275.htm#fr_1539) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p33.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p34"></span> [2 Kings i.
8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#008)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1540"></span>[266:1541](0020275.htm#fr_1540) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p34.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p35"></span> [Isa. xx.
2](../../../bib/kjv/isa020.htm#002)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1541"></span>[266:1542](0020275.htm#fr_1541) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p35.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p36"></span> [Jer. xiii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#001)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1542"></span>[266:1543](0020275.htm#fr_1542) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p37.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p38"></span> \[The bearing of this chapter on
ecclesiastical vestments must be evident. It is wholly inconsistent with
aught but very simple attire in public worship; and rebukes even the
fashionable costumes of women and much of our mediæval æstheticism, with
primitive severity. On the whole subject, see the *Vestiarium
Christianum* of the Rev. Wharton B. Marriott. London, *Rivingtons*,
1868.\]

<span id="fn_1543"></span>[266:1544](0020275.htm#fr_1543) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p39.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p40"></span> \[Based upon the idea that Joseph’s
coat of many colours, which was afterwards dipped in blood, was a symbol
of our Lord’s raiment, on which lots were cast.\]

<span id="fn_1544"></span>[266:1545](0020275.htm#fr_1544) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p40.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p41"></span> [Ps. civ.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#002)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1545"></span>[266:1546](0020275.htm#fr_1545) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p42.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p43"></span> \[Women’s tunics tucked up to give
freedom to the knee, are familiar objects in ancient art.\]

<span id="fn_1546"></span>[267:1547](0020275.htm#fr_1546) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p43.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p44"></span> *Iliad*, v. 83.

<span id="fn_1547"></span>[267:1548](0020275.htm#fr_1547) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p44.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p45"></span> Flax grown in the island of Amorgos.

<span id="fn_1548"></span>[267:1549](0020275.htm#fr_1548) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p46.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p47"></span> \[[Matt. vi.
25](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#025)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.xi-p47.1"></span>.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. XII.—On Shoes.](0020276)
