[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020393)  [Next](0020395) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.vi.iv"></span>

##### <span id="vi.iv.vi.iv-p0.1"></span>Chapter IV.—The Greeks Drew Many of Their Philosophical Tenets from the Egyptian and Indian Gymnosophists.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.iv-p1"></span>We shall find another testimony in
confirmation, in the fact that the best of the philosophers, having
appropriated their most excellent dogmas from us, boast, as it were, of
certain of the tenets which pertain to each sect being culled from other
Barbarians, chiefly from the Egyptians—both other tenets, and that
especially of the transmigration of the soul. For the Egyptians pursue a
philosophy of their own. This is principally shown by their sacred
ceremonial. For first advances the Singer, bearing some one of the
symbols of music. For they say that he must learn two of the books of
Hermes, the one of which contains the hymns of the gods, the second the
regulations for the king’s life. And after the Singer advances the
Astrologer, <span id="fr_3249"></span>[3250](#fn_3249) with a horologe
in his hand, and a palm, the symbols of astrology. He must have the
astrological books of Hermes, which are four in number, always in his
mouth. Of these, one is about the order of the fixed stars that are
visible, and another about the conjunctions and luminous appearances of
the sun and moon; and the rest respecting their risings. Next in order
advances the sacred Scribe, with wings on his head, and in his hand a
book and rule, in which were writing ink and the reed, with which they
write. And he must be acquainted with what are called hieroglyphics, and
know about cosmography and geography, the position of the sun and moon,
and about the five planets; also the description of Egypt, and the chart
of the Nile; and the description of the equipment of the priests and of
the places consecrated to them, and about the measures and the things in
use in the sacred rites. Then the Stole-keeper follows those previously
mentioned, with the cubit of justice and the cup for libations. He is
acquainted with all points called Pædeutic (relating to training) and
Moschophatic (sacrificial). There are also ten books which relate to the
honour paid by them to their gods, and containing the Egyptian worship;
as that relating to sacrifices, first-fruits, hymns, prayers,
processions, festivals, and the like. And behind all walks the Prophet,
with the water-vase carried openly in his arms; who is followed by those
who carry the issue of loaves. He, as being the governor of the temple,
learns the ten books called “Hieratic;” and they contain all about the
laws, and the gods, and the whole of the training of the priests. For
the Prophet is, among the Egyptians, also over the distribution of the
revenues. There are then forty-two books of Hermes indispensably
necessary; of which the six-and-thirty containing the whole philosophy
of the Egyptians are learned by the forementioned personages; and the
other six, which are medical, by the Pastophoroi
(image-bearers),—treating of the structure of the body, and of diseases,
and instruments, and medicines, and about the eyes, and the last about
women. <span id="fr_3250"></span>[3251](#fn_3250) Such are the customs
of the Egyptians, to speak briefly.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.iv-p4"></span>The philosophy of the Indians, too, has
been celebrated. Alexander of Macedon, having taken ten of the Indian
Gymnosophists, that seemed the best and most sententious, proposed to
them problems, threatening to put to death him that did not answer to
the purpose; ordering one, who was the eldest of them, to decide.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.iv-p5"></span>The first, then, being asked whether he
thought that the living were more in number than the dead, said, The
living; for that the <span id="page_489">p. 489</span> <span
id="vi.iv.vi.iv-Page_489"></span>dead were not. The second, on being
asked whether the sea or the land maintained larger beasts, said, The
land; for the sea was part of it. And the third being asked which was
the most cunning of animals? The one, which has not hitherto been known,
man. And the fourth being interrogated, For what reason they had made
Sabba, who was their prince, revolt, answered, Because they wished him
to live well rather than die ill. And the fifth being asked, Whether he
thought that day or night was first, said, One day. For puzzling
questions must have puzzling answers. And the sixth being posed with the
query, How shall one be loved most? By being most powerful; in order
that he may not be timid. And the seventh being asked, How any one of
men could become God? said, If he do what it is impossible for man to
do. And the eighth being asked, Which is the stronger, life or death?
said, Life, which bears such ills. And the ninth being interrogated, Up
to what point it is good for a man to live? said, Till he does not think
that to die is better than to live. And on Alexander ordering the tenth
to say something, for he was judge, he said, “One spake worse than
another.” And on Alexander saying, Shall you not, then, die first,
having given such a judgment? he said, And how, O king, wilt thou prove
true, after saying that thou wouldest kill first the first man that
answered very badly?

<span id="vi.iv.vi.iv-p6"></span>And that the Greeks are called
pilferers of all manner of writing, is, as I think, sufficiently
demonstrated by abundant proofs. <span
id="fr_3251"></span>[3252](#fn_3251)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3249"></span>[488:3250](0020394.htm#fr_3249) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.iv-p2"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vi.iv-p2.1"></span>Ὠροσκόοπος</span>. \[Elucidation III.\]

<span id="fn_3250"></span>[488:3251](0020394.htm#fr_3250) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.iv-p2.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.iv-p3"></span> \[Elucidation IV.\]

<span id="fn_3251"></span>[489:3252](0020394.htm#fr_3251) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.iv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.iv-p7"></span> \[Instructive remarks on the
confusions, etc., in Greek authors, may be seen in Schliemann, *Mycenœ*,
p. 36, ed. New York, 1878.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V.—The Greeks Had Some Knowledge of the True
God.](0020395)
