[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020163)  [Next](0020165) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xxvii"></span>

##### <span id="iv.ii.iii.xxvii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXVII.—Roman Chronology to the Death of M. Aurelius.

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xxvii-p1"></span>When Cyrus, then, had reigned
twenty-nine years, and had been slain by Tomyris in the country of the
Massagetæ, this being in the 62d Olympiad, then the Romans began to
increase <span id="page_120">p. 120</span> <span
id="iv.ii.iii.xxvii-Page_120"></span>in power, God strengthening them,
Rome having been founded by Romulus, the reputed child of Mars and Ilia,
in the 7th Olympiad, on the 21st day of April, the year being then
reckoned as consisting of ten months. Cyrus, then, having died, as we
have already said, in the 62d Olympiad, this date falls 220 A.U.C., in
which year also Tarquinius, surnamed Superbus, reigned over the Romans,
who was the first who banished Romans and corrupted the youth, and made
eunuchs of the citizens, and, moreover, first defiled virgins, and then
gave them in marriage. On this account he was fitly called Superbus in
the Roman language, and that is translated “the Proud.” For he first
decreed that those who saluted him should have their salute acknowledged
by some one else. He reigned twenty-five years. After him yearly consuls
were introduced, tribunes also and ediles for 453 years, whose names we
consider it long and superfluous to recount. For if any one is anxious
to learn them, he will ascertain them from the tables which Chryserus
the nomenclator compiled: he was a freedman of Aurelius Verus, who
composed a very lucid record of all things, both names and dates, from
the rounding of Rome to the death of his own patron, the Emperor Verus.
The annual magistrates ruled the Romans, as we say, for 453 years.
Afterwards those who are called emperors began in this order: first,
Caius Julius, who reigned 3 years 4 months 6 days; then Augustus, 56
years 4 months 1 day; Tiberius, 22 years; then another Caius, 3 years 8
months 7 days; Claudius, 23 years 8 months 24 days; Nero, 13 years 6
months 58 days; Galba, 2 years 7 months 6 days; Otho, 3 months 5 days;
Vitellius, 6 months 22 days; Vespasian, 9 years 11 months 22 days;
Titus, 2 years 22 days; Domitian, 15 years 5 months 6 days; Nerva, 1
year 4 months 10 days; Trajan, 19 years 6 months 16 days; Adrian, 20
years 10 months 28 days; Antoninus, 22 years 7 months 6 days; Verus, 19
years 10 days. The time therefore of the Cæsars to the death of the
Emperor Verus is 237 years 5 days. From the death of Cyrus, therefore,
and the reign of Tarquinius Superbus, to the death of the Emperor Verus,
the whole time amounts to 744 years.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVIII.—Leading Chronological Epochs.](0020165)
