[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020313)  [Next](0020315.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi"></span>

##### <span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXI.—The Jewish Institutions and Laws of Far Higher Antiquity Than the Philosophy of the Greeks.

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p1"></span>On the plagiarizing of the dogmas of
the philosophers from the Hebrews, we shall treat a little afterwards.
But first, as due order demands, we must now speak of the epoch of
Moses, by which the philosophy of the Hebrews will be demonstrated
beyond all contradiction to be the most ancient of all wisdom. This has
been discussed with accuracy by Tatian in his book *To the Greeks*, and
by Cassian in the first book of his *Exegetics*. Nevertheless our
commentary demands that we too should run over what has been said on the
point. Apion, then, the grammarian, surnamed Pleistonices, in the fourth
book of *The Egyptian Histories*, although of so hostile a disposition
towards the Hebrews, being by race an Egyptian, as to compose a work
against the Jews, when referring to Amosis king of the Egyptians, and
his exploits, adduces, as a witness, Ptolemy of Mendes. And his remarks
are to the following effect: Amosis, who lived in the time of the Argive
Inachus, overthrew Athyria, as Ptolemy of Mendes relates in his
*Chronology*. Now this Ptolemy was a priest; and setting forth the deeds
of the Egyptian kings in three entire books, he says, that the exodus of
the Jews from Egypt, under the conduct of Moses, took place while Amosis
was king of Egypt. Whence it is seen that Moses flourished in the time
of Inachus. And of the Hellenic states, the most ancient is the Argolic,
I mean that which took its rise from Inachus, as Dionysius of
Halicarnassus teaches in his *Times*. And younger by forty generations
than it was Attica, founded by Cecrops, who was an aboriginal of double
race, as Tatian expressly says; and Arcadia, founded by Pelasgus,
younger too by nine generations; and he, too, is said to have been an
aboriginal. And more recent than this last by fifty-two generations, was
Pthiotis, founded by Deucalion. And from the time of Inachus to the
Trojan war twenty generations or more are reckoned; let us say, four
hundred years and more. And if Ctesias says that the Assyrian power is
many years older than the Greek, the exodus of Moses from Egypt will
appear to have taken place in the forty-second year of the Assyrian
empire, <span id="fr_2030"></span>[2031](#fn_2030.md) in the thirty-second
year of the reign of Belochus, in the time of Amosis the Egyptian, and
of Inachus the Argive. And in Greece, in the time of Phoroneus, who
succeeded Inachus, the flood of Ogyges occurred; and monarchy subsisted
in Sicyon first in the person of Ægialeus, then of Europs, then of
Telches; in Crete, in the person of Cres. For Acusilaus says that
Phoroneus was the first man. Whence, too, the author of *Phoronis* said
that he was “the father of mortal men.” Thence Plato in the *Timœus*,
following Acusilaus, writes: “And wishing to draw them out into a
discussion respecting antiquities, he <span
id="fr_2031"></span>[2032](#fn_2031.md) said that he ventured to speak of
the most remote antiquities of this city <span
id="fr_2032"></span>[2033](#fn_2032.md) respecting Phoroneus, called the
first man, and Niobe, and what happened after the deluge.” And in the
time of Phorbus lived Actæus, from whom is derived Actaia, Attica; and
in the time of Triopas lived Prometheus, and Atlas, and Epimetheus, and
Cecrops of double race, and Ino. And in the time of Crotopus occurred
the burning of Phaëthon, and the deluge <span
id="fr_2033"></span>[2034](#fn_2033.md) of Deucalion; and in the time of
Sthenelus, the reign of Amphictyon, and the arrival of Danaus in the
Peloponnesus; and trader Dardanus happened the building of Dardania,
whom, says Homer,

> <span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p5.2"></span> “First cloud-compelling Zeus
> begat,”—  

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p6"></span>and the transmigration from Crete into
Phœnicia. And in the time of Lynceus took place the abduction of
Proserpine, and the dedication of the sacred enclosure in Eleusis, and
the husbandry of Triptolemus, and the arrival of Cadmus in Thebes, and
the reign of Minos. And in the time of Prœtus the war of Eumolpus with
the Athenians took place; and in the time of Acrisius, the removal of
Pelops from Phrygia, the arrival of Ion at Athens; and the second
Cecrops appeared, and the exploits of Perseus and Dionysus took place,
and Orpheus and Musæus lived. And in the eighteenth year of the reign of
Agamemnon, Troy was taken, in the first year of the reign of Demophon
the son of Theseus at Athens, on the twelfth day <span id="page_325">p.
325</span> <span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-Page_325"></span>of the month
Thargelion, as Dionysius the Argive says; but Ægias and Dercylus, in the
third book, say that it was on the eighth day of the last division of
the month Panemus; Hellanicus says that it was on the twelfth of the
month Thargelion; and some of the authors of the *Attica* say that it
was on the eighth of the last division of the month in the last year of
Menestheus, at full moon.

> <span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p6.1"></span> “It was midnight,”  

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p7"></span>says the author of the *Little Iliad*,

> <span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p7.1"></span> “And the moon shone clear.”  

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p8"></span>Others say, it took place on the same
day of Scirophorion. But Theseus, the rival of Hercules, is older by a
generation than the Trojan war. Accordingly Tlepolemus, a son of
Hercules, is mentioned by Homer, as having served at Troy.

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p9"></span>Moses, then, is shown to have preceded
the deification of Dionysus six hundred and four years, if he was
deified in the thirty-second year of the reign of Perseus, as
Apollodorus says in his *Chronology*. From Bacchus to Hercules and the
chiefs that sailed with Jason in the ship Argo, are comprised
sixty-three years. Æsculapius and the Dioscuri sailed with them, as
Apollonius Rhodius testifies in his *Argonautics.* And from the reign of
Hercules, in Argos, to the deification of Hercules and of Æsculapius,
are comprised thirty-eight years, according to Apollodorus the
chronologist; from this to the deification of Castor and Pollux,
fifty-three years. And at this time Troy was taken. And if we may
believe the poet Hesiod, let us hear him:—

> <span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p9.1"></span> “Then to Jove, Maia, Atlas’
> daughter, bore renowned Hermes,  
> Herald of the immortals, having ascended the sacred couch.  
> And Semele, the daughter of Cadmus, too, bore an illustrious son,  
> Dionysus, the joy-inspiring, when she mingled with him in love.” <span
> id="fr_2034"></span>[2035](#fn_2034.md)  

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p11"></span>Cadmus, the father of Semele, came to
Thebes in the time of Lynceus, and was the inventor of the Greek
letters. Triopas was a contemporary of Isis, in the seventh generation
from Inachus. And Isis, who is the same as Io, is so called, it is said,
from her going (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p11.1"></span>ἰέναι</span>) roaming over the whole
earth. Her, Istrus, in his work on the migration of the Egyptians, calls
the daughter of Prometheus. Prometheus lived in the time of Triopas, in
the seventh generation after Moses. So that Moses appears to have
flourished even before the birth of men, according to the chronology of
the Greeks. Leon, who treated of the Egyptian divinities, says that Isis
by the Greeks was called Ceres, who lived in the time of Lynceus, in the
eleventh generation after Moses. And Apis the king of Argos built
Memphis, as Aristippus says in the first book of the *Arcadica*. And
Aristeas the Argive says that he was named Serapis, and that it is he
that the Egyptians worship. And Nymphodorus of Amphipolis, in the third
book of the *Institutions of Asia*, says that the bull Apis, dead and
laid in a coffin (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p11.2"></span>σορός</span>), was deposited in the temple
of the god (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p11.3"></span>δαίμονος</span>) there worshipped, and
thence was called Soroapis, and afterwards Serapis by the custom of the
natives. And Apis is third after Inachus. Further, Latona lived in the
time of Tityus. “For he dragged Latona, the radiant consort of Zeus.”
Now Tityus was contemporary with Tantalus. Rightly, therefore, the
Bœotian Pindar writes, “And in time was Apollo born;” and no wonder when
he is found along with Hercules, serving Admetus “for a long year.”
Zethus and Amphion, the inventors of music, lived about the age of
Cadmus. And should one assert that Phemonoe was the first who sang
oracles in verse to Acrisius, let him know that twenty-seven years after
Phemonoe, lived Orpheus, and Musæus, and Linus the teacher of Hercules.
And Homer and Hesiod are much more recent than the Trojan war; and after
them the legislators among the Greeks are far more recent, Lycurgus and
Solon, and the seven wise men, and Pherecydes of Syros, and Pythagoras
the great, who lived later, about the Olympiads, as we have shown. We
have also demonstrated Moses to be more ancient, not only than those
called poets and wise men among the Greeks, but than the most of their
deities. Nor he alone, but the Sibyl also is more ancient than Orpheus.
For it is said, that respecting her appellation and her oracular
utterances there are several accounts; that being a Phrygian, she was
called Artemis; and that on her arrival at Delphi, she sang—

> <span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p11.4"></span> “O Delphians, ministers of
> far-darting Apollo,  
> I come to declare the mind of Ægis-bearing Zeus,  
> Enraged as I am at my own brother Apollo.”  

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p12"></span>There is another also, an Erythræan,
called Herophile. These are mentioned by Heraclides of Pontus in his
work *On Oracles*. I pass over the Egyptian Sibyl, and the Italian, who
inhabited the Carmentale in Rome, whose son was Evander, who built the
temple of Pan in Rome, called the Lupercal.

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p13"></span>It is worth our while, having reached
this point, to examine the dates of the other prophets among the Hebrews
who succeeded Moses. After the close of Moses’s life, Joshua succeeded
to the leadership of the people, and he, after warring for sixty-five
years, rested in the good land other five-and-twenty. As the book of
Joshua relates, the above mentioned man was the successor of Moses
twenty-seven years. Then the Hebrews having sinned, were delivered to
Chusachar <span id="fr_2035"></span>[2036](#fn_2035.md) king of Mesopotamia
for eight years, as the book of Judges mentions. But <span
id="page_326">p. 326</span> <span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-Page_326"></span>having afterwards besought the Lord,
they receive for leader Gothoniel, <span
id="fr_2036"></span>[2037](#fn_2036.md) the younger brother of Caleb, of
the tribe of Judah, who, having slain the king of Mesopotamia, ruled
over the people forty years in succession. And having again sinned, they
were delivered into the hands of Æglom <span
id="fr_2037"></span>[2038](#fn_2037.md) king of the Moabites for eighteen
years. But on their repentance, Aod, <span
id="fr_2038"></span>[2039](#fn_2038.md) a man who had equal use of both
hands, of the tribe of Ephraim, was their leader for eighty years. It
was he that despatched Æglom. On the death of Aod, and on their sinning
again, they were delivered into the hand of Jabim <span
id="fr_2039"></span>[2040](#fn_2039.md) king of Canaan twenty years. After
him Deborah the wife of Lapidoth, of the tribe of Ephraim, prophesied;
and Ozias the son of Rhiesu was high priest. At her instance Barak the
son of Bener, <span id="fr_2040"></span>[2041](#fn_2040.md) of the tribe of
Naphtali, commanding the army, having joined battle with Sisera, Jabim’s
commander-in-chief, conquered him. And after that Deborah ruled, judging
the people forty years. On her death, the people having again sinned,
were delivered into the hands of the Midianites seven years. After these
events, Gideon, of the tribe of Manasseh, the son of Joas, having fought
with his three hundred men, and killed a hundred and twenty thousand,
ruled forty years; after whom the son of Ahimelech, three years. He was
succeeded by Boleas, the son of Bedan, the son of Charran, <span
id="fr_2041"></span>[2042](#fn_2041.md) of the tribe of Ephraim, who ruled
twenty-three years. After whom, the people having sinned again, were
delivered to the Ammonites eighteen years; and on their repentance were
commanded by Jephtha the Gileadite, of the tribe of Manasseh; and he
ruled six years. After whom, Abatthan <span
id="fr_2042"></span>[2043](#fn_2042.md) of Bethlehem, of the tribe of Juda,
ruled seven years. Then Ebron <span id="fr_2043"></span>[2044](#fn_2043.md)
the Zebulonite, eight years. Then Eglom of Ephraim, eight years. Some
add to the seven years of Abatthan the eight of Ebrom. <span
id="fr_2044"></span>[2045](#fn_2044.md) And after him, the people having
again transgressed, came under the power of the foreigners, the
Philistines, for forty years. But on their returning \[to God\], they
were led by Samson, of the tribe of Dan, who conquered the foreigners in
battle. He ruled twenty years. And after him, there being no governor,
Eli the priest judged the people for forty years. He was succeeded by
Samuel the prophet; contemporaneously with whom Saul reigned, who held
sway for twenty-seven years. He anointed David. Samuel died two years
before Saul, while Abimelech was high priest. He anointed Saul as king,
who was the first that bore regal sway over Israel after the judges; the
whole duration of whom, down to Saul, was four hundred and sixty-three
years and seven months.

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p24"></span>Then in the first book of Kings there
are twenty years of Saul, during which he reigned after he was
renovated. And after the death of Saul, David the son of Jesse, of the
tribe of Judah, reigned next in Hebron, forty years, as is contained in
the second book of Kings. And Abiathar the son of Abimelech, of the
kindred of Eli, was high priest. In his time Gad and Nathan prophesied.
From Joshua the son of Nun, then, till David received the kingdom, there
intervene, according to some, four hundred and fifty years. But, as the
chronology set forth shows, five hundred and twenty-three years and
seven months are comprehended till the death of David.

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p25"></span>And after this Solomon the son of
David reigned forty years. Under him Nathan continued to prophesy, who
also exhorted him respecting the building of the temple. Achias of Shilo
also prophesied. And both the kings, David and Solomon, were prophets.
And Sadoc the high priest was the first who ministered in the temple
which Solomon built, being the eighth from Aaron, the first high priest.
From Moses, then, to the age of Solomon, as some say, are five hundred
and ninety-five years, and as others, five hundred and seventy-six.

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p26"></span>And if you count, along with the four
hundred and fifty years from Joshua to David, the forty years of the
rule of Moses, and the other eighty years of Moses’s life previous to
the exodus of the Hebrews from Egypt, you will make up the sum in all of
six hundred and ten years. But our chronology will run more correctly,
if to the five hundred and twenty-three years and seven months till the
death of David, you add the hundred and twenty years of Moses and the
forty years of Solomon. For you will make up in all, down to the death
of Solomon, six hundred and eighty-three years and seven months.

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p27"></span>Hiram gave his daughter to Solomon
about the time of the arrival of Menelaus in Phœnicia, after the capture
of Troy, as is said by Menander of Pergamus, and Lætus in *The
Phœnicia.* And after Solomon, Roboam his son reigned for seventeen
years; and Abimelech the son of Sadoc was high priest. In his reign, the
kingdom being divided, Jeroboam, of the tribe of Ephraim, the servant of
Solomon, reigned in Samaria; and Achias the Shilonite continued to
prophesy; also Samæas the son of Amame, and he who came from Judah to
Jeroboam, <span id="fr_2045"></span>[2046](#fn_2045.md) and prophesied
against the altar. After him his son <span id="page_327">p. 327</span>
<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-Page_327"></span>Abijam, twenty-three years; and
likewise his son Asaman. <span id="fr_2046"></span>[2047](#fn_2046.md) The
last, in his old age, was diseased in his feet; and in his reign
prophesied Jehu the son of Ananias.

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p30"></span>After him Jehosaphat his son reigned
twenty-five years. <span id="fr_2047"></span>[2048](#fn_2047.md) In his
reign prophesied Elias the Thesbite, and Michæas the son of Jebla, and
Abdias the son of Ananias. And in the time of Michæas there was also the
false prophet Zedekias, the son of Chonaan. These were followed by the
reign of Joram the son of Jehosaphat, for eight years; during whose time
prophesied Elias; and after Elias, Elisæus the son of Saphat. In his
reign the people in Samaria ate doves’ dung and their own children. The
period of Jehosaphat extends from the close of the third book of Kings
to the fourth. And in the reign of Joram, Elias was translated, and
Elisæus the son of Saphat commenced prophesying, and prophesied for six
years, being forty years old.

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p32"></span>Then Ochozias reigned a year. In his
time Elisæus continued to prophesy, and along with him Adadonæus. <span
id="fr_2048"></span>[2049](#fn_2048.md) After him the mother of
Ozias, <span id="fr_2049"></span>[2050](#fn_2049.md) Gotholia, <span
id="fr_2050"></span>[2051](#fn_2050.md) reigned eight <span
id="fr_2051"></span>[2052](#fn_2051.md) years, having slain the children of
her brother. <span id="fr_2052"></span>[2053](#fn_2052.md) For she was of
the family of Ahab. But the sister of Ozias, Josabæa, stole Joas the son
of Ozias, and invested him afterwards with the kingdom. And in the time
of this Gotholia, Elisæus was still prophesying. And after her reigned,
as I said before, Joash, rescued by Josabæa the wife of Jodæ the high
priest, and lived in all forty years.

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p38"></span>There are comprised, then, from
Solomon to the death of Elisæus the prophet, as some say, one hundred
and five years; according to others, one hundred and two; and, as the
chronology before us shows, from the reign of Solomon an hundred and
eighty-one.

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p39"></span>Now from the Trojan war to the birth
of Homer, according to Philochorus, a hundred and eighty years elapsed;
and he was posterior to the Ionic migration. But Aristarchus, in the
*Archilochian Memoirs*, says that he lived during the Ionic migration,
which took place a hundred and twenty years after the siege of Troy. But
Apollodorus alleges it was an hundred and twenty years after the Ionic
migration, while Agesilaus son of Doryssæus was king of the
Lacedæmonians: so that he brings Lycurgus the legislator, while still a
young man, near him. Euthymenes, in the *Chronicles*, says that he
flourished contemporaneously with Hesiod, in the time of Acastus, and
was born in Chios about the four hundredth year after the capture of
Troy. And Archimachus, in the third book of his *Eubœan History*, is of
this opinion. So that both he and Hesiod were later than Elisæus, the
prophet. And if you choose to follow the grammarian Crates, and say that
Homer was born about the time of the expedition of the Heraclidæ, eighty
years after the taking of Troy, he will be found to be later again than
Solomon, in whose days occurred the arrival of Menelaus in Phœnicia, as
was said above. Eratosthenes says that Homer’s age was two hundred years
after the capture of Troy. Further, Theopompus, in the forty-third book
of the *Philippics*, relates that Homer was born five hundred years
after the war at Troy. And Euphorion, in his book about the *Aleuades*,
maintains that he was born in the time of Gyges, who began to reign in
the eighteenth Olympiad, who, also he says, was the first that was
called tyrant (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p39.1"></span>τύραννος</span>). Sosibius Lacon, again,
in his *Record of Dates*, brings Homer down to the eighth year of the
reign of Charillus the son of Polydectus. Charillus reigned for
sixty-four years, after whom the son of Nicander reigned thirty-nine
years. In his thirty-fourth year it is said that the first Olympiad was
instituted; so that Homer was ninety years before the introduction of
the Olympic games.

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p40"></span>After Joas, Amasias his son reigned as
his successor thirty-nine years. He in like manner was succeeded by his
son Ozias, who reigned for fifty-two years, and died a leper. And in his
time prophesied Amos, and Isaiah his son, <span
id="fr_2053"></span>[2054](#fn_2053.md) and Hosea the son of Beeri, and
Jonas the son of Amathi, who was of Geth-chober, who preached to the
Ninevites, and passed through the whale’s belly.

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p42"></span>Then Jonathan the son of Ozias reigned
for sixteen years. In his time Esaias still prophesied, and Hosea, and
Michæas the Morasthite, and Joel the son of Bethuel.

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p43"></span>Next in succession was his son Ahaz,
who reigned for sixteen years. In his time, in the fifteenth year,
Israel was carried away to Babylon. And Salmanasar the king of the
Assyrians carried away the people of Samaria into the country of the
Medes and to Babylon.

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p44"></span>Again Ahaz was succeeded by
Osee, <span id="fr_2054"></span>[2055](#fn_2054.md) who reigned for eight
years. Then followed Hezekiah, for twenty-nine years. For his sanctity,
when he had approached his end, God, by Isaiah, allowed him to live for
other fifteen years, giving as a sign the going back of the sun. Up to
his times Esaias, Hosea, and Micah continued prophesying.

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p46"></span>And these are said to have lived after
the age <span id="page_328">p. 328</span> <span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-Page_328"></span>of Lycurgus, the legislator of the
Lacedæmonians. For Dieuchidas, in the fourth book of the *Megarics*,
places the era of Lycurgus about the two hundred and ninetieth year
after the capture of Troy.

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p47"></span>After Hezekiah, his son Manasses
reigned for fifty-five years. Then his son Amos for two years. After him
reigned his son Josias, distinguished for his observance of the law, for
thirty-one years. He “laid the carcases of men upon the carcases of the
idols,” as is written in the book of Leviticus. <span
id="fr_2055"></span>[2056](#fn_2055.md) In his reign, in the eighteenth
year, the passover was celebrated, not having been kept from the days of
Samuel in the intervening period. <span
id="fr_2056"></span>[2057](#fn_2056.md) Then Chelkias the priest, the
father of the prophet Jeremiah, having fallen in with the book of the
law, that had been laid up in the temple, read it and died. <span
id="fr_2057"></span>[2058](#fn_2057.md) And in his days Olda <span
id="fr_2058"></span>[2059](#fn_2058.md) prohesied, and Sophonias, <span
id="fr_2059"></span>[2060](#fn_2059.md) and Jeremiah. And in the days of
Jeremiah was Ananias the son of Azor, <span
id="fr_2060"></span>[2061](#fn_2060.md) the false prophet. He <span
id="fr_2061"></span>[2062](#fn_2061.md) having disobeyed Jeremiah the
prophet, was slain by Pharaoh Necho king of Egypt at the river
Euphrates, having encountered the latter, who was marching on the
Assyrians.

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p55"></span>Josiah was succeeded by Jechoniah,
called also Joachas, <span id="fr_2062"></span>[2063](#fn_2062.md) his son,
who reigned three months and ten days. Necho king of Egypt bound him and
led him to Egypt, after making his brother Joachim king in his stead,
who continued his tributary for eleven years. After him his
namesake <span id="fr_2063"></span>[2064](#fn_2063.md) Joakim reigned for
three months. Then Zedekiah reigned for eleven years; and up to his time
Jeremiah continued to prophesy. Along with him Ezekiel <span
id="fr_2064"></span>[2065](#fn_2064.md) the son of Buzi, and Urias <span
id="fr_2065"></span>[2066](#fn_2065.md) the son of Samæus, and
Ambacum <span id="fr_2066"></span>[2067](#fn_2066.md) prophesied. Here end
the Hebrew kings.

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p61"></span>There are then from the birth of Moses
till this captivity nine hundred and seventy-two years; but according to
strict chronological accuracy, one thousand and eighty-five, six months,
ten days. From the reign of David to the captivity by the Chaldeans,
four hundred and fifty-two years and six months; but as the accuracy we
have observed in reference to dates makes out, four hundred and
eighty-two and six months ten days.

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p62"></span>And in the twelfth year of the reign
of Zedekiah, forty years before the supremacy of the Persians,
Nebuchodonosor made war against the Phœnicians and the Jews, as Berosus
asserts in his *Chaldæan Histories*. And Joabas, <span
id="fr_2067"></span>[2068](#fn_2067.md) writing about the Assyrians,
acknowledges that he had received the history from Berosus, and
testifies to his accuracy. Nebuchodonosor, therefore, having put out the
eyes of Zedekiah, took him away to Babylon, and transported the whole
people (the captivity lasted seventy years), with the exception of a few
who fled to Egypt.

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p64"></span>Jeremiah and Ambacum were still
prophesying in the time of Zedekiah. In the fifth year of his reign
Ezekiel prophesied at Babylon; after him Nahum, then Daniel. After him,
again, Haggai and Zechariah prophesied in the time of Darius the First
for two years; and then the angel among the twelve. <span
id="fr_2068"></span>[2069](#fn_2068.md) After Haggai and Zechariah,
Nehemiah, the chief cup-bearer of Artaxerxes, the son of Acheli the
Israelite, built the city of Jerusalem and restored the temple. During
the captivity lived Esther and Mordecai, whose book is still extant, as
also that of the Maccabees. During this captivity Mishael, Ananias, and
Azarias, refusing to worship the image, and being thrown into a furnace
of fire, were saved by the appearance of an angel. At that time, on
account of the serpent, <span id="fr_2069"></span>[2070](#fn_2069.md)
Daniel was thrown into the den of lions; but being preserved through the
providence of God by Ambacub, he is restored on the seventh day. At this
period, too, occurred the sign of Jona; and Tobias, through the
assistance of the angel Raphael, married Sarah, the demon having killed
her seven first suitors; and after the marriage of Tobias, his father
Tobit recovered his sight. At that time Zorobabel, having by his wisdom
overcome his opponents, and obtained leave from Darius for the
rebuilding of Jerusalem, returned with Esdras to his native land; and by
him the redemption of the people and the revisal and restoration of the
inspired oracles were effected; and the passover of deliverance
celebrated, and marriage with aliens dissolved.

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p67"></span>Cyrus had, by proclamation, previously
enjoined the restoration of the Hebrews. And his promise being
accomplished in the time of Darius, the feast of the dedication was
held, as also the feast of tabernacles.

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p68"></span>There were in all, taking in the
duration of the captivity down to the restoration of the people, from
the birth of Moses, one thousand one hundred and fifty-five years, six
months, and ten days; and from the reign of David, according to some,
four hundred and fifty-two; <span id="page_329">p. 329</span> <span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-Page_329"></span>more correctly, five hundred and
seventy-two years, six months, and ten days.

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p69"></span>From the captivity at Babylon, which
took place in the time of Jeremiah the prophet, was fulfilled what was
spoken by Daniel the prophet as follows: “Seventy weeks are determined
upon thy people, and upon thy holy city, to finish the transgression,
and to seal sins, and to wipe out and make reconciliation for iniquity,
and to bring in everlasting righteousness, and to seal the vision and
the prophet, and to anoint the Holy of Holies. Know therefore, and
understand, that from the going forth of the word commanding an answer
to be given, and Jerusalem to be built, to Christ the Prince, are seven
weeks and sixty-two weeks; and the street shall be again built, and the
wall; and the times shall be expended. And after the sixty-two weeks the
anointing shall be overthrown, and judgment shall not be in him; and he
shall destroy the city and the sanctuary along with the coming Prince.
And they shall be destroyed in a flood, and to the end of the war shall
be cut off by desolations. And he shall confirm the covenant with many
for one week; and in the middle of the week the sacrifice and oblation
shall be taken away; and in the holy place shall be the abomination of
desolations, and until the consummation of time shall the consummation
be assigned for desolation. And in the midst of the week shall he make
the incense of sacrifice cease, and of the wing of destruction, even
till the consummation, like the destruction of the oblation.” <span
id="fr_2070"></span>[2071](#fn_2070.md) That the temple accordingly was
built in seven weeks, is evident; for it is written in Esdras. And thus
Christ became King of the Jews, reigning in Jerusalem in the fulfilment
of the seven weeks. And in the sixty and two weeks the whole of Judæa
was quiet, and without wars. And Christ our Lord, “the Holy of Holies,”
having come and fulfilled the vision and the prophecy, was anointed in
His flesh by the Holy Spirit of His Father. In those “sixty and two
weeks,” as the prophet said, and “in the one week,” was He Lord. The
half of the week Nero held sway, and in the holy city Jerusalem placed
the abomination; and in the half of the week he was taken away, and
Otho, and Galba, and Vitellius. And Vespasian rose to the supreme power,
and destroyed Jerusalem, and desolated the holy place. And that such are
the facts of the case, is clear to him that is able to understand, as
the prophet said.

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p71"></span>On the completion, then, of the
eleventh year, in the beginning of the following, in the reign of
Joachim, occurred the carrying away captive to Babylon by Nabuchodonosor
the king, in the seventh year of his reign over the Assyrians, in the
second year of the reign of Vaphres over the Egyptians, in the
archonship of Philip at Athens, in the first year of the forty-eighth
Olympiad. The captivity lasted for seventy years, and ended in the
second year of Darius Hystaspes, who had become king of the Persians,
Assyrians, and Egyptians; in whose reign, as I said above, Haggai and
Zechariah and the angel of the twelve prophesied. And the high priest
was Joshua the son of Josedec. And in the second year of the reign of
Darius, who, Herodotus says, destroyed the power of the Magi, Zorobabel
the son of Salathiel was despatched to raise and adorn the temple at
Jerusalem.

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p72"></span>The times of the Persians are
accordingly summed up thus: Cyrus reigned thirty years; Cambyses,
nineteen; Darius, forty-six; Xerxes, twenty-six; Artaxerxes, forty-one;
Darius, eight; Artaxerxes, forty-two; Ochus or Arses, three. The sum
total of the years of the Persian monarchy is two hundred and
thirty-five years.

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p73"></span>Alexander of Macedon, having
despatched this Darius, during this period, began to reign. Similarly,
therefore, the times of the Macedonian kings are thus computed:
Alexander, eighteen years; Ptolemy the son of Lagus, forty years;
Ptolemy Philadelphus, twenty-seven years; then Euergetes,
five-and-twenty years; then Philopator, seventeen years; then Epiphanes,
four-and-twenty years; he was succeeded by Philometer, who reigned
five-and-thirty years; after him Physcon, twenty-nine years; then
Lathurus, thirty-six years; then he that was surnamed Dionysus,
twenty-nine years; and last Cleopatra reigned twenty-two years. And
after her was the reign of the Cappadocians for eighteen days.

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p74"></span>Accordingly the period embraced by the
Macedonian kings is, in all, three hundred and twelve years and eighteen
days.

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p75"></span>Therefore those who prophesied in the
time of Darius Hystaspes, about the second year of his reign,—Haggai,
and Zechariah, and the angel of the twelve, who prophesied about the
first year of the forty-eighth Olympiad,—are demonstrated to be older
than Pythagoras, who is said to have lived in the sixty-second Olympiad,
and than Thales, the oldest of the wise men of the Greeks, who lived
about the fiftieth Olympiad. Those wise men that are classed with Thales
were then contemporaneous, as Andron says in the *Tripos*. For
Heraclitus being posterior to Pythagoras, mentions him in his book.
Whence indisputably the first Olympiad, which was demonstrated to be
four hundred and seven years later than the Trojan war, is found to be
prior to the age of the above-mentioned prophets, together with those
called the seven wise men. Accordingly it is easy to perceive that
Solomon, who lived in the time of Menelaus (who was during the Trojan
war), was earlier by <span id="page_330">p. 330</span> <span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-Page_330"></span>many years than the wise men among the
Greeks. And how many years Moses preceded him we showed, in what we said
above. And Alexander, surnamed Polyhistor, in his work on the Jews, has
transcribed some letters of Solomon to Vaphres king of Egypt, and to the
king of the Phœnicians at Tyre, and theirs to Solomon; in which it is
shown that Vaphres sent eighty thousand Egyptian men to him for the
building of the temple, and the other as many, along with a Tyrian
artificer, the son of a Jewish mother, of the tribe of Dan, <span
id="fr_2071"></span>[2072](#fn_2071.md) as is there written, of the name of
Hyperon. <span id="fr_2072"></span>[2073](#fn_2072.md) Further, Onomacritus
the Athenian, who is said to have been the author of the poems ascribed
to Orpheus, is ascertained to have lived in the reign of the
Pisistratidæ, about the fiftieth Olympiad. And Orpheus, who sailed with
Hercules, was the pupil of Musæus. Amphion precedes the Trojan war by
two generations. And Demodocus and Phemius were posterior to the capture
of Troy; for they were famed for playing on the lyre, the former among
the Phæacians, and the latter among the suitors. And the *Oracles*
ascribed to Musæus are said to be the production of Onomacritus, and the
*Crateres* of Orpheus the production of Zopyrus of Heraclea, and *The
Descent to Hades* that of Prodicus of Samos. Ion of Chios relates in the
*Triagmi,* <span id="fr_2073"></span>[2074](#fn_2073.md) that Pythagoras
ascribed certain works \[of his own\] to Orpheus. Epigenes, in his book
respecting *The Poetry attributed to Orpheus,* says that *The Descent to
Hades* and the *Sacred Discourse* were the production of Cecrops the
Pythagorean; and the *Peplus* and the *Physics* of Brontinus. Some also
make Terpander out ancient. Hellanicus, accordingly, relates that he
lived in the time of Midas: but Phanias, who places Lesches the Lesbian
before Terpander, makes Terpander younger than Archilochus, and relates
that Lesches contended with Arctinus, and gained the victory. Xanthus
the Lydian says that he lived about the eighteenth Olympiad; as also
Dionysius says that Thasus was built about the fifteenth Olympiad: so
that it is clear that Archilochus <span
id="fr_2074"></span>[2075](#fn_2074.md) was already known after the
twentieth Olympiad. He accordingly relates the destruction of Magnetes
as having recently taken place. Simonides is assigned to the time of
Archilochus. Callinus is not much older; for Archilochus refers to
Magnetes as destroyed, while the latter refers to it as flourishing.
Eumelus of Corinth being older, is said to have met Archias, who founded
Syracuse.

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p80"></span>We were induced to mention these
things, because the poets of the epic cycle are placed amongst those of
most remote antiquity. Already, too, among the Greeks, many diviners are
said to have made their appearance, as the Bacides, one a Bœotian, the
other an Arcadian, who uttered many predictions to many. By the counsel
of Amphiletus the Athenian, <span id="fr_2075"></span>[2076](#fn_2075.md)
who showed the time for the onset, Pisistratus, too, strengthened his
government. For we may pass over in silence Cometes of Crete, Cinyras of
Cyprus, Admetus the Thessalian, Aristæas the Cyrenian, Amphiaraus the
Athenian, Timoxeus <span id="fr_2076"></span>[2077](#fn_2076.md) the
Corcyræan, Demænetus the Phocian, Epigenes the Thespian, Nicias the
Carystian, Aristo the Thessalian, Dionysius the Carthaginian, Cleophon
the Corinthian, Hippo the daughter of Chiro, and Bœo, and Manto, and the
host of Sibyls, the Samian, the Colophonian, the Cumæan, the Erythræan,
the Pythian, <span id="fr_2077"></span>[2078](#fn_2077.md) the
Taraxandrian, the Macetian, the Thessalian, and the Thesprotian. And
Calchas again, and Mopsus, who lived during the Trojan war. Mopsus,
however, was older, having sailed along with the Argonants. And it is
said that Battus the Cyrenian composed what is called *the Divination*
of Mopsus. Dorotheus in the first *Pandect* relates that Mopsus was the
disciple of Alcyon and Corone. And Pythagoras the Great always applied
his mind to prognostication, and Abaris the Hyperborean, and Aristæas
the Proconnesian, and Epimenides the Cretan, who came to Sparta, and
Zoroaster the Mede, and Empedocles of Agrigentum, and Phormion the
Lacedæmonian; Polyaratus, too, of Thasus, and Empedotimus of Syracuse;
and in addition to these, Socrates the Athenian in particular. “For,” he
says in the *Theages*, “I am attended by a supernatural intimation,
which has been assigned me from a child by divine appointment. This is a
voice which, when it comes, prevents what I am about to do, but exhorts
never.” <span id="fr_2078"></span>[2079](#fn_2078.md) And Execestus, the
tyrant of the Phocians, wore two enchanted rings, and by the sound which
they uttered one against the other determined the proper times for
actions. But he died, nevertheless, treacherously murdered, although
warned beforehand by the sound, as Aristotle says in the *Polity of the
Phocians*.

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p85"></span>Of those, too, who at one time lived
as men among the Egyptians, but were constituted gods by human opinion,
were Hermes the Theban, and Asclepius of Memphis; Tireseus and Manto,
again, at Thebes, as Euripides says. Helenus, too, and Laocoön, and
Œnone, and Crenus in <span id="page_331">p. 331</span> <span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-Page_331"></span>Ilium. For Crenus, one of the
Heraclidæ, is said to have been a noted prophet. Another was Jamus in
Elis, from whom came the Jamidæ; and Polyidus at Argos and Megara, who
is mentioned by the tragedy. Why enumerate Telemus, who, being a prophet
of the Cyclops, predicted to Polyphemus the events of Ulysses’
wandering; or Onomacritus at Athens; or Amphiaraus, who campaigned with
the seven at Thebes, and is reported to be a generation older than the
capture of Troy; or Theoclymenus in Cephalonia, or Telmisus in Caria, or
Galeus in Sicily?

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p86"></span>There are others, too, besides these:
Idmon, who was with the Argonauts, Phemonoe of Delphi, Mopsus the son of
Apollo and Manto in Pamphylia, and Amphilochus the son of Amphiaraus in
Cilicia, Alcmæon among the Acarnanians, Anias in Delos, Aristander of
Telmessus, who was along with Alexander. Philochorus also relates in the
first book of the work, *On Divination,* that Orpheus was a seer. And
Theopompus, and Ephorus, and Timæus, write of a seer called Orthagoras;
as the Samian Pythocles in the fourth book of *The Italics* writes of
Caius Julius Nepos.

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p87"></span>But some of these “thieves and
robbers,” as the Scripture says, predicted for the most part from
observation and probabilities, as physicians and soothsayers judge from
natural signs; and others were excited by demons, or were disturbed by
waters, and fumigations, and air of a peculiar kind. But among the
Hebrews the prophets were moved by the power and inspiration of God.
Before the law, Adam spoke prophetically in respect to the woman, and
the naming of the creatures; Noah preached repentance; <span
id="fr_2079"></span>[2080](#fn_2079.md) Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob gave many
clear utterances respecting future and present things. Contemporaneous
with the law, Moses and Aaron; and after these prophesied Jesus the son
of Nave, Samuel, Gad, Nathan, Achias, Samæas, Jehu, Elias, Michæas,
Abdiu, Elisæus, Abbadonai, Amos, Esaias, Osee, Jonas, Joel, Jeremias,
Sophonias the son of Buzi, Ezekiel, Urias, Ambacum, Naum, Daniel,
Misael, who wrote the syllogisms, Aggai, Zacharias, and the angel among
the twelve. These are, in all, five-and-thirty prophets. And of women
(for these too prophesied), Sara, and Rebecca, and Mariam, and Debbora,
and Olda, i.e., Huldah.

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p89"></span>Then within the same period John
prophesied till the baptism of salvation; <span
id="fr_2080"></span>[2081](#fn_2080.md) and after the birth of Christ, Anna
and Simeon. <span id="fr_2081"></span>[2082](#fn_2081.md) For Zacaharias,
John’s father, is said in the Gospels to have prophesied before his son.
Let us then draw up the chronology of the Greeks from Moses.

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p92"></span>From the birth of Moses to the exodus
of the Jews from Egypt, eighty years; and the period down to his death,
other forty years. The exodus took place in the time of Inachus, before
the wandering of Sothis, <span id="fr_2082"></span>[2083](#fn_2082.md)
Moses having gone forth from Egypt three hundred and forty-five years
before. From the rule of Moses, and from Inachus to the flood of
Deucalion, I mean the second inundation, and to the conflagration of
Phaethon, which events happened in the time of Crotopus, forty
generations are enumerated (three generations being reckoned for a
century). From the flood to the conflagration of Ida, and the discovery
of iron, and the Idæan Dactyls, are seventy-three years, according to
Thrasyllus; and from the conflagration of Ida to the rape of Ganymede,
sixty-five years. From this to the expedition of Perseus, when Glaucus
established the Isthmian games in honour of Melicerta, fifteen years;
and from the expedition of Perseus to the building of Troy, thirty-four
years. From this to the voyage of the Argo, sixty-four years. From this
to Theseus and the Minotaur, thirty-two years; then to the seven at
Thebes, ten years. And to the Olympic contest, which Hercules instituted
in honour of Pelops, three years; and to the expedition of the Amazons
against Athens, and the rape of Helen by Theseus, nine years. From this
to the deification of Hercules, eleven years; then to the rape of Helen
by Alexander, four years. From the taking of Troy to the descent of
Æneas and the founding of Lavinium, ten years; and to the government of
Ascanius, eight years; and to the descent of the Heraclidæ, sixty-one
years; and to the Olympiad of Iphitus, three hundred and thirty-eight
years. Eratosthenes thus sets down the dates: “From the capture of Troy
to the descent of the Heraclidæ, eighty years. From this to the founding
of Ionia, sixty years; and the period following to the protectorate of
Lycurgus, a hundred and fifty-nine years; and to the first year of the
first Olympiad, a hundred and eight years. From which Olympiad to the
invasion of Xerxes, two hundred and ninety-seven years; from which to
the beginning of the Peloponnesian war, forty-eight years; and to its
close, and the defeat of the Athenians, twenty-seven years; and to the
battle at Leuctra, thirty-four years; after which to the death of
Philip, thirty-five years. And after this to the decease of Alexander,
twelve years.”

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p94"></span>Again, from the first Olympiad, some
say, to the <span id="page_332">p. 332</span> <span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-Page_332"></span>building of Rome, are comprehended
twenty-four years; and after this to the expulsion of the kings, <span
id="fr_2083"></span>[2084](#fn_2083.md) when consuls were created, about
two hundred and forty-three years. And from the taking of Babylon to the
death of Alexander, a hundred and eighty-six years. From this to the
victory of Augustus, when Antony killed himself at Alexandria, two
hundred and ninety-four years, when Augustus was made consul for the
fourth time. And from this time to the games which Domitian instituted
at Rome, are a hundred and fourteen years; and from the first games to
the death of Commodus, a hundred and eleven years.

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p96"></span>There are some that from Cecrops to
Alexander of Macedon reckon a thousand eight hundred and twenty-eight
years; and from Demophon, a thousand two hundred and fifty; and from the
taking of Troy to the expedition of the Heraclidæ, a hundred and twenty
or a hundred and eighty years. From this to the archonship of Evænetus
at Athens, in whose time Alexander is said to have marched into Asia,
according to Phanias, are seven hundred and fifty years; according to
Ephorus, seven hundred and thirty-five; according to Timæus and
Clitarchus, eight hundred and twenty; according to Eratosthenes, seven
hundred and seventy-four. As also Duris, from the taking of Troy to the
march of Alexander into Asia, a thousand years; and from that to the
archonship of Hegesias, in whose time Alexander died eleven years. From
this date to the reign of Germanicus Claudius Cæsar, three hundred and
sixty-five years. From which time the years summed up to the death of
Commodus are manifest.

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p97"></span>After the Grecian period, and in
accordance with the dates, as computed by the barbarians, very large
intervals are to be assigned.

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p98"></span>From Adam to the deluge are comprised
two thousand one hundred and forty-eight years, four days. From Shem to
Abraham, a thousand two hundred and fifty years. From Isaac to the
division of the land, six hundred and sixteen years. Then from the
judges to Samuel, four hundred and sixty-three years, seven months. And
after the judges there were five hundred and seventy-two years, six
months, ten days of kings.

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p99"></span>After which periods, there were two
hundred and thirty-five years of the Persian monarchy. Then of the
Macedonian, till the death of Antony, three hundred and twelve years and
eighteen days. After which time, the empire of the Romans, till the
death of Commodus, lasted for two hundred and twenty-two years.

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p100"></span>Then, from the seventy years’
captivity, and the restoration of the people into their own land to the
captivity in the time of Vespasian, are comprised four hundred and ten
years. Finally, from Vespasian to the death of Commodus, there are
ascertained to be one hundred and twenty-one years, six months, and
twenty-four days.

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p101"></span>Demetrius, in his book, *On the Kings
in Judæa,* says that the tribes of Juda, Benjamin, and Levi were not
taken captive by Sennacherim; but that there were from this captivity to
the last, which Nabuchodonosor made out of Jerusalem, a hundred and
twenty-eight years and six months; and from the time that the ten tribes
were carried captive from Samaria till Ptolemy the Fourth, were five
hundred and seventy-three years, nine months; and from the time that the
captivity from Jerusalem took place, three hundred and thirty-eight
years and three months.

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p102"></span>Philo himself set down the kings
differently from Demetrius.

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p103"></span>Besides, Eupolemus, in a similar
work, says that all the years from Adam to the fifth year of Ptolemy
Demetrius, who reigned twelve years in Egypt, when added, amount to five
thousand a hundred and forty-nine; and from the time that Moses brought
out the Jews from Egypt to the above-mentioned date, there are, in all,
two thousand five hundred and eighty years. And from this time till the
consulship in Rome of Caius Domitian and Casian, a hundred and twenty
years are computed.

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p104"></span>Euphorus and many other historians
say that there are seventy-five nations and tongues, in consequence of
hearing the statement made by Moses: “All the souls that sprang from
Jacob, which went down into Egypt, were seventy-five.” <span
id="fr_2084"></span>[2085](#fn_2084.md) According to the true reckoning,
there appear to be seventy-two generic dialects, as our Scriptures hand
down. The rest of the vulgar tongues are formed by the blending of two,
or three, or more dialects. A dialect is a mode of speech which exhibits
a character peculiar to a locality, or a mode of speech which exhibits a
character peculiar or common to a race. The Greeks say, that among them
are five dialects—the Attic, Ionic, Doric, Æolic, and the fifth the
Common; and that the languages of the barbarians, which are innumerable,
are not called dialects, but tongues.

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p106"></span>Plato attributes a dialect also to
the gods, forming this conjecture mainly from dreams and oracles, and
especially from demoniacs, who do not speak their own language or
dialect, but that of the demons who have taken possession of them. He
thinks also that the irrational creatures have dialects, which those
that belong to <span id="page_333">p. 333</span> <span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-Page_333"></span>the same genus understand. <span
id="fr_2085"></span>[2086](#fn_2085.md) Accordingly, when an elephant falls
into the mud and bellows out any other one that is at hand, on seeing
what has happened, shortly turns, and brings with him a herd of
elephants, and saves the one that has fallen in. It is said also in
Libya, that a scorpion, if it does not succeed in stinging a man, goes
away and returns with several more; and that, hanging on one to the
other like a chain they make in this way the attempt to succeed in their
cunning design.

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p108"></span>The irrational creatures do not make
use of an obscure intimation, or hint their meaning by assuming a
particular attitude, but, as I think, by a dialect of their own. <span
id="fr_2086"></span>[2087](#fn_2086.md) And some others say, that if a fish
which has been taken escape by breaking the line, no fish of the same
kind will be caught in the same place that day. But the first and
generic barbarous dialects have terms by nature, since also men confess
that prayers uttered in a barbarian tongue are more powerful. And Plato,
in the *Cratylus*, when wishing to interpret <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p109.1"></span>πῦρ</span> (*fire*), says that it is a
barbaric term. He testifies, accordingly, that the Phrygians use this
term with a slight deviation.

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p110"></span>And nothing, in my opinion, after
these details, need stand in the way of stating the periods of the Roman
emperors, in order to the demonstration of the Saviour’s birth.
Augustus, forty-three years; Tiberius, twenty-two years; Caius, four
years; Claudius, fourteen years; Nero, fourteen years; Galba, one year;
Vespasian, ten years; Titus, three years; Domitian, fifteen years;
Nerva, one year; Trajan, nineteen years; Adrian, twenty-one years;
Antoninus, twenty-one years; likewise again, Antoninus and Commodus,
thirty-two. In all, from Augustus to Commodus, are two hundred and
twenty-two years; and from Adam to the death of Commodus, five thousand
seven hundred and eighty-four years, two months, twelve days.

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p111"></span>Some set down the dates of the Roman
emperors thus:—

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p112"></span>Caius Julius Cæsar, three years, four
months, five days; after him Augustus reigned forty-six years, four
months, one day. Then Tiberius, twenty-six years, six months, nineteen
days. He was succeeded by Caius Cæsar, who reigned three years, ten
months, eight days; and he by Claudius for thirteen years, eight months,
twenty-eight days. Nero reigned thirteen years, eight months,
twenty-eight days; Galba, seven months and six days; Otho, five months,
one day; Vitellius, seven months, one day; Vespasian, eleven years,
eleven months, twenty-two days; Titus, two years, two months; Domitian,
fifteen years, eight months, five days; Nerva, one year, four months,
ten days; Trajan, nineteen years, seven months, ten days; Adrian, twenty
years, ten months, twenty-eight days. Antoninus, twenty-two years, three
months, and seven days; Marcus Aurelius Antoninus, nineteen years,
eleven days; Commodus, twelve years, nine months, fourteen days.

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p113"></span>From Julius Cæsar, therefore, to the
death of Commodus, are two hundred and thirty-six years, six months. And
the whole from Romulus, who founded Rome, till the death of Commodus,
amounts to nine hundred and fifty-three years, six months. And our Lord
was born in the twenty-eighth year, when first the census was ordered to
be taken in the reign of Augustus. And to prove that this is true, it is
written in the Gospel by Luke as follows: “And in the fifteenth year, in
the reign of Tiberius Cæsar, the word of the Lord came to John, the son
of Zacharias.” And again in the same book: “And Jesus was coming to His
baptism, being about thirty years old,” <span
id="fr_2087"></span>[2088](#fn_2087.md) and so on. And that it was
necessary for Him to preach only a year, this also is written: <span
id="fr_2088"></span>[2089](#fn_2088.md) “He hath sent Me to proclaim the
acceptable year of the <span class="sc"><span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p115.2"></span>Lord</span>.” This both the prophet
spake, and the Gospel. Accordingly, in fifteen years of Tiberius and
fifteen years of Augustus; so were completed the thirty years till the
time He suffered. And from the time that He suffered till the
destruction of Jerusalem are forty-two years and three months; and from
the destruction of Jerusalem to the death of Commodus, a hundred and
twenty-eight years, ten months, and three days. From the birth of
Christ, therefore, to the death of Commodus are, in all, a hundred and
ninety-four years, one month, thirteen days. And there are those who
have determined not only the year of our Lord’s birth, but also the day;
and they say that it took place in the twenty-eighth year of Augustus,
and in the twenty-fifth day of Pachon. And the followers of Basilides
hold the day of his baptism as a festival, spending the night before in
readings.

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p116"></span>And they say that it was the
fifteenth year of Tiberius Cæsar, the fifteenth day of the month Tubi;
and some that it was the eleventh of the same month. And treating of His
passion, with very great accuracy, some say that it took place in the
sixteenth year of Tiberius, on the twenty-fifth of Phamenoth; and others
the twenty-fifth of Pharmuthi and others say that on the nineteenth of
Pharmuthi the Saviour suffered. Further, others say that He was born on
the twenty-fourth or twenty-fifth of Pharmuthi. <span
id="fr_2089"></span>[2090](#fn_2089.md)

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p118"></span>We have still to add to our
chronology the <span id="page_334">p. 334</span> <span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-Page_334"></span>following,—I mean the days which Daniel
indicates from the desolation of Jerusalem, the seven years and seven
months of the reign of Vespasian. For the two years are added to the
seventeen months and eighteen days of Otho, and Galba, and Vitellius;
and the result is three years and six months, which is “the half of the
week,” as Daniel the prophet said. For he said that there were two
thousand three hundred days from the time that the abomination of Nero
stood in the holy city, till its destruction. For thus the declaration,
which is subjoined, shows: “How long shall be the vision, the sacrifice
taken away, the abomination of desolation, which is given, and the power
and the holy place shall be trodden under foot? And he said to him, Till
the evening and morning, two thousand three hundred days, and the holy
place shall be taken away.” <span id="fr_2090"></span>[2091](#fn_2090.md)

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p120"></span>These two thousand three hundred
days, then, make six years four months, during the half of which Nero
held sway, and it was half a week; and for a half, Vespasian with Otho,
Galba, and Vitellius reigned. And on this account Daniel says, “Blessed
is he that cometh to the thousand three hundred and thirty-five
days.” <span id="fr_2091"></span>[2092](#fn_2091.md) For up to these days
was war, and after them it ceased. And this number is demonstrated from
a subsequent chapter, which is as follows: “And from the time of the
change of continuation, and of the giving of the abomination of
desolation, there shall be a thousand two hundred and ninety days.
Blessed is he that waiteth, and cometh to the thousand three hundred and
thirty-five days.” <span id="fr_2092"></span>[2093](#fn_2092.md)

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p123"></span>Flavius Josephus the Jew, who
composed the history of the Jews, computing the periods, says that from
Moses to David were five hundred and eighty-five years; from David to
the second year of Vespasian, a thousand one hundred and seventy-nine;
then from that to the tenth year of Antoninus, seventy-seven. So that
from Moses to the tenth year of Antoninus there are, in all, two
thousand one hundred and thirty-three years.

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p124"></span>Of others, counting from Inachus and
Moses to the death of Commodus, some say there were three thousand one
hundred and forty-two years; and others, two thousand eight hundred and
thirty-one years.

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p125"></span>And in the Gospel according to
Matthew, the genealogy which begins with Abraham is continued down to
Mary the mother of the Lord. “For,” it is said, <span
id="fr_2093"></span>[2094](#fn_2093.md) “from Abraham to David are fourteen
generations; and from David to the carrying away into Babylon are
fourteen generations; and from the carrying away into Babylon till
Christ are likewise other fourteen generations,”—three mystic intervals
completed in six weeks. <span id="fr_2094"></span>[2095](#fn_2094.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2030"></span>[324:2031](0020314.htm#fr_2030.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p2"></span> The deficiencies of the text in this
place have been supplied from Eusebius’s *Chronicles*.

<span id="fn_2031"></span>[324:2032](0020314.htm#fr_2031.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p3"></span> i.e., Solon, in his conversation with
the Egyptian priests.

<span id="fn_2032"></span>[324:2033](0020314.htm#fr_2032.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p4"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p4.1"></span>πόλει</span>, “city,” is not in Plato.

<span id="fn_2033"></span>[324:2034](0020314.htm#fr_2033.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p5.1"></span>ἐπομβρία</span>.

<span id="fn_2034"></span>[325:2035](0020314.htm#fr_2034.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p9.6"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p10"></span> \[*Theog*., 938.\]

<span id="fn_2035"></span>[325:2036](0020314.htm#fr_2035.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p14"></span> Chushan-rishathaim; [Judg. iii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#008.md)<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2036"></span>[326:2037](0020314.htm#fr_2036.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p14.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p15"></span> Othniel.

<span id="fn_2037"></span>[326:2038](0020314.htm#fr_2037.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p16"></span> Eglon.

<span id="fn_2038"></span>[326:2039](0020314.htm#fr_2038.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p17"></span> Ehud.

<span id="fn_2039"></span>[326:2040](0020314.htm#fr_2039.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p18"></span> Jabin.

<span id="fn_2040"></span>[326:2041](0020314.htm#fr_2040.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p19"></span> Abinoam; [Judg. iv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#006.md)<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2041"></span>[326:2042](0020314.htm#fr_2041.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p19.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p20"></span> *Sic*. <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p20.1"></span>Θωλεᾶς</span> may be the right reading
instead of <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p20.2"></span>Βωλεᾶς</span>. But [Judg. x.
1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#001.md)<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p20.3"></span>
says Tola, the son of Puah, the son of Dodo.

<span id="fn_2042"></span>[326:2043](0020314.htm#fr_2042.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p20.4"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p21"></span> Ibzan, A. V., [Judg. xii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg012.htm#008.md)<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p21.1"></span>;
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p21.2"></span>Ἀβαισσάν</span>,
*Septuagant*. According to [Judg. xii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg012.htm#011.md)<span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p21.3"></span>, Elon the Zebulonite succeeded Ibzan.

<span id="fn_2043"></span>[326:2044](0020314.htm#fr_2043.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p21.4"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p22"></span> Not mentioned in Scripture.

<span id="fn_2044"></span>[326:2045](0020314.htm#fr_2044.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p23"></span> *Sic*.

<span id="fn_2045"></span>[326:2046](0020314.htm#fr_2045.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p27.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p28"></span> See [1 Kings
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#001.md),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#002.md)<span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p28.1"></span>. The text has <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p28.2"></span>ἐπι ῾Ροβοάμ</span>, which, if retained,
must be translated “in the reign of Roboam.” But Jeroboam was probably
the original reading.

<span id="fn_2046"></span>[327:2047](0020314.htm#fr_2046.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p28.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p29"></span> Asa.

<span id="fn_2047"></span>[327:2048](0020314.htm#fr_2047.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p30.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p31"></span> So Lowth corrects the text, which has
five.

<span id="fn_2048"></span>[327:2049](0020314.htm#fr_2048.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p32.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p33"></span> Supposed to be “son of Oded” or
“Adad,” i.e., Azarias.

<span id="fn_2049"></span>[327:2050](0020314.htm#fr_2049.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p33.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p34"></span> i.e., of Ochozias.

<span id="fn_2050"></span>[327:2051](0020314.htm#fr_2050.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p34.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p35"></span> Athalia.

<span id="fn_2051"></span>[327:2052](0020314.htm#fr_2051.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p35.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p36"></span> She was slain in the seventh year of
her reign.

<span id="fn_2052"></span>[327:2053](0020314.htm#fr_2052.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p36.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p37"></span> Not of her brother, but of her son
Ahaziah, all of whom she slew except Joash.

<span id="fn_2053"></span>[327:2054](0020314.htm#fr_2053.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p40.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p41"></span> Clement is wrong in asserting that
Amos the prophet was the father of Isaiah. The names are written
differently in Hebrew, though the same in Greek.

<span id="fn_2054"></span>[327:2055](0020314.htm#fr_2054.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p44.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p45"></span> By a strange mistake Hosea king of
Israel is reckoned among the kings of Judah.

<span id="fn_2055"></span>[328:2056](0020314.htm#fr_2055.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p47.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p48"></span> [Lev. xxvi.
30](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#030.md)<span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2056"></span>[328:2057](0020314.htm#fr_2056.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p48.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p49"></span> [2 Kings xxiii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#022.md)<span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2057"></span>[328:2058](0020314.htm#fr_2057.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p49.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p50"></span> [2 Kings xxii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#008.md)<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2058"></span>[328:2059](0020314.htm#fr_2058.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p50.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p51"></span> Huldah.

<span id="fn_2059"></span>[328:2060](0020314.htm#fr_2059.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p51.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p52"></span> Zephaniah.

<span id="fn_2060"></span>[328:2061](0020314.htm#fr_2060.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p52.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p53"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p53.1"></span>ὀ Ἰωσίου</span>, the reading of the text,
is probably corrupt.

<span id="fn_2061"></span>[328:2062](0020314.htm#fr_2061.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p53.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p54"></span> Josias.

<span id="fn_2062"></span>[328:2063](0020314.htm#fr_2062.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p55.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p56"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p56.1"></span>ὀ καὶ Ἰωάχας</span>, instead of which the
text has <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p56.2"></span>καὶ
Ἰωάχας</span>.

<span id="fn_2063"></span>[328:2064](0020314.htm#fr_2063.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p56.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p57"></span> The names, however, were not the
same. The name of the latter was Jehoiachin. The former in Hebrew was
written <span class="Hebrew"><span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p57.1"></span>יהויקים</span>, the latter <span
class="Hebrew"><span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p57.2"></span>יהויכין</span>. By
copyists they were often confounded, as here by Clement.

<span id="fn_2064"></span>[328:2065](0020314.htm#fr_2064.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p57.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p58"></span> Lowth suplies <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p58.1"></span>Ἰεζεκιήλ</span>, which
is wanting in the text.

<span id="fn_2065"></span>[328:2066](0020314.htm#fr_2065.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p58.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p59"></span> He was a contemporary of Jeremiah,
but was killed before the time of Zedekiah by Joachin. [Jer. xxvi.
20](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#020.md)<span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p59.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2066"></span>[328:2067](0020314.htm#fr_2066.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p59.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p60"></span> Habakkuk.

<span id="fn_2067"></span>[328:2068](0020314.htm#fr_2067.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p62.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p63"></span> Juba.

<span id="fn_2068"></span>[328:2069](0020314.htm#fr_2068.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p64.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p65"></span> Malachi, my angel or messenger.
\[Again, p. 331, *infra*.\]

<span id="fn_2069"></span>[328:2070](0020314.htm#fr_2069.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p65.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p66"></span> On account of killing the serpent, as
is related in the apocryphal book, “Bel and the Dragon, or Serpent.”

<span id="fn_2070"></span>[329:2071](0020314.htm#fr_2070.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p69.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p70"></span> [Dan. ix.
24-27](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#024.md)<span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p70.1"></span>. \[Speaker’s Commentary, *Excursus, ad
locum*.\]

<span id="fn_2071"></span>[330:2072](0020314.htm#fr_2071.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p75.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p76"></span> The text has David.

<span id="fn_2072"></span>[330:2073](0020314.htm#fr_2072.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p76.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p77"></span> Hiram or Huram was his name ([1 Kings
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1007.htm#013.md),
[40](../../../bib/kjv/kg1007.htm#040.md)<span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p77.1"></span>). Clement seems to have mistaken the
words <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p77.2"></span>ὑπὲρ
ὦν</span> occuring in the epistle referred to for a proper name.

<span id="fn_2073"></span>[330:2074](0020314.htm#fr_2073.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p77.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p78"></span> Such, according to Harpocration, was
the title of this work. In the text it is called <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p78.1"></span>Τριγράμμοι</span>.
Suidas calls it <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p78.2"></span>Τριασμοί</span>.

<span id="fn_2074"></span>[330:2075](0020314.htm#fr_2074.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p78.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p79"></span> The passage seems incomplete. The
bearing of the date of the building of Thasos on the determination of
the age of Archilochus, may be, that it was built by Telesiclus his son.

<span id="fn_2075"></span>[330:2076](0020314.htm#fr_2075.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p80.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p81"></span> Called so because he sojourned at
Athens. His birthplace was Acarnania.

<span id="fn_2076"></span>[330:2077](0020314.htm#fr_2076.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p81.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p82"></span> Another reading is <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p82.1"></span>Τιμόθεος</span>;
Sylburgius conjectures <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p82.2"></span>Τιμόξενος</span>.

<span id="fn_2077"></span>[330:2078](0020314.htm#fr_2077.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p82.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p83"></span> The text has <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p83.1"></span>Φυτώ</span>, which
Sylburgius conjectures has been changed from <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p83.2"></span>Πυθώ</span>.

<span id="fn_2078"></span>[330:2079](0020314.htm#fr_2078.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p83.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p84"></span> Plato’s *Theages*, xi. p. 128.

<span id="fn_2079"></span>[331:2080](0020314.htm#fr_2079.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p87.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p88"></span> \[Not to be lightly passed over. This
whole paragraph is of value. Noah is the eighth *preacher* (2 Pet. ii.
5) of righteousness.\]

<span id="fn_2080"></span>[331:2081](0020314.htm#fr_2080.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p89.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p90"></span> \[The baptism of Jesus as
distinguished from the baptism of repetance. John is clearly recognised,
here, as of the old dispensation. [John iv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#001.md)<span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p90.1"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_2081"></span>[331:2082](0020314.htm#fr_2081.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p90.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p91"></span> \[It is extraordinary that he fails
to mention the blessed virgin and her *Magnificat*, the earliest
Christian hymn; i.e., the first after the incarnation.\]

<span id="fn_2082"></span>[331:2083](0020314.htm#fr_2082.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p92.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p93"></span> i.e., of Io, the daughter of Inachus.

<span id="fn_2083"></span>[332:2084](0020314.htm#fr_2083.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p94.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p95"></span> For <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p95.1"></span>Βαβυλῶνος</span>, <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p95.2"></span>Βασιλἐων</span> has
been substituted. In an old chronologist, as quoted by Clement
elsewhere, the latter occurs; and the date of the expulsion of the kings
harmonizes with the number of years here given, which that of the
destruction of Babylon does not.

<span id="fn_2084"></span>[332:2085](0020314.htm#fr_2084.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p104.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p105"></span> [Gen. xlvi.
27](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#027.md)<span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p105.1"></span>, Sept.

<span id="fn_2085"></span>[333:2086](0020314.htm#fr_2085.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p106.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p107"></span> \[This assent to Plato’s whim, on
the part of our author, is suggestive.\]

<span id="fn_2086"></span>[333:2087](0020314.htm#fr_2086.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p108.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p109"></span> \[This assent to Plato’s whim, on
the part of our author, is suggestive.\]

<span id="fn_2087"></span>[333:2088](0020314.htm#fr_2087.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p113.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p114"></span> [Luke
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#001.md),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#002.md),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#023.md)<span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p114.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2088"></span>[333:2089](0020314.htm#fr_2088.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p114.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p115"></span> \[A fair parallel to the amazing
traditional statement of Irenæus, and his objection to this very idea,
vol. i. p. 391, this series. [Isa.
61:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#001.md),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#002.md)<span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p115.1"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_2089"></span>[333:2090](0020314.htm#fr_2089.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p116.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p117"></span> \[Mosheim, *Christ. of First Three
Cent.*, i. 432; and Josephus, *Antiquities*, ii. 14.\]

<span id="fn_2090"></span>[334:2091](0020314.htm#fr_2090.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p118.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p119"></span> [Dan.
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#013.md),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#014.md)<span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p119.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2091"></span>[334:2092](0020314.htm#fr_2091.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p120.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p121"></span> [Dan. xii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#012.md)<span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p121.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2092"></span>[334:2093](0020314.htm#fr_2092.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p121.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p122"></span> [Dan.
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#011.md),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#012.md)<span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p122.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2093"></span>[334:2094](0020314.htm#fr_2093.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p125.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p126"></span> [Matt. i.
17](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#017.md)<span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p126.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2094"></span>[334:2095](0020314.htm#fr_2094.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p126.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxi-p127"></span> \[As to our author’s chronology, see
Elucidation XV., *infra*.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXII.—On the Greek Translation of the Old
Testament.](0020315.md)
