[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020162)  [Next](0020164) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xxvi"></span>

##### <span id="iv.ii.iii.xxvi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXVI.—Contrast Between Hebrew and Greek Writings.

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xxvi-p1"></span>Hence one can see how our sacred
writings are shown to be more ancient and true than those of the Greeks
and Egyptians, or any other historians. For Herodotus and Thucydides, as
also Xenophon, and most other historians, began their relations from
about the reign of Cyrus and Darius, not being able to speak with
accuracy of prior and ancient times. For what great matters did they
disclose if they spoke of Darius and Cyrus, barbarian kings, or of the
Greeks Zopyrus and Hippias, or of the wars of the Athenians and
Lacedæmonians, or the deeds of Xerxes or of Pausanias, who ran the risk
of starving to death in the temple of Minerva, or the history of
Themistocles and the Peloponnesian war, or of Alcibiades and
Thrasybulus? For my purpose is not to furnish mere matter of much talk,
but to throw light upon the number of years from the foundation of the
world, and to condemn the empty labour and trifling of these authors,
because there have neither been twenty thousand times ten thousand years
from the flood to the present time, as Plato said, affirming that there
had been so many years; nor yet 15 times 10,375 years, as we have
already mentioned Apollonius the Egyptian gave out; nor is the world
uncreated, nor is there a spontaneous production of all things, as
Pythagoras and the rest dreamed; but, being indeed created, it is also
governed by the providence of God, who made all things; and the whole
course of time and the years are made plain to those who wish to obey
the truth. <span id="fr_687"></span>[688](#fn_687) Lest, then, I seem to
have made things plain up to the time of Cyrus, and to neglect the
subsequent periods, as if through inability to exhibit them, I will
endeavour, by God’s help, to give an account, according to my ability,
of the course of the subsequent times.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_687"></span>[119:688](0020163.htm#fr_687) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.xxvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xxvi-p2"></span> \[Usher notes this as affirmed in
general terms only, and qualified afterwards, in cap. xxix, *infra*,
note i, p. 121.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVII.—Roman Chronology to the Death of M.
Aurelius.](0020164)
