[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020205)  [Next](0020207.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.ii.xxxvi"></span>

##### <span id="v.ii.xxxvi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXXVI.—Bearing of the Doctrine of the Resurrection on the Practices of the Christians.

<span id="v.ii.xxxvi-p1"></span>Who, then, that believes in a
resurrection, would make himself into a tomb for bodies that will rise
again? For it is not the part of the same persons to believe that our
bodies will rise again, and to eat them as if they would not; and to
think that the earth will give back the bodies held by it, but that
those which a man has entombed in himself will not be demanded back. On
the contrary, it is reasonable to suppose, that those who think they
shall have no account to give of the present life, ill or well spent,
and that <span id="page_148">p. 148</span> <span
id="v.ii.xxxvi-Page_148"></span>there is no resurrection, but calculate
on the soul perishing with the body, and being as it were quenched in
it, will refrain from no deed of daring; but as for those who are
persuaded that nothing will escape the scrutiny of God, but that even
the body which has ministered to the irrational impulses of the soul,
and to its desires, will be punished along with it, it is not likely
that they will commit even the smallest sin. But if to any one it
appears sheer nonsense that the body which has mouldered away, and been
dissolved, and reduced to nothing, should be reconstructed, we certainly
cannot with any reason be accused of wickedness with reference to those
that believe not, but only of folly; for with the opinions by which we
deceive ourselves we injure no one else. But that it is not our belief
alone that bodies will rise again, but that many philosophers also hold
the same view, it is out of place to show just now, lest we should be
thought to introduce topics irrelevant to the matter in hand, either by
speaking of the intelligible and the sensible, and the nature of these
respectively, or by contending that the incorporeal is older than the
corporeal, and that the intelligible precedes the sensible, although we
become acquainted with the latter earliest, since the corporeal is
formed from the incorporeal, by the combination with it of the
intelligible, and that the sensible is formed from the intelligible; for
nothing hinders, according to Pythagoras and Plato, that when the
dissolution of bodies takes place, they should, from the very same
elements of which they were constructed at first, be constructed
again. <span id="fr_831"></span>[832](#fn_831.md) But let us defer the
discourse concerning the resurrection. <span
id="fr_832"></span>[833](#fn_832.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_831"></span>[148:832](0020206.htm#fr_831.md) <span
id="v.ii.xxxvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xxxvi-p2"></span> \[Comp. cap. xxxi., *supra*, p. 146.
The science of their times lent itself to the notions of the Fathers
necessarily; but neither Holy Scripture nor theology binds us to any
theory of the *how*, in this great mystery; hence Plato and Pythagoras
are only useful, as showing that even they saw nothing impossible in the
resurrection of the dead. As to “the same elements,” identity does not
consist in the same particles of material, but in the continuity of
material, by which every seed reproduces “its own body.” [1 Cor. xv.
38](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#038.md)<span
id="v.ii.xxxvi-p2.1"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_832"></span>[148:833](0020206.htm#fr_832.md) <span
id="v.ii.xxxvi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xxxvi-p3"></span> \[It is a fair inference that *The
Discourse* was written after the *Embassy.* “In it,” says Kaye, “may be
found nearly all the arguments which human reason has been able to
advance in support of the resurrection.” p. 200.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXVII.—Entreaty to Be Fairly Judged.](0020207.md)
