[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020271)  [Next](0020273) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.ii.viii"></span>

##### <span id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p0.1"></span>Chapter VIII.—On the Use of Ointments and Crowns.

<span id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p1"></span>The use of crowns and ointments is
not necessary for us; for it impels to pleasures and indulgences,
especially on the approach of night. I know that the woman brought to
the sacred supper “an alabaster box of ointment,” <span
id="fr_1452"></span>[1453](#fn_1452) and anointed the feet of the Lord,
and refreshed Him; and I know that the ancient kings of the Hebrews were
crowned with gold and precious stones. But the woman not having yet
received the Word (for she was still a sinner), honoured the Lord with
what she thought the most precious thing in her possession—the ointment;
and with the ornament of her person, with her hair, she wiped off the
superfluous ointment, while she expended on the Lord tears of
repentance: “wherefore her sins are forgiven.” <span
id="fr_1453"></span>[1454](#fn_1453)

<span id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p4"></span>This may be a symbol of the Lord’s
teaching, and of His suffering. For the feet anointed with fragrant
ointment mean divine instruction travelling with renown to the ends of
the earth. “For their sound hath gone forth to the ends of the
earth.” <span id="fr_1454"></span>[1455](#fn_1454) And if I seem not to
insist too much, the feet of the Lord which were anointed are the
apostles, having, according to prophecy, received the fragrant unction
of the Holy Ghost. Those, therefore, who travelled over the world and
preached the Gospel, are figuratively called the feet of the Lord, of
whom also the Holy Spirit foretells in the psalm, “Let us adore at the
place where His feet stood,” <span id="fr_1455"></span>[1456](#fn_1455)
that is, where the apostles, His feet, arrived; since, preached by them,
He came to the ends of the earth. And tears are repentance; and the
loosened hair proclaimed deliverance from the love of finery, and the
affliction in patience which, on account of the Lord, attends preaching,
the old vainglory being done away with by reason of the new faith. <span
id="fr_1456"></span>[1457](#fn_1456)

<span id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p8"></span>Besides, it shows the Lord’s
passion, if you understand it mystically thus: the oil (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p8.1"></span>ἔλαιον</span>) is
the Lord Himself, from whom comes the mercy (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p8.2"></span>ἔλεος</span>) which reaches us. But the
ointment, <span id="page_254">p. 254</span> <span
id="vi.iii.ii.viii-Page_254"></span>which is adulterated oil, is the
traitor Judas, by whom the Lord was anointed on the feet, being released
from His sojourn in the world. For the dead are anointed. And the tears
are we repentant sinners, who have believed in Him, and to whom He has
forgiven our sins. And the dishevelled hair is mourning Jerusalem, the
deserted, for whom the prophetic lamentations were uttered. The Lord
Himself shall teach us that Judas the deceitful is meant: “He that
dippeth with Me in the dish, the same shall betray Me.” <span
id="fr_1457"></span>[1458](#fn_1457) You see the treacherous guest, and
this same Judas betrayed the Master with a kiss. For he was a hypocrite,
giving a treacherous kiss, in imitation of another hypocrite of old. And
He reproves that people respecting whom it was said, “This people honour
Me with their lips; but their heart is far from Me.” <span
id="fr_1458"></span>[1459](#fn_1458) It is not improbable, therefore,
that by the oil He means that disciple to whom was shown mercy, and by
the tainted and poisoned oil the traitor.

<span id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p11"></span>This was, then, what the anointed
feet prophesied—the treason of Judas, when the Lord went to His passion.
And the Saviour Himself washing the feet of the disciples, <span
id="fr_1459"></span>[1460](#fn_1459) and despatching them to do good
deeds, pointed out their pilgrimage for the benefit of the nations,
making them beforehand fair and pure by His power. Then the ointment
breathed on them its fragrance, and the work of sweet savour reaching to
all was proclaimed; for the passion of the Lord has filled us with sweet
fragrance, and the Hebrews with guilt. This the apostle most clearly
showed, when he said, “thanks be to God, who always makes us to triumph
in Christ, and maketh manifest the savour of His knowledge by us in
every place. For we are to God a sweet savour of the Lord, in them that
are saved, and them that are lost; to one a savour of death unto death,
to the other a savour of life unto life.” <span
id="fr_1460"></span>[1461](#fn_1460) And the kings of the Jews using
gold and precious stones and a variegated crown, the anointed ones
wearing Christ symbolically on the head, were unconsciously adorned with
the head of the Lord. The precious stone, or pearl, or emerald, points
out the Word Himself. The gold, again, is the incorruptible Word, who
admits not the poison of corruption. The Magi, accordingly, brought to
Him on His birth, gold, the symbol of royalty. And this crown, after the
image of the Lord, fades not as a flower.

<span id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p14"></span>I know, too, the words of
Aristippus the Cyrenian. Aristippus was a luxurious man. He asked an
answer to a sophistical proposition in the following terms: “A horse
anointed with ointment is not injured in his excellence as a horse, nor
is a dog which has been anointed, in his excellence as a dog; no more is
a man,” he added, and so finished. But the dog and horse take no account
of the ointment, whilst in the case of those whose perceptions are more
rational, applying girlish scents to their persons, its use is more
censurable. Of these ointments there are endless varieties, such as the
Brenthian, the Metallian, and the royal; the Plangonian and the Psagdian
of Egypt. Simonides is not ashamed in Iambic lines to say,—

> <span id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p14.1"></span> “I was anointed with ointments
> and perfumes,  
> And with nard.”  

<span id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p15"></span>For a merchant was present. They
use, too, the unguent made from lilies, and that from the cypress. Nard
is in high estimation with them, and the ointment prepared from roses
and the others which women use besides, both moist and dry, scents for
rubbing and for fumigating; for day by day their thoughts are directed
to the gratification of insatiable desire, to the exhaustless variety of
fragrance. Wherefore also they are redolent of an excessive
luxuriousness. And they fumigate and sprinkle their clothes, their
bed-clothes, and their houses. Luxury all but compels vessels for the
meanest uses to smell of perfume.

<span id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p16"></span>There are some who, annoyed at the
attention bestowed on this, appear to me to be rightly so averse to
perfumes on account of their rendering manhood effeminate, as to banish
their compounders and vendors from well-regulated states, and banish,
too, the dyers of flower-coloured wools. For it is not right that
ensnaring garments and unguents should be admitted into the city of
truth; but it is highly requisite for the men who belong to us to give
forth the odour not of ointments, but of nobleness and goodness. And let
woman breathe the odour of the true royal ointment, that of Christ, not
of unguents and scented powders; and let her always be anointed with the
ambrosial chrism of modesty, and find delight in the holy unguent, the
Spirit. This ointment of pleasant fragrance Christ prepares for His
disciples, compounding the ointment of celestial aromatic ingredients.

<span id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p17"></span>Wherefore also the Lord Himself is
anointed with an ointment, as is mentioned by David: “Wherefore God, thy
God, hath anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows;
myrrh, and stacte, and cassia from thy garments.” <span
id="fr_1461"></span>[1462](#fn_1461) But let us not unconsciously
abominate unguents, like vultures or like beetles (for these, they say,
when smeared with ointment, die); and let a few unguents be selected by
women, such as will not be overpowering to a husband. For excessive
anointings with unguents savour of a funeral <span id="page_255">p.
255</span> <span id="vi.iii.ii.viii-Page_255"></span>and not of
connubial life. Yet oil itself is inimical to bees and insects; and some
men it benefits, and some it summons to the fight; and those who were
formerly friends, when anointed with it, it turns out to deadly combat.

<span id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p19"></span>Ointment being smooth oil, do you
not think that it is calculated to render noble manners effeminate?
Certainly. And as we have abandoned luxury in taste, so certainly do we
renounce voluptuousness in sights and odours; lest through the senses,
as through unwatched doors, we unconsciously give access into the soul
to that excess which we have driven away. If, then, we say that the Lord
the great High Priest offers to God the incense of sweet fragrance, let
us not imagine that this is a sacrifice and sweet fragrance of
incense; <span id="fr_1462"></span>[1463](#fn_1462) but let us
understand it to mean, that the Lord lays the acceptable offering of
love, the spiritual fragrance, on the altar.

<span id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p21"></span>To resume: oil itself suffices to
lubricate the skin, and relax the nerves, and remove any heavy smell
from the body, if we require oil for this purpose. But attention to
sweet scents is a bait which draws us in to sensual lust. For the
licentious man is led on every hand, both by his food, his bed, his
conversation, by his eyes, his ears, his jaws, and by his nostrils too.
As oxen are pulled by rings and ropes, so is the voluptuary by
fumigations and unguents, and the sweet scents of crowns. But since we
assign no place to pleasure which is linked to no use serviceable to
life, come let us also distinguish here too, selecting what is useful.
For there are sweet scents which neither make the head heavy nor provoke
love, and are not redolent of embraces and licentious companionship,
but, along with moderation, are salutary, nourishing the brain when
labouring under indisposition, and strengthening the stomach. One must
not therefore refrigerate himself with flowers when he wishes to supple
his nerves. For their use is not wholly to be laid aside, but ointment
is to be employed as a medicine and help in order to bring up the
strength when enfeebled, and against catarrhs, and colds, and ennui, as
the comic poet says:—

> <span id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p21.1"></span> “The nostrils are anointed; it
> being  
> A most essential thing for health to fill the brain with good
> odours.”  

<span id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p22"></span>The rubbing of the feet also with
the fatness of warming or cooling unguents is practiced on account of
its beneficial effects; so consequently, in the case of those who are
thus saturated, an attraction and flow take place from the head to the
inferior members. But pleasure to which no utility attaches, induces the
suspicion of meretricious habits, and is a drug provocative of the
passions. Rubbing one’s self with ointment is entirely different from
anointing one’s self with ointment. The former is effeminate, while
anointing with ointment is in some cases beneficial. Aristippus the
philosopher, accordingly, when anointed with ointment, said “that the
wretched Cinœdi deserved to perish miserably for bringing the utility of
ointment into bad repute.” “Honour the physician for his usefulness,”
says the Scripture, “for the Most High made him; and the art of healing
is of the Lord.” Then he adds, “And the compounder of unguents will make
the mixture,” <span id="fr_1463"></span>[1464](#fn_1463) since unguents
have been given manifestly for use, not for voluptuousness. For we are
by no means to care for the exciting properties of unguents, but to
choose what is useful in them, since God hath permitted the production
of oil for the mitigation of men’s pains.

<span id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p24"></span>And silly women, who dye their grey
hair and anoint their locks, grow speedily greyer by the perfumes they
use, which are of a drying nature. Wherefore also those that anoint
themselves become drier, and the dryness makes them greyer. For if
greyness is an exsiccation of the hair, or defect of heat, the dryness
drinking up the moisture which is the natural nutriment of the hair, and
making it grey, how can we any longer retain a liking for unguents,
through which ladies, in trying to escape grey hair, become grey? And as
dogs with fine sense of smell track the wild beasts by the scent, so
also the temperate scent the licentious by the superfluous perfume of
unguents.

<span id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p25"></span>Such a use of crowns, also, has
degenerated to scenes of revelry and intoxication. Do not encircle my
head with a crown, for in the springtime it is delightful to while away
the time on the dewy meads, while soft and many-coloured flowers are in
bloom, and, like the bees, enjoy a natural and pure fragrance. <span
id="fr_1464"></span>[1465](#fn_1464) But to adorn one’s self with “a
crown woven from the fresh mead,” and wear it at home, were unfit for a
man of temperance. For it is not suitable to fill the wanton hair with
rose-leaves, or violets, or lilies, or other such flowers, stripping the
sward of its flowers. For a crown encircling the head cools the hair,
both on account of its moisture and its coolness. Accordingly,
physicians, determining by physiology that the brain is cold, approve of
anointing the breast and the points of the nostrils, so that the warm
exhalation passing gently through, may salutarily warm the chill. A man
ought not therefore to cool himself with flowers. Besides, those who
crown themselves destroy the pleasure there is in flowers: for they
enjoy neither the sight of them, since they wear the crown <span
id="page_256">p. 256</span> <span
id="vi.iii.ii.viii-Page_256"></span>above their eyes; nor their
fragrance, since they put the flowers away above the organs of
respiration. For the fragrance ascending and exhaling naturally, the
organ of respiration is left destitute of enjoyment, the fragrance being
carried away. As beauty, so also the flower delights when looked at; and
it is meet to glorify the Creator by the enjoyment of the sight of
beautiful objects. <span id="fr_1465"></span>[1466](#fn_1465) The use of
them is injurious, and passes swiftly away, avenged by remorse. Very
soon their evanescence is proved; for both fade, both the flower and
beauty. Further, whoever touches them is cooled by the former, inflamed
by the latter. In one word, the enjoyment of them except by sight is a
crime, and not luxury. It becomes us who truly follow the Scripture to
enjoy ourselves temperately, as in Paradise. We must regard the woman’s
crown to be her husband, and the husband’s crown to be marriage; and the
flowers of marriage the children of both, which the divine husbandman
plucks from meadows of flesh. “Children’s children are the crown of old
men.” <span id="fr_1466"></span>[1467](#fn_1466) And the glory of
children is their fathers, it is said; and our glory is the Father of
all; and the crown of the whole church is Christ. As roots and plants,
so also have flowers their individual properties, some beneficial, some
injurious, some also dangerous. The ivy is cooling; nux emits a
stupefying effluvium, as the etymology shows. The narcissus is a flower
with a heavy odour; the name evinces this, and it induces a torpor
(<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p28.2"></span>νάρκην</span>) in the nerves. And the
effluvia of roses and violets being mildly cool, relieve and prevent
headaches. But we who are not only not permitted to drink with others to
intoxication, but not even to indulge in much wine, <span
id="fr_1467"></span>[1468](#fn_1467) do not need the crocus or the
flower of the cypress to lead us to an easy sleep. Many of them also, by
their odours, warm the brain, which is naturally cold, volatilizing the
effusions of the head. The rose is hence said to have received its name
(<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p29.1"></span>ῥόδον</span>) because it emits a
copious stream (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p29.2"></span>ῥεῦμα</span>) of odour (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p29.3"></span>ὀδωδή</span>).
Wherefore also it quickly fades.

<span id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p30"></span>But the use of crowns did not exist
at all among the ancient Greeks; for neither the suitors nor the
luxurious Phæacians used them. But at the games there was at first the
gift to the athletes; second, the rising up to applaud; third, the
strewing with leaves; lastly, the crown, Greece after the Median war
having given herself up to luxury.

<span id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p31"></span>Those, then, who are trained by the
Word are restrained from the use of crowns; and do not think that this
Word, which has its seat in the brain, ought to be bound about, not
because the crown is the symbol of the recklessness of revelry, but
because it has been dedicated to idols. Sophocles accordingly called the
narcissus “the ancient coronet of the great gods,” speaking of the
earth-born divinities; and Sappho crowns the Muses with the rose:—

> <span id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p31.1"></span> “For thou dost not share in
> roses from Pieria.”  

<span id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p32"></span>They say, too, that Here delights
in the lily, and Artemis in the myrtle. For if the flowers were made
especially for man, and senseless people have taken them not for their
own proper and grateful use, but have abused them to the thankless
service of demons, we must keep from them for conscience sake. The crown
is the symbol of untroubled tranquillity. For this reason they crown the
dead, and idols, too, on the same account, by this fact giving testimony
to their being dead. For revellers do not without crowns celebrate their
orgies; and when once they are encircled with flowers, at last they are
inflamed excessively. We must have no communion with demons. Nor must we
crown the living image of God after the manner of dead idols. For the
fair crown of amaranth is laid up for those who have lived well. This
flower the earth is not able to bear; heaven alone is competent to
produce it. <span id="fr_1468"></span>[1469](#fn_1468) Further, it were
irrational in us, who have heard that the Lord was crowned with
thorns, <span id="fr_1469"></span>[1470](#fn_1469) to crown ourselves
with flowers, insulting thus the sacred passion of the Lord. For the
Lord’s crown prophetically pointed to us, who once were barren, but are
placed around Him through the Church of which He is the Head. But it is
also a type of faith, of life in respect of the substance of the wood,
of joy in respect of the appellation of crown, of danger in respect of
the thorn, for there is no approaching to the Word without blood. But
this platted crown fades, and the plait of perversity is untied, and the
flower withers. For the glory of those who have not believed on the Lord
fades. And they crowned Jesus raised aloft, testifying to their own
ignorance. For being hard of heart, they understood not that this very
thing, which they called the disgrace of the Lord, was a prophecy wisely
uttered: “The Lord was not known by the people” <span
id="fr_1470"></span>[1471](#fn_1470) which erred, which was not
circumcised in understanding, whose darkness was not enlightened, which
knew not God, denied the Lord, forfeited the place of the true Israel,
persecuted God, hoped to reduce the Word to disgrace; and Him whom they
crucified as a malefactor they crowned as a king. Wherefore the Man on
whom they believed not, they shall <span id="page_257">p. 257</span>
<span id="vi.iii.ii.viii-Page_257"></span>know to be the loving God the
Lord, the Just. Whom they provoked to show Himself to be the Lord, to
Him when lifted up they bore witness, by encircling Him, who is exalted
above every name, with the diadem of righteousness by the ever-blooming
thorn. This diadem, being hostile to those who plot against Him, coerces
them; and friendly to those who form the Church, defends them. This
crown is the flower of those who have believed on the glorified One, but
covers with blood and chastises those who have not believed. It is a
symbol, too, of the Lord’s successful work, He having borne on His head,
the princely part of His body, all our iniquities by which we were
pierced. For He by His own passion rescued us from offences, and sins,
and such like thorns; and having destroyed the devil, deservedly said in
triumph, “O Death, where is thy sting?” <span
id="fr_1471"></span>[1472](#fn_1471) And we eat grapes from thorns, and
figs from thistles; while those to whom He stretched forth His hands—the
disobedient and unfruitful people—He lacerates into wounds. I can also
show you another mystic meaning in it. <span
id="fr_1472"></span>[1473](#fn_1472) For when the Almighty Lord of the
universe began to legislate by the Word, and wished His power to be
manifested to Moses, a godlike vision of light that had assumed a shape
was shown him in the burning bush (the bush is a thorny plant); but when
the Word ended the giving of the law and His stay with men, the Lord was
again mystically crowned with thorn. On His departure from this world to
the place whence He came, He repeated the beginning of His old descent,
in order that the Word beheld at first in the bush, and afterwards taken
up crowned by the thorn, might show the whole to be the work of one
power, He Himself being one, the Son of the Father, who is truly one,
the beginning and the end of time.

<span id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p39"></span>But I have made a digression from
the pædagogic style of speech, and introduced the didactic. <span
id="fr_1473"></span>[1474](#fn_1473) I return accordingly to my subject.

<span id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p41"></span>To resume, then: we have showed
that in the department of medicine, for healing, and sometimes also for
moderate recreation, the delight derived from flowers, and the benefit
derived from unguents and perfumes, are not to be overlooked. And if
some say, What pleasure, then, is there in flowers to those that do not
use them? let them know, then, that unguents are prepared from them, and
are most useful. The Susinian ointment is made from various kinds of
lilies; and it is warming, aperient, drawing, moistening, abstergent,
subtle, antibilious, emollient. The Narcissinian is made from the
narcissus, and is equally beneficial with the Susinian. The Myrsinian,
made of myrtle and myrtle berries, is a styptic, stopping effusions from
the body; and that from roses is refrigerating. For, in a word, these
also were created for our use. “Hear me,” it is said, “and grow as a
rose planted by the streams of waters, and give forth a sweet fragrance
like frankincense, and bless the Lord for His works.” <span
id="fr_1474"></span>[1475](#fn_1474) We should have much to say
respecting them, were we to speak of flowers and odours as made for
necessary purposes, and not for the excesses of luxury. And if a
concession must be made, it is enough for people to enjoy the fragrance
of flowers; but let them not crown themselves with them. For the Father
takes great care of man, and gives to him alone His own art. The
Scripture therefore says, “Water, and fire, and iron, and milk, and fine
flour of wheat, and honey, the blood of the grape, and oil, and
clothing,—all these things are for the good of the godly.” <span
id="fr_1475"></span>[1476](#fn_1475)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1452"></span>[253:1453](0020272.htm#fr_1452) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p2"></span> [Matt. xxvi.
7](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#007)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p2.1"></span>, etc.

<span id="fn_1453"></span>[253:1454](0020272.htm#fr_1453) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p3"></span> [Luke vii.
47](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#047)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1454"></span>[253:1455](0020272.htm#fr_1454) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p5"></span> [Ps. xix.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#004)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p5.1"></span>; [Rom. x.
18](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#018)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p5.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_1455"></span>[253:1456](0020272.htm#fr_1455) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p5.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p6"></span> [Ps.
cxxxii.](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#000)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="fn_1456"></span>[253:1457](0020272.htm#fr_1456) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p7"></span>\[We need not refuse this
efflorescence as poetry, nor accept it as exposition.\]

<span id="fn_1457"></span>[254:1458](0020272.htm#fr_1457) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p8.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p9"></span> [Matt. xxvi.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#023)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1458"></span>[254:1459](0020272.htm#fr_1458) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p10"></span> [Isa. xxix.
13](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#013)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1459"></span>[254:1460](0020272.htm#fr_1459) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p12"></span> [John xiii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#005)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1460"></span>[254:1461](0020272.htm#fr_1460) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p13"></span> [2 Cor. ii.
14-16](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#014)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1461"></span>[254:1462](0020272.htm#fr_1461) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p18"></span> [Ps.
45:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#008)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1462"></span>[255:1463](0020272.htm#fr_1462) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p20"></span> \[Considering the use of incense
in Hebrew worship, and the imagery of the Apocalypse, the emphasis with
which the Fathers reject material incense, is to be noted.\]

<span id="fn_1463"></span>[255:1464](0020272.htm#fr_1463) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p23"></span> [Sir.
38:1](../../../bib/apo/sir038.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/apo/sir038.htm#002),
[8](../../../bib/apo/sir038.htm#008)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1464"></span>[255:1465](0020272.htm#fr_1464) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p26"></span> \[An idyllic passage illustrative
of our author’s delight in rural scenes and pleasures.\]

<span id="fn_1465"></span>[256:1466](0020272.htm#fr_1465) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p27"></span> \[Christianity delights in natural
beauty, and always associates its enjoyment with praise to its Author.
[Ecclus. xliii. 11](../../../bib/apo/sir043.htm#011)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p27.1"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_1466"></span>[256:1467](0020272.htm#fr_1466) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p28"></span> [Prov. xvii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#006)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1467"></span>[256:1468](0020272.htm#fr_1467) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p28.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p29"></span> \[This was a marked characteristic
of Christian manners at war with heathenism.\]

<span id="fn_1468"></span>[256:1469](0020272.htm#fr_1468) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p33"></span> \[

> <span id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p33.1"></span> “Immortal amaranth, a flower
> which once  
> In Paradise fast by the tree of life  
> Began to bloom.”  

<span id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p34"></span>*Paradise Lost*, iii. 352.\]

<span id="fn_1469"></span>[256:1470](0020272.htm#fr_1469) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p35"></span> [Matt. xxvii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#029)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1470"></span>[256:1471](0020272.htm#fr_1470) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p35.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p36"></span> [Isa. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#003)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1471"></span>[257:1472](0020272.htm#fr_1471) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p36.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p37"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
55](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#055)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1472"></span>[257:1473](0020272.htm#fr_1472) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p37.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p38"></span> \[See note 10, p. 253. The beauty
of this mysticism need not be pointed out, but it need not be pressed as
exposition.\]

<span id="fn_1473"></span>[257:1474](0020272.htm#fr_1473) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p39.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p40"></span> \[This illustrates, in part, the
difference between the *esoteric*, or mystic, and the more popular
teaching of our author.\]

<span id="fn_1474"></span>[257:1475](0020272.htm#fr_1474) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p42"></span> [Sir.
39:13](../../../bib/apo/sir039.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/apo/sir039.htm#014)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1475"></span>[257:1476](0020272.htm#fr_1475) <span
id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p42.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p43"></span> [Sir.
39:26](../../../bib/apo/sir039.htm#026),
[27](../../../bib/apo/sir039.htm#027)<span
id="vi.iii.ii.viii-p43.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chap. IX.—On Sleep.](0020273)
