[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020400)  [Next](0020402) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xi"></span>

##### <span id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XI.—The Mystical Meanings in the Proportions of Numbers, Geometrical Ratios, and Music.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p1"></span>As then in astronomy we have Abraham as
an instance, so also in arithmetic we have the same Abraham. “For,
hearing that Lot was taken captive, and having numbered his own
servants, born in his house, 318 (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p1.1"></span>τιὴ</span> <span
id="fr_3333"></span>[3334](#fn_3333) ),” he defeats a very great number
of the enemy.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p3"></span>They say, then, that the character
representing 300 is, as to shape, the type of the Lord’s sign, <span
id="fr_3334"></span>[3335](#fn_3334) and that the *Iota* and the *Eta*
indicate the Saviour’s name; that it was indicated, accordingly, that
Abraham’s domestics were in salvation, who having fled to the Sign and
the Name became lords of the captives, and of the very many unbelieving
nations that followed them.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p5"></span>Now the number 300 is, 3 by 100. Ten is
allowed to be the perfect number. And 8 is the first cube, which is
equality in all the dimensions—length, breadth, depth. “The days of men
shall be,” it is said, “120 (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p5.1"></span>ρκ´</span>) years.” <span
id="fr_3335"></span>[3336](#fn_3335) And the sum is made up of the
numbers from 1 to 15 added together. <span
id="fr_3336"></span>[3337](#fn_3336) And the moon at 15 days is full.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p8"></span>On another principle, 120 is a
triangular <span id="fr_3337"></span>[3338](#fn_3337) number, and
consists of the equality <span id="fr_3338"></span>[3339](#fn_3338) of
the number 64, \[which consists of eight of the odd numbers beginning
with unity\], <span id="fr_3339"></span>[3340](#fn_3339) the addition of
which (1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, 13, 15) in succession generate squares; <span
id="fr_3340"></span>[3341](#fn_3340) and of the inequality of the number
56, consisting of seven of the even numbers beginning with 2 (2, 4, 6,
8, 10, 12, 14), which produce the numbers that are not squares <span
id="fr_3341"></span>[3342](#fn_3341)

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p14"></span>Again, according to another way of
indicating, the number 120 consists of four numbers—of one triangle, 15;
of another, a square, 25; of a third, a pentagon, 35; and of a fourth, a
hexagon, 45. The 5 is taken according to the same ratio in each mode.
For in triangular numbers, from the unity 5 comes 15; and in squares,
25; and of those in succession, proportionally. Now 25, which is the
number 5 from unity, is said to be the symbol of the Levitical tribe.
And the <span id="page_500">p. 500</span> <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xi-Page_500"></span>number 35 depends also on the
arithmetic, geometric, and harmonic scale of doubles—6, 8, 9, 12; the
addition of which makes 35. In these days, the Jews say that seven
months’ children are formed. And the number 45 depends on the scale of
triples—6, 9, 12, 18—the addition of which makes 45; and similarly, in
these days they say that nine months’ children are formed.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p15"></span>Such, then, is the style of the
example in arithmetic. And let the testimony of geometry be the
tabernacle that was constructed, and the ark that was
fashioned,—constructed in most regular proportions, and through divine
ideas, by the gift of understanding, which leads us from things of sense
to intellectual objects, or rather from these to holy things, and to the
holy of holies. For the squares of wood indicate that the square form,
producing right angles, pervades all, and points out security. And the
length of the structure was three hundred cubits, and the breadth fifty,
and the height thirty; and above, the ark ends in a cubit, narrowing to
a cubit from the broad base like a pyramid, the symbol of those who are
purified and tested by fire. And this geometrical proportion has a
place, for the transport of those holy abodes, whose differences are
indicated by the differences of the numbers set down below.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p16"></span>And the numbers introduced are
sixfold, as three hundred is six times fifty; and tenfold, as three
hundred is ten times thirty; and containing one and two-thirds (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p16.1"></span>επιδίμοιροι</span>),
for fifty is one and two-thirds of thirty.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p17"></span>Now there are some who say that three
hundred cubits are the symbol of the Lord’s sign; <span
id="fr_3342"></span>[3343](#fn_3342) and fifty, of hope and of the
remission given at Pentecost; and thirty, or as in some, twelve, they
say points out the preaching \[of the Gospel\]; because the <span
class="sc"><span id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p18.1"></span>Lord</span> preached in
His thirtieth year; and the apostles were twelve. And the structure’s
terminating in a cubit is the symbol of the advancement of the righteous
to oneness and to “the unity of the faith.” <span
id="fr_3343"></span>[3344](#fn_3343)

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p20"></span>And the table which was in the temple
was six cubits; <span id="fr_3344"></span>[3345](#fn_3344) and its four
feet were about a cubit and a half.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p22"></span>They add, then, the twelve cubits,
agreeably to the revolution of the twelve months, in the annual circle,
during which the earth produces and matures all things; adapting itself
to the four seasons. And the table, in my opinion, exhibits the image of
the earth, supported as it is on four feet, summer, autumn, spring,
winter, by which the year travels. Wherefore also it is said that the
table has “wavy chains;” <span id="fr_3345"></span>[3346](#fn_3345)
either because the universe revolves in the circuits of the times, or
perhaps it indicated the earth surrounded with ocean’s tide.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p24"></span>Further, as an example of music, let
us adduce David, playing at once and prophesying, melodiously praising
God. Now the Enarmonic <span id="fr_3346"></span>[3347](#fn_3346) suits
best the Dorian harmony, and the Diatonic the Phrygian, as Aristoxenus
says. The harmony, therefore, of the Barbarian psaltery, which exhibited
gravity of strain, being the most ancient, most certainly became a model
for Terpander, for the Dorian harmony, who sings the praise of Zeus
thus:—

> <span id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p25.4"></span> “O Zeus, of all things the
> Beginning, Ruler of all;  
> O Zeus, I send thee this beginning of hymns.”  

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p26"></span>The lyre, according to its primary
signification, may by the psalmist be used figuratively for the Lord;
according to its secondary, for those who continually strike the chords
of their souls under the direction of the Choir-master, the Lord. And if
the people saved be called the lyre, it will be understood to be in
consequence of their giving glory musically, through the inspiration of
the Word and the knowledge of God, being struck by the Word so as to
produce faith. You may take music in another way, as the ecclesiastical
symphony at once of the law and the prophets, and the apostles along
with the Gospel, and the harmony which obtained in each prophet, in the
transitions of the persons.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p27"></span>But, as seems, the most of those who
are inscribed with the Name, <span id="fr_3347"></span>[3348](#fn_3347)
like the companions of Ulysses, handle the word unskilfully, passing by
not the Sirens, but the rhythm and the melody, stopping their ears with
ignorance; since they know that, after lending their ears to Hellenic
studies, they will never subsequently be able to retrace their steps.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p29"></span>But he who culls what is useful for
the advantage of the catechumens, and especially when they are Greeks
(and the earth is the Lord’s, and the fulness thereof <span
id="fr_3348"></span>[3349](#fn_3348) ), must not abstain from erudition,
like irrational animals; but he must collect as many aids as possible
for his hearers. But he must by no means linger over these studies,
except solely for the advantage accruing from them; so that, on grasping
and obtaining this, he may be able to take his departure home to the
true philosophy, which is a strong cable for the soul, providing
security from everything.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p31"></span>Music is then to be handled for the
sake of the embellishment and composure of manners. For instance, at a
banquet we pledge each other while the music is playing; <span
id="fr_3349"></span>[3350](#fn_3349) soothing by song the eagerness of
our desires, and glorifying God <span id="page_501">p. 501</span> <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xi-Page_501"></span>for the copious gift of human
enjoyments, for His perpetual supply of the food necessary for the
growth of the body and of the soul. But we must reject superfluous
music, which enervates men’s souls, and leads to variety,—now mournful,
and then licentious and voluptuous, and then frenzied and frantic.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p33"></span>The same holds also of astronomy. For
treating of the description of the celestial objects, about the form of
the universe, and the revolution of the heavens, and the motion of the
stars, leading the soul nearer to the creative power, it teaches to
quickness in perceiving the seasons of the year, the changes of the air,
and the appearance of the stars; since also navigation and husbandry
derive from this much benefit, as architecture and building from
geometry. This branch of learning, too, makes the soul in the highest
degree observant, capable of perceiving the true and detecting the
false, of discovering correspondences and proportions, so as to hunt out
for similarity in things dissimilar; and conducts us to the discovery of
length without breadth, and superficial extent without thickness, and an
indivisible point, and transports to intellectual objects from those of
sense.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p34"></span>The studies of philosophy, therefore,
and philosophy itself, are aids in treating of the truth. For instance,
the cloak was once a fleece; then it was shorn, and became warp and
woof; and then it was woven. Accordingly the soul must be prepared and
variously exercised, if it would become in the highest degree good. For
there is the scientific and the practical element in truth; and the
latter flows from the speculative; and there is need of great practice,
and exercise, and experience.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p35"></span>But in speculation, one element
relates to one’s neighbours and another to one’s self. Wherefore also
training ought to be so moulded as to be adapted to both. He, then, who
has acquired a competent acquaintance with the subjects which embrace
the principles which conduce to scientific knowledge (*gnosis*), may
stop and remain for the future in quiet, directing his actions in l
conformity with his theory.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p36"></span>But for the benefit of one’s
neighbours, in the case of those who have proclivities for writing, and
those who set themselves to deliver the word, both is other culture
beneficial, and the reading of the Scriptures of the Lord is necessary,
in order to the demonstration of what is said, and especially if those
who hear are accessions from Hellenic culture.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p37"></span>Such David describes the Church: “The
queen stood on thy right hand, enveloped in a golden robe,
variegated;” <span id="fr_3350"></span>[3351](#fn_3350) and with
Hellenic and superabundant accomplishments, “clothed variegated with
gold-fringed garments.” <span id="fr_3351"></span>[3352](#fn_3351) And
the Truth says by the Lord, “For who had known Thy counsel, hadst Thou
not given wisdom, and sent Thy Holy Spirit from the Highest; and so the
ways of those on earth were corrected, and men learned Thy decrees, and
were saved by wisdom?” For the Gnostic knows things ancient by the
Scripture, and conjectures things future: he understands the involutions
of words and the solutions of enigmas. He knows beforehand signs and
wonders, and the issues of seasons and periods, as we have said already.
Seest thou the fountain of instructions that takes its rise from wisdom?
But to those who object, What use is there in knowing the causes of the
manner of the sun’s motion, for example, and the rest of the heavenly
bodies, or in having studied the theorems of geometry or logic, and each
of the other branches of study?—for these are of no service in the
discharge of duties, and the Hellenic philosophy is human wisdom, for it
is incapable of teaching <span id="fr_3352"></span>[3353](#fn_3352) the
truth—the following remarks are to be made. First, that they stumble in
reference to the highest of things—namely, the mind’s free choice. “For
they,” it is said, “who keep holy holy things, shall be made holy; and
those who have been taught will find an answer.” <span
id="fr_3353"></span>[3354](#fn_3353) For the Gnostic alone will do
holily, in accordance with reason all that has to be done, as he hath
learned through the Lord’s teaching, received through men.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p42"></span>Again, on the other hand, we may hear:
“For in His hand, that is, in His power and wisdom, are both we and our
words, and all wisdom and skill in works; for God loves nothing but the
man that dwells with wisdom.” <span id="fr_3354"></span>[3355](#fn_3354)
And again, they have not read what is said by Solomon; for, treating of
the construction of the temple, he says expressly, “And it was Wisdom as
artificer that framed it; and Thy providence, O Father, governs
throughout.” <span id="fr_3355"></span>[3356](#fn_3355) And how
irrational, to regard philosophy as inferior to architecture and
shipbuilding! And the Lord fed the multitude of those that reclined on
the grass opposite to Tiberias with the two fishes and the five barley
loaves, indicating the preparatory training of the Greeks and Jews
previous to the divine grain, which is the food cultivated by the law.
For barley is sooner ripe for the harvest than wheat; and the fishes
signified the Hellenic philosophy that was produced and moved in the
midst of the Gentile billow, given, as they were, for copious food to
those lying on the ground, increasing no more, like the fragments of the
<span id="page_502">p. 502</span> <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xi-Page_502"></span>loaves, but having partaken of the
Lord’s blessing, and breathed into them the resurrection of
Godhead <span id="fr_3356"></span>[3357](#fn_3356) through the power of
the Word. But if you are curious, understand one of the fishes to mean
the curriculum of study, and the other the philosophy which supervenes.
The gatherings <span id="fr_3357"></span>[3358](#fn_3357) point out the
word of the Lord.

> <span id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p46.2"></span> “And the choir of mute fishes
> rushed to it,”  

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p47"></span>says the Tragic Muse somewhere.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p48"></span>“I must decrease,” said the prophet
John, <span id="fr_3358"></span>[3359](#fn_3358) and the Word of the
Lord alone, in which the law terminates, “increase.” Understand now for
me the mystery of the truth, granting pardon if I shrink from advancing
further in the treatment of it, by announcing this alone: “All things
were made by Him, and without Him was not even one thing.” <span
id="fr_3359"></span>[3360](#fn_3359) Certainly He is called “the chief
corner stone; in whom the whole building, fitly joined together, groweth
into an holy temple of God,” <span id="fr_3360"></span>[3361](#fn_3360)
according to the divine apostle.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p52"></span>I pass over in silence at present the
parable which says in the Gospel: “The kingdom of heaven is like a man
who cast a net into the sea and out of the multitude of the fishes
caught, makes a selection of the better ones.” <span
id="fr_3361"></span>[3362](#fn_3361)

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p54"></span>And now the wisdom which we possess
announces the four virtues <span id="fr_3362"></span>[3363](#fn_3362) in
such a way as to show that the sources of them were communicated by the
Hebrews to the Greeks. This may be learned from the following: “And if
one loves justice, its toils are virtues. For temperance and prudence
teach justice and fortitude; and than these there is nothing more useful
in life to men.”

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p56"></span>Above all, this ought to be known,
that by nature we are adapted for virtue; not so as to be possessed of
it from our birth, but so as to be adapted for acquiring it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3333"></span>[499:3334](0020401.htm#fr_3333) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p1.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p2"></span> [Gen. xiv.
14](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#014)<span id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p2.1"></span>.
In Greek numerals.

<span id="fn_3334"></span>[499:3335](0020401.htm#fr_3334) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p4"></span> The Lord’s sign is the cross, whose
form is represented by T; <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p4.1"></span>Ιη</span> (the other two letters of <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p4.2"></span>τιή</span>, 381) are
the first two letters of the name <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p4.3"></span>Ἰησοῦς</span> (Jesus).

<span id="fn_3335"></span>[499:3336](0020401.htm#fr_3335) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p6"></span> [Gen. vi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#003)<span id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3336"></span>[499:3337](0020401.htm#fr_3336) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p7"></span> The sum of the numbers from 1 to 15
inclusive is 120.

<span id="fn_3337"></span>[499:3338](0020401.htm#fr_3337) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p9"></span> “Triangular numbers are those which
can be disposed in a triangle, as 3 ∴, 6, etc, being represented by the
formula (x2 + x)/2” (Liddell and Scott’s *Lexicon*). Each side of the
triangle of courses contains an equal number of units, the sum of which
amounts to the number. \[Elucidation VI.\]

<span id="fn_3338"></span>[499:3339](0020401.htm#fr_3338) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p10"></span> This number is called equality,
because it is composed of eight numbers, an even number; as fifty-six is
called inequality, because it is composed of seven numbers, an odd
number.

<span id="fn_3339"></span>[499:3340](0020401.htm#fr_3339) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p11"></span> The clause within brackets has been
suggested by Hervetus to complete the sense.

<span id="fn_3340"></span>[499:3341](0020401.htm#fr_3340) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p12"></span> That is, 1+3+5+7+11+13+15=120; and
1+3=4+5=9+7=16+9=25+11=36+13=49+15=64, giving us the numbers 4, 9, 16,
25, 36, 49, 64, the squares of 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.

<span id="fn_3341"></span>[499:3342](0020401.htm#fr_3341) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p13"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p13.1"></span>ἐτερομήκεις</span>, the product of two
unequal factors, i.e., 2+4+6+8+10+12+14=56; and 2+4=6=3 x 2, 6+4=10=5 x
2, and so on.

<span id="fn_3342"></span>[500:3343](0020401.htm#fr_3342) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p18"></span> The cross.

<span id="fn_3343"></span>[500:3344](0020401.htm#fr_3343) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p18.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p19"></span> [Eph.
iv.](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#000)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p19.1"></span>13.

<span id="fn_3344"></span>[500:3345](0020401.htm#fr_3344) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p21"></span> [Ex. xxv.
23](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#023)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p21.1"></span>. The table is said to be two cubits in
length, a cubit in breadth, and a cubit and a half in height; therefore
it was six cubits round.

<span id="fn_3345"></span>[500:3346](0020401.htm#fr_3345) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p23"></span> [Ex. xxv.
24](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#024)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3346"></span>[500:3347](0020401.htm#fr_3346) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p24.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p25"></span> The three styles of Greek music were
the <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p25.1"></span>ἐναρμονικόν</span>, <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p25.2"></span>διάτονον</span>, and
<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p25.3"></span>χρωματικόν</span>.

<span id="fn_3347"></span>[500:3348](0020401.htm#fr_3347) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p27.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p28"></span> i.e., of Christ.

<span id="fn_3348"></span>[500:3349](0020401.htm#fr_3348) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p29.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p30"></span> [1 Cor. x.
26](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#026)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p30.1"></span>, etc.

<span id="fn_3349"></span>[500:3350](0020401.htm#fr_3349) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p31.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p32"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p32.1"></span>ψάλλοντες</span> is substituted by Lowth
for <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p32.2"></span>ψάλλειν</span> of the text; <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p32.3"></span>ἐν τῷ ψάλλειν</span>
has also been proposed.

<span id="fn_3350"></span>[501:3351](0020401.htm#fr_3350) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p37.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p38"></span> [Ps. xlv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#009)<span id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3351"></span>[501:3352](0020401.htm#fr_3351) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p38.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p39"></span> [Ps. xlv.
14](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#014)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p39.1"></span>. \[Elucidation VII.\]

<span id="fn_3352"></span>[501:3353](0020401.htm#fr_3352) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p39.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p40"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p40.1"></span>διδακτικήν</span>, proposed by Sylburgius,
seems greatly preferable to the reading of the text, <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p40.2"></span>διδακτήν</span>, and
has been adopted above.

<span id="fn_3353"></span>[501:3354](0020401.htm#fr_3353) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p40.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p41"></span> [Wisd. vi.
10](../../../bib/apo/wis006.htm#010)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3354"></span>[501:3355](0020401.htm#fr_3354) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p42.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p43"></span> [Wisd. vii.
16](../../../bib/apo/wis007.htm#016)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3355"></span>[501:3356](0020401.htm#fr_3355) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p43.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p44"></span> [Wis.
14:2](../../../bib/apo/wis014.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/apo/wis014.htm#003)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3356"></span>[502:3357](0020401.htm#fr_3356) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p44.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p45"></span> That is, resurrection effected by
divine power.

<span id="fn_3357"></span>[502:3358](0020401.htm#fr_3357) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p45.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p46"></span> Such seems the only sense possible of
this clause,—obtained, however, by substituting for <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p46.1"></span>συνάλογοι λόγοὐ
κ.τ.λ., σύλλογοι λόγον κ.τ.λ</span>.

<span id="fn_3358"></span>[502:3359](0020401.htm#fr_3358) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p48.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p49"></span> [John iii.
30](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#030)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3359"></span>[502:3360](0020401.htm#fr_3359) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p49.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p50"></span> [John i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003)<span id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3360"></span>[502:3361](0020401.htm#fr_3360) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p50.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p51"></span> [Eph.
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#021)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3361"></span>[502:3362](0020401.htm#fr_3361) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p52.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p53"></span> [Matt.
13:47](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#047),
[48](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#048)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3362"></span>[502:3363](0020401.htm#fr_3362) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p54.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xi-p55"></span> Prudence, fortitude, justice,
temperance. \[Known as the philosophical virtues.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII.—Human Nature Possesses an Adaptation for Perfection;
The Gnostic Alone Attains It.](0020402)
