[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020254)  [Next](0020256) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.i.v"></span>

##### <span id="vi.iii.i.v-p0.1"></span>Chapter V.—All Who Walk According to Truth are Children of God.

<span id="vi.iii.i.v-p1"></span>That, then, Pædagogy is the training of
children (<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.iii.i.v-p1.1"></span>παίδων
ἀγωγή</span>), is clear from the word itself. It remains for us to
consider the children whom Scripture points to; then to give the
pædagogue charge of them. We are the children. In many ways Scripture
celebrates us, and describes us in manifold figures of speech, giving
variety to the simplicity of the faith by diverse names. Accordingly, in
the Gospel, “the Lord, standing on the shore, says to the
disciples”—they happened to be fishing—“and called aloud, Children, have
ye any meat?” <span id="fr_1048"></span>[1049](#fn_1048) —addressing
those that were already in the position of disciples as children. “And
they brought to Him,” it is said, “children, that He might put His hands
on them and bless them; and when His disciples hindered them, Jesus
said, Suffer the children, and forbid them not to come to Me, for of
such is the kingdom of heaven.” <span
id="fr_1049"></span>[1050](#fn_1049) What the expression means the Lord
Himself shall declare, saying, “Except ye be converted, and become as
little chidren, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven;” <span
id="fr_1050"></span>[1051](#fn_1050) not in that place speaking
figuratively of regeneration, but setting before us, for our imitation,
the simplicity that is in children. <span
id="fr_1051"></span>[1052](#fn_1051)

<span id="vi.iii.i.v-p6"></span>The prophetic spirit also distinguishes
us as children. “Plucking,” it is said, “branches of olives or palms,
the children went forth to meet the Lord, and cried, saying, Hosanna to
the Son of David! Blessed is He that cometh in the name of the
Lord;” <span id="fr_1052"></span>[1053](#fn_1052) light, and glory, and
praise, with supplication to the Lord: for this is the meaning of the
expression Hosanna when rendered in Greek. And the Scripture appears to
me, in allusion to the prophecy just mentioned, reproachfully to upbraid
the thoughtless: “Have ye never read, Out of the mouths of babes and
sucklings Thou hast perfected praise?” <span
id="fr_1053"></span>[1054](#fn_1053) In this way the Lord in the Gospels
spurs on His disciples, urging them to attend to Him, hastening as He
was to the Father; rendering His hearers more eager by the intimation
that after a little He was to depart, and showing them that it was
requisite that they should take more unsparing advantage of the truth
than ever before, as the Word was to ascend to heaven. Again, therefore,
He calls them children; for He says, “Children, a little while I am with
you.” <span id="fr_1054"></span>[1055](#fn_1054) And, again, He likens
the kingdom of heaven to children sitting in the market-places and
saying, “We have piped unto you, and ye have not danced; we have
mourned, and ye have not lamented;” <span
id="fr_1055"></span>[1056](#fn_1055) and whatever else He added
agreeably thereto. And it is not alone the Gospel that holds these
sentiments. Prophecy also agrees with it. David accordingly says,
“*Praise, O children, the* <span class="sc"><span
id="vi.iii.i.v-p10.2"></span>Lord</span>; *praise the name of the* <span
class="sc"><span id="vi.iii.i.v-p10.3"></span>Lord</span>.” <span
id="fr_1056"></span>[1057](#fn_1056) It says also by Esaias, “*Here am
I, and the children that God hath given me.*” <span
id="fr_1057"></span>[1058](#fn_1057) Are you amazed, then, to hear that
men who belong to the nations are sons in the Lord’s sight? You do not
in that case appear to give ear to the Attic dialect, from which you may
learn that beautiful, comely, and freeborn young maidens are still
called <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iii.i.v-p12.2"></span>παιδίσκαι</span>, and servant-girls <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iii.i.v-p12.3"></span>παιδισκάρια</span>; and
that those last also are, on account of the bloom of youth, called by
the flattering name of young maidens.

<span id="vi.iii.i.v-p13"></span>And when He says, “Let my lambs stand
on my right,” <span id="fr_1058"></span>[1059](#fn_1058) He alludes to
the simple children, as if they were sheep and lambs in nature, not men;
and the lambs He counts worthy of preference, from the superior regard
He has to that tenderness and simplicity of disposition in men which
constitutes innocence. Again, when He says, “as suckling calves,” He
again alludes figuratively to us; and “as an innocent and gentle
dove,” <span id="fr_1059"></span>[1060](#fn_1059) the reference is again
to us. Again, by Moses, He commands “two young pigeons or a pair of
turtles to be offered for sin;” <span
id="fr_1060"></span>[1061](#fn_1060) thus saying, that the harmlessness
and innocence and placable nature of these tender young birds are
acceptable to God, and explaining that like is an expiation for like.
Further, the timorousness of the turtle-doves typifies fear in reference
to sin.

<span id="vi.iii.i.v-p17"></span>And that He calls us chickens the
Scripture testifies: “As a hen gathereth her chickens under her
wings.” <span id="fr_1061"></span>[1062](#fn_1061) Thus are we the
Lord’s chickens; the Word thus marvellously and mystically describing
the simplicity of childhood. For sometimes He calls us children,
sometimes chickens, sometimes infants, and at other times sons, and “a
new people,” and “a recent people.” “And my servants shall be called by
a new name” <span id="fr_1062"></span>[1063](#fn_1062) (a new name, He
says, fresh and eternal, pure and simple, and childlike and true), which
shall be blessed on the earth. And again, He figuratively calls us colts
unyoked to vice, not broken in by wickedness; but simple, and bounding
joyously to the Father alone; not such horses “as neigh after their
neighbours’ wives, <span id="page_213">p. 213</span> <span
id="vi.iii.i.v-Page_213"></span>that are under the yoke, and are
female-mad;” <span id="fr_1063"></span>[1064](#fn_1063) but free and
new-born, jubilant by means of faith, ready to run to the truth, swift
to speed to salvation, that tread and stamp under foot the things of the
world.

<span id="vi.iii.i.v-p21"></span>“Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Sion;
tell aloud, O daughter of Jerusalem: behold, thy King cometh, just,
meek, and bringing salvation; meek truly is He, and riding on a beast of
burden, and a young colt.” <span id="fr_1064"></span>[1065](#fn_1064) It
was not enough to have said colt alone, but He added to it also *young,*
to show the youth of humanity in Christ, and the eternity of simplicity,
which shall know no old age. And we who are little ones being such
colts, are reared up by our divine colt-tamer. But if the new man in
Scripture is represented by the ass, this ass is also a colt. “And he
bound,” it is said, “the colt to the vine,” having bound this simple and
childlike people to the word, whom He figuratively represents as a vine.
For the vine produces wine, as the Word produces blood, and both drink
for health to men—wine for the body, blood for the spirit.

<span id="vi.iii.i.v-p23"></span>And that He also calls us lambs, the
Spirit by the mouth of Isaiah is an unimpeachable witness: “He will feed
His flock like a shepherd, He will gather the lambs with His arm,” <span
id="fr_1065"></span>[1066](#fn_1065) —using the figurative appellation
of lambs, which are still more tender than sheep, to express simplicity.
And we also in truth, honouring the fairest and most perfect objects in
life with an appellation derived from the word child, have named
training <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iii.i.v-p24.2"></span>παιδεία</span>, and discipline <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iii.i.v-p24.3"></span>παιδαγωγία</span>.
Discipline (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iii.i.v-p24.4"></span>παιδαγωγία</span>) we declare to be right
guiding from childhood to virtue. Accordingly, our Lord revealed more
distinctly to us what is signified by the appellation of children. On
the question arising among the apostles, “which of them should be the
greater,” Jesus placed a little child in the midst, saying, “Whosoever,
shall humble himself as this little child, the same shall be the greater
in the kingdom of heaven.” <span id="fr_1066"></span>[1067](#fn_1066) He
does not then use the appellation of children on account of their very
limited amount of understanding from their age, as some have thought.
Nor, if He says, “Except ye become as these children, ye shall not enter
into the kingdom of God,” are His words to be understood as meaning
“without learning.” We, then, who are infants, no longer roll on the
ground, nor creep on the earth like serpents as before, crawling with
the whole body about senseless lusts; but, stretching upwards in soul,
loosed from the world and our sins, touching the earth on tiptoe so as
to appear to be in the world, we pursue holy wisdom, although this seems
folly to those whose wits are whetted for wickedness. Rightly, then, are
those called children who know Him who is God alone as their Father, who
are simple, and infants, and guileless, who are lovers of the horns of
the unicorns. <span id="fr_1067"></span>[1068](#fn_1067)

<span id="vi.iii.i.v-p27"></span>To those, therefore, that have made
progress in the word, He has proclaimed this utterance, bidding them
dismiss anxious care of the things of this world, and exhorting them to
adhere to the Father alone, in imitation of children. Wherefore also in
what follows He says: “Take no anxious thought for the morrow;
sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof.” <span
id="fr_1068"></span>[1069](#fn_1068) Thus He enjoins them to lay aside
the cares of this life, and depend on the Father alone. And he who
fulfils this commandment is in reality a child and a son to God and to
the world,—to the one as deceived, to the other as beloved. And if we
have one Master in heaven, as the Scripture says, then by common consent
those on the earth will be rightly called disciples. For so is the
truth, that perfection is with the Lord, who is always teaching, and
infancy and childishness with us, who are always learning. Thus prophecy
hath honoured *perfection*, by applying to it the appellation *man*. For
instance, by David, He says of the devil: “The <span class="sc"><span
id="vi.iii.i.v-p28.2"></span>Lord</span> abhors the man of blood;” <span
id="fr_1069"></span>[1070](#fn_1069) he calls him man, as perfect in
wickedness. And the Lord is called man, because He is perfect in
righteousness. Directly in point is the instance of the apostle, who
says, writing the Corinthians: “For I have espoused you to one man, that
I may present you as a chaste virgin to Christ,” <span
id="fr_1070"></span>[1071](#fn_1070) whether as children or saints, but
to the Lord alone. And writing to the Ephesians, he has unfolded in the
clearest manner the point in question, speaking to the following effect:
“Till we all attain to the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of
God, to a perfect man, to the measure of the stature of the fulness of
Christ: that we be no longer children, tossed to and fro by every wind
of doctrine, by the craft of men, by their cunning in stratagems of
deceit; but, speaking the truth in love, may grow up to Him in all
things,” <span id="fr_1071"></span>[1072](#fn_1071) —saying these things
in order to the edification of the body of Christ, who is the head and
man, the only one perfect in righteousness; and we who are children
guarding against the blasts of heresies, which blow to our inflation;
and not putting our trust in fathers who teach us otherwise, are then
made perfect when we are the church, having received Christ the head.
Then it is right to notice, with respect to the appellation of infant
(<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.iii.i.v-p31.2"></span>νήπιος</span>),
that <span id="page_214">p. 214</span> <span
id="vi.iii.i.v-Page_214"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iii.i.v-p31.3"></span>τὸ νήπιον</span> is not predicated of the
silly: for the silly man is called <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iii.i.v-p31.4"></span>νηπύτιος</span>: and <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iii.i.v-p31.5"></span>νήπιος</span> is <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iii.i.v-p31.6"></span>νεήπιος</span> (since
he that is tender-hearted is called <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iii.i.v-p31.7"></span>ἤπιος</span>), as being one that has newly
become gentle and meek in conduct. This the blessed Paul most clearly
pointed out when he said, “When we might have been burdensome as the
apostles of Christ, we were gentle (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iii.i.v-p31.8"></span>ἤπιοι</span>) among you, as a nurse
cherisheth her children.” <span id="fr_1072"></span>[1073](#fn_1072) The
child (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iii.i.v-p32.2"></span>νήπιος</span>) is therefore gentle (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iii.i.v-p32.3"></span>ἤπιος</span>), and
therefore more tender, delicate, and simple, guileless, and destitute of
hypocrisy, straightforward and upright in mind, which is the basis of
simplicity and truth. For He says, “Upon whom shall I look, but upon him
who is gentle and quiet?” <span id="fr_1073"></span>[1074](#fn_1073) For
such is the virgin speech, tender, and free of fraud; whence also a
virgin is wont to be called “a tender bride,” and a child
“tender-hearted.” And we are tender who are pliant to the power of
persuasion, and are easily drawn to goodness, and are mild, and free of
the stain of malice and perverseness, for the ancient race was perverse
and hard-hearted; but the band of infants, the new people which we are,
is delicate as a child. On account of the hearts of the innocent, the
apostle, in the Epistle to the Romans, owns that he rejoices, and
furnishes a kind of definition of children, so to speak, when he says,
“I would have you wise toward good, but simple towards evil.” <span
id="fr_1074"></span>[1075](#fn_1074) For the name of child, <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iii.i.v-p34.2"></span>νήπιος</span>, is not
understood by us privatively, though the sons of the grammarians make
the <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.iii.i.v-p34.3"></span>νη</span> a
privative particle. For if they call us who follow after childhood
foolish, see how they utter blasphemy against the Lord, in regarding
those as foolish who have betaken themselves to God. But if, which is
rather the true sense, they themselves understand the designation
children of simple ones, we glory in the name. For the new minds, which
have newly become wise, which have sprung into being according to the
new covenant, are infantile in the old folly. Of late, then, God was
known by the coming of Christ: “For no man knoweth God but the Son, and
he to whom the Son shall reveal Him.” <span
id="fr_1075"></span>[1076](#fn_1075)

<span id="vi.iii.i.v-p36"></span>In contradistinction, therefore, to the
older people, the new people are called young, having learned the new
blessings; and we have the exuberance of life’s morning prime in this
youth which knows no old age, in which we are always growing to maturity
in intelligence, are always young, always mild, always new: for those
must necessarily be new, who have become partakers of the new Word. And
that which participates in eternity is wont to be assimilated to the
incorruptible: so that to us appertains the designation of the age of
childhood, a lifelong spring-time, because the truth that is in us, and
our habits saturated with the truth, cannot be touched by old age; but
Wisdom is ever blooming, ever remains consistent and the same, and never
changes. “Their children,” it is said, “shall be borne upon their
shoulders, and fondled on their knees; as one whom his mother
comforteth, so also shall I comfort you.” <span
id="fr_1076"></span>[1077](#fn_1076) The mother draws the children to
herself; and we seek our mother the Church. Whatever is feeble and
tender, as needing help on account of its feebleness, is kindly looked
on, and is sweet and pleasant, anger changing into help in the case of
such: for thus horses’ colts, and the little calves of cows, and the
lion’s whelp, and the stag’s fawn, and the child of man, are looked upon
with pleasure by their fathers and mothers. Thus also the Father of the
universe cherishes affection towards those who have fled to Him; and
having begotten them again by His Spirit to the adoption of children,
knows them as gentle, and loves those alone, and aids and fights for
them; and therefore He bestows on them the name of child. The word Isaac
I also connect with child. Isaac means laughter. He was seen sporting
with his wife and helpmeet Rebecca by the prying king. <span
id="fr_1077"></span>[1078](#fn_1077) The king, whose name was Abimelech,
appears to me to represent a supramundane wisdom contemplating the
mystery of sport. They interpret Rebecca to mean endurance. O wise
sport, laughter also assisted by endurance, and the king as spectator!
The spirit of those that are children in Christ, whose lives are ordered
in endurance, rejoice. And this is the divine sport. “Such a sport, of
his own, Jove sports,” says Heraclitus. For what other employment is
seemly for a wise and perfect man, than to sport and be glad in the
endurance of what is good—and, in the administration of what is good,
holding festival with God? That which is signified by the prophet may be
interpreted differently,—namely, of our rejoicing for salvation, as
Isaac. He also, delivered from death, laughed, sporting and rejoicing
with his spouse, who was the type of the Helper of our salvation, the
Church, to whom the stable name of endurance is given; for this cause
surely, because she alone remains to all generations, rejoicing ever,
subsisting as she does by the endurance of us believers, who are the
members of Christ. And the witness of those that have endured to the
end, and the rejoicing on their account, is the mystic sport, and the
salvation accompanied with decorous solace which brings us aid.

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span> <span id="vi.iii.i.v-Page_215"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.i.v-p39"></span>The King, then, who is Christ, beholds
from above our laughter, and looking through the window, as the
Scripture says, views the thanksgiving, and the blessing, and the
rejoicing, and the gladness, and furthermore the endurance which works
together with them and their embrace: views His Church, showing only His
face, which was wanting to the Church, which is made perfect by her
royal Head. And where, then, was the door by which the Lord showed
Himself? The flesh by which He was manifested. He is Isaac (for the
narrative may be interpreted otherwise), who is a type of the Lord, a
child as a son; for he was the son of Abraham, as Christ the Son of God,
and a sacrifice as the Lord, but he was not immolated as the Lord. Isaac
only bore the wood of the sacrifice, as the Lord the wood of the cross.
And he laughed mystically, prophesying that the Lord should fill us with
joy, who have been redeemed from corruption by the blood of the Lord.
Isaac did everything but suffer, as was right, yielding the precedence
in suffering to the Word. Furthermore, there is an intimation of the
divinity of the Lord in His not being slain. For Jesus rose again after
His burial, having suffered no harm, like Isaac released from sacrifice.
And in defence of the point to be established, I shall adduce another
consideration of the greatest weight. The Spirit calls the Lord Himself
a child, thus prophesying by Esaias: “Lo, to us a child has been born,
to us a son has been given, on whose own shoulder the government shall
be; and His name has been called the Angel of great Counsel.” Who, then,
is this infant child? He according to whose image we are made little
children. By the same prophet is declared His greatness: “Wonderful,
Counsellor, Mighty God, Everlasting Father, Prince of Peace; that He
might fulfil His discipline: and of His peace there shall be no
end.” <span id="fr_1078"></span>[1079](#fn_1078) O the great God! O the
perfect child! The Son in the Father, and the Father in the Son. And how
shall not the discipline of this child be perfect, which extends to all,
leading as a schoolmaster us as children who are His little ones? He has
stretched forth to us those hands of His that are conspicuously worthy
of trust. To this child additional testimony is borne by John, “the
greatest prophet among those born of women:” <span
id="fr_1079"></span>[1080](#fn_1079) Behold the Lamb of God!” <span
id="fr_1080"></span>[1081](#fn_1080) For since Scripture calls the
infant children lambs, it has also called Him—God the Word—who became
man for our sakes, and who wished in all points to be made like to
us—“the Lamb of God”—Him, namely, that is the Son of God, the child of
the Father.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1048"></span>[212:1049](0020255.htm#fr_1048) <span
id="vi.iii.i.v-p1.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.i.v-p2"></span> [John
21:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#005)<span id="vi.iii.i.v-p2.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1049"></span>[212:1050](0020255.htm#fr_1049) <span
id="vi.iii.i.v-p2.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.i.v-p3"></span> [Matt. xix.
14](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#014)<span id="vi.iii.i.v-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1050"></span>[212:1051](0020255.htm#fr_1050) <span
id="vi.iii.i.v-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.i.v-p4"></span> [Matt. xviii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#003)<span id="vi.iii.i.v-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1051"></span>[212:1052](0020255.htm#fr_1051) <span
id="vi.iii.i.v-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.i.v-p5"></span> \[The dignity ascribed to Christian
childhood in this chapter is something noteworthy. The Gospel glorifying
children, sanctifies marriage, and creates the home.\]

<span id="fn_1052"></span>[212:1053](0020255.htm#fr_1052) <span
id="vi.iii.i.v-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.i.v-p7"></span> [Matt. xxi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#009)<span id="vi.iii.i.v-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1053"></span>[212:1054](0020255.htm#fr_1053) <span
id="vi.iii.i.v-p7.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.i.v-p8"></span> [Matt. xxi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#016)<span id="vi.iii.i.v-p8.1"></span>;
[Ps. viii. 2](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#002)<span
id="vi.iii.i.v-p8.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_1054"></span>[212:1055](0020255.htm#fr_1054) <span
id="vi.iii.i.v-p8.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.i.v-p9"></span> [John xiii.
33](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#033)<span id="vi.iii.i.v-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1055"></span>[212:1056](0020255.htm#fr_1055) <span
id="vi.iii.i.v-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.i.v-p10"></span> [Matt.
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#017)<span
id="vi.iii.i.v-p10.1"></span>. \[In the Peshitoi-Syraic version, where
are probably found the very words our Saviour thus quotes from children
in Nazareth, this saying is seen to be metrical and alliterative.\]

<span id="fn_1056"></span>[212:1057](0020255.htm#fr_1056) <span
id="vi.iii.i.v-p10.4"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.i.v-p11"></span> [Ps. cxiii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#001)<span id="vi.iii.i.v-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1057"></span>[212:1058](0020255.htm#fr_1057) <span
id="vi.iii.i.v-p11.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.i.v-p12"></span> [Isa. viii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#018)<span id="vi.iii.i.v-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1058"></span>[212:1059](0020255.htm#fr_1058) <span
id="vi.iii.i.v-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.i.v-p14"></span> [Matt. xxv.
33](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#033)<span id="vi.iii.i.v-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1059"></span>[212:1060](0020255.htm#fr_1059) <span
id="vi.iii.i.v-p14.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.i.v-p15"></span> [Matt. x.
16](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#016)<span id="vi.iii.i.v-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1060"></span>[212:1061](0020255.htm#fr_1060) <span
id="vi.iii.i.v-p15.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.i.v-p16"></span> [Lev. xv.
29](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#029)<span id="vi.iii.i.v-p16.1"></span>,
xii. 8; [Luke ii. 24](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#024)<span
id="vi.iii.i.v-p16.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_1061"></span>[212:1062](0020255.htm#fr_1061) <span
id="vi.iii.i.v-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.i.v-p18"></span> [Matt. xxiii.
37](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#037)<span id="vi.iii.i.v-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1062"></span>[212:1063](0020255.htm#fr_1062) <span
id="vi.iii.i.v-p18.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.i.v-p19"></span> [Isa.
65:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#015),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#016)<span
id="vi.iii.i.v-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1063"></span>[213:1064](0020255.htm#fr_1063) <span
id="vi.iii.i.v-p19.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.i.v-p20"></span> [Jer. v.
8](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#008)<span id="vi.iii.i.v-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1064"></span>[213:1065](0020255.htm#fr_1064) <span
id="vi.iii.i.v-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.i.v-p22"></span> [Zech. ix.
9](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#009)<span id="vi.iii.i.v-p22.1"></span>;
[Gen. xlix. 11](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#011)<span
id="vi.iii.i.v-p22.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_1065"></span>[213:1066](0020255.htm#fr_1065) <span
id="vi.iii.i.v-p23.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.i.v-p24"></span> [Isa. xl.
11](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#011)<span id="vi.iii.i.v-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1066"></span>[213:1067](0020255.htm#fr_1066) <span
id="vi.iii.i.v-p24.5"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.i.v-p25"></span> [Matt. xviii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#004)<span id="vi.iii.i.v-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1067"></span>[213:1068](0020255.htm#fr_1067) <span
id="vi.iii.i.v-p25.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.i.v-p26"></span> Theodoret explains this to mean that,
as the animal referred to has only one horn, so those brought up in the
practice of piety worship only one God. \[It might mean lovers of those
promises which are introduced by these words in the marvellous
twenty-second Psalm.\]

<span id="fn_1068"></span>[213:1069](0020255.htm#fr_1068) <span
id="vi.iii.i.v-p27.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.i.v-p28"></span> [Matt. vi.
34](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#034)<span id="vi.iii.i.v-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1069"></span>[213:1070](0020255.htm#fr_1069) <span
id="vi.iii.i.v-p28.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.i.v-p29"></span> [Ps. v.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#006)<span id="vi.iii.i.v-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1070"></span>[213:1071](0020255.htm#fr_1070) <span
id="vi.iii.i.v-p29.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.i.v-p30"></span> [2 Cor. xi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#002)<span id="vi.iii.i.v-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1071"></span>[213:1072](0020255.htm#fr_1071) <span
id="vi.iii.i.v-p30.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.i.v-p31"></span> [Eph. iv.
13-15](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#013)<span
id="vi.iii.i.v-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1072"></span>[214:1073](0020255.htm#fr_1072) <span
id="vi.iii.i.v-p31.9"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.i.v-p32"></span> [1 Thess.
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#007)<span id="vi.iii.i.v-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1073"></span>[214:1074](0020255.htm#fr_1073) <span
id="vi.iii.i.v-p32.4"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.i.v-p33"></span> [Isa. lxvi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#002)<span id="vi.iii.i.v-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1074"></span>[214:1075](0020255.htm#fr_1074) <span
id="vi.iii.i.v-p33.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.i.v-p34"></span> [Rom. xvi.
19](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#019)<span id="vi.iii.i.v-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1075"></span>[214:1076](0020255.htm#fr_1075) <span
id="vi.iii.i.v-p34.4"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.i.v-p35"></span> [Matt. xi.
27](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#027)<span id="vi.iii.i.v-p35.1"></span>;
[Luke x. 22](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#022)<span
id="vi.iii.i.v-p35.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_1076"></span>[214:1077](0020255.htm#fr_1076) <span
id="vi.iii.i.v-p36.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.i.v-p37"></span> [Isa.
66:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#013)<span
id="vi.iii.i.v-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1077"></span>[214:1078](0020255.htm#fr_1077) <span
id="vi.iii.i.v-p37.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.i.v-p38"></span> [Gen. xxvi.
8](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#008)<span id="vi.iii.i.v-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1078"></span>[215:1079](0020255.htm#fr_1078) <span
id="vi.iii.i.v-p39.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.i.v-p40"></span> [Isa. ix.
6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006)<span id="vi.iii.i.v-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1079"></span>[215:1080](0020255.htm#fr_1079) <span
id="vi.iii.i.v-p40.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.i.v-p41"></span> [Luke vii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#028)<span id="vi.iii.i.v-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1080"></span>[215:1081](0020255.htm#fr_1080) <span
id="vi.iii.i.v-p41.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.i.v-p42"></span> [John
1:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#029),
[36](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#036)<span
id="vi.iii.i.v-p42.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI.—The Name Children Does Not Imply Instruction in
Elementary Principles.](0020256)
