[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020346)  [Next](0020348) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xxiii"></span>

##### <span id="vi.iv.ii.xxiii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXIII.—On Marriage.

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xxiii-p1"></span>Since pleasure and lust seem to fall
under marriage, it must also be treated of. Marriage is the first
conjunction of man and woman for the procreation of legitimate
children. <span id="fr_2420"></span>[2421](#fn_2420) Accordingly
Menander the comic poet says:—

> <span id="vi.iv.ii.xxiii-p2.1"></span> “For the begetting of
> legitimate children,  
> I give thee my daughter.”  

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xxiii-p3"></span>We ask if we ought to marry; which
is one of the points, which are said to be relative. For some must
marry, and a man must be in some condition, and he must marry some one
in some condition. For every one is not to marry, nor always. But there
is a time in which it is suitable, and a person for whom it is suitable,
and an age up to which it is suitable. Neither ought every one to take a
wife, nor is it every woman one is to take, nor always, nor in every
way, nor inconsiderately. But only he who is in certain circumstances,
and such an one and at such time as is requisite, and for the sake of
children, and one who is in every respect similar, and who does not by
force or compulsion love the husband who loves her. Hence Abraham,
regarding his wife as a sister, says, “She is my sister by my father,
but not by my mother; and she became my wife,” <span
id="fr_2421"></span>[2422](#fn_2421) teaching us that children of the
same mothers ought not to enter into matrimony. Let us briefly follow
the history. Plato ranks marriage among outward good things, providing
for the perpetuity of our race, and handing down as a torch a certain
perpetuity to children’s children. Democritus repudiates marriage and
the procreation of children, on account of the many annoyances thence
arising, and abstractions from more necessary things. Epicurus agrees,
and those who place good in pleasure, and in the absence of trouble and
pain. According to the opinion of the Stoics, marriage and the rearing
of children are a thing indifferent; and according to the Peripatetics,
a good. In a word, these, following out their dogmas in words, became
enslaved to pleasures; some using concubines, some mistresses, and the
most youths. And that wise quaternion in the garden with a mistress,
honoured pleasure by their acts. Those, then, will not escape the curse
of yoking an ass with an ox, who, judging certain things not to suit
them, command others to do them, or the reverse. This Scripture has
briefly showed, when it says, “What thou hatest, thou shalt not do to
another.” <span id="fr_2422"></span>[2423](#fn_2422)

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xxiii-p6"></span>But they who approve of marriage
say, Nature has adapted us for marriage, as is evident from the
structure of our bodies, which are male and female. And they constantly
proclaim that command, “Increase and replenish.” <span
id="fr_2423"></span>[2424](#fn_2423) And though this is the case, yet it
seems to them shameful that man, created by God, should be more
licentious than the irrational creatures, which do not mix with many
licentiously, but with one of the same species, such as pigeons and
ringdoves, <span id="fr_2424"></span>[2425](#fn_2424) and creatures like
them. Furthermore, they say, “The childless man fails in the perfection
which is according to nature, not having substituted his proper
successor in his place. For he is perfect that has produced from himself
his like, or rather, when he sees that he has produced the same; that
is, when that which is begotten attains to the same nature with him who
begat.” Therefore we must by all means marry, both for our country’s
sake, <span id="page_378">p. 378</span> <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xxiii-Page_378"></span>for the succession of children, and
as far as we are concerned, the perfection of the world; since the poets
also pity a marriage half-perfect and childless, but pronounce the
fruitful one happy. But it is the diseases of the body that principally
show marriage to be necessary. For a wife’s care and the assiduity of
her constancy appear to exceed the endurance of all other relations and
friends, as much as to excel them in sympathy; and most of all, she
takes kindly to patient watching. And in truth, according to Scripture,
she is a needful help. <span id="fr_2425"></span>[2426](#fn_2425) The
comic poet then, Menander, while running down marriage, and yet alleging
on the other side its advantages, replies to one who had said:—

> <span id="vi.iv.ii.xxiii-p9.2"></span> “I am averse to the thing,  
> For you take it awkwardly.”  

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xxiii-p10"></span>Then he adds:—

> <span id="vi.iv.ii.xxiii-p10.1"></span> “You see the hardships and the
> things which annoy you in it.  
> But you do not look on the advantages.”  

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xxiii-p11"></span>And so forth.

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xxiii-p12"></span>Now marriage is a help in the case
of those advanced in years, by furnishing a spouse to take care of one,
and by rearing children of her to nourish one’s old age.

> <span id="vi.iv.ii.xxiii-p12.1"></span> “For to a man after death his
> children bring renown,  
> Just as corks bear the net,  
> Saving the fishing-line from the deep.” <span
> id="fr_2426"></span>[2427](#fn_2426)  

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xxiii-p14"></span>according to the tragic poet
Sophocles.

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xxiii-p15"></span>Legislators, moreover, do not allow
those who are unmarried to discharge the highest magisterial offices.
For instance, the legislator of the Spartans imposed a fine not on
bachelorhood only, but on monogamy, <span
id="fr_2427"></span>[2428](#fn_2427) and late marriage, and single life.
And the renowned Plato orders the man who has not married to pay a
wife’s maintenance into the public treasury, and to give to the
magistrates a suitable sum of money as expenses. For if they shall not
beget children, not having married, they produce, as far as in them
lies, a scarcity of men, and dissolve states and the world that is
composed of them, impiously doing away with divine generation. It is
also unmanly and weak to shun living with a wife and children. For of
that of which the loss is an evil, the possession is by all means a
good; and this is the case with the rest of things. But the loss of
children is, they say, among the chiefest evils: the possession of
children is consequently a good thing; and if it be so, so also is
marriage. It is said:—

> <span id="vi.iv.ii.xxiii-p16.3"></span> “Without a father there never
> could be a child,  
> And without a mother conception of a child could not be.  
> Marriage makes a father, as a husband a mother.” <span
> id="fr_2428"></span>[2429](#fn_2428)  

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xxiii-p18"></span>Accordingly Homer makes a thing to
be earnestly prayed for:—

> <span id="vi.iv.ii.xxiii-p18.1"></span> “A husband and a house;”  

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xxiii-p19"></span>yet not simply, but along with good
agreement. For the marriage of other people is an agreement for
indulgence; but that of philosophers leads to that agreement which is in
accordance with reason, bidding wives adorn themselves not in outward
appearance, but in character; and enjoining husbands not to treat their
wedded wives as mistresses, making corporeal wantonness their aim; but
to take advantage of marriage for help in the whole of life, and for the
best self-restraint.

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xxiii-p20"></span>Far more excellent, in my opinion,
than the seeds of wheat and barley that are sown at appropriate seasons,
is man that is sown, for whom all things grow; and those seeds temperate
husbandmen ever sow. Every foul and polluting practice must therefore be
purged away from marriage; that the intercourse of the irrational
animals may not be cast in our teeth, as more accordant with nature than
human conjunction in procreation. Some of these, it must be granted,
desist at the time in which they are directed, leaving creation to the
working of Providence.

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xxiii-p21"></span>By the tragedians, Polyxena, though
being murdered, is described nevertheless as having, when dying, taken
great care to fall decently,—

> <span id="vi.iv.ii.xxiii-p21.1"></span> “Concealing what ought to be
> hid from the eyes of men.”  

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xxiii-p22"></span>Marriage to her was a calamity. To
be subjected, then, to the passions, and to yield to them, is the
extremest slavery; as to keep them in subjection is the only liberty.
The divine Scripture accordingly says, that those who have transgressed
the commandments are sold to strangers, that is, to sins alien to
nature, till they return and repent. Marriage, then, as a sacred image,
must be kept pure from those things which defile it. <span
id="fr_2429"></span>[2430](#fn_2429) We are to rise from our slumbers
with the Lord, and retire to sleep with thanksgiving and prayer,—

> <span id="vi.iv.ii.xxiii-p23.1"></span> “Both when you sleep, and when
> the holy light comes,”  

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xxiii-p24"></span>confessing the Lord in our whole
life; possessing piety in the soul, and extending self-control to the
body. For it is pleasing to God to lead decorum from the tongue to our
actions. Filthy speech is the way to effrontery; and the end of both is
filthy conduct.

<span id="page_379">p. 379</span> <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xxiii-Page_379"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xxiii-p25"></span>Now that the Scripture counsels
marriage, and allows no release from the union, is expressly contained
in the law, “Thou shalt not put away thy wife, except for the cause of
fornication;” and it regards as fornication, the marriage of those
separated while the other is alive. Not to deck and adorn herself beyond
what is becoming, renders a wife free of calumnious suspicion, while she
devotes herself assiduously to prayers and supplications; avoiding
frequent departures from the house, and shutting herself up as far as
possible from the view of all not related to her, and deeming
housekeeping of more consequence than impertinent trifling. “He that
taketh a woman that has been put away,” it is said, “committeth
adultery; and if one puts away his wife, he makes her an
adulteress,” <span id="fr_2430"></span>[2431](#fn_2430) that is, compels
her to commit adultery. And not only is he who puts her away guilty of
this, but he who takes her, by giving to the woman the opportunity of
sinning; for did he not take her, she would return to her husband. What,
then, is the law? <span id="fr_2431"></span>[2432](#fn_2431) In order to
check the impetuosity of the passions, it commands the adulteress to be
put to death, on being convicted of this; and if of priestly family, to
be committed to the flames. <span id="fr_2432"></span>[2433](#fn_2432)
And the adulterer also is stoned to death, but not in the same place,
that not even their death may be in common. And the law is not at
variance with the Gospel, but agrees with it. How should it be
otherwise, one Lord being the author of both? She who has committed
fornication liveth in sin, and is dead to the commandments; but she who
has repented, being as it were born again by the change in her life, has
a regeneration of life; the old harlot being dead, and she who has been
regenerated by repentance having come back again to life. The Spirit
testifies to what has been said by Ezekiel, declaring, “I desire not the
death of the sinner, but that he should turn.” <span
id="fr_2433"></span>[2434](#fn_2433) Now they are stoned to death; as
through hardness of heart dead to the law which they believed not. But
in the case of a priestess the punishment is increased, because “to whom
much is given, from him shall more be required.” <span
id="fr_2434"></span>[2435](#fn_2434)

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xxiii-p31"></span>Let us conclude this second book of
the *Stromata* at this point, on account of the length and number of the
chapters.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2420"></span>[377:2421](0020347.htm#fr_2420) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xxiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xxiii-p2"></span> \[He places the essence of marriage
in the chaste consummation itself, the first after lawful nuptials. Such
is the force of this definition, which the note in ed. Migne
misrepresents, as if it were a denial that *second* nuptials are
marriage.\]

<span id="fn_2421"></span>[377:2422](0020347.htm#fr_2421) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xxiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xxiii-p4"></span> [Gen. xx.
12](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#012)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xxiii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2422"></span>[377:2423](0020347.htm#fr_2422) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xxiii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xxiii-p5"></span> [Tob. iv.
15](../../../bib/apo/tob004.htm#015)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xxiii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2423"></span>[377:2424](0020347.htm#fr_2423) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xxiii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xxiii-p7"></span> [Gen. i.
28](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#028)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xxiii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2424"></span>[377:2425](0020347.htm#fr_2424) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xxiii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xxiii-p8"></span> \[The offering of the purification
has a beautiful regard to the example of the turtle-dove; and the
marriage-ring may have been suggested by the ringdove, a symbol of
constancy in nature.\]

<span id="fn_2425"></span>[378:2426](0020347.htm#fr_2425) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xxiii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xxiii-p9"></span> [Gen. ii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#018)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xxiii-p9.1"></span>. \[A beautiful tribute to the true
wife.\]

<span id="fn_2426"></span>[378:2427](0020347.htm#fr_2426) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xxiii-p12.5"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xxiii-p13"></span> The corrections of Stanley on
these lines have been adopted. They occur in the *Choephoræ* of
Æschylus, 503, but may have been found in Sophocles, as the tragic poets
borrowed from one another.

<span id="fn_2427"></span>[378:2428](0020347.htm#fr_2427) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xxiii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xxiii-p16"></span> i.e., not entering into a second
marriage after a wife’s death. But instead of <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.ii.xxiii-p16.1"></span>μονογαμίου</span> some read <span
class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.ii.xxiii-p16.2"></span>κακογαμίου</span>—bad marriage.

<span id="fn_2428"></span>[378:2429](0020347.htm#fr_2428) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xxiii-p16.7"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xxiii-p17"></span> \[To be a *mother*, indeed, one
must be first a *wife;* the woman who has a child out of wedlock is not
entitled to this holy name.\]

<span id="fn_2429"></span>[378:2430](0020347.htm#fr_2429) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xxiii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xxiii-p23"></span> \[A holy marriage, as here so
beautifully defined, was something wholly unknown to Roman and Greek
civilization. Here we find the Christian family established.\]

<span id="fn_2430"></span>[379:2431](0020347.htm#fr_2430) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xxiii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xxiii-p26"></span> [Matt. v.
32](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#032)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xxiii-p26.1"></span>; xix. 9.

<span id="fn_2431"></span>[379:2432](0020347.htm#fr_2431) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xxiii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xxiii-p27"></span> [Lev. xx.
10](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#010)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xxiii-p27.1"></span>; [Deut. xxii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#022)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xxiii-p27.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_2432"></span>[379:2433](0020347.htm#fr_2432) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xxiii-p27.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xxiii-p28"></span> [Lev. xxi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#009)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xxiii-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2433"></span>[379:2434](0020347.htm#fr_2433) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xxiii-p28.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xxiii-p29"></span> [Ezek. xxxiii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#011)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xxiii-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2434"></span>[379:2435](0020347.htm#fr_2434) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.xxiii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.xxiii-p30"></span> [Luke. xii.
48](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#048)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.xxiii-p30.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Elucidations](0020348)
