[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020431)  [Next](0020433) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.viii.ii"></span>

##### <span id="vi.iv.viii.ii-p0.1"></span>Chapter II.—The Necessity of Perspicuous Definition.

<span id="vi.iv.viii.ii-p1"></span>What better or clearer method, for
the commencement of instruction of this nature, can there be than
discussion of the term advanced, so distinctly, that all who use the
same language may follow it? Is the term for demonstration of such a
kind as the word *Blityri*, which is a mere sound, signifying nothing?
But how is it that neither does the philosopher, nor the orator,—no more
does the judge,—adduce demonstration as a term that means nothing; nor
is any of the contending parties ignorant of the fact, that the meaning
does not exist?

<span id="vi.iv.viii.ii-p2"></span>Philosophers, in fact, present
demonstration as having a substantial existence, one in one way, another
in another. Therefore, if one would treat aright of each question, he
cannot carry back the discourse to another more generally admitted
fundamental principle than what is admitted to be signified by the term
by all of the same nation and language.

<span id="vi.iv.viii.ii-p3"></span>Then, starting from this point, it is
necessary to inquire if the proposition has this signification or not.
And next, if it is demonstrated to have, it is necessary to investigate
its nature accurately, of what kind it is, and whether it ever passes
over the class assigned. And if it suffices not to say, absolutely, only
that which one thinks (for <span id="page_559">p. 559</span> <span
id="vi.iv.viii.ii-Page_559"></span>one’s opponent may equally allege, on
the other side, what he likes); then what is stated must be confirmed.
If the decision of it be carried back to what is likewise matter of
dispute, and the decision of that likewise to another disputed point, it
will go on *ad infinitum*, and will be incapable of demonstration. But
if the belief of a point that is not admitted be carried back to one
admitted by all, that is to be made the commencement of instruction.
Every term, therefore, advanced for discussion is to be converted into
an expression that is admitted by those that are parties in the
discussion, to form the starting point for instruction, to lead the way
to the discovery of the points under investigation. For example, let it
be the term “sun” that is in question. Now the Stoics say that it is “an
intellectual fire kindled from the waters of the sea.” Is not the
definition, consequently, obscurer than the term, requiring another
demonstration to prove if it be true? It is therefore better to say, in
the common and distinct form of speech, “that the brightest of the
heavenly bodies is named the sun.” For this expression is more credible
and clearer, and is likewise admitted by all.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III.—Demonstration Defined.](0020433)
