[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020256)  [Next](0020258) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.i.vii"></span>

##### <span id="vi.iii.i.vii-p0.1"></span>Chapter VII.—Who the Instructor Is, and Respecting His Instruction.

<span id="vi.iii.i.vii-p1"></span>Since, then, we have shown that all of
us are by Scripture called children; and not only so, but that we who
have followed Christ are figuratively called babes; and that the Father
of all alone is perfect, for the Son is in Him, and the Father is in the
Son; it is time for us in due course to say who our Instructor is.

<span id="vi.iii.i.vii-p2"></span>He is called Jesus. Sometimes He calls
Himself a shepherd, and says, “I am the good Shepherd.” <span
id="fr_1140"></span>[1141](#fn_1140) According to a metaphor drawn from
shepherds, who lead the sheep, is hereby understood the Instructor, who
leads the children—the Shepherd who tends the babes. For the babes are
simple, being figuratively described as sheep. “And they shall all,” it
is said, “be one flock, and one shepherd.” <span
id="fr_1141"></span>[1142](#fn_1141) The Word, then, <span
id="page_223">p. 223</span> <span id="vi.iii.i.vii-Page_223"></span>who
leads the children to salvation, is appropriately called *the
Instructor* <span id="fr_1142"></span>[1143](#fn_1142) (Pædagogue).

<span id="vi.iii.i.vii-p6"></span>With the greatest clearness,
accordingly, the Word has spoken respecting Himself by Hosea: “I am your
Instructor.” <span id="fr_1143"></span>[1144](#fn_1143) Now piety is
instruction, being the learning of the service of God, and training in
the knowledge of the truth, and right guidance which leads to heaven.
And the word “instruction” <span id="fr_1144"></span>[1145](#fn_1144) is
employed variously. For there is the instruction of him who is led and
learns, and that of him who leads and teaches; and there is, thirdly,
the guidance itself; and fourthly, what is taught, as the commandments
enjoined.

<span id="vi.iii.i.vii-p9"></span>Now the instruction which is of God is
the right direction of truth to the contemplation of God, and the
exhibition of holy deeds in everlasting perseverance.

<span id="vi.iii.i.vii-p10"></span>As therefore the general directs the
phalanx, consulting the safety of his soldiers, and the pilot steers the
vessel, desiring to save the passengers; so also the Instructor guides
the children to a saving course of conduct, through solicitude for us;
and, in general, whatever we ask in accordance with reason from God to
be done for us, will happen to those who believe in the Instructor. And
just as the helmsman does not always yield to the winds, but sometimes,
turning the prow towards them, opposes the whole force of the
hurricanes; so the Instructor never yields to the blasts that blow in
this world, nor commits the child to them like a vessel to make
shipwreck on a wild and licentious course of life; but, wafted on by the
favouring breeze of the Spirit of truth, stoutly holds on to the child’s
helm,—his ears, I mean,—until He bring him safe to anchor in the haven
of heaven.

<span id="vi.iii.i.vii-p11"></span>What is called by men an ancestral
custom passes away in a moment, but the divine guidance is a possession
which abides for ever.

<span id="vi.iii.i.vii-p12"></span>They say that Phœnix was the
instructor of Achilles, and Adrastus of the children of Crœsus; and
Leonides of Alexander, and Nausithous of Philip. But Phœnix was
women-mad, Adrastus was a fugitive. Leonides did not curtail the pride
of Alexander, nor Nausithous reform the drunken Pellæan. No more was the
Thracian Zopyrus able to check the fornication of Alcibiades; but
Zopyrus was a bought slave, and Sicinnus, the tutor of the children of
Themistocles, was a lazy domestic. They say also that he invented the
Sicinnian dance. Those have not escaped our attention who are called
royal instructors among the Persians; whom, in number four, the kings of
the Persians select with the greatest care from all the Persians and set
over their sons. But the children only learn the use of the bow, and on
reaching maturity have sexual intercourse with sisters, and mothers, and
women, wives and courtesans innumerable, practiced in intercourse like
the wild boars.

<span id="vi.iii.i.vii-p13"></span>But our Instructor is the holy God
Jesus, the Word, who is the guide of all humanity. The loving God
Himself is our Instructor. Somewhere in song the Holy Spirit says with
regard to Him, “He provided sufficiently for the people in the
wilderness. He led him about in the thirst of summer heat in a dry land,
and instructed him, and kept him as the apple of His eye, as an eagle
protects her nest, and shows her fond solicitude for her young, spreads
abroad her wings, takes them, and bears them on her back. The Lord alone
led them, and there was no strange god with them.” <span
id="fr_1145"></span>[1146](#fn_1145) Clearly, I trow, has the Scripture
exhibited the Instructor in the account it gives of His guidance.

<span id="vi.iii.i.vii-p15"></span>Again, when He speaks in His own
person, He confesses Himself to be the Instructor: “I am the Lord thy
God, who brought thee out of the land of Egypt.” <span
id="fr_1146"></span>[1147](#fn_1146) Who, then, has the power of leading
in and out? Is it not the Instructor? This was He who appeared to
Abraham, and said to him, “I am thy God, be accepted before Me;” <span
id="fr_1147"></span>[1148](#fn_1147) and in a way most befitting an
instructor, forms him into a faithful child, saying, “And be blameless;
and I will make My covenant between Me and thee, and thy seed.” There is
the communication of the Instructor’s friendship. And He most manifestly
appears as Jacob’s instructor. He says accordingly to him, “Lo, I am
with thee, to keep thee in all the way in which thou shalt go; and I
will bring thee back into this land: for I will not leave thee till I do
what I have told thee.” <span id="fr_1148"></span>[1149](#fn_1148) He is
said, too, to have wrestled with Him. “And Jacob was left alone, and
there wrestled with him a man (the Instructor) till the morning.” <span
id="fr_1149"></span>[1150](#fn_1149) This was the man who led, and
brought, and wrestled with, and anointed the athlete Jacob against
evil. <span id="fr_1150"></span>[1151](#fn_1150) Now that the Word was
at once Jacob’s trainer and the Instructor of humanity \[appears from
this\]—“He asked,” it is said, “His name, and said to him, Tell me what
is Thy name.” And he said, “Why is it that thou askest My name?” For He
reserved the new name for the new people—the babe; and was as yet
unnamed, the Lord God not having yet become man. Yet Jacob called the
name of the place, “Face of God.” “For I have seen,” he says, “God face
to face; and my life is preserved.” <span
id="fr_1151"></span>[1152](#fn_1151) The face of God is the Word by whom
God is manifested <span id="page_224">p. 224</span> <span
id="vi.iii.i.vii-Page_224"></span>and made known. Then also was he named
Israel, because he saw God the Lord. It was God, the Word, the
Instructor, who said to him again afterwards, “Fear not to go down into
Egypt.” <span id="fr_1152"></span>[1153](#fn_1152) See how the
Instructor follows the righteous man, and how He anoints the athlete,
teaching him to trip up his antagonist.

<span id="vi.iii.i.vii-p23"></span>It is He also who teaches Moses to
act as instructor. For the Lord says, “If any one sin before Me, him
will I blot out of My book; but now, go and lead this people into the
place which I told thee.” <span id="fr_1153"></span>[1154](#fn_1153)
Here He is the teacher of the art of instruction. For it was really the
Lord that was the instructor of the ancient people by Moses; but He is
the instructor of the new people by Himself, face to face. “For behold,”
He says to Moses, “My angel shall go before thee,” representing the
evangelical and commanding power of the Word, but guarding the Lord’s
prerogative. “In the day on which I will visit them,” <span
id="fr_1154"></span>[1155](#fn_1154) He says, “I will bring their sins
on them; that is, on the day on which I will sit as judge I will render
the recompense of their sins.” For the same who is Instructor is judge,
and judges those who disobey Him; and the loving Word will not pass over
their transgression in silence. He reproves, that they may repent. For
“the Lord willeth the repentance of the sinner rather than his
death.” <span id="fr_1155"></span>[1156](#fn_1155) And let us as babes,
hearing of the sins of others, keep from similar transgressions, through
dread of the threatening, that we may not have to undergo like
sufferings. What, then, was the sin which they committed? “For in their
wrath they slew men, and in their impetuosity they hamstrung bulls.
Cursed be their anger.” <span id="fr_1156"></span>[1157](#fn_1156) Who,
then, would train us more lovingly than He? Formerly the older people
had an old covenant, and the law disciplined the people with fear, and
the Word was an angel; but to the fresh and new people has also been
given a new covenant, and the Word has appeared, and fear is turned to
love, and that mystic angel is born—Jesus. For this same Instructor said
then, “Thou shalt fear the Lord God;” <span
id="fr_1157"></span>[1158](#fn_1157) but to us He has addressed the
exhortation, “Thou shalt love the Lord thy God.” <span
id="fr_1158"></span>[1159](#fn_1158) Wherefore also this is enjoined on
us: “Cease from your own works, from your old sins;” “Learn to do well;”
“Depart from evil, and do good;” “Thou hast loved righteousness, and
hated iniquity.” This is my new covenant written in the old letter. The
newness of the word must not, then, be made ground of reproach. But the
Lord hath also said in Jeremiah: “Say not that I am a youth: before I
formed thee in the belly I knew thee, and before I brought thee out of
the womb I sanctified thee.” <span id="fr_1159"></span>[1160](#fn_1159)
Such allusions prophecy can make to us, destined in the eye of God to
faith before the foundation of the world; but now babes, through the
recent fulfilment of the will of God, according to which we are born now
to calling and salvation. Wherefore also He adds, “I have set thee for a
prophet to the nations,” <span id="fr_1160"></span>[1161](#fn_1160)
saying that he must prophesy, so that the appellation of “youth” should
not become a reproach to those who are called babes.

<span id="vi.iii.i.vii-p32"></span>Now the law is ancient grace given
through Moses by the Word. Wherefore also the Scripture says, “The law
was given through Moses,” <span id="fr_1161"></span>[1162](#fn_1161) not
by Moses, but by the Word, and through Moses His servant. Wherefore it
was only temporary; but eternal grace and truth were by Jesus Christ.
Mark the expressions of Scripture: of the law only is it said “was
given;” but truth being the grace of the Father, is the eternal work of
the Word; and it is not said to *be given*, but *to be* by Jesus,
*without whom nothing was*. <span id="fr_1162"></span>[1163](#fn_1162)
Presently, therefore, Moses prophetically, giving place to the perfect
Instructor the Word, predicts both the name and the office of
Instructor, and committing to the people the commands of obedience, sets
before them the Instructor. “A prophet,” says he, “like Me shall God
raise up to you of your brethren,” pointing out Jesus the Son of God, by
an allusion to Jesus the son of Nun; for the name of Jesus predicted in
the law was a shadow of Christ. He adds, therefore, consulting the
advantage of the people, “Him shall ye hear;” <span
id="fr_1163"></span>[1164](#fn_1163) and, “The man who will not hear
that Prophet,” <span id="fr_1164"></span>[1165](#fn_1164) him He
threatens. Such a name, then, he predicts as that of the Instructor, who
is the author of salvation. Wherefore prophecy invests Him with a rod, a
rod of discipline, of rule, of authority; that those whom the persuasive
word heals not, the threatening may heal; and whom the threatening heals
not, the rod may heal; and whom the rod heals not, the fire may devour.
“There shall come forth,” it is said, “a rod out of the root of
Jesse.” <span id="fr_1165"></span>[1166](#fn_1165)

<span id="vi.iii.i.vii-p38"></span>See the care, and wisdom, and power
of the Instructor: “He shall not judge according to opinion, nor
according to report; but He shall dispense judgment to the humble, and
reprove the sinners of the earth.” And by David: “The Lord instructing,
hath instructed me, and not given me over to death.” <span
id="fr_1166"></span>[1167](#fn_1166) For to be chastised of the Lord,
and instructed, is deliverance from death. And by the same prophet He
says: <span id="page_225">p. 225</span> <span
id="vi.iii.i.vii-Page_225"></span>“Thou shalt rule them with a rod of
iron.” <span id="fr_1167"></span>[1168](#fn_1167) Thus also the apostle,
in the Epistle to the Corinthians, being moved, says, “What will ye?
Shall I come unto you with a rod, or in love, in the spirit of
meekness?” <span id="fr_1168"></span>[1169](#fn_1168) Also, “The Lord
shall send the rod of strength out of Sion,” <span
id="fr_1169"></span>[1170](#fn_1169) He says by another prophet. And
this same rod of instruction, “Thy rod and staff have comforted
me,” <span id="fr_1170"></span>[1171](#fn_1170) said some one else. Such
is the power of the Instructor—sacred, soothing, saving.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1140"></span>[222:1141](0020257.htm#fr_1140) <span
id="vi.iii.i.vii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.i.vii-p3"></span> [John x.
11](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#011)<span
id="vi.iii.i.vii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1141"></span>[222:1142](0020257.htm#fr_1141) <span
id="vi.iii.i.vii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.i.vii-p4"></span> [John x.
16](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#016)<span
id="vi.iii.i.vii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1142"></span>[223:1143](0020257.htm#fr_1142) <span
id="vi.iii.i.vii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.i.vii-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iii.i.vii-p5.1"></span>παιδαγωγός</span>.

<span id="fn_1143"></span>[223:1144](0020257.htm#fr_1143) <span
id="vi.iii.i.vii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.i.vii-p7"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iii.i.vii-p7.1"></span>παιδευτής</span>; [Hos. v.
2](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#002)<span id="vi.iii.i.vii-p7.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_1144"></span>[223:1145](0020257.htm#fr_1144) <span
id="vi.iii.i.vii-p7.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.i.vii-p8"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iii.i.vii-p8.1"></span>παιδαγωγία</span>.

<span id="fn_1145"></span>[223:1146](0020257.htm#fr_1145) <span
id="vi.iii.i.vii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.i.vii-p14"></span> [Deut. xxxii.
10-12](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#010)<span
id="vi.iii.i.vii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1146"></span>[223:1147](0020257.htm#fr_1146) <span
id="vi.iii.i.vii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.i.vii-p16"></span> [Ex. xx.
2](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#002)<span
id="vi.iii.i.vii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1147"></span>[223:1148](0020257.htm#fr_1147) <span
id="vi.iii.i.vii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.i.vii-p17"></span> [Gen.
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#002)<span
id="vi.iii.i.vii-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1148"></span>[223:1149](0020257.htm#fr_1148) <span
id="vi.iii.i.vii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.i.vii-p18"></span> [Gen. xxviii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#015)<span
id="vi.iii.i.vii-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1149"></span>[223:1150](0020257.htm#fr_1149) <span
id="vi.iii.i.vii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.i.vii-p19"></span> [Gen. xxxii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#024)<span
id="vi.iii.i.vii-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1150"></span>[223:1151](0020257.htm#fr_1150) <span
id="vi.iii.i.vii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.i.vii-p20"></span> Or, “against the evil one.”

<span id="fn_1151"></span>[223:1152](0020257.htm#fr_1151) <span
id="vi.iii.i.vii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.i.vii-p21"></span> [Gen. xxxii.
30](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#030)<span
id="vi.iii.i.vii-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1152"></span>[224:1153](0020257.htm#fr_1152) <span
id="vi.iii.i.vii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.i.vii-p22"></span> [Gen. xlvi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#003)<span
id="vi.iii.i.vii-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1153"></span>[224:1154](0020257.htm#fr_1153) <span
id="vi.iii.i.vii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.i.vii-p24"></span> [Exod.
32:33](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#033),
[34](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#034)<span
id="vi.iii.i.vii-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1154"></span>[224:1155](0020257.htm#fr_1154) <span
id="vi.iii.i.vii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.i.vii-p25"></span> [Exod.
32:33](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#033),
[34](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#034)<span
id="vi.iii.i.vii-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1155"></span>[224:1156](0020257.htm#fr_1155) <span
id="vi.iii.i.vii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.i.vii-p26"></span> [Ezek.
18:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#023),
[32](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#032)<span
id="vi.iii.i.vii-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1156"></span>[224:1157](0020257.htm#fr_1156) <span
id="vi.iii.i.vii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.i.vii-p27"></span> [Gen. xlix.
6](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#006)<span
id="vi.iii.i.vii-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1157"></span>[224:1158](0020257.htm#fr_1157) <span
id="vi.iii.i.vii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.i.vii-p28"></span> [Deut. vi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#002)<span
id="vi.iii.i.vii-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1158"></span>[224:1159](0020257.htm#fr_1158) <span
id="vi.iii.i.vii-p28.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.i.vii-p29"></span> [Matt. xxii.
37](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#037)<span
id="vi.iii.i.vii-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1159"></span>[224:1160](0020257.htm#fr_1159) <span
id="vi.iii.i.vii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.i.vii-p30"></span> [Jer. i.
7](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#007)<span
id="vi.iii.i.vii-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1160"></span>[224:1161](0020257.htm#fr_1160) <span
id="vi.iii.i.vii-p30.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.i.vii-p31"></span> [Jer. i.
5](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#005)<span
id="vi.iii.i.vii-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1161"></span>[224:1162](0020257.htm#fr_1161) <span
id="vi.iii.i.vii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.i.vii-p33"></span> [John i.
17](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#017)<span
id="vi.iii.i.vii-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1162"></span>[224:1163](0020257.htm#fr_1162) <span
id="vi.iii.i.vii-p33.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.i.vii-p34"></span> [John i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003)<span
id="vi.iii.i.vii-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1163"></span>[224:1164](0020257.htm#fr_1163) <span
id="vi.iii.i.vii-p34.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.i.vii-p35"></span> [Deut. xviii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#015)<span
id="vi.iii.i.vii-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1164"></span>[224:1165](0020257.htm#fr_1164) <span
id="vi.iii.i.vii-p35.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.i.vii-p36"></span> [Deut. xviii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#019)<span
id="vi.iii.i.vii-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1165"></span>[224:1166](0020257.htm#fr_1165) <span
id="vi.iii.i.vii-p36.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.i.vii-p37"></span> [Isa.
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#004)<span
id="vi.iii.i.vii-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1166"></span>[224:1167](0020257.htm#fr_1166) <span
id="vi.iii.i.vii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.i.vii-p39"></span> [Ps. cxviii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#018)<span
id="vi.iii.i.vii-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1167"></span>[225:1168](0020257.htm#fr_1167) <span
id="vi.iii.i.vii-p39.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.i.vii-p40"></span> [Ps. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#009)<span
id="vi.iii.i.vii-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1168"></span>[225:1169](0020257.htm#fr_1168) <span
id="vi.iii.i.vii-p40.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.i.vii-p41"></span> [1 Cor. iv.
21](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#021)<span
id="vi.iii.i.vii-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1169"></span>[225:1170](0020257.htm#fr_1169) <span
id="vi.iii.i.vii-p41.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.i.vii-p42"></span> [Ps. cx.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#002)<span
id="vi.iii.i.vii-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1170"></span>[225:1171](0020257.htm#fr_1170) <span
id="vi.iii.i.vii-p42.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.i.vii-p43"></span> [Ps. xxiii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#004)<span
id="vi.iii.i.vii-p43.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII.—Against Those Who Think that What is Just is Not
Good.](0020258)
