[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020317)  [Next](0020319.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxv"></span>

##### <span id="vi.iv.i.xxv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXV.—Plato an Imitator of Moses in Framing Laws.

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxv-p1"></span>Plato the philosopher, aided in
legislation by the books of Moses, censured the polity of Minos, and
that of Lycurgus, as having bravery alone as their aim; while he praised
as more seemly the polity which expresses some one thing, and directs
according to one precept. For he says that it becomes us to philosophize
with strength, and dignity, and wisdom,—holding unalterably the same
opinions about the same things, with reference to the dignity of heaven.
Accordingly, therefore, he interprets what is in the law, enjoining us
to look to one God and to do justly. Of politics, he says there are two
kinds,—the department of law, and that of politics, strictly so called.

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxv-p2"></span>And he refers to the Creator, as the
Statesman (<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.i.xxv-p2.1"></span>ὁ
πολιτικός</span>) by way of eminence, in his book of this name (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.i.xxv-p2.2"></span>ὁ πολιτικός</span>);
and those who lead an active and just life, combined with contemplation,
he calls statesmen (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.i.xxv-p2.3"></span>πολιτικοί</span>). That department of
politics which is called “Law,” he divides into administrative
magnanimity and private good order, which he calls orderliness; and
harmony, and sobriety, which are seen when rulers suit their subjects,
and subjects are obedient to their rulers; a result which the system of
Moses sedulously aims at effecting. Further, that the department of law
is founded on generation, that of politics on friendship and consent,
Plato, with the aid he received, affirms; and so, coupled with the laws
the philosopher in the *Epinomis*, who knew the course of all
generation, which takes place by the instrumentality of the planets; and
the other philosopher, *Timæus*, who was an astronomer and student of
the motions of the stars, and of their sympathy and association with one
another, he consequently joined to the “polity” (or “republic”). Then,
in my opinion, the end both of the statesman, and of him who lives
according to the law, is contemplation. It is necessary, therefore, that
public affairs should be rightly managed. But to philosophize is best.
For he who is wise will live concentrating all his energies on
knowledge, directing his life by good deeds, despising the opposite, and
following the pursuits which contribute to truth. And the law is not
what is decided by law (for what is seen is not vision), nor every
opinion (not certainly what is evil). But law is the opinion which is
good, and what is good is that which is true, and what is true is that
which finds “true being,” and attains to it. “He who is,” <span
id="fr_2108"></span>[2109](#fn_2108.md) says Moses, “sent me.” In
accordance with which, namely, good opinion, some have called law, right
reason, which enjoins what is to be done and forbids what is not to be
done.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2108"></span>[338:2109](0020318.htm#fr_2108.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i.xxv-p2.4"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i.xxv-p3"></span> “I AM,” A.V.: [Ex. iii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#014.md)<span id="vi.iv.i.xxv-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVI.—Moses Rightly Called a Divine Legislator, And,
Though Inferior to Christ, Far Superior to the Great Legislators of the
Greeks, Minos and Lycurgus.](0020319.md)
