[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020351)  [Next](0020353.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.iv.i"></span>

##### <span id="vi.iv.iv.i-p0.1"></span>Chapter I.—Order of Contents.

<span id="vi.iv.iv.i-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="vi.iv.iv.i-p1.1"></span>It</span> will follow, I think, that I
should treat of martyrdom, and of who the perfect man is. With these
points shall be included what follows in accordance with the demands of
the points to be spoken about, and how both bond and free must equally
philosophize, whether male or female in sex. And in the sequel, after
finishing what is to be said on faith and inquiry, we shall set forth
the department of symbols; so that, on cursorily concluding the
discourse on ethics, we shall exhibit the advantage which has accrued to
the Greeks from the barbarian philosophy. After which sketch, the brief
explanation of the Scriptures both against the Greeks and against the
Jews will be presented, and whatever points we were unable to embrace in
the previous *Miscellanies* (through having respect necessarily to the
multitude of matters), in accordance with the commencement of the poem,
purposing to finish them in one commentary. In addition to these points,
afterwards on completing the sketch, as far as we can in accordance with
what we propose, we must give an account of the physical doctrines of
the Greeks and of the barbarians, respecting elementary principles, as
far as their opinions have reached us, and argue against the principal
views excogitated by the philosophers.

<span id="vi.iv.iv.i-p2"></span>It will naturally fall after these,
after a cursory view of theology, to discuss the opinions handed down
respecting prophecy; so that, having demonstrated that the Scriptures
which we believe are valid from their omnipotent authority, we shall be
able to go over them consecutively, and to show thence to all the
heresies one God and Omnipotent Lord to be truly preached by the law and
the prophets, and besides by the blessed Gospel. Many contradictions
against the heterodox await us while we attempt, in writing, to do away
with the force of the allegations made by them, and to persuade them
against their will, proving by the Scriptures themselves.

<span id="vi.iv.iv.i-p3"></span>On completing, then, the whole of what
we propose in the commentaries, on which, if the Spirit will, we
ministering to the urgent need, (for it is exceedingly necessary, before
coming to the truth, to embrace what ought to be said by way of
preface), shall address ourselves to the true gnostic science of nature,
receiving initiation into the minor mysteries before the greater; so
that nothing may be in the way of the truly divine declaration of sacred
things, the subjects requiring preliminary detail and statement being
cleared away, and sketched beforehand. The science of nature, then, or
rather observation, as contained in the gnostic tradition according to
the rule of the truth, depends on the discussion concerning cosmogony,
ascending thence to the department of theology. Whence, then, we shall
begin our account of what is handed down, with the creation as related
by the prophets, introducing also the tenets of the heterodox, and
endeavouring as far as we can to confute them. But it shall be written
if God will, and as He inspires; and now we must proceed to what we
proposed, and complete the discourse on ethics.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II.—The Meaning of the Name Stromata or
Miscellanies.](0020353.md)
