[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020215)  [Next](0020217) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iii.viii"></span>

##### <span id="v.iii.viii-p0.1"></span>Chapter VIII.—Human Flesh Not the Proper or Natural Food of Men.

<span id="v.iii.viii-p1"></span>But what need is there to speak of
bodies not allotted to be the food of any animal, and destined only for
a burial in the earth in honour of nature, since the Maker of the world
has not alloted any animal whatsoever as food to those of the same kind,
although some others of a different kind serve for food according to
nature? If, indeed, they are able to show that the flesh of men was
alloted to men for food, there will be nothing to hinder its being
according to nature that they should eat one another, just like anything
else that is allowed by nature, and nothing to prohibit those who dare
to say such things from regaling themselves with the bodies of their
dearest friends as delicacies, as being especially suited to them, and
to entertain their living friends with the same fare. But if it be
unlawful even to speak of this, and if for men to partake of the flesh
of men is a thing most hateful and abominable, and more detestable than
any other unlawful and unnatural food or act; and if what is against
nature can never pass into nourishment for the limbs and parts requiring
it, and what does not pass into nourishment can never become united with
that which it is not adapted to nourish,—then can the bodies of men
never combine with bodies like themselves, to which this nourishment
would be against nature, even though it were to pass many times through
their stomach, owing to some most bitter mischance; but, removed from
the influence of the nourishing power, and scattered to those parts of
the universe again from which they obtained their first origin, they are
united with these for as long a period of time as may be the lot of
each; and, separated thence again by the skill and power of Him who has
fixed the nature of every animal, and furnished it with its peculiar
powers, they are united suitably, each to each, whether they have been
burnt up by fire, or rotted by water, or consumed by wild beasts, or by
any other animals, or separated from the entire body and dissolved
before the other parts; and, being again united with one another, they
occupy the same place for the exact construction and formation of the
same body, and for the resurrection and life of that which was dead, or
even entirely dissolved. To expatiate further, however, on these topics,
is not suitable; for all men are agreed in their decision respecting
them,—those at least who are not half brutes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX.—Absurdity of Arguing from Man’s Impotency.](0020217)
