[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020381)  [Next](0020383) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.v.viii"></span>

##### <span id="vi.iv.v.viii-p0.1"></span>Chapter VIII.—The Use of the Symbolic Style by Poets and Philosophers.

<span id="vi.iv.v.viii-p1"></span>But it was not only the most highly
intellectual of the Egyptians, but also such of other barbarians as
prosecuted philosophy, that affected the symbolical style. They say,
then, that Idanthuris king of the Scythians, as Pherecydes of Syros
relates, sent to Darius, on his passing the Ister in threat of war, a
symbol, instead of a letter, consisting of a mouse, a frog, a bird, a
javelin, a plough. And there being a doubt in reference to them, as was
to be expected, Orontopagas the Chiliarch said that they were to resign
the kingdom; taking dwellings to be meant by the mouse, waters by the
frog, air by the bird, land by the plough, arms by the javelin. But
Xiphodres interpreted the contrary; for he said, “If we do not take our
flight like birds, or like mice get below the earth, or like frogs
beneath the water, we shall not escape their arrows; for we are not
lords of the territory.”

<span id="vi.iv.v.viii-p2"></span>It is said that Anacharsis the
Scythian, while asleep, covered the pudenda with his left hand, and his
mouth with his right, to intimate that both ought to be mastered, but
that it was a greater thing to master the tongue than voluptuousness.

<span id="page_455">p. 455</span> <span
id="vi.iv.v.viii-Page_455"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.viii-p3"></span>And why should I linger over the
barbarians, when I can adduce the Greeks as exceedingly addicted to the
use of the method of concealment? Androcydes the Pythagorean says the
far-famed so-called Ephesian letters were of the class of symbols. For
he said that <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.v.viii-p3.1"></span>ἄσκιον</span> (shadowless) meant darkness,
for it has no shadow; and <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.v.viii-p3.2"></span>κατάσκιον</span> (shadowy) light, since it
casts with its rays the shadow; and <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.v.viii-p3.3"></span>λίξ</span> if is the earth, according to
an ancient’ appellation; and <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.v.viii-p3.4"></span>τετράς</span> is the year, in reference to
the seasons; and <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.v.viii-p3.5"></span>δαμναμενεύς</span> is the sun, which
overpowers (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.v.viii-p3.6"></span>δαμάζων</span>); and <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.v.viii-p3.7"></span>τὰ αἴσια</span> is the
true voice. And then the symbol intimates that divine things have been
arranged in harmonious order—darkness to light, the sun to the year, and
the earth to nature’s processes of production of every sort. Also
Dionysius Thrax, the grammarian, in his book, *Respecting the Exposition
of the Symbolical Signification in Circles*, says expressly, “Some
signified actions not by words only, but also by symbols: by words, as
is the case of what are called the Delphic maxims, ‘Nothing in excess,’
‘Know thyself,’ and the like; and by symbols, as the wheel that is
turned in the temples of the gods, derived from the Egyptians, and the
branches that are given to the worshippers. For the Thracian Orpheus
says:—

> <span id="vi.iv.v.viii-p3.8"></span> “Whatever works of branches are a
> care to men on earth,  
> Not one has one fate in the mind, but all things  
> Revolve around; and it is not lawful to stand at one point,  
> But each one keeps an equal part of the race as they began.”  

<span id="vi.iv.v.viii-p4"></span>The branches either stand as the
symbol of the first food, or they are that the multitude may know that
fruits spring and grow universally, remaining a very long time; but that
the duration of life allotted to themselves is brief. And it is on this
account that they will have it that the branches are given; and perhaps
also that they may know, that as these, on the other hand, are burned,
so also they themselves speedily leave this life, and will become fuel
for fire.

<span id="vi.iv.v.viii-p5"></span>Very useful, then, is the mode of
symbolic interpretation for many purposes; and it is helpful to the
right theology, and to piety, and to the display of intelligence, and
the practice of brevity, and the exhibition of wisdom. “For the use of
symbolical speech is characteristic of the wise man,” appositely remarks
the grammarian Didymus, “and the explanation of what is signified by
it.” And indeed the most elementary instruction of children embraces the
interpretation of the four elements; for it is said that the Phrygians
call water Bedu, as also Orpheus says: <span
id="fr_3035"></span>[3036](#fn_3035) —

> <span id="vi.iv.v.viii-p6.1"></span> “And bright water is poured down,
> the Bedu of the nymphs.”  

<span id="vi.iv.v.viii-p7"></span>Dion Thytes also seems to write
similarly:—

> <span id="vi.iv.v.viii-p7.1"></span> And taking Bedu, pour it on your
> hands, and turn to divination.”  

<span id="vi.iv.v.viii-p8"></span>On the other hand, the comic poet,
Philydeus, understands by Bedu the air, as being (Biodoros) life-giver,
in the following lines:—

> <span id="vi.iv.v.viii-p8.1"></span> “I pray that I may inhale the
> salutary Bedu,  
> Which is the most essential part of health;  
> Inhale the pure, the unsullied air.”  

<span id="vi.iv.v.viii-p9"></span>In the same opinion also concurs
Neanthes of Cyzicum, who writes that the Macedonian priests invoke Bedu,
which they interpret to mean *the air,* to be propitious to them and to
their children. And Zaps some have ignorantly taken for fire (from <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.v.viii-p9.1"></span>ζέσιν</span>,
*boiling*); for so the sea is called, as Euphorion, in his reply to
Theoridas:—

> <span id="vi.iv.v.viii-p9.2"></span> “And Zaps, destroyer of ships,
> wrecked it on the rocks.”  

<span id="vi.iv.v.viii-p10"></span>And Dionysius Iambus similarly:—

> <span id="vi.iv.v.viii-p10.1"></span> “Briny Zaps moans about the
> maddened deep.”  

<span id="vi.iv.v.viii-p11"></span>Similarly Cratinus the younger, the
comic poet:—

> <span id="vi.iv.v.viii-p11.1"></span> “Zaps casts forth shrimps and
> little fishes.”  

<span id="vi.iv.v.viii-p12"></span>And Simmias of Rhodes:—

> <span id="vi.iv.v.viii-p12.1"></span> “Parent of the Ignetes and the
> Telchines briny Zaps was born.” <span
> id="fr_3036"></span>[3037](#fn_3036)  

<span id="vi.iv.v.viii-p14"></span>And <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.v.viii-p14.1"></span>χθών</span> is the earth (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.v.viii-p14.2"></span>κεχυμένη</span>)
spread forth to bigness. And Plectron, according to some, is the sky
(<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.v.viii-p14.3"></span>πόλος</span>),
according to others, it is the air, which strikes (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.v.viii-p14.4"></span>πλήσσοντα</span>) and
moves to nature and increase, and which fills all things. But these have
not read Cleanthes the philosopher, who expressly calls Plectron the
sun; for darting his beams in the east, as if striking the world, he
leads the light to its harmonious course. And from the sun it signifies
also the rest of the stars.

<span id="vi.iv.v.viii-p15"></span>And the Sphinx is not the
comprehension <span id="fr_3037"></span>[3038](#fn_3037) of the
universe, and the revolution of the world, according to the poet Aratus;
but perhaps it is the spiritual tone which pervades and holds together
the universe. But it is better to regard it as the ether, which holds
together and presses all things; as also Empedocles says:—

> <span id="vi.iv.v.viii-p16.3"></span> “But come now, first will I
> speak of the Sun, the first principle of all things,  
> From which all, that we look upon, has sprung,  
> Both earth, and billowy deep, and humid air;  
> Titan and Ether too, which binds all things around.”  

<span id="vi.iv.v.viii-p17"></span>And Apollodorus of Corcyra says that
these lines were recited by Branchus the seer, when purifying the
Milesians from plague; for he, sprinkling <span id="page_456">p.
456</span> <span id="vi.iv.v.viii-Page_456"></span>the multitude with
branches of laurel, led off the hymn somehow as follows:—

> <span id="vi.iv.v.viii-p17.1"></span> “Sing Boys Hecaergus and
> Hecaerga.”  

<span id="vi.iv.v.viii-p18"></span>And the people accompanied him,
saying, “Bedu, <span id="fr_3038"></span>[3039](#fn_3038) Zaps, Chthon,
Plectron, Sphinx, Cnaxzbi, Chthyptes, Phlegmos, Drops.” Callimachus
relates the story in iambics. Cnaxzbi is, by derivation, the plague,
from its gnawing (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.v.viii-p19.2"></span>κναίειν</span>) and destroying (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.v.viii-p19.3"></span>διαφθείρειν</span>),
and <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.v.viii-p19.4"></span>θῦψαι</span> is to consume with a
thunderbolt. Thespis the tragic poet says that something else was
signified by these, writing thus: “Lo, I offer to thee a libation of
white Cnaxzbi, having pressed it from the yellow nurses. Lo, to thee, O
two-horned Pan, mixing Chthyptes cheese with red honey, I place it on
thy sacred altars. Lo, to thee I pour as a libation the sparkling gleam
of Bromius.” He signifies, as I think, the soul’s first milk-like
nutriment of the four-and-twenty elements, after which solidified milk
comes as food. And last, he teaches of the blood of the vine of the
Word, the sparkling wine, the perfecting gladness of instruction. And
Drops is the operating Word, which, beginning with elementary training,
and advancing to the growth of the man, inflames and illumines man up to
the measure of maturity.

<span id="vi.iv.v.viii-p20"></span>The third is said to be a writing
copy for children—<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.v.viii-p20.1"></span>μάρπτες, σφίγξ, κλώψ, ζυνχθηδόν</span>.
And it signifies, in my opinion, that by the arrangement of the elements
and of the world, we must advance to the knowledge of what is more
perfect, since eternal salvation is attained by force and toil; for
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.v.viii-p20.2"></span>μάρψαι</span>
is to grasp. And the harmony of the world is meant by the Sphinx; and
<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.v.viii-p20.3"></span>ζυνχθηδόν</span> means difficulty; and
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.v.viii-p20.4"></span>κλώψς</span>
means at once the secret knowledge of the Lord and day. Well! does not
Epigenes, in his book on the *Poetry of Orpheus*, in exhibiting the
peculiarities found in Orpheus, <span
id="fr_3039"></span>[3040](#fn_3039) say that by “the curved rods”
(<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.v.viii-p21.1"></span>κεραίσι</span>) is meant “ploughs;” and
by the warp (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.v.viii-p21.2"></span>στήμοσι</span>), the furrows; and the
woof (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.v.viii-p21.3"></span>μίτος</span>) is a figurative expression
for the seed; and that the tears of Zeus signify a shower; and that the
“parts” (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.v.viii-p21.4"></span>μοῖραι</span>) are, again, the phases of
the moon, the thirtieth day, and the fifteenth, and the new moon, and
that Orpheus accordingly calls them “white-robed,” as being parts of the
light? Again, that the Spring is called “flowery,” from its nature; and
Night “still,” on account of rest; and the Moon “Gorgonian,” on account
of the face in it; and that the time in which it is necessary to sow is
called Aphrodite by the “Theologian.” <span
id="fr_3040"></span>[3041](#fn_3040) In the same way, too, the
Pythagoreans figuratively called the planets the “dogs of Persephone;”
and to the sea they applied the metaphorical appellation of “the tears
of Kronus.” Myriads on myriads of enigmatical utterances by both poets
and philosophers are to be found; and there are also whole books which
present the mind of the writer veiled, as that of Heraclitus *On
Nature*, who on this very account is called “Obscure.” Similar to this
book is the *Theology* of Pherecydes of Syrus; for Euphorion the poet,
and the *Causes* of Callimachus, and the *Alexandra* of Lycophron, and
the like, are proposed as an exercise in exposition to all the
grammarians.

<span id="vi.iv.v.viii-p23"></span>It is, then, proper that the
Barbarian philosophy, on which it is our business to speak, should
prophecy also obscurely and by symbols, as was evinced. Such are the
injunctions of Moses: “These common things, the sow, the hawk, the
eagle, and the raven, are not to be eaten.” <span
id="fr_3041"></span>[3042](#fn_3041) For the sow is the emblem of
voluptuous and unclean lust of food, and lecherous and filthy
licentiousness in venery, always prurient, and material, and lying in
the mire, and fattening for slaughter and destruction.

<span id="vi.iv.v.viii-p25"></span>Again, he commands to eat that which
parts the hoof and ruminates; “intimating,” says Barnabas, “that we
ought to cleave to those who fear the Lord, and meditate in their heart
on that portion of the word which they have received, to those who speak
and keep the Lord’s statutes, to those to whom meditation is a work of
gladness, and who ruminate on the word of the Lord. And what is the
parted hoof? That the righteous walks in this world, and expects the
holy eternity to come.” Then he adds, “See how well Moses enacted. But
whence could they understand or comprehend these things? We who have
rightly understood speak the commandments as the Lord wished; wherefore
He circumcised our ears and hearts, that we may comprehend these things.
And when he says, ‘Thou shalt not eat the eagle, the hawk, the kite, and
the crow;’ he says, ‘Thou shalt not adhere to or become like those men
who know not how to procure for themselves subsistence by toil and
sweat, but live by plunder, and lawlessly.’ For the eagle indicates
robbery, the hawk injustice, and the raven greed. It is also written,
‘With the innocent man thou wilt be innocent, and with the chosen
choice, and with the perverse thou shall pervert.’ <span
id="fr_3042"></span>[3043](#fn_3042) It is incumbent on us to cleave to
the saints, because they that cleave to them shall be sanctified.” <span
id="fr_3043"></span>[3044](#fn_3043)

<span id="vi.iv.v.viii-p28"></span>Thence Theognis writes:—

> <span id="vi.iv.v.viii-p28.1"></span> “For from the good you will
> learn good things;  
> But if you mix with the bad, you will destroy any mind you may
> have.”  

<span id="page_457">p. 457</span> <span
id="vi.iv.v.viii-Page_457"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.viii-p29"></span>And when, again, it is said in the
ode, “For He hath triumphed gloriously: the horse and his rider hath He
cast into the sea;” <span id="fr_3044"></span>[3045](#fn_3044) the
many-limbed and brutal affection, lust, with the rider mounted, who
gives the reins to pleasures, “He has cast into the sea,” throwing them
away into the disorders of the world. Thus also Plato, in his book *On
the Soul*, says that the charioteer and the horse that ran off—the
irrational part, which is divided in two, into anger and
concupiscence—fall down; and so the myth intimates that it was through
the licentiousness of the steeds that Phaëthon was thrown out. Also in
the case of Joseph: the brothers having envied this young man, who by
his knowledge was possessed of uncommon foresight, stripped off the coat
of many colours, and took and threw him into a pit (the pit was empty,
it had no water), rejecting the good man’s varied knowledge, springing
from his love of instruction; or, in the exercise of the bare faith,
which is according to the law, they threw him into the pit empty of
water, selling him into Egypt, which was destitute of the divine word.
And the pit was destitute of knowledge; into which being thrown and
stript of his knowledge, he that had become unconsciously wise, stript
of knowledge, seemed like his brethren. Otherwise interpreted, the coat
of many colours is lust, which takes its way into a yawning pit. “And if
one open up or hew out a pit,” it is said, “and do not cover it, and
there fall in there a calf or ass, the owner of the pit shall pay the
price in money, and give it to his neighbour; and the dead body shall be
his. <span id="fr_3045"></span>[3046](#fn_3045) Here add that prophecy:
“The ox knoweth his owner, and the ass his master’s crib: but Israel
hath not understood Me.” <span id="fr_3046"></span>[3047](#fn_3046) In
order, then, that none of those, who have fallen in with the knowledge
taught by thee, may become incapable of holding the truth, and disobey
and fall away, it is said, Be thou sure in the treatment of the word,
and shut up the living spring in the depth from those who approach
irrationally, but reach drink to those that thirst for truth. Conceal
it, then, from those who are unfit to receive the depth of knowledge,
and so cover the pit. The owner of the pit, then, the Gnostic, shall
himself be punished, incurring the blame of the others stumbling, and of
being overwhelmed by the greatness of the word, he himself being of
small capacity; or transferring the worker into the region of
speculation, and on that account dislodging him from off-hand faith.
“And will pay money,” rendering a reckoning, and submitting his accounts
to the “omnipotent Will.”

<span id="vi.iv.v.viii-p33"></span>This, then, is the type of “the law
and the prophets which were until John;” <span
id="fr_3047"></span>[3048](#fn_3047) while he, though speaking more
perspicuously as no longer prophesying, but pointing out as now present,
Him, who was proclaimed symbolically from the beginning, nevertheless
said, “I am not worthy to loose the latchet of the Lord’s shoe.” <span
id="fr_3048"></span>[3049](#fn_3048) For he confesses that he is not
worthy to baptize so great a Power; for it behooves those, who purify
others, to free the soul from the body and its sins, as the foot from
the thong. Perhaps also this signified the final exertion of the
Saviour’s power toward us—the immediate, I mean—that by His presence,
concealed in the enigma of prophecy, inasmuch as he, by pointing out to
sight Him that had been prophesied of, and indicating the Presence which
had come, walking forth into the light, loosed the latchet of the
oracles of the \[old\] economy, by unveiling the meaning of the symbols.

<span id="vi.iv.v.viii-p36"></span>And the observances practiced by the
Romans in the case of wills have a place here; those balances and small
coins to denote justice, and freeing of slaves, and rubbing of the ears.
For these observances are, that things may be transacted with justice;
and those for the dispensing of honour; and the last, that he who
happens to be near, as if a burden were imposed on him, should stand and
hear and take the post of mediator.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3035"></span>[455:3036](0020382.htm#fr_3035) <span
id="vi.iv.v.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.viii-p6"></span> \[Kaye, p. 181.\]

<span id="fn_3036"></span>[455:3037](0020382.htm#fr_3036) <span
id="vi.iv.v.viii-p12.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.viii-p13"></span> This line has given commentators
considerable trouble. Diodorus says that the Telchimes—fabled sons of
Ocean—were the first inhabitants of Rhodes.

<span id="fn_3037"></span>[455:3038](0020382.htm#fr_3037) <span
id="vi.iv.v.viii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.viii-p16"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.v.viii-p16.1"></span>σύνεσις</span>. Sylburgius, with much
probability, conjectures <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.v.viii-p16.2"></span>σύνδεσις</span>, binding together.

<span id="fn_3038"></span>[456:3039](0020382.htm#fr_3038) <span
id="vi.iv.v.viii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.viii-p19"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.v.viii-p19.1"></span>Βέδυ, Ζάψ, Χθών, Πλῆκτρον, Σφίγξ,
Κναξζβί, Χθύπτης, Φλεγμός, Δρώψ</span>. On the interpretation of which,
much learning and ingenuity have been expended.

<span id="fn_3039"></span>[456:3040](0020382.htm#fr_3039) <span
id="vi.iv.v.viii-p20.5"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.viii-p21"></span> \[See valuable references and note
on the Sibylline and Orphic sayings. Leighton, *Works*, vol. vi. pp.
131, 178.\]

<span id="fn_3040"></span>[456:3041](0020382.htm#fr_3040) <span
id="vi.iv.v.viii-p21.5"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.viii-p22"></span> Orpheus.

<span id="fn_3041"></span>[456:3042](0020382.htm#fr_3041) <span
id="vi.iv.v.viii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.viii-p24"></span> Lev. xi; [Deut.
xiv.](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#000)<span
id="vi.iv.v.viii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="fn_3042"></span>[456:3043](0020382.htm#fr_3042) <span
id="vi.iv.v.viii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.viii-p26"></span> [Ps.
18:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#025),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#026)<span
id="vi.iv.v.viii-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3043"></span>[456:3044](0020382.htm#fr_3043) <span
id="vi.iv.v.viii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.viii-p27"></span> \[*Epistle of Barnabas*, vol. i, p.
143, 144. S.\]

<span id="fn_3044"></span>[457:3045](0020382.htm#fr_3044) <span
id="vi.iv.v.viii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.viii-p30"></span> [Ex. xv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#001)<span
id="vi.iv.v.viii-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3045"></span>[457:3046](0020382.htm#fr_3045) <span
id="vi.iv.v.viii-p30.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.viii-p31"></span> [Exod.
21:33](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#033),
[36](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#036)<span
id="vi.iv.v.viii-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3046"></span>[457:3047](0020382.htm#fr_3046) <span
id="vi.iv.v.viii-p31.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.viii-p32"></span> [Isa. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#003)<span
id="vi.iv.v.viii-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3047"></span>[457:3048](0020382.htm#fr_3047) <span
id="vi.iv.v.viii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.viii-p34"></span> [Matt. xi.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#013)<span
id="vi.iv.v.viii-p34.1"></span>; [Luke xvi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#016)<span
id="vi.iv.v.viii-p34.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_3048"></span>[457:3049](0020382.htm#fr_3048) <span
id="vi.iv.v.viii-p34.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.viii-p35"></span> [Mark i.
7](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#007)<span
id="vi.iv.v.viii-p35.1"></span>; [Luke iii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#016)<span
id="vi.iv.v.viii-p35.2"></span>; [John i.
27](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#027)<span
id="vi.iv.v.viii-p35.3"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX.—Reasons for Veiling the Truth in Symbols.](0020383)
