[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020246)  [Next](0020248) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.ii.xi"></span>

##### <span id="vi.ii.xi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XI.—How Great are the Benefits Conferred on Man Through the Advent of Christ.

<span id="vi.ii.xi-p1"></span>Contemplate a little, if agreeable to you,
the divine beneficence. The first man, when in Paradise, sported free,
because he was the child of God; but when he succumbed to pleasure (for
the serpent allegorically signifies pleasure crawling on its belly,
earthly wickedness nourished <span id="page_203">p. 203</span> <span
id="vi.ii.xi-Page_203"></span>for fuel to the flames), was as a child
seduced by lusts, and grew old in disobedience; and by disobeying his
Father, dishonoured God. Such was the influence of pleasure. Man, that
had been free by reason of simplicity, was found fettered to sins. The
Lord then wished to release him from his bonds, and clothing Himself
with flesh—O divine mystery!—vanquished the serpent, and enslaved the
tyrant death; and, most marvellous of all, man that had been deceived by
pleasure, and bound fast by corruption, had his hands unloosed, and was
set free. O mystic wonder! The Lord was laid low, and man rose up; and
he that fell from Paradise receives as the reward of obedience something
greater \[than Paradise\]—namely, heaven itself. Wherefore, since the
Word Himself has come to us from heaven, we need not, I reckon, go any
more in search of human learning to Athens and the rest of Greece, and
to Ionia. For if we have as our teacher Him that filled the universe
with His holy energies in creation, salvation, beneficence, legislation,
prophecy, teaching, we have the Teacher from whom all instruction comes;
and the whole world, with Athens and Greece, has already become the
domain of the Word. <span id="fr_1008"></span>[1009](#fn_1008) For you,
who believed the poetical fable which designated Minos the Cretan as the
bosom friend of Zeus, will not refuse to believe that we who have become
the disciples of God have received the only true wisdom; and that which
the chiefs of philosophy only guessed at, the disciples of Christ have
both apprehended and proclaimed. And the one whole Christ is not
divided: “There is neither barbarian, nor Jew, nor Greek, neither male
nor female, but a new man,” <span id="fr_1009"></span>[1010](#fn_1009)
transformed by God’s Holy Spirit. Further, the other counsels and
precepts are unimportant, and respect particular things,—as, for
example, if one may marry, take part in public affairs, beget children;
but the only command that is universal, and over the whole course of
existence, at all times and in all circumstances, tends to the highest
end, viz., life, is piety, <span id="fr_1010"></span>[1011](#fn_1010)
—all that is necessary, in order that we may live for ever, being that
we live in accordance with it. Philosophy, however, as the ancients say,
is “a long-lived exhortation, wooing the eternal love of wisdom;” while
the commandment of the Lord is far-shining, “enlightening the eyes.”
Receive Christ, receive sight, receive thy light,

> <span id="vi.ii.xi-p4.3"></span> “In order that you may know well both
> God and man.” <span id="fr_1011"></span>[1012](#fn_1011)  

<span id="vi.ii.xi-p6"></span>“Sweet is the Word that gives us light,
precious above gold and gems; it is to be desired above honey and the
honey-comb.” <span id="fr_1012"></span>[1013](#fn_1012) For how can it
be other than desirable, since it has filled with light the mind which
had been buried in darkness, and given keenness to the “light-bringing
eyes” of the soul? For just as, had the sun not been in existence, night
would have brooded over the universe notwithstanding the other
luminaries of heaven; so, had we nor known the Word, and been
illuminated by Him; we should have been nowise different from fowls that
are being fed, fattened in darkness, and nourished for death. Let us
then admit the light, that we may admit God; let us admit the light, and
become disciples to the Lord. This, too, He has been promised to the
Father: “I will declare Thy name to my brethren; in the midst of the
Church will I praise Thee.” <span id="fr_1013"></span>[1014](#fn_1013)
Praise and declare to me Thy Father God; Thy utterances save; Thy hymn
teaches <span id="fr_1014"></span>[1015](#fn_1014) that hitherto I have
wandered in error, seeking God. But since Thou leadest me to the light,
O Lord, and I find God through Thee, and receive the Father from Thee, I
become “Thy fellow-heir,” <span id="fr_1015"></span>[1016](#fn_1015)
since Thou “wert not ashamed of me as Thy brother.” <span
id="fr_1016"></span>[1017](#fn_1016) Let us put away, then, let us put
away oblivion of the truth, viz., ignorance; and removing the darkness
which obstructs, as dimness of sight, let us contemplate the only true
God, first raising our voice in this hymn of praise: <span
id="fr_1017"></span>[1018](#fn_1017) Hail, O light! For in us, buried in
darkness, shut up in the shadow of death, light has shone forth from
heaven, purer than the sun, sweeter than life here below. That light is
eternal life; and whatever partakes of it lives. But night fears the
light, and hiding itself in terror, gives place to the day of the Lord.
Sleepless light is now over all, and the west has given credence to the
east. For this was the end of the new creation. For “the Sun of
Righteousness,” who drives His chariot over all, pervades equally all
humanity, like “His Father, who makes His sun to rise on all men,” and
distils on them the dew of the truth. He hath changed sunset into
sunrise, and through the cross brought death to life; and having
wrenched man from destruction, He hath raised him to the skies,
transplanting mortality into immortality, and translating earth to
heaven—He, the husbandman of God,

> <span id="vi.ii.xi-p12.1"></span> “Pointing out the favourable signs
> and rousing the nations  
> To good works, putting them in mind of the true sustenance;” <span
> id="fr_1018"></span>[1019](#fn_1018)  

<span id="vi.ii.xi-p14"></span>having bestowed on us the truly great,
divine, and inalienable inheritance of the Father, deifying man by
heavenly teaching, putting His laws <span id="page_204">p. 204</span>
<span id="vi.ii.xi-Page_204"></span>into our minds, and writing them on
our hearts. What laws does He inscribe? “That all shall know God, from
small to great;” and, “I will be merciful to them,” says God, “and will
not remember their sins.” <span id="fr_1019"></span>[1020](#fn_1019) Let
us receive the laws of life, let us comply with God’s expostulations;
let us become acquainted with Him, that He may be gracious. And though
God needs nothing let us render to Him the grateful recompense of a
thankful heart and of piety, as a kind of house-rent for our dwelling
here below.

> <span id="vi.ii.xi-p15.3"></span> “Gold for brass,  
> A hundred oxen’s worth for that of nine;” <span
> id="fr_1020"></span>[1021](#fn_1020)  

<span id="vi.ii.xi-p17"></span>that is, for your little faith He gives
you the earth of so great extent to till, water to drink and also to
sail on, air to breathe, fire to do your work, a world to dwell in; and
He has permitted you to conduct a colony from here to heaven: with these
important works of His hand, and benefits in such numbers, He has
rewarded your little faith. Then, those who have put faith in
necromancers, receive from them amulets and charms, to ward off evil
forsooth; and will you not allow the heavenly Word, the Saviour, to be
bound on to you as an amulet, and, by trusting in God’s own charm, be
delivered from passions which are the diseases of the mind, and rescued
from sin?—for sin is eternal death. Surely utterly dull and blind, and,
like moles, doing nothing but eat, you spend your lives in darkness,
surrounded with corruption. But it is truth which cries, “The light
shall shine forth from the darkness.” Let the light then shine in the
hidden part of man, that is, the heart; and let the beams of knowledge
arise to reveal and irradiate the hidden inner man, the disciple of the
Light, the familiar friend and fellow-heir of Christ; especially now
that we have come to know the most precious and venerable name of the
good Father, who to a pious and good child gives gentle counsels, and
commands what is salutary for His child. He who obeys Him has the
advantage in all things, follows God, obeys the Father, knows Him
through wandering, loves God, loves his neighbour, fulfils the
commandment, seeks the prize, claims the promise. But it has been God’s
fixed and constant purpose to save the flock of men: for this end the
good God sent the good Shepherd. And the Word, having unfolded the
truth, showed to men the height of salvation, that either repenting they
might be saved, or refusing to obey, they might be judged. This is the
proclamation of righteousness: to those that obey, glad tidings; to
those that disobey, judgment. The loud trumpet, when sounded, collects
the soldiers, and proclaims war. And shall not Christ, breathing a
strain of peace to the ends of the earth, gather together His own
soldiers, the soldiers of peace? Well, by His blood, and by the word, He
has gathered the bloodless host of peace, and assigned to them the
kingdom of heaven. The trumpet of Christ is His Gospel. He hath blown
it, and we have heard. “Let us array ourselves in the armour of peace,
putting on the breastplate of righteousness, and taking the shield of
faith, and binding our brows with the helmet of salvation; and the sword
of the Spirit, which is the word of God,” <span
id="fr_1021"></span>[1022](#fn_1021) let us sharpen. So the apostle in
the spirit of peace commands. These are our invulnerable weapons: armed
with these, let us face the evil one; “the fiery darts of the evil one”
let us quench with the sword-points dipped in water, that, have been
baptized by the Word, returning grateful thanks for the benefits we have
received, and honouring God through the Divine Word. “For while thou art
yet speaking,” it is said, “He will say, Behold, I am beside
thee.” <span id="fr_1022"></span>[1023](#fn_1022) O this holy and
blessed power, by which God has fellowship with men! Better far, then,
is it to become at once the imitator and the servant of the best of all
beings; for only by holy service will any one be able to imitate God,
and to serve and worship Him only by imitating Him. The heavenly and
truly divine love comes to men thus, when in the soul itself the spark
of true goodness, kindled in the soul by the Divine Word, is able to
burst forth into flame; and, what is of the highest importance,
salvation runs parallel with sincere willingness—choice and life being,
so to speak, yoked together. Wherefore this exhortation of the truth
alone, like the most faithful of our friends, abides with us till our
last breath, and is to the whole and perfect spirit of the soul the kind
attendant on our ascent to heaven. What, then, is the exhortation I give
you? I urge you to be saved. This Christ desires. In one word, He freely
bestows life on you. And who is He? Briefly learn. The Word of truth,
the Word of incorruption, that regenerates man by bringing him back to
the truth—the goad that urges to salvation—He who expels destruction and
pursues death—He who builds up the temple of God in men, that He may
cause God to take up His abode in men. Cleanse the temple; and pleasures
and amusements abandon to the winds and the fire, as a fading flower;
but wisely cultivate the fruits of self-command, and present thyself to
God as an offering of first-fruits, that there may be not the work
alone, but also the grace of God; and both are requisite, that the
friend of Christ may be rendered worthy of the kingdom, and be counted
worthy of the kingdom.

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span> <span id="vi.ii.xi-Page_205"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1008"></span>[203:1009](0020247.htm#fr_1008) <span
id="vi.ii.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.xi-p2"></span> \[The Catholic instinct is here; and an
all-embracing benevolence is its characteristic, not worldly empire.\]

<span id="fn_1009"></span>[203:1010](0020247.htm#fr_1009) <span
id="vi.ii.xi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.xi-p3"></span> [Gal. iii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#028)<span id="vi.ii.xi-p3.1"></span>,
vi. 15.

<span id="fn_1010"></span>[203:1011](0020247.htm#fr_1010) <span
id="vi.ii.xi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.xi-p4"></span> \[He seems to be thinking of [1 Tim. vi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#006)<span id="vi.ii.xi-p4.1"></span>, and
[1 Tim. iv. 8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#008)<span
id="vi.ii.xi-p4.2"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_1011"></span>[203:1012](0020247.htm#fr_1011) <span
id="vi.ii.xi-p4.5"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.xi-p5"></span> *Iliad*, v. 128.

<span id="fn_1012"></span>[203:1013](0020247.htm#fr_1012) <span
id="vi.ii.xi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.xi-p7"></span> [Ps. xix.
10](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#010)<span id="vi.ii.xi-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1013"></span>[203:1014](0020247.htm#fr_1013) <span
id="vi.ii.xi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.xi-p8"></span> [Ps. xxii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#022)<span id="vi.ii.xi-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1014"></span>[203:1015](0020247.htm#fr_1014) <span
id="vi.ii.xi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.xi-p9"></span> \[[Eph. v.
14](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#014)<span id="vi.ii.xi-p9.1"></span>, is
probably from a hymn of the Church, which is here referred to as His, as
it is adopted into Scripture.\]

<span id="fn_1015"></span>[203:1016](0020247.htm#fr_1015) <span
id="vi.ii.xi-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.xi-p10"></span> [Rom. viii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#017)<span id="vi.ii.xi-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1016"></span>[203:1017](0020247.htm#fr_1016) <span
id="vi.ii.xi-p10.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.xi-p11"></span> [Heb. ii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#011)<span id="vi.ii.xi-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1017"></span>[203:1018](0020247.htm#fr_1017) <span
id="vi.ii.xi-p11.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.xi-p12"></span> \[A quotation from another hymn, in all
probability.\]

<span id="fn_1018"></span>[203:1019](0020247.htm#fr_1018) <span
id="vi.ii.xi-p12.4"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.xi-p13"></span> Aratus.

<span id="fn_1019"></span>[204:1020](0020247.htm#fr_1019) <span
id="vi.ii.xi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.xi-p15"></span> [Heb. viii.
10-12](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#010)<span
id="vi.ii.xi-p15.1"></span>; [Jer.
31:33](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#033),
[34](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#034)<span id="vi.ii.xi-p15.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_1020"></span>[204:1021](0020247.htm#fr_1020) <span
id="vi.ii.xi-p15.6"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.xi-p16"></span> *Il*., vi. 236. \[The exchange of
Glaucus.\]

<span id="fn_1021"></span>[204:1022](0020247.htm#fr_1021) <span
id="vi.ii.xi-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.xi-p18"></span> [Eph. vi.
14-17](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#014)<span
id="vi.ii.xi-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1022"></span>[204:1023](0020247.htm#fr_1022) <span
id="vi.ii.xi-p18.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.xi-p19"></span> [Isa. lviii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#009)<span id="vi.ii.xi-p19.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII.—Exhortation to Abandon Their Old Errors and Listen
to the Instructions of Christ.](0020248)
