[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020074)  [Next](0020076.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.xxxix"></span>

##### <span id="iii.ii.xxxix-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXXIX.—Catalogue of the Argive Kings.

<span id="iii.ii.xxxix-p1"></span>The kings of the Argives were these:
Inachus, Phoroneus, Apis, Criasis, Triopas, Argeius, Phorbas, Crotopas,
Sthenelaus, Danaus, Lynceus, Prœtus, Abas, Acrisius, Perseus,
Sthenelaus, Eurystheus, Atreus, Thyestes, and Agamemnon, in the
eighteenth year of whose reign Troy was taken. And every intelligent
person will most carefully observe that, according to the tradition of
the Greeks, they possessed no historical composition; for Cadmus, who
taught them letters, came into Bœotia many generations later. But after
Inachus, under Phoroneus, a check was with difficulty given to their
savage and nomadic life, and they entered upon a new order of things.
Wherefore, if Moses is shown to be contemporary with Inachus, he is four
hundred years older than the Trojan war. But this is demonstrated from
the succession of the Attic, \[and of the <span id="page_81">p.
81</span> <span id="iii.ii.xxxix-Page_81"></span>Macedonian, the
Ptolemaic, and the Antiochian\] <span id="fr_511"></span>[512](#fn_511.md)
kings. Hence, if the most illustrious deeds among the Greeks were
recorded and made known after Inachus, it is manifest that this must
have been after Moses. In the time of Phoroneus, who was after Inachus,
Ogygus is mentioned among the Athenians, in whose time was the first
deluge; and in the time of Phorbas was Actæus, from whom Attica was
called Actæa; and in the time of Triopas were Prometheus, and
Epimetheus, and Atlas, and Cecrops of double nature, and Io; in the time
of Crotopas was the burning of Phaëthon and the flood of Deucalion; in
the time of Sthenelus was the reign of Amphictyon and the coming of
Danaus into Peloponnesus, and the founding of Dardania by Dardanus, and
the return of Europa from Phœnicia to Crete; in the time of Lynceus was
the abduction of Koré, and the founding of the temple in Eleusis, and
the husbandry of Triptolemus, and the coming of Cadmus to Thebes, and
the reign of Minos; in the time of Prœtus was the war of Eumolpus
against the Athenians; in the time of Acrisius was the coming over of
Pelops from Phrygia, and the coming of Ion to Athens, and the second
Cecrops, and the deeds of Perseus and Dionysus, and Musæus, the disciple
of Orpheus; and in the reign of Agamemnon Troy was taken.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_511"></span>[81:512](0020075.htm#fr_511.md) <span
id="iii.ii.xxxix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xxxix-p2"></span> The words within brackets, though
they occur in the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.ii.xxxix-p2.1"></span>mss.</span> and in Eusebius, are supposed
by some scholars to be a very old interpolation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XL. Moses More Ancient and Credible Than the Heathen
Heroes.](0020076.md)
