[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020397)  [Next](0020399.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.vi.viii"></span>

##### <span id="vi.iv.vi.viii-p0.1"></span>Chapter VIII.—Philosophy is Knowledge Given by God.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.viii-p1"></span>For Paul too, in the Epistles,
plainly does not disparage philosophy; but deems it unworthy of the man
who has attained to the elevation of the Gnostic, any more to go back to
the Hellenic “philosophy,” figuratively calling it “the rudiments of
this world,” <span id="fr_3304"></span>[3305](#fn_3304.md) as being most
rudimentary, and a preparatory training for the truth. Wherefore also,
writing to the Hebrews, who were declining again from faith to the law,
he says, “Have ye not need again of one to teach you which are the first
principles of the oracles of God, and are become such as have need of
milk, and not of strong meat?” <span
id="fr_3305"></span>[3306](#fn_3305.md) So also to the Colossians, who were
Greek converts, “Beware lest any man spoil you by philosophy and vain
deceit, after the tradition of men, after the rudiments of this world,
and not after Christ,” <span id="fr_3306"></span>[3307](#fn_3306.md)
—enticing them again to return to philosophy, the elementary doctrine.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.viii-p5"></span>And should one say that it was
through human understanding that philosophy was discovered by the
Greeks, still I find the Scriptures saying that understanding is sent by
God. The psalmist, accordingly, considers understanding as the greatest
free gift, and beseeches, saying, “I am Thy servant; give me
understanding.” <span id="fr_3307"></span>[3308](#fn_3307.md) And does not
David, while asking the abundant experience of knowledge, write, “Teach
me gentleness, and discipline, and knowledge: for I have believed in Thy
commandments?” <span id="fr_3308"></span>[3309](#fn_3308.md) He confessed
the covenants to be of the highest authority, and that they were given
to the more excellent. Accordingly the psalm again says of God, “He hath
not done thus to any nation; and He hath not shown His judgments to
them.” <span id="fr_3309"></span>[3310](#fn_3309.md) The expression “He
hath not done so” shows that *He hath done*, but not “thus.” The “thus,”
then, is put comparatively, with reference to pre-eminence, which
obtains in our case. The prophet might have said simply, “He hath not
done,” without the “thus.”

<span id="vi.iv.vi.viii-p9"></span>Further, Peter in the Acts says, “Of
a truth, I perceive that God is no respecter of persons; but in every
nation he that feareth Him, and worketh righteousness, is accepted by
Him.” <span id="fr_3310"></span>[3311](#fn_3310.md)

<span id="page_495">p. 495</span> <span
id="vi.iv.vi.viii-Page_495"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.viii-p11"></span>The absence of respect of persons in
God is not then in time, but from eternity. Nor had His beneficence a
beginning; nor any more is it limited to places or persons. For His
beneficence is not confined to parts. “Open ye the gates of
righteousness,” it is said; “entering into them, I will confess to the
<span class="sc"><span id="vi.iv.vi.viii-p11.1"></span>Lord</span>. This
is the gate of the <span class="sc"><span
id="vi.iv.vi.viii-p11.2"></span>Lord</span>. The righteous shall enter
by it.” <span id="fr_3311"></span>[3312](#fn_3311.md) Explaining the
prophet’s saying, Barnabas adds, “There being many gates open, that
which is in righteousness is the gate which is in Christ, by which all
who enter are blessed.” Bordering on the same meaning is also the
following prophetic utterance: “The <span class="sc"><span
id="vi.iv.vi.viii-p12.2"></span>Lord</span> is on many waters;” <span
id="fr_3312"></span>[3313](#fn_3312.md) not the different covenants alone,
but the modes of teaching, those among the Greek and those among the
Barbarians, conducing to righteousness. And already clearly David,
bearing testimony to the truth, sings, “Let sinners be turned into
Hades, and all the nations that forget God.” <span
id="fr_3313"></span>[3314](#fn_3313.md) They forget, plainly, Him whom they
formerly remembered, and dismiss Him whom they knew previous to
forgetting Him. There was then a dim knowledge of God also among the
nations. So much for those points.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.viii-p15"></span>Now the Gnostic must be erudite. And
since the Greeks say that Protagoras having led the way, the opposing of
one argument by another was invented, it is fitting that something be
said with reference to arguments of this sort. For Scripture says, “He
that says much, shall also hear in his turn.” <span
id="fr_3314"></span>[3315](#fn_3314.md) And who shall understand a parable
of the Lord, but the wise, the intelligent, and he that loves his Lord?
Let such a man be faithful; let him be capable of uttering his
knowledge; let him be wise in the discrimination of words; let him be
dexterous in action; let him be pure. “The greater he seems to be, the
more humble should he be,” says Clement in the Epistle to the
Corinthians,—“such an one as is capable of complying with the precept,
‘And some pluck from the fire, and on others have compassion, making a
difference,’” <span id="fr_3315"></span>[3316](#fn_3315.md)

<span id="vi.iv.vi.viii-p18"></span>The pruning-hook is made, certainly,
principally for pruning; but with it we separate twigs that have got
intertwined, cut the thorns which grow along with the vines, which it is
not very easy to reach. And all these things have a reference to
pruning. Again, man is made principally for the knowledge of God; but he
also measures land, practices agriculture, and philosophizes; of which
pursuits, one conduces to life, another to living well, a third to the
study of the things which are capable of demonstration. Further, let
those who say that philosophy took its rise from the devil know this,
that the Scripture says that “the devil is transformed into an angel of
light.” <span id="fr_3316"></span>[3317](#fn_3316.md) When about to do
what? Plainly, when about to prophesy. But if he prophesies as an angel
of light, he will speak what is true. And if he prophesies what is
angelical, and of the light, then he prophesies what is beneficial when
he is transformed according to the likeness of the operation, though he
be different with respect to the matter of apostasy. For how could he
deceive any one, without drawing the lover of knowledge into fellowship,
and so drawing him afterwards into falsehood? Especially he will be
found to know the truth, if not so as to comprehend it, yet so as not to
be unacquainted with it.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.viii-p20"></span>Philosophy is not then false, though
the thief and the liar speak truth, through a transformation of
operation. Nor is sentence of condemnation to be pronounced ignorantly
against what is said, on account of him who says it (which also is to be
kept in view, in the case of those who are now alleged to prophesy); but
what is said must be looked at, to see if it keep by the truth.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.viii-p21"></span>And in general terms, we shall not
err in alleging that all things necessary and profitable for life came
to us from God, and that philosophy more especially was given to the
Greeks, as a covenant peculiar to them—being, as it is, a stepping-stone
to the philosophy which is according to Christ—although those who
applied themselves to the philosophy of the Greeks shut their ears
voluntarily to the truth, despising the voice of Barbarians, or also
dreading the danger suspended over the believer, by the laws of the
state.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.viii-p22"></span>And as in the Barbarian philosophy,
so also in the Hellenic, “tares were sown” by the proper husbandman of
the tares; whence also heresies grew up among us along with the
productive wheat; and those who in the Hellenic philosophy preach the
impiety and voluptuousness of Epicurus, and whatever other tenets are
disseminated contrary to right reason, exist among the Greeks as
spurious fruits of the divinely bestowed husbandry. This voluptuous and
selfish philosophy the apostle calls “the wisdom of this world;” in
consequence of its teaching the things of this world and about it alone,
and its consequent subjection, as far as respects ascendancy, to those
who rule here. Wherefore also this fragmentary philosophy is very
elementary, while truly perfect science deals with intellectual objects,
which are beyond the sphere of the world, and with the objects still
more spiritual than those which “eye saw not, and ear heard not, nor did
it enter into the heart of men,” till the Teacher told the account of
them to us; <span id="page_496">p. 496</span> <span
id="vi.iv.vi.viii-Page_496"></span>unveiling the holy of holies; and in
ascending order, things still holier than these, to those who are truly
and not spuriously heirs of the Lord’s adoption. For we now dare aver
(for here is the faith that is characterized by knowledge <span
id="fr_3317"></span>[3318](#fn_3317) .md) that such an one knows all
things, and comprehends all things in the exercise of sure apprehension,
respecting matters difficult for us, and really pertaining to the true
gnosis <span id="fr_3318"></span>[3319](#fn_3318.md) such as were James,
Peter, John, Paul, and the rest of the apostles. For prophecy is full of
knowledge (*gnosis*), inasmuch as it was given by the Lord, and again
explained by the Lord to the apostles. And is not knowledge (*gnosis*)
an attribute of the rational soul, which trains itself for this, that by
knowledge it may become entitled to immortality? For both are powers of
the soul, both knowledge and impulse. And impulse is found to be a
movement after an assent. For he who has an impulse towards an action,
first receives the knowledge of the action, and secondly the impulse.
Let us further devote our attention to this. For since learning is older
than action; (for naturally, he who does what he wishes to do learns it
first; and knowledge comes from learning, and impulse follows knowledge;
after which comes action;) knowledge turns out the beginning and author
of all rational action. So that rightly the peculiar nature of the
rational soul is characterized by this alone; for in reality impulse,
like knowledge, is excited by existing objects. And knowledge (*gnosis*)
is essentially a contemplation of existences on the part of the soul,
either of a certain thing or of certain things, and when perfected, of
all together. Although some say that the wise man is persuaded that
there are some things incomprehensible, in such wise as to have
respecting them a kind of comprehension, inasmuch as he comprehends that
things incomprehensible are incomprehensible; which is common, and
pertains to those who are capable of perceiving little. For such a man
affirms that there are some things incomprehensible.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.viii-p25"></span>But that Gnostic of whom I speak,
himself comprehends what seems to be incomprehensible to others;
believing that nothing is incomprehensible to the Son of God, whence
nothing incapable of being taught. For He who suffered out of His love
for us, would have suppressed no element of knowledge requisite for our
instruction. Accordingly this faith becomes sure demonstration; since
truth follows what has been delivered by God. But if one desires
extensive knowledge, “he knows things ancient, and conjectures things
future; he understands knotty sayings, and the solutions of enigmas. The
disciple of wisdom foreknows signs and omens, and the issues of seasons
and of times.” <span id="fr_3319"></span>[3320](#fn_3319.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3304"></span>[494:3305](0020398.htm#fr_3304.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.viii-p2"></span> [Col. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#008.md)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.viii-p2.1"></span>. \[This is an interesting comment on the
apostles’ system, and very noteworthy.\]

<span id="fn_3305"></span>[494:3306](0020398.htm#fr_3305.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.viii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.viii-p3"></span> [Heb. v.
12](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#012.md)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.viii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3306"></span>[494:3307](0020398.htm#fr_3306.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.viii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.viii-p4"></span> [Col. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#008.md)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.viii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3307"></span>[494:3308](0020398.htm#fr_3307.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.viii-p6"></span> [Ps. cxix.
125](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#125.md)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.viii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3308"></span>[494:3309](0020398.htm#fr_3308.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.viii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.viii-p7"></span> [Ps. cxix.
66](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#066.md)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.viii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3309"></span>[494:3310](0020398.htm#fr_3309.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.viii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.viii-p8"></span> [Ps. cxlvii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#020.md)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.viii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3310"></span>[494:3311](0020398.htm#fr_3310.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.viii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.viii-p10"></span> [Acts
10:34](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#034.md),
[35](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#035.md)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.viii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3311"></span>[495:3312](0020398.htm#fr_3311.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.viii-p11.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.viii-p12"></span> [Ps.
18:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#019.md),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#020.md)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.viii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3312"></span>[495:3313](0020398.htm#fr_3312.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.viii-p12.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.viii-p13"></span> [Ps. xxix.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#003.md)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.viii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3313"></span>[495:3314](0020398.htm#fr_3313.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.viii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.viii-p14"></span> [Ps. ix.
17](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#017.md)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.viii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3314"></span>[495:3315](0020398.htm#fr_3314.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.viii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.viii-p16"></span> [Job xi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#002.md)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.viii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3315"></span>[495:3316](0020398.htm#fr_3315.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.viii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.viii-p17"></span> [Jude
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#022.md),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#023.md)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.viii-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3316"></span>[495:3317](0020398.htm#fr_3316.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.viii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.viii-p19"></span> [2 Cor. xi.
14](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#014.md)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.viii-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3317"></span>[496:3318](0020398.htm#fr_3317.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.viii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.viii-p23"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vi.viii-p23.1"></span>γνωστική.</span>

<span id="fn_3318"></span>[496:3319](0020398.htm#fr_3318.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.viii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.viii-p24"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vi.viii-p24.1"></span>γνωστικῶν</span>, for which Hervetus,
reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vi.viii-p24.2"></span>γνωστικόν</span>, has translated, “qui
vere est cognitione præditus.” This is suitable and easier, but
doubtful.

<span id="fn_3319"></span>[496:3320](0020398.htm#fr_3319.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.viii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.viii-p26"></span> [Wis.
7:17](../../../bib/apo/wis007.htm#017.md),
[18](../../../bib/apo/wis007.htm#018.md)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.viii-p26.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX.—The Gnostic Free of All Perturbations of the
Soul.](0020399.md)
