[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020117)  [Next](0020119.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.ii.xx"></span>

##### <span id="iv.ii.ii.xx-p0.1"></span>Chapter XX.—The Scriptural Account of Paradise.

<span id="iv.ii.ii.xx-p1"></span>Scripture thus relates the words of the
sacred history: “And God planted Paradise, eastward, in Eden; and there
He put the man whom He had formed. And out of the ground made God to
grow every tree that is pleasant to the sight, and good for food; the
tree of life also in the midst of Paradise, and the tree of the
knowledge of good and evil. And a river flows out of Eden, to water the
garden; thence it is parted into four heads. The name of the first is
Pison: that is it which compasseth the whole land of Havilah, where
there is gold; and the gold of that land is good, and there is bdellium
and the onyx stone. And the name of the second river is Gihon: the same
is it that compasseth the whole land of Ethiopia. And the third river is
Tigris: this is it which goeth toward Syria. And the fourth river is
Euphrates. And the <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.ii.ii.xx-p1.1"></span>Lord</span> God took the man whom He had
made, and put him in the garden, to till and to keep it. And God
commanded Adam, saying, Of every tree that is in the garden thou mayest
freely eat; but of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, ye shall
not eat of it; for in the day ye eat of it ye shall surely die. And the
<span class="sc"><span id="iv.ii.ii.xx-p1.2"></span>Lord</span> God
said, It is not good that the man should be alone; let Us make him an
helpmeet for him. And out of the ground God formed all the beasts of the
field, and all the fowls of heaven, and brought them to Adam. And
whatsoever Adam called every living creature, that was the name thereof.
And Adam gave names to all cattle, and to the fowls of the air, and to
all the beasts of the field. But for Adam there was not found an
helpmeet for him. And God caused an ecstasy to fall upon Adam, and he
slept; and He took one of his ribs, and closed up the flesh instead
thereof. And the rib, which the <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.ii.ii.xx-p1.3"></span>Lord</span> God had taken from man, made He
a woman, and brought her unto Adam. And Adam said, This is now bone of
my bones, and flesh of my flesh; she shall be called Woman, because she
was taken out of man. Therefore shall a man leave his father and his
mother, and shall cleave unto his wife, and they two shall be one flesh.
And they were both naked, Adam and his wife, and were not ashamed.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXI.—Of the Fall of Man.](0020119.md)
