[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020001)  [Next](0020003.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.i"></span> <span id="page_3">p. 3</span> <span
id="ii.i-Page_3"></span>

### <span id="ii.i-p0.1"></span>Introductory Note

##### <span id="ii.i-p0.2"></span>to

## <span id="ii.i-p0.3"></span>The Pastor of Hermas

<span id="ii.i-p1"></span>\[Translated by the Rev. F. Crombie, M.a.\]

<span id="ii.i-p2"></span>\[<span class="sc"><span
id="ii.i-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 160.\] <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.i-p2.2"></span>The</span> fragment known as the “Muratorian
Canon” is the historic ground for the date I give to this author. <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md) I desired to prefix *The Shepherd* to the
writings of Irenæus, but the limits of the volume would not permit. *The
Shepherd* attracted my attention, even in early youth, as a specimen of
primitive romance; but of course it disappointed me, and excited
repugnance. As to its form, it is even now distasteful. But more and
more, as I have studied it, and cleared up the difficulties which
surround it, and the questions it has started, it has become to me a
most interesting and suggestive relic of the primitive age. Dr.
Bunsen <span id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1.md) calls it “a good but dull
novel,” and reminds us of a saying of Niebuhr (Bunsen’s master), that
“he pitied the Athenian <span id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2.md) Christians for
being obliged to hear it read in their assemblies.” A very natural, but
a truly superficial, thought, as I trust I shall be able to show.

<span id="ii.i-p6"></span>At first sight, Hermas might seem to have
little in common with Irenæus; and, on many accounts, it would be
preferable to pair him with Barnabas. But I feel sure that chronology
forbids, and that the age of Irenæus, and of the martyrs of Lyons and
Vienne, is the period which called for this work, and which accounts for
its popularity and its diffusion among the churches. Its pacific spirit
in dealing with a rising heresy, which at first was a puzzle to the
Latins, <span id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3.md) which Pius was disposed to
meet by this gentle antidote, with which Eleutherus, in the spirit of a
pacificator, tampered to his own hurt, and by which Victor was
temporarily compromised, met precisely what the case seemed to demand in
the judgment of Western Christians. They could not foresee the results
of Montanism: it was not yet a defined heresy. And even the wise
prudence of Irenæus shows anxiety not too hastily to denounce it;
“seeing,” as Eusebius affirms, “there were many other wonderful powers
of divine grace yet exhibited, *even at that time*, in different
churches.”

<span id="ii.i-p8"></span>Bunsen pronounces magisterially on the
Muratorian fragment as an ill-translated excerpt from Hegesippus,
written about <span class="sc"><span id="ii.i-p8.1"></span>a.d.</span>
165. This date may be inaccurate, but the evidence is that of a
contemporary on which we may rely. “Very recently,” he says, “*in our
own times*, in the city of Rome, Hermas compiled *The Shepherd;* his
brother, Bishop Pius, <span id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4.md) then sitting in
the *cathedra* <span id="page_4">p. 4</span> <span
id="ii.i-Page_4"></span>of the Roman Church.” With the period thus
assigned, the internal evidence agrees. It accounts for the
anti-Montanism of the whole allegory, and not less for the choice of
this non-controversial form of antidote. Montanism is not named; but it
is opposed by a reminder of better “prophesyings,” and by setting the
pure spirit of the apostolic age over against the frenzied and
pharisaical pretensions of the fanatics. The pacific policy at first
adopted by the Roman bishops, dictated, no doubt, this effort of Hermas
to produce such a refutation as his brother <span
id="fr_5"></span>[6](#fn_5.md) might commend to the churches.

<span id="ii.i-p11"></span>Let me present, in outline, the views which
seem to me necessary to a good understanding of the work; and as I am so
unfortunate as to differ with the Edinburgh editors, who are entitled,
*primâ facie*, to be supposed correct, I shall venture to apologize for
my own conceptions, by a few notes and elucidations. <span
id="fr_6"></span>[7](#fn_6.md)

<span id="ii.i-p13"></span>As Eusebius informs us, the *charismata* were
not extinct in the churches when the Phrygian imitations began to puzzle
the faithful. Bunsen considers its first propagators specimens of the
*clairvoyant* art, and pointedly cites the manipulations they were said
to practice (like persons playing on the harp), in proof of this. We
must place ourselves in those times to comprehend the difficulties of
early Christians in dealing with the counterfeit. “Try the spirits,”
said St. John; and St. Paul had said more expressly, “Quench not the
Spirit; *despise not* prophesyings; *prove* all things,” etc. This very
expression suggests that there might often be something *despicable* in
the form and manner of uttering what was excellent. To borrow a phrase
of our days, “the human element” was painfully predominant at times,
even among those who spoke by the Spirit. The smoke of personal
infirmity discoloured genuine scintillations from hearts in which still
smouldered the fire of Pentecostal gifts. The reticence of Irenæus is
therefore not to be marvelled at. He cautioned Eleutherus no doubt, but
probably felt, with him, that the rumours from Phrygia needed further
examination. The prophetic gifts were said to be lodged in men and women
austere as John the Baptist, and professing a mission to rebuke the
carnal and self-indulgent degeneracy of a generation that knew not the
apostles.

<span id="ii.i-p14"></span>It would not be a very bold conjecture, that
Hermas and his brother were elderly grandchildren of the original
Hermas, the friend of St. Paul. *The Shepherd*, then, might be based
upon personal recollections, and upon the traditions of a family which
the spirit of prophecy had reproved, and who were monuments of its
power. The book supplies us with evidences of the awakened conscience
with which Hermas strove to “bless his household.” But, be this as it
may, this second Hermas, with his brother’s approbation, undertakes to
revive the memory of those primal days portrayed in the Epistle to
Diognetus, when Christians, though *sorrowful*, were “always rejoicing.”
He compiles accordingly a non-metrical idyl; reproducing, no doubt,
traditional specimens of those “prophesyings,” on which St. Paul
remarks. Hence we infer, that such outpourings as became the subject of
apostolic censure, when they confused the order of the Corinthian
Church, <span id="fr_7"></span>[8](#fn_7.md) were, in their nobler
examples, such “visions,” “mandates” and “similitudes” as these; more or
less human as to form, but, in their moral teachings, an impressive
testimony against heathen oracles, and their obscene or blasphemous
suggestions.

<span id="ii.i-p16"></span>The permissive wisdom of the Spirit granting,
while restraining, such manifestations, is seen in thus counterbalancing
Sibylline and other ethnic utterances. ([Acts xvi.
16-19](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#016)<span id="ii.i-p16.1"></span>..md)
With this in view, Hermas makes his compilation. He casts it into an
innocent fiction, as Cowper wrote in the name of Alexander Selkirk, and
introduces Hermas and Clement to identify the times which are idealized
in his allegory. Very gently, but forcibly, therefore, he brings back
the original Christians <span id="page_5">p. 5</span> <span
id="ii.i-Page_5"></span>as antagonists of the Montanistic opinions; and
so exclusively does this idea predominate in the whole work, as
Tertullian’s scornful comment implies, that one wonders to find Wake,
with other very learned men, conceding that the Pauline Hermas was its
actual author. Were it so, he must have been a prophet indeed. No doubt
those of the ancients who knew nothing of the origin of the work, and
accepted it as the production of the first Hermas, were greatly
influenced by this idea. It seemed to them a true oracle from God, like
those of the Apocalypse, though sadly inferior; preparing the Church for
one of its great trials and perils, and fulfilling, as did the
Revelation of St. John, that emphatic promise concerning the Spirit, “He
shall show you things to come.”

<span id="ii.i-p17"></span>This view of the subject, moreover, explains
historical facts which have been so unaccountable to many critics; such
as the general credit it obtained, and that its influence was greater in
the East than among Latins. But once commended to the Asiatic churches
by Pius, as a useful instruction for the people, and a safeguard against
the Phrygian excesses, it would easily become current wherever the Greek
language prevailed. Very soon it would be popularly regarded as the work
of the Pauline Hermas, and as embodying genuine *prophesyings* of the
apostolic age. A qualified inspiration would thus be attributed to them,
precisely such as the guarded language of Origen <span
id="fr_8"></span>[9](#fn_8.md) suggested afterwards: hence the
deutero-canonical repute of the book, read, like the Apocrypha, for
instruction and edification, but not cited to establish any doctrine as
of the faith. <span id="fr_9"></span>[10](#fn_9.md) It must be remembered,
that, although the Roman Church was at first a Grecian colony, and
largely composed of those Hellenistic Jews to whom St. Paul’s arguments
in his Epistle to the Romans were personally appropriate, yet in the
West, generally, it was not so: hence the greater diffusion of *The
Shepherd* written in Greek, through the Greek churches. There, too, the
Montanists were a raging pestilence long before the West really felt the
contagion through the influence of the brilliant Tertullian. These facts
account for the history of the book, its early currency and credit in
the Church. Nor must we fail to observe, that the tedious allegorizing
of Hermas, though not acceptable to us, was by no means displeasing to
Orientals. To this day, the common people, even with us, seem to be
greatly taken with story-telling and “similitudes,” especially when
there is an interpreter to give them point and application.

<span id="ii.i-p20"></span>After reading Irenæus *Against Heresies*,
then, we may not inappropriately turn to this mild protest against the
most desolating and lasting delusion of primitive times. Most bitterly
this will be felt when we reach the great founder of “Latin
Christianity,” whose very ashes breathed contagion into the life of such
as handled his relics with affection, save only those, who, like
Cyprian, were gifted with a character as strong as his own. The genius
of Tertullian inspired his very insanity with power, and, to the
discipline of the Latin churches, he communicated something of the
rigour of Montanism, with the natural re-actionary relaxation of morals
in actual life. Of this, we shall learn enough when we come to read the
fascinating pages of that splendid but infatuated author. Montanism
itself, and the Encratite heresy which we are soon to consider in the
melancholy case of Tatian, were re-actions from those abominations of
the heathen with which Christians were daily forced to be conversant.
These Fathers erred through a temptation in which Satan was “transformed
as an angel of light.” Let us the more admire the penetrating foresight,
and the holy moderation, of Hermas. To our scornful age, indeed, glutted
with reading of every sort, and alike over-cultivated and superficial,
taking little time for thought, and almost as little for study, *The
Shepherd* can furnish nothing attractive. He who brings nothing to it,
gets nothing from it. But let the fastidious who desire at the same time
to be competent judges, put themselves into the times of the Antonines,
and make themselves, for the moment, Christians of that period, and they
will awaken to a new world of thought. Let such go into the assemblies
of the primitive faithful, in which it was evident that “not many wise
men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble, were called.”
There they were, “as sheep appointed to be slain,” <span id="page_6">p.
6</span> <span id="ii.i-Page_6"></span>“dying daily,” and, like their
blessed Master, “the scorn of men, and outcast of the people,” as they
gathered on the day of the Lord to “eat of that bread, and drink of that
cup.” After the manner of the synagogue, there came a moment when the
“president” said, “Brethren, if ye have any word of exhortation for the
people, say on.” But the tongues were ceasing, as the apostle foretold;
and they who professed to speak by the Spirit were beginning to be
doubted. “Your fathers, where are they? and the prophets, do they live
forever?” It was gratifying to the older men, and excited the curiosity
of the young, when the reader stood up, and said, “Hear, then, the words
of Hermas.” Blessed were the simple folk, those “lambs among wolves,”
who hungered and thirsted after righteousness, and who eagerly drank in
the pure and searching Scriptural morality of *The Shepherd*, and then
went forth to “shine as lights in the world,” in holy contrast with the
gross darkness that surrounded them.

<span id="ii.i-p21"></span>It has been objected, indeed, that the morals
of Hermas have a legalizing tone. The same is said of St. James, and the
Sermon on the Mount. Most unjustly and cruelly is this objection made to
*The Shepherd*. Granted its language is not formulated after Augustine,
as it could not be: its text is St. James, but, like St. James,
harmonized always with St. Paul. <span id="fr_10"></span>[11](#fn_10.md)
Faith is always honoured in its primary place; and penitence, in its
every evangelical aspect, is thoroughly defined. He exposes the
emptiness of formal works, such as mere physical fastings, and the
carnal observance of set times and days. That in one instance he favours
“works of supererogation” is an entire mistake, made by reading into the
words of Hermas a heresy of which he never dreamed. His whole teaching
conflicts with such a thought. His orthodoxy in other respects, is
sustained by such masters as Pearson and Bull. <span
id="fr_11"></span>[12](#fn_11.md) And then, the positive side of his
teaching is a precious testimony to the godly living exacted of
believers in the second century. How suitable to all times are the
maxims he extracts from the New Law. How searching his exposure of the
perils of lax family discipline, and of wealth unsanctified. What
heavenly precepts of life he lays down for all estates of men. To the
clergy, what rules he prescribes against ambition and detraction and
worldly-mindedness. Surely such reproofs glorify the epoch, when they
who had cast off, so recently, the lusts and passions of heathenism,
were, as the general acceptance of this book must lead us to suppose,
eager to be fed with “truth, severe in *rugged* fiction drest.”

<span id="ii.i-p24"></span>But the reader will now be eager to examine
the following <span class="sc"><span id="ii.i-p24.1"></span>Introductory
Notice</span> of the translator:—

<span id="ii.i-p25"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.i-p25.1"></span>The</span> Pastor of Hermas was one of the most
popular books, if not the most popular book, in the Christian Church
during the second, third, and fourth centuries. It occupied a position
analogous in some respects to that of Bunyan’s *Pilgrim’s Progress* in
modern times; and critics have frequently compared the two works.

<span id="ii.i-p26"></span>In ancient times two opinions prevailed in
regard to the authorship. The most widely spread was, that the Pastor of
Hermas was the production of the Hermas mentioned in the Epistle to the
Romans. Origen <span id="fr_12"></span>[13](#fn_12.md) states this opinion
distinctly, and it is repeated by Eusebius <span
id="fr_13"></span>[14](#fn_13.md) and Jerome. <span
id="fr_14"></span>[15](#fn_14.md)

<span id="ii.i-p30"></span>Those who believed the apostolic Hermas to be
the author, necessarily esteemed the book very highly; and there was
much discussion as to whether it was inspired or not. The early writers
are of opinion that it was really inspired. Irenæus quotes it as
Scripture; <span id="fr_15"></span>[16](#fn_15.md) Clemens Alexandrinus
speaks of it as making its statements “divinely;” <span
id="fr_16"></span>[17](#fn_16.md) and Origen, though a few of his
expressions are regarded by some as implying doubt, unquestionably gives
it as his opinion that it is “divinely inspired.” <span
id="fr_17"></span>[18](#fn_17.md) Eusebius mentions that difference of
opinion prevailed in his day as to the inspiration of the book, some
opposing its claims, and others maintaining its divine origin,
especially <span id="page_7">p. 7</span> <span
id="ii.i-Page_7"></span>because it formed an admirable introduction to
the Christian faith. For this latter reason it was read publicly, he
tells us, in the churches.

<span id="ii.i-p34"></span>The only voice of antiquity decidedly opposed
to the claim is that of Tertullian. He designates it apocryphal, <span
id="fr_18"></span>[19](#fn_18.md) and rejects it with scorn, as favouring
anti-Montanistic opinions. Even *his* words, however, show that it was
regarded in many churches as Scripture.

<span id="ii.i-p36"></span>The second opinion as to the authorship is
found in no writer of any name. It occurs only in two places: a poem
falsely ascribed to Tertullian, and a fragment published by Muratori, on
the Canon, the authorship of which is unknown, and the original language
of which is still a matter of dispute. <span
id="fr_19"></span>[20](#fn_19.md) The fragment says, “The Pastor was
written very lately in our times, in the city of Rome, by Hermas, while
Bishop Pius, his brother, sat in the chair of the Church of the city of
Rome.”

<span id="ii.i-p38"></span>A third opinion has had advocates in modern
times. The Pastor of Hermas is regarded as a fiction, and the person
Hermas, who is the principal character, is, according to this opinion,
merely the invention of the fiction-writer.

<span id="ii.i-p39"></span>Whatever opinion critics may have in regard
to the authorship, there can be but one opinion as to the date. The
Pastor of Hermas must have been written at an early period. The fact
that it was recognised by Irenæus as Scripture shows that it must have
been in circulation long before his time. The most probable date
assigned to its composition is the reign of Hadrian, or of Antoninus
Pius.

<span id="ii.i-p40"></span>The work is very important in many respects;
but especially as reflecting the tone and style of books which
interested and instructed the Christians of the second and third
centuries.

<span id="ii.i-p41"></span>The Pastor of Hermas was written in Greek. It
was well known in the Eastern Churches: it seems to have been but little
read in the Western. Yet the work bears traces of having been written in
Italy.

<span id="ii.i-p42"></span>For a long time the Pastor of Hermas was
known to scholars only in a Latin version, occurring in several <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.i-p42.1"></span>mss.</span> with but slight
vacations. But within recent times the difficulty of settling the text
has been increased by the discovery of various <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.i-p42.2"></span>mss.</span> A Latin translation has been edited,
widely differing from the common version. Then a Greek <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.i-p42.3"></span>ms.</span> was said to have been
found in Mount Athos, of which Simonides affirmed that he brought away a
portion of the original and a copy of the rest. Then a <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.i-p42.4"></span>ms.</span> of the Pastor of
Hermas was found at the end of the Sinaitic Codex of Tischendorf. And in
addition to all these, there is an Æthiopic translation. The discussion
of the value of these discoveries is one of the most difficult that can
fall to the lot of critics; for it involves not merely an examination of
peculiar forms of words and similar criteria, but an investigation into
statements made by Simonides and Tischendorf respecting events in their
own lives. But whatever may be the conclusions at which the critic
arrives, the general reader does not gain or lose much. In all the Greek
and Latin forms the Pastor of Hermas is substantially the same. There
are many minute differences; but there are scarcely any of
importance,—perhaps we should say none.

<span id="ii.i-p43"></span>In this translation the text of Hilgenfeld,
which is based on the Sinaitic Codex, has been followed.

<span id="ii.i-p44"></span>The letters *Vat*. mean the *Vatican*
manuscript, the one from which the common or Vulgate version was usually
printed.

<span id="ii.i-p45"></span>The letters *Pal*. mean the *Palatine*
manuscript edited by Dressel, which contains the Latin version,
differing considerably from the common version.

<span id="ii.i-p46"></span>The letters *Lips*. refer to the *Leipzig*
manuscript, partly original and partly copied, furnished by Simonides
from Athos. The text of Anger and Dindorf (Lips., 1856) has been used,
though reference has also been made to the text of Tischendorf in
Dressel.

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span> <span id="ii.i-Page_8"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p47"></span>The letters *Sin*. refer to the *Sinaitic*
Codex, as given in Dressel and in Hilgenfeld’s notes.

<span id="ii.i-p48"></span>The letters *Æth*. refer to the *Æthiopic*
version, edited, with a Latin translation, by Antonius D’Abbadie.
Leipzig, 1860.

<span id="ii.i-p49"></span>No attempt has been made to give even a tithe
of the various readings. Only the most important have been noted.

<span id="ii.i-p50"></span>\[It is but just to direct the reader’s
attention to an elaborate article of Dr. Donaldson, in the (London)
*Theological Review*, vol. xiv. p. 564; in which he very ingeniously
supports his opinions with regard to Hermas, and also touching the
Muratorian Canon. In one important particular he favours my own
impression; viz., that *The Shepherd* is a compilation, traditional, or
reproduced from memory. He supposes its sentiments “must have been
expressed in innumerable oral communications delivered in the churches
throughout the world.”\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[3:1](0020002.htm#fr_0.md) <span
id="ii.i-p2.3"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p3"></span> To be found, with copious annotations, in
Routh’s *Reliquiæ*, vol. i. pp. 389–434, Oxford, 1846. See also
Westcott, *On the Canon of the New Testament*, Cambridge, 1855.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[3:2](0020002.htm#fr_1.md) <span
id="ii.i-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p4"></span>*Hippolytus and His Age*, vol. i. p. 315.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[3:3](0020002.htm#fr_2.md) <span
id="ii.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p5"></span> Why “Athenian”? It was read everywhere. But
possibly this is a specification based on [Acts xvii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#021.md)<span id="ii.i-p5.1"></span>. They
may have welcomed it as *a novel* and a novelty.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[3:4](0020002.htm#fr_3.md) <span
id="ii.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p7"></span> More of this in Athenagoras; but see Kaye’s
*Justin Martyr*, p. 179, note 3, ed. 1853.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[3:5](0020002.htm#fr_4.md) <span
id="ii.i-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p9"></span> Roman fabulists know all about Pius, of
course, and give us this history: “He was a native of Aquileia, and was
elected bishop on the 15th of January, <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.i-p9.1"></span>a.d.</span> 158 … He governed the Church nine
years, five months, and twenty-seven days.” So affirms that favourite of
Popes, Artaud de Montor (*Histoire de Pie VIII*., p. xi. Paris, 1830).

<span id="fn_5"></span>[4:6](0020002.htm#fr_5.md) <span
id="ii.i-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p10"></span> The latest learned authority among Roman
Catholics, a Benedictine, gives us the dates <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.i-p10.1"></span>a.d.</span> 142–156, respectively, as those of
his election and decease. See *Series Episcoporum*, etc. P. B. Gams,
Ratisbonæ, 1873.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[4:7](0020002.htm#fr_6.md) <span
id="ii.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p12"></span> Relying upon the invaluable aid of Dr.
Routh, I had not thought of looking into Westcott, till I had worked out
my own conclusions. I am greatly strengthened by his elaborate and very
able argument. See his work on the *Canon*, pp. 213–235.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[4:8](0020002.htm#fr_7.md) <span
id="ii.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p15"></span> [1 Cor.
xiv.](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#000.md)<span id="ii.i-p15.1"></span> The
value of Hermas in helping us to comprehend this mysterious chapter
appears to me very great. Celsus reproached Christians as *Sibyllists*.
See Origen, *Against Celsus*, book v. cap. lxi.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[5:9](0020002.htm#fr_8.md) <span
id="ii.i-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p18"></span> Westcott, p. 219. Ed. 1855, London.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[5:10](0020002.htm#fr_9.md) <span
id="ii.i-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p19"></span> Hieron., tom. 1. p. 988, Benedictine ed.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[6:11](0020002.htm#fr_10.md) <span
id="ii.i-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p22"></span> Bull (and Grabe), *Harmonia Apostolica;*
Works, vol. iii.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[6:12](0020002.htm#fr_11.md) <span
id="ii.i-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p23"></span> Pearson, *Vindiciæ Ignat*., i. cap. 4. Bull,
*Defens. Fid. Nicæn*., 1. cap. 2. sec. 3; Works, vol. v. part i. p. 15.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[6:13](0020002.htm#fr_12.md) <span
id="ii.i-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p27"></span> Comment. in [Rom. xvi.
14](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#014.md)<span id="ii.i-p27.1"></span>, lib.
x. 31. \[But see Westcott’s fuller account of all this, pp. 219, 220.\]

<span id="fn_13"></span>[6:14](0020002.htm#fr_13.md) <span
id="ii.i-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p28"></span> *Hist. Eccl*. iii. 3.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[6:15](0020002.htm#fr_14.md) <span
id="ii.i-p28.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p29"></span> *De Viris Illustribus*, c. x.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[6:16](0020002.htm#fr_15.md) <span
id="ii.i-p30.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p31"></span> *Contra Hæres*., iv. 20, 2.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[6:17](0020002.htm#fr_16.md) <span
id="ii.i-p31.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p32"></span> *Strom.*, i. xxi. p. 426.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[6:18](0020002.htm#fr_17.md) <span
id="ii.i-p32.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p33"></span>*Ut supra.*

<span id="fn_18"></span>[7:19](0020002.htm#fr_18.md) <span
id="ii.i-p34.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p35"></span> *De Pudicitia*, c. xx., also c. x.; *De
Oratione*, c. xvi.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[7:20](0020002.htm#fr_19.md) <span
id="ii.i-p36.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p37"></span> \[This statement should be compared with
Westcott’s temperate and very full account of the Muratorian Fragment,
pp. 235–245.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book First.—Visions](0020003.md)
