[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020424)  [Next](0020426) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xv"></span>

##### <span id="vi.iv.vii.xv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XV.—The Objection to Join the Church on Account of the Diversity of Heresies Answered.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xv-p1"></span>Since it comes next to reply to the
objections alleged against us by Greeks and Jews; and since, in some of
the questions previously discussed, the sects also who adhere to other
teaching give, their help, it will be well first to clear away the
obstacles before us, and then, prepared thus for the solution of the
difficulties, to advance to the succeeding Miscellany.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xv-p2"></span>First, then, they make this objection
to us, saying, that they ought not to believe on account of the discord
of the sects. For the truth is warped when some teach one set of dogmas,
others another.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xv-p3"></span>To whom we say, that among you who are
Jews, and among the most famous of the philosophers among the Greeks,
very many sects have sprung up. And yet you do not say that one ought to
hesitate to philosophize or Judaize, because of the want of agreement of
the sects among you between themselves. And then, that heresies should
be sown among the truth, as “tares among the wheat,” was foretold by the
Lord; and what was predicted to take place could not but happen. <span
id="fr_3657"></span>[3658](#fn_3657) And the cause of this is, that
everything that is fair is followed by a foul blot. If one, then,
violate his engagements, and go aside from the confession which he makes
before us, are we not to stick to the truth because he has belied his
profession? But as the good man must not prove false or fail to ratify
what he has promised, although others violate their engagements; so also
are we bound in no way to transgress the canon of the Church. <span
id="fr_3658"></span>[3659](#fn_3658) And especially do we keep our
profession in the most important points, while they traverse it.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xv-p6"></span>Those, then, are to be believed, who
hold firmly to the truth. And we may broadly make use of this reply, and
say to them, that physicians holding opposite opinions according to
their own schools, yet equally in point of fact treat patients. Does
one, then, who is ill in body and needing treatment, not have recourse
to a physician, on account of the different schools in medicine? No
more, then, may he who in soul is sick and full of idols, make a pretext
of the heresies, in reference to the recovery of health and conversion
to God.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xv-p7"></span>Further, it is said that it is on
account of “those that are approved that heresies exist.” <span
id="fr_3659"></span>[3660](#fn_3659) \[The apostle\] calls “approved,”
either those who in reaching faith apply to the teaching of the Lord
with some discrimination (as those are called skilful <span
id="fr_3660"></span>[3661](#fn_3660) money-changers, who distinguish the
spurious coin from the genuine by the false <span id="page_550">p.
550</span> <span id="vi.iv.vii.xv-Page_550"></span>stamp), or those who
have already become approved both in life and knowledge.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xv-p10"></span>For this reason, then, we require
greater attention and consideration in order to investigate how
precisely we ought to live, and what is the true piety. For it is plain
that, from the very reason that truth is difficult and arduous of
attainment, questions arise from which spring the heresies, savouring of
self-love and vanity, of those who have not learned or apprehended
truly, but only caught up a mere conceit of knowledge. With the greater
care, therefore, are we to examine the real truth, which alone has for
its object the true God. And the toil is followed by sweet discovery and
reminiscence.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xv-p11"></span>On account of the heresies,
therefore, the toil of discovery must be undertaken; but we must not at
all abandon \[the truth\]. For, on fruit being set before us, some real
and ripe, and some made of wax, as like the real as possible, we are not
to abstain from both on account of the resemblance. But by the exercise
of the apprehension of contemplation, and by reasoning of the most
decisive character, we must distinguish the true from the seeming.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xv-p12"></span>And as, while there is one royal
highway, there are many others, some leading to a precipice, some to a
rushing river or to a deep sea, no one will shrink from travelling by
reason of the diversity, but will make use of the safe, and royal, and
frequented way; so, though some say this, some that, concerning the
truth, we must not abandon it; but must seek out the most accurate
knowledge respecting it. Since also among garden-grown vegetables weeds
also spring up, are the husbandmen, then, to desist from gardening?

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xv-p13"></span>Having then from nature abundant
means for examining the statements made, we ought to discover the
sequence of the truth. Wherefore also we are rightly condemned, if we do
not assent to what we ought to obey, and do not distinguish what is
hostile, and unseemly, and unnatural, and false, from what is true,
consistent, and seemly, and according to nature. And these means must be
employed in order to attain to the knowledge of the real truth.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xv-p14"></span>This pretext is then, in the case of
the Greeks, futile; for those who are willing may find the truth. But in
the case of those who adduce unreasonable excuses, their condemnation is
unanswerable. For whether do they deny or admit that there is such a
thing as demonstration? I am of opinion that all will make the
admission, except those who take away the senses. There being
demonstration, then, it is necessary to condescend to questions, and to
ascertain by way of demonstration by the Scriptures themselves how the
heresies failed, and how in the truth alone and in the ancient Church is
both the exactest knowledge, and the truly best set of principles (<span
class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vii.xv-p14.1"></span>αἴρεσις</span>). <span
id="fr_3661"></span>[3662](#fn_3661)

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xv-p16"></span>Now, of those who diverge from the
truth, some attempt to deceive themselves alone, and some also their
neighbours. Those, then, who are called (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vii.xv-p16.1"></span>δοξόσοφοι</span>) wise in their own
opinions, who think that they have found the truth, but have no true
demonstration, deceive themselves in thinking that they have reached a
resting place. And of whom there is no inconsiderable multitude, who
avoid investigations for fear of refutations, and shun instructions for
fear of condemnation. But those who deceive those who seek access to
them are very astute; who, aware that they know nothing, yet darken the
truth with plausible arguments.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xv-p17"></span>But, in my opinion, the nature of
plausible arguments is of one character, and that of true arguments of
another. And we know that it is necessary that the appellation of the
heresies should be expressed in contradistinction to the truth; from
which the Sophists, drawing certain things for the destruction of men,
and burying them in human arts invented by themselves, glory rather in
being at the head of a School than presiding over the Church. <span
id="fr_3662"></span>[3663](#fn_3662)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3657"></span>[549:3658](0020425.htm#fr_3657) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.xv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xv-p4"></span> \[[Matt. xiii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#028)<span
id="vi.iv.vii.xv-p4.1"></span>. But for our Lord’s foreshowing, the
existence of so much evil in the Church would be the greatest
stumbling-block of the faithful.\]

<span id="fn_3658"></span>[549:3659](0020425.htm#fr_3658) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.xv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xv-p5"></span> The “eccleisastical canon” here
recognised, marks the existence, at this period, of canon-law. See
Bunsen, *Hippol*., book iii. p. 105.\]

<span id="fn_3659"></span>[549:3660](0020425.htm#fr_3659) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.xv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xv-p8"></span> [1 Cor. xi.
19](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#019)<span
id="vi.iv.vii.xv-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3660"></span>[549:3661](0020425.htm#fr_3660) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.xv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xv-p9"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vii.xv-p9.1"></span>δοκίμους</span>, same word as above
translated “approved.”

<span id="fn_3661"></span>[550:3662](0020425.htm#fr_3661) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.xv-p14.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xv-p15"></span> \[A most important testimony to the
primitive rule of faith. Negatively it demonstrates the impossibility of
any primitive conception of the modern Trent doctrine, that the holder
of a particular see is the arbiter of truth and the end of
controversy.\]

<span id="fn_3662"></span>[550:3663](0020425.htm#fr_3662) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.xv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.xv-p18"></span> \[A just comment on the late Vatican
Council, and its shipwreck of the faith. See Janus, *Pope and Council*,
p. 182.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI.—Scripture the Criterion by Which Truth and Heresy
are Distinguished.](0020426)
