[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020406)  [Next](0020408) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvii"></span>

##### <span id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XVII.—Philosophy Conveys Only an Imperfect Knowledge of God.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p1"></span>But, as appears, the philosophers of
the Greeks, while naming God, do not know Him. But their philosophical
speculations, according to Empedocles, “as passing over the tongue of
the multitude, are poured out of mouths that know little of the whole.”
For as art changes the light of the sun into fire by passing it through
a glass vessel full of water, so also philosophy, catching a spark from
the divine Scripture, is visible in a few. Also, as all animals breathe
the same air, some in one way, others in another, and to a different
purpose; so also a considerable number of people occupy themselves with
the truth, or rather with discourse concerning the truth. For they do
not say aught respecting God, but expound Him by attributing their own
affections to God. For they spend life in seeking the probable, not the
true. But truth is not taught by imitation, but by instruction. For it
is not that we may seem good <span id="fr_3473"></span>[3474](#fn_3473)
that we believe in Christ, as it is not alone for the purpose of being
seen, while in the sun, that we pass into the sun. But in the one case
for the purpose of being warmed; and in the other, we are compelled to
be Christians in order to be excellent and good. For the kingdom belongs
pre-eminently to the violent, <span id="fr_3474"></span>[3475](#fn_3474)
who, from investigation, and study, and discipline, reap this fruit,
that they become kings.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p4"></span>He, then, who imitates opinion shows
also preconception. When then one, having got an inkling of the subject,
kindles it within in his soul by desire and study, he sets everything in
motion afterwards in order to know it. For that which one does not
apprehend, neither does he desire it, nor does he embrace the advantage
flowing from it. Subsequently, therefore, the Gnostic at last imitates
the Lord, as far as allowed to men, having received a sort of quality
akin to the Lord Himself, in order to assimilation to God. But those who
are not proficient in knowledge cannot judge the truth by rule. It is
not therefore possible to share in the gnostic contemplations, unless we
empty ourselves of our previous notions. For the truth in regard to
every object of intellect and of sense is thus simply universally
declared. For instance, we may distinguish the truth of painting from
that which is vulgar, and decorous music from licentious. There is,
then, also a truth of philosophy as distinct from the other
philosophies, and a true beauty as distinct from the spurious. It is not
then the partial truths, of which truth is predicated, but the truth
itself, that we are to investigate, not seeking to learn names. For what
is to be investigated respecting God is not one thing, but ten thousand.
There is a difference between declaring God, and declaring things about
God. And to speak generally, in everything the accidents are to be
distinguished from the essence.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p5"></span>Suffice it for me to say, that the
Lord of all is God; and I say the Lord of all absolutely, nothing being
left by way of exception.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p6"></span>Since, then, the forms of truth are
two—<span id="page_516">p. 516</span> <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-Page_516"></span>the names and the things—some
discourse of names, occupying themselves with the beauties of words:
such are the philosophers among the Greeks. But we who are Barbarians
have the things. Now it was not in vain that the Lord chose to make use
of a mean form of body; so that no one praising the grace and admiring
the beauty might turn his back on what was said, and attending to what
ought to be abandoned, might be cut off from what is intellectual. We
must therefore occupy ourselves not with the expression, but the
meaning.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p7"></span>To those, then, who are not
gifted <span id="fr_3475"></span>[3476](#fn_3475) with the power of
apprehension, and are not inclined to knowledge, the word is not
entrusted; since also the ravens imitate human voices, having no
understanding of the thing which they say. And intellectual apprehension
depends on faith. Thus also Homer said:—

> <span id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p8.3"></span> “Father of men and gods,” <span
> id="fr_3476"></span>[3477](#fn_3476) —  

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p10"></span>knowing not who the Father is, or
how He is Father.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p11"></span>And as to him who has hands it is
natural to grasp, and to him who has sound eyes to see the light; so it
is the natural prerogative of him who has received faith to apprehend
knowledge, if he desires, on “the foundation” laid, to work, and build
up “gold, silver, precious stones.” <span
id="fr_3477"></span>[3478](#fn_3477)

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p13"></span>Accordingly he does not profess to
wish to participate, but begins to do so. Nor does it belong to him to
*intend*, but to *be* regal, and illuminated, and gnostic. Nor does it
appertain to him to wish to grasp things in name, but in fact.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p14"></span>For God, being good, on account of
the principal part of the whole creation, seeing He wishes to save it,
was induced to make the rest also; conferring on them at the beginning
this first boon, that of existence. For that to be is far better than
not to be, will be admitted by every one. Then, according to the
capabilities of their nature, each one was and is made, advancing to
that which is better.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p15"></span>So there is no absurdity in
philosophy having been given by Divine Providence as a preparatory
discipline for the perfection which is by Christ; unless philosophy is
ashamed at learning from Barbarian knowledge how to advance to
truth. <span id="fr_3478"></span>[3479](#fn_3478) But if “the very hairs
are numbered, and the most insignificant motions,” how shall not
philosophy be taken into account? For to Samson power was given in his
hair, in order that he might perceive that the worthless arts that refer
to the things in this life, which lie and remain on the ground after the
departure of the soul, were not given without divine power.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p17"></span>But it is said Providence, from
above, from what is of prime importance, as from the head, reaches to
all, “as the ointment,” it is said, “which descends to Aaron’s beard,
and to the skirt of his garment” <span
id="fr_3479"></span>[3480](#fn_3479) (that is, of the great High Priest,
“by whom all things were made, and without whom not even one thing was
made” <span id="fr_3480"></span>[3481](#fn_3480) ); not to the ornament
of the body; for Philosophy is outside of the People, like
raiment. <span id="fr_3481"></span>[3482](#fn_3481) The philosophers,
therefore, who, trained to their own peculiar power of perception by the
spirit of perception, when they investigate, not a part of philosophy,
but philosophy absolutely, testify to the truth in a truth-loving and
humble spirit; if in the case of good things said by those even who are
of different sentiments they advance to understanding, through the
divine administration, and the ineffable Goodness, which always, as far
as possible, leads the nature of existences to that which is better.
Then, by cultivating the acquaintance not of Greeks alone, but also of
Barbarians, from the exercise common to their proper intelligence, they
are conducted to Faith. And when they have embraced the foundation of
truth, they receive in addition the power of advancing further to
investigation. And thence they love to be learners, and aspiring after
knowledge, haste to salvation.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p21"></span>Thus Scripture says, that “the
spirit of perception” was given to the artificers from God. <span
id="fr_3482"></span>[3483](#fn_3482) And this is nothing else than
Understanding, a faculty of the soul, capable of studying existences,—of
distinguishing and comparing what succeeds as like and unlike,—of
enjoining and forbidding, and of conjecturing the future. And it extends
not to the arts alone, but even to philosophy itself.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p23"></span>Why, then, is the serpent called
wise? Because even in its wiles there may be found a connection, and
distinction, and combination, and conjecturing of the future. And so
very many crimes are concealed; because the wicked arrange for
themselves so as by all means to escape punishment.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p24"></span>And Wisdom being manifold, pervading
the whole world, and all human affairs, varies its appellation in each
case. When it applies itself to first causes, it is called Understanding
(<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p24.1"></span>νόησις</span>). When, however, it
confirms this by demonstrative reasoning, it is termed Knowledge, and
Wisdom, and Science. When it is occupied in what pertains to piety, and
receives without speculation the primal Word <span
id="fr_3483"></span>[3484](#fn_3483) in consequence of the maintenance
of the operation in it, it is called Faith. In the sphere of things of
sense, establishing that which appears as being truest, it is <span
id="page_517">p. 517</span> <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-Page_517"></span>Right Opinion. In operations, again,
performed by skill of hand, it is Art. But when, on the other hand,
without the study of primary causes, by the observation of similarities,
and by transposition, it makes any attempt or combination, it is called
Experiment. But belonging to it, and supreme and essential, is the Holy
Spirit, which above all he who, in consequence of \[divine\] guidance,
has believed, receives after strong faith. Philosophy, then, partaking
of a more exquisite perception, as has been shown from the above
statements, participates in Wisdom.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p26"></span>Logical discussion, then, of
intellectual subjects, with selection and assent, is called Dialectics;
which establishes, by demonstration, allegations respecting truth, and
demolishes the doubts brought forward.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p27"></span>Those, then, who assert that
philosophy did not come hither from God, all but say that God does not
know each particular thing, and that He is not the cause of all good
things; if, indeed, each of these belongs to the class of individual
things. But nothing that exists could have subsisted at all, had God not
willed. And if He willed, then philosophy is from God, He having willed
it to be such as it is, for the sake of those who not otherwise than by
its means would abstain from what is evil. For God knows all things—not
those only which exist, but those also which shall be—and how each thing
shall be. And foreseeing the particular movements, “He surveys all
things, and hears all things,” seeing the soul naked within; and
possesses from eternity the idea of each thing individually. And what
applies to theatres, and to the parts of each object, in looking at,
looking round, and taking in the whole in one view, applies also to God.
For in one glance He views all things together, and each thing by
itself; but not all things, by way of primary intent.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p28"></span>Now, then, many things in life take
their rise in some exercise of human reason, having received the
kindling spark from God. For instance, health by medicine, and soundness
of body through gymnastics, and wealth by trade, have their origin and
existence in consequence of Divine Providence indeed, but in
consequence, too, of human co-operation. Understanding also is from God.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p29"></span>But God’s will is especially obeyed
by the free-will of good men. Since many advantages are common to good
and bad men: yet they are nevertheless advantageous only to men of
goodness and probity, for whose sake God created them. For it was for
the use of good men that the influence which is in God’s gifts was
originated. Besides, the thoughts of virtuous men are produced through
the inspiration <span id="fr_3484"></span>[3485](#fn_3484) of God; the
soul being disposed in the way it is, and the divine will being conveyed
to human souls, particular divine ministers contributing to such
services. For regiments of angels are distributed over the nations and
cities. <span id="fr_3485"></span>[3486](#fn_3485) And, perchance, some
are assigned to individuals. <span id="fr_3486"></span>[3487](#fn_3486)

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p33"></span>The Shepherd, then, cares for each
of his sheep; and his closest inspection is given to those who are
excellent in their natures, and are capable of being most useful. Such
are those fit to lead and teach, in whom the action of Providence is
conspicuously seen; whenever either by instruction, or government, or
administration, God wishes to benefit. But He wishes at all times.
Wherefore He moves those who are adapted to useful exertion in the
things which pertain to virtue, and peace, and beneficence. But all that
is characterized by virtue proceeds from virtue, and leads back to
virtue. And it is given either in order that men may become good, or
that those who are so may make use of their natural advantages. For it
co-operates both in what is general and what is particular. How absurd,
then, is it, to those who attribute disorder and wickedness to the
devil, to make him the bestower of philosophy, a virtuous thing! For he
is thus all but made more benignant to the Greeks, in respect of making
men good, than the divine providence and mind.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p34"></span>Again, I reckon it is the part of
law and of right reason to assign to each one what is appropriate to
him, and belongs to him, and falls to him. For as the lyre is only for
the harper, and the flute for the flute-player; so good things are the
possessions of good men. As the nature of the beneficent is to do good,
as it is of the fire to warm, and the light to give light, and a good
man will not do evil, or light produce darkness, or fire cold; so,
again, vice cannot do aught virtuous. For its activity is to do evil, as
that of darkness to dim the eyes.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p35"></span>Philosophy is not, then, the product
of vice, since it makes men virtuous; it follows, then, that it is the
work of God, whose work it is solely to do good. And all things given by
God are given and received well.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p36"></span>Further, if the practice of
philosophy does not belong to the wicked, but was accorded to the best
of the Greeks, it is clear also from what source it was
bestowed—manifestly from Providence, which assigns to each what is
befitting in accordance with his deserts.” <span
id="fr_3487"></span>[3488](#fn_3487)

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p38"></span>Rightly, then, to the Jews belonged
the Law, <span id="page_518">p. 518</span> <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-Page_518"></span>and to the Greeks Philosophy, until
the Advent; and after that came the universal calling to be a peculiar
people of righteousness, through the teaching which flows from faith,
brought together by one Lord, the only God of both Greeks and
Barbarians, or rather of the whole race of men. We have often called by
the name philosophy that portion of truth attained through philosophy,
although but partial. <span id="fr_3488"></span>[3489](#fn_3488)

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p40"></span>Now, too what is good in the arts as
arts, <span id="fr_3489"></span>[3490](#fn_3489) have their beginning
from God. For as the doing of anything artistically is embraced in the
rules of art, so also acting sagaciously is classed under the head of
sagacity (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p41.3"></span>φρόνησις</span>). Now sagacity is
virtue, and it is its function to know other things, but much more
especially what belongs to itself. And Wisdom (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p41.4"></span>Σοφία</span>) being power, is nothing
but the knowledge of good things, divine and human.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p42"></span>But “the earth is God’s, and the
fulness thereof,” <span id="fr_3490"></span>[3491](#fn_3490) says the
Scripture, teaching that good things come from God to men; it being
through divine power and might that the distribution of them comes to
the help of man.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p44"></span>Now the modes of all help and
communication from one to another are three. One is, by attending to
another, as the master of gymnastics, in training the boy. The second
is, by assimilation, as in the case of one who exhorts another to
benevolence by practising it before. The one co-operates with the
learner, and the other benefits him who receives. The third mode is that
by command, when the gymnastic master, no longer training the learner,
nor showing in his own person the exercise for the boy to imitate,
prescribes the exercise by name to him, as already proficient in it.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p45"></span>The Gnostic, accordingly, having
received from God the power to be of service, benefits some by
disciplining them, by bestowing attention on them; others, by exhorting
them, by assimilation; and others, by training and teaching them, by
command. And certainly he himself is equally benefited by the Lord.
Thus, then, the benefit that comes from God to men becomes known—angels
at the same time lending encouragement. <span
id="fr_3491"></span>[3492](#fn_3491) For by angels, whether seen or not,
the divine power bestows good things. Such was the mode adopted in the
advent of the Lord. And sometimes also the power “breathes” in men’s
thoughts and reasonings, and “puts in” their hearts “strength” and a
keener perception, and furnishes “prowess” and “boldness of
alacrity” <span id="fr_3492"></span>[3493](#fn_3492) both for researches
and deeds.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p48"></span>But exposed for imitation and
assimilation are truly admirable and holy examples of virtue in the
actions put on record. Further, the department of action is most
conspicuous both in the testaments of the Lord, and in the laws in force
among the Greeks, and also in the precepts of philosophy.

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p49"></span>And to speak comprehensively, all
benefit appertaining to life, in its highest reason, proceeding from the
Sovereign God, the Father who is over all, is consummated by the Son,
who also on this account “is the Saviour of all men,” says the apostle,
“but especially of those who believe.” <span
id="fr_3493"></span>[3494](#fn_3493) But in respect of its immediate
reason, it is from those next to each, in accordance with the command
and injunction of Him who is nearest the First Cause, that is, the Lord.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3473"></span>[515:3474](0020407.htm#fr_3473) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p2"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p2.1"></span>ἀγαθοὶ εἱς</span> are supplied here to
complete.

<span id="fn_3474"></span>[515:3475](0020407.htm#fr_3474) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p3"></span> \[[Matt. xi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#004)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p3.1"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_3475"></span>[516:3476](0020407.htm#fr_3475) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p8"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p8.1"></span>οὐκ ἁντιληπτικοῖς</span> is substituted
here for <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p8.2"></span>οὖν
ἀντιληπτοῖς</span> of the text.

<span id="fn_3476"></span>[516:3477](0020407.htm#fr_3476) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p8.5"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p9"></span> *Iliad*, i. 544.

<span id="fn_3477"></span>[516:3478](0020407.htm#fr_3477) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p12"></span> [1 Cor. iii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#012)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3478"></span>[516:3479](0020407.htm#fr_3478) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p16"></span> \[See p. 303, *supra*, this
volume.\]

<span id="fn_3479"></span>[516:3480](0020407.htm#fr_3479) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p18"></span> [Ps. cxxxiii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#002)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3480"></span>[516:3481](0020407.htm#fr_3480) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p19"></span> [John i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3481"></span>[516:3482](0020407.htm#fr_3481) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p20"></span> i.e., the body is the Jewish
people, and philosophy is something external to it, like the garment.

<span id="fn_3482"></span>[516:3483](0020407.htm#fr_3482) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p22"></span> [Ex. xxviii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#003)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3483"></span>[516:3484](0020407.htm#fr_3483) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p25"></span> Christ.

<span id="fn_3484"></span>[517:3485](0020407.htm#fr_3484) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p30"></span> Christ.

<span id="fn_3485"></span>[517:3486](0020407.htm#fr_3485) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p31"></span> Christ.

<span id="fn_3486"></span>[517:3487](0020407.htm#fr_3486) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p32"></span> Lowth proposes to read <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p32.1"></span>κατἀ τοὺς ἐπὶ
μέρους</span> instead of <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p32.2"></span>καὶ τῶν</span>, etc.; and Montfaucon,
instead of <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p32.3"></span>ἐνίοις ἄνοις</span> for <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p32.4"></span>ἀνθρώποις</span>.
But the sense is, in any case, as given above.

<span id="fn_3487"></span>[517:3488](0020407.htm#fr_3487) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p37"></span> \[Here I venture to commend, as
worthy of note, the speculations of Edward King, on [Matt. xxv.
32](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#032)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p37.1"></span>. *Morsels of Criticism*, vol. i. p.
333. *Ed*. London, 1788.\]

<span id="fn_3488"></span>[518:3489](0020407.htm#fr_3488) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p39"></span> \[Cap. xviii., *infra*.\]

<span id="fn_3489"></span>[518:3490](0020407.htm#fr_3489) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p41"></span> For <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p41.1"></span>ὡς ἐν τέχναις</span> it is proposed to
read <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p41.2"></span>ώς ἄν αὶ
τέχναι</span>.

<span id="fn_3490"></span>[518:3491](0020407.htm#fr_3490) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p42.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p43"></span> [Ps. xxiv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#001)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p43.1"></span>; [1 Cor. x.
26](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#026)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p43.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_3491"></span>[518:3492](0020407.htm#fr_3491) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p45.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p46"></span> \[See *supra*, this chapter; and,
*infra*, book vii. cap. i.\]

<span id="fn_3492"></span>[518:3493](0020407.htm#fr_3492) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p46.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p47"></span> “Blue-eyed Athene inspired him with
prowess.”—*Iliad*, x. 482. “And put excessive boldness in his
breast.”—*Iliad*, xvii. 570. “To Diomeded son of Tydeus Pallas Athene
gave strength and boldness.”—*Iliad*, v. 1, 2.

<span id="fn_3493"></span>[518:3494](0020407.htm#fr_3493) <span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p49.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p50"></span> [1 Tim. iv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#010)<span
id="vi.iv.vi.xvii-p50.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVIII.—The Use of Philosophy to the Gnostic.](0020408)
