[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020412)  [Next](0020414.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.vii.iii"></span>

##### <span id="vi.iv.vii.iii-p0.1"></span>Chapter III.—The Gnostic Aims at the Nearest Likeness Possible to God and His Son.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.iii-p1"></span>Now I pass over other things in
silence, glorifying the Lord. But I affirm that gnostic souls, that
surpass in the grandeur of contemplation the mode of life of each of the
holy ranks, among whom the blessed abodes of the gods are allotted by
distribution, reckoned holy among the holy, transferred entire from
among the entire, reaching places better than the better places,
embracing the divine vision not in mirrors or by means of mirrors, but
in the transcendently clear and absolutely pure insatiable vision which
is the privilege of intensely loving souls, holding festival through
endless ages, remain honoured with the indentity of all excellence. Such
is the vision attainable by “the pure in heart.” <span
id="fr_3526"></span>[3527](#fn_3526.md) This is the function of the
Gnostic, who has been perfected, to have converse with God through the
great High Priest, being made like the Lord, up to the measure of his
capacity, in the whole service of God, which tends to the salvation of
men, through care of the beneficence which has us for its object; and on
the other side through worship, through teaching and through beneficence
in deeds. The Gnostic even forms and creates himself; and besides also,
he, like to God, adorns those who hear him; assimilating as far as
possible the moderation which, arising from practice, tends to
impassibility, to Him who by nature possesses impassibility; and
especially having uninterrupted converse and fellowship with the Lord.
Mildness, I think, and philanthropy, and eminent piety, are the rules of
gnostic assimilation. I affirm that these virtues “are a sacrifice
acceptable in the sight of God;” <span
id="fr_3527"></span>[3528](#fn_3527.md) Scripture alleging that “the humble
heart with right knowledge is the holocaust of God;” <span
id="fr_3528"></span>[3529](#fn_3528.md) each man who is admitted to
holiness being illuminated in order to indissoluble union.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.iii-p5"></span>For “to bring themselves into
captivity,” and to slay themselves, putting to death “the old man, who
is through lusts corrupt,” and raising the new man from death, “from the
old conversation,” by abandoning the passions, and becoming free of sin,
both the Gospel and the apostle enjoin. <span
id="fr_3529"></span>[3530](#fn_3529.md)

<span id="vi.iv.vii.iii-p7"></span>It was this, consequently, which the
Law intimated, by ordering the sinner to be cut off, and translated from
death to life, to the impassibility that is the result of faith; which
the teachers of the Law, not comprehending, inasmuch as they regarded
the law as contentious, they have given a handle to those who attempt
idly to calumniate the Law. And for this reason we rightly do not
sacrifice to God, who, needing <span id="page_527">p. 527</span> <span
id="vi.iv.vii.iii-Page_527"></span>nothing, supplies all men with all
things; but we glorify Him who gave Himself in sacrifice for us, we also
sacrificing ourselves; from that which needs nothing to that which needs
nothing, and to that which is impassible from that which is impassible.
For in our salvation alone God delights. We do not therefore, and with
reason too, offer sacrifice to Him who is not overcome by pleasures,
inasmuch as the fumes of the smoke stop far beneath, and do not even
reach the thickest clouds; but those they reach are far from them. The
Deity neither is, then, in want of aught, nor loves pleasure, or gain,
or money, being full, and supplying all things to everything that has
received being and has wants. And neither by sacrifices nor offerings,
nor on the other hand by glory and honour, is the Deity won over; nor is
He influenced by any such things; but He appears only to excellent and
good men, who will never betray justice for threatened fear, nor by the
promise of considerable gifts.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.iii-p8"></span>But those who have not seen the
self-determination of the human soul, and its incapability of being
treated as a slave in what respects the choice of life, being disgusted
at what is done through rude injustice, do not think that there is a
God. On a par with these in opinion, are they who, falling into
licentiousness in pleasures, and grievous pains, and unlooked-for
accidents, and bidding defiance to events, say that there is no God, or
that, though existing, He does not oversee all things. And others there
are, who are persuaded that those they reckon gods are capable of being
prevailed upon by sacrifices and gifts, favouring, so to speak, their
profligacies; and will not believe that He is the only true God, who
exists in the invariableness of righteous goodness.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.iii-p9"></span>The Gnostic, then, is pious, who
cares first for himself, then for his neighbours, that they may become
very good. For the son gratifies a good father, by showing himself good
and like his father; and in like manner the subject, the governor. For
believing and obeying are in our own power.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.iii-p10"></span>But should any one suppose the cause
of evils to be the weakness of matter, and the involuntary impulses of
ignorance, and (in his stupidity) irrational necessities; he who has
become a Gnostic has through instruction superiority over these, as if
they were wild beasts; and in imitation of the divine plan, he does good
to such as are willing, as far as he can. And if ever placed in
authority, like Moses, he will rule for the salvation of the governed;
and will tame wildness and faithlessness, by recording honour for the
most excellent, and punishment for the wicked, in accordance with reason
for the sake of discipline.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.iii-p11"></span>For pre-eminently a divine image,
resembling God, is the soul of a righteous man; in which, through
obedience to the commands, as in a consecrated spot, is enclosed and
enshrined the Leader of mortals and of immortals, King and Parent of
what is good, who is truly law, and right, and eternal Word, being the
one Saviour individually to each, and in common to all.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.iii-p12"></span>He is the true Only-begotten, the
express image of the glory of the universal King and Almighty Father,
who impresses on the Gnostic the seal of the perfect contemplation,
according to His own image; so that there is now a third divine image,
made as far as possible like the Second Cause, the Essential Life,
through which we live the true life; the Gnostic, as we regard him,
being described as moving amid things sure and wholly immutable.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.iii-p13"></span>Ruling, then, over himself and what
belongs to him, and possessing a sure grasp, of divine science, he makes
a genuine approach to the truth. For the knowledge and apprehension of
intellectual objects must necessarily be called certain scientific
knowledge, whose function in reference to divine things is to consider
what is the First Cause, and what that “by whom all things were made,
and without whom nothing was made;” <span
id="fr_3530"></span>[3531](#fn_3530.md) and what things, on the other hand,
are as pervasive, and what is comprehensive; what conjoined, what
disjoined; and what is the position which each one of them holds, and
what power and what service each contributes. And again, among human
things, what man himself is, and what he has naturally or
preternaturally; and how, again, it becomes him to do or to suffer; and
what are his virtues and what his vices; and about things good, bad, and
indifferent; also about fortitude, and prudence, and self-restraint, and
the virtue which is in all respects complete, namely, righteousness.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.iii-p15"></span>Further, he employs prudence and
righteousness in the acquisition of wisdom, and fortitude, not only in
the endurance of circumstances, but also in restraining <span
id="fr_3531"></span>[3532](#fn_3531.md) pleasure and desire, grief and
anger; and, in general, to withstand <span
id="fr_3532"></span>[3533](#fn_3532.md) everything which either by any
force or fraud entices us. For it is not necessary to endure vices and
virtues, but it is to be persuaded to bear things that inspire fear.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.iii-p18"></span>Accordingly, pain is found
beneficial in the healing art, and in discipline, and in punishment; and
by it men’s manners are corrected to their advantage. Forms of fortitude
are endurance, magnanimity, high spirit, liberality, and grandeur. And
for this reason he neither meets with the blame or the bad opinion of
the multitude; nor is he subjected to opinions or flatteries. But in
<span id="page_528">p. 528</span> <span
id="vi.iv.vii.iii-Page_528"></span>the indurance of toils and at the
same time <span id="fr_3533"></span>[3534](#fn_3533.md) in the discharge of
any duty, and in his manly superiority to all circumstances, he appears
truly a man (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vii.iii-p19.4"></span>ἀνήρ</span>) among the rest of human
beings. And, on the other hand, maintaining prudence, he exercises
moderation in the calmness of his soul; receptive of what is commanded,
as of what belongs to him, entertaining aversion to what is base, as
alien to him; become decorous and supramundane, <span
id="fr_3534"></span>[3535](#fn_3534.md) he does everything with decorum and
in order, and transgresses in no respect, and in nothing. Rich he is in
the highest degree in desiring nothing, as having few wants; and being
in the midst of abundance of all good through the knowledge of the good.
For it is the first effect of his righteousness, to love to spend his
time and associate with those of his own race both in earth and heaven.
So also he is liberal of what he possesses. And being a lover of men, he
is a hater of the wicked, entertaining a perfect aversion to all
villany. He must consequently learn to be faithful both to himself and
his neighbours, and obedient to the commandments. For he is the true
servant of God who spontaneously subjects himself to His commands. And
he who already, not through the commandments, but through knowledge
itself, is pure in heart, is the friend of God. For neither are we born
by nature possessing virtue, nor after we are born does it grow
naturally, as certain parts of the body; since then it would neither be
voluntary nor praiseworthy. Nor is virtue, like speech, perfected by the
practice that results from everyday occurrences (for this is very much
the way in which vice originates). For it is not by any art, either
those of acquisition, or those which relate to the care of the body,
that knowledge is attained. No more is it from the curriculum of
instruction. For that is satisfied if it can only prepare and sharpen
the soul. For the laws of the state are perchance able to restrain bad
actions; but persuasive words, which but touch the surface, cannot
produce a scientific permanence of the truth.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.iii-p21"></span>Now the Greek philosophy, as it
were, purges the soul, and prepares it beforehand for the reception of
faith, on which the Truth builds up the edifice of knowledge.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.iii-p22"></span>This is the true athlete—he who in
the great stadium, the fair world, is crowned for the true victory over
all the passions. For He who prescribes the contest is the Almighty God,
and He who awards the prize is the only-begotten Son of God. Angels and
gods are spectators; and the contest, embracing all the varied
exercises, is “not against flesh and blood,” <span
id="fr_3535"></span>[3536](#fn_3535.md) but against the spiritual powers of
inordinate passions that work through the flesh. He who obtains the
mastery in these struggles, and overthrows the tempter, menacing, as it
were, with certain contests, wins immortality. For the sentence of God
in most righteous judgment is infallible. The spectators <span
id="fr_3536"></span>[3537](#fn_3536.md) are summoned to the contest, and
the athletes contend in the stadium; the one, who has obeyed the
directions of the trainer, wins the day. For to all, all rewards
proposed by God are equal; and He Himself is unimpeachable. And he who
has power receives mercy, and he that has exercised will is mighty.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.iii-p25"></span>So also we have received mind, that
we may know what we do. And the maxim “Know thyself” means here to know
for what we are born. And we are born to obey the commandments, if we
choose to be willing to be saved. Such is the Nemesis, <span
id="fr_3537"></span>[3538](#fn_3537.md) through which there is no escaping
from God. Man’s duty, then, is obedience to God, who has proclaimed
salvation manifold by the commandments. And confession is thanksgiving.
For the beneficent first begins to do good. And he who on fitting
considerations readily receives and keeps the commandments, is faithful
(<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vii.iii-p26.3"></span>πιστός</span>); and he who by love
requites benefits as far as he is able, is already a friend. One
recompense on the part of men is of paramount importance—the doing of
what is pleasing to God. As being His own production, and a result akin
to Himself, the Teacher and Saviour receives acts of assistance and of
improvement on the part of men as a personal favour and honour; as also
He regards the injuries inflicted on those who believe on Him as
ingratitude and dishonour to Himself. For what other dishonour can touch
God? Wherefore it is impossible to render a recompense at all equivalent
to the boon received from the Lord.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.iii-p27"></span>And as those who maltreat property
insult the owners, and those who maltreat soldiers insult the commander,
so also the ill-usage of His consecrated ones is contempt for the Lord.

<span id="vi.iv.vii.iii-p28"></span>For, just as the sun not only
illumines heaven and the whole world, shining over land and sea, but
also through windows and small chinks sends his beams into the innermost
recesses of houses, so the Word diffused everywhere casts His eye-glance
on the minutest circumstances of the actions of life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3526"></span>[526:3527](0020413.htm#fr_3526.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.iii-p2"></span> [Matt. v.
8](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#008.md)<span
id="vi.iv.vii.iii-p2.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3527"></span>[526:3528](0020413.htm#fr_3527.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.iii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.iii-p3"></span> [Phil. iv.
18](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#018.md)<span
id="vi.iv.vii.iii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3528"></span>[526:3529](0020413.htm#fr_3528.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.iii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.iii-p4"></span> [Ps.
51:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#017.md),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#019.md)<span
id="vi.iv.vii.iii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3529"></span>[526:3530](0020413.htm#fr_3529.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.iii-p6"></span> [Rom.
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#006.md),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#007.md)<span
id="vi.iv.vii.iii-p6.1"></span>; [2 Cor. x.
5](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#005.md)<span
id="vi.iv.vii.iii-p6.2"></span>; [Eph. iv.
22-24](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#022.md)<span
id="vi.iv.vii.iii-p6.3"></span>; [Col.
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#008.md),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#009.md)<span
id="vi.iv.vii.iii-p6.4"></span>, etc.

<span id="fn_3530"></span>[527:3531](0020413.htm#fr_3530.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.iii-p14"></span> [John i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003.md)<span
id="vi.iv.vii.iii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3531"></span>[527:3532](0020413.htm#fr_3531.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.iii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.iii-p16"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vii.iii-p16.1"></span>κρατεῖν</span> is hear supplied to
complete the sense.

<span id="fn_3532"></span>[527:3533](0020413.htm#fr_3532.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.iii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.iii-p17"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vii.iii-p17.1"></span>ἀντιτάσσεσθαι</span> is suggested
instead of <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vii.iii-p17.2"></span>ἀντιτάσσεται</span> of the text.

<span id="fn_3533"></span>[528:3534](0020413.htm#fr_3533.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.iii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.iii-p19"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vii.iii-p19.1"></span>ἄμα</span> is here, on the authority of
a <span class="sc"><span id="vi.iv.vii.iii-p19.2"></span>ms.</span>, and
with the approval of Sylburguis, to be substituted for <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.vii.iii-p19.3"></span>ἅλμα</span>.

<span id="fn_3534"></span>[528:3535](0020413.htm#fr_3534.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.iii-p19.5"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.iii-p20"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vii.iii-p20.1"></span>κόσμιος, καὶ ὑπερκόσμιος</span>. The
author plays on the double meaning of <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vii.iii-p20.2"></span>κόσμος</span>, world or order.

<span id="fn_3535"></span>[528:3536](0020413.htm#fr_3535.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.iii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.iii-p23"></span> [Eph. vi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#012.md)<span
id="vi.iv.vii.iii-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3536"></span>[528:3537](0020413.htm#fr_3536.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.iii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.iii-p24"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vii.iii-p24.1"></span>τὸ θέατρον</span> used for the place,
the spectacle, and the spectators.

<span id="fn_3537"></span>[528:3538](0020413.htm#fr_3537.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vii.iii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii.iii-p26"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vii.iii-p26.1"></span>Ἀδράστεια</span>, a name given to
Nemesis, said to be from an altar erected to her by Adrastus; but as
used here, and when employed as an adjective qualifying Nemesis, it has
reference to <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.vii.iii-p26.2"></span>διδράσκω</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV.—The Heathens Made Gods Like Themselves, Whence
Springs All Superstition.](0020414.md)
