[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020285)  [Next](0020287) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.iii.viii"></span>

##### <span id="vi.iii.iii.viii-p0.1"></span>Chapter VIII.—Similitudes and Examples a Most Important Part of Right Instruction.

<span id="vi.iii.iii.viii-p1"></span>And if any one of you shall
entirely avoid luxury, he will, by a frugal upbringing, train himself to
the endurance of involuntary labours, by employing constantly voluntary
afflictions as training exercises for persecutions; so that when he
comes to compulsory labours, and fears, and griefs, he will not be
unpracticed in endurance.

<span id="vi.iii.iii.viii-p2"></span>Wherefore we have no country on
earth, that we may despise earthly possessions. And frugality <span
id="fr_1644"></span>[1645](#fn_1644) is in the highest degree rich,
being equal to unfailing expenditure, bestowed on what is requisite, and
to the degree requisite. For <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iii.iii.viii-p3.2"></span>τέλε</span> has the meaning of
expenses.

<span id="vi.iii.iii.viii-p4"></span>How a husband is to live with his
wife, and respecting self-help, and housekeeping, and the employment of
domestics; and further, with respect to the time of marriage, and what
is suitable for wives, we have treated in the discourse concerning
marriage. What pertains to disciplane alone is reserved now for
description, as we delineate the life of Christians. The most indeed has
been already said, and laid down in the form of disciplinary rules. What
still remains we shall subjoin; for examples are of no small moment in
determining to salvation. <span id="fr_1645"></span>[1646](#fn_1645)

<span id="vi.iii.iii.viii-p6"></span>See, says the tragedy,

> <span id="vi.iii.iii.viii-p6.1"></span> “The consort of Ulysses was
> not killed  
> By Telemachus; for she did not take a husband in addition to a
> husband,  
> But in the house the marriage-bed remains unpolluted.” <span
> id="fr_1646"></span>[1647](#fn_1646)  

<span id="vi.iii.iii.viii-p8"></span>Reproaching foul adultery, he
showed the fair image of chastity in affection to her husband.

<span id="vi.iii.iii.viii-p9"></span>The Lacedæmonians compelling the
Helots, their servants (Helots is the name of their servants), to get
drunk, exhibited their drunken pranks before themselves, who were
temperate, for cure and correction.

<span id="vi.iii.iii.viii-p10"></span>Observing, accordingly, their
unseemly behaviour, in order that they themselves might not fall into
like censurable conduct, they trained themselves, <span id="page_282">p.
282</span> <span id="vi.iii.iii.viii-Page_282"></span>turning the
reproach of the drunkards to the advantage of keeping themselves free
from fault.

<span id="vi.iii.iii.viii-p11"></span>For some men being instructed are
saved; and others, self-taught, either aspire after or seek virtue.

> <span id="vi.iii.iii.viii-p11.1"></span> “He truly is the best of all
> who himself perceives all things.” <span
> id="fr_1647"></span>[1648](#fn_1647)  

<span id="vi.iii.iii.viii-p13"></span>Such is Abraham, who sought God.

> <span id="vi.iii.iii.viii-p13.1"></span> “And good, again, is he who
> obeys him who advises well.” <span
> id="fr_1648"></span>[1649](#fn_1648)  

<span id="vi.iii.iii.viii-p15"></span>Such are those disciples who
obeyed the Word. Wherefore the former was called “friend,” the latter
“apostles;” the one diligently seeking, and the other preaching one and
the same God. And both are peoples, and both these have hearers, the one
who is profited through seeking, the other who is saved through finding.

> <span id="vi.iii.iii.viii-p15.1"></span> “But whoever neither himself
> perceives, nor, hearing another,  
> Lays to heart—he is a worthless man.” <span
> id="fr_1649"></span>[1650](#fn_1649)  

<span id="vi.iii.iii.viii-p17"></span>The other people is the
Gentile—useless; this is the people that followeth not Christ.
Nevertheless the Instructor, lover of man, helping in many ways, partly
exhorts, partly upbraids. Others having sinned, He shows us their
baseness, and exhibits the punishment consequent upon it, alluring while
admonishing, planning to dissuade us in love from evil, by the
exhibition of those who have suffered from it before. By which examples
He very manifestly checked those who had been evil-disposed, and
hindered those who were daring like deeds; and others He brought to a
foundation of patience; others He stopped from wickedness; and others He
cured by the contemplation of what is like, bringing them over to what
is better.

<span id="vi.iii.iii.viii-p18"></span>For who, when following one in the
way, and then on the former falling into a pit, would not guard against
incurring equal danger, by taking care not to follow him in his slip?
What athlete, again, who has learned the way to glory, and has seen the
combatant who had preceded him receiving the prize, does not exert
himself for the crown, imitating the elder one?

<span id="vi.iii.iii.viii-p19"></span>Such images of divine wisdom are
many; but I shall mention one instance, and expound it in a few words.
The fate of the Sodomites was judgment to those who had done wrong,
instruction to those who hear. The Sodomites having, through much
luxury, fallen into uncleanness, practising adultery shamelessly, and
burning with insane love for boys; the All-seeing Word, whose notice
those who commit impieties cannot escape, cast His eye on them. Nor did
the sleepless guard of humanity observe their licentiousness in silence;
but dissuading us from the imitation of them, and training us up to His
own temperance, and falling on some sinners, lest lust being unavenged,
should break loose from all the restraints of fear, ordered Sodom to be
burned, pouring forth a little of the sagacious fire on licentiousness;
lest lust, through want of punishment, should throw wide the gates to
those that were rushing into voluptuousness. Accordingly, the just
punishment of the Sodomites became to men an image of the salvation
which is well calculated for men. For those who have not committed like
sins with those who are punished, will never receive a like punishment.
By guarding against sinning, we guard against suffering. “For I would
have you know,” says Jude, “that God, having once saved His people from
the land of Egypt, afterwards destroyed them that believed not; and the
angels which kept not their first estate, but left their own habitation,
He hath reserved to the judgment of the great day, in everlasting chains
under darkness of the savage angels.” <span
id="fr_1650"></span>[1651](#fn_1650) And a little after he sets forth,
in a most instructive manner, representations of those that are judged:
“Woe unto them, for they have gone in the way of Cain, and run greedily
after the error of Balaam, and perished in the gainsaying of Core.” For
those, who cannot attain the privilege of adoption, fear keeps from
growing insolent. For punishments and threats are for this end, that
fearing the penalty we may abstain from sinning. I might relate to you
punishments for ostentation, and punishments for vainglory, not only for
licentiousness; and adduce the censures pronounced on those whose hearts
are bad through wealth, <span id="fr_1651"></span>[1652](#fn_1651) in
which censures the Word through fear restrains from evil acts. But
sparing prolixity in my treatise, I shall bring forward the following
precepts of the Instructor, that you may guard against His threatenings.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1644"></span>[281:1645](0020286.htm#fr_1644) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.viii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.viii-p3"></span> The word used by Clement here for
frugality is <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iii.iii.viii-p3.1"></span>εύτέλεια</span>, and he supposes the
word to mean originally “spending well.” A proper way of spending money
is as good as unfailing riches, since it always has enough for all that
is necessary.

<span id="fn_1645"></span>[281:1646](0020286.htm#fr_1645) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.viii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.viii-p5"></span> \[This plea for *similitudes*
illustrates the principle of Hermas, and the ground of the currency of
his *Pastor.*\]

<span id="fn_1646"></span>[281:1647](0020286.htm#fr_1646) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.viii-p6.5"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.viii-p7"></span> Euripides, *Orestes*, 588–590.

<span id="fn_1647"></span>[282:1648](0020286.htm#fr_1647) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.viii-p11.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.viii-p12"></span> Hesiod, *Works and Days*, i. 291.

<span id="fn_1648"></span>[282:1649](0020286.htm#fr_1648) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.viii-p13.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.viii-p14"></span> *Ibid*.

<span id="fn_1649"></span>[282:1650](0020286.htm#fr_1649) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.viii-p15.4"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.viii-p16"></span> *Ibid*.

<span id="fn_1650"></span>[282:1651](0020286.htm#fr_1650) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.viii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.viii-p20"></span> [Jude
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#006)<span
id="vi.iii.iii.viii-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1651"></span>[282:1652](0020286.htm#fr_1651) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.viii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.viii-p21"></span> Following Lowth’s conjecture of
<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iii.iii.viii-p21.1"></span>κακοφρόνων</span> insteasd of that of
the text, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iii.iii.viii-p21.2"></span>κακόφρονας</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX.—Why We are to Use the Bath.](0020287)
