[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020331)  [Next](0020333.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.ii.viii"></span>

##### <span id="vi.iv.ii.viii-p0.1"></span>Chapter VIII.—The Vagaries of Basilides and Valentinus as to Fear Being the Cause of Things.

<span id="vi.iv.ii.viii-p1"></span>Here the followers of Basilides,
interpreting this expression, say, “that the Prince, <span
id="fr_2236"></span>[2237](#fn_2236.md) having heard the speech of the
Spirit, who was being ministered to, was struck with amazement both with
the voice and the vision, having had glad tidings beyond his hopes
announced to him; and that his amazement was called fear, which became
the origin of wisdom, which distinguishes classes, and discriminates,
and perfects, and restores. For not the world alone, but also the
election, He that is over all has set apart and sent forth.”

<span id="vi.iv.ii.viii-p3"></span>And Valentinus appears also in an
epistle to have adopted such views. For he writes in these very words:
“And as <span id="fr_2237"></span>[2238](#fn_2237.md) terror fell on the
angels at this creature, because he uttered things greater than
proceeded from his formation, by reason of the being in him who had
invisibly communicated a germ of the supernal essence, and who spoke
with free utterance; so also among the tribes of men in the world, the
works of men became terrors to those who made them,—as, for example,
images and statues. And the hands of all fashion things to bear the name
of God: <span id="page_356">p. 356</span> <span
id="vi.iv.ii.viii-Page_356"></span>for Adam formed into the name of man
inspired the dread attaching to the pre-existent man, as having his
being in him; and they were terror-stricken, and speedily marred the
work.”

<span id="vi.iv.ii.viii-p5"></span>But there being but one First Cause,
as will be shown afterwards, these men will be shown to be inventors of
chatterings and chirpings. But since God deemed it advantageous, that
from the law and the prophets, men should receive a preparatory
discipline by the Lord, the fear of the Lord was called the beginning of
wisdom, being given by the Lord, through Moses, to the disobedient and
hard of heart. For those whom reason convinces not, fear tames; which
also the Instructing Word, foreseeing from the first, and purifying by
each of these methods, adapted the instrument suitably for piety.
Consternation is, then, fear at a strange apparition, or at an
unlooked-for representation—such as, for example, a message; while fear
is an excessive wonderment on account of something which arises or is.
They do not then perceive that they represent by means of amazement the
God who is highest and is extolled by them, as subject to perturbation
and antecedent to amazement as having been in ignorance. If indeed
ignorance preceded amazement; and if this amazement and fear, which is
the beginning of wisdom, is the fear of God, then in all likelihood
ignorance as cause preceded both the wisdom of God and all creative
work, and not only these, but restoration and even election itself.
Whether, then, was it ignorance of what was good or what was evil?

<span id="vi.iv.ii.viii-p6"></span>Well, if of good, why does it cease
through amazement? And minister and preaching and baptism are \[in that
case\] superfluous to them. And if of evil, how can what is bad be the
cause of what is best? For had not ignorance preceded, the minister
would not have come down, nor would have amazement seized on “the
Prince,” as they say; nor would he have attained to a beginning of
wisdom from fear, in order to discrimination between the elect and those
that are mundane. And if the fear of the pre-existent man made the
angels conspire against their own handiwork, under the idea that an
invisible germ of the supernal essence was lodged within that creation,
or through unfounded suspicion excited envy, which is incredible, the
angels became murderers of the creature which had been entrusted to
them, as a child might be, they being thus convicted of the grossest
ignorance. Or suppose they were influenced by being involved in
foreknowledge. But they would not have conspired against what they
foreknew in the assault they made; nor would they have been
terror-struck at their own work, in consequence of foreknowledge, on
their perceiving the supernal germ. Or, finally, suppose, trusting to
their knowledge, they dared (but this also were impossible for them), on
learning the excellence that is in the Pleroma, to conspire against man.
Furthermore also they laid hands on that which was according to the
image, in which also is the archetype, and which, along with the
knowledge that remains, is indestructible.

<span id="vi.iv.ii.viii-p7"></span>To these, then, and certain others,
especially the Marcionites, the Scripture cries, though they listen not,
“He that heareth Me shall rest with confidence in peace, and shall be
tranquil, fearless of all evil.” <span
id="fr_2238"></span>[2239](#fn_2238.md)

<span id="vi.iv.ii.viii-p9"></span>What, then, will they have the law to
be? They will not call it evil, but just; distinguishing what is good
from what is just. But the Lord, when He enjoins us to dread evil, does
not exchange one evil for another, but abolishes what is opposite by its
opposite. Now evil is the opposite of good, as what is just is of what
is unjust. If, then, that absence of fear, which the fear of the Lord
produces, is called the beginning of what is good, <span
id="fr_2239"></span>[2240](#fn_2239.md) fear is a good thing. And the fear
which proceeds from the law is not only just, but good, as it takes away
evil. But introducing absence of fear by means of fear, it does not
produce apathy by means of mental perturbation, but moderation of
feeling by discipline. When, then, we hear, “Honour the Lord, and be
strong: but fear not another besides Him,” <span
id="fr_2240"></span>[2241](#fn_2240.md) we understand it to be meant
fearing to sin, and following the commandments given by God, which is
the honour that cometh from God. For the fear of God is <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.ii.viii-p11.2"></span>Δέος</span> \[in
Greek\]. But if fear is perturbation of mind, as some will have it that
fear is perturbation of mind, yet all fear is not perturbation.
Superstition is indeed perturbation of mind; being the fear of demons,
that produce and are subject to the excitement of passion. On the other
hand, consequently, the fear of God, who is not subject to perturbation,
is free of perturbation. For it is not God, but falling away from God,
that the man is terrified for. And he who fears this—that is, falling
into evils—fears and dreads those evils. And he who fears a fall, wishes
himself to be free of corruption and perturbation. “The wise man,
fearing, avoids evil: but the foolish, trusting, mixes himself with it,”
says the Scripture; and again it says, “In the fear of the <span
class="sc"><span id="vi.iv.ii.viii-p11.3"></span>Lord</span> is the hope
of strength.” <span id="fr_2241"></span>[2242](#fn_2241.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2236"></span>[355:2237](0020332.htm#fr_2236.md) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.viii-p2"></span> Viz., of the angels, who according
to them was Jehovah, the God of the Jews.

<span id="fn_2237"></span>[355:2238](0020332.htm#fr_2237.md) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.viii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.viii-p4"></span> Instead of <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.ii.viii-p4.1"></span>ὡς περίφοβος</span> of the text, we read
with Grabe <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.ii.viii-p4.2"></span>ὡσπερεὶ φόβος</span>.

<span id="fn_2238"></span>[356:2239](0020332.htm#fr_2238.md) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.viii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.viii-p8"></span> [Prov. i.
33](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#033.md)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.viii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2239"></span>[356:2240](0020332.htm#fr_2239.md) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.viii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.viii-p10"></span> The text reads <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.ii.viii-p10.1"></span>κακῶν</span>. Lowth
conjectures the change, which we have adopted, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.ii.viii-p10.2"></span>καλῶν</span>.

<span id="fn_2240"></span>[356:2241](0020332.htm#fr_2240.md) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.viii-p10.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.viii-p11"></span> [Prov. vii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#002.md)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.viii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2241"></span>[356:2242](0020332.htm#fr_2241.md) <span
id="vi.iv.ii.viii-p11.4"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii.viii-p12"></span> [Prov.
14:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#016.md),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#026.md)<span
id="vi.iv.ii.viii-p12.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX.—The Connection of the Christian Virtues.](0020333.md)
