[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020349)  [Next](0020351.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.iii.i"></span>

### <span id="vi.iv.iii.i-p0.1"></span>Elucidations.

##### <span id="vi.iv.iii.i-p0.2"></span>I.

<span id="vi.iv.iii.i-p1"></span>(See p. 381, cap. i.)

<span id="vi.iv.iii.i-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="vi.iv.iii.i-p2.1"></span>In</span> his third book, Clement exposes
the Basilidians and others who perverted the rule of our Lord, which
permissively, but not as of obligation, called some to the self-regimen
of a single life, on condition of their possessing the singular gift
requisite to the same. True continence, he argues, implies the command
of the tongue, and all manner of concupiscence, such as greed of wealth,
or luxury in using it. If, by a divine faculty and gift of grace, it
enables us to practice temperance, very well; but more is necessary. As
to marriage, he states what seems to him to be the truth. We honour
celibate chastity, and esteem them blest to whom this is God’s gift. We
<span id="page_403">p. 403</span> <span
id="vi.iv.iii.i-Page_403"></span>also admire a single marriage, and the
dignity which pertains to one marriage only; admitting, nevertheless,
that we ought to compassionate others, and to bear one another’s
burdens, lest any one, when he thinks he stands, should himself also
fall. The apostle enjoins, with respect to a second marriage, “If thou
art tempted by concupiscence, resort to a lawful wedlock.”

<span id="vi.iv.iii.i-p3"></span>Our author then proceeds to a
castigation of Carpocrates, and his son Epiphanes, an Alexandrian on his
father’s side, who, though he lived but seventeen years, his mother
being a Cephallenian, received divine honours at Sama, where a
magnificent temple, with altars and shrines, was erected to him; the
Cephallenians celebrating his apotheosis, by a new-moon festival, with
sacrifices, libations and hymns, and convivialities. This youth
acquired, from his father, a knowledge of Plato’s philosophy and of the
circle of the sciences. He was the author of the jargon about
monads, <span id="fr_2674"></span>[2675](#fn_2674.md) of which see Irenæus;
and from him comes the heresy of those subsequently known as
Carpocratians. He left a book, *De Justitia,* in which he contends for
what he represents as Plato’s idea of a community of women in sexual
relations. Justly does our author reckon him a destroyer alike of law
and Gospel, unworthy even of being classed with decent heretics; and he
attributes to his followers all those abominations which had been
charged upon the Christians. This illustrates the terrible necessity,
which then existed, of drawing a flaming line of demarcation between the
Church, and the wolves in sheeps’ clothing, who thus dishonoured the
name of Christ, by associating such works of the devil with the adoption
of a nominal discipleship. It should be mentioned that Mosheim questions
the story of Epiphanes. (See his *Hist. of the First Three Centuries,*
vol. i. p. 448.)

##### <span id="vi.iv.iii.i-p4.1"></span>II.

<span id="vi.iv.iii.i-p5"></span>(See p. 383, cap. ii. note 1.)

<span id="vi.iv.iii.i-p6"></span>The early disappearance of the
Christian *agapæ* may probably be attributed to the terrible abuse of
the word here referred to, by the licentious Carpocratians. The genuine
*agapæ* were of apostolic origin (2 Pet. ii. 13; [Jude
12](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#012.md)<span
id="vi.iv.iii.i-p6.1"></span>), but were often abused by hypocrites,
even under the apostolic eye ([1 Corinthians
11:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#021.md)<span
id="vi.iv.iii.i-p6.2"></span>). In the Gallican Church, a survival or
relic of these feasts of charity is seen in the *pain béni;* and, in the
Greek churches. in the <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.iii.i-p6.3"></span>ἀντίδωρον</span> or *eulogiæ* distributed
to non-communicants at the close of the Eucharist, from the loaf out of
which the bread of oblation is supposed to have been cut.

##### <span id="vi.iv.iii.i-p6.4"></span>III.

<span id="vi.iv.iii.i-p7"></span>(See p. 383, note 3.)

<span id="vi.iv.iii.i-p8"></span>Next, he treats of the Marcionites, who
rejected marriage on the ground that the material creation is in itself
evil. Promising elsewhere to deal with this general false principle, he
refutes Marcion, and with him the Greeks who have condemned the
generative law of nature, specifying Heraclitus, Empedocles, the Sibyl,
Homer, and others; but he defends Plato against Marcion, who represents
him as teaching the depravity of matter. He proceeds to what the
dramatists have exhibited of human misery. He shows the error of those
who represent the Pythagoreans as on that account denying themselves the
intimacies of conjugal society; for he says they practiced this
restraint, only after having given themselves a family. He explains the
prohibition of the bean, by Pythagoras, on the very ground, that it
occasioned sterility in women according to Theophrastus. Clement
expounds the true meaning of Christ’s words, perverted by those who
abstained from marriage not in honour of encraty, but as an insane
impeachment of the divine wisdom in the material creation.

<span id="page_404">p. 404</span> <span
id="vi.iv.iii.i-Page_404"></span>

##### <span id="vi.iv.iii.i-p8.1"></span>IV.

<span id="vi.iv.iii.i-p9"></span>(See p. 385, note 3.)

<span id="vi.iv.iii.i-p10"></span>He refutes the Carpocratians, also, in
their slanders against the deacon Nicolas, showing that the Nicolaitans
had abused his name and words. Likewise, concerning Matthias, he exposes
a similar abuse. He castigates one who seduced a maiden into impurity by
an absurd perversion of Scripture, and thoroughly exposes this
blasphemous abuse of the apostolic text. He subjoins another refutation
of one of those heretics, and allows that some might adopt the opinion
of his dupes, if, as the Valentinians would profess, only spiritual
communion were concerned.

<span id="vi.iv.iii.i-p11"></span>Seeing, however, that these heretics,
and the followers of Prodicus, who wrongfully call themselves
*gnostics,* claimed a practical indulgence in all manner of disgusting
profligacies, he convicts them by arguments derived from right reason
and from the Scriptures, and by human laws as well. Further, he exposes
the folly of those who pretended that the less honourable parts of man
are not the work of the Creator, and overwhelms their presumption by
abundant argument, exploding, at the same time, their corruptions of the
sacred text of the Scriptures.

##### <span id="vi.iv.iii.i-p11.1"></span>V.

<span id="vi.iv.iii.i-p12"></span>(See p. 388, note 3.)

<span id="vi.iv.iii.i-p13"></span>To relieve himself of a more
particular struggle with each individual heresy, he proceeds to reduce
them under two heads: (1) Those who teach a reckless mode of life (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.iii.i-p13.1"></span>ἀδιαφόρως ζῆν</span>),
and (2) those who impiously affect continence. To the first, he opposes
the plain propriety and duty of a decorous way of living continently;
showing, that as it cannot be denied that there are certain abominable
and filthy lusts, which, as such, must be shunned, therefore there is no
such thing as living “indifferently” with respect to them. He who lives
to the flesh, moreover, is condemned; nor can the likeness and image of
God be regained, or eternal life be ensured, save by a strict observance
of divine precepts. Further, our author shows that true Christian
liberty consists, not, as they vociferate, in self-indulgence, but, on
the contrary, is founded in an entire freedom from perturbations of mind
and passion, and from all filthy lusts.

##### <span id="vi.iv.iii.i-p13.2"></span>VI.

<span id="vi.iv.iii.i-p14"></span>(See p. 389, note 4.)

<span id="vi.iv.iii.i-p15"></span>As to the second class of heretics, he
reproves the contemners of God’s ordinance, who boast of a false
continence, and scorn holy matrimony and the creation of a family. He
contends with them by the authority of St. John, and first answers
objections of theirs, based on certain apocryphal sayings of Christ to
Salome; next, somewhat obscurely, he answers their notions of laws about
marriage imposed in the Old Law, and, as they pretend, abrogated in the
New; thirdly, he rebukes their perpetual clatter about the uncleanness
of conjugal relations; and, fourth, he pulverizes their arguments
derived from the fact, that the children of the resurrection “neither
marry, nor are given in marriage.”

<span id="vi.iv.iii.i-p16"></span>Then he gives his attention to another
class of heretics boasting that they followed the example of Christ, and
presuming to teach that marriage is of the devil. He expounds the
exceptional celibacy of the Messiah, by the two natures of the Godman,
which need nothing but a reverent statement to expose the fallacy of
arguing from His example in this particular, seeing He, alone, of all
the sons of men, is thus supreme over all considerations of human
nature, pure and simple, as it exists in the sons of Adam. Moreover, He
espoused the Church, which is His <span id="page_405">p. 405</span>
<span id="vi.iv.iii.i-Page_405"></span>wife. Clement expounds very
wisely those sayings of our Lord which put honour upon voluntary
celibacy, where the gift has been imparted, for His better service.

<span id="vi.iv.iii.i-p17"></span>And here let it be noted, how
continually the heresies of these times seem to turn on this matter of
the sexes. It is impossible to cleanse a dirty house, without raising a
dust and a bad smell; and heathenism, which had made lust into a
religion, and the worship of its gods a school of gross vice,
penetrating all classes of society, could not be exorcised, and give
place to faith, hope and charity, without this process of conflict, in
which Clement distinguishes himself. At the same time, the wisdom of our
Lord’s precepts and counsels are manifest, in this history. Alike He
taught the sanctity and blessedness of marriage and maternity, and the
exceptional blessedness of the celibate when received as a gift of God,
for a peculiar ministry. Thus heathen morals were rebuked and
castigated, womanhood was lifted to a sphere of unwonted honour, and the
home was created and sanctified in the purity and chastity of the
Christian wife; while yet a celibate chastity was recognised as having a
high place in the Christian system. The Lord prescribes to all, whether
married or unmarried, a law of discipline and evangelical encraty. The
Christian homes of England and America may be pointed out, thank God, as
illustrating the divine wisdom; while the degraded monasteries of Italy
and Spain and South America, with the horrible history of enforced
celibacy in the Latin priesthood, are proofs of the unwisdom of those
who imported into the Western churches the very heresies and abortive
argumentations which Clement disdains, while he pulverizes them and
blows them away, thoroughly purging his floor, and burning up this
chaff.

##### <span id="vi.iv.iii.i-p17.1"></span>VII.

<span id="vi.iv.iii.i-p18"></span>(See p. 390, note 16.)

<span id="vi.iv.iii.i-p19"></span>Here it is specially important to
observe what Clement demonstrates, not only from the teachings of the
apostles, of Elijah and Samuel and the Master Himself, but, finally and
irrefragably, from the apostolic example. He names St. Peter here as
elsewhere, and notes his memorable history as a married man. <span
id="fr_2675"></span>[2676](#fn_2675.md) He supposes St. Paul himself to
have been married; and he instances St. Philip the deacon, and his
married daughters, besides giving the right exposition of a passage
which Carpocrates had shamefully distorted from its plain significance.

##### <span id="vi.iv.iii.i-p20.1"></span>VIII.

<span id="vi.iv.iii.i-p21"></span>(See p. 391, note 18.)

<span id="vi.iv.iii.i-p22"></span>He passes to a demonstration of the
superiority of Christian continence over the sort of self-constraint
lauded by Stoics and other philosophers. God only can enable man to
practice a genuine continence, not merely contending with depraved
lusts, but eradicating them. Here follow some interesting examples drawn
from the brahmins and fakirs of India; interesting tokens, by the way,
of the assaults the Gospel had already made upon their strongholds about
the Ganges.

##### <span id="vi.iv.iii.i-p22.1"></span>IX.

<span id="vi.iv.iii.i-p23"></span>(See, p. 392, note 4.)

<span id="vi.iv.iii.i-p24"></span>Briefly he explains another text, “Sin
shall not have dominion over you,” which the heretics wrested from the
purpose and intent of St. Paul. He also returns to a passage from the
apocryphal Gospel of the Hebrews, and to the pretended conversation of
Christ with Salome, treating it, perhaps, with more consideration than
it merits.

<span id="page_406">p. 406</span> <span
id="vi.iv.iii.i-Page_406"></span>

##### <span id="vi.iv.iii.i-p24.1"></span>X.

<span id="vi.iv.iii.i-p25"></span>(See p. 392, note 11.)

<span id="vi.iv.iii.i-p26"></span>But this Gospel of the Hebrews, and
another apocryphal Gospel, that of the Egyptians, may be worthy of a few
words just here. Jones (*On the Canon*, vol. i. p. 206) very learnedly
maintains that Clement “never saw it,” nor used it for any quotation of
his own. And, as for a Gospel written in the Hebrew tongue, Clement
could not read Hebrew; the single citation he makes out of it, being,
probably, at second hand. Greatly to the point is the argument of
Lardner, <span id="fr_2676"></span>[2677](#fn_2676.md) therefore, who says,
as settling the question of the value of these books, “If Clement, who
lived at Alexandria, and was so well acquainted with almost all sorts of
books, had (but a slight, or) no knowledge at all of them, how obscure
must they have been; how little regarded by Catholic Christians.”

##### <span id="vi.iv.iii.i-p27.1"></span>XI.

<span id="vi.iv.iii.i-p28"></span>(See p. 393, note 5; also Elucidation
xvii. p. 408, *infra*.)

<span id="vi.iv.iii.i-p29"></span>Ingenious is Clement’s exposition of
that saying of our Lord, “Where two or three are met together in my
name,” etc. He explodes a monstrous exposition of the text, and
ingeniously applies it to the Christian family. The husband and the wife
living in chaste matrimony, and the child which God bestows, are three
in sweet society, who may claim and enjoy the promise. This reflects
great light upon the Christian home, as it rose, like a flower, out of
the “Church in the house.” Family prayers, the graces before and after
meat, the hymn “On lighting the lamps at eventide,” and the *complines*,
or prayers at bedtime, are all the products of the divine contract to be
with the “two or three” who are met in His name to claim that
inconceivably precious promise. Other texts from St. Matthew are
explained, in their Catholic verity, by our venerable author.

##### <span id="vi.iv.iii.i-p29.1"></span>XII.

<span id="vi.iv.iii.i-p30"></span>(See p. 394, note 1.)

<span id="vi.iv.iii.i-p31"></span>He further expounds the Catholic idea
of marriage, and rescues, from heretical adulteration, the precept of
Moses ([Ex. xix. 15](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#015.md)<span
id="vi.iv.iii.i-p31.1"></span>); introducing a lucid parallel, with the
Apostolic command, <span id="fr_2677"></span>[2678](#fn_2677.md) “Come out
from among them, and be separate,” etc. He turns the tables on his foul
antagonists; showing them that this very law obliges the Catholic
Christian to separate himself alike from the abominations of the
heathen, and from the depraved heretics who abuse the word of God, and
“wrest the Scriptures to their own destruction.” This eleventh chapter
of the third book abounds in Scriptural citations and expositions, and
is to be specially praised for asserting the purity of married life, in
connection with the inspired law concerning fasting and abstinence ([1
Cor. vii. 3-5](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#003.md)<span
id="vi.iv.iii.i-p32.4"></span>), laid down by the reasonably ascetic St.
Paul.

##### <span id="vi.iv.iii.i-p32.5"></span>XIII.

<span id="vi.iv.iii.i-p33"></span>(See p. 396, note 5.)

<span id="vi.iv.iii.i-p34"></span>The melancholy example of Tatian is
next instanced, in his departures from orthodox encraty. Against poor
Tatian’s garrulity, he proves the sanctity of marriage, alike in the New
and the Old Testaments. A curious argument he adduces against the
*ceremonial* washing prescribed by the <span id="page_407">p. 407</span>
<span id="vi.iv.iii.i-Page_407"></span>law ([Lev. xv.
18](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#018.md)<span
id="vi.iv.iii.i-p34.1"></span>), but not against the same as a dictate
of natural instinct. He considers that particular ceremonial law a
protest against the polygamy which God tolerated, but never authorized,
under Moses; and its abrogation (i.e., by the Synod of Jerusalem), is a
testimony that there is no uncleanness, whatever, in the chaste society
of the married pair, in Christ. He rescues other texts from the profane
uses of the heretics, proving that our duty to abstain from laying up
treasures here, merely layouts the care of the poor and needy; and that
the saying, that “the children of the kingdom neither marry nor are
given in marriage,” respects only their estate after the resurrection.
So the command about “caring for the things of God,” is harmonized with
married life. But our author dwells on the apostle’s emphatic counsels
against second marriages. It is noteworthy how deeply Clement’s
orthodoxy has rooted itself in the Greek churches, where the clergy must
be once married, but are not permitted to marry a second time.

<span id="vi.iv.iii.i-p35"></span>A curious objection is met and
dismissed. The man who excused himself “because he had married a wife,”
was a great card for heretical manipulations; but no need of saying that
Clement knows how to turn this, also, upon their own hands.

##### <span id="vi.iv.iii.i-p35.1"></span>XIV.

<span id="vi.iv.iii.i-p36"></span>(See p. 398, note 8.)

<span id="vi.iv.iii.i-p37"></span>Julius Cassianus (assigned by Lardner
to <span class="sc"><span id="vi.iv.iii.i-p37.1"></span>a.d.</span> 190)
was an Alexandrian Encratite, of whom, whatever his faults, Clement
speaks not without respect. He is quoted with credit in the *Stromata*
(book i. cap. xxi. p. 324), but comes into notice here, as having led
off the school of Docetism. But Clement does not treat him as he does
the vulgar and licentious errorist. He reproves him for his use of the
Gospel according to the Egyptians, incidentally testifying to the
Catholic recognition of only four Gospels. He refutes a Platonic idea of
Cassian, as to the pre-existence of the soul. Also, he promises a full
explanation, elsewhere, of “the coats of skins” (which Cassian seems to
have thought the flesh itself), wherewith Adam and Eve were clothed.
Lardner refers us to Beausobre for a curious discussion of this matter.
Clement refutes a false argument from Christ’s hyperbole of hatred to
wife and children and family ties, and also gives lucid explanations of
passages from Isaiah, Jeremiah, and Ezra, which had been wrested to
heretical abuse. In a similar manner, he overthrows what errorists had
built upon Job’s saying, “who can bring a clean thing out of the
unclean;” as also their false teachings on the texts, “In sin hath my
mother conceived me,” “the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul,” and
the apostolic instance of the athlete who is “temperate in all things.”

##### <span id="vi.iv.iii.i-p37.2"></span>XV.

<span id="vi.iv.iii.i-p38"></span>(See p. 400, cap. xvii. and 401, note
2.)

<span id="vi.iv.iii.i-p39"></span>He proclaims the purity of physical
generation, because of the parturition of the Blessed Virgin;
castigating the docetism of Cassian, who had presumed to speak of the
body of Jesus as a phantasm, and the grosser blasphemies of Marcion and
Valentinus, equally destructive to the Christ of the Gospel. <span
id="fr_2678"></span>[2679](#fn_2678.md) He overturns the whims of these
latter deceivers, about Adam’s society with his wife, and concludes that
our Lord’s assumption of the flesh of His mother, was a sufficient
corroboration of that divine law by which the generations of mankind are
continued.

##### <span id="vi.iv.iii.i-p40.2"></span>XVI.

<span id="vi.iv.iii.i-p41"></span>(See p, 402, note 8.)

<span id="vi.iv.iii.i-p42"></span>From all which Clement concludes that
his two classes of heretics are alike wanderers from Catholic orthodoxy;
whether, on the one hand, under divers pretexts glorifying an unreal
continence <span id="page_408">p. 408</span> <span
id="vi.iv.iii.i-Page_408"></span>against honourable marriage, or, on the
other, persuading themselves as speciously to an unlimited indulgence of
their sinful lusts and passions. Once more he quotes the Old Testament
and the New, which denounce uncleanness, but not the conjugal relations.
He argues with indignation upon those who degrade the estate to which a
bishop is called as “the husband of one wife, ruling his own house and
children well.” Then he reverts to his idea of “the two or three,”
maintaining that a holy marriage makes the bishop’s home “a house of the
Lord” (see note 75, p. 1211, *ed*. Migne). And he concludes the book by
repeating his remonstrance against the claim of these heretics to be
veritable *Gnostics*,—a name he will by no means surrender to the
enemies of truth.

##### <span id="vi.iv.iii.i-p42.1"></span>XVII.

<span id="vi.iv.iii.i-p43"></span>(On [Matt. xviii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#020.md)<span
id="vi.iv.iii.i-p43.2"></span>, p. 393; and, see Elucidation XI,
*supra*.)

<span id="vi.iv.iii.i-p44"></span>To the interpretation I have thought
preferable, and which I ventured to enlarge, it should be added that our
author subjoins others, founded on flesh, soul, and spirit; on vocation,
election, and the Gnostic accepting both; and on the Jew and the
Gentile, and the Church gathered from each race.

<span id="vi.iv.iii.i-p45"></span>Over and over again Clement asserts
that a life of chaste wedlock is not to be accounted imperfect.

<span id="vi.iv.iii.i-p46"></span>On the celibate in practice, see
*<span id="vi.iv.iii.i-p46.1"></span>Le Célibat des Prêtres*, <span
id="vi.iv.iii.i-p46.2"></span>par l’abbé Chavard, Genèva, 1874.

##### <span id="vi.iv.iii.i-p46.3"></span>XVIII.

<span id="vi.iv.iii.i-p47"></span>The *Commentaria* of Le Nourry have
been my guide to the brief analysis of these Elucidations, though I have
not always allowed the learned Benedictine to dictate an opinion, or to
control my sense of our author’s argument.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2674"></span>[403:2675](0020350.htm#fr_2674.md) <span
id="vi.iv.iii.i-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iii.i-p4"></span> See vol. i. p. 332, note 4, this
series.

<span id="fn_2675"></span>[405:2676](0020350.htm#fr_2675.md) <span
id="vi.iv.iii.i-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iii.i-p20"></span> See the touching story of St. Peter’s
words to his wife as she was led to martyrdom (*Stromata*, book vii. p.
451, Edinburgh Edition).

<span id="fn_2676"></span>[406:2677](0020350.htm#fr_2676.md) <span
id="vi.iv.iii.i-p26.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iii.i-p27"></span> Works, ii. 252. See, also, the
apocryphal collection in this series, hereafter.

<span id="fn_2677"></span>[406:2678](0020350.htm#fr_2677.md) <span
id="vi.iv.iii.i-p31.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iii.i-p32"></span> [2 Cor. vi.
17](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#017.md)<span
id="vi.iv.iii.i-p32.1"></span>. Compare [Ex. xxix.
45](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#045.md)<span
id="vi.iv.iii.i-p32.2"></span>, and [Lev. xxvi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#012.md)<span
id="vi.iv.iii.i-p32.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_2678"></span>[407:2679](0020350.htm#fr_2678.md) <span
id="vi.iv.iii.i-p39.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iii.i-p40"></span> In using the phrase *ecclesia nostra*
(<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.iii.i-p40.1"></span>ἡ κατὰ τὴν
Ἐκκλησιαν καθ᾽ ἡμας</span>), which I take to refer to the church
militant, we encounter a formula which we use differently in our day.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book IV.](0020351.md)
