[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020385)  [Next](0020387.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.v.xii"></span>

##### <span id="vi.iv.v.xii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XII.—God Cannot Be Embraced in Words or by the Mind.

<span id="vi.iv.v.xii-p1"></span>“For both is it a difficult task to
discover the Father and Maker of this universe; and having found Him, it
is impossible to declare Him to all. For this is by no means capable of
expression, like the other subjects of instruction,” says the
truth-loving Plato. For he that had heard right well that the all-wise
Moses, ascending the mount for holy contemplation, to the summit of
<span id="page_463">p. 463</span> <span
id="vi.iv.v.xii-Page_463"></span>intellectual objects, necessarily
commands that the whole people do not accompany him. And when the
Scripture says, “Moses entered into the thick darkness where God was,”
this shows to those capable of understanding, that God is invisible and
beyond expression by words. And “the darkness”—which is, in truth, the
unbelief and ignorance of the multitude—obstructs the gleam of truth.
And again Orpheus, the theologian, aided from this quarter, says:—

> <span id="vi.iv.v.xii-p1.1"></span> “One is perfect in himself, and
> all things are made the progeny of one,”  

<span id="vi.iv.v.xii-p2"></span>or, “are born;” for so also is it
written. He adds:—

> <span id="vi.iv.v.xii-p2.1"></span> “Him  
> No one of mortals has seen, but He sees all.”  

<span id="vi.iv.v.xii-p3"></span>And he adds more clearly:—

> <span id="vi.iv.v.xii-p3.1"></span> “Him see I not, for round about, a
> cloud  
> Has settled; for in mortal eyes are small,  
> And mortal pupils—only flesh and bones grow there.”  

<span id="vi.iv.v.xii-p4"></span>To these statements the apostle will
testify: “I know a man in Christ, caught up into the third heaven, and
thence into Paradise, who heard unutterable words which it is not lawful
for a man to speak,”—intimating thus the impossibility of expressing
God, and indicating that what is divine is unutterable by human <span
id="fr_3083"></span>[3084](#fn_3083.md) power; if, indeed, he begins to
speak above the third heaven, as it is lawful to initiate the elect
souls in the mysteries there. For I know what is in Plato (for the
examples from the barbarian philosophy, which are many, are suggested
now by the composition which, in accordance with promises previously
given, waits the suitable time). For doubting, in *Timæus*, whether we
ought to regard several worlds as to be understood by many heavens, or
this one, he makes no distinction in the names, calling the world and
heaven by the same name. But the words of the statement are as follows:
“Whether, then, have we rightly spoken of one heaven, or of many and
infinite? It were more correct to say one, if indeed it was created
according to the model.” Further, in the Epistle of the Romans to the
Corinthians <span id="fr_3084"></span>[3085](#fn_3084.md) it is written,
“An ocean illimitable by men and the worlds after it.” Consequently,
therefore, the noble apostle exclaims, “Oh the depth of the riches both
of the wisdom and the knowledge of God!” <span
id="fr_3085"></span>[3086](#fn_3085.md)

<span id="vi.iv.v.xii-p8"></span>And was it not this which the prophet
meant, when he ordered unleavened cakes <span
id="fr_3086"></span>[3087](#fn_3086.md) to be made, intimating that the
truly sacred mystic word, respecting the unbegotten and His powers,
ought to be concealed? In confirmation of these things, in the Epistle
to the Corinthians the apostle plainly says: “Howbeit we speak wisdom
among those who are perfect, but not the wisdom of this world, or of the
princes of this world, that come to nought. But we speak the wisdom of
God hidden in a mystery.” <span id="fr_3087"></span>[3088](#fn_3087.md) And
again in another place he says: “To the acknowledgment of the mystery of
God in Christ, in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge.” <span id="fr_3088"></span>[3089](#fn_3088.md) These things the
Saviour Himself seals when He says: “To you it is given to know the
mysteries of the kingdom of heaven.” <span
id="fr_3089"></span>[3090](#fn_3089.md) And again the Gospel says that the
Saviour spake to the apostles the word in a mystery. For prophecy says
of Him: “He will open His mouth in parables, and will utter things kept
secret from the foundation of the world.” <span
id="fr_3090"></span>[3091](#fn_3090.md) And now, by the parable of the
leaven, the Lord shows concealment; for He says, “The kingdom of heaven
is like leaven, which a woman took and hid in three measures of meal,
till the whole was leavened.” <span id="fr_3091"></span>[3092](#fn_3091.md)
For the tripartite soul is saved by obedience, through the spiritual
power hidden in it by faith; or because the power of the word which is
given to us, being strong <span id="fr_3092"></span>[3093](#fn_3092.md) and
powerful, draws to itself secretly and invisibly every one who receives
it, and keeps it within himself, and brings his whole system into unity.

<span id="vi.iv.v.xii-p16"></span>Accordingly Solon has written most
wisely respecting God thus:—

> <span id="vi.iv.v.xii-p16.1"></span> “It is most difficult to
> apprehend the mind’s invisible measure  
> Which alone holds the boundaries of all things.”  

<span id="vi.iv.v.xii-p17"></span>For “the divine,” says the poet of
Agrigenturn, <span id="fr_3093"></span>[3094](#fn_3093.md) —

> <span id="vi.iv.v.xii-p18.1"></span> “Is not capable of being
> approached with our eyes,  
> Or grasped with our hands; but the highway  
> Of persuasion, highest of all, leads to men’s minds.”  

<span id="vi.iv.v.xii-p19"></span>And John the apostle says: “No man
hath seen God at any time. The only-begotten God, who is in the bosom of
the Father, He hath declared Him,” <span
id="fr_3094"></span>[3095](#fn_3094.md) —calling invisibility and
ineffableness the bosom of God. Hence some have called it the Depth, as
containing and embosoming all things, inaccessible and boundless.

<span id="vi.iv.v.xii-p21"></span>This discourse respecting God is most
difficult to handle. For since the first principle of everything is
difficult to find out, the absolutely first and oldest principle, which
is the cause of all other things being and having been, is difficult to
exhibit. For how can that be expressed which is neither genus, nor
difference, nor species, nor individual, nor number; nay more, is <span
id="page_464">p. 464</span> <span
id="vi.iv.v.xii-Page_464"></span>neither an event, nor that to which an
event happens? No one can rightly express Him wholly. For on account of
His greatness He is ranked as the All, and is the Father of the
universe. Nor are any parts to be predicated of Him. For the One is
indivisible; wherefore also it is infinite, not considered with
reference to inscrutability, but with reference to its being without
dimensions, and not having a limit. And therefore it is without form and
name. And if we name it, we do not do so properly, terming it either the
One, or the Good, or Mind, or Absolute Being, or Father, or God, or
Creator, or Lord. We speak not as supplying His name; but for want, we
use good names, in order that the mind may have these as points of
support, so as not to err in other respects. For each one by itself does
not express God; but all together are indicative of the power of the
Omnipotent. For predicates are expressed either from what belongs to
things themselves, or from their mutual relation. But none of these are
admissible in reference to God. Nor any more is He apprehended by the
science of demonstration. For it depends on primary and better known
principles. But there is nothing antecedent to the Unbegotten.

<span id="vi.iv.v.xii-p22"></span>It remains that we understand, then,
the Unknown, by divine grace, and by the word alone that proceeds from
Him; as Luke in the Acts of the Apostles relates that Paul said, “Men of
Athens, I perceive that in all things ye are too superstitious. <span
id="fr_3095"></span>[3096](#fn_3095.md) For in walking about, and beholding
the objects of your worship, I found an altar on which was inscribed, To
the Unknown God. Whom therefore ye ignorantly worship, Him declare I
unto you.” <span id="fr_3096"></span>[3097](#fn_3096.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3083"></span>[463:3084](0020386.htm#fr_3083.md) <span
id="vi.iv.v.xii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.xii-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.v.xii-p5.1"></span>ἁγίᾳ</span> is the reading of the text.
This is with great probability supposed to be changed from <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.v.xii-p5.2"></span>ἀνῃ</span>, a usual
contraction for <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.v.xii-p5.3"></span>ανθρωπίνη</span>.

<span id="fn_3084"></span>[463:3085](0020386.htm#fr_3084.md) <span
id="vi.iv.v.xii-p5.4"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.xii-p6"></span> \[i.e., as written by St. Clement of
Rome. See vol. i, p. 10. S.\]

<span id="fn_3085"></span>[463:3086](0020386.htm#fr_3085.md) <span
id="vi.iv.v.xii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.xii-p7"></span> [Rom. xi.
33](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#033.md)<span id="vi.iv.v.xii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3086"></span>[463:3087](0020386.htm#fr_3086.md) <span
id="vi.iv.v.xii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.xii-p9"></span> Alluding to [Gen. xviii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#006.md)<span id="vi.iv.v.xii-p9.1"></span>;
the word used is <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.v.xii-p9.2"></span>ἐγκρυφίαι</span>, which Clement, following
Philo, from its derivation, takes to signify occult mysteries.

<span id="fn_3087"></span>[463:3088](0020386.htm#fr_3087.md) <span
id="vi.iv.v.xii-p9.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.xii-p10"></span> [1 Cor.
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#006.md),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#007.md)<span
id="vi.iv.v.xii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3088"></span>[463:3089](0020386.htm#fr_3088.md) <span
id="vi.iv.v.xii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.xii-p11"></span> [Col.
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#002.md),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#003.md)<span
id="vi.iv.v.xii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3089"></span>[463:3090](0020386.htm#fr_3089.md) <span
id="vi.iv.v.xii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.xii-p12"></span> [Matt. xiii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#011.md)<span
id="vi.iv.v.xii-p12.1"></span>; [Mark iv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#011.md)<span
id="vi.iv.v.xii-p12.2"></span>; [Luke viii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#010.md)<span
id="vi.iv.v.xii-p12.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_3090"></span>[463:3091](0020386.htm#fr_3090.md) <span
id="vi.iv.v.xii-p12.4"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.xii-p13"></span> [Ps. lxxviii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#002.md)<span id="vi.iv.v.xii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3091"></span>[463:3092](0020386.htm#fr_3091.md) <span
id="vi.iv.v.xii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.xii-p14"></span> [Matt. xiii.
33](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#033.md)<span
id="vi.iv.v.xii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3092"></span>[463:3093](0020386.htm#fr_3092.md) <span
id="vi.iv.v.xii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.xii-p15"></span> According to the conjecture of
Sylburgius, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv.v.xii-p15.1"></span>σύντονος</span> is adopted for <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv.v.xii-p15.2"></span>σύντομος</span>.

<span id="fn_3093"></span>[463:3094](0020386.htm#fr_3093.md) <span
id="vi.iv.v.xii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.xii-p18"></span> Empedocles.

<span id="fn_3094"></span>[463:3095](0020386.htm#fr_3094.md) <span
id="vi.iv.v.xii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.xii-p20"></span> [John. i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018.md)<span
id="vi.iv.v.xii-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3095"></span>[464:3096](0020386.htm#fr_3095.md) <span
id="vi.iv.v.xii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.xii-p23"></span> \[Elucidation VII.\]

<span id="fn_3096"></span>[464:3097](0020386.htm#fr_3096.md) <span
id="vi.iv.v.xii-p23.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.v.xii-p24"></span> [Acts
17:22](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#022.md),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#023.md)<span
id="vi.iv.v.xii-p24.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII.—The Knowledge of God a Divine Gift, According to
the Philosophers.](0020387.md)
