[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020288)  [Next](0020290.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi"></span>

##### <span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XI.—A Compendious View of the Christian Life.

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p1"></span>Wherefore the wearing of gold and the
use of softer clothing is not to be entirely prohibited. But irrational
impulses must be curbed, lest, carrying us away through excessive
relaxation, they impel us to voluptuousness. For luxury, that has dashed
on to surfeit, is prone to kick up its heels and toss its mane, and
shake off the charioteer, the Instructor; who, pulling back the reins
from far, leads and drives to salvation the human horse—that is, the
irrational part of the soul—which is wildly bent on pleasures, and
vicious appetites, and precious stones, and gold, and variety of dress,
and other luxuries.

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p2"></span>Above all, we are to keep in mind
what was spoken sacredly: “Having your conversation honest among the
Gentiles; that, whereas they speak against you as evil-doers, they may,
by the good works which they behold, glorify God.” <span
id="fr_1667"></span>[1668](#fn_1667.md)

###### <span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p3.2"></span>Clothes.

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p4"></span>The Instructor permits us, then, to
use simple clothing, and of a white colour, as we said before. So that,
accommodating ourselves not to variegated art, but to nature as it is
produced, and pushing away whatever is deceptive and belies the truth,
we may embrace the uniformity and simplicity of the truth. <span
id="fr_1668"></span>[1669](#fn_1668.md)

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p6"></span>Sophocles, reproaching a youth,
says:—

> <span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p6.1"></span> “Decked in women’s clothes.”  

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p7"></span>For, as in the case of the soldier,
the sailor, and the ruler, so also the proper dress of the temperate man
is what is plain, becoming, and clean. Whence also in the law, the law
enacted by Moses about leprousy rejects what has many colours and spots,
like the various scales of the snake. He therefore wishes man, no longer
decking himself gaudily in a variety of colours, but white all over from
the crown of the head to the sole of the foot, to be clean; so that, by
a transition from the body, we may lay aside the varied and versatile
passions of the man, and love the unvaried, and unambiguous, and simple
colour of truth. And he who also in this emulates Moses—Plato best of
all—approves of that texture on which not more than a chaste woman’s
work has been employed. And white colours well become gravity. And
elsewhere he says, “Nor apply dyes or weaving, except for warlike
decorations.” <span id="fr_1669"></span>[1670](#fn_1669.md)

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p9"></span>To men of peace and of light,
therefore, white is appropriate. <span
id="fr_1670"></span>[1671](#fn_1670.md) As, then, signs, which are very
closely allied to causes, by their presence indicate, or rather
demonstrate, the existence of the result; as smoke is the sign of fire,
and a good complexion and a regular pulse of health; so also clothing of
this description shows the character of our habits. Temperance is pure
and simple; since purity is a habit which ensures pure conduct unmixed
with what is base. Simplicity is a habit which does away with
superfluities.

<span id="page_285">p. 285</span> <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-Page_285"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p11"></span>Substantial clothing also, and
chiefly what is unfulled, protects the heat which is in the body; not
that the clothing has heat in itself, but that it turns back the heat
issuing from the body, and refuses it a passage. And whatever heat falls
upon it, it absorbs and retains, and being warmed by it, warms in turn
the body. And for this reason it is chiefly to be worn in winter.

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p12"></span>It also (temperance) is contented.
And contentment is a habit which dispenses with superfluities, and, that
there may be no failure, is receptive of what suffices for the healthful
and blessed life according to the Word. <span
id="fr_1671"></span>[1672](#fn_1671.md)

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p14"></span>Let the women wear a plain and
becoming dress, but softer than what is suitable for a man, yet not
quite immodest or entirely gone in luxury. And let the garments be
suited to age, person, figure, nature, pursuits. For the divine apostle
most beautifully counsels us “to put on Jesus Christ, and make no
provision for the lusts of the flesh.” <span
id="fr_1672"></span>[1673](#fn_1672.md)

###### <span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p15.2"></span>Ear-rings.

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p16"></span>The Word prohibits us from doing
violence to nature <span id="fr_1673"></span>[1674](#fn_1673.md) by boring
the lobes of the ears. For why not the nose too?—so that, what was
spoken, may be fulfilled: “As an ear-ring in a swine’s nose, so is
beauty to a woman without discretion.” <span
id="fr_1674"></span>[1675](#fn_1674.md) For, in a word, if one thinks
himself made beautiful by gold, he is inferior to gold; and he that is
inferior to gold is not lord of it. But to confess one’s self less
ornamental than the Lydian ore, how monstrous! As, then, the gold is
polluted by the dirtiness of the sow, which stirs up the mire with her
snout, so those women that are luxurious to excess in their wantonness,
elated by wealth, dishonour by the stains of amatory indulgences what is
the true beauty.

###### <span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p18.2"></span>Finger-rings.

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p19"></span>The Word, then, permits them a
finger-ring of gold. <span id="fr_1675"></span>[1676](#fn_1675.md) Nor is
this for ornament, but for sealing things which are worth keeping safe
in the house in the exercise of their charge of housekeeping.

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p21"></span>For if all were well trained, there
would be no need of seals, if servants and masters were equally honest.
But since want of training produces an inclination to dishonesty, we
require seals.

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p22"></span>But there are circumstances in which
this strictness may relaxed. For allowance must sometimes be made in
favour of those women who have not been fortunate <span
id="fr_1676"></span>[1677](#fn_1676.md) in falling in with chaste husbands,
and adorn themselves in order to please their husbands. But let desire
for the admiration of their husbands alone be proposed as their aim. I
would not have them to devote themselves to personal display, but to
attract their husbands by chaste love for them—a powerful and legitimate
charm. But since they wish their wives to be unhappy in mind, let the
latter, if they would be chaste, make it their aim to allay by degrees
the irrational impulses and passions of their husbands. And they are to
be gently drawn to simplicity, by gradually accustoming them to
sobriety. For decency is not produced by the imposition of what is
burdensome, but by the abstraction of excess. For women’s articles of
luxury are to be prohibited, as things of swift wing producing unstable
follies and empty delights; by which, elated and furnished with wings,
they often fly away from the marriage bonds. Wherefore also women ought
to dress neatly, and bind themselves around with the band of chaste
modesty, lest through giddiness they slip away from the truth. It is
right, then, for men to repose confidence in their wives, and commit the
charge of the household to them, as they are given to be their helpers
in this.

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p24"></span>And if it is necessary for us, while
engaged in public business, or discharging other avocations in the
country, and often away from our wives, to seal anything for the sake of
safety, He (the Word) allows us a signet for this purpose only. Other
finger-rings are to be cast off, since, according to the Scripture,
“instruction is a golden ornament for a wise man.” <span
id="fr_1677"></span>[1678](#fn_1677.md)

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p26"></span>But women who wear gold seem to me
to be afraid, lest, if one strip them of their jewellery, they should be
taken for servants, without their ornaments. But the nobility of truth,
discovered in the native beauty which has its seat in the soul, judges
the slave not by buying and selling, but by a servile disposition. And
it is incumbent on us not to seem, but to be free, trained by God,
adopted by God.

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p27"></span>Wherefore we must adopt a mode of
standing and motion, and a step, and dress, and in a word, a mode of
life, in all respects as worthy as possible of freemen. But men are not
to wear the ring on the joint; for this is feminine; but to place it on
the little finger at its root. For so the hand will be freest for work,
in whatever we need it; and the signet will not very easily fall off,
being guarded by the large knot of the joint.

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p28"></span>And let our seals be either a dove,
or a fish, or a ship scudding before the wind, or a musical lyre, which
Polycrates used, or a ship’s anchor, which Seleucus got engraved as a
device; and if there be one fishing, he will remember the <span
id="page_286">p. 286</span> <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-Page_286"></span>apostle, and the children drawn out
of the water. For we are not to delineate the faces of idols, <span
id="fr_1678"></span>[1679](#fn_1678.md) we who are prohibited to cleave to
them; nor a sword, nor a bow, following as we do, peace; nor
drinking-cups, being temperate.

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p30"></span>Many of the licentious have their
lovers <span id="fr_1679"></span>[1680](#fn_1679.md) engraved, <span
id="fr_1680"></span>[1681](#fn_1680.md) or their mistresses, as if they
wished to make it impossible ever to forget their amatory indulgences,
by being perpetually put in mind of their licentiousness.

###### <span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p32.3"></span>The Hair.

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p33"></span>About the hair, the following seems
right. Let the head of men be shaven, unless it has curly hair. But let
the chin have the hair. But let not twisted locks hang far down from the
head, gliding into womanish ringlets. For an ample beard suffices for
men. And if one, too, shave a part of his beard, it must not be made
entirely bare, for this is a disgraceful sight. The shaving of the chin
to the skin is reprehensible, approaching to plucking out the hair and
smoothing. For instance, thus the Psalmist, delighted with the hair of
the beard, says, “As the ointment that descends on the beard, the beard
of Aaron.” <span id="fr_1681"></span>[1682](#fn_1681.md)

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p35"></span>Having celebrated the beauty of the
beard by a repetition, he made the face to shine with the ointment of
the Lord.

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p36"></span>Since cropping is to be adopted not
for the sake of elegance, but on account of the necessity of the case;
the hair of the head, that it may not grow so long as to come down and
interfere with the eyes, and that of the moustache similarly, which is
dirtied in eating, is to be cut round, not by the razor, for that were
not well-bred, but by a pair of cropping scissors. But the hair on the
chin is not to be disturbed, as it gives no trouble, and lends to the
face dignity and paternal terror. <span
id="fr_1682"></span>[1683](#fn_1682.md)

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p38"></span>Moreover, the shape instructs many
not to sin, because it renders detection easy. To those who do
\[not\] <span id="fr_1683"></span>[1684](#fn_1683.md) wish to sin openly, a
habit that will escape observation and is not conspicuous is most
agreeable, which, when assumed, will allow them to transgress without
detection; so that, being undistinguishable from others, they may
fearlessly go their length in sinning. <span
id="fr_1684"></span>[1685](#fn_1684.md) A cropped head not only shows a man
to be gave, but renders the cranium less liable to injury, by
accustoming it to the presence of both cold and heat; and it averts the
mischiefs arising from these, which the hair absorbs into itself like a
sponge, and so inflicts on the brain constant mischief from the
moisture.

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p41"></span>It is enough for women to
protect <span id="fr_1685"></span>[1686](#fn_1685.md) their locks, and bind
up their hair simply along the neck with a plain hair-pin, nourishing
chaste locks with simple care to true beauty. For meretricious plaiting
of the hair, and putting it up in tresses, contribute to make them look
ugly, cutting the hair and plucking off it those treacherous braidings;
on account of which they do not touch their head, being afraid of
disordering their hair. Sleep, too, comes on, not without fear lest they
pull down without knowing the shape of the braid.

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p43"></span>But additions of other people’s hair
are entirely to be rejected, and it is a most sacrilegious thing for
spurious hair to shade the head, covering the skull with dead locks. For
on whom does the presbyter lay his hand? <span
id="fr_1686"></span>[1687](#fn_1686.md) Whom does he bless? Not the woman
decked out, but another’s hair, and through them another head. And if
“the man is head of the woman, and God of the man,” <span
id="fr_1687"></span>[1688](#fn_1687.md) how is it not impious that they
should fall into double sins? For they deceive the men by the excessive
quantity of their hair; and shame the Lord as far as in them lies, by
adorning themselves meretriciously, in order to dissemble the truth. And
they defame the head, which is truly beautiful.

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p46"></span>Consequently neither is the hair to
be dyed, nor grey hair to have its colour changed. For neither are we
allowed to diversify our dress. And above all, old age, which
conciliates trust, is not to be concealed. But God’s mark of honour is
to be shown in the light of day, to win the reverence of the young. For
sometimes, when they have been behaving shamefully, the appearance of
hoary hairs, arriving like an instructor, has changed them to sobriety,
and paralyzed juvenile lust with the splendour of the sight.

###### <span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p46.1"></span>Painting the Face.

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p47"></span>Nor are the women to smear their
faces with the ensnaring devices of wily cunning. But let us show to
them the decoration of sobriety. For, in the first place, the best
beauty is that which is spiritual, as we have often pointed out. For
when the soul is adorned by the Holy Spirit, and inspired with the
radiant charms which proceed from Him,—righteousness, wisdom, fortitude,
temperance, love of the good, modesty, <span id="page_287">p. 287</span>
<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-Page_287"></span>than which no more blooming
colour was ever seen,—then let coporeal beauty be cultivated too,
symmetry of limbs and members, with a fair complexion. The adornment of
health is here in place, through which the transition of the artificial
image to the truth, in accordance with the form which has been given by
God, is effected. But temperance in drinks, and moderation in articles
of food, are effectual in producing beauty according to nature; for not
only does the body maintain its health from these, but they also make
beauty to appear. For from what is fiery arises a gleam and sparkle; and
from moisture, brightness and grace; and from dryness, strength and
firmness; and from what is aërial, free-breathing and equipoise; from
which this well-proportioned and beautiful image of the Word is adorned.
Beauty is the free flower of health; for the latter is produced within
the body; while the former, blossoming out from the body, exhibits
manifest beauty of complexion. Accordingly, these most decorous and
healthful practices, by exercising the body, produce true and lasting
beauty, the heat attracting to itself all the moisture and cold spirit.
Heat, when agitated by moving causes, is a thing which attracts to
itself; and when it does attract, it gently exhales through the flesh
itself, when warmed, the abundance of food, with some moisture, but with
excess of heat. Wherefore also the first food is carried off. But when
the body is not moved, the food consumed does not adhere, but falls
away, as the loaf from a cold oven, either entire, or leaving only the
lower part. Accordingly, the *fœces* are in excess in the case of those
who do not throw off the excrementitious matters by the rubbings
necessitated by exercise. And other superfluous matters abound in their
case too, and also perspiration, as the food is not assimilated by the
body, but is flowing out to waste. Thence also lusts are excited, the
redundance flowing to the *pudenda* by commensurate motions. Wherefore
this redundance ought to be liquefied and dispersed for digestion, by
which beauty acquires its ruddy hue. But it is monstrous for those who
are made in “the image and likeness of God,” to dishonour the archetype
by assuming a foreign ornament, preferring the mischievous contrivance
of man to the divine creation.

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p48"></span>The Instructor orders them to go
forth “in becoming apparel, and adorn themselves with shamefacedness and
sobriety,” <span id="fr_1688"></span>[1689](#fn_1688.md) “subject to their
own husbands; that, if any obey not the word, they may without the word
be won by the conversation of the wives; while they behold,” he says,
“your chaste conversation. Whose adorning, let it not be that outward
adorning of plaiting the hair, and of wearing of gold, or of putting on
of apparel; but let it be the hidden man of the heart, in that which is
not corruptible, even the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, which is
in the sight of God of great price.” <span
id="fr_1689"></span>[1690](#fn_1689.md)

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p51"></span>For the labour of their own hands,
above all, adds genuine beauty to women, exercising their bodies and
adorning themselves by their own exertions; not bringing unornamental
ornament wrought by others, which is vulgar and meretricious, but that
of every good woman, supplied and woven by her own hands whenever she
most requires. For it is never suitable for women whose lives are framed
according to God, to appear arrayed in things bought from the market,
but in their own home-made work. For a most beautiful thing is a thrifty
wife, who clothes both herself and her husband with fair array of her
own working; <span id="fr_1690"></span>[1691](#fn_1690.md) in which all are
glad—the children on account of their mother, the husband on account of
his wife, she on their account, and all in God.

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p53"></span>In brief, “A store of excellence is
a woman of worth, who eateth not the bread of idleness; and the laws of
mercy are on her tongue; who openeth her mouth wisely and rightly; whose
children rise up and call her blessed,” as the sacred Word says by
Solomon: “Her husband also, and he praiseth her. For a pious woman is
blessed; and let her praise the fear of the <span class="sc"><span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p53.1"></span>Lord</span>.” <span
id="fr_1691"></span>[1692](#fn_1691.md)

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p55"></span>And again, “A virtuous woman is a
crown to her husband.” <span id="fr_1692"></span>[1693](#fn_1692.md) They
must, as far as possible, correct their gestures, looks, steps, and
speech. For they must not do as some, who, imitating the acting of
comedy, and practising the mincing motions of dancers, conduct
themselves in society as if on the stage, with voluptuous movements, and
gliding steps, and affected voices, casting languishing glances round,
tricked out with the bait of pleasure. “For honey drops from the lips of
a woman who is an harlot; who, speaking to please, lubricates thy
throat. But at last thou wilt find it bitterer than bile, and sharper
than a two-edged sword. For the feet of folly lead those who practice it
to hell after death.” <span id="fr_1693"></span>[1694](#fn_1693.md)

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p58"></span>The noble Samson was overcome by the
harlot, and by another woman was shorn of his manhood. But Joseph was
not thus beguiled by another woman. The Egyptian harlot was conquered.
And chastity, <span id="fr_1694"></span>[1695](#fn_1694.md) assuming to
itself bonds, appears superior to dissolute licence. Most excellent is
what has been said:—

<span id="page_288">p. 288</span> <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-Page_288"></span>

> <span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p59.4"></span> “In fine, I know not how  
> To whisper, nor effeminately,  
> To walk about with my neck awry,  
> As I see others—lechers there  
> In numbers in the city, with hair plucked out.” <span
> id="fr_1695"></span>[1696](#fn_1695.md)  

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p61"></span>But feminine motions, dissoluteness,
and luxury, are to be entirely prohibited. For voluptuousness of motion
in walking, “and a mincing gait,” as Anacreon says, are altogether
meretricious.

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p62"></span>“As seems to me,” says the comedy,
“it is time <span id="fr_1696"></span>[1697](#fn_1696.md) to abandon
meretricious steps and luxury.” And the steps of harlotry lean not to
the truth; for they approach not the paths of life. Her tracks are
dangerous, and not easily known. <span
id="fr_1697"></span>[1698](#fn_1697.md) The eyes especially are to be
sparingly used, since it is better to slip with the feet than with the
eyes. <span id="fr_1698"></span>[1699](#fn_1698.md) Accordingly, the Lord
very summarily cures this malady: “If thine eye offend thee, cut it
out,” <span id="fr_1699"></span>[1700](#fn_1699.md) He says, dragging lust
up from the foundation. But languishing looks, and ogling, which is to
wink with the eyes, is nothing else than to commit adultery with the
eyes, lust skirmishing through them. For of the whole body, the eyes are
first destroyed. “The eye contemplating beautiful objects (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p66.4"></span>καλά</span>),
gladdens the heart;” that is, the eye which has learned rightly (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p66.5"></span>καλῶς</span>) to
see, gladdens. “Winking with the eye, with guile, heaps woes on
men.” <span id="fr_1700"></span>[1701](#fn_1700.md) Such they introduce the
effeminate Sardanapalus, king of the Assyrians, sitting on a couch with
his legs up, fumbling at his purple robe, and casting up the whites of
his eyes. Women that follow such practices, by their looks offer
themselves for prostitution. “For the light of the body is the eye,”
says the Scripture, by which the interior illuminated by the shining
light appears. Fornication in a woman is in the raising of the
eyes. <span id="fr_1701"></span>[1702](#fn_1701.md)

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p69"></span>“Mortify therefore your members
which are upon the earth; fornication, uncleanness, inordinate
affection, and concupiscence, and covetousness, which is idolatry: for
which things’ sake cometh the wrath of God upon the children of
disobedience,” <span id="fr_1702"></span>[1703](#fn_1702.md) cries the
apostle.

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p71"></span>But we enkindle the passions, and
are not ashamed.

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p72"></span>Some of these women eating
mastich, <span id="fr_1703"></span>[1704](#fn_1703.md) going about, show
their teeth to those that come near. And others, as if they had not
fingers, give themselves airs, scratching their heads with pins; and
these made either of tortoise or ivory, or some other dead creature they
procure at much pains. And others, as if they had certain
efflorescences, in order to appear comely in the eyes of spectators,
stain their faces by adorning them with gay-coloured unguents. Such a
one is called by Solomon “a foolish and bold woman,” who “knows not
shame. She sits at the door of her house, conspicuously in a seat,
calling to all that pass by the way, who go right on their ways;” by her
style and whole life manifestly saying, “Who among you is very silly?
let him turn to me.” And those devoid of wisdom she exhorts, saying,
“Touch sweetly secret bread, and sweet stolen water;” meaning by this,
clandestine love (from this point the Bœotian Pindar, coming to our
help, says, “The clandestine pursuit of love is something sweet”). But
the miserable man “knoweth not that the sons of earth perish beside her,
and that she tends to the level of hell.” But says the Instructor: “Hie
away, and tarry not in the place; nor fix thine eye on her: for thus
shalt thou pass over a strange water, and cross to Acheron.” <span
id="fr_1704"></span>[1705](#fn_1704.md) Wherefore thus saith the Lord by
Isaiah, “Because the daughters of Sion walk with lofty neck, and with
winkings of the eyes, and sweeping their garments as they walk, and
playing with their feet; the Lord shall humble the daughters of Sion,
and will uncover their form” <span id="fr_1705"></span>[1706](#fn_1705.md)
—their deformed form. I, deem it wrong that servant girls, who follow
women of high rank, should either speak or act unbecomingly to them. But
I think it right that they should be corrected by their mistresses. With
very sharp censure, accordingly, the comic poet Philemon says: “You may
follow at the back of a pretty servant girl, seen behind a gentlewoman;
and any one from the Platæicum may follow close, and ogle her.” For the
wantonness of the servant recoils on the mistress; allowing those who
attempt to take lesser liberties not to be afraid to advance to greater;
since the mistress, by allowing improprieties, shows that she does not
disapprove of them. And not to be angry at those who act wantonly, is a
clear proof of a disposition inclining to the like. “For like mistress
like wench,” <span id="fr_1706"></span>[1707](#fn_1706.md) as they say in
the proverb.

###### <span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p76.2"></span>Walking.

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p77"></span>Also we must abandon a furious mode
of walking, and choose a grave and leisurely, but not a lingering step.

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p78"></span>Nor is one to swagger in the ways,
nor throw back his head to look at those he meets, if they look at him,
as if he were strutting on the stage, and pointed at with the finger.
Nor, when pushing up hill, are they to be shoved up by <span
id="page_289">p. 289</span> <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-Page_289"></span>their domestics, as we see those that
are more luxurious, who appear strong, but are enfeebled by effeminacy
of soul.

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p79"></span>A true gentleman must have no mark
of effeminacy visible on his face, or any other part of his body. Let no
blot on his manliness, then, be ever found either in his movements or
habits. Nor is a man in health to use his servants as horses to bear
him. For as it is enjoined on them, “to be subject to their masters with
all fear, not only to the good and gentle, but also to the
froward,” <span id="fr_1707"></span>[1708](#fn_1707.md) as Peter says; so
fairness, and forbearance, and kindness, are what well becomes the
masters. For he says: “Finally, be ye all of one mind, having compassion
one of another; love as brethren, be pitiful, be humble,” and so forth,
“that ye may inherit a blessing,” <span
id="fr_1708"></span>[1709](#fn_1708.md) excellent and desirable.

###### <span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p81.4"></span>The Model Maiden.

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p82"></span>Zeno the Cittiæan thought fit to
represent the image of a young maid, and executed the statue thus: “Let
her face be clean, her eyebrows not let down, nor her eyelids open nor
turned back. Let her neck not be stretched back, nor the members of her
body be loose. But let the parts that hang from the body look as if they
were well strung; let there be the keenness of a well-regulated
mind <span id="fr_1709"></span>[1710](#fn_1709.md) for discourse, and
retention of what has been rightly spoken; and let her attitudes and
movements give no ground of hope to the licentious; but let there be the
bloom of modesty, and an expression of firmness. But far from her be the
wearisome trouble that comes from the shops of perfumers, and
goldsmiths, and dealers in wool, and that which comes from the other
shops where women, meretriciously dressed, pass whole days as if sitting
in the stews.”

###### <span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p83.2"></span>Amusements and Associates.

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p84"></span>And let not men, therefore, spend
their time in barbers’ shops and taverns, babbling nonsense; and let
them give up hunting for the women who sit near, <span
id="fr_1710"></span>[1711](#fn_1710.md) and ceaselessly talking slander
against many to raise a laugh.

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p86"></span>The game of dice <span
id="fr_1711"></span>[1712](#fn_1711.md) is to be prohibited, and the
pursuit of gain, especially by dicing, <span
id="fr_1712"></span>[1713](#fn_1712.md) which many keenly follow. Such
things the prodigality of luxury invents for the idle. For the cause is
idleness, and a love <span id="fr_1713"></span>[1714](#fn_1713.md) for
frivolities apart from the truth. For it is not possible otherwise to
obtain enjoyment without injury; and each man’s preference of a mode of
life is a counterpart of his disposition.

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p90"></span>But, as appears, only intercourse
with good men benefits; on the other hand, the all-wise Instructor, by
the mouth of Moses, recognising companionship with bad men as swinish,
forbade the ancient people to partake of swine; to point out that those
who call on God ought not to mingle with unclean men, who, like swine,
delight in corporeal pleasures, in impure food, and in itching with
filthy pruriency after the mischievous delights of lewdness.

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p91"></span>Further, He says: “Thou art not to
eat a kite or swift-winged ravenous bird, or an eagle,” <span
id="fr_1714"></span>[1715](#fn_1714.md) meaning: Thou shalt not come near
men who gain their living by rapine. And other things also are exhibited
figuratively.

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p93"></span>With whom, then, are we to
associate? With the righteous, He says again, speaking figuratively; for
everything “which parts the hoof and chews the cud is clean.” For the
parting of the hoof indicates the equilibrium of righteousness, and
ruminating points to the proper food of righteousness, the word, which
enters from without, like food, by instruction, but is recalled from the
mind, as from the stomach, to rational recollection. And the spiritual
man, having the word in his mouth, ruminates the spiritual food; and
righteousness parts the hoof rightly, because it sanctifies us in this
life, and sends us on our way to the world to come.

###### <span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p93.1"></span>Public Spectacles.

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p94"></span>The Instructor will not then bring
us to public spectacles; nor inappropriately might one call the
racecourse and the theatre “the seat of plagues;” <span
id="fr_1715"></span>[1716](#fn_1715.md) for there is evil counsel as
against the Just One, <span id="fr_1716"></span>[1717](#fn_1716.md) and
therefore the assembly against Him is execrated. These assemblies,
indeed, are full of confusion <span id="fr_1717"></span>[1718](#fn_1717.md)
and iniquity; and these pretexts for assembling are the cause of
disorder—men and women assembling promiscuously if for the sight of one
another. In this respect the assembly has already shown itself bad: for
when the eye is lascivious, <span id="fr_1718"></span>[1719](#fn_1718.md)
the desires grow warm; and the eyes that are accustomed to look
impudently at one’s neighbours during the leisure granted to them,
inflame the amatory desires. Let spectacles, therefore, and plays that
are full of scurrility and of abundant gossip, be forbidden. <span
id="fr_1719"></span>[1720](#fn_1719.md) For what base action is it that is
<span id="page_290">p. 290</span> <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-Page_290"></span>not exhibited in the theatres? And
what shameless saying is it that is not brought forward by the buffoons?
And those who enjoy the evil that is in them, stamp the clear images of
it at home. And, on the other hand, those that are proof against these
things, and unimpressible, will never make a stumble in regard to
luxurious pleasures.

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p100"></span>For if people shall say that they
betake themselves to the spectacles as a pastime for recreation, I
should say that the cities which make a serious business of pastime are
not wise; for cruel contests for glory which have been so fatal are not
sport. No more is senseless expenditure of money, nor are the riots that
are occasioned by them sport. And ease of mind is not to be purchased by
zealous pursuit of frivolities, for no one who has his senses will ever
prefer what is pleasant to what is good.

###### <span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p100.1"></span>Religion in Ordinary Life.

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p101"></span>But it is said we do not all
philosophize. Do we not all, then, follow after life? What sayest thou?
How hast thou believed? How, pray, dost thou love God and thy neighbour,
if thou dost not philosophize? And how dost thou love thyself, if thou
dost not love life? It is said, I have not learned letters; but if thou
hast not learned to read, thou canst not excuse thyself in the case of
hearing, for it is not taught. And faith is the possession not of the
wise according to the world, but of those according to God; and it is
taught without letters; and its handbook, at once rude and divine, is
called love—a spiritual book. It is in your power to listen to divine
wisdom, ay, and to frame your life in accordance with it. Nay, you are
not prohibited from conducting affairs in the world decorously according
to God. Let not him who sells or buys aught name two prices for what he
buys or sells; but stating the net price, and studying to speak the
truth, if he get not his price, he gets the truth, and is rich in the
possession of rectitude. But, above all, let an oath on account of what
is sold be far from you; and let swearing, too, on account of other
things be banished.

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p102"></span>And in this way those who frequent
the market-place and the shop philosophize. “For thou shalt not take the
name of the <span class="sc"><span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p102.1"></span>Lord</span> thy God in vain: for the
<span class="sc"><span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p102.2"></span>Lord</span> will
not hold him guiltless that taketh His name in vain.” <span
id="fr_1720"></span>[1721](#fn_1720.md)

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p104"></span>But those who act contrary to these
things—the avaricious, the liars, the hypocrites, those who make
merchandise of the truth—the Lord cast out of His Father’s court, <span
id="fr_1721"></span>[1722](#fn_1721.md) not willing that the holy house of
God should be the house of unrighteous traffic either in words or in
material things.

###### <span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p105.4"></span>Going to Church.

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p106"></span>Woman and man are to go to
church <span id="fr_1722"></span>[1723](#fn_1722.md) decently attired, with
natural step, embracing silence, possessing unfeigned love, pure in
body, pure in heart, fit to pray to God. Let the woman observe this,
further. Let her be entirely covered, unless she happen to be at home.
For that style of dress is grave, and protects from being gazed at. And
she will never fall, who puts before her eyes modesty, and her shawl;
nor will she invite another to fall into sin by uncovering her face. For
this is the wish of the Word, since it is becoming for her to pray
veiled. <span id="fr_1723"></span>[1724](#fn_1723.md)

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p109"></span>They say that the wife of Æneas,
through excess of propriety, did not, even in her terror at the capture
of Troy, uncover herself; but, though fleeing from the conflagration,
remained veiled.

###### <span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p109.1"></span>Out of Church.

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p110"></span>Such ought those who are
consecrated to Christ appear, and frame themselves in their whole life,
as they fashion themselves in the church <span
id="fr_1724"></span>[1725](#fn_1724.md) for the sake of gravity; and to be,
not to seem such—so meek, so pious, so loving. But now I know not how
people change their fashions and manners with the place. As they say
that polypi, assimilated to the rocks to which they adhere, are in
colour such as they; so, laying aside the inspiration of the assembly,
after their departure from it, they become like others with whom they
associate. Nay, in laying aside the artificial mask of solemnity, they
are proved to be what they secretly were. After having paid reverence to
the discourse about God, they leave within \[the church\] what they have
heard. And outside they foolishly amuse themselves with impious playing,
and amatory quavering, occupied with flute-playing, and dancing, and
intoxication, and all kinds of trash. They who sing thus, and sing in
response, are those who before hymned immortality,—found at last wicked
and wickedly singing this most pernicious palinode, “Let us eat and
drink, for to-morrow we die.” But not to-morrow in truth, but already,
are these dead to God; burying their dead, <span
id="fr_1725"></span>[1726](#fn_1725.md) that is, sinking themselves down to
death. The apostle very firmly assails them. “Be not deceived; neither
adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with mankind, nor
thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor railers,” and whatever else he
adds to these, “shall inherit the kingdom of God.” <span
id="fr_1726"></span>[1727](#fn_1726.md)

<span id="page_291">p. 291</span> <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-Page_291"></span>

###### <span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p113.2"></span>Love and the Kiss of Charity.

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p114"></span>And if we are called to the kingdom
of God, let us walk worthy of the kingdom, loving God and our neighbour.
But love is not proved by a kiss, but by kindly feeling. But there are
those, that do nothing but make the churches resound with a kiss, <span
id="fr_1727"></span>[1728](#fn_1727.md) not having love itself within. For
this very thing, the shameless use of a kiss, which ought to be mystic,
occasions foul suspicions and evil reports. The apostle calls the kiss
holy. <span id="fr_1728"></span>[1729](#fn_1728.md)

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p117"></span>When the kingdom is worthily
tested, we dispense the affection of the soul by a chaste and closed
mouth, by which chiefly gentle manners are expressed.

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p118"></span>But there is another unholy kiss,
full of poison, counterfeiting sanctity. Do you not know that spiders,
merely by touching the mouth, afflict men with pain? And often kisses
inject the poison of licentiousness. It is then very manifest to us,
that a kiss is not love. For the love meant is the love of God. “And
this is the love of God,” says John, “that we keep His
commandments;” <span id="fr_1729"></span>[1730](#fn_1729.md) not that we
stroke each other on the mouth. “And His commandments are not grievous.”
But salutations of beloved ones in the ways, full as they are of foolish
boldness, are characteristic of those who wish to be conspicuous to
those without, and have not the least particle of grace. For if it is
proper mystically “in the closet” to pray to God, it will follow that we
are also to greet mystically our neighbour, whom we are commanded to
love second similarly to God, within doors, “redeeming the time.” “For
we are the salt of the earth.” <span
id="fr_1730"></span>[1731](#fn_1730.md) “Whosoever shall bless his friend
early in the morning with a loud voice, shall be regarded not to differ
from cursing.” <span id="fr_1731"></span>[1732](#fn_1731.md)

###### <span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p121.2"></span>The Government of the Eyes.

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p122"></span>But, above all, it seems right that
we turn away from the sight of women. For it is sin not only to touch,
but to look; and he who is rightly trained must especially avoid them.
“Let thine eyes look straight, and thine eyelids wink right.” <span
id="fr_1732"></span>[1733](#fn_1732.md) For while it is possible for one
who looks to remain stedfast; yet care must be taken against falling.
For it is possible for one who looks to slip; but it is impossible for
one, who looks not, to lust. For it is not enough for the chaste to be
pure; but they must give all diligence, to be beyond the range of
censure, shutting out all ground of suspicion, in order to the
consummation of chastity; so that we may not only be faithful, but
appear worthy of trust. For this is also consequently to be guarded
against, as the apostle says, “that no man should blame us; providing
things honourable, not only in the sight of the Lord, but also in the
sight of men.” <span id="fr_1733"></span>[1734](#fn_1733.md) “But turn away
thine eyes from a graceful woman, and contemplate not another’s beauty,”
says the Scripture. <span id="fr_1734"></span>[1735](#fn_1734.md) And if
you require the reason, it will further tell you, “For by the beauty of
woman many have gone astray, and at it affection blazes up like
fire;” <span id="fr_1735"></span>[1736](#fn_1735.md) the affection which
arises from the fire which we call love, leading to the fire which will
never cease in consequence of sin.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1667"></span>[284:1668](0020289.htm#fr_1667.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p3"></span> [1 Pet. ii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#012.md)<span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1668"></span>[284:1669](0020289.htm#fr_1668.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p5"></span> \[Surely the costly and gorgeous
ecclesiastical raiment of the Middle Ages is condemned by Clement’s
primitive maxims.\]

<span id="fn_1669"></span>[284:1670](0020289.htm#fr_1669.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p8"></span> Plato’s words are: “The web is not
to be more than a woman’s work for a month. White colour is peculiarly
becoming for the gods in other things, but especially in cloth. Dyes are
not to be applied, except for warlike decorations.”—<span
class="sc"><span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p8.1"></span>Plato</span>: *De
Legibus*, xii. 992.

<span id="fn_1670"></span>[284:1671](0020289.htm#fr_1670.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p10"></span> \[Another law against colours in
clerical attire.\]

<span id="fn_1671"></span>[285:1672](0020289.htm#fr_1671.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p13"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p13.1"></span>Καρὰ Λόγον</span>. The reading in the
text is <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p13.2"></span>κατάλογον</span>.

<span id="fn_1672"></span>[285:1673](0020289.htm#fr_1672.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p15"></span> [Rom. xiii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#014.md)<span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1673"></span>[285:1674](0020289.htm#fr_1673.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p17"></span> \[Natural instinct is St. Paul’s
argument ([1 Cor. 11:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#014.md),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#015.md)<span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p17.1"></span>); and that it rules for modesty in man
as well as women, is finely illustrated by an instructive story in
Herodotus (book i. 8–12). The wife of Gyges could be guilty of a
heathenish revenge, but nature taught her to abhor exposure. “A woman
who puts off her raiment, puts off her modesty,” said Candaules to her
foolish husband.\]

<span id="fn_1674"></span>[285:1675](0020289.htm#fr_1674.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p17.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p18"></span> [Prov. xi.
22](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#022.md)<span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1675"></span>[285:1676](0020289.htm#fr_1675.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p20"></span> \[Possibly used thus early as a
distinction of matrons.\]

<span id="fn_1676"></span>[285:1677](0020289.htm#fr_1676.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p23"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p23.1"></span>Εὑτυχούσαις</span>, for which the text
has <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p23.2"></span>ἐντοχούσαις</span>.

<span id="fn_1677"></span>[285:1678](0020289.htm#fr_1677.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p24.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p25"></span> [Ecclus. xxi.
21](../../../bib/apo/sir021.htm#021.md)<span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1678"></span>[286:1679](0020289.htm#fr_1678.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p28.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p29"></span> \[How this was followed, is proved
by the early Christian devices of the catacombs, contrasted with the
engraved gems from Pompeii, in the *Museo Borbonico* at Naples.\]

<span id="fn_1679"></span>[286:1680](0020289.htm#fr_1679.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p30.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p31"></span> Masculine.

<span id="fn_1680"></span>[286:1681](0020289.htm#fr_1680.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p31.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p32"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p32.1"></span>γεγλυμμἐνους</span>, written on the
margin of Codex clxv. for <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p32.2"></span>γεγυμνωμένους</span> (naked) of the
text. \[Royal Library, Naples.\]

<span id="fn_1681"></span>[286:1682](0020289.htm#fr_1681.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p33.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p34"></span> [Ps. cxxxiii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#002.md)<span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1682"></span>[286:1683](0020289.htm#fr_1682.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p36.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p37"></span> \[Here Clement’s rules are
arbitrary, and based on their existing ideas of propriety. If it be not
improper to shave the head, much less to shave the face, which he allows
in part.\]

<span id="fn_1683"></span>[286:1684](0020289.htm#fr_1683.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p38.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p39"></span> “Not” does not occur in the <span
class="sc"><span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p39.1"></span>mss</span>.

<span id="fn_1684"></span>[286:1685](0020289.htm#fr_1684.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p39.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p40"></span> For <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p40.1"></span>δεδοικότες</span>, the conjectural
emendation <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p40.2"></span>δεδυκότες</span>, has been adopted.

<span id="fn_1685"></span>[286:1686](0020289.htm#fr_1685.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p41.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p42"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p42.1"></span>φυλάσσειν</span>, Sylburg and Bod. Reg.,
agree better than <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p42.2"></span>μαλάσσειν</span> with the context.

<span id="fn_1686"></span>[286:1687](0020289.htm#fr_1686.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p43.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p44"></span> \[The *chrism* (confirmation) was
thus administered then, not with material oil, and was called
*anointing*, with reference to [1 John ii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#027.md)<span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p44.1"></span>. Consult *Bunsen*, however, who
attributes great antiquity to his canons (collected in vol. iii.
*Hippolytus*), p. 22, *Church and House Book*.\]

<span id="fn_1687"></span>[286:1688](0020289.htm#fr_1687.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p44.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p45"></span> [1 Cor. xi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#003.md)<span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p45.1"></span>. Nov. reads “Christ,” as in St. Paul,
instead of “God.”

<span id="fn_1688"></span>[287:1689](0020289.htm#fr_1688.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p48.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p49"></span> [1 Tim. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#009.md)<span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1689"></span>[287:1690](0020289.htm#fr_1689.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p49.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p50"></span> [1 Pet. iii.
1-4](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#001.md)<span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1690"></span>[287:1691](0020289.htm#fr_1690.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p51.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p52"></span> In reference to [Prov. xxxi.
22](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#022.md)<span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1691"></span>[287:1692](0020289.htm#fr_1691.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p53.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p54"></span> [Prov.
31:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#026.md),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#027.md),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#028.md),
[30](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#030.md)<span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p54.1"></span>, quoted from memory, and with variety
of reading.

<span id="fn_1692"></span>[287:1693](0020289.htm#fr_1692.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p55.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p56"></span> [Prov. xii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#004.md)<span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1693"></span>[287:1694](0020289.htm#fr_1693.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p56.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p57"></span> [Prov. v.
3-5](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#003.md)<span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p57.1"></span>, Septuagint.

<span id="fn_1694"></span>[287:1695](0020289.htm#fr_1694.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p58.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p59"></span> We have read from the New College
<span class="sc"><span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p59.1"></span>ms.</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p59.2"></span>σωφροσύνη</span> for
<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p59.3"></span>σωφροσύνης</span>.

<span id="fn_1695"></span>[288:1696](0020289.htm#fr_1695.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p59.10"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p60"></span> From some comic poet.

<span id="fn_1696"></span>[288:1697](0020289.htm#fr_1696.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p62.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p63"></span> Some read <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p63.1"></span>ᾤραν ἀπολείπει</span> . \[New College
<span class="sc"><span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p63.2"></span>ms.</span>\] In
the translation the conjecture <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p63.3"></span>ᾤρα ἀπολείπειν</span> is adopted.

<span id="fn_1697"></span>[288:1698](0020289.htm#fr_1697.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p63.4"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p64"></span> An adaptation of [Prov.
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#005.md),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#006.md)<span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p64.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1698"></span>[288:1699](0020289.htm#fr_1698.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p64.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p65"></span> An imitation of Zeno’s saying, “It
is better to slip with the feet than the tongue.”

<span id="fn_1699"></span>[288:1700](0020289.htm#fr_1699.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p65.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p66"></span> Quoting from memory, he has
substituted <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p66.1"></span>ἔκκοψον</span> for <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p66.2"></span>ἔξελε</span> ([Matt.
v. 29](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#029.md)<span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p66.3"></span>).

<span id="fn_1700"></span>[288:1701](0020289.htm#fr_1700.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p66.6"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p67"></span> [Prov. x.
10](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#010.md)<span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p67.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1701"></span>[288:1702](0020289.htm#fr_1701.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p67.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p68"></span> [Ecclus. xxvi.
9](../../../bib/apo/sir026.htm#009.md)<span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p68.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1702"></span>[288:1703](0020289.htm#fr_1702.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p69.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p70"></span> [Col.
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#005.md),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#006.md)<span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p70.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1703"></span>[288:1704](0020289.htm#fr_1703.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p72.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p73"></span> \[A similar practice, very gross
and unbecoming, prevails among the lower class of girls brought together
in our common schools.\]

<span id="fn_1704"></span>[288:1705](0020289.htm#fr_1704.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p73.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p74"></span> [Prov. ix.
13-18](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#013.md)<span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p74.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1705"></span>[288:1706](0020289.htm#fr_1705.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p74.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p75"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p75.1"></span>τὸ ἄσχημον σχῆμα</span> ([Isa.
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#016.md),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#017.md)<span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p75.2"></span>), Sept.

<span id="fn_1706"></span>[288:1707](0020289.htm#fr_1706.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p75.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p76"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p76.1"></span>ἀ κύων</span>, catella. The literal
English rendering is coarser and more opprobrious than the original,
which Helen applies to herself (*Iliad*, vi. 344, 356).

<span id="fn_1707"></span>[289:1708](0020289.htm#fr_1707.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p79.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p80"></span> [1 Pet. ii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#018.md)<span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p80.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1708"></span>[289:1709](0020289.htm#fr_1708.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p80.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p81"></span> [1 Pet. iii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#008.md)<span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p81.1"></span>. Clement has substituted <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p81.2"></span>ταπεινόφρονες</span>
for <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p81.3"></span>φιλόφρονες</span> (courteous).

<span id="fn_1709"></span>[289:1710](0020289.htm#fr_1709.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p82.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p83"></span> This passage has been variously
amended and translated. The reading of the text has been adhered to, but
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p83.1"></span>ὸρθόνου</span>
has been coupled with what follows.

<span id="fn_1710"></span>[289:1711](0020289.htm#fr_1710.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p84.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p85"></span> Sylburg suggests <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p85.1"></span>παριούας</span>
(passing by) instead of <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p85.2"></span>παριζούσας</span>.

<span id="fn_1711"></span>[289:1712](0020289.htm#fr_1711.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p86.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p87"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p87.1"></span>κὔβος</span>, a die marked on all the
six sides. \[This prohibition would include cards in modern ethics.\]

<span id="fn_1712"></span>[289:1713](0020289.htm#fr_1712.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p87.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p88"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p88.1"></span>διὰ ͠ῶν ἀστραγάλων. The
ἀστραγάλοι</span> were dice marked on four sides only. Clemens seems to
use the terms here indifferently.

<span id="fn_1713"></span>[289:1714](0020289.htm#fr_1713.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p88.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p89"></span> Lowth’s conjecture of <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p89.1"></span> ἔρως</span> instead
of <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p89.2"></span>ἐρᾷ</span>
has been adopted.

<span id="fn_1714"></span>[289:1715](0020289.htm#fr_1714.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p91.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p92"></span> [Lev.
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#013.md),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#014.md)<span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p92.1"></span>; [Deut. xiv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#012.md)<span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p92.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_1715"></span>[289:1716](0020289.htm#fr_1715.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p94.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p95"></span> [Ps. i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md)<span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p95.1"></span>, Septuagint.

<span id="fn_1716"></span>[289:1717](0020289.htm#fr_1716.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p95.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p96"></span> [Acts iii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#014.md)<span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p96.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1717"></span>[289:1718](0020289.htm#fr_1717.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p96.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p97"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p97.1"></span>ἀναμιξιας</span> adopted instead of the
reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p97.2"></span>ἀμιξίας</span>, which is plainly wrong.

<span id="fn_1718"></span>[289:1719](0020289.htm#fr_1718.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p97.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p98"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p98.1"></span>λιχνευούσης</span> on the authority of
the Pal. <span class="sc"><span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p98.2"></span>ms.</span> Nov. Reg. Bod.

<span id="fn_1719"></span>[289:1720](0020289.htm#fr_1719.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p98.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p99"></span>\[Jeremy Collier’s *Short View of
the Immorality and Profaneness of the English Stage* (London, 1698) and
the discussions that followed belong to literature, and ought to be
republished with historic notes.\]

<span id="fn_1720"></span>[290:1721](0020289.htm#fr_1720.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p102.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p103"></span> [Ex. xx.
7](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#007.md)<span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p103.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1721"></span>[290:1722](0020289.htm#fr_1721.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p104.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p105"></span> In allusion to the cleansing of
the temple ([John ii. 13-17](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#013.md)<span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p105.1"></span>; [Matt.
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#012.md),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#013.md)<span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p105.2"></span>; [Luke
19:45](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#045.md),
[46](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#046.md)<span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p105.3"></span>).

<span id="fn_1722"></span>[290:1723](0020289.htm#fr_1722.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p106.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p107"></span> \[This early use of the word
“church” for the place or house of worship, is to be noted. See
Elucidation ii.\]

<span id="fn_1723"></span>[290:1724](0020289.htm#fr_1723.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p107.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p108"></span> [1 Cor. xi.
5](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#005.md)<span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p108.1"></span>. \[This helps to the due rendering of
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p108.2"></span>ἐξουσίαν ἐπὶ
τῆς κεφαλῆς</span> in [1 Cor. xi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#010.md)<span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p108.3"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_1724"></span>[290:1725](0020289.htm#fr_1724.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p110.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p111"></span> \[[1 Cor. xi.
22](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#022.md)<span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p111.1"></span>. But I cannot say that the word <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p111.2"></span>ἐκκλησία</span> is
used for the place of Christian worship, even in this text, where it
seems to be in antithesis with the dwelling-house.\]

<span id="fn_1725"></span>[290:1726](0020289.htm#fr_1725.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p111.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p112"></span> [Matt. viii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#022.md)<span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p112.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1726"></span>[290:1727](0020289.htm#fr_1726.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p112.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p113"></span> [1 Cor.
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#009.md),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#010.md)<span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p113.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1727"></span>[291:1728](0020289.htm#fr_1727.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p114.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p115"></span> \[The sexes sat apart in the
primitive churches, and the kiss of peace was given by women only to
women (Bunsen, *Hippol*., iii. p. 15). Does the author, here, imply that
*unholy* kissing had crept in? Among the Germans, even in our days,
nothing is more common than to see men, not at all related, salute one
another in this way. It was therefore all one with shaking hands, in the
apostolic ordinance. For some very fine reflections on the *<span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p115.1"></span>baiser de paix*, see De Masitre,
*Soirèes*, ii. p. 199, ed. Paris, 1850.\]

<span id="fn_1728"></span>[291:1729](0020289.htm#fr_1728.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p115.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p116"></span> [Rom. xvi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#016.md)<span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p116.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1729"></span>[291:1730](0020289.htm#fr_1729.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p118.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p119"></span> [1 John v.
3](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#003.md)<span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p119.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1730"></span>[291:1731](0020289.htm#fr_1730.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p119.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p120"></span> [Matt. v.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#013.md)<span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p120.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1731"></span>[291:1732](0020289.htm#fr_1731.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p120.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p121"></span> [Prov. xxvii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#014.md)<span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p121.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1732"></span>[291:1733](0020289.htm#fr_1732.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p122.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p123"></span> [Prov. iv.
25](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#025.md)<span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p123.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1733"></span>[291:1734](0020289.htm#fr_1733.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p123.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p124"></span> [2 Cor.
8:20](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#020.md),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#021.md)<span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p124.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1734"></span>[291:1735](0020289.htm#fr_1734.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p124.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p125"></span> [Ecclus. ix.
8](../../../bib/apo/sir009.htm#008.md)<span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p125.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1735"></span>[291:1736](0020289.htm#fr_1735.md) <span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p125.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p126"></span> [Ecclus. ix.
8](../../../bib/apo/sir009.htm#008.md)<span
id="vi.iii.iii.xi-p126.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII.—Continuation: with Texts from Scripture.](0020290.md)
