[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020224)  [Next](0020226.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iii.xvii"></span>

##### <span id="v.iii.xvii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XVII.—The Series of Changes We Can Now Trace in Man Renders a Resurrection Probable.

<span id="v.iii.xvii-p1"></span>For this nature of men, which has
inequality allotted to it from the first, and according to the purpose
of its Maker, has an unequal life and continuance, interrupted sometimes
by sleep, at another time by death, and by the changes incident to each
period of life, whilst those which follow the first are not clearly seen
beforehand. Would any one have believed, unless taught by experience,
that in the soft seed alike in all its parts there was deposited such a
variety and number of great powers, or of masses, which in this way
arise and become consolidated—I mean of bones, and nerves, and
cartilages, of muscles too, and flesh, and intestines, and the other
parts of the body? For neither in the yet moist seed is anything of this
kind to be seen, nor even in infants do any of those things make their
appearance which pertain to adults, or in the adult period what belongs
to those who are past their prime, or in these what belongs to such as
have grown old. But although some of the things I have said exhibit not
at all, and others but faintly, the natural sequence and the changes
that come upon the nature of men, yet all who are not blinded in their
judgment of these matters by vice or sloth, know that there must be
first the depositing of the seed, and that when this is completely
organized in respect of every member and part and the progeny comes
forth to the light, there comes the growth belonging to the first period
of life, and the maturity which attends growth, and after the maturity
the slackening of the physical powers till old age, and then, when the
body is worn out, its dissolution. As, therefore, in this matter, though
neither the seed has inscribed upon it the life or form of men, nor the
life the dissolution into the primary elements; the succession of
natural occurrences makes things credible which have no credibility from
the phenomena themselves, much more does reason, tracing out the truth
from the natural sequence, afford ground for believing in the
resurrection, since it is safer and stronger than experience for
establishing the truth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVIII.—Judgment Must Have Reference Both to Soul and
Body: There Will Therefore Be a Resurrection.](0020226.md)
