[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020037)  [Next](0020039.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.ii"></span>

##### <span id="iii.ii.ii-p0.1"></span>Chapter II.—The Vices and Errors of the Philosophers.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p1"></span>What noble thing have you produced by
your pursuit of philosophy? Who of your most eminent men has been free
from vain boasting? Diogenes, who made such a parade of his independence
with his tub, was seized with a bowel complaint through eating a raw
polypus, and so lost his life by gluttony. Aristippus, walking about in
a purple robe, led a profligate life, in accordance with his professed
opinions. Plato, a philosopher, was sold by Dionysius for his
gormandizing propensities. And Aristotle, who absurdly placed a limit to
Providence and made happiness to consist in the things which give
pleasure, quite contrary to his duty as a preceptor flattered Alexander,
forgetful that he was but a youth; and he, showing how well he had
learned the lessons of his master, because his friend would not worship
him shut him up and and carried him about like a bear or a leopard. He
in fact obeyed strictly the precepts of his <span id="page_66">p.
66</span> <span id="iii.ii.ii-Page_66"></span>teacher in displaying
manliness and courage by feasting, and transfixing with his spear his
intimate and most beloved friend, and then, under a semblance of grief,
weeping and starving himself, that he might not incur the hatred of his
friends. I could laugh at those also who in the present day adhere to
his tenets,—people who say that sublunary things are not under the care
of Providence; and so, being nearer the earth than the moon, and below
its orbit, they themselves look after what is thus left uncared for; and
as for those who have neither beauty, nor wealth, nor bodily strength,
nor high birth, they have no happiness, according to Aristotle. Let such
men philosophize, for me!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. Ridicule of the Philosophers.](0020039.md)
