[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0020214)  [Next](0020216.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iii.vii"></span>

##### <span id="v.iii.vii-p0.1"></span>Chapter VII.—The Resurrection-Body Different from the Present.

<span id="v.iii.vii-p1"></span>Nay, suppose we were to grant that the
nourishment coming from these things (let it be so called, as more
accordant with the common way of speaking), although against nature, is
yet separated and changed into some one of the moist or dry, or warm or
cold, matters which the body contains, our opponents would gain nothing
by the concession: for the bodies that rise again are reconstituted from
the parts which properly belong to them, whereas no one of the things
mentioned is such a part, nor has it the form or place of a part; nay,
it does not remain always with the parts of the body which are
nourished, or rise again with the parts that rise, since no longer does
blood, or phlegm, or bile, or breath, contribute anything to the life.
Neither, again, will the bodies nourished then require the things they
once required, seeing that, along with the want and corruption of the
bodies nourished, the need also of those things by which they were
nourished is taken away. To this must be added, that if we were to
suppose the change arising from such nourishment to reach as far as
flesh, in that case too there would be no necessity that the flesh
recently changed by food of that kind, if it became united to the body
of some other man, should again as a part contribute to the formation of
that body, since neither the flesh which takes it up always retains what
it takes, nor does the flesh so incorporated abide and remain with that
to which it was added, but is subject to a great variety of changes,—at
one time being dispersed by toil or care, at another time being wasted
by grief or trouble or disease, and by the distempers arising from being
heated or chilled, the humours which are changed with the flesh and fat
not receiving the nourishment so as to remain what they are. But while
such are the changes to which the flesh is subject, we should find that
flesh, nourished by food unsuited to it, suffers them in a much greater
degree; now swelling out and growing fat by what it has received, and
then again rejecting it in some way or other, and decreasing in bulk,
from one or more of the causes already mentioned; and that that alone
remains in the parts which is adapted to bind together, or cover, or
warm the flesh that has been chosen by nature, and adheres to those
parts by which it sustains the life which is according to nature, and
fulfils the labours of that life. So that whether the investigation in
which we have just been engaged be fairly judged of, or the objections
urged against our position be conceded, in neither case can it be shown
that what is said by our opponents is true, nor can the bodies of men
ever combine with those of the same nature, whether at any time, through
ignorance and being cheated of their perception by some one else, men
have partaken of such a body, or of their own accord, impelled by want
or madness, they have defiled themselves with the <span id="page_153">p.
153</span> <span id="v.iii.vii-Page_153"></span>body of one of like
form; for we are very well aware that some brutes have human forms, or
have a nature compounded of men and brutes, such as the more daring of
the poets are accustomed to represent.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII.—Human Flesh Not the Proper or Natural Food of
Men.](0020216.md)
