<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fjo00)  [Next](fjo02.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B003C1R142/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Notes on the Folklore of the Fjort*, by Richard Edward Dennett,
\[1898\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# PREFACE.

'THE following collections reached my hands in a more or less
fragmentary state, The bulk of the work had been written at one time,
and little was needed to put it into a state for publication. But other
portions, and those not the least important, had been written at
different times and with different objects, and the task of weaving them
all together in the author's absence was not a light one. Thus, though
the author has read the proofs of all but Appendix II, it will be easily
understood that the difficulties involved in passing a book of this kind
through the press, while he was residing several thousand miles away,
are such as to account for many imperfections, which would have been
rectified had he been able himself to determine its final form and to
superintend its publication. The sins of omission, of occasional
repetition, and perhaps of occasional obscurity, that may be found, must
therefore be laid at the editor's, and not at the author's door. I can
only hope that the circumstances may be taken into account to extenuate
these offences.

The difficulties I have referred to would, indeed, have been insuperable
had it not been for the incessant help of Miss Kingsley. The debt due to
her is by no means confined to the writing of her interesting and
valuable introduction and the arrangement of Appendix I. She read all
the manuscripts and selected in the first instance those most suitable
for publication. Innumerable questions of detail have arisen in the
course of printing, making it necessary to refer constantly to her, and
in every case her knowledge of the country and the people, her time and
thought, have been ungrudgingly placed at the service of the Folk-Lore
Society. Lastly, she selected the photographs to be reproduced for the
plates, and laid her own stock of negatives under contribution for the
purpose of adding to them. It has been a matter of regret that the
Society has been unable to avail itself to a greater extent of her
kindness in this direction.

I am also indebted to Mr. W. H. D. Rouse for help kindly rendered in
revising the Latin translation of the songs.

The orthography of the word *Fjort* has been adopted with some
hesitation. Mr. Dennett has himself not always adhered to this form. In
the chapter on the Death and Burial of the Fjort (which was communicated
independently to the Society and published in *Folk-Lore*, vol. viii.,
p. 133), as it originally stood, he wrote *Fiote*. The pronunciation of
the word would, I am informed, be more closely represented in ordinary
English spelling as *Feeaught*.

E. SIDNEY HARTLAND.

Highgarth, Gloucester,

    July, 1898.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](fjo02.md)

</div>
