<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fjo07)  [Next](fjo09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B003C1R142/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Notes on the Folklore of the Fjort*, by Richard Edward Dennett,
\[1898\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# V. THE VANISHING WIFE.

Two brothers lived in a certain town. They were called Buite and Swarmi.

Swarmi was married and had servants to wait upon him; but Buite was
alone and despised. As Buite had no one to cook for him, he used to eat
palm-kernels, which he daily brought in from the bush.

Swarmi treated Buite very badly, never asking him to join him at his
meals, or enter in any way into the festivities of his family; so that
Buite determined to leave his town, and live alone far away in the bush.
So one day, without saying anything, he left his brother, and walked,
and walked, and walked, until at nightfall he arrived at a deep valley,
fertile and thickly planted with palm-trees. Far away at the bottom of
this damp valley, beneath the shade of the high trees, palms and rushes,
Buite built himself a little shed-a roof, supported upon sticks, about a
foot in height above the ground. In this damp hovel he spread out his
mat to sleep upon, and lighted his fire to cook his solitary meals.

Tired and weary of life, Buite one night fell asleep, and dreamt that a
beautiful girl called him, that he rose and followed her, and that she
led him through the thick jungle and woods, until they arrived at a
river. Here she told him to tap on the ground three times; and to his
surprise a canoe appeared. He tapped the canoe three times, and paddles
made their appearance. Then she told him to go and fish, and bring her
food, that she might cook it for him; but that he should cut the heads
off the fish, as she could not bear to see them. And he dreamt that he
did so, and returned to find the girl waiting for him to cook the fish.
Then he awoke, and could sleep no longer that night.

The next morning he got up and, remembering his dream, travelled through
the jungle and woods, until he came to the river he had seen in his
dream. And he tapped the ground, and lo! there appeared the canoe. He
tapped the canoe, and there were the paddles. Then he went and fished,
and cut the heads off the fish, and returned to his wretched hovel. But
the shed had disappeared, and in its place was a large house,
beautifully furnished, and all the necessary out-houses, and above
everything, the beautiful girl, who came forward to meet him, just as if
she had been accustomed to do so every day, and she also had nine little
servants to wait upon her. And when she told him, that she had come to
comfort him, he was very pleased and loved her very much.

And every day, when he went out fishing, she would send one of the
little ones with him, to carry the fish. And people who passed that way
were astonished at the liberal treatment bestowed upon them by Buite,
and wondered where he had got his wife and riches from. His brother,
Swarmi, would not believe in Buite's prosperity, and determined to visit
him.

Now Buite each day went fishing, taking one of his wife's boys with him.
But after a time he got tired of always cutting off the fishes' heads.

And it so happened one day that he did not cut off the heads of the
fish. When the boy saw this, he cried out and protested saying that his
mother did not like to see a fish's head.

But Buite asked him if it was for him, a servant, to talk in that way to
his master. And the boy left for the house, carrying the fish with him.
But after a time Buite ran after the boy, and caught him up just before
he got home, and cut the heads of the fish off, so that his wife should
not see them.

And this happened eight times with eight different servants of his wife.
Each time the boy protested; each time Buite scolded him, and then,
repenting, ran after the boy and cut the heads of the fish off.

The ninth time he took the youngest boy, Parrot by name, and fished, and
gave the entire fish to him to carry home. And Parrot cried very much
and protested, but was frightened by Buite's imperious manner, and ran
away home with the fish. And Buite ran after him, and ran, and ran, and
ran, but could not catch Parrot up.

And Parrot arrived, and showed the fish to the woman; and immediately
the house vanished; and the out-houses, and the servants, and beautiful
furniture, and lastly the lovely wife, all disappeared, so that when
Buite arrived, all out of breath, he no longer saw his house, or wife,
or servants, but only his brother, Swarmi, who just then turned up to
visit him.

And Buite was very sorry, and wept very much; and Swarmi more than ever
despised him, and left him once more alone.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VI. Another Vanishing Wife.](fjo09)

</div>
