<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fjo24)  [Next](fjo26.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B003C1R142/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Notes on the Folklore of the Fjort*, by Richard Edward Dennett,
\[1898\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# XXII. HOW THE FETISH SUNGA PUNISHED MY GREAT-UNCLE'S TWIN BROTHER, BASA.

BASA was my great uncle's twin brother, and a very clever fisherman.
Every day he used to go out fishing in the river; and every day he
caught great quantities of fish, which he used to smuggle into his
house, so that none should know that he had caught any. His brother and
relations used each day to ask him: "Basa, have you caught any fish?"
And he would answer "No," although his house was full of fish going
rotten. All this time the fetish Sunga was watching, and was grieved to
hear him lie thus. So one day she sent one of her moleques, or little
servants, to the place where Basa was fishing, to call him to her. It
happened that upon that day Basa caught so much fish that he had to make
some new matets, or baskets, to hold it all. He had already filled two,
and placed them in the fork of a large tree, when he heard three
distinct clappings of the hands, as if some child were saluting him, and
then he heard a voice saying: "Come to my mother."

Then Basa was greatly afraid, and answered: "Which way? please show me
the way."

"Follow me," said the voice of the child, as; she led him to the river.

When they stepped into the river, the waters dried up, and all the fish
disappeared, so that the bed of the river formed a perfect road for
them. Even the fallen trees had been removed, that Basa might not meet
the slightest difficulty in the way. When they had reached the watershed
of the river, there in the great lake he saw a large and beautiful town.
Here he was met by many people, and warmly welcomed. They led him to a
chair, and asked him to be seated. But he was alarmed at all this
ceremony, and wondered what it all meant.

Then Sunga laid a table before him, and loaded it with food and wine,
and asked him to eat and drink. But he was still and told Sunga that so
grand was the feast she had afraid, placed before him that the smell
alone of it had satisfied him. Then she pressed him to eat and drink,
and finally he did so, drinking all the wine that there was.

Then Sunga deprived him of the power of speech, that he might lie no
more, and bade him depart to his town. And so for the future he could
only make his wants known by signs.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXIII. The Rabbit And The Antelope.](fjo26.md)

</div>
