<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fjo19)  [Next](fjo21) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B003C1R142/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Notes on the Folklore of the Fjort*, by Richard Edward Dennett,
\[1898\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# XVII. THE TURTLE AND THE MAN.

A TURTLE and a man built themselves a small town, but because they had
as yet planted nothing they suffered from hunger.

"Let us build a large trap," said the turtle," that we may catch an
antelope." The man agreed, and they set to work and made a very large
one.

"This is too large," said the turtle," let us divide it, and each have a
trap of his own."

The man divided it and the turtle chose the best one. That night the man
caught nothing, but a splendid antelope was found in the turtle's trap.
As the turtle could not lift it, he called all the people from round
about to a dance.

While they were dancing, the chimpacasi, or wild ox, came out of the
wood and wanted to know what all this singing was about. And the turtle
told him that he had caught an antelope, and as he could not carry it to
his house, he had called in his friends. "Perhaps, good ox, you will
take the antelope out of the trap for me and lift it as far as my
house."

"Oh, certainly," said the ox.

"And now, please go and fetch some water."

The ox went and drew some water. They then cut up the antelope.

"Clean the plates, please," said the turtle.

And the delighted ox washed them.

"This is your share, dear ox; but you must go and got some leaves to
wrap it in."

And while the ox was away in the woods, collecting leaves, the turtle
lifted all the meat up and carried it into his house, which was a very
strong one, and shut himself inside.

The ox returned and asked for his share, but the turtle refused to let
him have it, and insulted him grossly. The ox became very angry, and
told the turtle that he would destroy the trap. But the turtle had reset
the trap, so that when the ox put his head in he was caught, and died
after a short struggle.

"Oh, oh, Mr. Ox, I told you so. You should be more careful when you are
entering the turtle's trap."

He called the people again to dance and sing.

This time the leopard was attracted by the noise, and came to the turtle
to find out what it was all about. And the turtle told him, and said
that his hands were very sore, and that he could not carry the ox to his
house; would the leopard drag him there?

Glad to oblige the turtle, the leopard at once offered his services, and
in a very short time had brought the ox to the turtle's house.

"Thank you, dear leopard, will you now go to the river and fetch some
water, and clean the pots?

"Certainly," said the leopard.

And when they had cooked the whole of the ox, the turtle put aside part
of the meat for the leopard, and carried the rest into his shimbec.

"You would better go and fetch some leaves to wrap the meat in," said
the turtle.

The leopard went. While he was away, the turtle took the meat, and shut
himself within his strong house.

The leopard returned and said "Turtle, turtle, where is my meat?"

"It is here, my dear leopard."

"Then give it me."

"Nay, the ox was mine."

"Yes, but I helped you to cook it."

"Well, I shalt not give you any."

"Then I will destroy your trap."

"Take care you do not meet with the fate of the ox."

"Yes, I will take care."

And the leopard went and destroyed the trap entirely, and then, placing
the rope round his neck lay down in the middle of the ruins, as if he
had been entrapped.

Then the turtle went again to look at his trap and was delighted to find
the leopard there.

"Ah, ah, I told you so! Why did you not take more care, my dear
leopard?"

And the turtle stretched out his long neck as if to kiss the leopard.
The leopard sprang upon him, and bit the turtle's head off before he had
time to pull it in. He then entered his shimbec and ate up all the meat
that the turtle had stored there.

Now the man wondered what the leopard was doing in the turtle's shimbec.
So he went there and asked the leopard And the leopard told him bow the
turtle had tried to trick him, and how he had killed the turtle. And the
man said he was quite right and might go on eating the food of the
turtle.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XVIII. Killing A Leopard.](fjo21)

</div>
