<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fjo34)  [Next](fjo36.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B003C1R142/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Notes on the Folklore of the Fjort*, by Richard Edward Dennett,
\[1898\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# XXXII. DEATH AND BURIAL OF THE FJORT.

ONE of my cook's many fathers having died (this time, his real father),
he came to me with tears in his eyes to ask me for a little rum to take
to town, where he said his family were waiting for him. Some days
previously the cook had told me that his father was suffering from the
sleeping sickness, and was nearing his end, so that when I heard the cry
of "Chibai-i " floating across the valley from a little town close to
that in which the cook lived, I guessed who the dead one was, and was
prepared to lose the cook's services for a certain number of days.

The death of the father of a family is always a very sad event, but the
death of the father of a Fjort family seems to me to be peculiarly
pathetic. His little village at once assumes a deserted appearance; his
wives and sisters, stripped of their gay cloths, wander aimlessly around
and about the silent corpse, crying and wringing their hands, their
tears coursing down their cheeks along little channels washed in the
thick coating of oil and ashes with which they have besmeared their
dusky faces. Naked children, bereft for the time being of their mother's
care, cry piteously; and the men, with a blue band of cloth (*ntanta
mabundi*) tied tightly round their heads, sit apart and in silence,
already wondering what evil person or fetish has caused them this
overwhelming loss.

The first sharp burst of grief being over, loving bands shave and wash
the body, and, if the family be rich enough, palm-wine or rum is used
instead of water. Then the heavy body is placed upon mats of rushes and
covered with a cloth. After resting in this position for a day, the body
is wrapped in long pieces of cloth and placed upon a kind of rack or
framework bed, underneath which a hole has been dug to receive the
water, etc, that comes from the corpse. A fire is lighted both at the
head and foot of the rack, and the body is covered each day with the
leaves of the Acaju, so that the smoke that hangs about it will keep off
the flies. More cloth is from time to time wrapped around the body; but,
unless there are many palavers which cannot be quickly settled, it is
generally buried after two or three wrappings. The more important the
person, the longer, of course, it takes to settle these palavers and
their many complications; and as the body cannot be buried until they
are settled, one can understand how the heirs of a great king sometimes
come to give up the hope of burying their relation, and leave him
unburied for years. On the other hand, the slave, however rich he may
be, is quickly buried.

The family being all present, a day is appointed upon which the cause of
the death shall be divined. Upon this day the family, and the family in
which the deceased was brought up, collect what cloth they can and send
it to some well-known Nganga, a long way off. The Nganga meets the
messengers and describes to them exactly all the circumstances connected
with the life, sickness and death of the deceased; and if they conclude
that this information agrees with what they know to be the facts of the
case, they place the cloth before him and beseech him to inform them the
cause of their relation's death. This the Nganga sets himself to divine.
After some delay he informs the relations (1) that the father has died
because someone (perhaps now dead) knocked a certain nail into a certain
fetish, with his death as the end in view, or (2) that so-and-so has
bewitched him, or (3) that he died because his time had come.

The relations then go to the Nganga of the fetish or Nkissi mentioned,
and ask him if he remembers so-and-so knocking a nail into it? and if
so, will be kindly point out the nail to them? He may say Yes. Then they
will pay him to draw it out, so that the rest of the family may not die.
Or the relations give the person indicated by the Nganga as having
bewitched the dead man, the so-called Ndotchi (witch), a powdered bark,
which he must swallow and vomit if he be really innocent. The bark named
*Mbundu* is given to the man who owns to being a witch, but denies
having killed the person in question. That of *Nkassa* is given to those
who deny the charge of being witches altogether. The witches or other
persons who, having taken the bark, do not vomit are either killed or
die from the effects of the poison, and their bodies used to be burnt.
Since civilized government have occupied the country a slight
improvement has taken place, in that the relations of the witch are
allowed to bury the body. If events turns out as divined by the Nganga,
he retains the cloth given to him by the relations or their messengers:
otherwise he must return it to the family, who take it to another
Nganga.

While all this is going on, a carpenter is called in to build the
coffin; and he is paid one fowl, one mat of rushes, and one closely
woven mat per day. Rum and a piece of blue cloth are given to him on the
day he covers the case with red cloth. Palm-wine, rum, and cloth are
given to him as payment on its completion. And now that all palavers are
finished, and the coffin ready, the family are once more called
together; and the prince of the land and strangers are invited to come
and bear how all the palavers have been settled. A square in front of
the shimbec containing the coffin is cleared of herbs and grass, and
carefully swept; and here, during the whole night previous to the
official meeting, women and children dance. Mats are placed immediately
in front of the shimbec for the family and their fetishes (Poomba): the
side opposite is prepared for the prince and his followers; and the
other two sides are kept for those strangers and guests who care to
come. At about three o'clock guns are fired off as a signal that all is
ready. The family headed by their elder and spokesman then seat
themselves ready to receive their guests. Then the guests glide into the
village and make their way to the elder, present themselves, and then
take their allotted seats.

When all are assembled, the elder addresses the two family fetishes held
by two of the family. Pointing and shaking his hand at them, he tells
them how the deceased died, and all the family has done to settle the
matter; he tells them how they have allowed the father to be taken, and
prays them to protect the rest of the family; and when he has finished
his address, the two who hold the fetishes, or wooden figures, pick up a
little earth and throw it on the beads of the fetishes, then, lifting
them up, rub their heads in the earth in front of them.

Then the elder addresses the prince and his people, and the strangers
who have come to bear how the deceased has died, and offers them each a
drink. When they have finished drinking, he turns to the fetishes and
tells them that they have allowed evil to overtake the deceased, but
prays them to protect his guests from the same. Then the fetishes again
have earth thrown at them, and their heads are once more rubbed in the
earth.

And now the elder addresses the wives and tells them that their husband
has been cruelly taken from them, and that they are now free to marry
another; and then, turning to the fetishes, he trusts that they will
guard the wives from the evil that killed their husband; and the
fetishes are again dusted and rubbed in the earth.

On the occasion that I watched these proceedings, the elder got up and
addressed me, telling me that my cook, who had served me so well and
whom I had sent to town when he was sick, etc.,etc., had now lost his
father; and once more turning to his fetishes, the poor creatures were
again made to kiss old mother earth, this time for my benefit.

If a witch has to undergo the bark-test, rum is given to the prince, and
he is told that if he hears that the Ndotchi has been killed he is to
take no official notice of the fact.

Then the men dance all through the night; and the next day the body is
placed in the coffin and buried. In KaCongo the coffin is much larger
than that made in Loango; and it is placed upon a huge car on four or
six solid wheels. This car remains over the grave, ornamented in
different ways with stuffed animals and empty demijohns, animal-boxes,
and other earthenware goods, in accordance with the wealth of the
deceased. I can remember when slaves and wives were buried together with
the prince; but this custom has now died out in Loango and KaCongo, and
we only bear of its taking place far away inland.

The "fetish cbibinga"\[1\] sometimes will not allow the corpse to close
its eyes. This is a sure sign that the deceased is annoyed about
something, and does not wish to be buried. In such a case no coffin is
made, the body is wrapped in mats and placed in the woods near to an
Nlomba tree. Should he be buried in the ordinary way, all the family
would fall sick and die. Should his chimyumba (KaCongo *chimbindi*)
appear to one of his family, that person would surely die. But others
not of the family may see it and not die.

The deceased will often not rest quiet until his *nkulu* (soul? spirit?)
is placed in the head of one of his relations, so that he can
communicate with the family. This is done by the Nganga picking up some
of the earth from the grave of the deceased, and, after mixing it with
other medicine, placing it in either the born of an antelope (*lekorla*)
or else a little tin box (*nkobbi*). Then seating himself upon a mat
within a circle drawn in chalk on the ground, he shakes a little rattle
(*nquanga*) at the patient, and goes through some form of incantation,
until the patient trembles and cries out with the voice of the deceased,
when they all know that the *nkulu* has taken up its residence in his
head. The medicine and earth together with the *nkobbi* is called *nkulu
mpemba*, and shows that the deceased died of some ordinary disease; but
when the medicine and earth are put into the *lekorla* it shows that the
deceased died of some sickness of the bead, and this is called *nkulu
mabiali*.

\[1. *Chibinga* is the state of a corpse which remains with its eyes
open, and is also the power, or *nkissi*, that is the cause of this
affliction.\]

The Fjort say the "shadow" ceases at the death of the person. I asked if
that was because they kept the corpse in the shade; what if they put the
corpse in the sun? The young man asked turned to his elderly aunt and
re-asked her this question. "No," she said emphatically, "certainly
not!"\[1\]

\[1. Miss Kingsley writes as follows on this: "The final passage is an
unconscious support to my statements regarding the four souls of man.
The shadow dies utterly at bodily death; therefore it does not matter
whether the corpse is in the sun, or no, because the shadow it might
throw would not be the shadow of the man as he was when alive; it would
only be the shadow of the dead stuff." (See *Folk-Lore*, vol. viii., p.
144.)\]

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: APPENDIX I: Nzambi.](fjo36.md)

</div>
