<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fjo40)  [Next](fjo42.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B003C1R142/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Notes on the Folklore of the Fjort*, by Richard Edward Dennett,
\[1898\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# PALAVERS.

It has struck me, as it must have struck all residents in Africa, that
the force of reason and logic, as illustrated in his many palavers,
plays no mean part in the life of the Fjort.

A discussion takes place between two natives which leads to a quarrel.
Each party relates his side of the question to some friend, these
friends enter into the discussion, but fail to settle the question in
dispute. A bet is then made between the two in the following way: one
offers the other a corner of his cloth (a dress), and the other taking
his knife cuts it off. Or a stick is broken into two parts, each keeping
his part until the palaver is settled. The dispute is then referred to a
prince, in whose presence it is "talked out." This prince decides the
matter, and is paid for his trouble. This the Fjort calls "Ku funda
nKana, that is to plead and circumstantiate a cause.

Palavers of the above kind of course are easily settled, but the more
serious questions, such as those of shedding blood and intertribal
dispute, are far more imposing and formal. It matters not whether the
tribes have had recourse to arms in their endeavours to settle the
palaver; no question is considered finally settled until it has been
properly and judicially talked out. In wars of this kind the stronger
may gain the day, but the weaker, if not entirely annihilated, will bide
his time, and bring the palaver up again on some future and more
favourable occasion, and probably be successful in getting right given
to him after all. The palaver settled, the fine inflicted paid, the
whole question is closed for ever.\[1\]

The princes before whom the palaver is to be talked are generally seated
near the trunk of some wide-spreading, shade-giving tree. The audience
sit opposite to them-the defendant and plaintiff and their followers on
either side, the space left being thus formed with a hollow square.

If the palaver is one of great importance, and the parties opposed to
each other are wealthy, they will employ their pleaders or Nzonzi (who
know how to speak). The plaintiff states his case. The defendant states
his. The simple bearing of the supposed facts of the case may take days,
for each has to trace back the palaver to its origin. "If you want to
catch a rat, says the Fjort, "go to its hole." Then the Nzonzi of the
plaintiff argues the case, showing that under each bead his party is in
the right, illustrating his speech by well-known comparisons, proverbs,
truisms, and songs. The Nzonzi of the defendant) on the other hand,
takes up each heading and argues against it. The followers on each side
emphasize each

\[1. This is common to all the West African tribes I know, and not
confined to the Fjort. M. H. K.\]

conclusion drawn by the Nzonzi by repeating his last sentence, by
clapping their bands, or by joining in the chorus of the song, that the
Nzonzi has sung to illustrate his case. If this song is a stirring one
and does not tell much either way, princes and audience as well as both
sides join in it until by it terrific grunt the presiding prince
silences the court.

This kind of thing goes on for many days, perhaps, until the two have as
it were talked themselves dry, then, after leaving the court to drink
water (as they say), the princes, having decided upon the guilt of the
litigant, return. The presiding prince then, going through the counts
once more, gives his judgment. Song after song is sung, hands are
clapped, and telling words are repeated, until as the prince nears the
end of his discourse the whole court is led by pure reason to admit the
justice of his words and judgment.

Then a great uproar ensues, the last song is sung with terrible
enthusiasm, men jump up and twist themselves about, dancing and waving
their spears and guns above their heads. The condemned is fined and
given so many days to pay, or if the punishment be death, he is
immediately tied up and either killed or ransomed according to his
position. If the dispute has been between two tribes, after the fine has
been paid an agreement is made between the two parties, and a slave
killed, to seal the compact.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Story Of A Partnership.](fjo42.md)

</div>
