[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rok17)  [Next](rok19) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00295RH82/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Religion of the Koran*, by Arthur N. Wollaston, \[1911\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

### WINE, GAMING, FOODS AND USURY, INFANTICIDE, ILL-TREATMENT OF ORPHANS

CHAPTER II., Verse 216.—They will ask thee about wine and games of
chance; say, "In them both is sin and profit to men; but the sin of both
is greater than the profit of the same."

Chapter V., Verse 92.—O ye who believe! verily, wine, and games of
chance, and statues, and divining (arrows) are only an abomination of
Satan's work; avoid them then that haply ye may prosper. Satan only
desires to place enmity and hatred between you by wine and games of
chance, and to turn you from the remembrance of God and from prayer; but
will ye not desist, and obey God, and obey the Apostles, and beware, for
if ye turn back, then know that our Apostle has only his message to
preach.

Chapter II., Verse 168.—O ye who do believe! eat of the good things
wherewith we have provided you, and give thanks unto God if it be Him ye
serve—He has only forbidden for you what is dead, and blood, and flesh
of swine, and whatsoever has been consecrated to other than God; but he
who is forced, neither revolting

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

nor transgressing, it is in no sin for him; verily God is forgiving and
merciful.

Chapter V., Verse 4.—Forbidden to you is that which dies of itself, and
blood, and the flesh of swine, and that which is devoted to other than
God, and the strangled, and the knocked down, and that which falls down,
and the gored, and what wild beasts have eaten—except what ye slaughter
in time—and what is sacrificed to idols and dividing carcases by arrows.

Chapter II., Verse 276.—Those who devour usury shall not rise again,
save as he riseth whom Satan hath paralysed with a touch; and that is
because they say, "Selling is only like usury," but God has made selling
lawful and usury unlawful; and he to whom the admonition from his Lord
has come, if he desists, what has gone before is his; his matter is in
God's hands. But whosoever returns (to usury) these are the Fellows of
the Fire, and they shall dwell therein for aye. God shall blot out our
usury, but shall make almsgiving profitable, for God loves not any
sinful misbeliever.

Chapter XXX., Verse 38.—And what ye put out to usury that it may
increase with the wealth of men, it shall not increase with God; but
what ye put out in alms, desiring the face of God—these it is who shall
gain double.

Chapter VI., Verse 142.—Losers are they who kill their children
foolishly, without knowledge, and who prohibit what God has bestowed
upon them, forging a lie against God, they have erred and are not
guided.

Chapter XVI., Verse 60.—When any one of

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

them has tidings of a female child, his face is over clouded and black,
and he has to keep back his wrath.

He skulks away from the people, for the evil tidings he has heard—is he
to keep it with its disgrace, or to bury it in the dust?—aye! evil is it
that they judge!

For those who disbelieve in the future life is a similitude of evil; but
for God is the loftiest similitude; for He is the mighty, the wise!

Chapter XVII., Verse 33.—And slay not your children for fear of poverty;
we will provide for them; beware! for to slay them is ever a great sin!

Chapter IV., Verse 10.—Verily, those who devour the property of orphans
unjustly, only devour into their bellies fire, and they shall broil in
flames.

Chapter VI., Verse 153.—And draw not nigh unto the wealth of the orphan,
save so as to better it, until he reaches full age, and give weight and
measure with justice.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Marriage and Divorce](rok19)
