[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](leg08)  [Next](leg10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### VI.

### A LEGEND OF KHENSU NEFER-HETEP <span id="fr_30"></span>[1](#fn_30) AND THE PRINCESS OF BEKHTEN.

THE text of this legend is cut in hieroglyphics upon a sandstone stele,
with a rounded top, which was found

<span id="page_liii">p. liii</span>

in the temple of Khensu at Thebes, and is now preserved in the
Bibliothèque Nationale at Paris; it was discovered by Champollion, and
removed to Paris by Prisse d'Avennes in 1846. The text was first
published by Prisse d'Avennes, <span id="fr_31"></span>[1](#fn_31) and
it was first translated by Birch <span id="fr_32"></span>[2](#fn_32) in
1853. The text was republished and translated into French by E. de Rougé
in 1858, <span id="fr_33"></span>[3](#fn_33) and several other
renderings have been given in German and in English since that
date. <span id="fr_34"></span>[4](#fn_34) When the text was first
published, and for some years afterwards, it was generally thought that
the legend referred to events which were said to have taken place under
a king who was identified as Rameses XIII., but this misconception was
corrected by Erman, who showed <span id="fr_35"></span>[5](#fn_35) that
the king was in reality Rameses II. By a careful examination of the
construction of the text he proved that the narrative on the stele was
drawn up several hundreds of years after the events described in it took
place, and that its author was but imperfectly acquainted with the form
of the Egyptian language in use in the reign of Rameses II. In fact, the
legend was written in the interests of the priests of the temple of
Khensu, who

<span id="page_liv">p. liv</span>

wished to magnify their god and his power to cast out devils and to
exorcise evil spirits; it was probably composed between B.C. 650 and
B.C. 250. <span id="fr_36"></span>[1](#fn_36)

The legend, after enumerating the great names of Rameses II., goes on to
state that the king was in the "country of the two rivers," by which we
are to understand some portion of Mesopotamia, the rivers being the
Tigris and Euphrates, and that the local chiefs were bringing to him
tribute consisting of gold, lapis-lazuli, turquoise, and logs of wood
from the Land of the God. It is difficult to understand how gold and
logs of wood from Southern Arabia and East Africa came to be produced as
tribute by chiefs who lived so far to the north. Among those who sent
gifts was the Prince of Bekhten, and at the head of all his tribute he
sent his eldest daughter, bearing his message of homage and duty. Now
the maiden was beautiful, and the King of Egypt thought her so lovely
that be took her to wife, and bestowed upon. her the name "Ra-neferu,"
which means something like the "beauties of Ra." He took her back with
him to Egypt, where she was installed as Queen.

During the summer of the fifteenth year of his reign, whilst Rameses II.
was celebrating a festival of Amen-Ra in the Temple of Luxor, one came
to him and reported that an envoy had arrived from the Prince of
Bekhten, bearing with him many gifts for the Royal Wife Ra-neferu. When
the envoy had been brought

<span id="page_lv">p. lv</span>

into the presence, he addressed words of homage to the king, and, having
presented the gifts from his lord, he said that he had come to beg His
Majesty to send a "learned man," i.e., a magician, to Bekhten to attend
Bent-enth-resh, His Majesty's sister-in-law, who was stricken with some
disease. Thereupon the king summoned the learned men of the House of
Life, i.e., the members of the great College of Magic at Thebes, and the
*qenbetu* officials, and when they had entered his presence, he
commanded them to select a man of "wise heart and deft fingers" to go to
Bekhten. The choice fell upon one Tehuti-em-heb, and His Majesty sent
him to Bekhten with the envoy. When they arrived in Bekhten,
Tehuti-em-heb found that the Princess Bent-enth-resh was possessed by an
evil spirit which refused to be exorcised by him, and he was unable to
cast out the devil. The Prince of Bekhten, seeing that the healing of
his daughter was beyond the power of the Egyptian, sent a second envoy
to Rameses II., and besought him to send a god to drive out the devil.
This envoy arrived in Egypt in the summer of the twenty-sixth year of
the reign of Rameses II., and found the king celebrating a festival in
Thebes. When he heard the petition of the envoy, he went to the Temple
of Khensu Nefer-hetep "a second time," <span
id="fr_37"></span>[1](#fn_37) and

<span id="page_lvi">p. lvi</span>

presented himself before the god and besought his help on behalf of his
sister-in-law.

Then the priests of Khensu Nefer-hetep carried the statue of this god to
the place where was the statue of Khensu surnamed "Pa-ari-sekher," i.e.,
the "Worker of destinies," who was able to repel the attacks of evil
spirits and to drive them out. When the statues of the two gods were
facing each other, Rameses II. entreated Khensu Nefer-hetep to "turn his
face towards," i.e., to look favourably upon Khensu. Pa-ari-sekher, and
to let him go to Bekhten to drive the devil out of the Princess of
Bekhten. The text affords no explanation of the fact that Khensu
Nefer-hetep was regarded as a greater god than Khensu Pa-ari-sekher, or
why his permission had to be obtained before the latter could leave the
country. It is probable that the demands made upon Khensu Nefer-hetep by
the Egyptians who lived in Thebes and its neighbourhood were so numerous
that it was impossible to let his statue go into outlying districts or
foreign lands, and that a deputy-god was appointed to perform miracles
outside Thebes. This arrangement would benefit the people, and would,
moreover, bring much money to the priests. The appointment of a
deputy-god is not so strange as it may seem, and modern African peoples
are familiar with the expedient. About one hundred years ago the priests
of the god Bobowissi of Winnebah, in the Tshi region of West Africa,
found their business so large that it was absolutely necessary for them
to appoint a

<span id="page_lvii">p. lvii</span>

deputy. The priests therefore selected Brahfo, i.e., "deputy," and gave
out that Bobowissi had deputed all minor matters to him, and that his
utterances were to be regarded as those of Bobowissi. Delegates were
ordered to be sent to Winnebah in Ashanti, where they would be shown the
"deputy" god by the priests, and afterwards he would be taken to
Mankassim, where he would reside, and do for the people all that
Bobowissi had done hitherto. <span id="fr_38"></span>[1](#fn_38)

When Rameses II. had made his petition to Khensu Nefer-hetep, the statue
of the god bowed its head twice, in token of assent. Here it is clear
that we have an example of the use of statues with movable limbs, which
were worked, when occasion required, by the priests. The king then made
a second petition to the god to transfer his *sa*, or magical power, to
Khensu Pa-ari-sekher so that when he had arrived in Bekhten he would be
able to heal the Princess. Again the statue of Khensu Nefer-hetep bowed
its head twice, and the petition of the king was granted. The text goes
on to say that the magical power of the greater god was transferred to
the lesser god four times, or in a fourfold measure, but we are not told
how this was effected. We know from many passages in the texts that
every god was believed to possess this magical power, which is called
the "*sa* of life," or the "*sa* of the god,". <span
id="fr_39"></span>[2](#fn_39) This *sa* could be transferred by

<span id="page_lviii">p. lviii</span>

a god or goddess to a human being, either by an embrace or through some
offering which was eaten. Thus Temu transferred the magical power of his
life to Shu and Tefnut by embracing them, <span
id="fr_40"></span>[1](#fn_40) and in the Ritual of the Divine Cult <span
id="fr_41"></span>[2](#fn_41) the priest says, The two vessels of milk
of Temu are the *sa* <span id="fr_42"></span>[1](#fn_40) of my limbs."
The man who possessed this *sa* could transfer it to his friend by
embracing him and then "making passes" with his hands along his back.
The *sa* could be received by a man from a god and then transmitted by
him to a statue by taking it in his arms, and this ceremony was actually
performed by the king in the Ritual of the Divine Cult. <span
id="fr_43"></span>[3](#fn_42) The primary source of this *sa* was Ra,
who bestowed it without measure on the blessed dead, <span
id="fr_44"></span>[4](#fn_43) and caused them to live for ever thereby.
These, facts make it tolerably certain that the magical power of Khensu
Nefer-hetep was transferred to Khensu Pa-ari-sekher in one of two ways:
either the statue of the latter was brought near to that of the former
and it received the *sa* by contact, or the high priest first received
the *sa* from the greater god and then transmitted it to the lesser god
by embraces and "passes" with his hands. Be this as it may,

<span id="page_lix">p. lix</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Khensu Pa-ari-sekher received the magical power,
and having been placed in his boat, he set out for Bekhten, accompanied
by five smaller boats, and chariots and horses which marched on each
side of him.

When after a journey of seventeen months Khensu Pa-ari-sekher arrived in
Bekhten, he was cordially welcomed by the Prince, and, having gone to
the place where the Princess who was possessed of a devil lived, he
exercised his power to such purpose that she was healed immediately.
Moreover, the devil which had been cast out admitted that Khensu
Pa-ari-sekher was his master, and promised that he would depart to the
place whence he came, provided that the Prince of

Bekhten would celebrate a festival in his honour before his departure.
Meanwhile the Prince and his soldiers stood by listening to the
conversation between the god and the devil, and they were very much
afraid. Following the instructions of Khensu Pa-ari-sekher the Prince
made a great feast in honour of the supernatural visitors, and then the
devil departed to the "place which he loved," and there was general
rejoicing in the land. The Prince of Bekhten was so pleased with the
Egyptian god that he determined not to allow him to return to Egypt.
When the statue of Khensu Pa-ari-sekher had been in Bekhten for three
years and nine months, the Prince in a vision saw the god, in the form
of a golden hawk, come forth from his shrine, and fly up into the air
and direct his course to Egypt. Realizing that the. statue of the god
was

<span id="page_lx">p. lx</span>

useless without its indwelling spirit, the Prince of Bekhten permitted
the priests of Khensu Pa-ari-sekher to depart with it to Egypt, and
dismissed them with gifts of all kinds. In due course they arrived in
Egypt and the priests took their statue to the temple of Khensu
Nefer-hetep, and handed over to that god all the gifts which the Prince
of Bekhten had given them, keeping back nothing for their own god. After
this Khensu Pa-ari-sekher returned to his temple in peace, in the
thirty-third year of the reign of Rameses II., having been absent from
it about eight years.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_30"></span>[lii:1](leg09.htm#fr_30) In the headlines of
this section, p. 106 ff., for Ptah Nefer-hetep read Khensu Nefer-hetep.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[liii:1](leg09.htm#fr_31) *Choix de Monuments
Égyptiens*, Paris, 1847, plate xxiv.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[liii:2](leg09.htm#fr_32) *Transactions of the
Royal Society of Literature*, New Series, vol. iv., p. 217 ff.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[liii:3](leg09.htm#fr_33) *Journal Asiatique*
(*Étude sur une Stèle Égyptienne*), August, 1856, August, 1857, and
August-Sept., 1858, Paris, 8vo, with plate.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[liii:4](leg09.htm#fr_34) Brugsch, *Geschichte
Aegyptens*, 1877, p. 627 ff.; Birch, *Records of the Past*, Old Series,
vol. iv., p. 53 ff.; Budge, *Egyptian Reading Book*, text and
transliteration, p. 40 ff.; translation, p. xxviii. ff.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[liii:5](leg09.htm#fr_35) *Aeg. Zeit.*, 1883,
pp. 54-60.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[liv:1](leg09.htm#fr_36) Maspero, *Les Contes
Populaires*, 3rd edit., p. 166.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[lv:1](leg09.htm#fr_37) Thus the king must have
invoked the help of Khensu on the occasion of the visit of the first
envoy.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[lvii:1](leg09.htm#fr_38) Ellis, *Tshi-speaking
Peoples*, p. 55.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[lvii:2](leg09.htm#fr_39) Text of Unas, line
562.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[lviii:1](leg09.htm#fr_42) *Pyramid Texts*, Pepi
I., l. 466.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[lviii:2](leg09.htm#fr_41) Ed. Moret, p. 21.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[lviii:3](leg09.htm#fr_43) *Ibid.*, p. 99.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[lviii:4](leg09.htm#fr_44) Pepi I., line 666.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Summary: VII. A Legend Of Khnemu And Of A Seven Years'
Famine](leg10)
