[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](leg14)  [Next](leg16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span> <span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

### THE LEGEND OF THE DESTRUCTION OF MANKIND.

### CHAPTER I.

\[Here is the story of Ra,\] the god who was self-begotten and
self-created, after he had assumed the sovereignty over men and women,
and gods, and things, the ONE god. Now men and women were speaking words
of complaint, saying:--"Behold, his Majesty (Life, Strength, and Health
to him!) hath grown old, and his bones have become like (silver, and his
members have turned into gold and his hair is like unto real
lapis-lazuli." His Majesty heard the words of complaint which men and
women were uttering, and his Majesty (Life, Strength, and Health to
him!) said unto those who were in his train:--"Cry out, and bring to me
my Eye, and Shu, and Tefnut, and Seb, and Nut, and the father-gods, and
the mother-gods who were with me, even when I was in Nu side by side
with my god Nu. Let there be brought along with my Eye his ministers,
and let them be led to me hither secretly, so that men and women may not
perceive them \[coming\] hither, and may not therefore take to flight
with their hearts. Come thou <span id="fr_58"></span>[1](#fn_57) with
them

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span> <span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

to the Great House, and let them declare their plans (or, arrangements)
fully, for I will go from Nu into the place wherein I brought about my
own existence, and let those gods be brought unto me there." Now the
gods were drawn up on each side of Ra, and they bowed down before his
Majesty until their heads touched the ground, and the maker of men and
women, the king of those who have knowledge, spake his words in the
presence of the Father of the first-born gods. And the gods spake in the
presence of his Majesty, saying:--"Speak unto us, for we are listening
to them" (i.e., thy words). Then RA spake unto Nu, saying:--"O thou
first-born god from whom I came into being, O ye gods of ancient time,
my ancestors, take ye heed to what men and women \[are doing\]; for
behold, those who were created by my Eye are uttering words of complaint
against me. Tell me what ye would do in the matter, and consider this
thing for me, and seek out \[a plan\] for me, for I will not slay them
until I have heard what ye shall say to me concerning it."

Then the Majesty of Nu, to son Ra, spake, saying:--"Thou art the god who
art greater than he who made thee, thou art the sovereign of those who
were created with thee, thy throne is set, and the fear of thee is
great; let thine Eye go against those who have uttered blasphemies
against thee." And the Majesty of Ra, said:--" Behold, they have betaken
themselves to flight into the mountain lands, for their

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span> <span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

hearts are afraid because of the words which they have uttered." Then
the gods spake in the presence of his Majesty, saying:--"Let thine Eye
go forth and let it destroy for thee those who revile thee with words of
evil, for there is no eye whatsoever that can go before it and resist
thee and it when it journeyeth in the form of Hathor." Thereupon this
goddess went forth and slew the men and the women who were on the
mountain (or, desert land). And the Majesty of this god said, "Come,
come in peace, O Hathor, for the work is accomplished." Then this
goddess said, "Thou hast made me to live, for when I gained the mastery
over men and women it was sweet to my heart;" and the Majesty of Ra
said, "I myself will be master over them as \[their\] king, and I will
destroy them." And it came to pass that Sekhet of the offerings waded
about in the night season in their blood, beginning at
Suten-henen. <span id="fr_59"></span>[1](#fn_58) Then the Majesty of Ra,
spake \[saying\], "Cry out, and let there come to me swift and speedy
messengers who shall be able to run like the wind . . . .;" and
straightway messengers of this \[kind were brought unto him. And the
Majesty of this god spake \[saying\], "Let these messengers go to
Abu, <span id="fr_60"></span>[2](#fn_59) and bring unto me mandrakes in
great numbers;" and \[when\] these

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span> <span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

mandrakes were brought unto him the Majesty of this god gave them to
Sekhet, the goddess who dwelleth in Annu (Heliopolis) to crush. And
behold, when the maidservants were bruising the grain for \[making\]
beer, these mandrakes were placed in the vessels which were to hold the
beer, and some of the blood of the men and women \[who had been slain\].
Now they made seven thousand vessels of beer. Now when the Majesty of
RE, the King of the South and North, had come with the gods to look at
the vessels of beer, and behold, the daylight had appeared after the
slaughter of men and women by the goddess in their season as she sailed
up the river, the Majesty of Ra said, "It is good, it is good,
nevertheless I must protect men and women against her." And Ra, said,
"Let them take up the vases and carry them to the place where the men
and women were slaughtered by her." Then the Majesty of the King of the
South and North in the three-fold beauty of the night caused to be
poured out these vases of beer which make \[men\] to lie down (or,
sleep), and the meadows of the Four Heavens <span
id="fr_61"></span>[1](#fn_60) were filled with beer (or, water) by
reason of the Souls of the Majesty of this god. And it came to pass that
when this goddess arrived at the dawn of day, she found these
\[Heavens\] flooded \[with beer\], and she was pleased thereat; and

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span> <span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

she drank \[of the beer and blood\], and her heart rejoiced, and she
became drunk, and she gave no further attention to men and women. Then
said the Majesty of Ra to this goddess, "Come in peace, come in peace, O
Amit," <span id="fr_62"></span>[1](#fn_61) and thereupon beautiful women
came into being in the city of Amit (or, Amem). And the Majesty of Ra
spake \[concerning\] this goddess, \[saying\], "Let there be made for
her vessels of the beer which produceth sleep at every holy time and
season of the year, and they shall be in number according to the number
of my hand-maidens;" and from that early time until now men have been
wont to make on the occasions of the festival of Hathor vessels of the
beer which make them to sleep in number according to the number of the
handmaidens of Ra. And the Majesty of Ra spake unto this goddess,
\[saying\], "I am smitten with the pain of the fire of sickness; whence
cometh to me \[this\] pain?" And the Majesty of Ra said, "I live, but my
heart hath become exceedingly weary <span id="fr_63"></span>[2](#fn_62)
with existence with them (i.e., with men); I have slain \[some of\]
them, but there is a remnant of worthless ones, for the destruction
which I wrought among them was not as great as my power." Then the gods
who were in his following said unto him, "Be not overcome by thy
inactivity, for thy might is in proportion to thy will." And the Majesty
of this god said unto the Majesty of Nu, "My members are weak for (or,
as

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span> <span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

at) the first time; I will not permit this to come upon me a second
time." And the Majesty of the god Nu said, "O son Shu, be thou the Eye
'for thy father . . . . . and avenue (?) him, and 'thou goddess Nut,
place him . . . . . ... And the goddess Nut said, How can this be then,
"O my father Nu? "Hail," said Nut . . . . . to the god Nu., and the
goddess straightway became \[a cow\], and she set the Majesty of Ra upon
\[her\] back . . . . . And when these things had been done, men and
women saw the god Ra, upon the back \[of the cow\]. Then these men and
women said, "Remain with us, and we will overthrow thine enemies who
speak words of blasphemy \[against thee.\], and \[destroy them\]." Then
his Majesty \[Ra\] set out for the Great House, and \[the gods who were
in the train of Ra remained\] with them (i.e., the men); during that
time the earth was in darkness. And when the earth became light
\[again\]j and the morning had dawned, the men came forth with their
bows and their \[weapons\], and they set their arms in motion to shoot
the enemies \[of Ra\]. Then said the Majesty of this god, "Your
"transgressions of violence are placed behind you, for the slaughtering
of the enemies is above the slaughter \[of sacrifice\];" thus came into
being the slaughter \[of sacrifice\]. And the Majesty of this god said
unto Nut, "I have placed myself upon my back in order to stretch myself
out." What then is the

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span> <span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

meaning of this? It meaneth that he united (?) himself with Nut. \[Thus
came into being\] . . . . . . Then said the Majesty of this god, "I am
departing from them (i.e., from men), and he must come after (me who
would see me;" thus came into being . . . . . Then the Majesty of this
god looked forth from its interior, saying, "Gather together \[men for
me\], and make ready for me an abode for multitudes;" thus came into
being . . . . . . . And his Majesty (life, health, and strength be to
him!) said, "Let a great field (*sekhet*) be produced (*hetep*);
"thereupon Sekhet-hetep came into being. \[And the god said\], "I will
gather herbs (*aarat*) therein;" thereupon Sekhet-aaru came into being.
\[And the god said\], "I will make it to contain as dwellers things
(*khet*) like stars of all sorts;" thereupon the stars (*akhekha*) came
into being. Then the goddess Nut trembled because of the height.

And the Majesty of Ra said, "I decree that supports be to bear \[the
goddess up\];" thereupon the props of heaven (*heh*) came into being.
And the Majesty of Ra said, O my son Shu, I pray thee to set thyself
under \[my\] daughter Nut, and guard thou for me the supports (*heh*) of
the millions (*heh*) which are there, and which live in darkness. Take
thou the goddess upon thy head, and act thou as nurse for her;"
thereupon came into being \[the custom\] of a son nursing a daughter,
and \[the custom\] of a father carrying a son upon his head.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_57"></span>[15:1](leg15.htm#fr_58) The god here addressed
appears to have been Nu.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[19:1](leg15.htm#fr_59) Or, Henen-su, חָנֵס,
i.e., Herakleopolis, Magna.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[19:2](leg15.htm#fr_60) I.e., Elephantine, or
Syene, a place better known by the Arabic name ASWAN.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[21:1](leg15.htm#fr_61) I.e., the South, North,
West, and East of the sky.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[23:1](leg15.htm#fr_62) I.e., "the fair and
gracious goddess."

<span id="fn_62"></span>[23:2](leg15.htm#fr_63) Literally, "My heart
hath stopped greatly."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Legend of the Destruction of Mankind, Chapter II.](leg16)
