[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](leg16)  [Next](leg18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE LEGEND OF THE DESTRUCTION OF MANKIND

### CHAPTER III.

III\. THEN THE MAJESTY OF THIS GOD SPAKE UNTO THOTH, \[saying\] "Let a
call go forth for me to the Majesty of the god Seb, saying, 'Come, with
the utmost speed, at once."' And when the Majesty of Seb had come, the
Majesty of this god said unto him, "Let war be made against thy worms
(or, serpents) which are in thee; verily, they shall have fear of me as
long as I have being; but thou knowest their magical powers. Do thou go
to the place where my father Nu is, and say thou unto him, 'Keep ward
over the worms (or, serpents) which are in the earth and water.' And
moreover,

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span> <span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

thou shalt make a writing for each of the nests of thy serpents which
are there, saying, 'Keep ye guard \[lest ye\] cause injury to anything.'
They shall know that I am removing myself \[from them\], but indeed I
shall shine upon them. Since, however, they indeed wish for a father,
thou shalt be a father unto them in this land for ever. Moreover, let
good heed be taken to the men who have my words of power, and to those
whose mouths have knowledge of such things; verily my own words of power
are there, verily it shall not happen that any shall participate with me
in my protection, by reason of the majesty which hath come into being
before me. I will decree them to thy son Osiris, and their children
shall be watched over, the hearts of their princes shall be obedient
(or, ready) by reason of the magical powers of those who act according
to their desire in all the earth through their words of power which are
in their bodies."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Legend Of The Destruction Of Mankind, Chapter IV.](leg18)
