[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](leg28)  [Next](leg30) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

# THE HISTORY OF ISIS AND OSIRIS,

### WITH EXPLANATIONS OF THE SAME, COLLECTED BY PLUTARCH, AND SUPPLEMENTED BY HIS OWN VIEWS.

I. Though it be the wise man's duty, O CLEA, <span
id="fr_260"></span>[1](#fn_258) to apply to the gods for every good
thing which he hopes to enjoy, yet ought he more especially to pray to
them for their assistance in his search after that knowledge which more
immediately regards themselves, as far as such knowledge may be
attained, inasmuch as there is nothing which they can bestow more truly
beneficial to mankind, or more worthy themselves, than truth. For
whatever other good things are indulged to the wants of men, they have
all, properly speaking, no relation to, and are of a nature quite
different from, that of their divine donors. For 'tis not the abundance
of their gold and silver, nor the command of the thunder, but wisdom and
knowledge which constitute the power and happiness of those heavenly
beings. It is therefore well observed by Homer (*Iliad*, xiii. 354), and
indeed with more propriety than be usually talks of the gods, when,
speaking of Zeus and Poseidon, he

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

tells us that both were descended from the same parents, and born in the
same region, but that Zeus was the elder and knew most"; plainly
intimating thereby that the empire of the former was more august and
honourable than that of his brother, as by means of his age he was his
superior, and more advanced in wisdom and science. Nay, 'tis my opinion,
I own, that even the blessedness of that eternity which is the portion
of the Deity himself consists in that universal knowledge of all nature
which accompanies it; for setting this aside, eternity might be more
properly styled an endless duration than an enjoyment of existence.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_258"></span>[198:1](leg29.htm#fr_260) She is said to have
been a priestess of Isis and of Apollo Delphicus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section II](leg30)
