[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](leg45)  [Next](leg47) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

XVIII\. When Isis had come to her son Horus, who was being reared at
Buto, <span id="fr_306"></span>[1](#fn_304) she deposited the chest in a
remote and unfrequented place. One night, however, when Typhon was
hunting by the light of the moon, he came upon it by chance, and
recognizing the body which was enclosed in it, he tore it into several
pieces, fourteen  <span id="fr_307"></span>[2](#fn_305) in all, and
scattered them in different places

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

up and down the country. When Isis knew what had been done, she set out
in search of the scattered portions of her husband's body; and in order
to pass more easily through the lower, marshy parts of the country, she
made use of a boat made of the papyrus plant. For this reason, they say,
either fearing the anger of the goddess, or else venerating the papyrus,
the crocodile never injures anyone who travels in this sort of
vessel. <span id="fr_308"></span>[1](#fn_306) And this, they say, hath
given rise to the report that there are very many different sepulchres
of Osiris in Egypt, for wherever Isis found one of the scattered
portions of her husband's body, there she buried it. Others, however,
contradict this story, and tell us that the variety of sepulchres of
Osiris was due rather to the policy of the queen, who, instead of the
real body, as she pretended, presented to these cities only an image of
her husband. This she did in order to increase the honours which would
by these means be paid to his memory, and also to defeat Typhon, who, if
he were victorious in his fight against Horus in which be was about to
engage, would search for the body of Osiris, and being distracted by the
number of sepulchres would despair of ever being able to find the true
one. We are told, moreover, that notwithstanding all her efforts, Isis
was never able to discover the phallus of

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Osiris, which, having been thrown into the Nile
immediately upon its separation from the rest of the body, <span
id="fr_309"></span>[1](leg47.htm#fn_307) had been devoured by the
Lepidotus, the Phagrus, and the Oxyrhynchus, fish which above all
others, for this reason, the Egyptians have in more especial avoidance.
In order, however, to make some amends for the loss, Isis consecrated
the phallus made in imitation of it, and instituted a solemn festival to
its memory, which is even to this day observed by the Egyptians.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_304"></span>[224:1](leg46.htm#fr_306) In Egyptian, the
double city Pe-Tep. See the texts from the Metternich Stele printed in
this volume.

<span id="fn_305"></span>[224:2](leg46.htm#fr_307) The fourteen members
are: head, feet, bones, arms, heart, interior, tongue, eyes, fists,
fingers, back, ears, loins, and body. Some of the lists in Egyptian add
the face of a ram and the hair. The cities in which Isis buried the
portions of his body are: Koptos, Philae in Elephantine, Herakleopolis
Magna, Kusae, Heliopolis, Diospolis of Lower Egypt, Letopolis, Saïs,
Hermopolis <span id="page_225">p. 225</span> of Lower Egypt, Athribis,
Aq (Schedia), Ab in the Libyan nome, Netert, Apis.

<span id="fn_306"></span>[225:1](leg46.htm#fr_308) Moses was laid in an
ark of bulrushes, i.e., papyrus, and was found uninjured.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section XIX.](leg47)
