[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](maui03)  [Next](maui05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0024FAHBQ/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Legends of Maui, A Demi-God of Polynesia*, by W. D. Westervelt,
\[1910\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# I.

### MAUI'S HOME

"Akalana was the man;  
Hira-a-ke-ahi was the wife;  
Maui First was born;  
Then Maui-waena;  
Maui Kiikii was born;  
Then Maui of the malo.""

--Queen Liliuokalani's Family Chant.

FOUR BROTHERS, each bearing the name of Maui, belong to Hawaiian legend.
They accomplished little as a family, except on special occasions when
the youngest of the household awakened his brothers by some unexpected
trick which drew them into unwonted action. The legends of Hawaii,
Tonga, Tahiti, New Zealand and the Hervey group make this youngest Maui
"the discoverer of fire" or "the ensnarer of the sun" or "the fisherman
who pulls up islands" or "the man endowed with magic," or "Maui with
spirit power." The legends vary somewhat, of course, but not as much as
might be expected when the thousands of miles between various groups of
islands are taken into consideration.

Maui was one of the Polynesian demi-gods. His parents belonged to the
family of supernatural beings. He himself was possessed of supernatural
powers and was supposed to make use of all manner of enchantments. In
New Zealand antiquity a Maui was said to have assisted other gods in the
creation of man. Nevertheless Maui was very human. He lived in thatched
houses, had wives and children, and was scolded by the women for not
properly supporting his household.

The time of his sojourn among men is very indefinite. In Hawaiian
genealogies Maui and his brothers were placed among the descendants of
Ulu and "the sons of Kii," and Maui was one of the ancestors of
Kamehameha, the first king of the united Hawaiian Islands. This would
place him in the seventh or eighth century of the Christian Era. But it
is more probable that Maui belongs to the mist-land of time. His
mischievous pranks with the various gods would make him another Mercury
living in any age from the creation to the beginning of the Christian
era.

The Hervey Island legends state that Maui's father was "the supporter of
the heavens" and his mother "the guardian of the road to the invisible
world."

In the Hawaiian chant, Akalana was the name of his father. In other
groups this was the name by which his mother was known. Kanaloa, the
god, is sometimes known as the father of Maui. In Hawaii Hina was his
mother. Elsewhere Ina, or Hina, was the grandmother, from whom he
secured fire.

The Hervey Island legends say that four mighty ones lived in the old
world from which their ancestors came. This old world bore the name
Ava-iki, which is the same as Hawa-ii, or Hawaii. The four gods were
Mauike, Ra, Ru, and Bua-Taranga.

It is interesting to trace the connection of these four names with
Polynesian mythology. Mauike is the same as the demi-god of New Zealand,
Mafuike. On other islands the name is spelled Mauika, Mafuika, Mafuia,
Mafuie, and Mahuika. Ra, the sun god of Egypt, is the same as Ra in New
Zealand and La (sun) in Hawaii. Ru, the supporter of the heavens, is
probably the Ku of Hawaii, and the Tu of New Zealand and other islands,
one of the greatest of the gods worshiped by the ancient Hawaiians. The
fourth mighty one from Ava-ika was a woman, Bua-taranga, who guarded the
path to the underworld. Talanga in Samoa, and Akalana in Hawaii were the
same as Taranga. Pua-kalana (the Kalana flower) would probably be the
same in Hawaiian as Bua-taranga in the language of the Society Islands.

Ru, the supporter of the Heavens, married Buataranga, the guardian of
the lower world. Their one child was Maui. The legends of Raro-Toaga
state that Maui's father and mother were the children of Tangaroa
(Kanaloa in Hawaiian), the great god worshiped throughout Polynesia.
There were three Maui brothers and one sister, Ina-ika (Ina, the fish).

The New Zealand legends relate the incidents of the babyhood of Maui.

Maui was prematurely born, and his mother, not, caring to be troubled
with him, cut off a lock of her hair, tied it around him and cast him
into the sea. In this way the name came to him, Maui-Tiki-Tiki, or "Maui
formed in the topknot." The waters bore him safely. The jelly fish
enwrapped and mothered him. The god of the seas cared for and protected
him. He was carried to the god's house and hung up in the roof that he
inight feel the warm air of the fire, and be cherished into life. When
he was old enough, he came to his relations while they were all gathered
in the great House of Assembly, dancing and making merry. Little Maui
crept in and sat down behind his brothers. Soon his mother called the
children and found a strange child, who proved that he was her son, and
was taken in as one of the family. Some of the brothers were jealous,
but the eldest addressed the others as follows:

"Never mind; let him be our dear brother. In the days of peace remember
the proverb, 'When you are on friendly terms, settle your disputes in a
friendly way; when you are at war, you must redress your injuries by
violence.' It is better for us, brothers, to be kind to other people.
These are the ways by which men gain influence-by laboring for abundance
of food to feed others, by collecting property to give to others, and by
similar means by which you promote the good of others."

Thus, according to the New Zealand story related by Sir George Grey,
Maui was received in his home.

Maui's home was placed by some of the Hawaiian myths at Kauiki, a
foothill of the great extinct crater Haleakala, on the Island of Maui.
It was here he lived when the sky was raised to its present position.
Here was located the famous fort around which many battles were fought
during the years immediately preceding the coming of Captain Cook. This
fort was held by warriors of the Island of Hawaii a number of years. It
was from this home that Maui was supposed to have journeyed when he
climbed Mt. Haleakala to ensnare the sun.

And yet most of the Hawaiian legends place Maui's home by the rugged
black lava beds of the Wailuku river near Hilo on the island Hawaii.
Here he lived when he found the way to make fire by rubbing sticks
together, and when he killed Kuna, the great eel, and performed other
feats of valor. He was supposed to cultivate the land on the north side
of the river. His mother, usually known as Hina, had her home in a lava
cave under the beautiful Rainbow Falls, one of the fine scenic
attractions of Hilo. An ancient demigod, wishing to destroy this home,
threw a great mass of lava across the stream below the falls. The rising
water was fast filling the cave.

Hina called loudly to her powerful son Maui. He came quickly and found
that a large and strong ridge of lava lay across the stream. One end
rested against a small hill. Maui struck the rock on the other side of
the hill and thus broke a new pathway for the river. The water swiftly
flowed away and the cave remained as the home of the Maui family.

According to the King Kalakaua family legend, translated by Queen
Liliuokalani, Maui and his brothers also made this place their home.
Here he aroused the anger of two uncles, his mother's brothers, who were
called "Tall Post" and "Short Post," because they guarded the entrance
to a cave in which the Maui family probably had its home.

"They fought hard with Maui, and were thrown, and red water flowed
freely from Maui's forehead. This was the first shower by Maui." Perhaps
some family discipline followed this knocking down of door posts, for it
is said:

"They fetched the sacred Awa bush,  
Then came the second shower by Maui;  
The third shower was when the elbow of Awa was broken;  
The fourth shower came with the sacred bamboo."

Maui's mother, so says a New Zealand legend, had her home in the
under-world as well as with her children. Maui determined to find the
hidden dwelling place. His mother would meet the children in the evening
and lie down to sleep with them and then disappear with the first
appearance of dawn. Maui remained awake one night, and when all were
asleep, arose quietly and stopped up every crevice by which a ray of
light could enter. The morning came and the sun mounted up-far up in the
sky. At last his mother leaped up and tore away the things which shut
out the light.

"Oh, dear; oh, dear! She saw the sun high in the heavens; so she hurried
away, crying at the thought of having been so badly treated by her own
children."

Maui watched her as she pulled up a tuft of grass and disappeared in the
earth, pulling the grass back to its place.

Thus Maui found the path to the under-world. Soon he transformed himself
into a pigeon and flew down, through the cave, until he saw a party of
people under a sacred tree, like those growing in the ancient first
Hawaii. He flew to the tree and threw down berries upon the people. They
threw back stones. At last he permitted a stone from his father to
strike him, and he fell to the ground. "They ran to catch him but lo!
the pigeon had turned into a man."

Then his father "took him to the water to be baptized" (possibly a
modern addition to the legend). Prayers were offered and ceremonies
passed through. But the prayers were incomplete and Maui's father knew
that the gods would be angry and cause Maui's death, and all because in
the hurried baptism a part of the prayers had been left unsaid. Then
Maui returned to the upper world and lived again with his brothers.

Maui commenced his mischievous life early, for Hervey Islanders say that
one day the children were playing a game dearly loved by Polynesians-
hide-and-seek. Here a sister enters into the game and hides little Maui
under a pile of dry sticks. His brothers could not find him, and the
sister told them where to look. The sticks were carefully handled, but
the child could not be found. He had shrunk himself so small that he was
like an insect under some sticks and leaves. Thus early he began to use
enchantments.

Maui's home, at the best, was only a sorry affair. Gods and demigods
lived in caves and small grass houses. The thatch rapidly rotted and
required continual renewal. In a very short time the heavy rains beat
through the decaying roof. The home was without windows or doors, save
as low openings in the ends or sides allowed entrance to those willing
to crawl through. Off on one side would be the rude shelter, in the
shadow of which Hina pounded the bark of certain trees into wood pulp
and then into strips of thin, soft wood-paper, which bore the name of
"Tapa cloth." This cloth Hina prepared for the clothing of Maui and his
brothers. Tapa cloth was often treated to a coat of cocoa-nut, or
candle-nut oil, making it somewhat waterproof and also more durable.

Here Maui lived on edible roots and fruits and raw fish, knowing little
about cooked food, for the art of fire making was not yet known. In
later years Maui was supposed to live on the eastern end of the island
Maui, and also in another home on the large island Hawaii, on which he
discovered how to make fire by rubbing dry sticks together. Maui was the
Polynesian Mercury. As a little fellow he was endowed with peculiar
powers, permitting him to become invisible or to change his human form
into that of an animal. He was ready to take anything from any one by
craft or force. Nevertheless, like the thefts of Mercury, his pranks
usually benefited mankind.

It is a little curious that around the different homes of Maui, there is
so little record of temples and priests and altars. He lived too far
back for priestly customs. His story is the rude, mythical survival of
the days when of church and civil government there was none and worship
of the gods was practically unknown, but every man was a law unto
himself, and also to the other man, and quick retaliation followed any
injury received.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II. Maui the Fisherman](maui05)
