[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](maui02)  [Next](maui04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0024FAHBQ/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Legends of Maui, A Demi-God of Polynesia*, by W. D. Westervelt,
\[1910\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# PREFACE

Maui is a demi god whose name should probably be pronounced Ma-u-i, *i.
e.*, Ma-oo-e. The meaning of the word is by no means clear. It may mean
"to live," "to subsist." It may refer to beauty and strength, or it may
have the idea of "the left hand" or "turning aside." The word is
recognized as belonging to remote Polynesian antiquity.

MacDonald, a writer of the New Hebrides Islands, gives the derivation of
the name Maui primarily from, the Arabic word "Mohyi," which means
"causing to: live" or "life," applied sometimes to the gods and
sometimes to chiefs as "preservers and sustainers" of their followers.

The Maui story probably contains a larger number of unique and ancient
myths than that of any other legendary character in the mythology of any
nation.

There are three centers for these legends, New Zealand in the south,
Hawaii in the north, and the Tahitian group including the Hervey Islands
in the east. In each of these groups of islands, separated by thousands
of miles, there are the same legends, told in almost the same way, and
with very little variation in names. The intermediate groups of islands
of even as great importance as Tonga, Fiji or Samoa, possess the same
legends in more or less of a fragmentary condition, as if the three
centers had been settled first when the Polynesians were driven away
from the Asiatic coasts by their enemies, the Malays. From these centers
voyagers sailing away in search of adventures would carry fragments
rather than complete legends. This is exactly what has been done and
there are as a result a large number of hints of wonderful deeds. The
really long legends as told about the demi god Ma-u-i and his mother
Hina number about twenty.

It is remarkable that these legends have kept their individuality. The
Polynesians are not a very clannish people. For some centuries they have
not been in the habit of frequently visiting each other. They have had
no written language, and picture writing of any kind is exceedingly rare
throughout Polynesia and yet in physical traits, national customs,
domestic habits, and language, as well as in traditions and myths, the
different inhabitants of the islands of Polynesia are as near of kin as
the cousins of the United States and Great Britain.

The Maui legends form one of the strongest links in the mythological
chain of evidence which binds the scattered inhabitants of the Pacific
into one nation. An incomplete list aids in making clear the fact that
groups of islands hundreds and even thousands of miles apart have been
peopled centuries past by the same organic race. Either complete or
fragmentary Maui legends are found in the single islands and island
groups of Aneityum, Bowditch or Fakaofa, Efate, Fiji, Fotuna, Gilbert,
Hawaii, Hervey, Huahine, Mangaia, Manihiki, Marquesas, Marshall, Nauru,
New Hebrides, New Zealand, Samoa, Savage, Tahiti or Society, Tauna,
Tokelau and Tonga.

S. Percy Smith of New Zealand in his book Hawaiki mentions a legend
according to which Maui made a voyage after overcoming a sea monster,
visiting the Tongas, the Tahitian group, Vai-i or Hawaii, and the
Paumotu Islands. Then Maui went on to U-peru, which Mr. Smith says "may
be Peru." It was said that Maui named some of the islands of the
Hawaiian group, calling the island Maui "Maui-ui in remembrance of his
efforts in lifting up the heavens," Hawaii was named Vai-i, and Lanai
was called Ngangai-as if Maui had found the three most southerly islands
of the group.

The Maui legends possess remarkable antiquity. Of course, it is
impossible to give any definite historical date, but there can scarcely
be any question of their origin among the ancestors of the Polynesians
before they scattered over the Pacific ocean. They belong to the
prehistoric Polynesians. The New Zealanders claim Maui as an ancestor of
their most ancient tribes and sometimes class him among the most ancient
of their gods, calling him "creator of land" and "creator of man."
Tregear, in a paper before the New Zealand Institute, said that Maui was
sometimes thought to be "the sun himself," "the solar fire," "the sun
god," while his mother Hina was called "the moon goddess." The noted
greenstone god of the Maoris of New Zealand, Potiki, may well be
considered a representation of Maui-Tiki-Tiki, who was sometimes called
Maui-po-tiki.

Whether these legends came to the people in their sojourn in India
before they migrated to the Straits of Sunda is not certain; but it may
well be assumed that these stories had taken firm root in the memories
of the priests who transmitted the most important traditions from
generation to generation, and that this must have been done before they
were driven away from the Asiatic coasts by the Malays.

Several hints of Hindoo connection is found in the Maui legends. The
Polynesians not only ascribed human attributes to all animal life with
which they were acquainted, but also carried the idea of an alligator or
dragon with them, wherever they went, as in the mo-o of the story
Tuna-roa.

The Polynesians also had the idea of a double soul inhabiting the body.
This is carried out in the ghost legends more fully than in the Maui
stories, and yet "the spirit separate from the spirit which never
forsakes man" according to Polynesian ideas, was a part of the Maui
birth legends. This spirit, which can be separated or charmed away from
the body by incantations was called the "hau," When Maui's father
performed the religious ceremonies over him which would protect him and
cause him to be successful, he forgot a part of his incantation to the
"hau," therefore Maui lost his protection from death when he sought
immortality for himself and all mankind.

How much these things aid in proving a Hindoo or rather Indian origin
for the Polynesians is uncertain, but at least they are of interest
along the lines of race origin.

The Maui group of legends is preminently peculiar. They are not only
different from the myths of other nations, but they are unique in the
character of the actions recorded. Maui's deeds rank in a higher class
than most of the mighty efforts of the demi gods of other nations and
races, and are usually of more utility. Hercules accomplished nothing to
compare with "lifting the sky," "snaring the sun," "fishing for
islands," "finding fire in his grandmother's finger-nails," "learning
from birds how to make fire by rubbing dry sticks," or "getting a magic
bone" from the jaw of an ancestor who was half dead, that is dead on one
side and therefore could well afford to let the bone on that side go for
the benefit of a descendant. The Maui legends are full of helpful
imaginations, which are distinctly Polynesian.

The phrase "Maui of the Malo" is used among the Hawaiians in connection
with the name Maui a Kalana, "Maui the son of Akalana." It may be well
to note the origin of the name. It was said that Hina usually sent her
retainers to gather sea moss for her, but one morning she went down to
the sea by herself. There she found a beautiful red malo, which she
wrapped around her as a pa-u or skirt. When she showed it to Akalana,
her husband, he spoke of it as a gift of the gods, thinking that it
meant the gift of Maria or spiritual power to their child when he should
be born. In this way the Hawaiians explain the superior talent and
miraculous ability of Maui which placed him above his brothers.

These stories were originally printed as magazine articles, chiefly in
the Paradise of the Pacific, Honolulu; therefore there are sometimes
repetitions which it seemed best to leave, even when reprinted in the
present form.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I. Maui's Home](maui04)
