[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](iwwk08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

In West Kerry

AT Tralee station--I was on my way to a village many miles beyond
Dingle--I found a boy who carried my bag some way along the road to an
open yard, where the light railway starts for the west. There was a
confused mass of peasants struggling on the platform, with all sort of
baggage, which the people lifted into the train for themselves as well
as they were able. The seats ran up either side of the cars, and the
space between them was soon filled with sacks of flour, cases of porter,
chairs rolled in straw, and other household goods. A drunken young man
got in just before we started, and sang songs for a few coppers, telling
us that he had spent all his money, and had nothing left to pay for his
ticket. Then, when the carriage was closely packed, we moved slowly out
of the station. At my side there was an old man who explained the Irish
names of the places that we came to, and pointed out the Seven Pigs, a
group of islands in the bay; Kerry Head, further off; and many distant
mountains. Beyond him a dozen big women in shawls were crowded together;
and just opposite me there was a young woman wearing a wedding ring, who
was one of the peculiarly refined women of Kerry, with supreme charm in
every movement and expression. The big woman talked to her about some
elderly man who had been sick--her husband, it was likely--and some
young man who had gone away to England, and was breaking his heart with
loneliness.

'Ah, poor fellow!' she said; 'I suppose he will get used to it like
another; and wouldn't he be worse off if he was beyond the seas in Saint
Louis, or the towns of America?'

This woman seemed to unite the healthiness of the country people with
the greatest sensitiveness, and whenever there was any little stir or
joke in the carriage, her face and neck flushed with pleasure and
amusement. As we went on there were superb sights--first on the north,
towards Loop Head, and then when we reached the top of the ridge, to the
south also, to Drung Hill, Macgillicuddy's Reeks, and other mountains of
South Kerry. A little further on, nearly all the people got out at a
small station; and the young woman I had admired gathered up most of the
household goods and got down also, lifting heavy boxes with the power of
a man. Then two returned American girls got in, fine, stout-looking
women, with distress in their expression, and we started again. Dingle
Bay could now be seen through narrow valleys on our left, and had
extraordinary beauty in the evening light. In the carriage next to ours
a number of herds and jobbers were travelling, and for the last hour
they kept up a furious altercation that seemed always on the verge of
breaking out into a dangerous quarrel, but no blows were given.

At the end of the line an old blue side-car was waiting to take me to
the village where I was going. I was some time fastening on my goods,
with the raggedy boy who was to drive me; and then we set off passing
through the usual streets of a Kerry town, with public--houses at the
corners, till we left the town by a narrow quay with a few sailing boats
and a small steamer with coal. Then we went over a bridge near a large
water-mill, where a number of girls were standing about, with black
shawls over their heads, and turned sharp to the right, against the face
of the mountains. At first we went up hill for several miles, and got on
slowly, though the boy jumped down once or twice and gathered a handful
of switches to beat the tall mare he was driving. Just as the twilight
was beginning to deepen we reached the top of the ridge and came out
through a gap into sight of Smerwick Harbour, a wild bay with
magnificent headlands beyond it, and a long stretch of the Atlantic. We
drove on towards the west, sometimes very quickly, where the slope was
gradual, and then slowly again when the road seemed to fall away under
us, like the wall of a house. As the night fell the sea became like a
piece of white silver on our right; and the mountains got black on our
left, and heavy night smells began to come up out of the bogs. Once or
twice I noticed a blue cloud over the edge of the road, and then I saw
that we were nearly against the gables of a little village, where the
houses were so closely packed together there was no light from any of
them. It was now quite dark, and the boy got cautious in his driving,
pulling the car almost into the ditch once or twice to avoid an enormous
cavity where the middle of the road had settled down into the bogs. At
last we came to another river and a public-house, and went up a hill,
from which we could see the outline of a chapel; then the boy turned to
me: 'Is it ten o'clock yet?' he said; 'for we're mostly now in the
village.'

 

 

 

This morning, a Sunday, rain was threatening; but I went out west after
my breakfast under Croagh Martin, in the direction of the Atlantic. At
one of the first villages I came to I had a long talk with a man who was
sitting on the ditch waiting till it was time for Mass. Before long we
began talking about the Irish language.

'A few years ago,' he said, 'they were all for stopping it off; and when
I was a boy they tied a gobban into my mouth for the whole afternoon
because I was heard speaking Irish. Wasn't that great cruelty? And now
when I hear the same busybodies coming around and telling us for the
love of God to speak nothing but Irish, I've a good mind to tell them to
go to hell. There was a priest out here a while since who was telling us
to stay always where we are, and to speak nothing but Irish; but, I
suppose, although the priests are learned men, and great scholars, they
don't understand the life of the people the same as another man would.
In this place the land is poor--you can see that for yourself--and the
people have little else to live on; so that when there is a long family,
one son will stay at home and keep on the farm, and the others will go
away because they must go. Then when they once pass out of the Dingle
station in Tralee they won't hear a word of Irish, or meet anyone who'd
understand it; so what good, I ask you, is a man who hasn't got the
English, and plenty of it?'

After I left him I went on towards Dunquin, and lay for a long time on
the side of a magnificently wild road under Croagh Martin, where I could
see the Blasket Islands and the end of Dunmore Head, the most westerly
point of Europe. It was a grey day, with a curious silence on the sea
and sky and no sign of life anywhere, except the sail of one curagh--or
niavogue, as they are called here--that was sailing in from the islands.
Now and then a cart passed me filled with old people and children, who
saluted me in Irish; then I turned back myself. I got on a long road
running through a bog, with a smooth mountain on one side and the sea on
the other, and Brandon in front of me, partly covered with clouds. As
far as I could see there were little groups of people on their way to
the chapel in Ballyferriter, the men in homespun and the women wearing
blue cloaks, or, more often, black shawls twisted over their heads. This
procession along the olive bogs, between the mountains and the sea, on
this grey day of autumn, seemed to wring me with the pang of emotion one
meets everywhere in Ireland--an emotion that is partly local and
patriotic, and partly a share of the desolation that is mixed everywhere
with the supreme beauty of the world.

 

 

In the evening, when I was walking about the village, I fell in with a
man who could read Gaelic, and was full of enthusiasm for the old
language and of contempt for English.

'I can tell you,' he said, 'that the English I have is no more good to
me than the cover of that pipe. Buyers come here from Dingle and Cork
and Clare, and they have good Irish, and so has everyone we meet with,
for there is no one can do business in this place who hasn't the
language on his tongue.'

Then I asked him about the young men who go away to America.

'Many go away,' he said, 'who could stay if they wished to, for it is a
fine place for fishing, and a man will get more money and better health
for himself, and rear a better family, in this place than in many
another. It's a good place to be in, and now, with the help of God, the
little children will all learn to read and write in Irish, and that is a
great thing, for how can people do any good, or make a song even, if
they cannot write? You will be often three weeks making a song, and
there will be times when you will think of good things to put into it
that could never be beaten in the whole world; but if you cannot write
them down you will forget them, maybe, by the next day, and then what
good will be your song?'

After a while we went upstairs to a large room in the inn, where a
number of young men and girls were dancing jigs and reels. These young
people, although they are as Irish-speaking as the people of Connemara,
are pushing forward in their ways of living and dress; so that this
group of dancers could hardly have been known, by their appearance, from
any Sunday party in Limerick or Cork. After a long four-hand reel, my
friend, who was dressed in homespun, danced a jig to the whistling of a
young man with great energy and spirit. Then he sat down beside me in
the corner, and we talked about spring trawling and the price of nets. I
told him about the ways of Aran and Connemara; and then he told me about
the French trawlers who come to this neighbourhood in April and May.

'The Frenchmen from Fécamp,' he said, 'are Catholics and decent people;
but those who come from Boulogne have no religion, and are little better
than a wild beast would lep on you out of a wood. One night there was a
drift of them below in the public-house, where there is a counter, as
you've maybe seen, with a tin top on it. Well, they were talking
together, and they had some little difference among themselves, and from
that they went on raising their voices, till one of them out with his
knife and drove it down through the tin into the wood! Wasn't that a
dangerous fellow?'

Then he told me about their tobacco.

'The French do have two kinds of tobacco; one of them is called
hay-tobacco, and if you give them a few eggs, or maybe nine little
cabbage plants, they'll give you as much of it as would fill your hat.
Then we get a pound of our own tobacco and mix the two of them together,
and put them away in a pig's bladder--it's that way we keep our
tobacco--and we have enough with that lot for the whole winter.'

 

 

This evening a circus was advertised in Dingle, for one night only; so I
made my way there towards the end of the afternoon, although the weather
was windy and threatening. I reached the town an hour too soon, so I
spent some time watching the wild-looking fishermen and fish-women who
stand about the quays. Then I wandered up and saw the evening train
coming in with the usual number of gaily-dressed young women and
half-drunken jobbers and merchants; and at last, about eight o'clock, I
went to the circus field, just above the town, in a heavy splash of
rain. The tent was set up in the middle of the field, and a little to
the side of it a large crowd was struggling for tickets at one of the
wheeled houses in which the acrobats live. I went round the tent in the
hope of getting in by some easier means, and found a door in the canvas,
where a man was calling out: 'Tickets, or money, this way,' and I passed
in through a long winding passage. It was some time after the hour named
for the show, but although the tent was almost filled there was no sign
of the performers; so I stood back in a corner and watched the crowd
coming in wet and dripping from the rain, which had turned to a
downpour. The tent was lighted by a few flaring gas-jets round the
central pole, with an opening above them, through which the rain shot
down in straight whistling lines. The top of the tent was dripping and
saturated, and the gas, shining sideways across, made it glitter in many
places with the brilliancy of golden silk. When a sudden squall came
with a rush from the narrow valleys behind the town, the whole structure
billowed, and flapped and strained, till one waited every moment to see
the canvas fall upon our heads. The people, who looked strangely black
and swarthy in the uncertain light, were seated all round on three or
four rows of raised wooden seats, and many who were late were still
crushing forward, and standing in dense masses wherever there was room.
At the entrance a rather riotous crowd began to surge in so quickly that
there was some danger of the place being rushed. Word was sent across
the ring, and in a moment three or four of the women performers, with
long streaming ulsters buttoned over their tights, ran out from behind
the scenes and threw themselves into the crowd, forcing back the wild
hill-side people, fishwomen and drunken sailors, in an extraordinary
tumult of swearing, wrestling and laughter. These women seemed to enjoy
this part of their work, and shrieked with amusement when two or three
of them fell on some enormous farmer or publican and nearly dragged him
to the ground. Here and there among the people I could see a little
party of squireens and their daughters, in the fashions of five years
ago, trying, not always successfully, to reach the shilling seats. The
crowd was now so thick I could see little more than the heads of the
performers, who had at last come into the ring, and many of the shorter
women who were near me must have seen nothing the whole evening, yet
they showed no sign of impatience. The performance was begun by the
usual dirty white horse, that was brought out and set to gallop round,
with a gaudy horse-woman on his back, who jumped through a hoop and did
the ordinary feats, the horse's hoofs splashing and possing all the time
in the green slush of the ring. An old door-mat was laid down near the
entrance for the performers, and as they came out in turn they wiped the
mud from their feet before they got up on their horses. A little later
the clown came out, to the great delight of the people. He was followed
by some gymnasts, and then the horse-people came out again in different
dress and make-up, and went through their old turns once more. After
that there was prolonged fooling between the clown and the chief
horseman, who made many mediaeval jokes, that reminded me of little
circuses on the outer boulevards of Paris, and at last the horseman sang
a song which won great applause:

Here's to the man who kisses his wife,  
And kisses his wife alone;  
For there's many a man kissed another man's wife  
When he thought he kissed his own.

Here's to the man who rocks his child,  
And rocks his child alone;  
For there's many a man rocked another man's child  
When he thought he rocked his own.

About ten o'clock there seemed to be a lull in the storm, so I went out
into the open air with two young men who were going the road I had to
travel. The rain had stopped for a moment, but a high wind was blowing
as we made our way to a public-house to get a few biscuits and a glass
of beer before we started. A sleepy barmaid, who was lolling behind the
counter with a novel, pricked up her ears when she heard us talking of
our journey.

'Surely you are not going to Ballydavid,' she said, 'at such an hour of
a night like this.'

We told her we were going to a place which was further away.

'Well,' she said, 'I wouldn't go to that place to-night if you had a
coach-and-four to drive me in, and gave me twenty pounds into the
bargain! How at all will you get on in the darkness when the roads will
be running with water, and you'll be likely to slip down every place
into some drain or ditch?'

When we went out, and began to make our way down the steep hill through
the town, the night seemed darker than ever after the glare of the bar.
Before we had gone many yards a woman's voice called out sharply from
under the wall: 'Mind the horse.' I looked up and saw the black outline
of a horse's head standing right above me. It was not plain in such
darkness how we should get to the end of our ten-mile journey; but one
of the young men borrowed a lantern from a chandler in the bottom of the
town, and we made our way over the bridge and up the hill, going slowly
and painfully with just light enough, when we kept close together, to
avoid the sloughs of water and piles of stones on the roadway. By the
time we reached the top of the ridge and began to work down carefully
towards Smerwick, the rain stopped, and we reached the village without
any mishap.

 

 

I go out often in the mornings to the site of Sybil Ferriter's Castle,
on a little headland reached by a narrow strip of rocks. As I lie there
I can watch whole flights of cormorants and choughs and seagulls that
fly about under the cliffs, and beyond them a number of niavogues that
are nearly always fishing in Ferriter's Cove. Further on there are Sybil
Head and three rocky points, the Three Sisters then Smerwick Harbour and
Brandon far away, usually covered with white airy clouds. Between these
headlands and the village there is a strip of sandhill grown over with
sea-holly, and a low beach where scores of red bullocks lie close to the
sea, or wade in above their knees. Further on one passes peculiar
horseshoe coves, with contorted lines of sandstone on one side and slaty
blue rocks on the other, and necks of transparent sea of wonderful
blueness between them.

I walked up this morning along the slope from the east to the top of
Sybil Head, where one comes out suddenly on the brow of a cliff with a
straight fall of many hundred feet into the sea. It is a place of
indescribable grandeur, where one can see Carrantuohill and the Skelligs
and Loop Head and the full sweep of the Atlantic, and, over all, the
wonderfully tender and searching light that is seen only in Kerry.
Looking down the drop of five or six hundred feet, the height is so
great that the gannets flying close over the sea look like white
butterflies, and the choughs like flies fluttering behind them. One
wonders in these places why anyone is left in Dublin, or London, or
Paris, when it would be better, one would think, to live in a tent or
hut with this magnificent sea and sky, and to breathe this wonderful
air, which is like wine in one's teeth.

Here and there on this headland there are little villages of ten or
twenty houses, closely packed together without any order or roadway.
Usually there are one or two curious beehive-like structures in these
villages, used here, it is said, as pigsties or storehouses. On my way
down from Sybil Head I was joined by a tall young man, who told me he
had been in the navy, but had bought himself out before his time was
over. 'Twelve of us joined from this place,' he said, 'and I was the
last of them that stayed in it, for it is a life that no one could put
up with. It's not the work that would trouble you, but it's that they
can't leave you alone, and that you must be ever and always fooling over
something.'

He had been in South Africa during the war, and in Japan, and all over
the world; but he was now dressed in homespuns, and had settled down
here, he told me, for the rest of his life. Before we reached the
village we met Maurice, the fisherman I have spoken of and we sat down
under a hedge to shelter from a shower. We began to talk of fevers and
sicknesses and doctors--these little villages are often infested with
typhus--and Maurice spoke about the traditional cures.

'There is a plant,' he said, 'which is the richest that is growing out
of the ground, and in the old times the women used to be giving it to
their children till they'd be growing up seven feet maybe in height.
Then the priests and doctors began taking everything to themselves and
destroyed the old knowledge, and that is a poor thing; for you know well
it was the Holy Mother of God who cured her own Son with plants the like
of that, and said after that no mother should be without a plant for
ever to cure her child. Then she threw out the seeds of it over the
whole world, so that it's growing every place from that day to this.'

 

 

I came out to-day, a holiday, to the Great Blasket Island with a
schoolmaster and two young men from the village, who were coming for the
afternoon only. The day was admirably clear, with a blue sea and sky,
and the voyage in the long canoe--I had not been in one for two or three
years--gave me indescribable enjoyment. We passed Dunmore Head, and then
stood Out nearly due west towards the Great Blasket itself, the height
of the mountains round the bay and the sharpness of the rocks making the
place singularly different from the sounds about Aran, where I had last
travelled in a curagh. As usual, three men were rowing--the man I have
come to stay with, his son, and a tall neighbour, all dressed in blue
jerseys, homespun trousers and shirts, and talking in Irish only, though
my host could speak good English when he chose to. As we came nearer the
island, which seemed to rise like a mountain straight out of the sea, we
could make out a crowd of people in their holiday clothes standing or
sitting along the brow of the cliff watching our approach, and just
beyond them a patch of cottages with roofs of tarred felt. A little
later we doubled into a cove among the rocks, where I landed at a boat
slip, and then scrambled up a steep zig-zag pathway to the head of the
cliff where the people crowded round us and shook hands with the men who
had come with me.

This cottage where I am to stay is one of the highest of the group, and
as we passed up to it through little paths among the cottages many
white, wolfish-looking dogs came out and barked furiously. My host had
gone on in front with my bag, and when I reached his threshold he came
forward and shook hands with me again, with a finished speech of
welcome. His eldest daughter, a young married woman of about twenty, who
manages the house, shook hands with me also, and then, without asking if
we were hungry, began making us tea in a metal teapot and frying rashers
of bacon. She is a small, beautifully-formed woman, with brown hair and
eyes--instead of the black hair and blue eyes that are usually found
with this type in Ireland--and delicate feet and ankles that are not
common in these parts, where the woman's work is so hard. Her sister,
who lives in the house also, is a bonny girl of about eighteen, full of
humour and spirits.

The schoolmaster made many jokes in English and Irish while the little
hostess served our tea and then the kitchen filled up with young men and
women--the men dressed like ordinary fishermen, the women wearing print
bodices and coloured skirts, that had none of the distinction of the
dress of Aran--and a polka was danced, with curious solemnity, in a
whirl of dust. When it was over it was time for my companions to go back
to the mainland. As soon as we came out and began to go down to the sea,
a large crowd, made up of nearly all the men and women and children of
the island, came down also, closely packed round us. At the edge of the
cliff the young men and the schoolmaster bade me good-bye and went down
the zig-zag path, leaving me alone with the islanders on the ledge of
rock, where I had seen the people as we came in. I sat for a long time
watching the sail of the canoe moving away to Dunquin, and talking to a
young man who had spent some years in Ballyferriter, and had good
English. The evening was peculiarly fine, and after a while, when the
crowd had scattered, I passed up through the cottages, and walked
through a boreen towards the north-west, between a few plots of potatoes
and little fields of weeds that seemed to have gone out of cultivation
not long ago. Beyond these I turned up a sharp, green hill, and came out
suddenly on the broken edge of a cliff. The effect was wonderful. The
Atlantic was right underneath; then I could see the sharp rocks of
several uninhabited islands, a mile or two off, the Tearaught further
away, and, on my left, the whole northern edge of this island curving
round towards the west, with a steep heathery face, a thousand feet
high. The whole sight of wild islands and sea was as clear and cold and
brilliant as what one sees in a dream, and alive with the singularly
severe glory that is in the character of this place.

As I was wandering about I saw many of the younger islanders not far off
jumping and putting the weight--a heavy stone--or running races on the
grass. Then four girls, walking arm-in-arm, came up and talked to me in
Irish. Before long they began to laugh loudly at some signs I made to
eke out my meaning, and by degrees the men wandered up also, till there
was a crowd round us. The cold of the night was growing stronger,
however, and we soon turned back to the village, and sat round the fire
in the kitchen the rest of the evening.

At eleven o'clock the people got up as one man and went away, leaving me
with the little hostess--the man of the house had gone to the mainland
with the young men--her husband and sister. I told them I was sleepy,
and ready to go to bed; so the little hostess lighted a candle, carried
it into the room beyond the kitchen, and stuck it up on the end of the
bedpost of one of the beds with a few drops of grease. Then she took off
her apron, and fastened it up in the window as a blind, laid another
apron on the wet earthen floor for me to stand on, and left me to
myself. The room had two beds, running from wall to wall with a small
space between them, a chair that the little hostess had brought in, an
old hair-brush that was propping the window open, and no other article.
When I had been in bed for some time, I heard the host's voice in the
kitchen, and a moment or two later he came in with a candle in his hand,
and made a long apology for having been away the whole of my first
evening on the island, holding the candle while he talked very close to
my face. I told him I had been well entertained by his family and
neighbours, and had hardly missed him. He went away, and half an hour
later opened the door again with the iron spoon which serves to lift the
latch, and came in, in a suit of white homespuns, and said he must ask
me to let him stretch out in the other bed, as there was no place else
for him to lie. I told him that he was welcome, and he got into the
other bed and lit his pipe. Then we had a long talk about this place and
America and the younger generations.

'There has been no one drowned on this island,' he said, ' for forty
years, and that is a great wonder, for it is a dangerous life. There was
a man--the brother of the man you were talking to when the girls were
dancing--was married to a widow had a public-house away to the west of
Ballydavid, and he was out fishing for mackerel, and he got a great haul
of them; then he filled his canoe too full, so that she was down to the
edge in the water, and a wave broke into her when they were near the
shore, and she went down under them. Two men got ashore, but the man
from this island was drowned, for his oilskins went down about his feet,
and he sank where he was.'

Then we talked about the chances of the mackerel season. 'If the season
is good,' he said, 'we get on well; but it is not certain at all. We do
pay four pounds for a net, and sometimes the dogfish will get into it
the first day and tear it into pieces as if you'd cut it with a knife.
Sometimes the mackerel will die in the net, and then ten men would be
hard set to pull them up into the canoe, so that if the wind rises on us
we must cut loose, and let down the net to the bottom of the sea. When
we get fish here in the night we go to Dunquin and sell them to buyers
in the morning; and, believe me, it is a dangerous thing to cross that
sound when you have too great a load taken into your canoe. When it is
too bad to cross over we do salt the fish ourselves--we must salt them
cleanly and put them in clean barrels--and then the first day it is calm
buyers will be out after them from the town of Dingle.'

Afterwards he spoke of the people who go away to America, and the
younger generations that are growing up now in Ireland.

'The young people is no use,' he said. 'l am not as good a man as my
father was, and my son is growing up worse than I am.' Then he put up
his pipe on the end of the bed-post. 'You'll be tired now,' he went on,
'so it's time we were sleeping; and, I humbly beg your pardon, might I
ask your name?' I told him.

'Well, good night so,' he said, 'and may you have a good sleep your
first night in this island.'

Then he put out the candle and we settled to sleep. In a few minutes I
could hear that he was in his dreams, and just as my own ideas were
beginning to wander the house door opened, and the son of the place, a
young man of about twenty, came in and walked into our room, close to my
bed, with another candle in his hand. I lay with my eyes closed, and the
young man did not seem pleased with my presence, though he looked at me
with curiosity. When he was satisfied he went back to the kitchen and
took a drink of whisky and said his prayers; then, after loitering about
for some time and playing with a little mongrel greyhound that seemed to
adore him, he took off his clothes, clambered over his father, and
stretched out on the inner side of the bed.

 

 

 

I awoke in the morning about six o'clock, and not long afterwards the
host awoke also, and asked how I did. Then he wanted to know if I ever
drank whisky; and when he heard that I did so, he began calling for one
of his daughters at the top of his voice. In a few moments the younger
girl came in, her eyes closing with sleep, and, at the host's bidding,
got the whisky bottle, some water, and a green wine-glass out of the
kitchen. She came first to my bedside and gave me a dram, then she did
the same for her father and brother, handed us our pipes and tobacco,
and went back to the kitchen.

There were to be sports at noon in Ballyferriter, and when we had talked
for a while I asked the host if he would think well of my going over to
see them. 'I would not,' he said 'you'd do better to stay quiet in this
place where you are; the men will be all drunk coming back, fighting and
kicking in the canoes, and a man the like of you, who aren't used to us,
would be frightened. Then, if you went, the people would be taking you
into one public-house, and then into another, till you'd maybe get drunk
yourself, and that wouldn't be a nice thing for a gentleman. Stay where
you are in this island and you'll be safest so.'

When the son got up later and began going in and out of the kitchen,
some of the neighbours, who had already come in, stared at me with
curiosity as I lay in my bed; then I got up myself and went into the
kitchen. The little hostess set about getting my breakfast, but before
it was ready she partly rinsed the dough out of a pan where she had been
kneading bread, poured some water into it, and put it on a chair near
the door. Then she hunted about the edges of the rafters till she found
a piece of soap, which she put on the back of a chair with the towel,
and told me I might wash my face. I did so as well as I was able, in the
middle of the people, and dried myself with the towel, which was the one
used by the whole family.

The morning looked as if it would turn to rain and wind, so I took the
advice I had been given and let the canoes go off without me to the
sports. After a turn on the cliffs I came back to the house to write
letters. The little hostess was washing up the breakfast things when I
arrived with my papers and pens, but she made room for me at the table,
and spread out an old newspaper for me to write on. A little later, when
she had finished her washing, she came over to her usual place in the
chimney corner, not far from where I was sitting, sat *down* on the
floor, and took out her hairpins and began combing her hair. As I
finished each letter I had to say who it was to, and where the people
lived; and then I had to tell her if they were married or single, how
many children they had, and make a guess at how many pounds they spent
in the year, and at the number of their servants. Just before I
finished, I the younger girl came back with three or four other young
women, who were followed in a little while by a party of men.

I showed them some photographs of the Aran Islands and Wicklow, which
they looked at with eagerness. The little hostess was especially taken
with two or three that had babies or children in their foreground; and
as she put her hands on my shoulders, and leaned over to look at them,
with the confidence that is so usual in these places, I could see that
she had her full share of the passion for children which is powerful in
all women who are permanently and profoundly attractive. While I was
telling her what I could about the children, I saw one of the men
looking with peculiar amazement at an old photograph of myself that had
been taken many years ago in an alley of the Luxembourg Gardens, where
there were many statues in the background. 'Look at that,' he whispered
in Irish to one of the girls, pointing to the statues; 'in those
countries they do have naked people standing about in their skins.'

I explained that the figures were of marble only, and then the little
hostess and all the girls examined them also. 'Oh! dear me,' said the
little hostess, 'Is deas an rud do bheith ag siubhal ins an domhain mor'
('It's a fine thing to be travelling in the big world ').

In the afternoon I went up and walked along the narrow central ridge of
the island, till I came to the highest point, which is nearly three
miles west of the village. The weather was gloomy and wild, and there
was something nearly appalling in the loneliness of the place. I could
look down on either side into a foggy edge of grey moving sea, and then
further off I could see many distant mountains, or look out across the
shadowy outline of Inishtooskert to the Tearaught rock. While I was
sitting on the little mound which marks the summit of the island--a
mound stripped and riddled by rabbits--a heavy bank of fog began to work
up from the south, behind Valentia, on the other jaw of Dingle Bay. As
soon as I saw it I hurried down from the pinnacle where I was, so that I
might get away from the more dangerous locality before the clouds
overtook me. In spite of my haste I had not gone half a mile when an
edge of fog whisked and circled round me, and in a moment I could see
nothing but a grey shroud of mist and a few yards of steep, slippery
grass. Everything was distorted and magnified to an extraordinary
degree; but I could hear the moan of the sea under me, and I knew my
direction, so I worked along towards the village without trouble. In
some places the island, on this southern side, is bitten into by sharp,
narrow coves, and when the fog opened a little I could see across them,
where gulls and choughs were picking about on the grass, looking as big
as Kerry cattle or black mountain sheep. Before I reached the house the
cloud had turned to a sharp shower of rain, and as I went in the water
was dripping from my hat. 'Oh! dear me,' said the little hostess, when
she saw me, 'Ta tu an-rhluc anois' ('You are very wet now '). She was
alone in the house, breathing audibly with a sort of simple
self-importance, as she washed her jugs and teacups. While I was
drinking my tea a little later, some woman came in with three or four
little girls--the most beautiful children I have ever seen--who live in
one of the nearest cottages. They tried to get the little girls to dance
a reel together, but the smallest of them went and hid her head in the
skirts of the little hostess. In the end two of the little girls danced
with two of those who were grown up, to the lilting of one of them. The
little hostess sat at the fire while they danced, plucking and drawing a
cormorant for the men's dinner, and calling out to the girls when they
lost the step of the dance.

In the evenings of Sundays and holidays the young men and girls go out
to a rocky headland on the north-west, where there is a long, grassy
slope, to dance and amuse themselves; and this evening I wandered out
there with two men, telling them ghost stories in Irish as we went. When
we turned over the edge of the hill we came on a number of young men
lying on the short grass playing cards. We sat down near them, and
before long a party of girls and young women came up also and sat down,
twenty paces off on the brink of the cliff some of them wearing the
fawn-coloured shawls that are so attractive and so much thought of in
the south. It was just after sunset, and Inishtooskert was standing out
with a smoky blue outline against the redness of the sky. At the foot of
the cliff a wonderful silvery light was shining on the sea, which
already, before the beginning of autumn, was eager and wintry and cold.
The little group of blue-coated men lying on the grass, and the group of
girls further off had a singular effect in this solitude of rocks and
sea; and in spite of their high spirits it gave me a sort of grief to
feel the utter loneliness and desolation of the place that has given
these people their finest qualities.

One of the young men had been thrown from a car a few days before on his
way home from Dingle, and his face was still raw and bleeding and
horrible to look at; but the young girls seemed to find romance in his
condition, and several of them went over and sat in a group round him,
stroking his arms and face. When the card-playing was over I showed the
young men a few tricks and feats, which they worked at themselves, to
the great amusement of the girls, till they had accomplished them all.
On our way back to the village the young girls ran wild in the twilight,
flying and shrieking over the grass, or rushing up behind the young men
and throwing them over, if they were able, by a sudden jerk or trip. The
men in return caught them by one hand, and spun them round and round
four or five times, and then let them go, when they whirled down the
grassy slope for many yards, spinning like peg-tops, and only keeping
their feet by the greatest efforts or good-luck.

When we got to the village the people scattered for supper, and in our
cottage the little hostess swept the floor and sprinkled it with some
sand she had brought home in her apron. Then she filled a crock with
drinking water, lit the lamp and sat down by the fire to comb her hair.
Some time afterwards, when a number of young men had come in, as was
usual, to spend the evening, some one said a niavogue was on its way
home from the sports. We went out to the door, but it was too dark to
see anything except the lights of a little steamer that was passing up
the sound, almost beneath us, on its way to Limerick or Tralee. When it
had gone by we could hear a furious drunken uproar coming up from a
canoe that was somewhere out in the bay. It sounded as if the men were
strangling or murdering each other, and it seemed almost miraculous that
they should be able to manage their canoe. The people seemed to think
they were in no special danger, and we went in again to the fire and
talked about porter and whisky (I have never heard the men here talk for
half an hour of anything without some allusion to drink), discussing how
much a man could drink with comfort in a day, whether it is better to
drink when a man is thirsty or at ordinary times, and what food gives
the best liking for porter. Then they asked me how much porter I could
drink myself and I told them I could drink whisky, but that I had no
taste for porter, and would only take a pint or two at odd times, when I
was thirsty.

'The girls are laughing to hear you say that,' said an old man; 'but
whisky is a lighter drink, and I'd sooner have it myself, and any old
man would say the same.' A little later some young men came in, in their
Sunday clothes, and told us the news of the sports.

 

 

 

This morning it was raining heavily, and the host got out some nets and
set to work with his son and son-in-law, mending many holes that had
been cut by dog-fish, as the mackerel season is soon to begin. While
they were at work the kitchen emptied and filled continually with
islanders passing in and out, and discussing the weather and the season.
Then they started cutting each other's hair, the man who was being cut
sitting with an oilskin round him on a little stool by the door, and
some other men came in to sharpen their razors on the host's
razor-strop, which seems to be the only one on the island. I had not
shaved since I arrived, so the little hostess asked me after a while if
I would like to shave myself before dinner. I told her I would, so she
got me some water in the potato-dish and put it on a chair; then her
sister got me a little piece of broken looking-glass and put it on a
nail near the door, where there was some light. I set to work, and as I
stood with my back to the people I could catch a score of eyes in the
glass, watching me intently. 'That is a great improvement to you now,'
said the host, when I had done; 'and whenever you want a beard, God
bless you, you'll have a thick one surely.'

When I was coming down in the evening from the ridge of the island,
where I spent much of my time looking at the richness of the Atlantic on
one side and the sad or shining greys of Dingle Bay on the other, I was
joined by two young women and we walked back together. Just outside the
village we met an old women who stopped and laughed at us. 'Well, aren't
you in good fortune this night, stranger,' she said, 'to be walking up
and down in the company of women?'

'I am surely,' I answered; 'isn't that the best thing to be doing in the
whole world?'

At our own door I saw the little hostess sweeping the floor, so I went
down for a moment to the gable of the cottage, and looked out over the
roofs of the little village to the sound, where the tide was running
with extraordinary force. In a few minutes the little hostess came down
and stood beside me--she thought I should not be left by myself when I
had been driven away by the dust--and I asked her many questions about
the names and relationships of the people that I am beginning to know.

Afterwards, when many of the people had come together in the kitchen,
the men told me about their lobster-pots that are brought from
Southampton, and cost half-a-crown each. 'In good weather,' said the man
who was talking to me, 'they will often last for a quarter; but if
storms come up on them they will sometimes break up in a week or two.
Still and all, it's a good trade; and we do sell lobsters and crayfish
every week in the season to a boat from England or a boat from France
that does come in here, as you'll maybe see before you go.'

I told them that I had often been in France, and one of the boys began
counting up the numerals in French to show what he had learnt from their
buyers. A little later, when the talk was beginning to flag, I turned to
a young man near me--the best fiddler, I was told, on the island--and
asked him to play us a dance. He made excuses, and would not get his
fiddle; but two of the girls slipped off and brought it. The young man
tuned it and offered it to me, but I insisted that he should take it
first. Then he played one or two tunes, without tone, but with good
intonation and rhythm. When it was my turn I played a few tunes also;
but the pitch was so low I could not do what I wanted, and I had not
much success with the people, though the fiddler himself watched me with
interest. 'That is great playing,' he said, when I had finished; and I
never seen anyone the like of you for moving your hand and getting the
sound out of it with the full drag of the bow.' Then he played a polka
and four couples danced. The women, as usual, were in their naked feet,
and whenever there was a figure for women only there was a curious hush
and patter of bare feet, till the heavy pounding and shuffling of the
men's boots broke in again. The whirl of music and dancing in this
little kitchen stirred me with an extraordinary effect. The kindliness
and merrymaking of these islanders, who, one knows, are full of riot and
severity and daring, has a quality and attractiveness that is absent
altogether from the life of towns, and makes one think of the life that
is shown in the ballads of Scotland.

After the dance the host, who had come in, sang a long English doggerel
about a poor scholar who went to Maynooth and had great success in his
studies, so that he was praised by the bishop. Then he went home for his
holiday, and a young woman who had great riches asked him into her
parlour and told him it was no fit life for a fine young man to be a
priest, always saying Mass for poor people, and that he would have a
right to give up his Latin and get married to herself. He refused her
offers and went back to his college. When he was gone she went to the
justice in great anger, and swore an oath against him that he had
seduced her and left her with child. He was brought back for his trial,
and he was in risk to be degraded and hanged, when a man rode up on a
horse and said it was himself was the lover of the lady, and the father
of her child.

Then they told me about an old man of eighty years, who is going to
spend the winter alone on Inishvickillaun, an island six miles from this
village. His son is making canoes and doing other carpenter's jobs on
this island, and the other children have scattered also; but the old man
refuses to leave the island he has spent his life on, so they have left
him with a goat, and a bag of flour and stack of turf.

I have just been to the weaver's, looking at his loom and appliances.
The host took me down to his cottage over the brow of the village, where
some young men were finishing the skeleton of a canoe; and we found his
family crowded round a low table on green stools with rope seats,
finishing their dinner of potatoes. A little later the old weaver, who
looks pale and sickly compared with the other islanders, took me into a
sort of outhouse with a damp feeling in the air, where his loom was set
up. He showed me how it was worked, and then brought out some pieces of
stuff that he had woven. At first I was puzzled by the fine brown colour
of some of the material; but they explained it was from selected wools
of the black or mottled sheep that are common here, and are so
variegated that many tints of grey or brown can be had from their
fleeces. The wool for the flannel is sometimes spun on this island;
sometimes it is given to women in Dunquin, who spin it cheaply for so
much a pound. Then it is woven, and finally the stuff is sent to a mill
in Dingle to be cleaned and dressed before it is given to a tailor in
Dingle to be made up for their own use. Such cloth is not cheap, but is
of wonderful quality and strength. When I came out of the weaver's, a
little sailing smack was anchored in the sound, and someone on board her
was blowing a horn. They told me she was the French boat, and as I went
back to my cottage I could see many canoes hurrying out to her with
their cargoes of lobsters and crabs.

 

 

 

I have left the island again. I walked round the cliffs in the morning,
and then packed my bag in my room, several girls putting their heads
Into the little window while I did so, to say it was a great pity I was
not staying on for another week or a fortnight. Then the men went off
with my bag in a heavy shower, and I waited a minute or two while the
little hostess buttered some bread for my lunch, and tied it up in a
clean handkerchief of her own. Then I bid them good-bye, and set off
down to the slip with three girls, who came with me to see that I did
not go astray among the innumerable paths. It was still raining heavily,
so I told them to put my cape, which they were carrying, over their
heads. They did so with delight, and ran down the path before me, to the
great amusement of the islanders. At the head of the cliff many people
were standing about to bid me good-bye and wish me a good voyage.

The wind was in our favour, so the men took in their oars after rowing
for about a quarter of a mile and lay down in the bottom of the canoe,
while one man ran up the sail, and the host steered with an oar. At
Dunquin the host hired me a dray, without springs, kissed my hand in
farewell, and I was driven away.

 

 

 

I have made my way round the foot of Dingle Bay and up the south coast
to a cottage where I often lodge. As I was resting in a ditch some time
in the afternoon, on a lonely mountain road, a little girl came along
with a shawl over her head. She stopped in front of me and asked me
where I was going, and then after a little talk: 'Well, man, let you
come,' she said; 'I'm going your road as well as you.' I got up and we
started. When I got tired of the hill I mounted, and she ran along
beside me for several miles, till we fell in with some people cutting
turf and she stopped to talk to them.

Then for a while my road ran round an immense valley of magnificent rich
turf bog, with mountains all round, and bowls where hidden lakes were
lying bitten out of the cliffs.

As I was resting again on a bridge over the Behy where Diarmuid caught
salmon with Grania, a man stopped to light his pipe and talk to me.
'There are three lakes above,' he said, 'Coomacarra, Coomaglaslaw and
Coomasdhara; the whole of this place was in a great state in the bad
times. Twenty years ago they sent down a 'mergency man to lodge above by
the lake and serve processes on the people, but the people were off
before him and lay abroad in the heather. Then, in the course of a
piece, a night came, with great rain out of the heavens, and my man
said: "I'll get them this night in their own beds, surely." Then he let
call the peelers--they had peelers waiting to mind him--and down they
come to the big steppingstones they have above for crossing the first
river coming out of the lakes; my man going in front to cross over, and
the water was high up covering the Stones. Then he gave two leps or
three, and the peelers heard him give a great shriek down in the flood.
They went home after--what could they do?--and the 'mergency man was
found in the sea stuck in a net.'

I was singularly pleased when I turned up the boreen at last to this
cottage where I lodge, an looked down through a narrow gully to Dingle
Bay. The people bade me welcome when came in, the old woman kissing my
hand.

There is no village near this cottage, yet many farms are scattered on
the hills near it; and as the people are in some ways a leading family,
many men and women look in to talk or tell stories, or to buy a few
pennyworth of sugar or starch. Although the main road passes a few
hundred yards to the west, this cottage is well known also to the race
of local tramps who move from one family to another in some special
neighbourhood or barony. This evening, when I came in, a little old man
in a tall hat and long brown coat was sitting up on the settle beside
the fire, and intending to spend, one could see, a night or more in the
place.

I had a great deal to tell the people at first of my travels in
different parts of the county, to the Blasket Islands--which they can
see from here--Corkaguiney and Tralee; and they had news to tell me also
of people who have married or died since I was here before, or gone
away, or come back from America. Then I was told that the old man,
Dermot (or Darby, as he is called in English), was the finest
story-teller in Iveragh; and after a while he told us a long story in
Irish, but spoke so rapidly and indistinctly--he had no teeth--that I
could understand but few passages. When he had finished I asked him
where he had heard the story.

'I heard it in the city of Portsmouth,' he said. 'I worked there for
fifteen years, and four years in Plymouth, and a long while in the hills
of Wales; twenty-five years in all I was working at the other side; and
there were many Irish in it, who would be telling stories in the
evening, the same as we are doing here. I heard many good stories, but
what can I do with them now and I an old lisping fellow, the way I can't
give them out like a ballad?'

When he had talked a little more about his travels, and a bridge over
the Severn, that he thought the greatest wonder of the world, I asked
him if he remembered the Famine.

'I do,' he said. 'I was living near Kenmare, and many's the day I saw
them burying the corpses in the ditch by the road. It was after that I
went to England, for this country was ruined and destroyed. I heard
there was work at that time in Plymouth; so I went to Dublin and took a
boat that was going to England; but it was at a place called Liverpool
they put me on shore, and then I had to walk to Plymouth, asking my way
on the road. In that place I saw the soldiers after coming back from the
Crimea, and they all broken and maimed.'

A little later, when he went out for a moment, the people told me he
beats up and down between Killorglin and Ballinskelligs and the Inny
river, and that he is a particular crabby kind of man, and will not take
anything from the people but coppers and eggs.

'And he's a wasteful old fellow with all,' said the woman of the house,
'though he's eighty years old or beyond it, for whatever money he'll get
one day selling his eggs to the coastguards, he'll spend it the next
getting a drink when he's thirsty, or keeping good boots on his feet.'

From that they began talking of misers, and telling stories about them.

'There was an old woman,' said one of the men, 'living beyond to the
east, and she was thought to have a great store of money. She had one
daughter only, and in the course of a piece a young lad got married to
her, thinking he'd have her fortune. The woman died after--God be
merciful to her!--and left the two of them as poor as they were before.
Well, one night a man that knew them was passing to the fair of Puck,
and he came in and asked would they give him a lodging for that night.
They gave him what they had and welcome; and after his tea, when they
were sitting over the fire--the way we are this night--the man asked
them how they were so poor-looking, and if the old woman had left
nothing behind her.

' "Not a farthing did she leave," said the daughter.

"And did she give no word or warning or message in her last moments?"
said the man.

' "She did not," said the daughter, "except only that I shouldn't comb
out the hair of her poll and she dead."

' "And you heeded her?" said the man.

' "I did, surely," said the daughter.

' "Well," said the man, "to-morrow night when I'm gone let the two of
you go down the Relic (the graveyard), and dig up her coffin and look in
her hair and see what it is you'll find in it."

' "We'll do that," said the daughter, and with that they all stretched
out for the night.

'The next evening they went down quietly with a shovel and they dug up
the coffin, and combed through her hair, and there behind her poll they
found her fortune, five hundred pounds, in good notes and gold.'

'There was an old fellow living on the little hill beyond the
graveyard,' said Danny-boy, when the man had finished, 'and he had his
fortune some place hid in his bed, and he was an old weak fellow, so
that they were all watching him to see he wouldn't hide it away. One
time there was no one in it but himself and a young girl, and the old
fellow slipped out of his bed and went out of the door as far as a
little bush and some stones. The young girl kept her eye on him, and she
made sure he'd hidden something in the bush; so when he was back in his
bed she called the people, and they all came and looked in the bushes,
but not a thing could they find. The old man died after, and no one ever
found his fortune to this day.'

'There were some young lads a while since,' said the old woman, 'and
they went up of a Sunday and began searching through those bushes to see
if they could find anything, but a kind of a turkey-cock came up out of
the stones and drove them away.'

'There was another old woman,' said the man of the house, 'who tried to
take down her fortune into her stomach. She was near death, and she was
all day stretched in her bed at the corner of the fire. One day when the
girl was tinkering about, the old woman rose up and got ready a little
skillet that was near the hob and put something into it and put it down
by the fire, and the girl watching her all the time under her oxter, not
letting on she seen her at all. When the old woman lay down again the
girl went over to put on more sods on the fire, and she got a look into
the skillet, and what did she see but sixty sovereigns. She knew well
what the old woman was striving to do, so she went out to the dairy and
she got a lump of fresh butter and put it down into the skillet, when
the woman didn't see her do it at all. After a bit the old woman rose up
and looked into the skillet, and when she saw the froth of the butter
she thought it was the gold that was melted. She got back into her
bed--a dark place, maybe--and she began sipping and sipping the butter
till she had the whole of it swallowed. Then the girl made some trick to
entice the skillet away from her, and she found the sixty sovereigns in
the bottom and she kept them for herself.'

By this time it was late, and the old woman brought over a mug of milk
and a piece of bread to Darby at the settle, and the people gathered at
their table for their supper; so I went into the little room at the end
of the cottage where I am given a bed.

When I came into the kitchen in the morning, old Darby was still asleep
on the settle, with his coat and trousers over him, a red night-cap on
his head, and his half-bred terrier, Jess, chained with a chain he
carries with him to the leg of the settle.

'That's a poor way to lie on the bare board,' said the woman of the
house, when she saw me looking at him; 'but when I filled a sack with
straw for him last night he wouldn't have it at all.'

While she was boiling some eggs for my breakfast, Darby roused up from
his sleep, pulled on his trousers and coat, slipped his feet into his
boots and started off, when he had eaten a few mouthfuls, for another
house where he is known, some five miles away.

Afterwards I went out on the cnuceen, a little hill between this cottage
and the sea, to watch the people gathering carragheen moss, a trade
which is much followed in this district during the spring tides of
summer. I lay down on the edge of the cliff, where the heathery hill
comes to an end and the steep rocks begin. About a mile to the west
there was a long headland, 'Feakle Callaigh' ('The Witch's Tooth '),
covered with mists, that blew over me from time to time with a swish of
rain, followed by sunshine again. The mountains on the other side of the
bay were covered, so I could see nothing but the strip ot brilliant sea
below me, thronged with girls and men up to their waists in the water,
with a hamper in one hand and a stick in the other, gathering the moss,
and talking and laughing loudly as they worked. The long frill of dark
golden rocks covered with seaweed, with the asses and children slipping
about on it, and the bars of silvery light breaking through on the
further inlets of the bay, had the singularly brilliant loveliness one
meets everywhere in Kerry.

When the tide began to come in I went down one of the passes to the sea,
and met many parties of girls and old men and women coming up with what
they had gathered, most of them still wearing the clothes that had been
in the sea, and were heavy and black with salt water. A little further
on I met Danny-boy and we sat down to talk.

'Do you see that sandy head?' he said, pointing out to the east, 'that
is called the Stooks of the Dead Women; for one time a boat came ashore
there with twelve dead women on board her, big ladies with green dresses
and gold rings, and fine jewelleries, and a dead harper or fiddler along
with them. Then there are graves again in the little hollow by the
cnuceen, and what we call them is the Graves of the Sailors; for some
sailors, Greeks or great strangers, were washed in there a hundred years
ago, and it is there that they were buried.'

Then we began talking of the carragheen he had gathered and the spring
tides that would come again during the summer. I took out my diary to
tell him the times of the moon, but he would hardly listen to me. When I
stopped, he gave his ass a cut with his stick, 'Go on now,' he said; 'I
wouldn't believe those almanacs at all; they do not tell the truth about
the moon.'

The greatest event in West Kerry is the horse-fair, known as Puck Fair,
which is held in August. If one asks anyone, many miles east or west of
Killorglin, when he reaped his oats or sold his pigs or heifers, he will
tell you it was four or five weeks, or whatever it may be, before or
after Puck. On the main roads, for many days past, I have been falling
in with tramps and trick characters of all kinds, sometimes single and
sometimes in parties of four or five, and as I am on the roads a great
deal I have often met the same persons several days in succession--one
day perhaps at Ballinskelligs, the next day at Feakle Callaigh, and the
third in the outskirts of Killorglin.

Yesterday cavalcades of every sort were passing from the west with
droves of horses, mares, jennets, foals and asses, with their owners
going after them in flat or railed carts, or riding on ponies.

The men of this house--they are going to buy a horse--went to the fair
last night, and I followed at an early hour in the morning. As I came
near Killorglin the road was much blocked by the latest sellers pushing
eagerly forward, and early purchasers who were anxiously leading off
their young horses before the roads became dangerous from the crush of
drunken drivers and riders.

Just outside the town, near the first public-house, blind beggars were
kneeling on the pathway, praying with almost Oriental volubility for the
souls of anyone who would throw them a coin.

'May the Holy Immaculate Mother of Jesus Christ,' said one of them,
'intercede for you in the hour of need. Relieve a poor blind creature,
and may Jesus Christ relieve yourselves in the hour of death. May He
have mercy, I'm saying, on your brothers and fathers and sisters for
evermore.'

Further on stalls were set out with cheap cakes and refreshments, and
one could see that many houses had been arranged to supply the crowds
who had come in. Then I came to the principal road that goes round the
fair-green, where there was a great concourse of horses, trotting and
walking and galloping; most of them were of the cheaper class of animal,
and were selling, apparently to the people's satisfaction, at prices
that reminded one of the time when fresh meat was sold for threepence a
pound. At the further end of the green there were one or two rough
shooting galleries, and a number of women--not very rigid, one could
see--selling, or appearing to sell, all kinds of trifles: a set that
come in, I am told, from towns not far away. At the end of the green I
turned past the chapel, where a little crowd had just carried in a man
who had been killed or badly wounded by a fall from a horse, and went
down to the bridge of the river, and then back again into the main slope
of the town. Here there were a number of people who had come in for
amusement only, and were walking up and down, looking at each other--a
crowd is as exciting as champagne to these lonely people, who live in
long glens among the mountains--and meeting with cousins and friends.
Then, in the three-cornered space in the middle of the town, I came on
Puck himself a magnificent he-goat (Irish puc), raised on a platform
twenty feet high, and held by a chain from each horn, with his face down
the road. He is kept in this position, with a few cabbages to feed on,
for three days, so that he may preside over the pig-fair and the
horse-fair and the day of winding up.

At the foot of this platform, where the crowd was thickest, a young
ballad-singer was howling a ballad in honour of Puck, making one think
of the early Greek festivals, since the time of which, it is possible,
the goat has been exalted yearly in Killorglin.

The song was printed on a green slip by itself. It ran:

 

A NEW SONG ON THE GREAT PUCK FAIR.

By JOHN PURCELL.

 

All young lovers that are fond of sporting, pay attention for a while,  
I will sing you the praises of Puck Fair, and I'm sure it will make you
smile;  
Where the lads and lassies coming gaily to Killorglin can be seen,  
To view the Puck upon the stage, as our hero dressed in green.  
  

Chorus.

And hurra for the gallant Puck so gay,  
For he is a splendid one  
Wind and rain don't touch his tail,  
For his hair is thirty inches long.

Now it is on the square he's erected with all colours grand and gay;  
There's not a fair throughout Ireland, but Puck Fair it takes the
sway,  
Where you see the gamblers in rotation, trick--o'-the-loop and other
games,  
The ballad-singers and the wheel-of-fortune and the shooting-gallery for
to take aim.

Chorus.  
  
Where is the tyrant dare oppose it?  
Our old customs we will hold up still,  
And I think we will have another--  
That is, Home Rule and Purchase Bill.

Now, all young men that are not married, next Shrove can take a wife,  
For before next Puck Fair we will have Home Rule, and then you will be
settled down in life.  
Now the same advice I give young girls for to get married and have
pluck.  
Let the landlords see that you defy them when coming to Fair of Puck.

Céad Mile Fáilte to the Fair of Puck.

When one makes the obvious elisions, the lines are not so irregular as
they look, and are always sung to a measure: yet the whole, in spite of
the assonance, rhymes, and the 'colours grand and gay,' seems pitifully
remote from any good spirit of ballad-making.

Across the square a man and a woman, who had a baby tied on her back,
were singing another ballad on the Russian and Japanese War, in the
curious method of antiphony that is still sometimes heard in the back
streets of Dublin. These are some of the verses

 

Man.

Now provisions are rising, 'tis sad for to state, The flour, tea and
sugar, tobacco and meat;  
But, God help us I poor Irish, how must we stand the test

Ambo.

If they only now stop the trade of commerce.

Woman.

Now the Russians are powerful on sea and on land;  
But the Japs they are active, they will them command,  
Before this war is finished I have one word to say,

Ambo.

There will be more shot and drowned than in the Crimea.

Man.

Now the Japs are victorious up to this time,  
And thousands of Russians I hear they are dying.  
Etc., etc.

And so it went on with the same alternation of the voices through seven
or eight verses; and it was curious to feel how much was gained by this
simple variation of the voices.

When I passed back to the fair-green, I met the men I am staying with,
and went off with them under an archway, and into a back yard to look at
a little two-year-old filly that they had bought and left for the moment
in a loose box with three or four young horses. She was prettily and
daintily shaped, but looked too light, I thought, for the work she will
be expected to do. As we came out again into the road, an old man was
singing an out-spoken ballad on women in the middle of the usual crowd.
Just as we passed it came to a scandalous conclusion; and the women
scattered in every direction, shrieking with laughter and holding shawls
over their mouths.

At the corner we turned into a public-house, where there were men we
knew, who had done their business also; and we went into the little
alcove to sit down quietly for a moment. 'What will you take, sir,' said
the man I lodge with, 'a glass of wine?'

I took beer and the others took porter; but we were only served after
some little time, as the house was thronged with people.

The men were too much taken up with their bargains and losses to talk
much of other matters; and before long we came out again, and the son of
the house started homewards, leading the new filly by a little halter of
rope.

Not long afterwards I started also. Outside Killorglin rain was coming
up over the hills of Glen Car, so that there was a strained hush in the
air, and a rich, aromatic smell coming from the bog myrtle, or boggy
shrub, that grows thickly in this place. The strings of horses and
jennets scattered over the road did not keep away a strange feeling of
loneliness that seems to hang over this brown plain of bog that
stretches from Carrantuohull to Cuchulain's House.

Before I reached the cottage dense torrents of rain were closing down
through the glens, and driving in white sheets between the little hills
that are on each side of the way.

 

 

 

One morning in autumn I started in a local train for the first stage of
my journey to Dublin, seeing the last of Macgillicuddy's Reeks, that
were touched with snow in places, Dingle Bay and the islands beyond it.
At a little station where I changed trains, I got into a carriage where
there was a woman with her daughter, a girl of about twenty, who seemed
uneasy and distressed. Soon afterwards, when a collector was looking at
our tickets, I called out that mine was for Dublin, and as soon as he
got out the woman came over to me.

'Are you going to Dublin?' she said.

I told her I was.

'Well,' she went on, 'here is my daughter going there too; and maybe
you'd look after her, for I'm getting down at the next station. She is
going up to a hospital for some little complaint in her ear, and she has
never travelled before, so that she's lonesome in her mind.'

I told her I would do what I could, and at the next station I was left
alone with my charge, and one other passenger, a returned American girl,
who was on her way to Mallow, to get the train for Queenstown. When her
mother was lost sight of the young girl broke out into tears, and the
returned American and myself had trouble to quiet her.

'Look at me,' said the American. 'I'm going off for ten years to
America, all by myself, and I don't care a rap.'

When the girl got quiet again, the returned American talked to me about
scenery and politics and the arts--she had been seen off by her sisters
in bare feet, with shawls over their heads--and the life of women in
America.

At several stations girls and boys thronged in to get places for
Queenstown, leaving parties of old men and women wailing with anguish on
the platform. At one place an old woman was seized with such a passion
of regret, when she saw her daughters moving away from her for ever,
that she made a wild rush after the train and when I looked out for a
moment I could see her writhing and struggling on the platform, with her
hair over her face, and two men holding her by the arms.

Two young men had got into our compartment for a few stations only, and
they looked on with the greatest satisfaction.

'Ah,' said one of them, 'we do have great sport every Friday and
Saturday, seeing the old women howling in the stations.'

When we reached Dublin I left my charge for a moment to see after my
baggage, and when I came back I found her sitting on a luggage barrow,
with her package in her hand, crying with despair because several cabmen
had refused to let her into their cabs, on the pretext that they dreaded
infection.

I could see they were looking out for some rich tourist with his trunks,
as a more lucrative fare; so I sent for the head-porter, who had charge
of the platform. When the porter arrived we chose a cab, and I saw my
charge driven off to her hospital, sitting on the front seat, with her
handkerchief to her eyes.

For the last few days--I am staying in the Kerry cottage I have spoken
of already--the people have been talking of horse-races that were to be
held on the sand, not far off and this morning I set out to see them
with the man and woman of the house and two of their neighbours. Our way
led through a steep boreen for a quarter of a mile to the edge of the
sea, and then along a pathway between the cliffs and a straight grassy
hill. When we had gone some distance the old man pointed out a slope in
front of us, where, he said, Diarmuid had done his tricks of rolling the
barrel and jumping over his spear, and had killed many of his enemies.
He told me the whole story, slightly familiarized in detail, but not
very different from the version everyone knows. A little further on he
pointed across the sea to our left--just beyond the strand where the
races were to be run--to a neck of sand where, he said, Oisin was called
away to the Tir-na-nOg.

'The Tir-na-nOg itself,' he said, 'is below that sea, and a while since
there were two men out in a boat in the night-time, and they got stuck
outside some way or another. They went to sleep then, and when one of
them wakened up he looked down into the sea, and he saw the Tir-na-nOg
and people walking about, and side-cars driving in the squares.'

Then he began telling me stories of mermaids--a common subject in this
neighbourhood.

'There was one time a man beyond of the name of Shee,' he said, 'and his
master seen a mermaid on the sand beyond combing her hair, and he told
Shee to get her. "I will," said Shee, "if you'll give me the best horse
you have in your stable." "I'll do that," said the master. Then Shee got
the horse, and when he saw the mermaid on the sand combing her hair,
with her covering laid away from her, he galloped up, when she wasn't
looking, and he picked up the covering and away he went with it. Then
the waves rose up behind him and he galloped his best, and just as he
was coming out at the top of the tide the ninth wave cut off his horse
behind his back, and left himself and the half of his horse and the
covering on the dry land. Then the mermaid came in after her covering,
and the master got married to her, and she lived with him a long time,
and had children--three or four of them. Well, in the wind-up, the
master built a fine new house, and when he was moving into it, and
clearing the things out, he brought down an old hamper out of the loft
and put it in the yard. The woman was going about, and she looked into
the hamper, and she saw her covering hidden away in the bottom of it.
She took it out then and put it upon her and went back into the sea, and
her children used to be on the shore crying after her. I'm told from
that day there isn't one of the Shees can go out in a boat on that bay
and not be drowned.'

We were now near the sandhills, where a crowd was beginning to come
together, and booths were being put up for the sale of apples and porter
and cakes. A train had come in a little before at a station a mile or so
away, and a number of the usual trick characters, with their
stock-in-trade, were hurrying down to the sea. The roulette man passed
us first, unfolding his table and calling out at the top of his voice

Come play me a game of timmun and tup,  
The more you puts down the more you takes up.

'Take notice, gentlemen, I come here to spend a fortune, not to make
one. Is there any sportsman in a hat or a cap, or a wig or a waistcoat,
will play a go with me now? Take notice, gentlemen, the luck is on the
green.'

The races had to be run between two tides while the sand was dry, so
there was not much time to be lost, and before we reached the strand the
horses had been brought together, ridden by young men in many variations
of jockey dress. For the first race there was one genuine race-horse,
very old and bony, and two or three young horses belonging to farmers in
the neighbourhood. The start was made from the middle of the crowd at
the near end of the strand, and the course led out along the edge of the
sea to a post some distance away, back again to the starting-point,
round a post, and out and back once more.

When the word was given the horses set off in a wild helter-skelter
along the edge of the sea, with crowds cheering them on from the
sandhills. As they got small in the distance it was not easy to see
which horse was leading, but after a sort of check, as they turned the
post, they began nearing again a few yards from the waves, with the old
race-horse, heavily pressed, a good length ahead. The stewards made a
sort of effort to clear the post that was to be circled, but without
much success, as the people were wild with excitement. A moment later
the old race-horse galloped into the crowd, twisted too suddenly,
something cracked and jolted, and it limped out on three legs, gasping
with pain. The next horse could not be stopped, and galloped out at the
wrong end of the crowd for some little way before it could be brought
back, so the last horses set off in front for the final lap.

The lame race-horse was now mobbed by onlookers and advisers, talking
incoherently.

'Was it the fault of the jock?' said one man.

'It was not,' said another, 'for Michael (the owner) didn't strike him,
and if it had been his fault, wouldn't he have broken his bones?'

'He was striving to spare a young girl had run out in his way,' said
another. 'It was for that he twisted him.'

'Little slut!' said a woman; 'what did she want beyond on the sand?'

Many remedies were suggested that did not sound reassuring, and in the
end the horse was led off in a hopeless condition. A little later the
race ended with an easy win for the wildest of the young horses.
Afterwards I wandered up among the people, and looked at the sports. At
one place a man, with his face heavily blackened, except one cheek and
eye--an extraordinary effect--was standing shots of a wooden ball behind
a board with a large hole in the middle, at three shots a penny. When I
came past half an hour afterwards he had been hit in the mouth--by a
girl some one told me--but seemed as cheerful as ever.

On the road, some little distance away, a party of girls and young men
were dancing polkas to the music of a melodeon, in a cloud of dust. When
I had looked on for a little while I met some girls I knew, and asked
them how they were getting on.

'We're not getting on at all,' said one of them, 'for we've been at the
races for two hours, and we've found no beaux to go along with us.'

When the horses had all run, a jennet race was held, and greatly
delighted the people, as the jennets--there were a number of them--got
scared by the cheering and ran wild in every direction. In the end it
was not easy to say which was the winner, and a dispute began which
nearly ended in blows. It was decided at last to run the race over again
the following Sunday after Mass, so everyone was satisfied.

The day was magnificently bright, and the ten miles of Dingle Bay were
wonderfully brilliant behind the masses of people, and the canvas
booths, and the scores of upturned shafts. Towards evening I got tired
taking or refusing the porter my friends pressed on me continually, so I
wandered off from the racecourse along the path where Diarmuid had
tricked the Fenians.

 

 

 

Later in the evening news had been coming in of the doings in the
sandhills, after the porter had begun to take effect and the darkness
had come on.

'There was great sport after you left,' a man said to me in the cottage
this evening. 'They were all beating and cutting each other on the shore
of the sea. Four men fought together in one place till the tide came up
on them, and was like to drown them; but the priest waded out up to his
middle and drove them asunder. Another man was left for dead on the road
outside the lodges, and some gentleman found him and had him carried
into his house, and got the doctor to put plasters on his head. Then
there was a red-headed fellow had his finger bitten through, and the
postman was destroyed for ever.'

'He should be,' said the man of the house, 'for Michael Patch broke the
seat of his car into three halves on his head.'

'It was this was the cause of it all,' said Danny-boy: 'they brought in
porter east and west from the two towns you know of, and the two porters
didn't agree together, and it's for that the people went raging at the
fall of night.'

 

 

 

I have been out to Bolus Head, one of the finest places I have met with.
A little beyond Ballinskelligs the road turns up the side of a steep
mountainy hill where one sees a brilliant stretch of sea, with many
rocks and islands--Deenish, Scariff the Hog's Head, and Dursey far away.
As I was sitting on the edge of the road an old man came along and we
began to talk. He had little English, but when I tried him in Irish we
got on well, though he did not follow any Connaught forms I let slip by
accident. We went on together, after a while, to an extraordinary
straggling village along the edge of the hill. At one of the cottages he
stopped and asked me to come in and take a drink and rest myself. I did
not like to refuse him, we had got so friendly, so I followed him in,
and sat down on a stool while his wife--a much younger woman--went into
the bedroom and brought me a large mug of milk. As I was drinking it and
talking to the couple, a sack that was beside the fire began to move
slowly, and the head of a yellow, feverish-looking child came out from
beneath it, and began looking at me with a heavy stare. I asked the
woman what ailed it, and she told me it had sickened a night or two
before with headache and pains all through it; but she had not had the
doctor, and did not know what was the matter. I finished the milk
without much enjoyment, and went on my way up Bolus Head and then back
to this cottage, wondering all the time if l had the germs of typhus in
my blood.

Last night, when I got back to the cottage, I found that another
'travelling man' had arrived to stay for a day or two; but he was hard
of hearing and a little simple in his head, so that we had not much
talk. I went to bed soon after dark and slept till about two o'clock in
the morning, when I was awakened by fearful screams in the kitchen. For
a moment I did not know where I was; then I remembered the old man, and
I jumped up and went to the door of my room. As I opened it I heard the
door of the family room across the kitchen opening also, and the
frightened whispers of the people. In a moment we could hear the old
man, who was sleeping on the settle, pulling himself out of a nightmare,
so we went back to our beds.

In the morning the woman told me his story:

'He was living above on a little hillside,' she said, 'in a bit of a
cabin, with his sister along with him. Then, after a while, she got
ailing in her heart, and he got a bottle for her from the doctor, and
he'd rise up every morning before the dawn to give her a sup of it. She
got better then, till one night he got up and measured out the spoonful,
or whatever it was, and went to give it to her, and he found her
stretched out dead before him. Since that night he wakes up one time and
another, and begins crying out for Maurya--that was his sister--and he
half in his dreams. It was that you heard in the night, and indeed it
would frighten any person to hear him screaming as if he was getting his
death.'

When the little man came back after a while, they began asking him
questions till he told his whole story, weeping pitiably. Then they got
him to tell me about the other great event of his life also, in the
rather childish Gaelic he uses.

He had once a little cur-dog, he said, and he knew nothing of the dog
licence; then one day the peelers--the boys with the little caps--asked
him into the barracks for a cup of tea. He went in cheerfully, and then
they put him and his little dog into the lock-up till some one paid a
shilling for him and got him out.

He has a stick he is proud of, bound with pieces of leather every few
inches--like one I have seen with a beggar in Belmullet. Since the first
night he has not had nightmare again, and he lies most of the evening
sleeping on the settle, and in the morning he goes round among the
houses, getting his share of meal and potatoes.

I do not think a beggar is ever refused in Kerry. Sometimes, while we
are talking or doing something in the kitchen, a man walks in without
saying anything and stands just inside the door, with his bag on the
floor beside him. In five or ten minutes, when the woman of the house
has finished what she is doing, she goes up to him and asks: 'Is it meal
or flour?' 'Flour,' says the man. She goes into the inner room, opens
her sack, and comes back with two handfuls. He opens his bag and takes
out a bundle carefully tied up in a cloth or handkerchief; he opens this
again, and usually there is another cloth inside, into which the woman
puts her flour. Then the cloths are carefully knotted together by the
corners, put back in the bag, and the man mutters a 'God bless you,' and
goes on his way.

The meal, flour and potatoes that are thus gathered up are always sold
by the beggar, and the money is spent on porter or second-hand clothes,
or very occasionally on food when he is in a neighbourhood that is not
hospitable. The buyers are usually found among the coastguards' wives,
or in the little public-houses on the roadside.

'Some of these men,' said the woman of the house, when I asked her about
them, 'will take their flour nicely and tastily and cleanly, and others
will throw it in anyway, and you'd be sorry to eat it afterwards.'

The talk of these people is almost bewildering. I have come to this
cottage again and again, and I often think I have heard all they have to
say, and then some one makes a remark that leads to a whole new bundle
of folk-tales, or stories of wonderful events that have happened in the
barony in the last hundred years. Tonight the people were unusually
silent, although several neighbours had come in, and to make
conversation I said something about the bull-fights in Spain that I had
been reading of in the newspapers. Immediately they started off with
stories of wicked or powerful bulls, and then they branched off to
clever dogs and all the things they have done in West Kerry, and then to
mad dogs and mad cattle and pigs--one incident after another, but always
detailed and picturesque and interesting.

 

 

 

I have come back to the north of Dingle, leaving Tralee late in the
afternoon. At the station there was a more than usually great crowd, as
there had been a fair in the town and many people had come in to make
their Saturday purchases. A number of messenger boys with parcels from
the shops in the town were shouting for the owners, using many familiar
names, Justin MacCarthy, Hannah Lynch and the like. I managed to get a
seat on a sack of flour beside the owner, who had other packages
scattered under our feet. When the train had started and the women and
girls--the carriage was filled with them--had settled down into their
places, I could see I caused great curiosity, as it was too late in the
year for even an odd tourist, and on this line everyone is known by
sight.

Before long I got into talk with the old man next me, and as soon as I
did so the women and girls stopped their talk and leaned out to hear
what we were saying.

He asked first if I belonged to Dingle, and I told him I did not.

'Well,' he said, 'you speak like a Kerry man, and you're dressed like a
Kerry man, so you belong to Kerry, surely.'

I told him I was born and bred in Dublin, and that I had travelled in
many places in Ireland and beyond it.

'That's easy said,' he answered, 'but I'd take an oath you were never
beyond Kerry to this day.'

Then he asked sharply: 'What do you do?'

I answered something about my wanderings in Europe, and suddenly he sat
up, as if a new thought had come to him.

'Maybe you're a wealthy man?' he said. I smiled complacently.

'And about thirty-five?'

I nodded.

'And not married?'

'No.'

'Well then,' he said, 'you're a damn lucky fellow to be travelling the
world with no one to impede you.'

Then he went on to discuss the expenses of travelling.

'You'll likely be paying twenty pounds for this trip,' he said, ' with
getting your lodging and buying your tickets, till you're back in the
city of Dublin?'

I told him my expenses were not so heavy.

'Maybe you don't drink so,' said his wife, who was near us, 'and that
way your living wouldn't be so costly at all.'

An interruption was made by a stop at a small station and the entrance
of a ragged ballad-singer, who sang a long ballad about the sorrows of
mothers who see all their children going away from them to America.

Further on, when the carriage was much emptier, a middle-aged man got
in, and we began discussing the fishing season, Aran fishing, hookers,
nobbies, and mackerel. I could see, while we were talking, that he, in
his turn, was examining me with curiosity. At last he seemed satisfied.

'Begob,' he said, 'I see what you are; you're a fish-dealer.'

It turned out that he was the skipper of a trawler, and we had a long
talk, the two of us and a local man who was going to Dingle also.

'There was one time a Frenchman below,' said the skipper, 'who got
married here and settled down and worked with the rest of us. One day we
were outside in the trawler, and there was a French boat anchored a bit
of a way off. "Come on," says Charley--that was his name--" and see can
we get some brandy from that boat beyond." "How would we get brandy,"
says I, "when we've no fish, or meat, or cabbages or a thing at all to
offer them?" He went down below then to see what he could get. At that
time there were four men only working the trawler, and in the heavy
season there were eight. Well, up he comes again and eight plates under
his arm. "There are eight plates," says he, "and four will do us; so
we'll take out the other four and make a swap with them for brandy."
With that he set the eight plates on the deck and began walking up and
down and looking on them.

' "The devil mend you," says I. "Will you take them up and come on, if
you're coming?"

' "I will," says he, "surely. I'm choicing out the ones that have
pictures on them, for it's that kind they do set store on?'' '

Afterwards we began talking of boats that had been upset during the
winter, and lives that had been lost in the neighbourhood.

'A while since,' said the local man, 'there were three men out in a
canoe, and the sea rose on them. They tried to come in under the cliff
but they couldn't come to land with the greatness of the waves that were
breaking. There were two young men in the canoe, and another man was
sixty, or near it. When the young men saw they couldn't bring in the
canoe, they said they'd make a jump for the rocks, and let her go
without them, if she must go. Then they pulled in on the next wave, and
when they were close in the two young men jumped on to a rock, but the
old man was too stiff, and he was washed back again in the canoe. It
came on dark after that, and all thought he was drowned, and they held
his wake in Dunquin. At that time there used to be a steamer going in
and out trading in Valentia and Dingle and Cahirciveen, and when she
came into Dingle, two or three days after, there was my man on board
her, as hearty as a salmon. When he was washed back he got one of the
oars, and kept her head to the wind; then the tide took him one bit and
the wind took him another, and he wrought and he wrought till he was
safe beyond in Valentia. Wasn't that a great wonder?' Then as he was
ending his story we ran down into Dingle.

Often, when one comes back to a place that one's memory and imagination
have been busy with, there is a feeling of smallness and disappointment,
and it is a day or two before one can renew all one's enjoyment. This
morning, however, when I went up the gap between Croagh Martin and then
back to Slea Head, and saw Inishtooskert and Inishvickillaun and the
Great Blasket Island itself, they seemed ten times more grey and wild
and magnificent than anything I had kept in my memory. The cold sea and
surf, and the feeling of winter in the clouds, and the blackness of the
rocks, and the red fern everywhere, were a continual surprise and
excitement.

Here and there on my way I met old men with tail-coats of frieze, that
are becoming so uncommon. When I spoke to them in English. they shook
their heads and muttered something I could not hear; but when I tried
Irish they made me long speeches about the weather and the clearness of
the day.

In the evening, as I was coming home, I got a glimpse that seemed to
have the whole character of Corkaguiney--a little line of low cottages
with yellow roofs, and an elder tree without leaves beside them,
standing out against a high mountain that seemed far away, yet was near
enough to be dense and rich and wonderful in its colour.

Then I wandered round the wonderful forts of Fahan. The blueness of the
sea and the hills from Carrantuohill to the Skelligs, the singular
loneliness of the hillside I was on, with a few choughs and gulls in
sight only, had a splendour that was almost a grief in the mind.

 

 

 

I turned into a little public-house this evening, where Maurice--the
fisherman I have spoken of before--and some of his friends often sit
when it is too wild for fishing. While we were talking a man came in,
and joined rather busily in what was being said, though I could see he
was not belonging to the place. He moved his position several times till
he was quite close to me, then he whispered: 'Will you stand me a
medium, mister? I'm hard set for money this while past.' When he had got
his medium he began to give me his history. He was a journeyman tailor
who had been a year or more in the place, and was beginning to pick up a
little Irish to get along with. When he had gone we had a long talk
about the making of canoes and the difference between those used in
Connaught and Munster.

'They have been in this country,' said Maurice, 'for twenty or
twenty-five years only, and before that we had boats; a canoe will cost
twelve pounds, or maybe thirteen pounds, and there is one old man beyond
who charges fifteen pounds. If it is well done a canoe will stand for
eight years, and you can get a new skin on it when the first one is
gone.' I told him I thought canoes had been in Connemara since the
beginning of the worId.

'That may well be,' he went on, 'for there was a certain man going out
as a pilot, up and down into Clare, and it was he made them first in
this place. It is a trade few can learn, for it is all done within the
head; you will have to sit down and think it out, and then make up when
it is all ready in your mind.'

I described the fixed thole-pins that are used in Connaught--here they
use two freely moving thole-pins, with the oar loose between them, and
they jeered at the simplicity of the Connaught system. Then we got on
the relative value of canoes and boats.

'They are not better than boats,' said Maurice, 'but they are more
useful. Before you get a heavy boat swimming you will be wet up to your
waist, and then you will be sitting the whole night like that; but a
canoe will swim in a handful of water, so that you can get in dry and
warm the whole night. Then there will be seven men in a big boat and
seven shares of the fish; but in a canoe there will be three men only
and three shares of the fish, though the nets are the same in the two.'

After a while a man sang a song, and then we began talking of tunes and
playing the fiddle, and I told them how hard it was to get any sound out
of one in a cottage with a floor of earth and a thatched roof over you.

'I can believe that,' said one of the men. 'There was a man a while
since went into Tralee to buy a fiddle; and when he went into the shop
an old fiddler followed him into it, thinking maybe he'd get the price
of a pint. Well, the man was within choicing the fiddles, maybe forty of
them, and the old fiddler whispered to him to take them out into the
air, "for there's many a fiddle would sound well in here wouldn't be
worth a curse outside," says he; so he was bringing them out and
bringing them out till he found a good one among them.'

 

 

 

This evening, after a day of teeming rain, it cleared for an hour, and I
went out while the sun was setting to a little cove where a high sea was
running. As I was coming back the darkness began to close in except in
the west, where there was a red light under the clouds. Against this
light I could see patches of open wall and little fields of stooks, and
a bit of laneway with an old man driving white cows before him. These
seemed transfigured beyond any description.

Then I passed two men riding bare-backed towards the west, who spoke to
me in Irish, and a little further on I came to the only village on my
way. The ground rose towards it, and as I came near there was a grey bar
of smoke from every cottage going up to the low clouds overhead, and
standing out strangely against the blackness of the mountain behind the
village.

Beyond the patch of wet cottages I had another stretch of lonely
roadway, and a heron kept flapping in front of me, rising and lighting
again with many lonely cries that made me glad to reach the little
public-house near Smerwick.
