[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](how08)  [Next](how10.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0762420189/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Harmonies of the World*, by Johannes Kepler, tr. Charles Glenn Wallis
\[1939\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1049">p. 1049</span>

### 8. IN THE CELESTIAL HARMONIES WHICH PLANET SINGS SOPRANO, WHICH ALTO, WHICH TENOR, AND WHICH BASS?

Although these words are applied to human voices, while voices or sounds
do not exist in the heavens, on account of the very great tranquillity
of movements, and not even the subjects in which we find the consonances
are comprehended under the true genus of movement, since we were
considering the movements solely as apparent from the sun, and finally,
although there is no such cause in the heavens, as in human singing, for
requiring a definite number of voices in order to make consonance (for
first there was the number of the six planets revolving around the sun,
from the number of the five intervals taken from the regular figures,
and then afterwards—in the order of nature, not of time—the congruence
of the movements was settled): I do not know why but nevertheless this
wonderful congruence with human song has such a strong effect upon me
that I am compelled to pursue this part of the comparison, also, even
without any solid natural cause. For those same properties which in Book
III, \[300\] Chapter 16, custom ascribed to the bass and nature gave
legal grounds for so doing are somehow possessed by Saturn and Jupiter
in the heavens; and we find those of the tenor in Mars, those of the
alto are present in the Earth and Venus, and those of the soprano are
possessed by Mercury, if not with equality of intervals, at least
proportionately. For howsoever in the following chapter the
eccentricities of each planet are deduced from their proper causes and
through those eccentricities the intervals proper to the movements of
each, none the less there comes from that the following wonderful result
(I do not know whether it is occasioned by the procurement and mere
tempering of necessities): (1) as the bass is opposed to the alto, so
there are two planets which have the nature of the alto, two that of the
bass, just as in any Mode of song there is one \[bass and one alto\] on
either side, while there are single representatives of the other single
voices. (2) As the alto is practically supreme in a very narrow range
\[*in angustiis*\] on account of necessary and natural causes unfolded
in Book III, so the almost innermost planets, the Earth and Venus, have
the narrowest intervals of movements, the Earth not much more than a
semitone, Venus not even a diesis. (3) And as the tenor is free, but
none the less progresses with moderation, so Mars alone—with the single
exception of Mercury—can make the greatest interval, namely a perfect
fifth. (4) And as the bass makes harmonic leaps, so Saturn and Jupiter
have intervals which are harmonic, and in relation to one another pass
from the octave to the octave and perfect fifth. (5) And as the soprano
is the freest, more than all the rest, and likewise the swiftest, so
Mercury can traverse more than an octave in the shortest period. But
this is altogether *per accidens*; now let us hear the reasons for the
eccentricities.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 9. The Genesis of the Eccentricities in the Single Planets From
the Procurement of the Consonances Between Their Movements](how10.md)
