[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](how01)  [Next](how03.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0762420189/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Harmonies of the World*, by Johannes Kepler, tr. Charles Glenn Wallis
\[1939\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 1. CONCERNING THE FIVE REGULAR SOLID FIGURES

\[271\] It has been said in the second book how the regular plane
figures are fitted together to form solids; there we spoke of the five
regular solids, among others, on account of the plane figures.
Nevertheless their number, five, was there demonstrated; and it was
added why they were designated by the Platonists as the figures of the
world, and to what element any solid was compared on account of what
property. But now, in the anteroom of this book, I must speak again
concerning these figures, on their own account, not on account of the
planes, as much as suffices for the celestial harmonies; the reader will
find the rest in the *Epitome of Astronomy*, Volume II, Book Iv.

Accordingly, from the *Mysterium Cosmographicum*, let me here briefly
inculcate the order of the five solids in the world, whereof three are
primary and two secondary. For the cube (1) is the outmost and the most
spacious, because firstborn and having the nature \[*rationem*\] of a
*whole*, in the very form of its generation. There follows the
*tetrahedron* (2), as if made a *part*, by cutting up the cube;
nevertheless it is primary too, with a solid trilinear angle, like the
cube. Within the tetrahedron is the *dodecahedron* (3), the last of
primary figures, namely, like a solid composed of parts of a cube and
similar parts of a tetrahedron, *i.e.*, of irregular tetrahedrons,
wherewith the cube inside is roofed over. Next in order is the
*icosahedron* (4) on account of its similarity, the last of the
secondary figures and having a plurilinear solid angle. The *octahedron*
(6) is inmost, which is similar to the cube and the first of the
secondary figures and to which as inscriptile the first place is due,
just as the first outside place is due to the cube as circumscriptile.

\[272\] However, there are as it were two noteworthy weddings of these
figures, made from different classes: the males, the cube and the
dodecahedron, among the primary; the females, the octahedron and the
icosahedron, among the secondary, to which is added one as it were
bachelor or hermaphrodite, the tetrahedron, because it is inscribed in
itself, just as those female solids are inscribed in the males and are
as it were subject to them, and have the signs of the feminine sex,
opposite the masculine, namely, angles opposite planes. Moreover, just
as the tetrahedron is the element, bowels, and as it were rib of the
male

<span id="page_1012">p. 1012</span>

cube, so the feminine octahedron is the element and part of the
tetrahedron in another way; and thus the tetrahedron mediates in this
marriage.

The main difference in these wedlocks or family relationships consists
in the following: the ratio of the cube is *rational*. For the
tetrahedron is one third of the body of the cube, and the octahedron
half of the tetrahedron, one sixth of the cube; while the ratio of the
dodecahedron's wedding is *irrational* \[*ineffabilis*\] but *divine*.

The union of these two words commands the reader to be careful as to
their significance. For the word *ineffabilis* here <span
id="img_101200"></span>

<table data-align="LEFT">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="CENTER"><a href="img/101200.jpg"><img src="tn/101200.jpg" /><br />
Click to enlarge</a></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

does not of itself denote any nobility, as elsewhere in theology and
divine things, but denotes an inferior condition. For in geometry, as
was said in the first book, there are many irrationals, which do not on
that account participate in a divine proportion too. But you must look
in the first book for what the divine ratio, or rather the divine
section, is. For in other proportions there are four terms present; and
three, in a continued proportion; but the divine requires a single
relation of terms outside of that of the proportion itself, namely in
such fashion that the two lesser terms, as parts make up the greater
term, as a whole. Therefore, as much as is taken away from this wedding
of the dodecahedron on account of its employing an irrational
proportion, is added to it conversely, because its irrationality
approaches the divine. This wedding also comprehends the solid star too,
the generation whereof arises from the continuation of five planes of
the dodecahedron till they all meet in a single point. See its
generation in Book

Lastly, we must note the ratio of the spheres circumscribed around them
to those inscribed in them: in the case of the tetrahedron it is
rational, 100,000 : 33,333 or 3 : 1; in the wedding of the cube it is
irrational, but the radius of the inscribed sphere is rational in
square, and is itself the square root of one third the square on the
radius \[of the circumscribed sphere\], namely 100,000 : 57,735; in the
wedding of the dodecahedron, clearly irrational, 100,000 : 79,465; in
the case of the star, 100,000 : 52,573, half the side of the icosahedron
or half the distance between two rays.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2. On the Kinship Between the Harmonic Ratios and the Five
Regular Figures](how03.md)
