[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](how06)  [Next](how08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0762420189/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Harmonies of the World*, by Johannes Kepler, tr. Charles Glenn Wallis
\[1939\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 6. IN THE EXTREME PLANETARY MOVEMENTS THE MUSICAL MODES OR TONES HAVE SOMEHOW BEEN EXPRESSED

\[294\] This follows from the aforesaid and there is no need of many
words; for the single planets somehow mark the pitches of the system
with their perihelial movement, in so far as it has been appointed to
the single planets to traverse a certain fixed interval in the musical
scale comprehended by the definite notes of it or the pitches of the
system, and beginning at that note or pitch of each planet which in the
preceding chapter fell to the aphelial movement of that planet: *G* to
Saturn and the Earth, *b* to Jupiter, which can be transposed higher to
*G*, *f*-sharp to Mars, *e* to Venus, *a* to Mercury in the higher
octave. See the single movements in the familiar terms of notes. They do
not form articulately the intermediate positions, which you here see
filled by notes, as they do the extremes, because they struggle from one
extreme to the opposite not by leaps and intervals but by a continuum of
tunings and actually traverse all the means (which are potentially
infinite)—which cannot be expressed by me in any other way than by a
continuous series of intermediate notes. Venus remains approximately in
unison and does not equal even the least of the concordant intervals in
the difference of its tension.

<span id="img_103900"></span>

[![](tn/103900.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/103900.jpg.md)

<span id="page_1040">p. 1040</span>

But the signature of two accidentals (flats) in a common staff and the
formation of the skeletal outline of the octave by the inclusion of a
definite concordant interval are a certain first beginning of the
distinction of Tones or Modes \[*modorum*\]. Therefore the musical Modes
have been distributed among the planets. But I know that for the
formation and determination of distinct Modes many things are requisite,
which belong to human song, as containing (a) distinct \[order of\]
intervals; and so I have used the word *somehow*.

But the harmonist will be free to choose his opinion as to which Mode
each planet expresses as its own, since the extremes have been assigned
to it here. From among the familiar Modes, I should give to Saturn the
Seventh or Eighth, because if you place its key-note at *G*, the
perihelial movement ascends to *b*; to Jupiter, the First or Second
Mode, because its aphelial movement has been fitted to *G* and its
perihelial movement arrives at *b* flat; to Mars, the Fifth or Sixth
Mode, not only because Mars comprehends approximately the perfect fifth,
which interval is common to all the Modes, but principally because when
it is reduced with the others to a common system, it attains *c* with
its perihelial movement and touches *f* with its aphelial, which is the
key-note of the Fifth or Sixth Mode or Tone; I should give the Third or
Fourth Mode to the Earth, because its movement revolves within a
semitone, while the first interval of those Modes is a semitone; but to
Mercury will belong indifferently all the Modes or Tones on account of
the greatness of its range; to Venus, clearly none on account of the
smallness of its range; but on account of the common system the Third
and Fourth Mode, because with reference to the other planets it occupies
*e*. (The Earth sings MI, FA, MI so that you may infer even from the
syllables that in this our domicile MIsery and FAmine obtain.) <span
id="fr_9"></span>[1](#fn_9.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_9"></span>[1040:1](how07.htm#fr_9.md) See note on hexachordal
system.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 7. The Universal Consonances of All Six Planets, Like Common
Four-Part Counterpoint, Can Exist](how08.md)
