[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](how10.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0762420189/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Harmonies of the World*, by Johannes Kepler, tr. Charles Glenn Wallis
\[1939\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 10. EPILOGUE CONCERNING THE SUN, BY WAY OF CONJECTURE <span id="fr_17"></span>[1](#fn_17.md)

From the celestial music to the hearer, from the Muses to Apollo the
leader of the Dance, from the six planets revolving and making
consonances to the Sun at the centre of all the circuits, immovable in
place but rotating into itself. For although the harmony is most
absolute between the extreme planetary movements, not with respect to
the true speeds through the ether but with respect to the angles which
are formed by joining with the centre of the sun the termini of the
diurnal arcs of the planetary orbits; while the harmony does not adorn
the termini, *i.e.*, the single movements, in so far as they are
considered in themselves but only in so far as by being taken together
and compared with one another, they become the object of some mind; and
although no object is ordained in vain, without the existence of some
thing which may be moved by it, while those angles seem to presuppose
some action similar to our eyesight or at least to that sense-perception
whereby, in Book IV, the sublunary nature perceived the angles of rays
formed by the planets on the Earth: still it is not easy for dwellers on
the Earth to conjecture what sort of sight is present in the sun, what
eyes there are, or what other instinct there is for perceiving those
angles

<span id="page_1081">p. 1081</span>

even without eyes and for evaluating the harmonies of the movements
entering into the antechamber of the mind by whatever doorway, and
finally what mind there is in the sun. None the less, however those
things may be, this composition of the six primary spheres around the
sun, cherishing it with their perpetual revolutions and as it were
adoring it (just as, separately, four moons accompany the globe of
Jupiter, two Saturn, but a single moon by its circuit encompasses,
cherishes, fosters the Earth and us its inhabitants, and ministers to
us) and this special business of the harmonies, which is a most clear
footprint of the highest providence over solar affairs, now being added
to that consideration, \[324\] wrings from me the following confession:
not only does light go out from the sun into the whole world, as from
the focus or eye of the world, as life and heat from the heart, as every
movement from the King and mover, but conversely also by royal law these
returns, so to speak, of every lovely harmony are collected in the sun
from every province in the world, nay, the forms of movements by twos
flow together and are bound into one harmony by the work of some mind,
and are as it were coined money from silver and gold bullion; finally,
the curia, palace, and praetorium or throne-room of the whole realm of
nature are in the sun, whatsoever chancellors, palatines, prefects the
Creator has given to nature: for them, whether created immediately from
the beginning or to be transported hither at some time, has He made
ready those seats. For even this terrestrial adornment, with respect to
its principal part, for quite a long while lacked the contemplators and
enjoyers, for whom however it had been appointed; and those seats were
empty. Accordingly the reflection struck my mind, what did the ancient
Pythagoreans in Aristotle mean, who used to call the centre of the world
(which they referred to as the "fire" but understood by that the sun)
"the watchtower of Jupiter," Διος φυλακὴν; what, likewise, was the
ancient interpreter pondering in his mind when he rendered the verse of
the Psalm as: "He has placed His tabernacle in the sun."

But also I have recently fallen upon the hymn of Proclus the Platonic
philosopher (of whom there has been much mention in the preceding
books), which was composed to the Sun and filled full with venerable
mysteries, if you excise that one κλῦθ (hear me) from it; although the
ancient interpreter already cited has explained this to some extent,
*viz*., in invoking the sun, he understands Him Who has placed His
tabernacle in the sun. For Proclus lived at a time in which it was a
crime, for which the rulers of the world and the people itself inflicted
all punishments, to profess Jesus of Nazareth, God Our Savior, and to
contemn the gods of the pagan poets (under Constantine, Maxentius, and
Julian the Apostate). Accordingly Proclus, who from his Platonic
philosophy indeed, by the natural light of the mind, had caught a
distant glimpse of the Son of God, that true light which lighteth every
man coming into this world, and who already knew that divinity must
never be sought with a superstitious mob in sensible things,
nevertheless [preferred](errata.htm#14.md) to seem to look for God in the
sun rather than in Christ a sensible man, in order that at the same time
he might both deceive the pagans by honoring verbally the Titan of the
poets and devote himself to his philosophy, by drawing away both the
pagans and the Christians from sensible beings, the pagans from the
visible sun, the Christians from the Son of Mary, because, trusting too
much to the natural light of reason, he spit out the mystery of the
Incarnation; and finally that at the same time he might take over from
them and adopt into his own philosophy whatever the Christians

<span id="page_1082">p. 1082</span>

had which was most divine and especially consonant with Platonic
philosophy. <span id="fr_18"></span>[1](#fn_18.md) And so the accusation of
the teaching of the Gospel concerning Christ is laid against this hymn
of Proclus, in its own matters: let that Titan keep as his private
possessions χρῦσα ἡνία \[golden reins\] and ταμιεῖυν φαοῦς, μεσσατὶην,
αἰθερος ἓδρην, κοδμοῡ κραδιαῖον ἐριφεγγεᾲ κυκλὸν \[a treasury of light,
a seat at the midpart of the ether, a radiant circle at the heart of the
world\], which visible aspect Copernicus too bestows upon him; let him
even keep his παλιννοστοὺς διφρείς \[cyclical chariot-drivings\],
although according to the ancient Pythagoreans he does not possess them
but in their place τὸ κέντρον, Διὸς φυλακήν \[the centre, the watchtower
of Zeus\]—which doctrine, misshapen by the forgetfulness of ages, as by
a flood, was not recognized by their follower Proclus; let him also keep
his γενεθλὴν Βλαστησασαν \[offspring born\] of himself, and whatever
else is of nature; in turn, let the philosophy of Proclus yield to
Christian doctrines, \[325\] let the sensible sun yield to the Son of
Mary, the Son of God, Whom Proclus addresses under the name of the
Titan, ζωαρκεὸς, ὢ ἂνα, πηγὴς αὐτὸς ἔχων κλήδα \[O lord, who dost hold
the key of the life-supporting spring\], and that πᾴντα τεῆς ἔπλήσας
ἐλερσινοοῖο προνόιης \[thou didst fulfill all things with thy
mind-awakening foresight\], and that immense power over the μοιρὰων
\[fates\], and things which were read of in no philosophy before the
promulgation of the Gospel <span id="fr_19"></span>[2](#fn_19.md), the
demons dreading him as their threatening scourge, the demons lying in
ambush for souls, ὂφρα ὐφιτενοῦς λαθοῖντο πατρὸς περιφέγγεος αὐλής \[in
order that they might escape the notice of the light-filled hall of the
lofty father\]; and who except the Word of the Father is that εἰκὼν
παγγεντετᾴο θεοῦ, οὖ φᾴεντος ἀπ᾽ ἀῤῥητου γενετῆρος παύσατο στοιχεῖων
ο̃ρυμᾴγδος ἐπ ἀλληλοῖσιν ἰὀντων \[image of the all-begetting father, upon
whose manifestation from an ineffable mother the sin of the elements
changing into one another ceased\], according to the following: The
Earth was unwrought and a chaotic mass, and darkness was upon the face
of the abyss, and God divided the light from the darkness, the waters
from the waters, the sea from the dry land; and: all things were made by
the very Word. Who except Jesus of Nazareth the Son of God, ψυχῶν
ἀναγωγεύς \[the shepherd of souls\], to whom ἱκεσιὴ πολυδὰκρους \[the
prayer of a tearful suppliant\] is to be offered, in order that He
cleanse us from sins and wash us of the filth τῆς γενεθλὴς \[of
generation\]—as if Proclus acknowledged the [forms](errata.htm#15.md) of
original sin—and guard us from punishment and evil, πρηυνὼν θόον ὀμμα
δικῆς \[by making mild the quick eye of justice\], namely, the wrath of
the Father? And the other things we read of, which are as it were taken
from the hymn of Zacharias (or, accordingly, was that hymn a part of the
*Metroace*?) Αχλυν ἀποσκεδὰσας ὀλεσὶμβροτον ὶολοχεύτον \[dispersing the
poisonous, man-destroying mist\], *viz*., in order that He may give to
souls living in darkness and the shadows of death the φάος ἁγνο̃ν \[holy
light\] and ὂλβο̃ν ἀστυφελικτὸν ἀπ᾽ ἐυσεβίνἐρατείης \[unshaken happiness
from

<span id="page_1083">p. 1083</span>

lovely piety\]; for that is to serve God in holiness and justice all our
days. Accordingly, let us separate out these and similar things and
restore them to the doctrine of the Catholic Church to which they
belong. But let us see what the principal reason is why there has been
mention made of the hymn. For this same sun which ὕψοθεν ἁρμνίης ῥῦμα
πλοῦσιον ἐξοτεύει \[sluices the rich flow of harmony from on high\]—so
too Orpheus κόσμου τὸν ἐναρμόνιον δρόμον ἕλκων \[making move the
harmonious course of the world\]—the same, concerning whose stock
Phoebus about to rise κιθαρῇ ὑπὸ θέσκελα μελπῶν εὐνάξει μεγὰ κῦμα
βαρυφλσισβοῖο γενεθλής \[sings marvellous things on his lyre and lulls
to sleep the heavy-sounding surge of generation\] and in whose dance
Paean is the partner, πλήσας ἁρμονὶης παναπήμονος εὔρεα κο̃σμν \[striking
the wide sweep of innocent harmony\]—him, I say, does Proclus at once
salute in the first verse of the hymn as πῦρος νοεροῦ βασιλέα \[king of
intellectual fire\]. By that commencement, at the same time, he
indicates what the Pythagoreans understood by the word of fire (so that
it is surprising that the pupil should disagree with the masters in the
position of the centre) and at the same time he transfers his whole hymn
from the body of the sun and its quality and light, which are sensibles,
to the intelligibles, and he has assigned to that πῦρ νοερὸς
\[intellectual fire\] of his—perhaps the artisan fire of the Stoics—to
that created God of Plato, that chief or self-ruling mind, a royal
throne in the solar body, confounding into one the creature and Him
through Whom all things have been created. But we Christians, who have
been taught to make better distinctions, know that this eternal and
untreated "Word," Which was "with God" and Which is contained by no
abode, although He is within all things, excluded by none, although He
is outside of all things, took up into unity of person flesh out of the
womb of the most glorious Virgin Mary, and, when the ministry of His
flesh was finished, occupied as His royal abode the heavens, wherein by
a certain excellence over and above the other parts of the world,
*viz*., through His glory and majesty, His celestial Father too is
recognized to dwell, and has also promised to His faithful, mansions in
that house of His Father: as for the remainder concerning that abode, we
believe it superfluous to inquire into it too curiously or to forbid the
senses or natural reasons to investigate that which the eye has not seen
nor the ear heard and into which the heart of man has not ascended; but
we duly subordinate the created mind—of whatsoever excellence it may
be—to its Creator, and we introduce neither God-intelligences with
Aristotle and the pagan philosophers nor armies of innumerable planetary
spirits with the Magi, nor do we propose that they are either to be
adored or summoned to intercourse with us by theurgic superstitions, for
we have a careful fear of that; but we freely inquire by natural reasons
what sort of thing each mind is, especially if in the heart of the world
\[326\] there is any mind bound rather closely to the nature of things
and performing the function of the soul of the world—or if also some
intelligent creatures, of a nature different from human perchance do
inhabit or will inhabit the globe thus animated (see my book *on the New
Star*, Chapter 24, "On the Soul of the World and Some of Its
Functions"). But if it is permissible, using the thread of analogy as a
guide, to traverse the labyrinths of the mysteries of nature, not
ineptly, I think, will someone have argued as follows: The relation of
the six spheres to their common centre, thereby the centre of the whole
world, is also the same as that of διανοὶα \[discussive intellection\]
to νοῦς \[intuitive intellection\], according as these faculties

<span id="page_1084">p. 1084</span>

are distinguished by Aristotle, Plato, Proclus, and the rest; and the
relation of the single planets' revolutions in place around the sun to
the ἀμετᾴθεδον \[unvarying\] rotation of the sun in the central space of
the whole system (concerning which the sun-spots are evidence; this has
been demonstrated in the *Commentaries on the Movement of Mars*) is the
same as the relation of τὸ διανοητικὸν to τὸ νοερὸν, that of the
manifold discourses of ratiocination to the most simple intellection of
the mind. For as the sun rotating into itself moves all the planets by
means of the form emitted from itself, so too—as the philosophers
teach—mind, by understanding itself and in itself all things, stirs up
ratiocinations, and by dispersing and unrolling its simplicity into
them, makes everything to be understood. And the movements of the
planets around the sun at their centre and the discourses of
ratiocinations are so interwoven and bound together that, unless the
Earth, our domicile, measured out the annual circle, midway between the
other spheres—changing from place to place, from station to
station—never would human ratiocination have worked its way to the true
intervals of the planets and to the other things dependent from them,
never would it have constituted astronomy. (See the *Optical Part of
Astronomy*, Chapter 9.)

On the other hand, in a beautiful correspondence, simplicity of
intellection follows upon the stillness of the sun at the centre of the
world, in that hitherto we have always worked under the assumption that
those solar harmonies of movements are defined neither by the diversity
of regions nor by the amplitude of the expanses of the world. As a
matter of fact, if any mind observes from the sun those harmonies, that
mind is without the assistance afforded by the movement and diverse
stations of his abode, by means of which it may string together
ratiocinations and discourse necessary for measuring out the planetary
intervals. Accordingly, it compares the diurnal movements of each
planet, not as they are in their own orbits but as they pass through the
angles at the centre of the sun. And so if it has knowledge of the
magnitude of the spheres, this knowledge must be present in it *a
priori*, without any toil of ratiocination: but to what extent that is
true of human minds and of sublunary nature has been made clear above,
from Plato and Proclus.

Under these circumstances, it will not have been surprising if anyone
who has been thoroughly warmed by taking a fairly liberal draft from
that bowl of Pythagoras which Proclus gives to drink from in the very
first verse of the hymn, and who has been made drowsy by the very sweet
harmony of the dance of the planets begins to dream (by telling a story
he may imitate Plato's Atlantis and, by dreaming, Cicero's Scipio):
throughout the remaining globes, which follow after from place to place,
there have been disseminated discursive or ratiocinative faculties,
whereof that one ought assuredly to be judged the most excellent and
absolute which is in the middle position among those globes, *viz*., in
man's earth, while there dwells in the sun simple intellect, πῦρ νοερὸν,
or νοῦς, the source, whatsoever it may be, of every harmony.

For if it was Tycho Brahe's opinion concerning that bare wilderness of
globes that it does not exist fruitlessly in the world but is filled
with inhabitants: with how much greater probability shall we make a
conjecture as to God's works and designs even for the other globes, from
that variety which we discern in this globe of the Earth. For He Who
created the species which should inhabit the waters, beneath which
however there is no room for the air \[327\] which living

<span id="page_1085">p. 1085</span>

things draw in; Who sent birds supported on wings into the wilderness of
the air; Who gave white bears and white wolves to the snowy regions of
the North, and as food for the bears the whale, and for the wolves,
birds' eggs; Who gave lions to the deserts of burning Libya and camels
to the wide-spread plains of Syria, and to the lions an endurance of
hunger, and to the camels an endurance of thirst: did He use up every
art in the globe of the Earth so that He was unable, every goodness so
that he did not wish, to adorn the other globes too with their fitting
creatures, as either the long or short revolutions, or the nearness or
removal of the sun, or the variety of eccentricities or the shine or
darkness of the bodies, or the properties of the figures wherewith any
region is supported persuaded?

Behold, as the generations of animals in this terrestrial globe have an
image of the male in the dodecahedron, of the female in the
icosahedron—whereof the dodecahedron rests on the terrestrial sphere
from the outside and the icosahedron from the inside: what will we
suppose the remaining globes to have, from the remaining figures? For
whose good do four moons encircle Jupiter, two Saturn, as does this our
moon this our domicile? But in the same way we shall ratiocinate
concerning the globe of the sun also, and we shall as it were
incorporate conjectures drawn from the harmonies, *et cetera*—which are
weighty of themselves—with other conjectures which are more on the side
of the bodily, more suited for the apprehension of the vulgar. Is that
globe empty and the others full, if everything else is in due
correspondence? If as the Earth breathes forth clouds, so the sun black
smoke? If as the Earth is moistened and grows under showers, so the sun
shines with those combusted spots, while clear flame-lets sparkle in its
all fiery body. For whose use is all this equipment, if the globe is
empty? Indeed, do not the senses themselves cry out that fiery bodies
dwell here which are receptive of simple intellects, and that truly the
sun is, if not the king, at least the queen πῦρος νοεροῦ \[of
intellectual fire\]?

Purposely I break off the dream and the very vast speculation, merely
crying out with the royal Psalmist: *Great is our Lord and great His
virtue and of His wisdom there is no number: praise Him, ye heavens,
praise Him, ye sun, moon, and planets, use every sense for perceiving,
every tongue for declaring your Creator. Praise Him, ye celestial
harmonies, praise Him, ye judges of the harmonies uncovered* (and you
before all, old happy Mastlin, for you used to animate these cares with
words of hope): *and thou my soul, praise the Lord thy Creator, as long
as I shall be: for out of Him and through Him and in Him are all
things*, καὶ τἀ αἰσθητὰ καὶ τὰ νοερὰ \[*both the sensible and the
intelligible*\]; *for both whose whereof we are utterly ignorant and
those which we know are the least part of them; because there is still
more beyond. To Him be praise, honour, and glory, world without end.
Amen*.

THE END

This work was completed on the 17th or 27th day of May, 1618; but Book V
was reread (while the type was being set) on the 9th or 19th of
February, 1619. At Linz, the capital of Austria—above the Enns.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_17"></span>[1080:1](how11.htm#fr_17.md) See Kepler's
commentary on this epilogue in the *Epitome*, page 850-51.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[1082:1](how11.htm#fr_18.md) It was the judgment of
the ancients concerning his book *Metroace* that in it he set forth, not
without divine rapture, his universal doctrine concerning God; and by
the frequent tears of the author apparent in it all suspicion was
removed from the hearers. None the less this same man wrote against the
Christians eighteen epichiremata, to which John Philoponus opposed
himself, reproaching Proclus with ignorance of Greek thought, which none
the less lie had undertaken to defend. That is to say, Proclus concealed
those things which did not make for his own philosophy.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[1082:2](how11.htm#fr_19.md) Nevertheless in Suidas
some similar things are attributed to ancient Orpheus, nearly equal to
Moses, as if his pupil; see too the hymns of Orpheus, on which Proclus
wrote commentaries.

 
