[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Fortean](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](damn22)  [Next](damn24) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027P8878/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Book of the Damned*, by Charles Fort, \[1919\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 23

<span class="smallcaps">Text-books</span> tell us that the Dhurmsalla
meteorites were picked up "soon," or "within half an hour." Given a
little time the conventionalists may argue that these stones were hot
when they fell, but that their great interior coldness had overcome the
molten state of their surfaces.

According to the Deputy Commissioner of Dhurmsalla, these stones had
been picked up "immediately" by passing coolies.

These stones were so cold that they benumbed the fingers. But they had
fallen with a great light. It is described as "a flame of

<span id="page_281">p. 281</span>

fire about two feet in depth and nine feet in length." Acceptably this
light was not the light of molten matter.

In this chapter we are very intermediatistic—and unsatisfactory. To the
intermediatist there is but one answer to all questions: Sometimes and
sometimes not.

Another form of this intermediatist "solution" of all problems is: Yes
and no.

Everything that is, also isn't.

A positivist attempts to formulate: so does the intermediatist, but with
less rigorousness: he accepts but also denies: he may seem to accept in
one respect and deny in some other respect, but no real line can be
drawn between any two aspects of anything. The intermediatist accepts
that which seems to correlate with something that he has accepted as a
dominant. The positivist correlates with a belief.

In the Dhurmsalla meteorites we have support for our expression that
things entering this earth's atmosphere sometimes shine with a light
that is not the light of incandescence—or so we account, or offer an
expression upon, "thunderstones," or carved stones that have fallen
luminously to this earth, in streaks that have looked like strokes of
lightning—but we accept, also, that some things that have entered this
earth's atmosphere, disintegrate with the intensity of flame and molten
matter—but some things, we accept, enter this earth's atmosphere and
collapse non-luminously, quite like deep-sea fishes brought to the
surface of the ocean. Whatever agreement we have is an indication that
somewhere aloft there is a medium denser than this earth's atmosphere. I
suppose our stronghold is in that such is not popular belief—

Or the rhythm of all phenomena:

Air dense at sea level upon this earth—less and less dense as one
ascends—then denser and denser. A good many bothersome questions arise—

Our attitude:

Here are the data:

Luminous rains sometimes fall (*Nature*, March 9, 1882; *Nature*,
25-437). This is light that is not the light of incandescence, but no
one can say that these occasional, or rare, rains come from this

<span id="page_282">p. 282</span>

earth's externality. We simply note cold light of falling bodies. For
luminous rain, snow, and dust, see Hartwig, *Aerial World*, p. 319. As
to luminous clouds, we have more nearly definite observations and
opinions: they mark transition between the Old Dominant and the New
Dominant. We have already noted the transition in Prof. Schwedoff's
theory of external origin of some hailstones—and the implications that,
to a former generation, seemed so preposterous—"droll" was the word—that
there are in inter-planetary regions volumes of water—whether they have
fishes and frogs in them or not. Now our acceptance is that clouds
sometimes come from external regions, having had origin from
super-geographical lakes and oceans that we shall not attempt to chart,
just at present—only suggesting to enterprising aviators—and we note
that we put it all up to them, and show no inclination to go Columbusing
on our own account—that they take bathing suits, or, rather, deep-sea
diving-suits along. So then that some clouds come from inter-planetary
oceans—of the Super-Sargasso Sea—if we still accept the Super-Sargasso
Sea—and shine, upon entering this earth's atmosphere. In *Himmel und
Erde*, February, 1889—a phenomenon of transition of thirty years
ago—Herr O. Jesse, in his observations upon luminous night-clouds, notes
the great height of them, and drolly or sensibly suggests that some of
them may have come from regions external to this earth. I suppose he
means only from other planets. But it's a very droll and sensible idea
either way.

In general I am accounting for a great deal of this earth's isolation:
that it is relatively isolated by circumstances that are similar to the
circumstances that make for relative isolation of the bottom of the
ocean—except that there is a clumsiness of analogy now. To call
ourselves deep-sea fishes has been convenient, but, in a
quasi-existence, there is no convenience that will not sooner or later
turn awkward—so, if there be denser regions aloft, these regions should
now be regarded as analogues of far-submerged oceanic regions, and
things coming to this earth would be like things rising to an attenuated
medium—and exploding—sometimes incandescently, sometimes with cold
light—sometimes non-luminously, like deep-sea fishes brought to the
surface—altogether conditions of inhospitality. I have a suspicion that,
in their own depths, deep-sea fishes are not

<span id="page_283">p. 283</span>

luminous. If they are, Darwinism is mere jesuitism, in attempting to
correlate them. Such advertising would so attract attention that all
advantages would be more than offset. Darwinism is largely a doctrine of
concealment: here we have brazen proclamation—if accepted. Fishes in the
Mammoth Cave need no light to see by. We might have an expression that
deep-sea fishes turn luminous upon entering a less dense medium—but
models in the American Museum of Natural History: specialized organs of
luminosity upon these models. Of course we do remember that awfully
convincing "dodo," and some of our sophistications we trace to him—at
any rate disruption is regarded as a phenomenon of coming from a dense
to a less dense medium.

An account by M. Acharius, in the *Transactions of the Swedish Academy
of Sciences*, 1808-215, translated for the *North American Review*,
3-319:

That M. Acharius, having heard of "an extraordinary and probably
hitherto unseen phenomenon," reported from near the town of Skeninge,
Sweden, investigated:

That, upon the 16th of May, 1808, at about 4 P.m., the sun suddenly
turned dull brick-red. At the same time there appeared, upon the western
horizon, a great number of round bodies, dark brown, and seemingly the
size of a hat crown. They passed overhead and disappeared in the eastern
horizon. Tremendous procession. It lasted two hours. Occasionally one
fell to the ground. When the place of a fall was examined, there was
found a film, which soon dried [and](errata.htm#6) vanished. Often, when
approaching the sun, these bodies seemed to link together, or were then
seen to be linked together, in groups not exceeding eight, and, under
the sun, they were seen to have tails three or four fathoms long. Away
from the sun the tails were invisible. Whatever their substance may have
been, it is described as gelatinous—"soapy and jellied."

I place this datum here for several reasons. It would have been a good
climax to our expression upon hordes of small bodies that, in our
acceptance, were not seeds, nor birds, nor ice-crystals: but the
tendency would have been to jump to the homogeneous conclusion that all
our data in that expression related to this one kind of phenomena,
whereas we conceive of infinite heterogeneity of the

<span id="page_284">p. 284</span>

external: of crusaders and rabbles and emigrants and tourists and
dragons and things like gelatinous hat crowns. Or that all things, here,
upon this earth, that flock together, are not necessarily sheep,
Presbyterians, gangsters, or porpoises. The datum is important to us,
here, as indication of disruption in this earth's atmosphere—dangers in
entering this earth's atmosphere.

I think, myself, that thousands of objects have been seen to fall from
aloft, and have exploded luminously, and have been called "ball
lightning."

"As to what ball lightning is, we have not yet begun to make intelligent
guesses." (*Monthly Weather Review*, 34-17.)

In general, it seems to me that when we encounter the opposition "ball
lightning" we should pay little attention, but confine ourselves to
guesses that are at least intelligent, that stand phantom-like in our
way. We note here that in some of our acceptances upon intelligence we
should more clearly have pointed out that they were upon the intelligent
as opposed to the instinctive. In the *Monthly Weather Review*, 33-409,
there is an account of "ball lightning" that struck a tree. It made a
dent such as a falling object would make. Some other time I shall
collect instances of "ball lightning," to express that they are
instances of objects that have fallen from the sky, luminously,
exploding terrifically. So bewildered is the old orthodoxy by these
phenomena that many scientists have either denied "ball lightning" or
have considered it very doubtful. I refer to Dr. Sestier's list of one
hundred and fifty instances, which he considered authentic.

In accord with our disaccord is an instance related in the *Monthly
Weather Review*, March, 1887—something that fell luminously from the
sky, accompanied by something that was not so affected, or that was
dark:

That, according to Capt. C. D. Sweet, of the Dutch bark, *J. P. A.*,
upon March 19, 1887, N. 37° 39´, W. 57° 00´, he encountered a severe
storm. He saw two objects in the air above the ship. One was luminous,
and might be explained in several ways, but the other was dark. One or
both fell into the sea, with a roar and the casting up of billows. It is
our acceptance that these things had

<span id="page_285">p. 285</span>

entered this earth's atmosphere, having first crashed through a field of
ice—"immediately afterward lumps of ice fell."

One of the most astonishing of the phenomena of "ball lightning" is a
phenomenon of many meteorites: violence of explosion out of all
proportion to size and velocity. We accept that the icy meteorites of
Dhurmsalla could have fallen with no great velocity, but the sound from
them was tremendous. The soft substance that fell at the Cape of Good
Hope was carbonaceous, but was unburned, or had fallen with velocity
insufficient to ignite it. The tremendous report that it made was heard
over an area more than seventy miles in diameter.

That some hailstones have been formed in a dense medium, and violently
disintegrate in this earth's relatively thin atmosphere: *Nature*,
88-350:

Large hailstones noted at the University of Missouri, Nov. 11, 1911:
they exploded with sounds like pistol shots. The writer says that he had
noticed a similar phenomenon, eighteen years before, at Lexington,
Kentucky. Hailstones that seemed to have been formed in a denser medium:
when melted under water they gave out bubbles larger than their central
air spaces. (*Monthly Weather Review*, 33-445.)

Our acceptance is that many objects have fallen from the sky, but that
many of them have disintegrated violently. This acceptance will
co-ordinate with data still to come, but, also, we make it easy for
ourselves in our expressions upon super-constructions, if we're asked
why, from thinkable wrecks of them, girders, plates, or parts
recognizably of manufactured metal have not fallen from the sky.
However, as to composition, we have not this refuge, so it is our
expression that there have been reported instances of the fall of
manufactured metal from the sky.

The meteorite of Rutherford, North Carolina, is of artificial material:
mass of pig iron. It is said to be fraudulent. (*Amer. Jour. Sci.*,
2-34-298•)

The object that was said to have fallen at Marblehead, Mass., in 1858,
is described in the *Amer. Jour. Sci.*, 2-34-135, as "a furnace product,
formed in smelting copper ores, or iron ores containing copper." It is
said to be fraudulent.

<span id="page_286">p. 286</span>

According to Ehrenberg, the substance reported by Capt. Callam to have
fallen upon his vessel, near Java, "offered complete resemblance to the
residue resulting from combustion of a steel wire in a flask of oxygen."
(Zurcher, *Meteors*, p. 239.) *Nature*, Nov. 21, 1878, publishes a
notice that, according to the Yuma *Sentinel*, a meteorite that
"resembles steel" had been found in the Mohave Desert. In *Nature*, Feb.
15, 1894, we read that one of the meteorites brought to the United
States by Peary, from Greenland, is of tempered steel. The opinion is
that meteoric iron had fallen in water or snow, quickly cooling and
hardening. This does not apply to composition. Nov. 5, 1898, *Nature*
publishes a notice of a paper by Prof. Berwerth, of Vienna, upon "the
close connection between meteoric iron and steel-works’ steel."

At the meeting of Nov. 24, 1906, of the Essex Field Club, was exhibited
a piece of metal said to have fallen from the sky, Oct. 9, 1906, at
Braintree. According to the *Essex Naturalist*, Dr. Fletcher, of the
British Museum, had declared this metal to be smelted iron—"so that the
mystery of its reported 'fall' remained unexplained."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 24](damn24)
