[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Fortean](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](damn24)  [Next](damn26) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027P8878/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Book of the Damned*, by Charles Fort, \[1919\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 25

"<span class="smallcaps">A formation</span> having the shape of a
dirigible." It was reported from Huntington, West Virginia (*Sci.
Amer.*, 115-241). Luminous object that was seen July 19, 1916, at about
11 P.M. Observed through "rather powerful field glasses," it looked to
be about two degrees long and half a degree wide. It gradually dimmed,
disappeared, reappeared, and then faded out of sight. Another person—as
we say: it would be too inconvenient to hold to our intermediatist
recognitions—another person who observed this phenomenon suggested to
the writer of the account that

<span id="page_291">p. 291</span>

the object was a dirigible, but the writer says that faint stars could
be seen behind it. This would seem really to oppose our notion of a
dirigible visitor to this earth—except for the inconclusiveness of all
things in a mode of seeming that is not final—or we suggest that behind
some parts of the object, thing, construction, faint stars were seen. We
find a slight discussion here. Prof. H. M. Russell thinks that the
phenomenon was a detached cloud of aurora borealis. Upon page 369 of
this volume of the *Scientific American*, another correlator suggests
that it was a light from a blast furnace—disregarding that, if there be
blast furnaces in or near Huntington, their reflections would be
commonplaces there.

We now have several observations upon cylindrical-shaped bodies that
have appeared in this earth's atmosphere: cylindrical, but pointed at
both ends, or torpedo-shaped. Some of the accounts are not very
detailed, but out of the bits of description my own acceptance is that
super-geographical routes are traversed by torpedo-shaped
super-constructions that have occasionally visited, or that have
occasionally been driven into this earth's atmosphere. From data, the
acceptance is that upon entering this earth's atmosphere, these vessels
have been so racked that had they not sailed away, disintegration would
have occurred: that, before leaving this earth, they have, whether in
attempted communication or not, or in mere wantonness or not, dropped
objects, which did almost immediately violently disintegrate or explode.
Upon general principles we think that explosives have not been purposely
dropped, but that parts have been racked off, and have fallen, exploding
like the things called "ball lightning." May have been objects of stone
or metal with inscriptions upon them, for all we know, at present. In
all instances, estimates of dimensions are valueless, but ratios of
dimensions are more acceptable. A thing said to have been six feet long
may have been six hundred feet long; but shape is not so subject to the
illusions of distance.

*Nature*, 40-415:

That, Aug. 5, 1889, during a violent storm, an object that looked I to
be about 15 inches long and 5 inches wide, fell, rather slowly, at East
Twickenham, England. It exploded. No substance from it was found.

<span id="page_292">p. 292</span>

*L’Année Scientifique*, 1864-54:

That, Oct. 10, 1864, M. Leverrier had sent to the Academy three letters
from witnesses of a long luminous body, tapering at both ends, that had
been seen in the sky.

In *Thunder and Lightning*, p. 87, Flammarion says that on Aug. 20,
1880, during a rather violent storm, M. A. Trécul, of the French
Academy, saw a very brilliant yellowish-white body, apparently 35 to 40
centimeters long, and about 25 centimeters wide. Torpedo-shaped. Or a
cylindrical body, "with slightly conical ends." It dropped something,
and disappeared in the clouds. Whatever it may have been that was
dropped, it fell vertically, like a heavy object, and left a luminous
train. The scene of this occurrence may have been far from the observer.
No sound was heard. For M. Trécul's account, see *Comptes Rendus*,
103-849.

*Monthly Weather Review*, 1907-310:

That, July 2, 1907, in the town of Burlington, Vermont, a terrific
explosion had been heard throughout the city. A ball of light, or a
luminous object, had been seen to fall from the sky—or from a
torpedo-shaped thing, or construction, in the sky. No one had seen this
thing that had exploded fall from a larger body that was in the sky—but
if we accept that at the same time there was a larger body in the sky—

My own acceptance is that a dirigible in the sky, or a construction that
showed every sign of disrupting, had barely time to drop—whatever it did
drop—and to speed away to safety above.

The following story is told, in the Review, by Bishop John S. Michaud:

"I was standing on the corner of Church and College Streets, just in
front of the Howard Bank, and facing east, engaged in conversation with
Ex-Governor Woodbury and Mr. A. A. Buell, when, without the slightest
indication, or warning, we were startled by what sounded like a most
unusual and terrific explosion, evidently very nearby. Raising my eyes,
and looking eastward along College Street, I observed a torpedo-shaped
body, some 300 feet away, stationary in appearance, and suspended in the
air, about 50 feet above the tops of the buildings. In size it was about
6 feet long by 8 inches in diameter, the shell, or covering, having a
dark appearance, with

<span id="page_293">p. 293</span>

here and there tongues of fire issuing from spots on the surface,
resembling red-hot, unburnished copper. Although stationary when first
noticed, this object soon began to move, rather slowly, and disappeared
over Dolan Brothers' store, southward. As it moved, the covering seemed
rupturing in places, and through these the intensely red flames issued."

Bishop Michaud attempts to correlate it with meteorological
observations.

Because of the nearby view this is perhaps the most remarkable of the
new correlates, but the correlate now coming is extraordinary because of
the great number of recorded observations upon it. My own acceptance is
that, upon Nov. 17, 1882, a vast dirigible crossed England, but by the
definiteness-indefinitness of all things quasi-real, some observations
upon it can be correlated with anything one pleases.

E. W. Maunder, invited by the Editors of the *Observatory* to write some
reminiscences for the 500th number of their magazine, gives one that he
says stands out (*Observatory*, 39-214). It is upon something that he
terms "a strange celestial visitor." Maunder was at the Royal
Observatory, Greenwich, Nov. 17, 1882, at night. There was an aurora,
without features of special interest. In the midst of the aurora, a
great circular disk of greenish light appeared and moved smoothly across
the sky. But the circularity was evidently the effect of foreshortening.
The thing passed above the moon, and was, by other observers, described
as "cigar-shaped," "like a torpedo," "a spindle," "a shuttle." The idea
of foreshortening is not mine: Maunder says this. He says: "Had the
incident occurred a third of a century later, beyond doubt everyone
would have selected the same simile—it would have been 'just like a
Zeppelin.'" The duration was about two minutes. Color said to have been
the same as that of the auroral glow in the north. Nevertheless, Maunder
says that this thing had no relation to auroral phenomena. "It appeared
to be a definite body." Motion too fast for a cloud, but "nothing could
be more unlike the rush of a meteor." In the *Philosophical Magazine*,
5-15-318, J. Rand Capron, in a lengthy paper, alludes throughout to this
phenomenon as an "auroral beam," but he lists

<span id="page_294">p. 294</span>

many observations upon its "torpedo-shape," and one observation upon a
"dark nucleus" in it—host of most confusing observations—estimates of
height between 40 and 200 miles—observations in Holland and Belgium. We
are told that according to Capron's spectroscopic observations the
phenomenon was nothing but a beam of auroral light. In the
*Observatory*, 6-192, is Maunder's contemporaneous account. He gives
apparent approximate length and breadth at twenty-seven degrees and
three degrees and a half. He gives other observations seeming to
indicate structure—"remarkable dark marking down the center."

In *Nature*, 27-84, Capron says that because of the moonlight he had
been able to do little with the spectroscope.

Color white, but aurora rosy (*Nature*, 27-87).

Bright stars seen through it, but not at the zenith, where it looked
opaque. This is the only assertion of transparency (*Nature*, 27-87).
Too slow for a meteor, but too fast for a cloud (*Nature*, 27-86).
"Surface had a mottled appearance" (*Nature*, 27-87). "Very definite in
form, like a torpedo" (*Nature*, 27-100). "Probably a meteoric object"
(Dr. Groneman, *Nature*, 27-296). Technical demonstration by Dr.
Groneman, that it was a cloud of meteoric matter (*Nature*, 28-105). See
*Nature*, 27-315, 338, 365, 388, 412, 434.

"Very little doubt it was an electric phenomenon" (Proctor, *Knowledge*,
2-419).

In the London *Times*, Nov. 20, 1882, the Editor says that he had
received a great number of letters upon this phenomenon. He publishes
two. One correspondent describes it as "well-defined and shaped like a
fish … extraordinary and alarming." The other correspondent writes of it
as "a most magnificent luminous mass, shaped somewhat like a torpedo."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 26](damn26)
