[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](tmt036)  [Next](tmt038.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

One day Raven saw a whale far out at sea and sat down on the beach to
study how he should bring it ashore. Then he got some pitchwood and
rocks of the kind that was formerly used in making fire, flew out to the
place where he thought the whale would come up, and went into its open
mouth. He made a fire inside of the whale and cooked everything there.
Only he would not touch the heart. When the whale took in many fish he
ate them. Finally he did cut the whale's heart out and killed it, after
which it began drifting about from place to place. Then he sang: "Let
the one who wants to be high-born like me cut the whale open and let me
out, and he will be as high as I am." He also sang: "Let the whale go
ashore. Let the whale go ashore on a long sandy beach." Finally he heard
waves breaking on a sandy beach, and he said again: "Let the one who
wants to be high-born like me cut the whale open and let me out, and he
will be as high as I am." Suddenly he heard the voices of children.
These children heard his voice, went home and informed their parents.
Then the people all came there and cut the whale open, and Raven flew
off into the woods crying "Q!one', q!one', q!one'."

Raven stayed up in the woods a long time in order to get the grease and
smell off of his feathers, and, when he came down again, he saw boxes
and boxes of whale grease. Then he made believe he was surprised and
asked the people where they got all of it. They said: "We found a whale
that had come right in here where we could get it easily. So we are
making oil out of it." Said he: "Did you hear anything inside when it
first came ashore." "Yes? there was some strange sound in there, and
something flew out calling itself q!one'." Then Raven answered, "Years
ago just such a thing as this happened, and all of the people of that
town that heard the noise died. It brings bad luck to hear such a noise
in a whale. You people must leave this right away. Don't eat any of it.
Leave it here."

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Then all of the people believed him and left
their oil there. It became his. <span id="fr_55"></span>[a](#fn_55.md)

Next Raven went to a place where many sea lions, seals, and porpoises
were lying about. Among these there were a number of children, who cut
pieces of fat from the animals and threw them back and forth. So he made
himself look like a child and, when they threw him a piece of fat, he
ate it. Finally the children missed their fat and said, "What is
becoming of all the fat we were playing with? It is all
disappearing." <span id="fr_56"></span>[b](#fn_56.md)

Then Raven came to a large town where everyone appeared to have died. He
entered the largest house, and saw no one inside, yet he could feel a
person continually pushing against him. It was a ghost house, and the
town was called the Town of Ghosts (Qa<u>y</u>ahâ<u>yî</u>'
ân<u>î</u>'). Afterward Raven loaded a canoe with provisions from the
ghosts' houses and started to paddle away, but he did not notice that a
very long line was fastened to the stern of the canoe and secured at the
other end round a tree. When he reached the end of this rope the canoe
was pulled right back to the beach, and the goods were all carried up to
the house by invisible hands. One of the ghosts also dropped a very
large rock upon his foot, making him lame. <span
id="fr_57"></span>[c](#fn_57.md)

Next Raven went among the Athapascan Indians of the interior beyond the
place he had reached before. There he saw a giant cannibal called
Cannibal-man. Knowing that this cannibal was very smart he tried to get
the better of him, so he won his confidence and learned that he was
married to the black pine (~~l~~A~~l~~). <span
id="fr_58"></span>[d](#fn_58.md) In the morning the cannibal bathed. After
that the two became very good friends, and the cannibal said to Raven,
"I am going hunting, and I am going to get four animals, two mountain
goats and two ground hogs." So the cannibal took a hide rope such as the
interior Indians used to make and started. On the way Raven said to the
cannibal, "Where is that man called TsA'maya?" He

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

was another very powerful man. And the cannibal showed him where
TsA'maya lived.

Then Raven stayed with TsA'maya, and they became good friends also. The
latter lived all by himself at that time, all of his friends having been
killed by Wolverine-man (NûsgA-qâ'). So he said to Raven, "I do not know
what to do with him. I would like to kill him." And Raven said to him,
"Do you see this spear? Go and get a bear skin and put it around
yourself. Put the spear in such a position as to make him believe he has
killed a bear." TsA'maya-did so, and by and by Wolverine-man came along.
He was very glad when he saw the bear and said, "I have another." Then
he picked the bear up, took out the spear and carried it home. After
that he went to gather wood. While he was gone Raven made himself appear
like a common blackbird and in that form said to TsA'maya,
"Wolverine-man's heart is in his foot." Then he took the little spear he
had concealed in his long hair and gave it to TsA'maya, who speared
Wolverine-man in the foot as soon as he came in. He was hurt badly but
ran away from them. When they caught up with him and told him they were
going to kill him, he said, "All right." But every time they killed him
he came to life again until finally they burned him. Then, when they
were about to pulverize his bones, the bones spoke up and said to them,
"Pulverize my bones and blow them away. They will always be a bother to
you and everybody else. I shall always remain in the world." That is
where the mosquitoes and gnats come from. <span
id="fr_59"></span>[a](#fn_59.md)

Afterward Raven came to where a house was floating far out at sea,
called K!u'datAn kah<u>î</u>'t<u>î</u>. Nâs-cA'kî-yê~~l~~ had been
keeping it there, and in it were all kinds of fishes, but Raven did not
know how to get at them. At the same place he also met a monster, called
Q!â'nAx<u>g</u>âda<u>y</u>i<u>yê</u> (which seems to mean "a thing that
is in the way"), who had a spear like the arm of a devilfish called,
"devilfish-arm spear." Raven wanted this, and obtained it by marrying
the monster's daughter. Then he got into a canoe, paddled out near the
house, and speared it. Inside he heard all kinds of songs sung by
different voices. These were the songs people were to sing in the
fishing season. When Raven threw his spear, it became very long and
wrapped itself around the house so firmly that he was enabled to take
his canoe ashore. He had great difficulty, however, for as he did so he
had to sing continually, "I think so, I think so," a song known to all
of the Raven people. Whenever he stopped singing, the house went back to
the place where it had been at first. This happened three times and the
fourth time he got it in.

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

\[paragraph continues\] After that the door of the house opened, and all
kinds of fish came out of it. He sang, "Some go to Stikine river. Some
go to Chilkat river," which they immediately did. Then he sang again,
"Some go to the small creeks to provide the poor people." That is how
fish came to be all over the world. <span
id="fr_60"></span>[a](tmt038.htm#fn_60.md)

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_55"></span>[92:a](tmt037.htm#fr_55.md) The writer's informant
added, "In our days when a person is making a living dishonestly by
lying and stealing he is not told so directly, but this story is brought
up to him and everyone knows what it means."

<span id="fn_56"></span>[92:b](tmt037.htm#fr_56.md) "When older people were
giving their children advice they would bring up this part of the story
and tell them not to be greedy and selfish, but honest. They would say
they did not want them to be like Raven, who ate up all his playmates'
fat. When people went about trading they would also bring up this story
to a person who wanted to make all the profit himself. They would tell
him he was like Raven, who wanted to enjoy everything himself." (From
the writer's informant.)

<span id="fn_57"></span>[92:c](tmt037.htm#fr_57.md) "This episode is
brought up to a child people desire to make honest. They say that just
as these goods were taken back from Raven, and he was made to feel shame
at having been discovered, a thief will always be found out. If the
child becomes a thief when be. grows up, they tell him that he will be
classed among the very lowest no matter how well born he was. They also
tell the little ones that there is a Creator watching them an the time,
just as these ghosts watched. The Raven could not see them, but they saw
him. They say that a person who does evil things is like a crippled or
deformed person, for he has disgraced his family. They tell them that a
person who gets that low is nobody and that the Creator despises him."
(From the writer's informant.)

<span id="fn_58"></span>[92:d](tmt037.htm#fr_58.md) What immediately
follows was probably considered by my informant too indecent to relate.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[93:a](tmt037.htm#fr_59.md) "This episode is
referred to when a person takes after a bad father. They say to him,
'Why do you take after your father? Everybody knows that you are his
child. Can't you take another road and do better than he did?'" (From
the writer's informant.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 31. Raven, Part IV](tmt038.md)
