[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](tmt003)  [Next](tmt005.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# TLINGIT MYTHS AND TEXTS

## Recorded by JOHN R. SWANTON

### INTRODUCTION

The following myths and texts were collected at Sitka and Wrangell,
Alaska, in January, February, March, and April, 1904, at the same time
as the material contained in the writer's paper on the Social Condition,
Beliefs, and Linguistic Relationship of the Tlingit Indians published in
the Twenty-sixth Annual Report of the Bureau. For further information
regarding these people the reader is referred to that paper, to Krause's
Tlinkit Indianer (Jena, 1885), Emmons' Basketry of the Tlingit Indians,
Niblack's Coast Indians of Southern Alaska and Northern British
Columbia, Dall's Alaska and its Resources, Boas's Indianische Sagen von
der Nord Pacifischen Küste Amerikas (Berlin, 1895), and the same writer
in the Fifth Report of the Committee Appointed by the British
Association for the Advancement of Science, to Investigate the
Northwestern Tribes of Canada, and the two special reports on Alaska for
the censuses of 1880 and 1890. Most of the ethnologic information
contained in the works of Veniaminoff and other early writers is
incorporated into the work of Krause.

Stories 7, 19, 94, 101, 102, and 103 were related by the writer's Sitka
interpreter, Don Cameron, of the Chilkat Kâ'gwAntân; stories 96 and 97
by Katlian, chief of the KîksA'd<u>î</u>; story 105 by a Yakutat man,
Q!â'dAstin; and all the other Sitka stories, including the texts
numbered 89-93, 95, 98, 99, and 104--by an old man of the Box-house
people, named Dekinâ'k!<sup>u</sup>. From Katishan, chief of the
Kasq!ague'dî of Wrangell, were obtained stories 31, 32, 33, 38, 65, 67,
68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 100, 106, and the potlatch speeches. Stories
34, 35, 42, 502 52, 53, 54, 57, 64, and 75 were related by an old Kake
man named KASâ'nk!, and the remaining Wrangell tales by, Katishan's
mother. The last-mentioned has lived for a considerable time among the
whites at Victoria, but with one exception her stories appear to have
been influenced little by the fact. Her son has been a church member and
shows a moralizing tendency; at the same time he was considered the best
speaker at feasts in past times, and is supposed to have a better
knowledge of the myths than anyone else in Wrangell.
Dekinâ'k!<sup>u</sup> of Sitka is also a church member but his stories
appear to be entirely after the ancient patterns.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1. Raven](tmt005.md)
