[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](tmt075)  [Next](tmt077.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 52. THE JEALOUS UNCLE <span id="fr_115"></span>[a](#fn_115.md)

A high-caste man had a beautiful wife of whom he was very jealous. He
had also four sisters well married in different villages, all with sons.
One morning the eldest of these sisters said to her husband, "I want to
go to see my brother. I believe he would like to see our son." Her
husband was willing, because he wanted to see the man himself. When they
arrived there, the woman's brother pretended that he thought a great
deal of his nephew, but really he did not want to see him for fear his
wife would take a liking to him because he was handsome. He told the
young man, however, that he was going to take him everywhere with him.
His mother felt very happy to think

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

that her brother thought so much of him and left him there with his
uncle.

Immediately after his mother had gone, however, the uncle determined to
make away with him, because his wife seemed to like him. So next morning
he said, "We are going down right away to get some devilfish to eat. The
tide will soon be low enough." Then the boy prepared. himself, for be
was very anxious to go, and they set out. His uncle said, "Walk right
along there," pointing to a high ridge parallel with the beach. "Walk
ahead, and I will follow you."

The boy did as he was directed and soon saw something large on the
beach, that kept opening and closing. It was a very large clam. His
uncle told him to get right on top of the ridge to watch it, for it was
the first time he had seen anything of the kind. As the boy was very
anxious to examine it, he got up there and leaned far over. When he did
so, however, the clam opened and remained open, and his uncle pushed him
right down into it. Then the clam closed upon him and killed him. The
boy's parents soon found out what had happened to their son, and,
although his uncle declared that it was an accident, they knew that he
was jealous and did not believe him.

Some time after this the uncle turned his thoughts to his second
sister's son who was still handsomer. His wife had seen this youth, and
had told her husband how fine he was. This made him very jealous, and he
sent to this sister, saying that it was about time she sent one of her
sons to help him, for he had no children and needed help. He knew that
the oldest child would be sent, because the next was a girl. So the boy
came, and he threw him down into the big clam like the other. The uncle
was very jealous of his wife because he knew that everyone fell in love
with her on account of her beauty.

After this the uncle sent for the third sister's child who was older
than the last he had killed, but he would not go for a long time, and
his parents did not ask him to. He was a flighty youth, however, and,
after his uncle had sent for him several times, he thought of his
uncle's handsome wife and made up his mind to visit them.

All of the time this boy was with him the uncle watched him and his wife
very closely and would not leave the house for a minute. His wife was
very anxious to give him warning, but her husband feared it and watched
her too closely. She made signs to the boy, but he did not understand
them. When his uncle took him down to the beach, he said, "I must go
back to the house after a drink of water." He thought that his uncle
would wait for him, but instead he followed him right back to the house.
Then the boy said to his uncle's wife, "Where is the water?" She pointed
it out, but as her husband stood close by, she could not say anything
more. So they went down to the beach, but, when the youth saw this clam
moving in the distance, he ran by it very quickly, and his uncle was
disappointed. Then they

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

went on farther, and the uncle said to him, "Do you see that hole down
there?" He could see plainly a very large hole. Then his uncle said,
"The devilfish that we want to get for our supper is in that." He handed
him the stick for getting devilfish and said, "Hook it. You can get it
very easily." The boy put the end of his stick into the hole, felt that
the fish was there, and hooked it. Immediately he tried to run off, but
his uncle was right behind him, and pushed him forward so that the
devilfish seized him and dragged him under the rock.

All the time this man was killing his nephews, the youngest, who looked
very much like the first one killed, had been practising. His father
showed him how to make himself look like a very small ball of feathers.
He had the shaman of that village make a bracelet of eagle down for him
inclosing a piece of devil's club carved by the shaman. Then the shaman
said, "Just as soon as you find that you are in danger turn this
bracelet around on your wrist four times as quickly as you can." Then
the shaman told him to climb a very high tree, and climbed right after
him, while his father stood watching. The shaman said, "Now turn that
around on your wrist four times as quickly as you can." He did so, and
just as he finished the shaman pushed him down. Then his father saw
nothing but a ball of eagle down rolling down the tree. As soon as it
reached the ground there stood the boy, and the shaman knew that
everything was all right. He also gave the boy a knife having a handle
carved like devil's clubs, which he kept in the bosom of his shift, tied
around his neck.

After this the boy's friends took him to his uncle and remained with him
for three days. On the fourth day they returned. Then the uncle's wife
cried continually to think that a boy not fully grown should be left
there to be killed, and his uncle said to her angrily, "What is it you
are always crying about? You are in love again aren't you?" Then the boy
said aloud so that his uncle could hear, "You are in love with the right
one this time." At that his uncle became angry and told him he talked
too much. Right away he said, "Come on with me. We will get a devilfish
for our supper." So the boy prepared himself, and they started off,
while his uncle's wife came out and watched them, thinking that he was
the last.

As they went along the boy saw the clam, and, before his uncle told him
it was there, he stood still just above it. For a moment he forgot about
his bracelet, but, just as he saw his uncle raise his hands, he
remembered and turned his bracelet about once. When he reached the clam
he turned it for the fourth time and fell into the clam as a ball of
feathers, while his uncle went home, thinking he had disposed of him.
The ball of feathers inside, however, turned back into a boy, and he cut
both sides of the clam and came out.

Then he saw the devilfish-stick his uncle had given him lying there and
thought he would go on and see the devilfish they were to have

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

had for their supper. When he reached the place and saw the devilfish
sitting outside of its hole he became frightened, yet he thought that he
would try to kill it. Now he went up to the creature and turned his
bracelet around twelve times, wishing that it become small. It did grow
small, and he killed it easily and dragged it home on his stick.
Reaching the house, he pushed the door open and threw it right in front
of his uncle, where it reassumed enormous proportions. Then his uncle
was astonished to see him and began screaming loudly, begging the boy to
take the devilfish out at once. So he took it out and threw it down upon
the beach. Afterward he looked back at it, and it had become the same
big devilfish again.

Now the boy remained with his uncle for a very long time, and his
uncle's wife thought a great deal of him, while his uncle seemed to do
so too. One day, however, he saw his wife talking to the boy and again
determined to kill him. Then he put something sharp pointed on the
ground, took the nephew up to the top of a very high tree and crawled up
after him. The boy, who knew what was going to happen, began singing and
turning his bracelet round slowly at the same time. Just as he had
turned it for the fourth time his uncle reached him and pushed him over.
When he landed upon the ground, however, there was nothing to be seen
but a ball of eagle down.

His uncle saw this, and, feeling that he could not kill his nephew,
treated him well for a very long time, but watched him closely. His wife
said to the boy, "Your uncle is thinking a great deal because he can't
kill you." But all that the boy would answer every time she said this
was, "Only a ball of eagle down." She did not know what he meant.

One day the uncle thought that he would deceive his wife and nephew, so
he told the latter that he was going back into the woods and started
off. Instead of going away, however, he went back of the house, looked
through a hole at them and listened. Then the boy came to his wife and
sat down close to her, and she said, "Let us run away. I am afraid of
your uncle." He answered that he would if he could get a canoe, and she
told him of a place where there was a canoe, some distance from the
town. Then the uncle came right in and wanted to kill his wife on the
spot but was so fond of her that he could not. The boy sat perfectly
still, moving his bracelet.

That night the uncle treated his nephew very kindly and began telling
him all kinds of stories, until at last the boy fell asleep. This was
just what he wanted. Then he tied the boy to a board, thinking, "I am
going to get rid of him this time. The feathers will get wet, and he
will be drowned." So he took him quite a distance out to sea and set him
adrift there. It was very stormy.

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

The boy, however, floated along for some time and finally came ashore in
safety on a nice sandy beach. The tide was very low. Then he heard the
laughter of some girls who were out digging clams. There were three of
them, and they were sisters. Now the eldest of the girls saw something
moving on the beach and went thither, thinking it was some dying animal.
Instead she saw a handsome youth, who looked right up at her but said
nothing. Said she, "What has happened to you?" But he would not speak.
She called to her sisters, and they ran up. Then the second sister
immediately fell in love with him, but the youngest had nothing to say.
The eldest had formerly been in love with the Youth that was first
destroyed, so she said to her second sister, "How much like my dead
lover he looks." She saw him smile because he knew her, but he did not
know the others, and immediately the eldest began to cry, saying that
that was her lover's smile only that he was a larger man. Then, the
second sister laughed, saying that she was going to untie him and have
him for her husband. The youngest, however, said, "Well! you two can
have him, for I am not going to have a man that cannot talk." "If he
comes out all right after we have untied him," said the eldest, "we will
both be his wives." So, the two older girls untied him and started to
raise his head while the youngest ran off to dig clams. They asked him
if he could talk, and he said, "Yes." As he walked between the girls,
one of them said, "You shall go to my father's house with me." At the
time they untied him the eagles were gathering around to devour him.

Then they took him into their father's house and their father said, "Who
is that fellow?" "We found him," said the second, "and we are going to
marry him." This one was very quick to speak, while the eldest was slow
and quiet. Their father consented, and he married both of the girls.
Then the eldest spoke to her father of how much he resembled her dead
lover, although the boy had not told anything about himself.

Those girls used to go off to hunt and spear salmon just like boys, so
the younger said next morning, "I am going out to spear salmon." She
brought a salmon home. The day following both girls asked him to go with
them, and he did so. They tried to teach him how to hunt, for he
belonged to such a very high family that he had never learned.

On the way the younger wife acted sulkily toward her elder sister
because she would never leave their husband's side. So she started off
alone, and her husband was afraid she would go away for good, for he
liked her very much on account of her liveliness. In the evening,
however, she came back with a salmon and said to her sister, "You can
live on love. You stick by your husband and do not go to get anything to
eat." Then their husband carried the

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

salmon back, and his elder wife came home slowly. The younger sister
cooked the salmon and put it between herself and her husband. He pulled
it along toward his elder wife, but the other said, "She shall not have
any. She is going to live on love." Then her husband said that if she
would let her sister have some salmon he would go out and try to get
another himself. It was early in the spring and the salmon were scarce.
The younger wife now felt jealous of her sister because she thought that
their husband thought more of her than of herself, though really the
reverse was the case. He pitied the elder, however, because she had done
so much for him.

When the young man saw that his younger wife was angry toward the elder,
however, he determined to leave them for a time. The younger did not
want to let him go, and begged him hard to remain, but the elder said
nothing, for he had told her his reasons. Finally he told his younger
wife that she must let him go but that he would come back. He said that
she must treat her elder sister well because his cousin (lit. "elder
brother") had been in love with her. When she asked him what cousin he
meant, he explained that his elder brother had died quite a while ago
and that this girl had been in love with him. After that she let him set
out.

At this time he thought that he would kill his uncle, so he paddled
thither. His uncle saw him, knew what he had come for, and was
frightened. Then the young man went to his uncle's house, spent the
evening and started away again. About midnight, however, he returned and
told his uncle that he had come to kill him because he had murdered his
brothers and made him himself suffer. Although his uncle begged hard to
be spared, he killed him, and, after telling his uncle's wife that he
had killed her husband and why he had done so, he returned to his wives.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_115"></span>[198:a](tmt076.htm#fr_115.md) This is expressed in
a rather unusual manner, and may have been modified perhaps by white
influences, but the main plot is entirely native.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 53. The Man who Married the Eagle](tmt077.md)
