[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](tmt018)  [Next](tmt020.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 15. BEAVER AND PORCUPINE <span id="fr_27"></span>[a](#fn_27.md)

A porcupine and a beaver were once very close friends. <span
id="fr_28"></span>[b](#fn_28.md) They traveled about everywhere and
reported to each other all that happened. The bear is very much afraid
of the porcupine, but he hates the beaver. Wherever the beaver has a dam
the bear breaks it up so as to let the water down, catches the beaver
and eats him. But he is afraid of the porcupine's sharp quills, so the
porcupine sometimes stayed in the beaver's house, which is always dry
inside.

When the lake began falling, they knew it was caused by the bear, and
the porcupine would go out to reconnoiter. Then he would come back and
say to his friend, "Do not go out. I will go out first." Then the bear
would be afraid of the porcupine's sharp quills and go away, after which
all the beavers began repairing their dam while the porcupine acted as
guard.

By and by the porcupine said to the beaver, "I am hungry. I want to go
to my own place." Porcupine got his food from the bark and sap of trees,
so he told the beaver to go up a tree with him, but the beaver could not
climb. Then the porcupine told him to stay below while he went up to
eat. Soon they saw the bear coming, and the beaver said, "Partner
(xô'ne), what shall I do? The bear is getting near." Then the porcupine
slid down quickly and said, "Lay your head close to my back." In that
way he got the beaver to the top of the tree. But, after a while, the
porcupine left him, and the beaver did not know how to climb down. He
began to beg the porcupine in every way to let him down, but in vain.
After quite a while, however, the squirrel, another friend of the
beaver,

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

came to him and helped him down, while the porcupine was off in a hole
in the rocks with a number of other porcupines.

By and by the porcupine went back and saw his friend swimming in the
lake. The beaver asked him down to the lake and then said, "Partner, let
us go out to the middle of the lake. Just put your head on the back of
my head and you will not get wet at all." Because these two friends fell
out, people now become friends, and, after they have loved each other
for a while, fall out. Then the porcupine did as he was directed, the
beaver told him to hold on tight, and they started. The beaver would
flap his tail on the water and dive down for some distance, come to the
surface, flap his tail, and go down again; and he repeated the
performance until he came to an island in the center of the lake. Then
he put the porcupine ashore and went flapping away from him in the same
manner.

Now the little porcupine wandered around the whole island, not knowing
how to get off. He climbed a tree, came down again, and climbed another,
and so on. But the wolverine lived on the mainland near by, so after a
while he began to sing for the wolverine (nûsk)"Nû-u-sguê-e',
Nû-u-sguê-e', Nû-u-sguê-e''." He called all the animals on the mainland,
but he called the wolverine especially, because he wanted the north wind
to blow so that it would freeze. <span id="fr_29"></span>[a](#fn_29.md)

Then the wolverine called out, "What is the matter with you?" So he at
last sang a song about himself, saying that he wanted to go home badly.
After he had sung this the whole sea froze over, and the porcupine ran
across it to his home. This is why they were going to be friends no
longer.

Then the porcupine made friends with the ground hog and they stayed up
between the mountains where they could see people whenever they started
up hunting. One day a man started out, and when they saw him, the
porcupine began singing, "Up to the land of ground hog. Up to the land
of ground hog." The man heard him. That is why people know that the
porcupine sings about the ground hog.

After this the man began trapping ground hogs for food and caught a
small ground hog. He took it home and skinned it. Then he took off the
head and heated some stones in order to cook it. When he was just about
to put it into the steaming box the head sang plainly, "Poor little
head, my poor little head, how am I going to fill him?" The man was
frightened, and, instead of eating, he went to his traps in the morning,
took them up (lit. "threw them off") and came home.

Next morning he reported everything to his friends, saying, "I killed a
ground hog, skinned it and started to cook the head. Then it said to me,
'Poor little head.'" After that he went out to see his

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

bear traps. While he was endeavoring to tighten the release of one of
these, the dead fall came down and struck him in the neck, making his
head fly off. When he had been absent for two days they searched for him
and found him in his own trap. This was what the ground hog had
predicted when it said, "My poor little head.'" They took his body down
to the beach, beat the drums for him, and had a feast on the ground hogs
and other animals he had trapped.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_27"></span>[43:a](tmt019.htm#fr_27.md) See story 63.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[43:b](tmt019.htm#fr_28.md) WutcyAqâ'wu, signifying
friendship between people regardless of relationship.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[44:a](tmt019.htm#fr_29.md) See *Twenty-sixth
Annual Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology*, p. 453.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 16. The Poor Man Who Caught Wonderful Things](tmt020.md)
