[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](tmt020)  [Next](tmt022.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 17. THE FINDING OF THE BLUE PAINT, AND HOW A CERTAIN CREEK RECEIVED ITS NAME

At Sitka lived four brothers who were very fond of hunting. In those
days people liked to hunt about the straits north of Sitka for fur
seals, sea otters, etc. One day, while they were out, they were forced
to take refuge from a storm at a place near Mount Edgecumbe, called
Town-on-the-inside-of-blue-paint-point (Ne<u>xî</u>'ntaiataq!-ân), and
while hunting about this place during their long stay they discovered a
rocky cave or overhanging cliff from which soft blue stuff continually
dropped. The youngest said, "I have discovered a valuable thing which
will be used for painting and for everything carved."

After they had been there for a long time the weather became fine and
the sea smooth. Now in olden times people knew that everything was
dangerous. When the brothers were about to start, they said, "We will
take some off now to carry home." So they knocked off a big piece,
rolled it up among their clothes and hid it away. But the canoe had
scarcely started before the sea began to get rough. When they were some
way out they headed for an island outside of Edgecumbe which they had to
pass. Then the eldest, who was steering, began to compose a song about
the course he was taking: "Which way shall I steer the canoe, straight
out into the ocean or straight on to the shore?" The youngest said,
"There is no way of getting home. Would it not be better to throw this
blue paint into the water? Then we can get ashore." So the eldest
brother put in the next verse as follows: "Which way shall we steer,
straight in or not? Shall we not throw this blue paint into the water?
If not how shall we be saved?" Then he exclaimed, "Bring the blue stuff
here and tie it to my head, and I will be drowned with it so that things
shall eat me up with it."

They were not drowned, however, and reached shore in safety, so people
still speak of their bravery in not throwing the blue paint overboard.
To this day they say that, if you take anything from there, the weather
will be stormy, and people are still afraid to do it, but take the risk
because the thing obtained is valuable.

For a long time after the brothers reached shore with this blue paint
the weather was bad and great rollers came sweeping in out of the ocean.
No one could go to sea after halibut.

At that time some people were camping a short distance north of Sitka,
and one day two women went from there with their children to dig clams.
The came into a small inlet and made their camp.

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Then the women began bringing up shellfish,
which they afterwards boiled to get the insides out, ran small sticks
through them, and hung them up to dry for their children. One day they
went down on the beach as usual, leaving their babies in camp; and the
smallest began crying. Then a child somewhat larger shouted, "The baby
is crying. The baby is crying." Its mother said, "Bury one of those
cockles in the fire and cook it for her," but the little boy understood
his mother to say, "Dig a hole for your little sister in the fire and
put her into it." So the little boy began to pull the fire apart and to
make a hole in the middle of it. He tried to knock his little sister
into this hole but she kept getting up again, so he shouted, "She keeps
trying to get away from me." After a while he became too strong for his
little sister, put her in, and covered her over.

When his mother came up, she said, "Little son, where is your little
sister?" "I have buried her in the fire. She is there." So after that
they named the stream Creek-where-a-person-was-burned
(KA'xs<u>î</u>gAn<u>î</u>hîn).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 18. Various Adventures Near Cross Sound](tmt022.md)
