[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](tmt014)  [Next](tmt016.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 11. STORIES OF THE MONSTER DEVILFISH <span id="fr_22"></span>[a](#fn_22) AND THE CRY-BABY <span id="fr_23"></span>[b](#fn_23.md)

Many people once went to a certain camp to dry salmon. They did not know
that a big devilfish lived under a steep cliff not very far from this
place. In olden times, besides using hooks, they caught salmon by means
of traps (cA~~l~~), and when the trap was full, they would take out the
fish and hang them on drying frames. When these people had many fish on
the frames, they took off their covers, so that the red color shone out
on the ocean very distinctly.

A man and his two brothers living at this camp were fond of hunting, and
one day, when very many salmon were on the frames, they started out.
While they were gone the devilfish saw the glow on the water from the
red salmon, threw his tentacles around the camp and swept every vestige
of it into the sea. In those times a hunter washed in urine before going
out hunting and was then sure to kill something, but on that day
everything the hunters speared got away. When they returned to the camp,
they saw many pieces of canoes drifting about the bay. Then they were
very sad on account of the loss of their friends, but they did not know
what had destroyed them.

After they had remained there for four days, they told the youngest to
climb to the top of a high hill and watch them. Then the eldest told his
other brother to cut four young spruce trees, and he sharpened these,
making two for himself and two for his brother. Early in the morning
they loaded their canoe with rocks and prepared to meet the dangerous
animal. They went out in front of the high cliff and began throwing
rocks down there, the elder saying to his youngest brother, "Look down."

After a while they saw the large devilfish coming up right under them.
Then they took the sharpened sticks and began to pierce its flesh. The
youngest watched all that happened. When their canoe was broken up, they
climbed on top of the devilfish and continued running the sticks into it
until it died. When that happened it carried them down along with it.

Then the youngest brother started off to find some settlement, and when
he came to one, the people set out at once to look for his brothers..
Finally they discovered the place to which the devilfish had floated,
along with the hunters and their canoe. But it did not get the salmon it
had destroyed so many people for. Then the people gave a death feast and
all cut their hair off short.

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

In the town to which these people belonged once lived a little boy who
was always crying. His parents tried to rear him properly, yet he cried,
cried, cried all the time. Finally his father shouted out, "Come this
way Dj<u>î</u>nAkA<u>x</u>wA'ts!a. <span id="fr_24"></span>[a](#fn_24.md)
Pull this boy away, for he cries too much." Toward evening he repeated
the same words, and this time a land-otter-man behind the house shouted
out stutteringly, "Bring my grandchild here and let him eat
gA~~l~~kAda<u>x</u>A'k!<sup>u</sup> to keep him quiet." So the little
boy was taken away and given what appeared to him to be blackberries.

Two days afterward they began searching for him, and they finally found
him far up in the woods. When they brought him down he had a big belly
and did not cry as loudly as he had before, so they thought that
something was wrong. Then they boiled some dried salmon and gave him
broth made from it. The heat of this broth expelled all of the small
creatures that had been given him to eat under the appearance of
blackberries. Spiders began running out of his mouth, cars, nose, eyes,
and buttocks. His insides were filled with them, and they had eaten out
all of his flesh. When these were expelled, nothing was left but the
skin which they threw away.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_22"></span>[40:a](tmt015.htm#fr_22.md) See pp.
[150](tmt051.htm#page_150.md)-151, story 31.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[40:b](tmt015.htm#fr_23.md) See [p.
145](tmt049.htm#page_145.md), story 31.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[41:a](tmt015.htm#fr_24.md) The name of some man
that had been captured by land otters.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 12. The Woman Who Was Killed by a Clam](tmt016.md)
