[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tmt034)  [Next](tmt036) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

# MYTHS RECORDED IN ENGLISH AT WRANGELL

### 31. RAVEN <span id="fr_49"></span>[a](#fn_49)

In olden times only high-caste people knew the story of Raven properly
because only they had time to learn it.

At the beginning of things there was no daylight and the world lay in
blackness. Then there lived in a house at the head of Nass river a being
called Raven-at-the-head-of-Nass (Nâs-cA'k<u>î</u>-yê~~l~~), the
principal deity to whom the Tlingit formerly prayed <span
id="fr_50"></span>[b](#fn_50) but whom no one had seen; and in his house
were all kinds of things including sun, moon, stars, and daylight. He
was addressed in prayers as Axcagû'n, or Axkînaye'g<u>î</u>, My Creator,
and Way<u>î</u>g<u>ê</u>na'~~l~~xe, Invisible-rich-man. With him were
two old men called Old-man-who-foresees-all-troubles-in-the-world
(Adawû'~~l~~!-ca'nak<sup>u</sup>!) and
He-who-knows-everything-that-happens (~~L~~iu'wAt-uwadjî'g<u>î</u>-can).
Next to Nâs-cA'k<u>î</u>-yê~~l~~, they prayed to the latter of these.
Under the earth was a third old person, Old-woman-underneath
(Hayi-câ'nak!<sup>u</sup>), placed under the world by
Nâs-cA'k<u>î</u>-yê~~l~~. <span id="fr_51"></span>[c](#fn_51)
Nâs-cA'k<u>î</u>-yê~~l~~ was unmarried and lived alone with these two
old men, and yet he had a daughter, a thing no one is able to explain.
Nor do people know what this daughter was. The two old persons took care
of her like servants, and especially they always looked into the water
before she drank to see that it was perfectly clean.

First of all beings Nâs-cA'k<u>î</u>-yê~~l~~ created the Heron
(~~L~~Aq!) as a very tall and very wise man and after him the Raven
(Yê~~l~~), who was also a very good and very wise man at that time.

Raven came into being in this wise. His first mother had many children,
but they all died young, and she cried over them continually. According
to some, this woman was Nâs-cA'k<u>î</u>-yê~~l~~'s sister and it was
Nâs-cA'k<u>î</u>-yê~~l~~ who was doing this because he did not wish her
to have any male children. By and by Heron came to her and said, "What
is it that you are crying about all the time?" She answered, "I am
always losing my children. I can not bring them up." Then he said, "Go
down on the beach when the tide is lowest, get a small, smooth stone,
and put it into the fire. When it is red hot, swallow it. Do

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

not be afraid." She said, "All right." Then she followed Heron's
directions and gave birth to Raven. Therefore Raven's name was really
ÎtcA'k!<sup>u</sup>, the name of a very hard rock, and he was hence
called TA'ql<u>î</u>k!-îc (Hammer-father). This is why Raven was so
tough and could not easily be killed.

Heron and Raven both became servants to Nâs-cA'k<u>î</u>-yê~~l~~, but he
thought more of Raven and made him head man over the world. Then
Nâs-cA'k<u>î</u>-yê~~l~~ made some people.

All of the beings Nâs-cA'k<u>î</u>-yê~~l~~ had created, however, existed
in darkness, and this existence lasted for a long time, how long is
unknown. But Raven felt very sorry for the few people in darkness and,
at last, he said to himself, "If I were only the son of
Nâs-cA'k<u>î</u>-yê~~l~~ I could do almost anything." So he studied what
he should do and decided upon a plan. He made himself very small, turned
himself into a hemlock needle, and floated upon the water
Nâs-cA'k<u>î</u>-yê~~l~~'s daughter was about to drink. Then she
swallowed it and soon after became pregnant.

Although all this was by the will of Nâs-cA'k<u>î</u>-yê~~l~~ and
although he knew what was the matter with his daughter, yet he asked her
how she had gotten into that condition. She said, "I drank water, and I
felt that I had swallowed something in it." Then
Nâs-cA'k<u>î</u>-yê~~l~~ instructed them to get moss for his daughter to
lie upon, and on that the child was born. They named him
Nâs-cA'k<u>î</u>-yê~~l~~ also. Then Nâs-cA'k<u>î</u>-yê~~l~~ cut a
basket in two and used half of it for a cradle, and he said that people
would do the same thing in future times, so they have since referred its
use to him.

Nâs-cA'k<u>î</u>-yê~~l~~ tried to make human beings out of a rock and
out of a leaf at the same time, but the rock was slow while the leaf was
very quick. Therefore human beings came from the leaf. Then he showed a
leaf to the human beings and said, "You see this leaf. You are to be
like it. When it falls off the branch and rots there is nothing left of
it." That is why there is death in the world. If men had come from the
rock there would be no death. Years ago people used to say when they
were getting old, "We are unfortunate in not having been made from a
rock. Being made from a leaf, we must die."

Nâs-cA'k<u>î</u>-yê~~l~~ also said, "After people die, if they are not
witches, and do not lie or steal, there is a good place for them to go
to." <span id="fr_52"></span>[a](#fn_52) Wicked people are to be dogs
and such low animals hereafter. The place for good people is above, and,
when one comes up there, he is asked, "What were you killed for?" or
"What was your life in the world?" The place he went to was governed by
his reply. So people used to say to their children, "Do not lie. Do not
steal. For the Maker (Nâs-cA'k<u>î</u>-yê~~l~~) will see you."

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

Some time afterward a man died, and Raven, coming into the house, saw
him there with his wife and children weeping around him. So he raised
the dead man's blanket with both hands, held it over the body, and
brought him back to life.

After that both Raven and her husband told this woman that there was no
death, but she disbelieved them. Then Raven said to her, "Lie down and
go to sleep." And, as she slept, she thought she saw a wide trail with
many people upon it and all kinds of fierce animals around. Good people
had to pass along this trail in order to live again. When she came to
the end of the trail there was a great river there, and a canoe came
across to her from the other side of it. She entered this and crossed.
There some people came to her and said, "You better go back. We are not
in a good place. There is starvation here, we are cold, and we get no
water to drink."

This is why people burn the bodies of the dead and put food into the
fire for them to eat. Burning their bodies makes the dead comfortable.
If they were not burned their spirits would be cold. This is why they
invite all those of the opposite clan as well as the nearest relations
of the dead man's wife, seating them together in one place, and burn
food in front of them. It is because they think that the dead person
gets all of the property destroyed at the feast and all of the food then
burned up. It is on account of what Raven showed them that they do so.

Because Nâs-cA'k<u>î</u>-yê~~l~~ got it into his mind to wish for
daylight in the world, he had wished for a grandchild through whom it
might come. Now, therefore, although he knew what answer he would
receive, he sent for ~~L~~iu'wAt-uwadjî'g<u>î</u>-can and questioned him
to see whether he would answer right: "Where did this child come from?
Whose is it? Can you tell?" And the other said, "His eyes look like the
eyes of Raven." That is how he came to get the name Raven.

After a while the baby began to crawl about. His grandfather thought a
great deal of him and let him play with everything in the house.
Everything in the house was his. The Raven began crying for the moon,
until finally they handed it to him and quick as a wink he let it go up
into the sky. After he had obtained everything else, he began to cry for
the box in which daylight was stored. He cried, cried, cried for a very
long time, until he looked as though he were getting very sick, and
finally his grandfather said, "Bring my child here." So they handed
Raven to his grandfather. Then his grandfather said to him, "My
grandchild, I am giving you the last thing I have in the world." So he
gave it to him.

Then Raven, who was already quite large, walked down along the bank of
Nass river until he heard the noise people were making as they fished
along the shore for eulachon in the darkness. All the people in the
world then lived at one place at the mouth of the Nass.

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

They had already heard that Nâs-cA'k<u>î</u>-yê~~l~~ had something
called "daylight," which would some day come into the world, and they
used to talk about it a great deal. They were afraid of it.

Then Raven shouted to the fishermen, "Why do you make so much noise? If
you make so much noise I will break daylight on you." Eight canoe loads
of people were fishing there. But they answered, "You are not
Nâs-cA'k<u>î</u>-yê~~l~~. How can you have the daylight?", and the noise
continued. Then Raven opened the box a little and light shot over the
world like lightning. At that they made still more noise. So he opened
the box completely and there was daylight everywhere.

When this daylight burst upon the people they were very much frightened,
and some ran into the water, some into the woods. Those that had
hair-seal or fur-seal skins for clothing ran into the water and became
hair seals and fur seals. Hair seal and fur seal were formerly only the
names of the clothing they had. Those who had skins called marten skins,
black-bear skins, grizzly-bear skins, etc., ran into the woods and
turned into such animals.

Petrel (<u>G</u>Anû'k) was one of the first persons created by
Nâs-cA'k<u>î</u>-yê~~l~~. He was keeper of the fresh water, and would
let none else touch it. The spring he owned was on a rocky island
outside of Kuiu, called Dekî'-nû (Fort-far-out), where the well may
still be seen. Raven stole a great mouthful of this water and dropped it
here and there as he went along. This is the origin of the great rivers
of the world, the Nass, Skeena, Stikine, Chilkat, and others. He said,
"This thing that I drop here and there will whirl all the time. It will
not overflow the world, yet there will be plenty of water." Before this
time Raven is said to have been pure white, but, as he was flying up
through the smoke hole with Petrel's water, the latter said, "Spirits,
hold down my smoke hole." So they held him until he was turned black by
the smoke.

After this Raven saw a fire far out at sea. Tying a piece of pitchwood
to a chicken hawk's bill, he told him to go out to this fire, touch it
with the pitchwood, and bring it back. When he had brought it to him
Raven put it into the rock and the red cedar saying, "This is how you
are to get your fire, from this rock and this red cedar," and that is
the way they formerly did.

Thus Raven (Yê~~l~~) went about among the natives of Alaska telling them
what to do, but Nâs-cA'k<u>î</u>-yê~~l~~ they never saw. Raven showed
all the Tlingit what to do for a living, but he did not get to be such a
high person as Nâs-cA'k<u>î</u>-yê~~l~~, and he taught the people much
foolishness. At that time the world was full of dangerous animals and
fish. Raven also tied up some witches, and so it was through him that
the people believed in witchcraft. Then he told the people that some
wild animals were to be their friends (i. e., their crest animals) to
which they were to talk,

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

Once he gave a feast and invited persons to it from other places. He had
two slaves after that, named Gîdza<u>g</u>ê't and Gîdzanû'q!u. This is
why the natives here had slaves. It was on account of his example. There
was a man who had no arm, so Raven thought he would be a shaman and cure
him. This is how the Tlingit came to have shamans. After there was death
he showed them how to dance over the body placed in the middle of the
floor.

Raven also taught the people how to make halibut hooks, and went out
fishing with them. He had names for the halibut hooks and talked to them
before he let them down into the sea. That is why the natives do so now.
He also taught them to be very quick when they went out halibut fishing
or they would catch nothing.

He also made different kinds of fish traps and taught the people how to
use them. He made the small variety and a big trap, shaped like a
barrel, for use in the Stikine.

He taught them how to make the seal spear (kAt). It has many barbs, and
there are different kinds. One is called tsa-cAxîctdzâ's. It is provided
with some attachment that hits the seal (tsa) upon the head whenever it
comes to the surface, driving its head under water until it dies, and
that is what the name signifies.

Then he showed them how to make a canoe. This he did on the Queen
Charlotte islands. At first the people were afraid to get into it, but
he said, "The canoe is not dangerous. People will seldom get drowned."

He taught them how to catch a salmon called îcqê'n, which requires a
different kind of hook from that used for halibut. The place where he
taught people how to get different kinds of shellfish is a beach on the
Queen Charlotte islands called Raven's beach to this day.

After he was through teaching the people these things, he went under the
ocean, and when he came back, taught them that the sea animals are not
what we think they are, but are like human beings. First he went to the
halibut people. They have a chief who invited him to eat, and had dried
devilfish and other kinds of dried fish brought out. He was well liked
everywhere he went under the sea because he was a very smart man. After
that he went to see the sculpin people, who were very industrious and
had all kinds of things in their houses. The killer-whale people seemed
to live on hair-seal meat, fat, and oil. Their head chief was named
<u>G</u>onaqAdê't, and even to this day the natives say that the sight
of him brings good fortune.

While he was under the ocean he saw some people fishing for halibut, and
he tried to tease them by taking hold of their bait. They, however,
caught him by the bill and pulled him up as far as the bottom of their
canoe, where he braced himself so that they pulled his bill out. They
did not know what this bill was and called it

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

gonê't-~~l~~uwu' (bill -of-something-unknown). Then Raven went from
house to house inquiring for his bill until he came to the house of the
chief. Upon asking for it there, they handed it to him wrapped in eagle
down. Then he put it back into its place and flew off through the smoke
hole.

Raven left that town and came to another. There he saw a king salmon
jumping about far out at sea. He got it ashore and killed it. Because he
was able to do everything, the natives did all that he told them. He was
the one who taught all things to the natives, and some of them still
follow his teachings. After that he got all kinds of birds for his
servants. It was through these that people found out he was the Raven.

Once he went to a certain place and told the people to go and fight
others. He said, "You go there and kill them all, and you will have all
the things in that town." This was the beginning of war.

After having been down among the fish teaching them, Raven went among
the birds and land animals. He said to the grouse (nukt), "You are to
live in a place where it is wintry, and you will always look out for a
place high up so that you can get plenty of breeze." Then he handed the
grouse four white pebbles, telling him to swallow them so that they
might become his strength. "You will never starve," he said, "so long as
you have these four pebbles." He also said, "You know that Sealion is
your grandchild. You must be generous, get four more pebbles and give
them to him." That is how the sealion came to have four large pebbles.
It throws these at hunters, and, if one strikes a person, it kills him.
From this story it is known that the grouse and the sealion can
understand each other.

Raven said to the ptarmigan: "You will be the maker of snowshoes. You
will know how to travel in snow." It was from these birds that the
Athapascans learned how to make snowshoes, and it was from them that
they learned how to put their lacings on.

Next Raven came to the "wild canary" (s!âs!), which is found in the
Tlingit country all the year round, and said: "You will be head among
the very small birds. You are not to live on what human beings eat. Keep
away from them."

Then he went to the robin and said: "You will make the people happy by
letting them hear your whistle. You will be a good whistler."

Then he said to the flicker (kûn): "You will be the head one among the
birds next in size. You will not be found in all places. You will be
very seldom seen."

He said to the ~~l~~ugA'n, a bird that lives far out on the ocean: "You
will live far out on the ocean on lonely rocks. You will be very seldom
seen near shore."

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

Then he came to the snipes and said to them: "You will always go in
flocks. You will never go out alone." Therefore we always see them in
flocks.

He said to the âsq!acâ'tc<u>î</u>, a small bird with greenish-yellow
plumage: "You will always go in flocks. You will always be on the tops
of the trees. That is where your food is."

To a very small bird called kot!ai', about the size of a butterfly, he
said: "You will be a very respectable bird. You will be seen only to
give good luck. People will hear your voice always but never see you.

Then Raven came to the blue jay and said: "You will have very fine
clothes and be a good talker. People will take patterns (probably
"colors") from your clothes."

Then he went to a bird called <u>x</u>ûnkAhâ' and said: "You will never
be seen unless the north wind is going to blow." That is what its name
signifies.

He came to the crows and said: "You will make lots of noise. You will be
great talkers." That is why, when you hear one crow, you hear a lot of
others right afterward.

He came to a bird called gus!yiadû'~~l~~ and said to it: "You will be
seen only when the warm weather is coming on. Never come near except
when warm weather is coming."

He came to the humming bird and said: "A person will enjoy seeing you.
If he sees you once, he will want to see you again."

He said to the eagle: "You will be very powerful and above all birds.
Your eyesight will be very good. What you want will be very easy for
you." He put talons on the eagle and said that they would be very useful
to him.

And so he went on speaking to all the birds.

Then he said to the land otter: "You will live in the water just as well
as on land." He and the land otter were good friends, so they went
halibut fishing together. The land otter was a fine fisherman. Finally
he said to the land otter: "You will always have your house on a point
where there is plenty of breeze from either side. Whenever a canoe
capsizes with people in it you will save them and make them your
friends." The land-otter-man (kû'cta-qâ) originated from Raven telling
this to the land otter. All Alaskans know about the land-otter-man but
very few tell the story of Raven correctly.

If the friends of those who have been taken away by the land otters get
them back, they become shamans, therefore it was through the land otters
that shamans were first known. Shamans can see one another by means of
the land-otter spirits although others can not.

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

The first man captured (or saved") by the land otters was a
K<u>î</u>ksA'd<u>î</u> named KAka'. The land otters kept coming to him
in large canoes looking like his mother or his sister or other dear
relation, and pretending that they had been looking for him for a long
time. But they could not control themselves as well as he, and at such
times he would discover who they were and that their canoe was nothing
but a skate. Finally, when KAka' found that he could not see his
friends, he thought that he might as well give himself up to the land
otters. Then they named him Qôwu~~l~~ka', a word in the land-otter
language now applied to a kind of fishhook which the halibut are thought
to like better than all others. Nowadays, when a figure of Qôwu~~l~~ka'
is made, it is covered with a dog skin, because it was by means of a dog
skin that he frightened the land otters, and they also hang his apron
about with dog bones. The shaman who is possessed by him dresses in the
same manner. From KAka' the people learned that the land otters affect
the minds of those who have been with them for a long time so as to turn
them against their own friends. They also learned from him that there
are shamans among the land otters, and that the land otters have a
language of their own.

For two years KAka''s friends hunted for him, fasting at the same time
and remaining away from their wives. At the end of this period the land
otters went to an island about 50 miles from Sitka and took KAka' with
them. The land-otter tribe goes to this place every year. Then an old
land-otter-woman called to KAka': "My nephew, I see that you are
worrying about the people at your home. When you get to the place
whither we are going place yourself astride of the first log you see
lying on the beach and sit there as long as you can." And her husband
said, to him: "Keep your head covered over. Do not look around." They
gave him this direction because they thought, "If this human being sees
all of our ways and learns all of our habits, we shall die." On the way
across the land-otter-people sang a song, really a kind of prayer, of
which the words are, "May we get on the current running to the shore."

The moment they came to land the land-otter-people disappeared and he
did not know what had become of them. They may have run into some den.
Then he ran up the sandy beach and sat on the first log he came to, as
he had been directed. The instant his body touched it he became
unconscious. It was a shaman's spirit that made him so.

By and by KAka''s friends, who were at that time hunting for fur seals,
an occupation that carries one far out to sea, suddenly heard the noise
of a shaman's drum and people beating for him with batons. They followed
the sound seaward until they saw thousands and thousands of sea birds
flying about something floating upon the ocean a mile or two ahead of
them. Arrived there they saw that it

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

was a log with KAka' lying upon it clothed only in a kelp apron. The
people were delighted to find even his body, and took it into their
canoe. He looked very wild and strange. He did not open his eyes, yet he
seemed to know who had possession of him, and without having his lips
stir a voice far down in his chest said, "It is I my masters." It was a
shaman's spirit that said this, and to the present day a shaman's spirit
will call the shaman's relations "my masters."

The old woman that saved him and told him to sit astride of the log was
his spirit and so was her husband. The log was the spirit's canoe. This
woman and her husband had been captured by the land otters long before,
but KAka' was so strong-minded a fellow that they felt they could do
nothing with him, so they let him go and became his spirits. They could
not turn him into a land otter because he did not believe that land
otters are stronger than human beings.

After the people had brought KAka' to a place just around the point from
their village, he said, "Leave me here for a little while." So most of
his relations remained with him, while two went home to tell the people
who were there. They were not allowed to keep it from the women. Then
they made a house for him out of devil clubs and he was left there for
two days while the people of the town fasted. They believed in these
spirits as we now believe in God. Before he was brought home the house
and the people in it had to be very clean, because he would not go where
there was filth. After they got him home they heard the spirit saying
far down within him, "It is 1, Old-land-otter-spirit
(Kû'cta-koca'nqo-yek)." This was the name of the old woman who first
told him what to do. The next spirit was The-spirit-that-saves
(Qôs<u>î</u>ne'xe-yek). He sang inside of him the same song that the
land otters sang. It was his spirit's song and has many words to it.

All the birds that assembled around him when he was floating upon the
sea were also his spirits. Even the wind and waves that first, upset him
were his spirits. Everything strange that he had seen at the time when
the land otters got possession of him were his spirits. There are,
always sea birds sitting on a floating log, and from KAka' people
learned that these are shamans' spirits. It is from his experience that
all Alaskans--Tlingit, Haida, even Eskimo and Athapascans--believe in
the land-otter-men (kû'cta-qa). By means of his spirits KAka' was able
to stand going naked for two years. This story of KAka' is a true story,
and it is from him that the Tlingit believe in shamans' spirits
(yêk). <span id="fr_53"></span>[a](#fn_53)

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

After leaving the land otters Raven appeared at Taku. There is a cliff
at the mouth of that inlet called WAs!As!e' where the North Wind used to
live, and Raven stayed there with him. The North Wind was very proud and
shone all over with what the Indians thought were icicles. So the
Indians never say anything against the North Wind, however long it
blows, because it has spirits (i. e., power). Years ago people thought
that there were spirits in all the large cliffs upon the islands, and
they would pray to those cliffs. They had this feeling toward them
because Raven once lived in this cliff with the North Wind.

Raven observed certain regulations very strictly when he was among the
rivers he had created. He told people never to mention anything that
lives in the sea by its right name while they were there, but to call a
seal a rabbit, for instance, and so with the other animals. This was to
keep them from meeting with misfortune among the rapids. Formerly the
Indians were very strict with their children when they went up the
rivers, but nowadays all that has been forgotten.

After this Raven went to Chilkat and entered a sweat house along with
the chief of the killer whales who tried to roast him. Raven, however,
had a piece of ice near him and every now and then put part of it into
his mouth. Then he would tell the killer whale that he felt chilly and
make him feel ashamed. "If I did not belong to the
<u>G</u>ânAxte'd<u>î</u> family," said Raven, "I could not have stood
that sweat house." For this reason the <u>G</u>ânAxte'd<u>î</u> now
claim the raven as an emblem and think they have more right to it than
anybody else.

It was from Raven that people found out there are Athapascan Indians. He
went back into their country. So the Chilkat people to this day make
their money by going thither. He also showed the Chilkat people how to
make tcî~~l~~, secret storehouses maintained some distance out of town,
and he taught them how to put salmon into these and keep them frozen
there over winter. So the Chilkat people got their name from tcî~~l~~,
"storehouse," and xât, "salmon."

Raven also showed the Chilkat people the first seeds of the Indian
tobacco and taught them how to plant it. After it was grown up, he dried
it, gathered clam shells, roasted them until they were very soft, and
pounded them up with the tobacco. They used to chew this, and it was so
good that it is surprising they gave it up. They made a great deal of
money at Chilkat by trading with this among the interior Indians, but
nowadays it is no longer planted.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_49"></span>[80:a](tmt035.htm#fr_49) See story 1. Into this
story, as will be seen, the writer's informant has woven a large portion
of the sacred myths of his people.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[80:b](tmt035.htm#fr_50) In another place the
writer's informant admitted that he had concluded this must be the case
because there were no bad stories about Nâs-cA'k<u>î</u>-yê~~l~~.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[80:c](tmt035.htm#fr_51) See *Twenty-sixth
Annual Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology*, p. 454.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[81:a](tmt035.htm#fr_52) See Twenty-sixth Annual
Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology, pp. 460 to 463.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[88:a](tmt035.htm#fr_53) See story 5.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 31. Raven, Part II](tmt036)
