[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tmt060)  [Next](tmt062) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

### 37. ORIGIN OF THE SCREECH OWL <span id="fr_105"></span>[a](#fn_105)

There was a certain woman at Sitka living with her husband and her
husband's mother. One evening she got hemlock branches, made strings out
of red-cedar bark, tied them together, and put them around herself. Then
she went out to a flat rock, still called Herring rock, where herring
are very abundant, just as the tide was coming over it, and, when the
fish collected in the branches, she threw them up on the beach. Every
day during the herring season she did the same thing, and after she
reached the house she put her apron carefully away until next time.

One day her old mother-in-law heard her cooking the herring and said,
"What is that you are cooking, my son's wife?" "Oh!" she answered, "a
few clams that I have collected." "Will you give me some?" said the old
woman, for she was hungry, but, when she reached out her hand for it,
her daughter-in-law dropped a hot rock into it and burnt her.

When her son came home that evening the old woman told him what had
happened. She said, "She was cooking something. I know that it did not
smell like clams. When I asked her for some she gave me a hot rock and
burnt my hand. I wonder where she got that fish, for I am sure that it
was some sort of fish. Immediately after you leave she is off. I don't
know what she does."

When the man heard that, he and his brother who had been hunting with
him started out at once before his wife saw them. The y pretended that
they were again going hunting, but they returned immediately to a place
where they could watch the village. From there they saw the woman put on
her apron of hemlock boughs, go out to the rock, and come home with the
herring. As soon as she had gone in they went out themselves and got a
canoe load of the fish. Then the woman's husband went up to the house
and said to his wife, "I have a load of herring down there." So she ran
down to the canoe and saw that it was loaded with them. She began
shouting up to them, "Bring me down my basket," for she wanted to carry
up the fish in it. The people heard her, but they felt ill-disposed
toward her on account of the way she had treated her. mother-in-law, so
they paid no attention. She kept on shouting louder and louder, and
presently her voice became strange. She shouted, "Hade' wud<u>î</u>kâ't,
wud<u>î</u>kâ't, wud<u>î</u>kâ't." <span id="fr_106"></span>[b](#fn_106)
She also began hooting like an owl.

As she kept on making this noise her voice seemed to go farther away
from the village. The people noticed it but paid no attention. After she
had asked for the basket right behind the village, she sounded still
more like an owl, and finally she ceased to ask for the

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

basket, and merely hooted (hm, hm). She had become the screech owl. She
left them altogether.

Nowadays, when a young girl is very selfish, people say to her, Ah! when
you get married, you will put a hot rock into your mother-in-law's hand,
and for punishment you will become an owl."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_105"></span>[176:a](tmt061.htm#fr_105) Story 98 is another
version.

<span id="fn_106"></span>[176:b](tmt061.htm#fr_106) This way with the
basket (kât).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 38. Little Felon](tmt062)
