[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](tmt066)  [Next](tmt068.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 43. THE SELF-BURNING FIRE

One winter the people at a certain place on Copper river were left with
nothing to eat and began dying off. About the middle of that winter all
of the children and some of the adults were dead, and only about half of
the former population remained. When only eight men were left they said
to one another, "Let us leave. Let us walk down this side of the river."
So they started off down the bank, and, after a long time, one of them
died of cold. They buried <span id="fr_109"></span>[a](#fn_109.md) him and
went on. By and by another froze to death and was also buried. This kept
on until there were only four. One day three of the remainder succumbed
in succession, the last at evening, leaving but one man from all that
village. This man was very sickly looking, but he felt strong, and when
his last companion fell, he left him lying there and went on rapidly. He
thought he would drop with grief, however, at the loss of his last
comrade.

As he was going on quite late in the evening he suddenly heard some one
shout right ahead of him. He followed the voice, which kept on calling
continually. Finally he came to a great fire and stood near it to warm
himself. It was that that had been calling him.

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

When the man had become thoroughly warmed he was about to start on
again. Suddenly, however, he heard the bushes breaking behind him, and,
looking back, he saw all the men who had frozen to death and all of the
village people standing around the fire. This fire is called
Self-burning Fire (WAy<u>î</u>'k! gA'n<u>î</u>), and it was that that
had brought all of those people to life. From that time on they were
able to get their food very easily at the mouth of the river.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_109"></span>[186:a](tmt067.htm#fr_109.md) The words of the
narrator, but corpses were usually burned.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 44. The Giant of Tâ'sna](tmt068.md)
