[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tmt021)  [Next](tmt023) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 18. VARIOUS ADVENTURES NEAR CROSS SOUND

There is a place in the neighborhood of Cross sound called
K!udê'sq!a<u>yî</u>k, which people used to frequent in olden times to
hunt, catch halibut, and so on. People were then in the habit of
traveling from camp to camp a great deal. One time a man and his wife
went out [to](errata.htm#2) get cedar bark off from some trees, and the
man went quite a distance up into the woods from his wife with. his
stone ax and tree climber. This tree-climber was an apparatus composed
of ropes, with a board for the climber to stand on. But, while he was
high up in a tree, the board slipped from under the man's feet, and the
rope held him tight to the tree by his neck so that he died. Since he
did not come back, his wife went home and reported that he was missing.
Then they hunted for him everywhere, and finally a man found him hanging
from the tree dead. The dead man was brother of a chief. So they took
the board that had fallen from under his feet home, laid it across the
neck of a slave and killed him to be revenged on the board. They kept
the board and exhibited it at feasts. Afterward people were called for
the death feast.

People continued going to the different bays hunting, and one day a
canoe with two men in it anchored close by a cliff. While they were
there one of them saw two huge devilfish arms moving across the bay.
They ran ashore and hid under a rock, letting the arms pass over them,
while the devilfish took the canoe into its hole under water.

Then the men started up the hill. On their way home they saw in a small
creek what appeared to be a little halibut, but on coming

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

closer they found that it was only a white rock which had that
appearance.

After they had reached home and had reported what had happened, all the
people began to chop at a log. Then they started a big fire and began to
burn it. But, when it was half burned, they put out the fire by throwing
hot water upon it. They were going to take it to the devilfish hole and
drown it there. So they took it over to that place and let it down, but
never saw it again.

Later four other men went hunting by canoe one autumn to a place called
WAtAs!â'x, where they encamped. By and by one of the party, on going to
his traps, found a big land otter in one of them. He took the bough of a
tree, twisted it around the land otter's neck, and carried it home. He
did not know what it was. As he dragged it home it went bouncing along
behind him and at every bounce something whistled behind him. Arrived at
camp he began to skin it. Then he said to his brothers, "Go and get your
pot ready to cook it," but, when they began to cut it up to put it in,
something whistled. "That is just what I heard on the way," he said.

After the pot had boiled and they had begun eating, something began to
whistle in a tree near by and threw a rock down. They threw one back and
soon rocks were flying back and forth. It was a great thing to fool
with. By and by the men said, "You might cut our faces," so, instead of
throwing rocks, they seized long cones and threw these back and forth
all night. Toward morning the being in the tree, which was a
land-otter-man, began to hit people, and they on their part had become
very tired. Finally they tried to get him down by lighting a fire under
the tree where he was sitting. When it was burning well, all suddenly
shouted, and he fell into it. Then they threw the fire over him, and he
burned up. But when they started for the beach to go home, all wriggled
from side to side and acted as if they were crazy; and when anyone went
to that place afterward he would act in the same manner.

These men lived at a place called Person-petrified (CAkdahAna'), and
when they came home, it was told them, "A woman and her child have been
lost from this place." This woman had been attacked by some strange man,
whom she also killed with the pole which was used to take off cedar
bark. At that time many persons had disappeared, and the people were
wearied out looking for them. Now, however, they were determined to find
the murderers, so all got into one canoe and started along the coast.
After a time the high waves compelled them to encamp, and all went up
into the woods to hunt through them for a beach. Then they came to a
house made of driftwood, where the murderers lived. They went to each
end where the main stringer protruded, lifted it off of its

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

supporting posts and let it fall on the occupants. Those who tried to
get out between the logs they-killed. Then they set the ruined house on
fire and burned it with all it contained; and they broke up the canoe
belonging to those people.

Close by lived a shaman related to the same people. His spirits told him
that there was a mountain near by where flint could be obtained. His
spirits had so much strength that he went right to that place and broke
it off. In those days every time a shaman cut an animal's tongue he had
more strength, so, when his strength was all combined, it amounted to
considerable.

At that time the people did not have any flint, but, after the spirit
discovered it, all knew where it was to be found, and they have since
brought it from there.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 19. Kâts!](tmt023)
