[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](tmt045)  [Next](tmt047.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Next Raven went to Tân-~~l~~utû' (the southern end of Prince of Wales
island) and saw a man there named QonA~~l~~gî'c. <span
id="fr_93"></span>[b](#fn_93.md) Raven said to him, "What are you doing
here?" "I am a great gambler," he said. "I love to gamble." Said Raven,
"You are a gambler but you can not win a thing. If you eat forty devil's
clubs and fast many days you will become a great gambler. You will win
everything you wish. But why do you want to learn gambling?" The man
said, "I have been gambling steadily and I can not win anything. A
person won from me my wife's clothing and all of my food and property.
Since I have so disgraced myself, I have left my town and have come here
to die." Said Raven, "Gambling is not very good. There will always be
hard feelings between gamblers, yet I will show you how. One of the
sticks has a red mark around it. It will be named nâq (devilfish). You
will see the smoke of nâq. When you get the devilfish, you are lucky. As
long as it keeps away

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

from you, you are unlucky." Then he said to the, man, "Make a house for
yourself out of devil's clubs first and stay inside while you are
fasting. After you have fasted four days, Greatest Gambler
(A~~l~~qâ'-s!â't<u>î</u>) will appear to you."

When the man had fasted for three days, living on nothing but devil's
clubs, he started to look for more. Then he found a devil's club, as big
around as a large tree, covered with scars, and he took the bark off in
eight different spots. Then he went to sleep and dreamed that a man came
to him. He said, "Do you know that I am Greatest Gambler? You took the
bark off from me in eight spots. It was I standing there." Then Greatest
Gambler said to him, "When you leave this place, look around down on the
beach and you will find something. When you reach your own village do
the same thing again, and you will find something else."

Next morning a real person came to him and said, "I want to see your
gambling sticks." So he showed them to him, and he gave them their
names. He gave all of them their names at that time. Each stick had a
certain mark. One was named devilfish and the others were called after
other kinds of animals and fish. They are the same to-day among both
Tsimshian and Tlingit. <span id="fr_94"></span>[a](#fn_94.md) The two
principal sticks besides the devilfish are tuq (a small bright fish
found in the sand along shore) and âncâ'djî (a small gregarious bird
which seems to feed on the tops of trees).

After Greatest Gambler had showed him how to gamble he prepared to
return to his people. When he was getting ready he looked about upon the
beach and found a sea otter lying there. When he reached the first place
where he had camped on coming away he camped there again and on looking
around as directed found a fur seal. He took off the two skins there and
dried them. It took him a whole day.

When he at last entered the village everybody made fun of him, saying,
"Ay<u>â</u>'o QonA~~l~~gî'c" (said to be Haida words meaning "Come and
let us gamble, QonA~~l~~gî'c"). He had made a shirt out of the sea otter
and a blanket out of the fur seal, so they were anxious to gamble in
order to win those things. When they first heard him speak of gambling
they made fun of him, thinking to beat him as before, and the same one
who had before won all of his goods sat down opposite. He was a fine
gambler and therefore very rich. When they started to play, the poor man
began to go through all kinds of performances, jumping up, running
about, and saying funny things to his opponent, so that the latter
became confused and could not do anything. The poor man began winning
his goods, and, when he got tobacco, he would treat the crowd about him
with it. Finally the poor man said, "That is enough. I am through," but
the rich man answered, "Stay and

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

let us gamble more," thinking that he would get all of his goods back.
The poor man, however, said he was through but would be willing to
gamble with him the next day, and he left his opponent sitting there
feeling very badly. The same day, however, his opponent went over to him
again and again asked him to gamble. "Oh! let us wait until to-morrow,"
he said, and he spoke kindly to him. Finally they began again. Whatever
words the poor man used toward his opponent at this time, people use at
this day. By and by he said to the chief, "Let us gamble for food next.
I want to feed my people." Then the rich man was angry, sat down, and
began gambling with him for food. Again his opponent won everything and
said, "That is enough. We have plenty of time to gamble. We will gamble
some other day." So they stopped, although the chief would have
persevered, and the poor man invited all of his friends in order to give
them the food he had won.

Next day the chief again brought over his gambling sticks, and they
recommenced. Whenever the poor man saw that his luck was turning, he
would jump up, ran around the circle of people, who were watching him
closely, run to a little creek near by, wash his hands very clean and
return to gamble. He did that over and over again while he was gambling.
Sometimes he would run off and chew upon a piece of dried salmon. Then
he could see the devilfish smoke much better. This time they staked
slaves, and he won quite a number, after which he jumped up, saying that
he had gambled enough. The chief begged him to continue, but he said,
"No, we have gambled long enough. I will gamble every day with you if
you desire, but this is enough for to-day."

Next morning they gambled again. A big crowd always followed him to the
gambling place because the way he acted was new to them. He would jump
up, call certain of his lucky sticks by name and say, "Now you come
out." Before he began gambling he mixed his sticks well together and
said, "The âsq!ancâ'd<u>î</u>! sticks will come out." So they came out,
flew around and around his head and settled among the other sticks
again. He was the only one who could see them.

By this time the chief opposing him had become fairly crazy. He had
nothing left but his house, his sisters' children, his wife, and
himself. He wanted to stake his sisters' children, but his opponent
said, that he would not gamble for people. Then the chief caught hold of
him and begged him, and his own friends came to him and said, "Why don't
you gamble and win those friends of his? You are very foolish not to."
"I do not want to gamble unless I can win something," he said. "What
good will those people be to me? I can not, do anything with them after
I win them." "You will have the name of having won them. Remember what
he did to you. He did not

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

have pity on you. When he won your wife's clothes did he give them
back?" Then the poor man moved a piece of painted moose hide, called
ck!ut!ê', around in front of the chief. It made him very angry, but he
dared not say anything. The chief lost his nephews, his house, and his
wife's clothes and offered to stake his wife, but his opponent refused
until his cousin said, "Go on and get everything he has. If you do not
want them you can give them back." So he won his wife also. Then he put
his gambling sticks away, refusing to gamble for the chief himself,
because he knew that there is always trouble at the bottom of gambling.
But his friends said, "If he is foolish enough to stake himself and his
wife, go on and gamble. After a while he will feel it in his face (i.
e., be ashamed)." So he played once more and won his opponent also.

Then he said, "Since you have staked everything and I have won, I
suppose that this is all. Do you remember how you won everything from
me? You were very hard on me. You even won my wife's clothing, and you
did not give me anything back. You left me in such a condition that I
could not do a thing to help myself and my wife. You know that I have
won you. You belong to me. You might be my slave, but I will not be that
hard upon you. I have won you and your wife, but I don't want to claim
you. Take your wife also. She is yours and I don't want to claim her
either."

High-caste people did not become gamblers, because they always
remembered this saying. They always told their children that gambling
belonged to lower people and was not work for an honest person. On
account of what happened at that time a gambler will now get crazy over
the game, and think, when he is using the last money in his purse, "I am
going to win it back. I may win it back with the last cent I have." So
he keeps on and on until he goes through with everything. The whole town
knows that he is going crazy over gambling, but he thinks that he is
doing the right thing. When a gambler wins a lot of things from anyone
nowadays, he remembers QonA~~l~~gî'c and gives some of them back. He is
not as hard on him as the chief was to the poor man. <span
id="fr_95"></span>[a](#fn_95.md)

It is from QonA~~l~~gî'c also that the gambling sticks have different
names and that there are different kinds of nâqs and different sorts of
cîcts. These cîcts are lucky gambling sticks, but the lucky medicine
that a gambler obtains is also called cîct. In order to get it he has to
fast, remain away from his wife, and keep what he is doing secret. At
that time he wishes for whatever he desires. This medicine also makes a
person brave and is used when preparing for some important action. The
name cîct is said to have come from a wolf which had something stuck
between its teeth. When a certain man got this out, the wolf said, "I
will show you my cîct. I will tell you what it is."

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

People who cheat have gambling sticks like birds that are able to fly
away, and they keep the names of these sticks to themselves.

It is since the time of this first gambler, too, that people have had
the custom of saying to a gambler, "Why don't you give a feast with the
food you have won?"

Gamblers claim that when the sticks move in a certain way while they are
gambling, it means death in the family. If they keep the rules of their
cîct it will tell them what animal they are going to kill when they are
out hunting.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_92"></span>[135:a](tmt044.htm#fr_92.md) See pp.
[90](tmt036.htm#page_90.md)-91.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[135:b](tmt046.htm#fr_93.md) Said to be a Haida
name.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[136:a](tmt046.htm#fr_94.md) It appears from
examples that no such uniformity really exists.

<span id="fn_95"></span>[138:a](tmt046.htm#fr_95.md) In this paragraph are
seen the effects of missionary teachings.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 31. Raven, Part XIII](tmt047.md)
