[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tmt069)  [Next](tmt071) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 46. THE LAND-OTTERS' CAPTIVE

Several persons once went out from Sitka together, when their canoe
upset and all were drowned except a man of the KîksA'd<u>î</u>. A canoe
came to this man, and he thought that it contained his friends, but they
were really land otters. They started southward with him and kept going
farther and farther, until they had passed clear round the Queen
Charlotte islands. At every place where they stopped they took in a
female land otter. All this time they kept a mat made out of the broad
part of a piece of kelp, over the man they had captured until at length
they arrived at a place they called Rainy-village (Sî'wu-â'nî).

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

At this place the man met an aunt who had been drowned years before and
had become the wife of two land otters. She was dressed in a ground-hog
robe. Then she said to him, "Your aunt's husbands will save you. You
must come to see me this evening." When he came his aunt said, "I can't
leave these people, for I have learned to think a great deal of them."

Afterward his aunt's husbands started back with him. They did not camp
until midnight. Their canoe was a skate, and, as soon as they came
ashore, they would turn it over on top of him so that, no matter how
hard he tried to get out, he could not. In making the passage across to
Cape Ommaney they worked very hard, and shortly after they landed they
heard the raven. <span id="fr_111"></span>[a](#fn_111) They could go
only a short distance for food.

When they first started back the woman had said to her husbands, "Don't
leave him where he can be captured again. Take him to a good place." So
they left him close to Sitka. Then he walked around in the neighborhood
of the town and made the people suffer so much every night that they
could not sleep, and determined to capture him. They fixed a rope in
such a way as to ensnare him, but at first they were unsuccessful.
Finally, however, they placed dog bones in the rope so that they would
stick into his hands, dog bones being the greatest enemies of the land
otters.

Late that night the land-otter-man tore his hands so with these bones
that he sat down and began to scream, and, while he was doing this, they
got the rope around him and captured him. When they got him home he was
at first very wild, but they restored his reason by cutting his head
with dog bones. He was probably not so far gone as most Victims. Then
they learned what had happened to him.

After this time, however, he would always eat his meat and fish raw.
Once, when he was among the halibut fishers, they wanted very much to
have him eat some cooked halibut. He was a good halibut fisher, probably
having learned the art from the land otters, though he did not say so.
For a long time the man refused to take any, but at last consented and
the food killed him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_111"></span>[189:a](tmt070.htm#fr_111) Supernatural beings
who heard the raven call before they came to land, died.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 47. The Man Fed From the Sky](tmt071)
