[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](tmt047)  [Next](tmt049.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

One time four boys went out hunting from Klawak with bow and arrows.
They saw some black ducks and shot at them, but the ducks kept swimming
out to sea, drawing them on. Far out the canoe upset. They hunted for
the boys for days and days, but could not find them. Then some property
was given to a shaman named Tuxstâ', who sent his spirit after them to
the point on the beach from which they had set out. Then the shaman
said, "The spirits of the boys seem to have taken the road to the
land-otters' dens." Therefore they kept on until they saw the boys upon
a point of land, but, as soon as the latter saw them, they ran into the
dens of the land otter. Then the town chief said, "Let the whole town
gather pitchwood and burn up the land-otter dens." So all of the people
went thither in their canoes, made fires at the mouths of the dens and
killed the land otters as soon as they came out. All perished but a few,
who said, "It is Tûts!îd<u>î</u>gû'L's fault that they have burned up
our houses and our food." Then Tûts!îd<u>î</u>gû'L jumped into the sea
from the other side of the point with the boys all around him, so that
they could not be found.

After this the shaman said, "The land otters are going to make war upon
the people here," and soon after they did so. The people attacked them
in return and they warred for some time. Many people fell down suddenly
and were taken sick, while others were injured by having limbs of trees
fall upon their heads. The shaman said that these mishaps were really
effects of the land-otters' arrows, made of the shells of the spider
crab. The people were also suffering from boils and pimples all over
their bodies, and he said that these were produced by the poisonous
shells. So many were dying that all became frightened. Whenever anyone
went out hunting or fishing he would be troubled with boils and itching
places and have to return. The shaman's spirits, which the land otters
could see, were the only things they feared.

Finally the shaman saw that there were two white land otters, and he
said, "If you can get hold of those you will be all right." Then a canoe
with four men started off, and the shaman sang with them telling them
that his spirits were going along also to look after them. He said, "You
will be lucky. You will get them. As soon as you get them put feathers
on their heads." So they went away and camped

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

for the night. They were unable to sleep, however, on account of the
strange noises about their camp as if people were talking in very low
tones. Still they could not see anything. They would say to one
another," Do you hear that?" "Yes," they answered. It was caused by the
two high-caste white land otters who were talking to Tuxstâ''s spirits.

Next morning the men arose very early, and the eldest said to the one
next in years, "Get up. I have had a queer dream. I dreamt that we had a
deer and that we were taking our deer to the land-otter den." Then one
of them answered, "You have had a lucky dream. Let us start right away."
So they took the canoe down and set out. Going along on the opposite
side of the point on which they had camped, they saw the two white
otters swimming in the water. The shaman's spirits had been holding
them. Then the men said to them, "Stay there. We have had you for a long
time now." So the otters remained where they were, and they caught them
and put feathers upon their heads. They were making deer of them. They
took them home to the fort in which they dwelt and carried them in. All
the people danced for them. And that night, after they had retired, the
people dreamt that the land otters were dancing the peace-making dance.
Some of the people said, "They really [danced](errata.htm#6.md)," but
others replied, "No, they did not dance. We only dreamt it." Still they
dressed up to dance in return. All were fasting, as was customary when
peace is about to be made. They also fed the land otters and waited upon
them very carefully.

By and by the shaman said that the land otters were coming, so the
people made ready for them. They soaked a very bitter root, called
s!îkc, in water for a long time. Some said, "They are not coming. The
shaman has made that up," but others believed him and got ready. Finally
the shaman said, "To-morrow they will be here." The next morning it was
very foggy and they could not see far out, but "they heard a drum
beating. At length the land-otter-people came ashore, and they helped
them carry their things up to the houses. One of these land otters had
two heads, one under the other. it was Tûts!îd<u>î</u>gû'L. All said,
"We depend on Tûts!îd<u>î</u>gû'L." Then numbers of land otters came
into the house, but, as soon as Tûts!îd<u>î</u>gû'L appeared at the
door, everybody there but the shaman fell down as if dead. The shaman in
turn filled his mouth with the poisonous water they had prepared and
spit it about upon the otters, rendering unconscious all that it
touched. The land otters, however, shouted," Keep away from
Tûts!îd<u>î</u>gû'L. Let him do his work." So Tûts!îd<u>î</u>gû'L
danced, saying, "Ha, ha, ha." When they started a song, the land otters
mentioned Tûts!îd<u>î</u>gû'L's name in the manner of the Indians. When
they were through with their dance, all of the people woke up, and the
land otters also came to. But, when the human

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

beings got up on their feet, all had vanished including the two white
ones.

Then the village people said to one another, "Did you see the dances?"
"Yes," they answered. They knew something had happened and did not want
to admit having missed it. "Did you see this Tûts!îd<u>î</u>gû'L?"
"Yes." "How was he dressed?" "He had two heads and wore a dancing apron.
He carried two large round rattles. As soon as he moved around sideways
we all went to sleep."

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 31. Raven, Part XV](tmt049.md)
