[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](tmt013)  [Next](tmt015.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 10. THE HALIBUT PEOPLE

There was a very long town where people were fishing for halibut. One
evening the daughter of the chief, whose house was in the middle of the
place, went down on the beach to cut up halibut, and slipped on some
halibut slime. She used bad words to it.

A few days afterward many canoe-loads of people came to get this girl in
marriage, and she started off with them. But, although they appeared to
her like human beings, they were really the halibut people. As soon as
they had left the village they went around a point, landed, and went up
into the woods after spruce gum and pitch.

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

\[paragraph continues\] They brought down a great quantity of this,
heated a rock in the fire and spread pitch all over it. When it was
melted they seated the woman upon it. The two brothers of this girl
searched along shore for her continually, and finally they discovered
where she was; but she was dead.

Then they felt very sad on her account and asked each other, "What shall
we do about her?" They thought of all kinds of schemes, and at last hit
upon a plan. Then they went home, filled a bladder full of blood, and
went out to the halibut fishing ground. The elder brother let his
younger brother down on a line, but before he got far he lost his breath
and had to be pulled up. So the elder brother prepared himself. He put
on his sister's dress, took his knife and the bladder full of blood, and
got safely to the bottom. When he arrived there he found himself in
front of a house. Some one came out to look and then said to the chief
inside, "Has your wife come out to see you?" They thought it was the
dead woman. So the halibut chief said, "Tell her to come in," and he
married her.

At this time the friends of the young man were vainly endeavoring to
catch halibut, and he could see their hooks. Instead of coming into the
houses these would fall around on the outside. They tried all kinds of
hooks of native manufacture, but the only one that succeeded was
Raven-backbone-hook (Yê~~l~~-tû'dAq!<u>ê</u>), which came right in
through the smoke hole.

After a while the halibut chief said, "Let us go and take a sweat bath."
\[Frater autem puellae mortuae semper secum portabat vesicam cruore
plenam, quo ungebat extrema vestem qua indutus erat, ut rhombum
deciperet, dicens, "Mensibus affectus sum; noli mihi appropinquare."\]

That night, as soon as the halibut chief was asleep, the man took his
knife, cut the chief's head off and ran outside with it. Everybody in
the town was asleep. Then he jerked on his brother's line, and his
brother pulled him up along with the head.

After that they paddled along shore for some time, and on the way the
elder brother kept shooting at ducks with his arrows. Finally he hit one
and took it into the canoe. It was shivering, and his brother said,
"Look at this little duck. It is dying of cold. I wish you were by my
father's camp fire." On account of these bad words the canoe went
straight down into the ocean.

Arrived at the bottom, they saw a long town, and some one said, "Get out
of the canoe and come up." Then the duck led them up into the house of
his grandfather, the killer whale--for the killer whale is grandfather
to the duck--and a big fire was built for them. Then they seated the
brothers close to this and said, "Do you think it is only your father
who has a big fire?" After they were so badly burned that their heads
were made to turn backward with the heat, they were thrown outside.
There they became the ducks called

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Always-crying-around-\[the-bay\]
(<u>Y</u>îkA<u>g</u>â'xe). You can hear them crying almost anytime when
you are in camp. They never got back to their friends.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 11. Stories of the Monster Devilfish and The Cry-Baby](tmt015.md)
