[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](tmt094)  [Next](tmt096.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 71. STORY OF THE KILLER-WHALE CREST OF THE DAQL!AWE'D<u>Î</u> <span id="fr_124"></span>[a](#fn_124.md)

There was a man called Natsî~~l~~Ane' (the name of a worm that appears
on dried salmon) who was continually quarreling with his wife. He had
many brothers-in-law, who became very much ashamed of this discord but
had to stay around to protect their sister. One day his brothers-in-law
took him to an island far out at sea, named KAts!ê'u<u>x</u>t<u>î</u>,
and talked very kindly to him. But, while he was out of sight upon the
island, they left him. Then he began thinking, "What can I do for
myself?" As he sat there he absent-mindedly whittled killer whales out
of cottonwood bark, which works easily. The two he had made he put into
the water and, as he did so, he shouted aloud as shamans used to do on
such occasions. Then he thought they looked as if they were swimming,
but, when they came up again, they were nothing but bark. After a while
he made two more whales out of alder. He tried to put his clan's spirits
into them as was often done

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

by shamans, and, as he put them in, he whistled four times like the
spirit, "Whu, whu, whu, whu." But they, too, floated up. Now he tried
all kinds of wood-hemlock, red cedar, etc. Finally he tried pieces of
yellow cedar, which swam right away in the form of large killer whales.
They swam out for a long distance, and, when they came back, again
turned into wood. Then he made holes in their dorsal fins, seized one of
them with each hand and had the killer whales take him out to sea. He
said, "You see my brothers-in-law traveling about in canoes. You are to
upset them." After he had gone out for some distance between the whales
they returned to land and became wood once more. He took them up and put
them in a certain place.

The next time he saw his brothers-in-law coming along in their canoes he
put his spirits into the water again, and they smashed the canoes and
killed those in them. Then Natsî~~l~~Ane' said to his killer whales,
"You are not to injure human beings any more. You must be kind to them."
After that they were the canoes of spirits, and, if shamans are lucky,
they get these spirit canoes. It is through this story that the
DAqL!awe'd<u>î</u> claim the killer whale. This clan was scattered
everywhere in Alaska, as well as among the Athapascans, Haida, and
Tsimshian.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_124"></span>[230:a](tmt095.htm#fr_124.md) See story 4.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 72. Story of the Nan<u>y</u>aâ'<u>y</u>î Crests](tmt096.md)
