[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tmt082)  [Next](tmt084) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

### 59. GAMNÂ'TCK!<u>Î</u> <span id="fr_117"></span>[a](#fn_117)

GAmnâ'tck!<u>î</u> killed a seal, skinned it, and threw the skin and
meat to his wife to wash. While she was washing them in the sea she saw
some killer whales coming landward. By and by the meat she was washing
drifted out from her and she waded after it. She went out until the
water reached her hips. Then she suddenly felt some one pull her and she
disappeared under water. It was the killer-whale people who thus took
her into their canoe.

After that GAmnâ'tck!<u>î</u> felt very badly and thought to himself,
"How can I get my wife back? How can I look for her under the water?" He
could not sleep all night, and early in the morning he thought, "I
wonder if I couldn't raise this water so as to go under it." In the
morning, therefore, before he had eaten he took his red and black
paints, went down to the water, raised the edge of it just as if he were
raising a blanket, and walked under. He walked on farther and farther.
It was just like walking on land.

By and by he came to a village full of very pale people who went about
with their heads down. He found out that they were the red cod people.
He wanted to make friends of them, so, thinking that they looked very
white, he painted them all red--men, women, and children. That is how
these fishes got their color. After that he asked them if they had seen
his wife, but they said that they had seen no one, so he went on.
Presently he came to another village and asked the people there the same
question to which he received the very same answer. Those were the
halibut people. In each village they gave him something to eat.

After he had 'left the halibut people GAmnâ'tck!<u>î</u> traveled for
several days before he came to another town. By and by, however, he
perceived smoke far ahead of him, and, going toward it, he saw that it
was from a fort. Inside of this fort was a large house which he
immediately entered, but the people there did not seem to care to see
strangers and would not talk to him. These were also very pale people,
so to please them he took out his black paint and painted all of them
with it. Then they felt well disposed toward him and were willing to
talk. "Can you tell me what clan has my wife?" he said. At first they
said that they did not know, but afterward one replied, "There is a
strange woman in that town across there." Then this person pointed the
village out, and GAmnâ'tck!<u>î</u> felt pleased to know where his wife
was. The people he had come among were the sharks, and those whose
village they showed him were the killer whales.

Then the shark chief said, "Every time we have had a fight we have
beaten them." The shark people also said to him, "The killer-whale chief
has a slave. Every morning the slave goes out after

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

water. Go to the creek and tell him what to do when he comes in. Tell
him to bring the water in and hand it to the chief over the fire. As he
does so he must drop it, and, while the house is full of steam, pick up
your wife and run out with her. The chief has married her. Then come
over here with her. They will run after you, but, if you can get away,
come right across." The shark people had always been jealous of the
killer whales because they had this woman.

While the shark people were telling him what to do, a strange,
bony-looking person kept jumping up from behind the boxes. He wondered
what made him act so queerly and began to feel uneasy about it, but,
when the bony person saw him looking at him in a strange manner, he
said, "Why! don't you know me. I am that halibut hook
(nA<u>x</u><sup>u</sup>) that the sharks once took away from you. My
name is ~~L~~gudjî' (the name of an island)."

Just after that the man started for the killer-whale town and sat down
by the creek. When the slave came out after water, he asked him to help
him, saying, "I hear that my wife is with this chief." "Yes," the slave
answered, "if she were a man, they would have kept her for a slave like
myself. Since she is a woman, the chief has married her, and she is
living very well. I will help you as much as I can. She wants to return
to you. Now watch and I will do what you tell me to do. I will spill
this water on the fire."

After that he took GAmnâ'tck!<u>î</u> to the door and showed him where
his wife sat. Then the slave walked in with the water while he stood
outside watching. He watched his wife through a crack and saw that she
appeared very much cast down. As soon as the fire was put out and the
house filled with steam he ran in, seized his wife, and started off with
her.

Then, when the slave thought that he had gotten a long distance away, he
shouted, "Some one has taken the woman away." The chief looked around,
and sure enough his wife was gone. Going outside, they saw that this man
had almost reached the shark fort, and they saw him enter it.

As soon as he got there, the shark people began to dress themselves for
war. They were noisy and acted as though they were very hungry, so that
GAmnâ'tck!<u>î</u> became frightened. The halibut hook came to him,
however, and told him not to be frightened, because the killer whales
were coming over. All at once the fort began moving up and down.
Whenever the killer whales tried to enter, the fort killed them by
moving up and down and cutting off their heads. The slaughter was so
great that the few survivors were frightened and went back. Two or three
days later the killer whales came again with like result.

After this the shark people said to GAmnâ'tck!<u>î</u>, "You better not
start out I right away. Stay here a while with us. They might be

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

lying in wait for you. Since we have fought for you so much, it is
better that you should get to your home safely." GAmnâ'tck!<u>î</u> did
so, and some time later they said, "Go straight along by the way you
came, and you will find your way out easily." He did this and reached
his home in safety.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_117"></span>[215:a](tmt083.htm#fr_117) Evidently a version
of the Tsimshian Story of Gunxnaxs<u>î</u>mgyêt. See story 4.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 60. The Hîn-ta<u>y</u>î'c<u>î</u>](tmt084)
