[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](tmt063)  [Next](tmt065.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 40. THE HALIBUT THAT DIVIDED THE QUEEN CHARLOTTE ISLANDS

Formerly there was but one village on the Queen Charlotte islands (Dekî'
qoan â'nî, Town-far-out). Everyday the people used to go out from this
village to fish for halibut, and all were successful except one man.
Though the people all about his canoe were pulling in fish he caught
nothing day after day, and he became angry.

One calm day, however, he had a bite. Pulling at his line he found that
something very strong was attached to it. After he had pulled it up a
short distance it would pull the line away from him, and each time he
let it go for fear of losing it. When he at last got it up, however, it
was only a little halibut about as big as a flounder. He could not catch
anything else.

In the evening, after this man had brought his halibut ashore and had
entered his house, he said, "I have a very small halibut. It might bring
me luck." His wife took up her knife and went down to it, but when she
saw that diminutive fish she took it by the tail and threw it up on the
beach. Then the halibut, which was still alive, began

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

to flop up and down faster and faster. Presently the woman saw a larger
halibut lying there. Everybody now watched it, and it kept flopping and
increasing in size until it became as large as a paddle. By and by it
grew to the size of a large piece of red-cedar bark prepared for
roofing, and at length it covered the entire beach. Toward evening it
was a veritable monster, which smashed the whole town in pieces by its
motions. Before that the Queen Charlotte group formed one large solid
body of land, but the halibut broke it into the various portions that
exist to-day. At that same time the people of this single village were
scattered all over the group.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 41. The Image That Came to Life](tmt065.md)
