[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tmt038)  [Next](tmt040) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

LAk<u>î</u>tc<u>î</u>ne' lived at Sitka. <span
id="fr_64"></span>[b](#fn_64) He had a wife from among human beings, and
every day, while he went out halibut fishing, she dug clams. The dog,
<u>G</u>Ant, that his father had given him he renamed CAq!.
~~L~~Ak<u>î</u>tc<u>î</u>ne' had several children, but he killed all of
them. He would take a child up, pet it, and sing cradle songs to it, and
at the same time make his red-cod spines stick into it so that it died.

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

\[paragraph continues\] He also used the "Blarney stone <span
id="fr_65"></span>[a](#fn_65) as a grindstone, and killed some of his
children by rubbing their faces upon it.

His wife mourned very much for her children, and finally thought of a
way of being revenged upon him. She had a litter of puppies by the dog.
There were originally twelve, but seven died, leaving four male puppies
and one female. These puppies grew up very fast. While the man and his
wife were away fishing and digging clams the puppies played about the
house, and the noise they made sounded just like that of children. But
the female always watched at the door, and when their mother ran up to
stop them all would be lying about on the floor asleep. They kept
getting noisier and noisier, and sounded more and more like human
beings. Finally ~~L~~Ak<u>î</u>tc<u>î</u>ne' heard it and said to his
wife: "Who are these making so much noise here?" "It is those dogs."
Then she thought very seriously what she should do with the puppies. The
next time ~~L~~Ak<u>î</u>tc<u>î</u>ne' was out he heard them still more
plainly, and now he thought that he heard human voices. He came ashore
in great anger and said to his wife: "It is not those dogs that I hear
talking." He was so dangerous a man that his wife was very much
frightened.

After that she formed a plan. So, when her husband went out halibut
fishing the next time, she stuck her digging stick into the ground, put
her blanket around it, and her hat upon the end. Then she ran up through
the woods and hid herself, while the little dog was watching
~~L~~Ak<u>î</u>tc<u>î</u>ne'. After that she crept back to the house,
which was made of brush, and in which they were again making a great
deal of noise. Looking inside, she found that the boys were all playing
about in human forms, their dog skins lying a short distance away from
them. Then she quickly ran in upon them, exclaiming, "You must like to
be dogs since you wear dog skins," grabbed the skins and threw them into
the fire. The little dog that sat outside was the only one that remained
in its original form.

Now, when ~~L~~Ak<u>î</u>tc<u>î</u>ne' came ashore, and saw the
children, he was angry and felt very much ashamed at having been
outwitted. He did not know how to kill them, for he thought they had
more power than he. One, named KAck!A'Lk!, was a shaman. He had his
grandfather and the one-eyed man and his wife that his grandfather had
killed as his spirits. ~~L~~Ak<u>î</u>tc<u>î</u>ne' thought that he
would first quarrel with his wife, and, when he came into the house, he
began to throw and kick things about. But, when he began to beat his
wife, the children jumped upon him and fought with him. They also asked
the dog to help them. Together they killed him.

After these boys were grown up, their mother told them many times of a
certain monster at a place called KA<u>g</u>ê't!, that had been

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

killing many people. Finally they set out to see it, anchored off the
mouth of the bay, and killed it with spears and arrows. They took the
skin from its head. Then they went throughout Alaska, killing off the
monsters of the sea and land that had troubled people and making others
less harmful. The natives say, if it had not been for those boys, they
would be there yet. They made some of these monsters promise that they
would not kill people. The wolves, which were very destructive in those
days, became less harmful through them. Although people in Alaska are
afraid of wolves, you have not heard of anyone being killed by them.

There was one person called Tcâk!<u>î</u>'s! resembling an eagle, who
flew around and was very powerful. He would say to the bears and other
game animals, "You are going to be killed." Because he kept warning the
animals, human beings were starving, so the brothers came to him and
made him promise not to injure people or forewarn the other animals.

Afterward the brothers left their mother at that place and went up to
~~L~~âxa<u>yî</u>'k, where they had heard of a bad person called
One-legged-man (Lê-~~l~~aq!oc<u>î</u>'). His proper name, however, is
Man-that-dries-fish-for-the-eagle (Tcâk!-qê'd<u>î</u>-At-q!An-qâ), and
he is very fond of spearing salmon. First the boys came to the prints of
his one foot going up beside the river, and after a while they saw him
coming down toward them spearing salmon. His shirt was the skin of a
brown bear and had strength as well as he.

Afterward ~~L~~q!ayâ'k! caught a salmon, took all of the meat out, and
got into its skin. Next day, at the time when they knew One-legged-man
was about to come up, ~~L~~q!ayâ'k! put it on again and laid himself in
a salmon hole in the creek. The big man, who was just coming along, saw
a fine salmon go into the hole and said, "What a fine looking salmon."
He thought that he could not get it, but, after he had stood watching it
for a while, it swam up toward him, and he speared it. Just as he was
dragging it ashore, however, ~~L~~q!ayâ'k! cut the cord to his spear
point with a knife he had taken along and swam back into the water hole.
Then the big man looked at his spear and said to himself, "My fine spear
is gone;" but after he had observed closer he said, "This is not broken.
It is cut. I suppose it is ~~L~~q!ayâ'k!'s doing." After that he went on
up the stream while the brothers cooked salmon for their meal.

By a by they saw One-legged-man coming down again carrying a feather
tied on the end of a long stick. He would point this feather at
different trees and then smell of it. Finally he pointed it at the tree
in which ~~L~~q!ayâ'k! and his brothers were then sitting and said,
"~~L~~q!ayâ'k! is in that tree." Then he spoke out saying, "Give me my
spear." ~~L~~q!ayâ'k! kept saying to his brothers, "Shall I go out and
fight him?" But they answered, "No, no, don't go yet." He

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

was so determined, however, that he finally went out and was killed.
Then the other brothers and the dog fell upon this man. After they had
set their dog on him, they killed him. They took his bear-skin shirt off
and burned his body. ~~L~~q!ayâ'k! had been torn all to pieces, but
KAck!A'Lk! put the pieces together, acted around him like a shaman, and
brought him back to life.

Then ~~L~~q!ayâ'k! went along up to the head of that stream dressed in
One-legged-man's shirt and acting like him. When he got there he found
the largest two bears that ever lived. These were the wife and
father-in-law of the man they had killed. ~~L~~q!ayâ'k! threw down one
salmon before the woman and another very bright one before her father
just as One-legged-man had been in the habit of doing. The woman found
out right away that ~~L~~q!ayâ'k! was not her husband, but she made love
to him and he took her as his wife. His father-in-law also thought a
great deal of him. Every morning ~~L~~q!ayâ'k! would go off down stream
after salmon just as One-legged-man had done. On these expeditions he
was always accompanied by his dog, which kept chewing on something
continually. He was really chewing those wild peoples' minds away to
make them tame so that they would not hurt ~~L~~q!ayâ'k!'s brothers. His
brothers all came to him.

After that they began pursuing Dry-cloud like Fire-drill's son. Like him
they chased it from one kind of animal to another. They chased it for
months and months until they had followed it far up into the sky where
you can see the tracks of ~~L~~q!ayâ'k! to this very day (the milky
way). Finally they reached a very cold region in the sky and wanted to
get back, but the clouds gathered so thickly about them that they could
not pass through. KAck!A'Lk!, therefore, called his spirits to open a
passage. After they had done so his brothers fell through and were
smashed to pieces on the earth. KAck!A'Lk!, however, had his spirits
make him enter a ptarmigan (q!ês!awa'), and reached the earth in safety.
Then he shook his rattle over his brothers and brought them to life.

Before they ascended into the sky the brothers had killed all of the
monsters on Prince of Wales island and elsewhere in Alaska except one at
Wrangell called KAxqoyê'nduA. When they heard about this one, they went
to He-who-knows-everything-that-happens
(~~L~~iu'wAt-uwadjî'g<u>î</u>-canA'ku) and said to him, "Grandfather, we
want your canoe. Will you lend it to us?" Its name was Arrow-canoe
(Tcû'net-yâk<sup>u</sup>). Then the old man said, "What do you want the
canoe for, grandchildren?" So they told him, and he said, "There is a
very bad thing living there. No one can get to him. Several different
kinds of spirits are to be met before you reach him. They are very
dangerous." Then he gave them directions, saying, "When the monster is
sleeping, he has his eyes open, but when he is awake he has his eyes
closed, and he is then watching everything. When you

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

see that his eyes are closed, do not try to kill him. Approach him when
his eyes are open. The canoe," he said, "is right round there back of my
house." They went to look for it but saw nothing at that place except an
old log covered with moss. They said to him, "Where is the canoe you
were talking about?" Then the old man came out and threw the moss off,
revealing a fine painted canoe. Another name for this was
Canoe-that-travels-in-the-air (QAx<u>y</u>î'xdoxoa), referring to its
swiftness. All of the paddles that he brought out to them were
beautifully painted. Then they got into the canoe and tested it.

Next day they set out and soon came to a point named Point-that
moves-up-and-down (Y<u>ê</u>n-yu~~l~~u'-s!îtA'ngî-q!a). Whenever a canoe
approached it this point would rise, and, as soon as the canoe attempted
to pass under, would fall and smash it. They, however, passed right
underneath, and it did not fall upon them. They killed it by doing so,
theirs being the first canoe that had passed under.

Beyond this they saw a patch of kelp called
Kelps-washed-up-against-one-another-by-the-waves (WûcxkAdutî't-gîc),
which closed on those trying to pass, but they shot through as soon as
the kelp parted. Thus they killed the kelp patch, and the kelp piled up
in one place, becoming a kelp-covered rock which may still be seen.

Next they reached Fire-coming-up-out-of-the-sea (HînAx-qe<u>g</u>A'ntc),
which rose out of the ocean quickly and fell back again. When it fell
back they passed over it and killed it.

After that they came to Dogs-of-the-sea (Wûc~~l~~AdAgû'q-cAq!), after
whom ~~L~~Akîtcîne''s dog is said to have been named. <span
id="fr_66"></span>[a](#fn_66) These drew to each side and then ran
together upon anyone who tried to pass between. Arrow-canoe was too
quick for them, however, and killed them by running through in safety.
Then they became rocks.

Before the monster's dwelling were two mountains, called
Mountains-that-divide (Wû'cqAda<u>g</u>At-ca), which formed his doors.
These would separate and come together again. Arrow-canoe passed between
when they were separated and killed them. You can see them now, one on
each side of a salt-water pond, looking as though they had been cut
apart.

As soon as they had passed between these they saw the monster, a very
bad shaman called also Shaman-of-the-sea (Hîn-t!Aq-î'xt!î). He looked as
though his eyes were open, so they threw a rope made of whale sinew
about his neck. Immediately he shook himself and broke it. They made
ropes out of the sinews of all the different monsters they had killed,
but he broke them. All the time they were doing this a little bird
called Old-person (Laguqâ'wu), <span id="fr_67"></span>[b](#fn_67) kept
coming to their camp and saying, "My sinews only, my sinews." So they

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

finally killed this bird, took out its sinews, and worked them into a
very small thread. As soon as they threw this around the monster's head
it came off. Then they took off its scalp, which had long hair like that
of other shamans, and the rest of its head turned into a rock at that
place. They now had two principal scalps from the two big monsters they
had killed.

When the brothers now returned to the old man and related what had
happened, he felt very good and said, "There would have been no person
living. This monster would have killed them all, if you had not
destroyed it." Everybody who heard that the monster was dead, was glad,
and did not fear to go to that place any more.

After this they returned to their mother and sister. At that time their
sister had just reached puberty and was shut up in the house with a mat
curtain hung in front of her. So they hung the shaman's scalp up in
front of the curtain. They also made her drink water through the leg
bones of geese and swans so that she should not touch the drinking cups.
Her mother put a large hat upon her so that she should not look at
anything she was forbidden to see, If one shouted that a canoe was
coming, or that anything else was taking place that she wanted to
witness, she did not dare to look out. Since her time these same
regulations have been observed.

Then they left that place and moved south through the interior. Having
killed off the ocean monsters, they were now going to kill those in the
forest. Besides that, they hunted all of this time, killing bear, ground
hogs, and other animals; but their sister was not allowed to look at any
of them. Among other wild animals they told the wolverine and wolf that
they must not kill human beings but be friendly with them. They killed
ground hogs, mountain sheep, and other animals for them and told them
that that was what they were to live upon.

At one place they saw a smoke far off in the woods and, advancing toward
it, came to the house of a man named He-whose-hands-see (Djînqotî'n). He
was so called because he was blind and had his wife aim his arrows for
him. He said to ~~L~~q!ayâ'k!, "My wife saw a grizzly bear and told me
where it was. She aimed my arrow and I shot at it. I felt that I had
killed it, but she said I had not. My wife has left me on account of
this, and I don't know where she is or what I am living on or how I am
living without her." Then ~~L~~q!ayâ'k! and his brothers gave him
ground-hog skins filled with grease and fat such as the interior people
used to make, also dried meat.

While they were in the interior the brothers also made needles out of
animal bones and threads out of sinew for their sister to use behind the
screen. She worked with porcupine quills and dyed sinews, and it is
through her that the interior women are such fine workers with the
needle.

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

After they met this man the girl's brothers asked her to make a small
net for them. This net was patterned after a spider's web which
Spider-spirit (Qas<u>î</u>st!a'n yêk) showed to KAck!A'Lk!, saying, "You
are to take this as a pattern." Then they took the old man to the creek
and said, "Do you feel this creek along here?" Putting a long handle on
the net, they said to him again, "Dip this net into the water here. It
is easy. You can feel when a fish gets into it." They gave him also a
basket their sister had made and said, "When you want to cook the fish,
put it in here together with many hot rocks." After showing him how to
cook his fish they left him and came to another camp. There another old
man lived who said to them, "Do you see that mountain?" There were two
mountains close together. "A very bad person lives over there named
Long-haired-person (CAku~~l~~yA't!)." So, after the brothers had gotten
a great deal of food together for the old man, they left their mother
and sister with him and went out to look for Long-haired-person. After a
while they came upon good, hard trails made by him along which he had
set spears with obsidian points, and presently they saw him coming along
one of these with his long hair dragging on the ground. He had a bone in
his nose and swan's down around his head and wrists. Then he said, "Come
to my house. I invite you home to eat something. I know you are there."
He said this although he could not see them. Then the boys came out to
him and called him "brother-in-law," and he said, "It is four days since
I saw you, my brothers-in-law. Your story is known everywhere." This
Athapascan shaman's spirits were telling him all these things. So he
took them home and gave them all the different kinds of food to which
they were accustomed, not treating them as a wild man would. Then they
said to him, "You see the old person that lives near by. Do not do any
harm to him. He is our grandfather. If you see that old blind fellow
down yonder, give him food also. Treat him like the other." Presently
the shaman said to the brothers, "Let us make a sweat house." In olden
times people used to talk to each other in the sweat houses, and the
shamans learned a great, deal from their spirits inside of them. That
was why the shaman wanted them to go in. But, when they were inside, and
he and KAck!A'Lk! had showed each other their spirits, it was found that
KAck!A'Lk!'s spirits were the stronger.

Now they returned to their mother and sister and took them to the head
of the Taku river, where they spent some time in hunting. Then they
crossed to this side and, moving along slowly on account of their
sister, they came to a place on the Stikine called in Athapascan
HAk!<u>î</u>'ts, where they also hunted. Their destination was the Nass.
Coming down along the north bank of the Stikine to find a good place

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

for their sister to cross, they started to make the passage between
Telegraph and the narrows, one of them taking the dog on his back.

Before the brothers set out, however, their mother covered their sister
up so that she would not look at them until they got over. But when they
were half way across, they started back and it looked to the mother as
if they were drifting downstream. She said to her daughter, "Daughter,
it looks as if your brothers were going to be drowned. They are already
drifting down the river." Upon that, the girl raised her covering a
little and looked out at them, and immediately they turned into stone.
The pack that one of them was carrying fell off and floated down a short
distance before petrifying, and it may still be seen there. The dog also
turned to rock on its master's head and the mother and sister on shore.
One of the boys had green and red paints with him, such as they used to
paint their bows and arrows and their faces, and nowadays you can go
there and get it. Years ago people passing these rocks prayed to them,
stuffed pieces of their clothing into the crevices, and asked the rocks
for long life. <span id="fr_68"></span>[a](tmt040.htm#fn_68)

Raven was then living just below this place. His smoke may still be seen
there, and they call it Raven's smoke (Yê~~l~~ s!ê'<u>g</u>e). When
KAck!A'Lk! turned into a rock, Raven said, "Where is that shaman that
was going to come to after he had died?" He meant that, while he used to
restore his brothers to life by shaking his rattle over them, he could
not now restore himself; and people now apply these remarks to a shaman
who has not succeeded in saving a person after he has been paid a great
deal for his services. They will say, "Where is that shaman that could
save anybody, but could not save the very person we wanted saved?" If a
shaman were not truthful, they would say, "He is trying to have
KAck!A'Lk!'s spirits but will never got them because he is not truthful
like KAck!A'Lk!." <span id="fr_69"></span>[b](tmt040.htm#fn_69)

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_63"></span>[99:a](tmt038.htm#fr_63) Katishan added that
once while Fire-drill's son was chasing Dry-cloud he was pulled into a
village in the sky for some offense and punished there. Since then
people have believed that the stars are inhabited. They were thought to
be towns and the light the reflection of the sea.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[99:b](tmt039.htm#fr_64) Near the site of the
Presbyterian School.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[100:a](tmt039.htm#fr_65) A conspicuous bowlder
with flat, smooth top nearly in front of the Presbyterian Indian School.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[103:a](tmt039.htm#fr_66) In another place,
however, Katishan suggested that it might have been named from ~~l~~êq!,
his red-cod blanket. The word cAq! must be an old term for dog or some
variety of dog.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[103:b](tmt039.htm#fr_67) Probably the wren.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 31. Raven, Part VI](tmt040)
