[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tmt032)  [Next](tmt034) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

### 29. THE FIRST WAR IN THE WORLD <span id="fr_45"></span>[a](#fn_45)

A man named Xaku'tc! was very fond of hunting and hunted almost every
day with his brother-in-law, bringing home seal and all sorts of game
which he had speared. There was no money in those days.

It was winter. One morning when he went out he speared a porpoise near
the place where a devilfish lived, and began to skin it there, letting
its blood spread out over the water. He told his steersman to keep a
sharp lookout for the devilfish.

While they were moving along slowly skinning it, they saw the color of
the devilfish coming toward them from under the water. It had its arms
extended upward ready for action.

Xaku'tc! had a big spear ready by his side, while his brother-in-law
began to sharpen his knife and thought to do great things with it. When
the devilfish came up out of the water he jumped into the midst of its
arms along with his knife and was swallowed so quickly that he was able
to do nothing; so his brother-in-law had to fight by himself. After he
had fought with it for a long time he killed it, and it began to sink
with him. The canoe stood up on one end before it went under, and he
climbed up on the thwarts as high as he could go. At last the devilfish
went right under with them, and finally floated up again at a place
called Narrow point (Ku~~l~~<u>î</u>sa'o q!a).

Some one must have witnessed this fight, for they cut the devilfish open
to see if the hunter were there, and found him stowed away snugly inside
of it. That was the man that people often talk about in these days as
Xaku'tc!. <span id="fr_46"></span>[b](#fn_46) He it was who killed the
devilfish.

Afterward his spirit came to one of his friends. People now try to get
strength from him because he killed this devilfish. In olden times, when
one killed a great creature, his strength always came to another person.
Then his strength came to a certain person, impelling him to go to war.

They used to put a light, thin-skinned coat on this person's back to try
his strength by endeavoring to pull it off, but they were not able to do
so. They would pull this coat as far back as his shoulders, but, try as
hard as they might, they could not get it farther. Then \[the spirit in
this shaman\] told his name. He said, "I am Xaku'tc!. I have been
swallowed by a devilfish, and I come to you as a spirit (yêk)." Many
people came to see the shaman when he was possessed and to try him with
the coat which no one could pull off. What do you think it was that held
it on his back?

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

After they had tested all of his spirits they started south to war. They
were always warring with the southern people. They and the southern
people hated each other. When they went down with this shaman they
always enslaved many women and sometimes destroyed a whole town, all on
account of his strength.

There was a brave man among the southern people, called Q!ô<u>g</u>a',
who liked to kill people from up this way. One time a little boy they
had captured escaped from the fort where he was. He had a bow and arrows
with him. The brave man discovered where he was, went after him, and
pulled him out from under the log where he was hiding. But meanwhile the
spirits in the canoes of the northern people had seen Q!ô<u>g</u>a'.
Then Q!ô<u>g</u>a' took the little boy down on the beach and said to
him, "Shoot me in the eye." He put an arrow in his bow and took such
good aim that the arrow passed straight through it. The point of this
arrow was made of the large mussel shell. The brave man fell just like a
piece of wood thrown down. The little boy had killed him. Then all ran
to the little boy and took off his head. The chiefs passed his dried
scalp from one to another and wondered at what he had done. They named
him ever after Little-head (Qâcâ'k!<sup>u</sup>), and the man he killed
was called One-Little-head-killed (Xû<u>g</u>â'wadja<u>g</u>et). Even
now they relate how Little-head killed the brave man. Then the northern
people came around the fort and destroyed everybody there, some of those
in the canoes being also killed.

After that the southern people started north to war. They had a shaman
among them. On the way they came to a man named Murrelet (Tc!ît). When
this man was young, he had been trained to run up steep cliffs by having
a mountain-sheep's hoof tied to his leg or neck, and being held up to
the walls of the house and made to go through the motions of climbing.
They said, "Is this the man they talk about so much who can run up any
mountain?" This is what they said when they were chasing him. Then they
caught him and took him into one of their canoes.

Now the war chief said to his friends, "Let us take him ashore to that
cliff." So they took him to a place called Bell point (Gao ~~l~~îtu')
where part of the town of Huna is, to try him there. They said to him,
"Murrelet, go up this cliff." When he attempted it, however, he fell
back into the canoe. All the people in the canoes laughed at him. They
said, "Oh! you little thing. Why is it that they say you are the best
runner up this way?" After he had fallen back the third time, he said,
"This is not the way I am dressed when I go up a cliff. I always carry a
stone ax, a staff, and a flint, and I always carry along a seal's
stomach full of grease." They prepared these things for him and gave
them to him. Then he

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

started up, wearing his claw snowshoes, which must have been shod with
points as strong as the iron ones people have now. He stepped up a
little distance, shook himself, and looked down. Then he called like the
murrelet and went up flying. The warriors were surprised and said, "Now
give him some more things to put on his feet." They talked about him in
the canoes. They said, "Look! he is up on the very top of the mountain
peeping at us." Then he lit fires all along on top of the mountain. All
the war canoes went along to another place where was a sandy beach.

Then they tied all the canoe ropes to the body of Murrelet's steersman,
intending to use him as an anchor. Murrelet heard him crying and ran
down the mountain toward him. He turned the world over with his
foes. <span id="fr_47"></span>[a](#fn_47) As he came he made a noise
like the murrelet. When he got near he told the man to cry very loudly.
Probably this man was his brother. It is rather hard to say. Then he
said, "I am going to cut the ropes now. Cry harder." So he cut all of
the ropes, and they ran off, while the war canoes floated away.
Afterward, however, the warriors found where they had drifted to and
recovered them.

Then they started for the fort toward which they had originally set out
and captured it.

One high-caste woman they saved and carried south. They took good care
of her on account of her birth. At the time when she was captured she
was pregnant, and her child was born among the southern people. They
also took good care of him; and while he was growing up his mother would
take some of his blood and put it upon his nose to make him brave.

For a long time he was ignorant that they were slaves, until one day a
young fellow kicked his mother in the nose so that it bled. Then they
told him, but he said, "You people know that she is my mother. Why don't
you take good care of her even if she is a slave?" After that a spirit
possessed him. It was sorrow that made him have this spirit. Then he
ordered them to make a paddle for him, and they made him a big one. His
spirit was so very powerful that he obtained enough blankets for his
services to purchase his mother's freedom. Afterward he got ready to
come north with his father and mother, and they helped him to load his
canoe. Before he started his father's people asked him not to bring war
down upon them. No one else went with them because his spirit was going
to guide them.

When they were about to start they put matting over his mother, and,
whenever they were going to encamp, they never went right ashore but
always dropped anchor outside. How it happened they did not know, but on
the way up his mother became pregnant

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

and what was born from her had strength. This strength was what brought
them up. During that journey the shaman never ate.

When they came to the beach his friends did not know at first who he
was, but his mother related all that had happened. Then his friends came
in and began to help him show his spirits. He was getting other spirits
from the country of the people he was going to war against. From his
wrist up to his elbow he made as many black spots as there were towns he
intended to conquer, and, while all were helping him with his spirits,
the spots one after another began to smoke. His father told him to
remember the place where he had stayed and not destroy it. So, when the
spots burned, the burning stopped at the one at his elbow which he
simply cleaned away with his hand. This meant that he would extinguish
the fire at that point and not fight there.

Then all of his friends prepared themselves and set out to war. They
came straight up to a certain fort without attempting to hide, and the
fort people shouted, "Come on, you Chilkat people." They had no iron in
those days, but were armed with mussel-shell knives and spears, and wore
round wooden fighting hats. They destroyed all the men at this fort and
enslaved the women and children. Afterward they stood opposite the fort,
took off their war hats and began to scalp all they had killed. When
they got off they put the scalps on sticks and tied them all around the
canoe. They called this, "Shouting out for the scalped heads"
(KêcayAt-dus-hu'ktc). They felt very happy over the number of people
they had killed and over the number of slaves they had captured. There
were no white people here then, not even Russians. It was very close to
the time when Raven made us. The people who were doing these things were
Kâ'gwAntân. They had started to war from Lucâ'cak!<u>î</u>-ân and
KAq!Anuwû'.

After that all the southern people started north to make war, coming by
the outside passage. The first place they reached while rounding this
island was Murrelet-point fort (Ao~~l~~<u>î</u>-tc!î't<u>î</u>nû). One
canoe started off to spy upon them and was chased ashore but was carried
across a narrow strip of land and so got back. Therefore this place is
called Things-taken-over (Â'nAxgA~~l~~na'). Then they came right up to
the fort, destroyed it, and captured the women. There must have been a
hundred canoes coming to war. In those days they always used bows and
arrows.

A certain woman captured here said, "There is another town up the inlet
from us." So they started up about evening and, when the tide was pretty
well up, passed through a place where there is a small tide rip. They
caught sight of the town far back inside of this and exclaimed, "There's
the town." Then they landed just below it and started up into the forest
in order to surround it. When it became very dark they began to make
noises like birds up in the

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

woods. In the morning they descended to fight, and the women and
children began crying. They captured all. Meanwhile the tidal rapids
began to roar as the tide fell.

One woman among the captives was very old. They asked her what time of
tide to run the rapids, and she said to herself, "It is of no use for me
to live, for all of my friends and brothers are gone. It is just as well
to die as to be enslaved." So she said to them, "At half tide."

Then two canoes started down ahead in order to reach some forts said to
lie in another direction. They rushed straight under and were seen no
more. The old woman was drowned with them. So they made a mark with
their blood at the place where these two canoe loads had been drowned to
tell what had happened. It may be seen to-day and looks like yellowish
paint.

Next day the remaining canoes started out when the tide was high and
came to another fort next morning. While they were around behind this a
woman came out. Then they seized her and ran a spear up into her body
from beneath many times until she dropped dead without speaking. So this
fort came to be called,
Fort-where-they-stabbed-up-into-a-woman's-privates
(KAk!-kagûs-wudû'watA'q<u>î</u>nû). Then the people fought with clubs
and bows and arrows until all in the fort were destroyed, and started on
to another. When they made an attack in those days, they never
approached in the daytime but toward morning when everybody was sleeping
soundly. Both sides used wooden helmets and spears.

At this fort the women were always digging a big variety of clam (called
<u>g</u>AL!), storing these clams in the fort for food. The fort was
filled with them. So, when the assailants started up the cliff, one of
the men inside struck him with a clam shell just under the war hat so
that he bled profusely. He could not see on account of the blood. Then
the man in the fort took an Indian ax and beat out his brains. Afterward
all in the fort seized clam shells and struck their foes in the face
with them so that they could not come up. They threw so fast that the
canoes were all kept away; so that place is now called
Where-clams-kept-out-the-foes (Xa'os<u>î</u>xani-<u>g</u>âL!). For the
same reason this was the only fort where any people were saved, and on
the other hand many of the enemy were destroyed by the fort people.

Now they left this fort and came to another, landing on a beach near by,
and between them and the fort was what they supposed to be a fresh water
pond. Then one of them called Little-bear-man, because he had on a
bear-skin coat, began to shoot at the fort with arrows. But the people
in the fort shouted to him, "Do not be in such great haste. The tide
runs out from the place where you are." Then the bear man said, "The
people here say that the tide runs out

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

from this place, but \[I know\] that it is a fresh-water pond."
Presently the tide began to run out from it as they had told him, so he
chopped some wood, made a fire and lay by it to wait. After the tide had
ebbed they began to fight, destroyed everybody there, and burned the
fort down. Close by the site of this fort is a place called
Porpoise-belly (Tcîtc<u>î</u>û'k!).

The warriors thought they were getting much the best of the people up
this way, but really only a few were left to look after the forts, most
being collected elsewhere.

After they had destroyed all the people in four forts they landed on a
long sandy beach to cut off the scalps. When there was no time to scalp,
the heads were carried away until there should be more leisure. Scalps
and slaves were what people fought for, and they dried the scalps by
rubbing them on hot stones or holding them near the fire. Then they
again started north. This raid consumed the whole summer.

Southward of Huna was a fort on a high cliff, called Jealous-man fort
(Caos<u>î</u>tî'yîqâ-nuwu'). It was named from the man who encamped
there who was so jealous of his wife that he would let no one else live
near him. When the foes all stopped in front of him, and he could hear
them talking, he began to quarrel with them, saying, "You big round
heads, you want to destroy all of the people up this way." While they
were talking back at him one of their canoes struck a rock and split in
two, and, after they had rescued the people in it, they began talking
about this circumstance, saying, "If we wait any longer he will quarrel
us over as well." So they left him and went on north.

The next fort they attacked is called Huna-people's fort
(Hû'naqâwu-nuwu') and it stood just where they were going to turn south
again. Here they had the greatest fight of all, and the fort people
killed many of them. Finally they broke up all the canoes of these
people and started south. At this time they were overloaded with the
slaves they had taken, but they went in to every fort they passed near
and broke up the canoes belonging to it. The last of these forts was
called Fort-that-rapids-run-around (Dâtx-xâtkAnAda'-nû). When they had
destroyed all of the canoes there, they said, "Will you people bring any
more wars upon us? You will not dare to fight us again." They felt very
happy, for they thought that they had destroyed all of the northern
people, and that no more raids would be made upon them.

Most of the northern people, however, were encamped along the coast to
the westward, and, when they heard what had happened, they came from
Yakutat, Alsek river, and other places to Lucâ'cak!<u>î</u>-ân. They
talked together for a long time and finally decided upon a plan. All the
men began to sharpen their stone axes, and, when that was

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

finished, they came to a big tree they had already marked out and began
to chop at it from all sides. This was the biggest tree ever known.
While they worked, the women would come around it wailing and mourning
for their dead friends. It took two days to chop this tree down, and, if
anybody broke his stone ax, they felt very sorry for him and beat the
drums as though some one were dead. Then they cut the tree in two and
took a section off along the whole length where the upper side of the
canoe was to be, and the head workman directed that it be burnt out
inside with fire. So all the people assembled about it to work, and as
fast as it was burnt they took sticks and knocked off the burnt part so
as to burn deeper and to shape it properly when it had been burned
enough. There was one heavy limb that they let stand, merely finishing
about it. This work took them all winter. During the same time they
bathed in the sea and whipped one another in order to be brave in the
approaching war.

Toward spring they got inside of the canoe with their stone axes and
began to smooth it by cutting out the burnt part. Then they began to
give names to the canoe. It was finally called Spruce-canoe
(Sît-yâk<sup>u</sup>). The thing they left in the middle was the real
thing they were going to kill people with. Finally they finished it by
putting in seats.

Now they were only waiting for it to get warmer. In those days there
were special war leaders, and in fighting they wore helmets and greaves
made of common varieties of wood.

There was a shaman among these people named Qâ~~l~~A'tk! belonging to
the Nâste'd<u>î</u>. Because they were going to war, all of his people
would come about him to help him capture the souls of the enemy. One
time he said to his clothes man, "Go out for food, and be brave. The
head spirit is going to help you." So the clothes man went out as
directed and the spirit showed him the biggest halibut in the ocean. For
the float to his line he used the largest sea-lion stomach, and, when he
began to pull it up, it looked as though the whole ocean were flowing
into its mouth. But the shaman told him to be courageous and hold on
though the hook looked like nothing more than a small spot. It did not
even move, for the strength of the spirits killed it, but it was so
large that they had to tow it in below the town. Then all the people who
were going to fight cut the halibut up and began to dry it. There was
enough for all who were going to war and for all the women left at home.
When it was dried they started to pack part away in the canoe. Then they
pushed the canoe down on skids made of the bodies of two women whom they
had captured from the southern people on a previous expedition and whom
they now killed for the purpose. Meanwhile the southern people thought
that they had destroyed all of those at the north and were scattered
everywhere in camps, not taking the trouble to make forts.

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

Finally all the northern warriors got into the big canoe and they
started south. It took probably ten days to get there. At the first camp
they reached they killed all the men and put the women and children down
on the sharpened limb alive. Of one woman who was saved they asked where
the other people were, and she said that they were scattered everywhere
in camps which she named. After they had destroyed the second camp they
enslaved more women, whom they also put upon the sharpened limb. As they
never took any off, the number on this increased continually. Then they
asked the woman: "Didn't you expect any war party to come down here?"
She said, "No one expected another raid down here, so they built no
forts."

The big canoe went around everywhere, killing people, destroying
property, and enslaving women. The women captured at each place told
them where others were to be found, and so they continued from place to
place. 'They destroyed more of the southern people than were killed up
this way. When they thought that they had killed everybody they started
north, stopping at a certain place to scalp the bodies. Then they
reached home, and everybody felt happy. They not only brought numbers of
slaves but liberated those of their own people who had been taken south.
Since that time people have been freer to camp where they please, and,
although the northern and southern people fought against each other for
a long time, more slaves were taken up this way, so the northern people
did not esteem the southern people very highly. This is said to have
been the very oldest war.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_45"></span>[72:a](tmt033.htm#fr_45) Cf. the first part of
this story with story 11 and story 31, pp.
[150](tmt051.htm#page_150)-151.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[72:b](tmt033.htm#fr_46) Said to mean "shaggy,"
referring to the thick, lumpy hair of the grizzly bear. The man was
probably one of the Kâ'gwAntân.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[74:a](tmt033.htm#fr_47) Meaning that he sent
sleep on them to make them sleep harder.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 30. How Protestant Christianity Was First Heard of at
Sitka](tmt034)
