[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](tmt024)  [Next](tmt026.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 21. ORIGIN OF ICEBERG HOUSE <span id="fr_32"></span>[a](#fn_32.md)

A man and his wife were living at a certain fort. At that time some
disease came into the world and destroyed all of their uncles, fathers,
and friends. Then the man thought within himself, "I ought to give some
sort of feast to my dead friends," and he began to gather berries.

One day a quantity of ice floated up on the beach below him. He took
this up piece by piece and put it into the house, treating the pieces as
his guests. He poured a great deal of oil into the fire to make it
blaze. Then he took dishes, put berries into them, and placed these in
front of the pieces of ice to show that he was sorry for the dead
people, and desired to give some one a feast. After he had given to
them, the ice gave forth a kind of squeak as if the pieces were talking
to him, though he could not make out what was said. It is from this
squeak that the people now know that he invited them, and it is from
this circumstance also that, when ice drifts down upon a person in a
canoe, he talks to it and gives it tobacco, calling it "My son's
daughter" or "My son's wife." This is ahead of the TcûkAne'd<u>î</u> (i.
e., the beginning of the TcûkAne'd<u>î</u> clan). Therefore they own
Iceberg House. <span id="fr_33"></span>[b](#fn_33.md)

Afterwards this man went out again. He said to himself, "I will invite
anyone out on the sea that hears me." After he had gotten well out in
his canoe he shouted, "Everybody this way. Everybody this way," just as
though he were calling guests, and immediately crowds of the bear tribe,
thinking they were the ones invited, began coming down between the
mountains.

When he saw those animals coming, the man told his wife to be
courageous, but for himself he said he did not care whether he lived or
died, because all of his friends were dead. When the bear people began
to come in, he told them to go up to the rear end of the house, saying,
"It is your brother-in-law's seat you are going to sit down

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

in" (i. e., that was where he formerly sat). His wife was somewhat
frightened, but he talked to them as if they were his own people. As he
called out the names of the dead men who had held those seats they would
say in turn, "Hade' (present)," and he would pass a dish he speaker.

After they were through eating the chief of the bear tribe said to his
friends very plainly, "Do not leave this man friendless, but go to him
every one of you and show your respect." So they told the man to lie
down in front of them, and before they left they licked him, meaning
that thereby they licked his sorrow away. They said, "This is because
you feel lonely." Then the bears started off.

At that time men from some other town came near, watched the big animals
come out and heard the man speak to them as if they were his own
friends, but they were afraid to go near.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_32"></span>[52:a](tmt025.htm#fr_32.md) See story 64.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[52:b](tmt025.htm#fr_33.md) This man can not have
belonged to the TcûkAne'd<u>î</u> himself, because the ice he invited
must be of the opposite clan, but his wife may have been. He perhaps
belonged to the T!A'q!dentân.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 22. The Woman Taken Away by the Frog People](tmt026.md)
