[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tmt057)  [Next](tmt059) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

### 34. A STORY OF THE <u>G</u>ONAQADÊ'T

The head chief of the people living at the head of Nass river once came
down to the ocean and on his way back tied. his canoe to a dead tree
hanging from a cliff. At midnight he felt the canoe shaking very hard.
He jumped up and was terrified to see foam breaking almost over his
canoe. Then he thought of a sea monster, and climbed up to the cliff by
means of the dead tree. His nephews, however, went down with the canoe.
A <u>G</u>onaqAdê't had swallowed them.

Along with this canoe had come down another, which stopped for the night
at a sandy beach right opposite. They had seen the chief's canoe there
the night before, and, observing next morning that it was gone, supposed
the chief had started on ahead and continued their journey. They had
also felt the motion of the sea, although it was previously very calm.
When they reached home the canoe chief asked whether the head chief had
returned, and they said, "No." Then he told them how strangely the sea
had acted and how he missed the chief's canoe and thought that it had
gone on ahead.

After he had remained in the village for five days the canoe chief began
to think seriously about the chief's absence. Then he got into a large
canoe along with very many people and set out to look for him. Four men
stood up in the canoe continually, one at the bow, one at the stern, and
two in the middle, looking always for the chief from the time that they
left their village. They camped very early that night and arrived next
morning at the dead tree where the chief's canoe had been tied. As they
passed this place they hoard somebody shout, and the man in the stern,
looking up, saw the missing chief standing on the very top of the cliff.
They saw also signs of the <u>G</u>onaqAdê't and knew what had happened.
Then they took him in, but he would say nothing until they had gotten
back to the village. There he spoke, saying, "I did not have time to
awaken my sisters' children. I could not have saved myself if I had done
so. That is why they are gone." He felt badly about them.

Then all the people in the village began bathing for strength, sitting
in the water and whipping each other, so that they might kill the
monster. The chief, however, was very quiet, and, when they asked him
what they should do, he told them to do as they pleased. They were
surprised at this. When he saw that they really meant business he was
very silent, and they could see that he was thinking deeply. Finally he
said, "Boys, you better not punish yourselves so much. You are injuring
yourselves, and you are all that I have left now. Let us treat this
monster kindly. Instead of having destroyed my sisters' children, he may
have taken them to live with him, and, if we were to kill him, we might
kill my sisters' children as well. Instead

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

\[paragraph continues\] I will give a feast and invite this
<u>G</u>onaqAdê't to it." They all told him to do so if he thought he
could get his nephews back thereby.

Then they talked this whole matter over in the chief's house, and the
chief said, "Who will go to invite this <u>G</u>onaqAdê't?" And many of
the brave young men answered, "I will; I will," so that he got a canoe
load very quickly. After that the chief said, "Which one of my
brothers-in-law will go to invite him?" "I will," answered one of them
who was also brave. Then all got into the canoe, traveled that night and
encamped just before dawn on a sandy beach close to the
<u>G</u>onaqAdê't's cliff. About noon they put on their best dancing
clothes and paddled to the cliff. Then the chief's brother-in-law arose
in the canoe and shouted out as loudly as he could, "The great chief has
invited the <u>G</u>onaqAdê't to a feast." He repeated these words four
times, and the fourth time he did so the water began to act as on the
night when the chief's nephews had been lost. The foam became very thick
finally, and the cliff opened, revealing at some distance a very long
town. They were invited to come nearer, and, although they thought that
the cliff would close upon them, they did so. There were many men about
this town, and out of one large house came the chief (the
<u>G</u>onaqAdê't), who said, "Our song leader is out after wood.
Therefore, my father's people, you will have to stay out there quite a
while. We must wait for our song leader." Then the <u>G</u>onaqAdê't
said, "A long time since I heard that I was going to be invited to a
feast by that great chief." While he was so speaking there came people
into the town with a load of wood, and they, knew that it was the song
leader himself. The <u>G</u>onaqAdê't's people were now so impatient
that all rushed down to the song leader's canoe and carried it up
bodily. Then the streets became empty, because everyone had gone in to
dress, and in a little while they came down on the beach again and
danced for the people in the canoes.

As soon as this was over the visitors asked to come ashore, and
immediately their canoe with everyone inside was carried up to the house
of the chief. One of the visitors was sent to all the houses in the town
to invite them to the chief's house, and there they gave them Indian
tobacco and watched very closely to see what they would do with it. They
seemed very fond of it.

After this tobacco feast was over the <u>G</u>onaqAdê't said, "Let us
have a dance for these people who have come to invite us. Let us make
them happy." They went away and dressed, and that evening they had a
dance for their visitors. Then the <u>G</u>onaqAdê't said, "These people
that come to invite me have to fast." <span
id="fr_103"></span>[a](#fn_103) Early next morning, therefore, the
<u>G</u>onaqAdê't sat up in bed and said to the people in the house,
"Make a fire and let us feed these people who have

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

come so far to invite me." He sent one of his men through the village to
announce that he was going to have a feast for the people who had come
after him. When this was over, he said to his visitors, "You will stay
here with us for four days."

Many people had volunteered to go on this expedition, because they
thought that if they were swallowed they would see those who had been
lost before, and they looked for them all of that time, but in vain. At
the close of the fourth day the <u>G</u>onaqAdê't said, "We will start
off very early in the morning." When they got close to the host's
village, however, it rained hard, and they thought they would not be
able to dance in it. Seeing that it did not let up, they said to the
<u>G</u>onaqAdê't, "Haven't you a shaman among you! Now is the time to
get help from your shaman. He ought to make it stop raining." They
employed him, and he made the rain stop by summoning his spirits. All
this time the people who had invited the <u>G</u>onaqAdê't were very
silent, and only he knew what was the matter with them. As they were now
very close to the town, they sent one canoe thither to make it known
that the <u>G</u>onaqAdê't's people were encamped close by, ready to
come to the village. The chief told his people to get a quantity of wood
and take it to those he had invited, because they were to stay there
another day. All in the village were anxious to do this, because they
thought that they would see the chief's nephews. As they went along they
said to one another that they would look for the chief's eldest nephew,
whom they expected to see dressed in his dancing clothes. But, when they
arrived at the camp, they were disappointed.

Next morning all of the <u>G</u>onaqAdê't's people started for the
village, and, when they arrived, they were asked to stop their canoes a
few feet off so that the village people could dance for them. Then the
village people came down close to their canoes and danced. Afterward the
<u>G</u>onaqAdê't's people danced. The <u>G</u>onaqAdê't himself always
led, wearing the same hat with jointed crown.

Next day the village people danced again, and, after they were through,
the chief said that his guests would have to fast. So they fasted all
that day, and very early in the morning the <u>G</u>onaqAdê't got up and
told his people that they must sit up in bed and sing before the raven
called. This they had to be very particular about. Then the village
chief sent to the different houses to announce that the
<u>G</u>onaqAdê't and his people were to eat, and he gave them food that
day. They danced for three days and feasted for the same length of time.
The fourth day the village chief invited the <u>G</u>onaqAdê't's people
in order to give them property. He gave more to the <u>G</u>onaqAdê't
than to all the rest. That was his last feast. The evening he finished
it he felt sad, and he and all of his people were very quiet because
they had not yet seen his nephews. He said to himself, "I

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

wonder why this <u>G</u>onaqAdê't did not bring my sisters' children.
That is just what I invited him to the feast for."

Soon after this thought had passed through the chief's mind the
<u>G</u>onaqAdê't called loudly to one of his men, "Bring me my box from
over yonder." This box was beautifully carved and painted, and it was
from it that the Tsimshian came to know how to carve and paint boxes.
Then he took out a chief's dancing hat with sea lion bristles and a
rattle, and just as soon as he had done so the chief's eldest nephew
stood beside him. He put the headdress upon him and gave him the rattle,
and the <u>G</u>onaqAdê't's people sang songs for him. They sang four
songs, and the <u>G</u>onaqAdê't said, "This hat, this rattle, and these
songs are yours." The village chief was happy when he saw his nephew.

Then the <u>G</u>onaqAdê't went through the same actions as before.
There had been twenty youths in the chief's large canoe, and he gave
each a hat, a rattle, and four songs, making them all stand on one side
of the house. Now the village chief felt very happy and was glad that he
had invited the <u>G</u>onaqAdê't to him instead of doing as the village
people had planned.

Next morning, when the <u>G</u>onaqAdê't was preparing to start, it was
very foggy. He and his people left the village singing, and their canoes
went along side by side until they passed out of sight in the fog. They
returned to their own home.

It is from this story that people do not want to hear the raven before
their guests get up. The chief's headdress with sea lion bristles also
came from the <u>G</u>onaqAdê't, and so it happened that the Nass people
wore it first.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_103"></span>[171:a](tmt058.htm#fr_103) See *Twenty-sixth
Annual Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology*, p. 440.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 35. Origin of the L!<u>ê</u>'nAx<u>x</u>î'dAq](tmt059)
