[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](tmt007)  [Next](tmt009.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 4. ORIGIN OF THE KILLER WHALE <span id="fr_16"></span>[b](#fn_16.md)

A man named NâtsA~~l~~Ane', belonging to the Tsague'd<u>î</u> (Seal
people), made killer whales. He first tried to carve them out of red
cedar, then out of hemlock, then out of all other kinds of wood in
succession. He took each set of figures to the beach and tried to make
them swim out, but instead they floated up on the surface. Last of all
he tried yellow cedar, and was successful.

He made these of different sorts. On one he marked white lines with
Indian chalk from the corners of its mouth back to its head. He said,
"This is going to be the white-mouthed killer whale." When he first put
them into the water he headed them up the inlet, telling them that
whenever they went up to the heads of the bays they were to hunt for
seal, halibut, and all other things under the sea; but he told them not
to hurt a human being. When you are going up the bay, people will say to
you, "Give us something to eat." Before this people did not know what
the killer whale is.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Another thing people did not know was that the killer whale could go
ashore and camp. One time a man married a high-caste woman and went up
to the head of a certain bay with her, because he knew that the killer
whales always went there. On the way they saw a camp fire blazing upon
the shore. There were killer whales encamped here, but he thought they
were human beings and landed to see them. When they got close in, he
jumped into the water to urinate. All at once the killer-whale chief
said, "I feel people's looks. Go outside and look on the beach." But,
when they saw him urinating, they started off, leaving their camp just
as it was, jumped into the water, and swam away.

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

Then he went up to the camp with his wife, and they saw all kinds of
food there. His wife said, "It is lucky that we came across this;" and
after awhile the man said, "Let us cook some, my wife." Then the woman
took her cooking basket and put some water into it. Presently she said,
"Way out there is a canoe coming." It was a black canoe. She said, "We
better leave this alone until the canoe comes so that we can invite them
to eat with us." Her husband said, "All right." By and by his wife said,
"What is the matter? To my eyes it does not appear like a canoe. It is
too black." It was really a young killer whale, under which the other
killer whales were swimming to make it appear like a canoe. When the
supposed canoe reached land, the whales rushed ashore, seized the woman,
who had concealed herself behind her husband, and carried her down to
the sea. They took her away because her husband had taken their
provisions. This time, when the killer whales rose again, instead of
appearing like only one canoe, they came up out of the water thick
everywhere and began to swim down the bay very fast. Meanwhile the
husband went down to his canoe, got in, and paddled after them along the
shore. But, when they came to a high cliff where the water went down
deep, all the whales suddenly dived out of sight.

Now the man climbed to the top of this cliff, fastened a bough to his
head and another slim spruce bough around his waist, filled the space
inside of his shirt with rocks, and jumped into the ocean at the spot
where his wife had disappeared, falling upon a smooth, mossy place on
the bottom. When he awoke, he arose, looked about, and saw a long town
near by. He entered the last house, which proved to belong to the chief
of the shark people.

In this house he saw a man with a crooked mouth peeping out at him from
behind a post. A long time before, when he had been fishing, a shark had
cut his line and carried off the hook, and it was this hook that now
peeped out at him. It said, "Master, it is I. When your line broke, they
took me down here and have made me a slave."

Then he said to the shark chief, "Is there any news in this town?" and
he replied, "Nothing especial in our town, but right across from us is
the killer-whales' town, and recently we heard that a woman had been
captured there and is now married to the killer whale chief." Then the
shark chief continued: "The killer-whale chief has a slave. who is
always chopping wood back in the forest with a stone ax. When you come
to him, say within yourself, 'I wish your stone ax would break.' Wish it
continually." So the shark instructed him.

Then he went over to the killer-whale town, and, when the slave's ax did
break, he went up to him and said, "I will help you to fix that stone ax
if you will tell me where my wife is." So he began to fix it in place
for him. It was the only stone ax in the killer-whale

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

tribe. Then the slave said, "I always bring wood down and make a fire in
the evening, after which my master sends me for water. When you see me
going after water, come to the door and wait there for me. As soon as I
come in I am going to push over the fire. At the same time I am going to
empty the water into it so as to make a quantity of steam. Then rush in
and carry out your wife."

The man followed these directions and started away with his wife. Then
his halibut hook shouted, "This way, my master, this way." So he ran
toward the shark people's town, and they pursued him. Now the killer
whales attacked the shark people because they said that the sharks had
instructed him what to do, and they killed many sharks.

In return the sharks began to make themselves strong. They were going
out again to fight the killer whales. They went to some rocks and began
sharpening their teeth. Then they began the battle, and whenever the
killer whales approached, the sharks would run against their bellies and
rip them open, letting out their entrails. The whole bay was full of
killer whales and sharks. What happened to the woman is not told.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

When the killer-whale tribe start north the seals say, "Here comes
another battle. Here come the warriors." They say this because the
killer whales are always after seals. Killer whales are of different
kinds, and the one that always swims ahead is the red killer whale,
called "killer-whale-spear" (Kît-wusâ'n<u>î</u>). It was so named by the
man who made these animals because he shaped it long and slender. The
Tsague'd<u>î</u>, to which this man belonged, are a branch of the
DAqL!awe'd<u>î</u>; therefore the DAqL!awe'd<u>î</u> are the only people
who make the killer whale their emblem. <span
id="fr_17"></span>[a](#fn_17.md)

On their way to us the first killer whales came into a bay called
Kots!ê'L!, after Ts!êL!, the first man who came to that bay. They
encamped at its head and the day after began digging into the cliff. The
land there is not very high, so they were soon through, laid skids down,
and carried their canoes across. Some people watched them. The killer
whales always used to cross at the place where they laid down these
skids, and now people cross there. It is called Killer-whale-crossing
place (Kîtgû'n<u>î</u>), but is now overgrown with trees and underbrush.

\[This place is said to be on the north arm of Tenakee bay, where a
canal has been projected to enable boats to reach Huna more easily.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_15"></span>[25:a](tmt007.htm#fr_15.md) It is said that no one
knows what these words mean.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[25:b](tmt008.htm#fr_16.md) See stories 59 and 71.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[21:a](tmt008.htm#fr_17.md) The Wû'ckitan must,
however, be added.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 5. KAka'](tmt009.md)
