[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tmt005)  [Next](tmt007) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 2. THE BIG CLAM

At the farther end of Tenakee inlet (T!î'na<u>g</u>e) is a little bay
called Where-sweetness-killed-a-person (GAt~~l~~qô'wa<u>g</u>eya). One
summer there were many people encamped there drying salmon, and among
them many lively young people. One day some girls took a canoe and
crossed the bay to a strawberry patch on the other side. Afterwards a
man named Ts!êL! went down into the water to wade over to them but was
swallowed by a halibut. So they named the place Kots!ê'L! after this
man.

Near this inlet is a high cliff in front of which a big clam formerly
lived. It used to stick its head (lit. penis) high up out of the water.
It always had its valves open, and if a canoe passed that way, it would
close them on it (lit. shut its mouth on it), and the canoe was gone.

Raven heard of this clam, and he instructed a little mink to call to it,
"Stick out your head and let us see you," (î~~l~~i'~~l~~-AnAxdâ'x
ts!Agâ'x dustî'n), while the people stood ready above with sharpened
sticks. But, instead of speaking as it was told, the mink said, "Raven
made clam" (Yê~~l~~ dje'aos<u>î</u>ni<u>yî</u> <u>g</u>âL!). Finally the
mink said plainly as he had been directed, "Stick your head out of the
water and let us see you," and it began to put out its head. He said, "A
little more." When it was well out, all the people seized their sticks
and plunged them into it, cutting the ligament which held the valves
together so that they sprang apart. Then the whole bay began to smell
badly from it. On the rock slide back of the place where this clam used
to run out its head all sorts of things now grow. It is called
Clam-slide (Yês-kâd<u>ê</u>').

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3. English Version of the Story of the Four Brothers](tmt007)
