[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](tmt039)  [Next](tmt041.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

As Raven was traveling along after his encounter with the mother of
Fire-drill's son, he raw a sculpin on the beach looking at him and hid
from it to see what it would do. Then he saw it swim out on the surface
of the ocean and go down out of sight some distance off. After that he
opened the door of the sea, went to the house of the sculpin, which was
under a large rock, and said to it, "My younger brother, this is you, is
it?" "I am not your younger brother." "Oh!

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

yes, you are my younger brother. We were once coming down Nass river in
a canoe with our father and had just reached its mouth when you fell
overboard and sank forever." Then the sculpin said, "I can not be your
younger brother for I am a very old person." Said Raven, "I want you to
be next to me. There will be many sculpins, but you shall be the
principal one." So he placed the sculpin (wêq!) in the sky where it may
still be seen \[as the Pleiades\]. <span id="fr_70"></span>[a](#fn_70.md)

Raven saw a canoe out after halibut and said, "Come ashore and take me
across," but they paid no attention to him. Then he said, "If you do not
I will put you up in the sky also. I will make an example of you, too."
Then he held his walking stick out toward the canoe and they found
themselves going up into the sky. That is what you can see in the sky
now. It is called The-halibut-fishers
(DAnA'q<sup>u</sup>s!îk<u>ê</u>). <span id="fr_71"></span>[b](#fn_71.md)

Haven went to another place and determined to invite some people to a
feast, so he invited all the seal people. When each seal came in he
smeared its forehead with pitch, and, as soon as it got warm, the pitch
ran down over the seal's eyes and blinded it. Then he clubbed it to
death. <span id="fr_72"></span>[c](#fn_72.md)

He went along again, saw a nice fat deer, and said to it, "My friend
this is you is it?" There was a deep, narrow canyon near by and Raven
laid a rotten stick across it saying, "Let us go across to the other
side upon this," but the deer said, "No, I can not. It will break with
me and I shall get hurt." "No, you shall see how I cross it." So Raven
went over and Deer tried to follow him but fell to the bottom of the
canyon and was crushed to death. Then Raven went down and ate him,
stuffing himself so full that he could scarcely move. He then acted as
though he were very sad and pretended to cry, saying, "My friend, my
friend, he is gone." He pretended that the wild animals had devoured
him. <span id="fr_73"></span>[d](#fn_73.md)

After this Raven went to ground-hog's house for the winter. The
ground-hogs go into their holes in September. At home they live like
human beings and to them we are animals just as much. So Raven spent the
winter with one of them and became very sick of it,

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

but he could not get out. The ground-hog enjoyed himself very much, but
Raven acted as if he were in prison and kept shouting to his companion,
"Winter comes on, Winter comes on," thinking that the ground-hog had
power to make the winter pass rapidly. The ground-hog had to stay in his
hole for six months, and at that time he had six toes, one for each, but
Raven pulled one of his toes out of each foot in order to shorten the
winter. That is why he has but five nowadays. <span
id="fr_74"></span>[a](#fn_74.md)

Next Raven married the daughter of a chief named Fog-over-the-salmon
(Xât-ka-qo<u>g</u>â's!<u>î</u>). It was winter, and they were without
food, so Raven wanted salmon very much. His wife made a large basket and
next morning washed her hands in it. When she got through there was a
salmon there. Both were very glad, and cooked and ate it. Every day
afterward she did the same thing until their house was full of drying
salmon. After that, however, Raven and his wife quarreled, and he hit
her on the shoulder with a piece of dried salmon. Then she ran away from
him, but, when he ran after her and seized her, his hands passed right
through her body. Then she went into the water and disappeared forever,
while all of the salmon she had dried followed her. He could not catch
her because she was the fog (gûs!). After that he kept going to his
father-in-law to beg him to have his wife come back, but his
father-in-law said, "You promised me that you would have respect for her
and take care of her. You did not do it, therefore you can not have her
back." <span id="fr_75"></span>[b](#fn_75.md)

Then Raven had to leave this place, and went on to another town where he
found a widower. He said to this man, "I am in the same fix as you. My
wife also has died." Raven wanted to marry the daughter of the chief in
that town, so he said, "Of course I have to marry a woman of as high
caste as my first wife. That is the kind I am looking for." But TsAgwâ'n
(a bird), who was also looking for a high-caste wife, followed Raven
about all the time. He said to the people, "That man is telling stories
around here. His first wife left him because he was cruel to her." For
this reason they refused to

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

give the girl to him. Then he said to the chief, "If I had married your
daughter you would have had a great name in the world. You will
presently see your daughter take up with some person who is a nobody,
and, when they speak of you in the world, it will always be as
Chief-with-no-name. You may listen to this TsAgwâ'n if you want to, but
you will be sorry for it. He is a man from whom no good comes. Hereafter
this TsAgwâ'n will live far out at sea. And I will tell you this much,
that neither TsAgwâ'n nor myself will get this woman." This is why
TsAgwâ'n is now always alone. Raven also said to the chief, "You will
soon hear something of this' daughter of yours." All the high-caste men
wanted to marry this woman, but she would not have them.

Going on again, Raven came to an old man living alone, named
DAmnâ'dj<u>î</u>, and said to him, "Do you know the young daughter of
the chief close by here?" "Yes, I know her." "Why don't you try to marry
her?" "I can't get her. I know I can't, so I don't want to try." Then
Raven said, "I will make a medicine to enable you to get her." "But I
have no slave," said the old man; "to get her a man must have slaves."
"Oh!" said Raven, "you do not have to have a slave to get her. She will
take a liking to you and nobody can help it. She will marry you. Her
father will lose half of his property." Then he made the old man look
young, got feathers to put into his hair and a marten-skin robe to put
over him so that he appeared very handsome. But Raven said to him, "You
are not going to look like this all of the time. It is only for a day or
so."

After this the rejuvenated man got into his skin canoe, for this was
well to the north, and paddled over to where the girl lived. He did not
ask her father's consent but went directly to her, and she immediately
fell in love with him. Although so many had been after her she now said,
"I will marry you. I will go with you even if my father kills me for
it."

When the chief's slaves found them in the bedroom at the rear of the
house, they said to the chief, "Your daughter is married." So her mother
looked in there and found it was true. Then her father said, "Come out
from that room, my daughter." He had already told his slaves to lay down
valuable furs on the floor for his daughter and her husband to sit on.
He thought if she were already married it was of no use for him to be
angry with her. So the girl came out with her husband, and, when her
father saw him he was very glad, for he liked his looks, and he was
dressed like a high-caste person.

Then the chief related to his son-in-law how a fellow came along wanting
to marry his daughter, and how TsAgwâ'n had come afterward and, told him
that he had been cruel to his first wife. Said

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

the chief, "This man had a wife. His first wife is living yet. I don't
want to hurt his wife's feelings."

After that his son-in-law said, "My father told me to start right out
after him to-day in my canoe." He was in a hurry to depart because he
was afraid that all of his good clothing would leave him. He said to his
wife, "Take only your blanket to use on the passage, because I have
plenty of furs of every description at home." So she took nothing but
her marten-skin robe and a fox robe.

As she lay in the canoe, however, with her head resting on his lap she
kept feeling drops of water fall upon her face, and she said many times,
"What is that dripping on my face?" Then he would say, "It must be the
water splashing from my paddle," but it was really the drippings that
fall from an old man's eyes when he is very filthy. Her husband had
already become an old man again and had lost his fine clothing, but she
could not see it because her face was turned the other way. When the
woman thought that they were nearly at their destination she raised
herself to look out, glanced at her husband's face, and saw that he was
an altogether different man. She cried very hard.

After they had arrived at his town the old man went from house to house
asking the people to take pity on him and let him bring his wife to one
of them, because he knew that his own house was not fit for her. These,
however, were some of the people that had wanted to marry this woman, so
they said, "Why don't you take her to Your own fine house? You wanted
her." Meanwhile she sat on the beach by the canoe, weeping. Finally the
shabby sister of this old man, who was still older than he, came down to
her and said, "See here, you are a high-caste girl. Everybody says this
man is your husband, and you know he is your husband, so you better come
up to the house with me." Then she saw the place where he lived, and
observed that his bed was worse than that of one of her father's slaves.
The other people also paid no attention to her, although they knew who
she was, because she had married this man. They would eat after
everybody else was through, and, while he was eating, the people of the
town would make fun of him by shouting out, "DAmnâ'dj<u>î</u>'s
father-in-law and his brothers-in-law are coming to his grand house to
see him." Then he would run out to see whether it were so and find that
they were making fun of him. Every morning, while he was breakfasting
with his wife, the people fooled him in this way.

Although he had not said so, the father-in-law and the brothers-in-law
of DAmnâ'dj<u>î</u> thought that he was a very high-caste person because
he was dressed so finely. So they got together all their expensive furs
to visit him, and they had one canoe load of slaves, which they intended
to give him, all dressed with green feathers

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

from the heads of mallard drakes. One morning the people again shouted,
"DAmnâ'dj<u>î</u>'s father-in-law and his brothers-in-law are coming to
see him." Running out to look this time, he saw canoe after canoe
coming, loaded down deep. Then he did not know what to do. He began to
sweep out the house and begged some boys to help him clean up, but they
said, "You clean up yourself. Those are your people coming." The people
of the place also began hiding all of their basket-work pots, and
buckets.

As they came in, the people in the canoes sang together and all of them
were iridescent with color. They were very proud people. Then the old
man begged the boys to carry up the strangers' goods, but they replied
as before, "You carry them up yourself. You can do it." So the strangers
had to bring up their own things into the house and sit about without
anyone telling them where. The old man's sister was crying all the time.
Then the strangers understood at once what was the matter and felt very
sorry for these old people.

After that the old man kept saying to the boys who came in to look at
his visitors, "One of you go after water," but they answered, "Go after
water yourself. You can do it." He tried to borrow a basket for his
guests to eat off of, but they all said, "Use your own basket. What did
you go and get that high-caste girl for? You knew that you couldn't
afford it. Why didn't you get a poor person like yourself instead of a
chief's daughter? Now you may know that it isn't fun to get a high-caste
person when one is poor." His brothers-in-law and his father-in-law felt
ashamed at what they heard, and they also felt badly for him. Then the
old woman gave her brother a basket that was unfit for the chief's
slaves to eat out of, and he ran out to get water for his guests.

When he got there, however, and was stooping down to fill his basket,
the creek moved back from him and he followed it. It kept doing this and
he kept running after it until he came to the mountain, where it finally
vanished into a house. Running into this, he saw a very old woman
sitting there who said to him, "What are you after? Is there anything I
can do for you?" He said, "There is much that you can do for me, if you
can really do it. My friends are very mean to me. My father-in-law and
the other relations of my wife have all come to my place to visit me. I
married a very high-caste woman, and the people of my place seem to be
very mean about it. I am very poor and have nothing with which to
entertain them." He told all of his troubles to her from the beginning,
and, when he was through, she said, "Is that all?" "Yes, that is all."
Then the woman brushed back his hair several times with her hand, and
lo! he had a head of beautiful hair, while his ragged clothes changed
into valuable ones. He was handsomer and better clothed than at the time
when he first obtained his wife. The old woman

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

that brought him luck is called
L!<u>ê</u>'nAx<u>x</u>î'dAq-that-lives-in-the-water
(HîntAk-L!<u>ê</u>'nax<u>x</u>î'dAq). The old basket he had also turned
into a very large beautiful basket. Then she said to him, "There is a
spring back in the corner. Go there and uncover it and dip that basket
as far down as you can reach." He did so and, when he drew it out, it
was full of dentalia.

Now DAmnâ'dj<u>î</u> returned home very quickly, but nobody recognized
him at first except his wife and those who had seen him when he went to
get her. Afterward he gave water to his guests, and they could see
dentalia shells at the bottom. The house was now filled with spectators,
and those who had made fun of him were very much ashamed of themselves.
After he had given them water, he gave them handfuls of dentalia, for
which his father-in-law and his brothers-in-law gave him slaves,
valuable furs, and other property. So he became very rich and was chief
of that town. That is why the Indians do the same now. If a
brother-in-law gives them the least thing they return much more than its
value.

Now he had a big house built, and everything that he said had to be
done. The people that formerly made fun of him were like slaves to him.
He also gave great feasts, inviting people from many villages. But,
after he had become very great among them, he was too hard upon the
people of his town. His wife was prouder than when she was with her
father and if boys or anyone else displeased her they were put to death.

As they were now very proud and had plenty of people to work for them,
the husband and wife spent much time sitting on the roof of their house
looking about. One spring the woman saw a flock of swans
(<u>g</u>oq~~l~~) coming from the southeast, and said, "Oh! there is a
high-caste person among those birds that I was going to marry." Another
time they went up, and a flock of geese (t!âwA'q) came along. Then she
again said to her husband, "Oh! there is the high-caste person I was
going to marry." By and by some sand-hill cranes (dû~~l~~) flew past,
and she repeated the same words. But, when the brants (q<u>ê</u>n) came
over, and she spoke these words, they at once flew down to her and
carried her off with them. Her husband ran after the brants underneath
as fast as he could, and every now and then some of her clothing fell
down, but he was unable to overtake her.

When the birds finally let this woman drop, she was naked and all of her
hair even was gone. Then she got up and walked along the beach crying,
and she made a kind of apron for herself out of leaves. Continuing on
along the beach, she came upon a red snapper head, which she picked up.
She wandered on aimlessly, not knowing what to do, because she was very
sad at the thought of her fine home and her husband. Presently she saw
smoke ahead of her and

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

arrived at a house where was an old woman. She opened the door, and the
old woman said, "Come in." Then she said to the old woman, "Let us cook
this red snapper head ... . Yes, let us cook it," said the latter. After
they had eaten it, the old woman said to her, "Go along the beach and
try to find something else." So she went out and found a sculpin (wêq!).
Then she came back to the house and cooked that, but, while they were
eating, she heard many boys shouting, and she thought they were laughing
at her because she was naked. She looked around but saw no one. Then the
old woman said to her, "Take it (the food) out to that hole." She went
outside with the tray and saw an underground sweathouse out of which
many hands protruded. This was the place from which the shouting came.
She handed the tray down and it was soon handed up again with two fine
fox skins in it. Then the old woman said to her, "Make your clothing out
of these furs," and so she did.

After she had put the skins on, this old woman said, "Your father and
mother live a short distance away along this beach. You better go to
them. They are living at a salmon creek." So the girl went on and soon
saw her father and mother in a canoe far out where her father was
catching salmon. But, when she ran down toward the canoe to meet them,
her father said to his wife, "Here comes a fox." As he was looking for
something with which to kill it, she ran back into the woods.

Then she felt very badly, and returned to the old woman crying. "Did you
see your father?" said the latter. "Yes." "What did he say to you?" "He
took me for a fox. He was going to kill me." Then the old woman said,
"Yes, what else do you think you are? You have already turned into a
fox. Now go back to your father and let him kill you."

The woman went to the same place again and saw her father still closer
to the shore; and she heard him say, "Here comes that big fox again."
Then she ran right up to him, saying to herself, "Let him kill me," and
he did so. Years ago all the high-caste people wore bracelets and
necklaces, and each family had its own way of fixing them. Now, as this
woman was skinning the fox, she felt something around its foreleg. She
looked at it and found something like her daughter's bracelet. Afterward
she also cut around the neck and found her daughter's necklace. Then she
told her husband to come and look saying, "Here on this fox are our
daughter's necklace and bracelet." So they cried over the fox and said,
"Something must have made her turn into a fox." They knew how this fox
ran toward them instead of going away.

Now they took the body of the fox, placed it upon a very nice mat, and
laid another over it. They put eagle's down, which was always kept in
bags ready for use, on the body, crying above it all the time.

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

\[paragraph continues\] They also began fasting, and all of her brothers
and relations in that village fasted with them. All cleaned up their
houses and talked to their Creator (Cagû'n). One midnight, after they
had fasted for many days, they felt the house shaking, and, they heard a
noise in the place where the body lay. Then the father and mother felt
very happy. The mother went there with a light and saw that her daughter
was in her own proper shape, acting like a shaman. Then the woman named
the spirits in her. The first she mentioned was the swan spirit, the
next the goose spirit, the next the sand-hill-crane spirit, the next the
brant spirit. Another spirit was the red-snapper-head spirit which
called itself Spirit-with-a-labret-in-its-chin (Tûts-ya-û'wu-yêk), and
another the fox spirit (Nâ<u>g</u>As!e' koyê'k). Now the father and
mother of this woman were very happy, but her husband lost all of his
wealth and became poor again. <span id="fr_76"></span>[a](#fn_76.md)

Raven went to another place and turned himself into a woman. Then she
thought within herself, "Whose daughter shall I say I am?" She saw a sea
gull sitting out on a high rock and thought she would call that her
father. Years ago a chief would always pick out a high place in the
village on which to sit in the morning, and when Raven saw the sea gull
she thought within herself, "I am TAcAkîtûA'n's
(Sitter-on-a-high-cliff's) daughter." A canoe came along filled with
killer whales returning to their own village, and she married one of
them. When they got near the town, some one on the beach called to them,
"Where is that canoe coming from?" and one replied, "We have

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

been after a wife and we have her." "Which chief's daughter is that?"
they inquired, because in olden times people never went for any woman by
canoe except the daughter of a chief. "It is TAcAkîtûA'n's daughter,"
said they. "It is Cudâ'xduxô''s (Barked-hemlock's) daughter." All of the
killer whales believed this.

After that, the killer whales began to notice that their food was
disappearing very rapidly, although they were always out fishing and
hunting and had had their house piled full of boxes of grease. They
said, "What is wrong? What has become of all the grease and fat in these
boxes?" They could not find out for a long time. Raven wore a labret at
that time set with abalone shell which was formerly very valuable, and
it is from him that high-caste people afterward used these. After some
time they found this labret in one of the boxes of grease and said,
"Just look at this labret in here." Then Raven exclaimed, "Ih! my
labret, that is always the way with my labret. Whenever it feels like
doing so, it will leave my lip and go off anywhere."

By and by Raven said, "I wonder what is wrong that I have such bad
dreams. I dreamt that all the people of this village were asleep, and my
husband went to sleep and never woke up. My dreams always come true.
Whatever I dream surely happens." Late the next night she got a stick,
sharpened the ends, and killed her husband; and early in the morning
they heard her crying, "My husband, CâwA'tkaLA'qdagê's father." Years
ago, before the white laws came in force, when a chief used these words
in his speech, people knew that he had a grudge against some one and was
going to murder him. The killer whales, however, did not know what she
meant.

Then Raven told the people that her husband had said, "Take me and place
me quite a distance from the town." They did so, and she said, "When you
hear me cry, I don't want any of you to pass the place where I am
mourning. Tic up the fingers of my right hand. Allow me to eat with my
left hand only. You people must also wait upon me. You must bring me
everything I eat. Also paint my face black." She being the widow, they
had to do everything just as she told them, and these are the
regulations people have observed up to the present time. When they heard
her crying around the spot where her husband's body had been laid, no
one dared go near, and to this day those who go by a house where people
are mourning have to be very quiet. Nor do they pass it at all unless
they are compelled to.

Raven stayed there mourning for a long time, but she was really eating
the killer-whale's body. After she had remained by it for a very long
time, she would come home chewing gum, but, when the husband's relations
asked her for a piece, she would say, "No, no one can chew this gum but
Maca'," which was the name she gave to herself,

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

She lived there for a long time, continually crying out of doors, but
she was really crying for joy because she intended to kill all of the
killer whales.

While sitting outside one day a kêk!<sup>u</sup> (a small sea gull with
black head and white body) flew past, and Raven said, "Here comes the
man I made white." By and by she saw another, called kuL!<u>ê</u>'ta,
also white, and repeated the same words. Then some swans came along far
up in the sky, and she said the same thing about them. The killer whales
heard all this and said, "Since you have made them white, can't you make
us white also?" "It will hurt you to be made white," said Raven. "Those
people that came along were made white because they were brave." Then
she sharpened the same hardwood stick with which she had killed her
husband and told all of the killers to lie in a row. She began pounding
this into their ears, and so killed all of them but the last. This
looked up in time to see what she was doing and rushed into the sea
saying, "Raven has finished us sure enough" (QothagA's<u>î</u>nî'yêl).
Raven remained there for some time eating the whales she had killed.

The reason why there are so many cowards among men nowadays is because
Raven, being a, man, made himself into a woman at that time. The people
that live single all their lives are such as came from Raven at that
period. This is also why thieves are great talkers and, when they have
gotten into trouble, have a way of getting out, and why some women are
bad and deceive their husbands; for Raven said that his husband had
wanted to be buried a long way from town, and they believed him. This is
why the Tlingit used to be very careful of the way they spoke and even
of the way they walked when in public. <span
id="fr_77"></span>[a](#fn_77.md)

After that Raven came to a fish-hawk (kûnackAn<u>yê</u>'t) and
exclaiming, "Oh! my friend." entered its house, where was a great
quantity of food. He felt very happy at the sight, and said to the bird,
"I will stay with you all winter." Then he stayed so long that the hawk
began to get tired of him, because Raven would not work. When he saw
that the bird was getting weary of him he would say, "The time for me to
work hasn't come yet. When I work you will have plenty of rest. You will
not have to do a thing. This beach

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

will be covered with all kinds of fish, and you will be tired of
preparing them." So the hawk would think of what Raven was going to do
for him, forget everything else, and work all the harder to supply him
with food while Raven stayed in the house. Raven would also talk to him,
saying, "I remember to have seen you long ago. You were very high-caste.
I remember it very well," In that way he made the hawk forget for a time
all the bad feelings he had had toward him. But finally the little hawk
determined to go away, and he left Raven there alone. <span
id="fr_78"></span>[a](#fn_78.md)

Then Raven went to another industrious bird, called
hîn<u>yî</u>klê'<u>xî</u>, a fishing bird living along the river. He
called him "brother-in-law," and was invited to have something to eat,
but next morning the bird left him for he knew that he was a lazy
fellow. <span id="fr_79"></span>[b](#fn_79.md)

After that Raven came to the goose people, and married a woman among
them. By and by they said to him, "We are going to leave for other
countries. I don't think you can stand the journey." "Oh! yes," said
Raven, "I think I can stand the journey. If you can, I can." So they set
out, and, when Raven became tired, his wife flew along under him to hold
him up. Finally they came to camp and began going out on the beaches to
dig roots. Raven helped them, but he did not like the goose life nor the
food they ate, so he commenced to get very lean. One day he killed a
goose and began cooking it apart by himself, but they discovered him and
said, "He is a man-eater." So they left him. <span
id="fr_80"></span>[c](#fn_80.md)

Raven went to another place, and they said to him, "There will soon be a
great feast here," and they asked him to make a totem pole. He finished
it, and, when they put it up, they had a big dance. The people who gave
this were of the Wolf clan, so he danced with one of the two Raven
parties. Afterward he made a long speech to the host. Then they danced
again, and Raven held a spear in his hands. This meant that he was going
to invite to a feast next, and was done that they might give him more
than the others. So nowadays some are in earnest in doing this while
others go through the performance and leave without keeping it in mind.
Raven was the person who first had those dances and speeches.

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

While they were engaged in the last dance the opposite company of Ravens
danced very hard and showed fight by crossing the line which is always
set between. For this reason Raven would not go to the next feast, to be
confronted by these people. They sent after him many times, and when
they finally became tired of sending, began the feast without him. Then
he told his slave to go over and see if they were already eating, and on
his return he said, "They are having a grand time. They are eating a
great quantity of food." "Take me there," said Raven to his slaves. So
they went along with him, one on each side. When he came there he saw
that they were having a grand time distributing boxes of food to all the
head chiefs, and he said to a slave, "Ask them where this chief shall
sit." He did so, but they went on with their feast without paying the
slightest attention to him. Then Raven made his slave ask again, "Where
shall this chief sit? Where shall this chief sit?" and again they paid
no attention, although he shouted so that all in the house could hear
him. When the people left he was still standing around, so his slaves
said to him, "Why were you so particular? We could have had a great deal
to eat." After all were gone Raven ate the leavings.

So nowadays, when a person wants more than anyone else and makes people
send for him again and again, they go on with the feast, lest those of
the opposite party think that the host cares more for this one person
than for all the rest of them and leave his house. That is why they paid
no attention to Raven when he did come. One reason why Raven stayed away
was that he thought he would make them come after him several times
because he had promised to give a feast in return. Nowadays a person who
is going to give a feast acts in the same way, and people know by it
what he intends,

The following winter Raven gave his feast. This was at Alsek river, and
you can still see his house there with the boxes inside \[a rock
hollowed out like a cave with other rocks inside of it\]. When they came
in sight of that the Indians would pray to it.

As soon as his guests came, Raven went down to meet them with his bow
and arrows. That is why people now go down with their guns. He had so
much respect for his guests that he had all of his relations act as
servants, washing their hands and waiting on them while they ate.
Therefore the natives now act just so when they invite people from other
towns. Raven taught that all who came after should do just as he had
done. He also prepared chewing tobacco for his guests.

Then he began building his house, and, when the frame, consisting of
four uprights and two cross-pieces, was completed, he and his friends
danced the first dance. In this dance people sing funeral songs. Fight
songs, or one song with eight verses, are used at this

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

time, following a certain regular sequence and, if one that does not
know the song starts it and begins with the wrong verse, it is looked on
as a disgrace to his people. The guests danced, wearing their masks,
hats, emblem coats, and other festal paraphernalia. After that he
distributed his property, the people that had invited him before and the
leading chiefs obtaining most of it. <span id="fr_81"></span>[a](#fn_81.md)

After this Raven returned to the place where he was born and found the
box which had held the sun, Moon, and stars, and which now contained his
mother, still hanging up in the house of Nâs-cA'k<u>î</u>-yê~~l~~. Then
he went out with his bow and arrows and shot a whale (yâ'<u>î</u>). It
floated ashore on the beach and every day he saw all kinds of sea birds
sitting upon it, but he did not like the looks of any of them. Finally,
however, he shot a bird called câx and a large bird which was very
pretty and had a bill that looked like copper. Then he went to
Nâs-cA'k<u>î</u>-yê~~l~~'s house, took down the box which contained his
mother, <span id="fr_82"></span>[b](#fn_82.md) and liberated the flickers
(kûn) which she always kept under her arms. When
Nâs-cA'k<u>î</u>-yê~~l~~ saw that, he said, "All those pretty things of
mine are gone." They knew that Raven had done this, so they called him
into the house, and Nâs-cA'k<u>î</u>-yê~~l~~ asked him if it was indeed
he. He said, "Yes." Then Nâs-cA'k<u>î</u>-yê~~l~~ said, "Go and fell
that tree standing over there," for he wanted the tree to kill him. But
when the tree fell upon Raven it could not kill him because he was made
of rock. Finding him still alive, Nâs-cA'k<u>î</u>-yê~~l~~ called him in
the following day and said, "Go and clean out that canoe." It was a
canoe just being made, and when Raven got into it to clean it out it
closed upon him. Then he simply extended his elbows and broke the canoe
after which he smashed it up for firewood. All this
Nâs-cA'k<u>î</u>-yê~~l~~ saw, and again sent for him. He came in, and
they put into the fire a large copper kettle made like a box, filled it
with water, and put heated stones into it. Then they told him to get in,
and they covered it over in

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

order to kill him. Raven, however, again changed himself into a rock,
and, when they thought he was cooked to pieces and looked inside, they
saw that he was still there. Then they told him to come out.

Now Nâs-cA'k<u>î</u>-yê~~l~~ was very angry and said, "Let rain pour
down all over the world, and let people die of starvation." Then it
became so wet and stormy that people could not get food and began to
starve. Their canoes were also broken up, their houses fell in on them,
and they suffered terribly. Now Nâs-cA'k<u>î</u>-yê~~l~~ asked for his
jointed dance hat and when he put it on, water began pouring out of the
very top of it. It is from Nâs-cA'k<u>î</u>-yê~~l~~ that the Indians
obtained this kind of hat. When the water rose so as to cover the house
floor, Raven and his mother got upon the lowest retaining timber. This
house we are talking of, although it looked like a house to them, was
really part of the world. It had eight rows of retaining timbers, and,
as the water came up, Raven and his mother climbed to a higher one. At
the same time the people of the world were climbing up into the hills.
When the waters reached the fourth retaining timber they were half way
up the mountains. When the house was nearly full of water, Raven had his
mother get into the skin of the câx he had killed, while he got into the
skin of the white bird with copper-colored bill, and to this very day
Tlingit do not eat the câx because it was Raven's mother. The câx, which
is a great diver, now stayed on the surface of the water, but Raven
himself flew to the very highest cloud in the sky and hung there by his
bill. <span id="fr_84"></span>[a](#fn_84.md)

After Raven had hung to this cloud for days and days, nobody knows how
long, he pulled his bill out and prayed to fall upon a piece of kelp,
for he thought that the water had gone down. He did so, and, flying off,
found the waters just half way down the mountains.

Then he traveled along again and came to a shark which had a long stick
it had been swimming around with. He took this, stuck it straight down
into the sea and used it as a ladder on which to descend under the
ocean. Arrived at the bottom, he gathered up some sea urchins and
started along with them.

By and by Raven came to a place where an old woman lived and said to
her, "How cold I am after eating those sea urchins." As she paid no
attention to him, he repeated it over and over for a long time.

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

\[paragraph continues\] At last she said, "What low tide is this Raven
talking about?" He did not answer, and presently she said again, "What
low tide are you talking about!" After she had asked him this question
many times Raven became very angry and said, "I will stick these
sea-urchin shells into your body if you don't keep quiet." At last he
did so, and she began singing, "Don't, Raven, the tide will go down if
you don't stop." At the same time Raven kept asking Eagle, whom he had
set to watch the tide, "How far down is the tide now?" "The tide is down
as far as half a man." By and by he asked again, "How far down is the
tide?" "The tide is very low," said Eagle. Then the old woman would
start her song again. "Let it get dry all around the world," said Raven
to Eagle. By and by Eagle said, "The tide is very, very low now. You can
see hardly any water." "Let it get still drier," said Raven. Finally
everything became dry, and this was the lowest tide that there ever was.
All kinds of salmon, whales, seals, and other sea creatures lay round on
the sand flats where the people that were saved could get them. They had
enough from that ebb tide to supply them for a long, long time. When the
tide began to rise again all the people watched it, fearing that there
would be another flood, and they carried their food a long distance
back, praying for it to stop.

Quite a while before this flood took place the shamans had predicted it,
and those who worked from that time on collecting food were saved while
the others were destroyed.

After the flood Raven stayed in a town of considerable size. A named
CAq!<sup>u</sup>k!<sup>u</sup>, collected all kinds of big sea animals,
man there, as whales and seals, at the time of this great ebb and made a
great quantity of grease out of them, while Raven collected only small
fishes like cod and red cod and obtained but a few stomachs full of oil.
He would eat this up as fast as he made it, but his companion worked
hard so as to have a large quantity on hand.

By and by Raven said to CAq!<sup>u</sup>k!<sup>u</sup>, "My uncle, I had
a bad dream last night. I dreamt that there was war here and that we
were all killed. You must be on the watch." After that Raven said to the
birds, "You must make a lot of noise now." They did so and
CAq!<sup>u</sup>k!<sup>u</sup>, thinking warriors were coming to kill
him, ran out of the house. At once Raven began carrying off the boxes of
grease to a certain place in the woods. Just as he was at work on the
last of these the people of the house came back, pushed him into it, and
tied him up, but he made a hole with his bill and escaped. Then he went
to the place where he had hidden the boxes and stayed there for a year,
until he had eaten everything up.

Next Raven returned to Nass river and found that the people there had
not changed their ways. They were dancing and feasting and invited him
to join them.

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

By and by he came to where war was going on between two different
parties, and he said to them, "Make carved fighting hats, greaves, and
war coats to protect your bodies." The name of one village was
G<u>î</u>t!<u>î</u>'kc and the warring families were the
G<u>î</u>nAxd<u>â</u>'y<u>î</u>kc (or GîtgîcA~~l~~k) and the
G<u>î</u>tAndu'. The people of G<u>î</u>t!<u>î</u>'kc were getting the
worst of it. There were only three of them left--the chief, his sister,
and his sister's daughter. So the chief began sending to all the
villages for an aged man who was very smart and knew the old stories.
Whenever he brought in an old man, however, the latter would talk of
what good food he had been eating and what a high family he belonged to,
or tell what a wild life he had led when he was young, all which had no
interest for the chief. He thought if he could find an old man that
would tell him just the old story he wanted, he would pay him well.
Finally he found that among his enemies was
Old-man-who-foresees-all-troubles-in-the-world, the one spoken of at the
beginning of this story, and he sent for him without letting the rest of
his enemies know about it.

After a while he heard this old man coming along, talking very loud,
like a brave person, and he thought, "This is the old man from whom I am
going to hear the story." Then the old man said, "Chief, if you are
pleased with the story I am about to tell you, let me know how long I
shall stay in your house, and, if you are not pleased, let me go at
once." After that he told him all about the brave people that had lived
in times gone by, and said, "Always speak very highly of your enemies.
If you speak slightingly of them they will get above you. If you speak
to them in a nice manner, you will be able to stand alone. If you speak
to your enemies kindly, they will say, 'Let us give ourselves up to
him.'" Then the chief said to the old man, "You shall stay with me a
long time," so he stayed there, and next day they waited on him, giving
him water to wash his hands and face and food to eat.

After that the old man sent for a piece of Alaska maple (q!â~~l~~q!ê')
and made a war hat out of it carved to resemble a wolf. Then he said,
"Isn't there a wolf skin around here somewhere?" So they killed a wolf,
skinned it entire along with the claws and teeth and put the dancing hat
inside to fill out the head. He sent for another piece of hard wood from
a tree called sAks and made an arrow out of it. He burned black lines
around the shaft of this arrow like those on gambling sticks. Then he
said to the chief, "Your sister shall sing the war song for you, and
your sister's daughter shall beat the drum. Put the wolf on while the
song is being sung and go down toward that beach just below the house.
Jump over that rock four times." There was a big rock upon the beach
just below the house. As he gave these directions the old man made his
voice sound as though he were making war. He began to excite the chief.
"My nephews," he continued,

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

\[paragraph continues\] "are out in the canoe farthest from the beach.
Be careful how you use your arrow. Do not point it toward that canoe."
When the old man was about to leave him he handed him the arrow and a
bow and said, "Put on your war clothes about midnight. Then stand in
front of your house and pretend that you are going to shoot. Stand with
the arrow pointed toward your enemies' village and say to the arrow just
before you let it go, 'I am shooting you to kill the chief of my
enemies.' Then let the arrow go." After that the old man left, saying
that that was all he intended to tell him.

The chief did everything just as he had been directed. At midnight he
put on his war clothes and said to his sister, "You start
[the](errata.htm#4.md) war song, and let my niece go to the drum." Then he
took the position the old man had told him and shot the arrow saying,
"Lodge in the heart of my enemies' chief." He shot, and in the morning
the people of that village saw that the chief was dead. They thought
that he had died of heart disease, but, when they examined his body,
they found the small arrow sticking into his heart. Then they cut this
out and began asking one another, "Where has this arrow come from? What
tribe does it belong to?" So they sent for the old man who had made it
and, as he was examining it, he said, "I wonder to what place this
belongs." Just then it flew out of his hand, and he said, "Run out and
see what it is going to say." So all ran outside, and the arrow flew up
and down in the sky saying "Nu'<u>x</u>gayu." This is the Tsimshian name
of an animal, but the old man made it indicate by that the village from
which it came. After that, it went across to their enemies' town. Now,
when they saw this, they got into their canoes and went over to fight.
As soon as the canoes had gotten around his house the chief said, "I am
not afraid to be killed by you, because I know that you are all from a
high family." Then he again had his sister sing the war song and his
niece beat the drum, and he acted as the old man had directed him. Just
before he came out he threw out ashes which looked like smoke and
concealed his movements. In the midst of this he came out and shot the
arrow toward their canoes, which passed through every man in four of
them. Then it came back to him, and he shot it through four more canoe
loads. Those who were left went home.

The day after this still more came to fight him with like result, but
the next time he made a mistake, shot toward the canoe which contained
the old man's relations, and killed all of them. Then the arrow flew
back to the old man, who sent it at the chief for whom he had made it,
and killed him.

Now the chief's sister put on her brother's war clothes, while her
daughter sang the song and drummed. With the arrow which had traveled
back to her, she began killing off her enemies just as her brother had
done. So the people made fun of the old man, saying,

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

\[paragraph continues\] "I thought you said you had killed that chief."
"I did kill him." "Well! if you killed the chief, who is it that is
killing our friends?" Still he kept assuring them that he had killed the
chief. Then they started over once more. But, this time, when the woman
had shot and was running back into the house, they saw by the apron she
wore that it was a woman, and the canoes started shoreward, the people
exclaiming, "It is a woman. It is a woman." When all had landed, and she
saw that they were coming after her, she and her daughter escaped out of
the rear of the house and ran up into the woods. From the top of the
mountain there she glanced back and said to her daughter, "Look at your
uncle's house. It is burning." They could see the fire and smoke coming
from it. Then they felt very sad and composed songs which the Indians
sing to this very day. They cried so hard that they fell asleep. After
that they went farther into the forest crying, and the mother said as
she wept, "I wonder whom I can get to marry my daughter so that he can
help me."

By and by Mink came to the woman and said, "What is the matter with me?
Will not I do for your daughter?" "What do you do for a living?" she
asked him. "I have a smell that kills everything." Then the woman went
straight on without paying the least attention to him. Next Marten came
along. To this woman they appeared as human beings. And Marten said,
"What is the matter with me?" "What can you do for a living?" He said he
was a very fast runner and could get anything he wanted, but she
rejected him. Then she went on again singing as before, "Who will marry
my daughter in order to help me?" Next came Mountain-goat. "What is the
matter with me?" "What do you do for a living?" "I can kill anything
with my horns. I live far up among the bluffs where nothing can harm
me." He did not please her, and she went on past. Then Wolf came,
saying, "What is the matter with me? Can not I get your daughter?" "What
do you do for a living?" "I am a fast runner. I can kill anything I
want. I have plenty to eat." He did not suit her, and she passed by him,
but he was so determined that he met her again with a mountain goat in
his mouth. She went right by, however, and came to a lake where she
repeated the same words. At that place she met a very fine-looking young
man, Frog. "What do you do for a living?" she asked, and he did not tell
her what he did but said, "Although I am small very few people like me.
Even the big animals are scared of me." After him Grizzly Bear asked,
"What is the matter with me?" "What do you do for a living?" "Don't you
see how large I am? I am a very powerful fellow." He showed her his
strength and what teeth he had, and said that he was very quick and
active, but she refused to have him, and went on. Then she met the Wild
Canary (s!âs!). "What do you do for a living?" she said. "I am a fine
singer." She

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

went on and met another bird, called Ts!în<u>îg</u>ê'nî, and asked,
"What do you do for a living?" "Don't you see that I am a very handsome
fellow. All the women want to marry me." Then she went along and met
Fox, who said, ''What is the matter with me?" "What do you do for a
living?" she asked. She noticed that he was dressed very warmly in very
beautiful clothing. "I can run and get anything I want," he said. "I
have plenty to eat." He did not suit her, and she went right by. After a
while there came Lynx (<u>g</u>âk), who replied to her question by
saying, "I am a traveler and get all kinds of birds to eat." Next she
met Wolverine (Nûsk) which answered, "I am a good hunter and I kill all
kinds of animals."

After that she went along sadly, repeating as usual, "Who will marry my
daughter so that he can help me?" Then she saw a man who shone all over,
standing on top of a mountain. She came very close to him, and he said,
"What is the matter with me?" "What do you do for a living?" "I move
about as quick as thought. Wherever I want to go there I am at once. My
father is the sun." She said, "Let us see him then." So he spoke to the
sun. It was a cloudy day, but, when he spoke to it, the sun appeared and
it became very warm. "All right," she said, "you can have my daughter
for your wife."

After that the man took a limb from a tree and said to his
mother-in-law, "You shall be this limb." He put her inside and shoved
the limb back. Then he said to her, "The world will call you
'Woman-of-the-forest' (Âs-gutu'<u>yî</u>k-câ). You will mock everybody
that shouts or whistles. When they hear you they will know what it is."
So she became the echo.

After this a spherical cloud came down and rolled up with them. As the
cloud was going up, the man said to his wife, "Don't look at it. Keep
your face hidden." When he told her to open her eyes again she saw that
she was in a beautiful place with flowers all about. It was his house.
It was a grassy country and there were all kinds of fruits about the
place.

There this woman had eight children, seven boys and a girl. She was very
much afraid of everything, and that is why women are so to-day. Then
they built for these children a small house with a painted front, put up
forty boxes of every kind of fruit and berry, also dried salmon, grease,
and other kinds of food, and stored the house with them. They had
bracelets and a marten-skin robe made for the girl, and her grandfather
said to her, "You are going to be very quarrelsome. While quarreling you
will always examine your bracelets." Then their grandfather prepared war
clothes for the boys and said, "You are now going down to fight." He
also gave them a painted wooden wedge and said, "Keep this with you all
the time. When you are fighting and see that your enemies are too strong
for you, and you are getting beaten, put this wedge into the

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

fire. While putting it into the fire, say this: 'Grandfather, our
enemies are beating us?'" Then they were all placed, together with their
house and its contents, in the spherical cloud and set down on the site
of G<u>î</u>t!<u>î</u>'kc. As soon as it landed, the little house grew
to be a big house with painted front, and the boxes of berries, salmon,
and other provisions were all big painted boxes. Everything had been
made small so as to come down without being seen.

Then the children of the sun were all very happy, and made so much noise
that their enemies, who were out on the river fishing for eulachon,
heard them and said, "Those are the bones of the G<u>î</u>t!<u>î</u>'kc
people that are making so much racket." As soon, however, as they found
that their enemies' village was repeopled they started off in their
canoes to make war upon them. They were so numerous that the children of
the sun found they were going to be beaten and put their wedge into the
fire. Then the sun came out fiercely, and many of the enemy became so
hot that they jumped into the ocean. The ocean was so hot that they died
there, while those upon land, becoming too blinded to fight, were also
killed. <span id="fr_85"></span>[a](tmt041.htm#fn_85.md)

Therefore nowadays people do the same thing. When they fight and a good
man of high caste is killed, his friends do not come to their opponents
as though they were angry. They use good words to them, and thereby
induce a man of equally high rank on the other side to come out and be
killed by them. If they went there talking meanly they would not get him
to come out. The woman who was saved remembered how her brother and all
of her relations had been killed. Therefore she took good care in
selecting a husband for her daughter, because she felt if she did so she
would get all of her relatives back. That is why the Indians of good
family took such good care of a daughter in old times. They knew that if
she married well she would be a help to the family.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_68"></span>[106:a](tmt039.htm#fr_68.md) See stories 3 and 97.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[106:b](tmt039.htm#fr_69.md) "The disobedience of
the young woman in looking up contrary to the directions of her brothers
is brought up to girls at that period in life. This is why they do
whatever their mothers tell them at that time, and do not displease
their brothers. They always think of ~~L~~q!ayâ'k!'s sister. So this
part of the story always taught them to be obedient.

Anciently we were taught commandments similar to those of the whites.
Don't look down on a person because he is proud. Don't look down on a
low-caste person. Don't steal. Don't lie." (From the writer's
informant.)

<span id="fn_70"></span>[107:a](tmt040.htm#fr_70.md) "So nowadays, when a
person wants people to think he knows a great deal and says, 'I am very
old, they will answer, 'If Sculpin could not make Raven believe he was
so old and knew so much, neither can you make us believe it of you. An
older person will come along and show you to the world as the sculpin is
seen now.' So, to-day, when children go out in the evening, they will
say, 'There is that sculpin up there.'"

<span id="fn_71"></span>[107:b](tmt040.htm#fr_71.md) "When a child was lazy
and disobedient, they told him how the halibut fishermen got up into the
sky for their laziness. Therefore the children were afraid of being
lazy." (From the writer's informant.)

<span id="fn_72"></span>[107:c](tmt040.htm#fr_72.md) "This is brought up to
a child to prevent him from being a murderer in secret, or a coward."
(From the writer's informant.)

<span id="fn_73"></span>[107:d](tmt040.htm#fr_73.md) "This episode is
brought up when one who was the enemy of a dead man is seen to act as if
he were very sad in the house where his body lies. People say to one
another, 'He is acting as Raven did when he killed his friend the deer.'
it is also applied to a person who is jealous of one who is well brought
up and in good circumstances. When such a person dies he will act like
Raven." (From the writer's informant.)

<span id="fn_74"></span>[108:a](tmt040.htm#fr_74.md) "This episode used to
be brought up to girls of 14 or 15 who wanted to run about to feasts and
other festivities without their mothers or grandmothers. Such girls were
told that they were like Raven when be was imprisoned in the ground-hog
hole and wanted to get out. Those who stayed indoors were respected by
everybody. They also likened Raven to a foolish girl who tries to lead a
good girl, Ground-hog, astray. They told the latter that some injury
would result, as happened to Ground-hog in losing his toes. When a
mother saw that her daughter was willing to listen to a foolish girl,
she would say to her, 'Whatever that foolish girl leads you to will be
seen on you as long as you live." (From the writer's informant.)

<span id="fn_75"></span>[108:b](tmt040.htm#fr_75.md) When a young man was
about to marry, people would bring this story up to him and tell him
that if he did not take care of his wife and once forgot himself, he
might lose her. If his wife were a good woman and he treated her right,
he would have money and property, but if he were mean to her, he would
lose it. And if he lost his wife and had been good to her, he could get
another easily." (From the writer's informant.)

<span id="fn_76"></span>[114:a](tmt040.htm#fr_76.md) "As TsAgw<u>â</u>'n
was a mischief maker and followed Raven to tell what he had done to his
wife, so some man will always follow one up if he doesn't tell the
truth. Formerly, when a man left his wife, a settlement of property was
made and, if a man married again before this took place, his first wife
made trouble for his second. Since no one wants trouble of this kind, a
woman always found out what a man was like before she married him, just
as this woman found out about Raven.

"Since DAmnâ'dj<u>î</u> married a woman of higher family than himself
and was taunted by the town people, nowadays they tell a young man that,
if he marries a girl of higher rank than himself, they will not remain
together long, because she will feel above him and want him to please
her continually, while she does nothing to please him. As
DAmnâ'dj<u>î</u> from being poor became rich suddenly and was very hard
on his people till all of his riches were again taken away from him,
they say, 'When you become wealthy after having been poor, don't be
proud or your money will all leave you.' When a man has had plenty of
money all his life and wastes it foolishly, they say of him, 'He has
fallen from the hands of the brant.' So a young man nowadays saves up a
considerable sum of money before he marries that he may not be made fun
of. Perhaps if we had not had this story among the natives of Alaska we
would have had nothing to go by.

"The fact that DAmnâ'dj<u>î</u>'s wife's relations did not insult or
maltreat him after they learned how poor he was, shows that they were
really high caste. Had they but recently acquired their wealth they
would have done so. Therefore people say to a person who speaks before
he thinks, 'Why can't you be like DAmnâ'dj<u>î</u>'s brothers-in-law?
Think before you speak.' When the village people were making fun of
their brother-in-law, his wife's relations might have done anything to
them, for they had wealth in furs and slaves, but they kept quiet
because they had too much respect for their sister to disgrace her
husband's village people. It was also out of respect for their sister
that, when they found out that all that the poor man had for them to
drink was water, they drank it willingly without saying a word, where a
low-caste person would have grumbled. Therefore people tell a man who
has no respect for his brother-in-law because he is low-caste that he
ought to be like these brothers-in-law of DAmnâ'dj<u>î</u>. Because
DAmnâ'dj<u>î</u> was lucky twice, the people in olden times used to pray
for luck continually. If he wanted to be lucky a poor man lived a very
pure life. Those who do not do what is right never will have luck."
(From the writer's informant.)

<span id="fn_77"></span>[116:a](tmt040.htm#fr_77.md) "This part of the
story was referred to when one wished to imply that a person was trying
to make people believe that he was better than he really was. So
nowadays, when a high-caste man wants to marry an orphan, people find
out who her father is, because Raven made believe her own father was a
chief. Some women will go off to a strange place and say falsely, 'I am
so-and-so's daughter,' making people think that she belongs to a very
high family. The same sort of woman will assume mourning for her
husband, and make people believe she is mourning when she is really
thinking what she is going to do and where she is going. If she finds
out she can get her living falsely, she will keep on being false. That
is why Raven told so many stories about her husband's death. When a
mother sees that her girl is very foolish, she will say to her, 'When
you marry and become a widow, you will eat up your husband's body,
meaning that, if her husband leaves her any property, she will use it up
foolishly. She also says to her, 'You are so foolish now, I believe you
will steal after you are married,' meaning that she will be foolish with
what her husband earns. Then, she says, 'They will find you out by
finding something of yours in the place where you have been, and it will
be a disgrace to your brothers and your father.'" (From the writer's
informant.)

<span id="fn_78"></span>[117:a](tmt040.htm#fr_78.md) "This is the way
nowadays with persons who have no respect for themselves. They go from
house to house to be fed by others, and such persons are greedy, great
eaters, and lazy, The people tell their children that those who lead
this kind of life are not respected. A person who tells the truth is
always known because he keeps his word. When Katishan was a boy, they
used to say to him when they could not make him do anything, 'You are so
lazy that you will be left in some village alone.' \[It is said that
Raven comes along and helps one abandoned in a village.\] This is why
the Tlingit tried hard to earn their living and make things comfortable
for themselves." (From the writer's Informant.)

<span id="fn_79"></span>[117:b](tmt040.htm#fr_79.md) "So it is always said,
'A lazy man will be known wherever he goes.' Such a person will go from
place to place living on others and perhaps bringing in a few pails of
water or some wood for his food, but however high-caste he is, he will
be looked down upon. Therefore the little ones were taught to stay in
their native place and make their living there, instead of wandering
from town to town. To this day the high-caste Indians do so and visit in
other towns only for a short time. Then people say 'Look at so-and-so.
He stays in his own village.'" (From the writer's informant.)

<span id="fn_80"></span>[117:c](tmt040.htm#fr_80.md) "Nowadays it is said
that although a wicked man may appear very nice he will soon be found
out. Some little act will betray him." (From the writer's informant.)

<span id="fn_81"></span>[119:a](tmt040.htm#fr_81.md) "So nowadays a man
that has invited people previously is paid first, receiving more than he
had given. It he thinks that he has received more than he ought he gives
another feast. When we now look back at this it looks as though these
people were fighting to see which family was highest.

"When a man has invited people and they are coining in toward the town
he himself remains in the house. Then some of his relations come and
pound on the door and say to him, 'Why are you staying in the house? You
are acting like a coward. Your enemies are coming., So the host comes
out with his bow and arrows, or nowadays his gun, and says, 'Where are
those enemies you were telling me about?' 'There they are out therein
that canoe.' 'Those are not my enemies. That is a crowd of women in that
canoe. Years ago my relations invited them.' He calls them women when
his people had invited them twice without a return invitation. The
people that are going to give the feast study what they are to say
before they have it, and they never let outsiders know what it is. As
the visitors' canoe approached shore they might say: 'What is that I see
out there?' Then one would look and reply, 'That is a
<u>G</u>onaqAdê't'." They call it a That is a <u>G</u>onaqAdê't because
they know that that party will give a feast and invite them in
return. <span id="fr_83"></span>[\*](#fn_83.md) They also have songs ready
to sing at the very beginning of the feast, and, when such a song is
started it shows that the feast will be a big one." (From the writer's
Informant.)

<span id="fn_82"></span>[119:b](tmt040.htm#fr_82.md) "Some people call this
woman Nâs-cA'k<u>î</u>-yê~~l~~'s wife and some his daughter, but I have
always heard that she was his daughter." (From the writer's informant.)

<span id="fn_83"></span>[119:\*](tmt040.htm#fr_83.md) To see a
<u>G</u>onaqAdê't' brought wealth to the beholder.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[120:a](tmt040.htm#fr_84.md) A short version of
this part of the story was related to me by my Sitka interpreter who had
obtained it from his wife. According to this, a man had a wife of whom
he was very jealous. People wanted to get to her and marry her, but he
guarded her very closely. Finally a man reached her and pulled aside her
arms, letting free all of the land animals and sea creatures she had
been keeping there. That was why her husband was so jealous about her.
Afterward the husband raised a flood, but one man heard of it and made a
big canoe to which others attached theirs, and all went up together. He
also took two animals of each species into his canoe. This last is
evidently a Christian addition. By some the jealous husband is said to
have been Loon.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 31. Raven, Part VII](tmt041.md)
