[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](tmt131)  [Next](tmt133.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_372">p. 372</span>

### THE TOBACCO FEAST <span id="fr_167"></span>[a](#fn_167.md)

If one of the family of the writer's informant, the Kasq!ague'd<u>î</u>,
had married a Nan<u>y</u>aâ'<u>yî</u> woman and she died, the
Nan<u>y</u>aâ'<u>yî</u> would invite his people for tobacco. They
invited them there to mourn. This feast was different from the pleasure
feasts, when dancing and such things took place. The people asked them
while the dead body was still lying in the house. Then the other
Kasq!ague'd<u>î</u> would ask the bereaved man to deliver a speech. The
Nan<u>y</u>aâ'<u>yî</u> would be very quiet because they were mourning.
Then he would rise and speak as follows:

"Yes, yes, my grandfathers, we remember you are mourning. We are not
smoking this tobacco for which you have invited us. These long dead
uncles of ours and our mothers are the ones who smoke it. Do not mourn,
my grandfathers. She is not dead. Her aunts are holding her on their
laps. All her father's brothers are shaking hands with her. Our \[dead\]
chief has come back because he has seen you mourning. Now, however, he
has wiped away your tears. That is all." <span
id="fr_168"></span>[b](#fn_168.md)

One of those giving the feast would now reply:

"I thank you deeply, deeply for the things you have done to these
grandfathers of yours with your words. A person will always take his
shell to a dry place. <span id="fr_169"></span>[c](#fn_169.md) So you have
done to this dead of ours.

<span id="page_373">p. 373</span>

\[paragraph continues\] All these, your grandfathers, were as if sick.
But now you are good medicine to us. These words of yours have cured
us."

Then they would say to the dead woman:

"Get up from your husbands' path \[so that they may pass out\]."

The spirits of the dead of both phratries are supposed to be smoking
while their friends on earth smoke, and they also share the feast.
People of the opposite phratry took care of the dead, because it was
thought men would be wanting in respect to their opposites if members of
their own phratry were invited to do it. For this service the opposites
were well paid.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_167"></span>[372:a](tmt132.htm#fr_167.md) Obtained from
Katishan at Wrangell.

<span id="fn_168"></span>[372:b](tmt132.htm#fr_168.md) Immediately
following the English translations of the several speeches on pp.
372-386 are given the corresponding Indian texts accompanied by
interlinear translations. (*Not included in etext--JBH*).

<span id="fn_169"></span>[372:c](tmt132.htm#fr_169.md) The opposite clan is
spoken of as the outside shell.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Speeches Delivered at a Feast When a Pole was Erected for the
Dead](tmt133.md)
