[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tmt112)  [Next](tmt114) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

# TEXTS <span id="fr_127"></span>[a](#fn_127)

### 89. THE ORIGIN OF COPPER <span id="fr_128"></span>[b](#fn_128)

A chief lived in the middle of a very long town. His daughter was fond
of picking berries. Once she went for berries with her father's slaves,
and while picking far up in the woods she stepped upon some
grizzly-bear's dung. "They always leave things under people's feet,
those wide anuses," she said. When they wanted to go down her basket
broke, and her father's slaves picked up the berries and put them back
for her. Very close to her father's house it broke again. Then one said
to her, "Now pick them up yourself." While she was putting them in a man
came to her whirling a stick in his hand. "Let me marry you," he said to
her. Then he started off with her. He went up toward the woods with her
and passed under two logs. These things which looked like logs were
mountains.

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

The people missed this woman. For that the people were called together,
and they searched everywhere for her. It was the grizzly bear to which
the high-caste woman had spoken angrily that married her. The
grizzly-bear people kept going after salmon. After they had gone her
husband went out after wet wood. She, however, always collected dry
wood. When they came up from the salmon place they threw off their
coats. They shook them. Something in these like grease would burn in the
soaked wood. The woman's dry wood, however, always went out. It was not
long before they did something to the high-caste woman on account of it.

When they went out again, the woman saw smoke right under her foot. A
grandmother mouse was coming out from under a little hill. It was that
which was going to help her. "Come in, grandchild," she said, "These are
very dangerous animals you are among. The grizzly-bear people have
carried you away." She told her the truth. Then she gave her advice.
"Over there is your father's home." So next

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

morning when they were gone after salmon she started running in the,
opposite direction. When they came home at midday the grizzly-bear
people missed her. The woman's dress had rotted up there. After she had
crossed one mountain she glanced behind her. It looked dark with grizzly
bears. When they gained on her she began crying for her life. She came
out on the edge of a lake. In the middle of this big lake a canoe was
floating wearing a dance hat. It said to her, "Run this way into the
water." Then she ran into the water toward it. She was pulled in, and it
went up with her into the sun.

The sun's sons had married a cannibal. <span
id="fr_129"></span>[a](#fn_129) Whomsoever they married never lasted
long before they killed her. Now, however, they liked the one they had
just married. To make way for her they killed the cannibal. They killed
her over a Tsimshian town. They chopped her into very fine pieces. This
is why there came to be so many cannibals there. They could see the
Tsimshian town. When the sun got straight up over her father's town they
said, "Here is your father's

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

town." Very soon they had a child. Their father's canoe, a grizzly-bear
canoe, stood at the end of this town. The canoe could hear. They loaded
it with things. They put grease inside of it for their father-in-law.
Then it walked away with them. After it had walked on for a long time it
would stop suddenly. This was because it was hungry, and they would then
break up a box of grease in front of the bow. They came in front of
their father-in-law's house. Then she recognized her father's house, and
went up in front of it. Then her brother came into the house and said,
"My sister has come and is outside." But his mother beat him because he
claimed to see his sister who had been long dead. His mother went out.
It was indeed true, and they were coming ashore. They did not see them
(her husbands), however, for they were like streaks of moonlight. Now,
after they had brought all their things up, one went out and said,
"There is nothing there." The wife said, "That moonlight down there is
they. Tell

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

them to come up." So people went to tell them. They came up. Then the
sunbeams lay alongside of the woman in streaks, and their little son in
front of them was also like a sunbeam. After they were seated inside of
the house they began to appear as if coming out of a fog. "Eat
something, my daughter," said the chief. Then a very young man ran to
get water for them. But her husband took a fishhawk's quill out, and put
this into it. If it bent over on account of the wet the man had not
behaved himself. After they had examined everyone she sent her little
brother, and her little brother always brought water for them. When her
brother went away she took her husband's bucket for the water herself.
But after she had been twice a man near the water seized her hand. And,
when she brought it into the house and set it close beside her husbands,
they put the fishhawk's quill into it. This time, after her hand had
been caught, the quill bent over with slime. Then they started to getup
to go outside, away from

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

her. She would catch first one and then the other, but her hands passed
right through them. Then they ceased to see them. Their canoe, however,
ran about on the lake.

After that the sun's children began to wish that filth would kill their
son. This is why poverty always kills a little boy when his father dies.
After her little child had begun to suffer very much they compelled him.
to go outside with his mother. She made a house with branches at the
other end of the town. There she stayed with her little child. She
continually bathed her little child inside of the house of branches, and
he grew larger there. People kept throwing the leavings of food on top
of their house. They always called him" This man living here." They
would laugh at him. Whenever the little boy ran out among the boys who
were playing they said "Uh! Garbage-man." Now he said to his mother,
"Make a bow and arrows for me." And, after she had made them, he went
out shooting just at daybreak. He shot all kinds of things. When he was
getting to be a man, he kept going up close by the lake.

<span id="page_258">p. 258</span>

After he had gone up there many times something came up quickly toward
him. Its mouth was red. After it had done so twice he asked his mother,
"What is that, mother?" Then he prepared anew spear. "When it opens its
mouth for you and puts its forefeet up on land run down to it. It is
your father's canoe." So he went there and it opened its mouth for him.
His mother had said, "Shoot it in the mouth," and, when he had shot it,
it was heard to say "<u>G</u>a," like a raven. It was as if its seats
had been all cut off. It was a copper canoe in which were wide seats.
The canoe was nothing but copper and broke entirely up. Throughout the
night he carried it into his house to his mother. No person knew of it.

Now he began making a big house out of copper. He would pound out spears
and bracelets under the branches. In those days there was no iron or
copper. He also pounded out copper plates. Then he set them all round
the inside of the house. When they threw garbage upon his house \[they
kept calling him\] "Pounding-chief." After he

<span id="page_259">p. 259</span>

had finished the house there were plenty of copper plates which he kept
pounding out. When they laughed at him and he ran outside they would
say, "Uh! Garbage-man." There was a chief's daughter whom they would let
no one marry. After people from all places had tried to get her he
prepared himself. He dressed himself at night. He took a piece of
twisted copper. He knew where the chief's daughter slept. He poked the
woman through a hole with this copper roll, and the woman caught hold of
it. She smelt it. She did not know what the copper was, no person in the
world having ever seen copper. Then he called to her saying, "Come
outside," and she went outside to him. "Go down to my house with me.
With me you shall stay," he said to her. She did not know whence the man
came. The man that used to be called dirty was only going to the beach
with her. Just before she touched the door it opened inward. The copper
door shone in her face. Whence were all those coppers that stood around
inside of the house? Then he married her in his house.

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span>

By and by the people began searching for that woman. They missed her for
many days. Two days were passed in searching for her. Then her father
said to a slave, "Search below here." The slave searched there for her.
When he had looked into the house the slave backed out. It began shining
in his face. Then the woman's husband from inside the house said to him,
"Come in. Do not tell about my house," he said. "Say Garbage-man has
married her." When he came into the house he told about it. He said,
"Garbage-man has married her." Then they started to rush out. Her mother
cried, "My daughter!" Then they rushed to his door. They kicked into the
house, under the house made of branches. "DAm" it sounded. It shone out
into her face, and they started back from the house door. Where was
their anger against him? Then she became ashamed. After they got home he
sent for his father-in-law, and he put eight coppers on him because he
had married his daughter. Then they

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

threw the branch house away, letting the copper shine out. But his
father had done this purposely to him in order to help him. So even now,
when a man is poor, something comes to help him. This shows how valuable
copper was at the place where this happened. Even lately a copper plate
used to cost two slaves. It has since become an everlasting thing there
(i. e., it, is now used there all the time).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_127"></span>[252:a](tmt113.htm#fr_127) All these stories,
with the exception of nos. 100 and 106, were obtained at Sitka.

<span id="fn_128"></span>[252:b](tmt113.htm#fr_128) Another version is
incorporated into story 31.

<span id="fn_129"></span>[254:a](tmt113.htm#fr_129) ~~L~~uqAna',
probably equivalent to Kwakiutl Lô'koala.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 90. The Man Who Was Abandoned](tmt114)
