[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tmt114)  [Next](tmt116) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_267">p. 267</span>

### 91. THE SHAMAN WHO WENT INTO THE FIRE, AND THE HERON'S SON <span id="fr_130"></span>[a](#fn_130)

A little boy's friends were all gone. His uncle was a great hunter, and
the little boy was always going around far up in the woods with bow and
arrows. He was growing bigger. He also went out with his uncle. His
uncle went about everywhere to kill things. He always brought plenty of
game down from the mountains.

One time he again went hunting. At that time the inside of the house was
full of the sides of mountain sheep, on racks. His uncle's wife bated
her husband's little nephew very much. When she went outside for a
moment, he broke off a little piece of fat from the sides of mountain
sheep hanging on the rack, to put inside of his cheek. Although there
was so much he broke off only so much. Then his uncle's wife looked all
around. The end piece was not there. "Is it you that has done this?" she
said to her husband's little nephew. He

<span id="page_268">p. 268</span>

cried and said, "No." Then she put her hand inside of his cheek. "Why
don't you go up on the mountain?" \[she said.\] She scratched the inside
of his cheek. Blood ran out of his mouth. While crying he pulled his
uncle's box toward him. He took his uncle's whetstone out of it.
Meanwhile his uncle was far away.

Then he started off into the woods, carrying the whetstone, and came out
to a creek. He came out on a sandy bank, pounded (or scooped) it out
like a salmon, and made a nest beside the water. He stayed upon it
overnight. His dream was like this. He was told, "Let it swim down into
the water." It was his spirit that told him to do this.

When his uncle came down he missed him. He asked his wife, "Where is my
nephew?" She answered. "He went up that way with his bow and arrows."

When \[the boy\] got up farther he made another nest. This man was named
"For-little-slave." He made eight nests. Now his spirit helper began to
come to him on the last. At that time he took his whetstone

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

down into the creek, and it swam up in it. Then he lost his senses and
went right up against the cliff. He stayed up there against the cliff.
Everything came to bear him there-sea gulls, eagles, etc. When his
spirits left him they would always be destroyed--the eagles, sea gulls,
all of them.

Now, his uncle hunted for him. After he had been out for eight days he
discovered the nest his nephew had made by the creek. He saw all the
nests his nephew had camped in. His uncle looked into the creek. The
salmon was swimming there, and be camped under the nest. Afterward he
listened. In the morning he heard the beating made by shamans' sticks.
He heard it just in the middle of the cliff. Then he came up underneath
it. Before he thought that \[his nephew\] had seen him, his nephew spoke
to him: "You came under me, the wrong way, uncle." The uncle pitied his
nephew very much. "Come up by this corner," said his nephew. Ever
afterward he was named, "For-little-slave." then his uncle asked him,
"What caused you to do this?" He did not say that his uncle's wife had

<span id="page_270">p. 270</span>

scratched the inside of his cheek. Instead be said to his Uncle: "Cave
spirits told me to come here." This was a big cave, bigger than a house.

Then his spirits came to him while his uncle was with him. They went
inside, and his uncle beat time for him. Then be told his uncle to
remember this: "When the spirit Ni<u>xâ</u>' runs into the fire with me,
do not let me burn up. While I am getting small throw me into a basket."
That was the way he did with him. It ran into the fire with him, and he
threw him into the basket. Then he always came to life inside of the
basket. He became a big man again.

That same evening he sent out his uncle to call, "This way those that
can sing." Then the cliff could hardly be seen for the mountain sheep
that came down to look into the cave. When they were seated there, he
whirled about his bow and arrows and all the mountain sheep were
destroyed. The inside of the cave was full of them. Now, he said to his
uncle: "Take off the hides." He was singing for great

<span id="page_271">p. 271</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Ni<u>xâ</u>'. When the spirit came out of him he
reminded his uncle, "When it runs into the fire with me, don't forget to
take me out and put me into the basket."

After all of the sheeps' sides were covered up be sent him for his wife.
He came up with his wife into the cave. Then he said to his uncle:. Take
the half-basket in which we cook. "Mash up the inside fat for your
wife." His spirits took out the woman's bottom part from her. For this
reason the woman never got full eating the mountain-sheep fat. She could
not taste the fat. He put her in this condition because she had
scratched the inside of his cheek.

By and by be said to his uncle: "Make your mind courageous when
Ni<u>xâ</u>' comes in." In the evening he told his uncle to go out and
call. The cliffs could hardly be seen. Grizzly bears came in front of
the house to the door of the cave. They extended far up in lines. Then
his uncle started the song for the spirit. They kept coming

<span id="page_272">p. 272</span>

inside. Suddenly a grizzly bear came in. It was as if eagle down were
tied around its ears. At that \[the uncle's\] wife became scared and
broke in two. He did this to her because she had scratched on the inside
of his cheek on account of the fat. His spirit also ran into the fire
with him. While his uncle stood in fear of the grizzly bear,
For-little-slave burned up in the fire.

At that the cave creaked, and every animal ran into its skin. The things
they were drying did so. They did so because the shaman had burned up.
So the shaman and his uncle also were finally burned up.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_130"></span>[267:a](tmt115.htm#fr_130) For another version
of the first part of this story, see Emmons, The Chilkat Blanket, in
Memoirs of American Museum of Natural History, III, 333-334.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 31. Raven, Part XXII](tmt116)
