[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](tmt115)  [Next](tmt117.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Now people were disappearing from the town they had left. There were two
wood roads. When anybody went out on one of these roads he never came
back, and a person who went out on the other also, never came back. When
one went away by canoe, he, too, was never seen again. He did not come
home. In a single year there

<span id="page_273">p. 273</span>

was no one left in that town except two, a woman and her daughter. After
she had thought over their condition, this woman took her daughter away.
She said, "Who will marry my daughter?" A heron that was walking upon
the shore ice spoke to them, "How am I?" "What can you do?" said the
woman. "I can stand upon the ice when it comes up." "Come home with us,"
said the woman. So the heron married \[the girl\], and she became
pregnant. She brought forth. She bore a son. It began to grow large. The
heron said to his wife, "What is the matter with your friends?" and she
answered, "When they went after wood they never came back."

After the child had become large he kept taking it to the beach. He
would bathe it amid the ice. Then the little boy began shooting with
arrows. He always took his bow and arrows around. When he killed
anything his father would say of the little boy, "My little son is just
like me." By and by he said to his wife, "I am going away."

<span id="page_274">p. 274</span>

\[paragraph continues\] After that the little boy began to go into the
water. He crawled up, when he was almost killed by it.

Once he started off with his bow and arrows. When he was walking along
the beach \[he saw\] a hîn-ta<u>y</u>î'c<u>î</u> <span
id="fr_131"></span>[a](#fn_131.md) swimming in a little pond of sea water.
He took it up. It cut his hands with its sharp sides. He reared it in
the little pond. As he was going along with his bow and arrows he would
feed it.

One time he said to his mother, "I am going after firewood." "But your
uncles never came down," \[she said\]. In the morning he jumped quickly
out on the floor. He took a stone ax and ran up in one of the roads. In
it there was a finger sticking up, which said to him, "This way with
your finger." He took hold of it and pulled up the being which was
there. He threw it down on a stone. In the place from which he took it
bones were left where it had been killing. Then he cut off its head with
his stone ax. He took it down to his mother. He threw it into the house
to her and to his grandmother, and they cut the face

<span id="page_275">p. 275</span>

all up. They burned its face in the fire along with urine. They treated
it just as they felt like doing. By and by the boy went up to the
hîn-ta<u>y</u>î'c<u>î</u> he was raising. Before it got longer than
himself he shot it in the head. He took off its skin. Then he put \[the
skin\] on a stump. How sharp were its edges!

When he got home again he jumped quickly out on the floor in the
morning. He took his stone ax along in the next road. When he got far up
he saw a head sticking up in the road. He said, "Up with your eyes,
Kucaqê'!tk<sup>u</sup>." The head was bent far backward. After he had
moved its head backward he cut it off. The place where he took up this
head was all full of bones. He threw that also down into the house. They
rubbed its face with dung. They did to it as they felt toward it. After
that he kept taking his bow and arrows up. He brought all kinds of
things into the house for his mothers (i. e., his mother and
grandmother). The son of the heron who came to help

<span id="page_276">p. 276</span>

the woman was doing this. By and by he asked his mother, "In which
direction did my uncles go who went out by sea and never came home?" She
said to him, "They would go this way, little son." He went in that
direction with his bow and arrows, and came out above the hole of a
devilfish. As he was sitting there ready for action he looked right down
into it. Then he went back for the hîn-ta<u>y</u>î'c<u>î</u> coat he had
hidden. When he returned he threw a stone down upon the devilfish. He
put on the hîn-ta<u>y</u>î'c<u>î</u> coat in order to jump into the
midst of the devilfish's arms. Then he went right into them very
quickly. He moved backward and forward inside of the devilfish's arms,
and cut them all up into fine pieces with his side. By and by he cut its
color sac in the midst of its arms, and afterward he swam out of the
hole. He was floating outside, and he came ashore and took off his coat.
Then be put it on the stump, and came again to his mother. The large
tentacles floated up below them. He had cut them up into small pieces.
It was that which had destroyed the people.

<span id="page_277">p. 277</span>

Again he took his bow and arrows. He came across a rat hole. The rat's
tail was hanging out. He came directly home and, early in the morning
before the raven called, he set out for it. He took his
hîn-ta<u>y</u>î'c<u>î</u> shirt. When he got back he started to put
\[the shirt\] on after he had sharpened its edges. After he had gotten
into it he went up to the \[rat\] hole. Then he threw a stone down upon
it, making it give forth a peeping sound, as if the mountain were
cracking in two. He swam round a stone, waiting for it to swim out. When
it swam out it ran its nose against him. It swain past him. It wanted to
drop its tail down on him. Then he floated edge up, and it tried to drop
its tail down upon him. When it dropped its tail down upon him it was
cut up into small pieces. Then it swam up to his side, crying on account
of what he had done. He cut it all up. Afterward he swam ashore. He put
his skin back on the stump. In the morning its head floated in front of
them. They cut it up.

<span id="page_278">p. 278</span>

After two days he pulled down his canoe. Going along for awhile, he came
up to the beach in front of a woman sitting in a house. She had only one
eye. "Come up, my nephew. I have stale salmon heads, my nephew," she
said to him. This person in front of whom he had come was the real one
who had destroyed the canoes. Those were human heads that she spoke of
as stale heads. He did not eat them. He saw what they were. "I have also
fish eggs," \[she said\]. Those were human eyes, and he did not eat of
them. He emptied them by the fire. The woman's husband, however, was
away hunting for human beings. Lastly she got human ribs, and when he
would not eat those she became angry about it. She threw a shell at him
with which she used to kill human beings, but missed him, for he jumped
away quickly. Then he took it up. He hit her with it in return, and the
cannibal wife broke in two. After be had killed her he pulled her over
on the fire. When he blew upon her ashes, however, they became
mosquitoes. This is why mosquitoes eat people. After

<span id="page_279">p. 279</span>

he had killed her he went away and met the cannibal man. When he met him
he killed him. He cut off his head and took it to his mother's home.
There they cut his face all up. They burned his face with dung.

In olden times when a person finished a story he said, "It's up to you."

Lâ'gu y<u>ê</u>n qAx du~~l~~-n<u>î</u>g<u>î</u>'n ye qoyanaqe'tc, "Hûtc!
q<u>ê</u>~~l~~qA'x."  
Old times \| when \| with \| they are through \| thus \| they always
say, \| "I am out of it," (or "Up to you.")

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_131"></span>[274:a](tmt116.htm#fr_131.md) See [p.
217](tmt083.htm#page_217.md).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 92. Mountain Dweller](tmt117.md)
