[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](tmt134)  [Next](tmt136.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_416">p. 416</span>

# ABSTRACTS OF MYTHS

## MYTHS RECORDED IN ENGLISH AT SITKA

### 1. RAVEN

Raven was the son of a man named Kit-ka'ositiyi-qâ, who gave him
strength to make the world. After he had made it he obtained the stars,
moon, and daylight from their keeper at the head of Nass by letting
himself be swallowed by the keeper's daughter and be born of her. He
obtained fresh water by tricking its owner, Petrel. As he was flying out
through the smoke hole, however, Petrel made his smoke-hole spirits
catch him and lighted a fire under him, turning him from white to black.
Raven scattered the freshwater out of his mouth to make rivers and
streams. Because some people who were fishing for eulachon would not
take him across a river, he let the sun forth, and they fled into the
woods or ocean, becoming such animals as the skins they wore had
belonged to. Next Raven stole fat from some boys who were throwing it
back and forth. He found a piece of jade bearing some design, stuck it
into the ground, and pretended to a spring salmon that the object was
calling it names. The salmon came ashore, and Raven killed it. Then he
got the birds to procure him skunk cabbage so that they might eat the
fish, but instead of feeding them, he sent them away a second time and
ate it himself, burying the bones in the ashes. After that the birds
dressed and painted themselves up. Raven came to the Bear, and the
latter fed him on some of his own flesh, a proceeding which Raven tried
to imitate in vain a little later. Then Raven went out fishing with Bear
and Cormorant, killed the former by cutting off a piece of flesh, and
pulled out Cormorant's tongue so that he could not tell anybody.
Afterward he killed Bear's wife by inducing her to eat halibut bladders
which he had filled with hot stones. He came to some fishermen and stole
the bait from their hooks, but was finally hooked in the nose and had to
recover his nose disguised as another person. Now he came to some deer
with fat hanging out of their nostrils, pretended that it was mucus, and
obtained it. He started along by canoe, and all of the animals wanted to
accompany him, but he accepted only Deer. Coming to a deep valley, he
laid some dried celery stalks across, covered them with moss, and
induced Deer to try to walk across. Deer did so and was, precipitated to
the bottom where he was devoured by Raven.

<span id="page_417">p. 417</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Afterward Raven began mourning for him. Now he
met the old woman who controls the tide, and forced her to let the tide
fall and rise as it does to-day. At the same time he told Mink to live
on sea urchins. Then he went on crying, "My wife, my wife," and, when he
saw some gum on a tree, thought that the tree also was mourning. Coming
to Petrel again, he contended with him as to which was the older, but
finally Petrel put on his fog-hat so that Raven was unable to find his
way out and had to admit Petrel was older than he. He induced Petrel to
let his hat "go into the world," so that when people see fog coming out
of an opening in the woods and going right back, they know it will be
good weather. He obtained fire with the help of a chicken hawk whose
bill was burned off in getting it, and he put the fire into red cedar
and some white stones. Coming to the great house containing all fish, he
brought it ashore by means of a cane carved to resemble the tentacle of
a devilfish, and gave a feast for his dead mother out of part of its
contents. The other fish spread throughout the world. He invited the
killer whales, pretended that he was going to show them how to stick
canes into their necks, and stuck sharp pointed sticks in instead, thus
killing all but one. (When Raven and another person were boiling down
the grease from these killer whales, he stole all from the other man.
Then this man shut him up in a grease-box and kicked it off a high
cliff, but Raven had induced him to fasten it with a piece of straw
instead of rope, and immediately flew out. <span
id="fr_194"></span>[a](#fn_192).md) He flew inside of a whale, and lived on
what it swallowed and its insides. At last he cut out its heart and
killed it. After he had floated ashore the people cut a hole through and
he flew away. Returning to the same place, he persuaded them that this
was a bad portent, so they left the town, and Raven consumed what they
had abandoned. Once Raven went to a calm place just outside of Sitka and
made many waves by rocking his canoe, since which time it has always
been very rough there. Next he set the heron and sea gull to quarreling
in order to obtain a herring which the former had swallowed. Having
stolen a salmon from some people when they were asleep, they in turn
discovered him asleep and wrenched off his gizzard. He went after it,
found them using it as a polo ball, and recovered it, but ever since the
Raven's gizzard has been big and dirty. Next he married the daughter of
Fog-on-the-salmon, and they put up many salmon eggs and dried salmon.
When it became stormy the salmon eggs helped him paddle. Afterward he
carried up the dried salmon and dumped the salmon eggs overboard, so
that people do not care much for salmon eggs nowadays. He met a man
whose club would go out to sea and kill seal of itself, stole this club,
and tried to make it do the same thing for him, but it would not, and he
broke it

<span id="page_418">p. 418</span>

in pieces on the rocks. He tried to make a certain place like Nass, but
the clams shooting upward drowned his voice and he was unsuccessful. He
turned to stone two brothers who had started to cross the Stikine.
Coming to the ground-hog people, he tried to make them believe that the
spring snowslides had begun so that they would throw their surplus food
out of doors, but in vain. He had to wait until spring, when they threw
it all out, and he gave a feast for his mother with it. Before this took
place, however, he obtained the female genital organs from a certain
island. and put them in their places. Then he invited everybody in the
world to his feast because he wanted to see a dance hat and Chilkat
blanket which were owned by the <u>G</u>onaqAdê't. Since then people
have liked to attend feasts.

Raven put a woman under the world to attend to the rising and falling of
the tides. Once he wanted to go under the ocean, so he had this woman
raise the waters, and they went up to the tops of the mountains. They
went up slowly, however, so that people had time to load their canoes.
The bears which were walking around on the tops of the mountains tried
to swim out to them, and those who had dogs were then well protected.
Some people walled about the mountain tops and kept their canoes inside.
All who survived were without firewood, however, and died of cold,
except some who were turned to stone by Raven along with many animals
and fishes. Then the sea went down so far that it was dry everywhere.
Raven and another bird-man went about picking up fishes to boil the
grease out of them, but Raven took only small fishes like sculpins while
the other took whales, etc. Raven seared his companion away and began
drinking his grease, but be came back, put Raven into a grease-box, and
kicked him off from a high cliff as had happened before. Raven also
escaped in the same manner. <span id="fr_195"></span>[a](#fn_193.md) One
time Raven invited the bears to a feast, and induced the wren to pull
out the entrails of one of them through his anus and thus kill him.
Raven had become so great an eater from having eaten the black spots off
his toes. After everybody had been destroyed at the time of the flood,
Raven made a new generation out of leaves, and so it happens that at the
time when leaves fall there are many deaths. He made a devilfish
digging-stick and went around to all things on the beaches, asking them
if they were going to hurt human beings. If they said "No," he left
them; if "Yes," he rooted them up. In his time fern roots were already
cooked, but he made them green; while devilfish, which were fat, he made
hard. On one occasion he invited all the tribes of little people, and,
when they were seated upon mats, he shook them and the little people
flew into people's eyes, becoming their pupils. He tried to capture a
sculpin in order to eat it, but it slipped between his fingers, and its
tail became slender as it is to-day. He threw his blanket upon

<span id="page_419">p. 419</span>

the sea, let it float ashore, and threw it upon a bush where it became
*Rebis bracteosum* (câx). Drinking water he called cât!k!. He placed a
woman at the head of a creek and said that the salmon should go up to
see her. He made the quills of the porcupine out of yellow cedar bark.
He made the west wind, which he placed in a house on top of a mountain,
and decreed that it should hurt nobody. He also told a person how to
obtain strength enough to paddle home by taking up a piece of red salmon
and blowing behind him. Raven made also the south wind and the north
wind. He made all the other native races of people. The dog was at first
a human being, but Raven altered him because he was too quick. One time
Raven came to a thing called fat-on-the-sea. He made it go under water
and come up again, and every time it came up he cut some of it off with
his paddle. The eighth time it went under for good. At one place a
person came out and spoke angrily to Raven, whereupon he turned him into
a wild celery plant. He tied something around the head of a clam and
gave it the same name as a man's privates.

After having tried every sort of contrivance for supporting the earth,
Raven drained a sea-water pond when the tide was out, killed a beaver
living at the bottom of it, and used its foreleg.
Old-woman-under-the-earth has charge of it. Afterward Raven killed a big
whale and tried to have it towed into the pond where the beaver had
been. Finally he got tired out and turned it into stone along with the
four canoes that were towing it. He gave names to several other places
in this neighborhood.

### 2. THE BIG CLAM

In Tenakee inlet is a place named after a person who was swallowed by a
halibut in attempting to wade over to some girls picking berries at a
strawberry patch on the other side. In the same neighborhood is a big
clam which used to swallow canoes. Raven, however, directed a little
mink to call to it to stick its head out, and after it had done so the
people plunged sticks into it and cut in two the ligament for closing
its valves.

### 3. ENGLISH VERSION OF THE STORY OF THE FOUR BROTHERS

Four brothers owned a dog which pursued a cloud up into the sky, and
they followed it, coming out at the edge of a very steep place on the
other side of the world. Descending this with difficulty they came upon
a one-legged man spearing salmon, and one of them stole his spear point
by concealing himself in a salmon and cutting it off. Next day the man
discovered them and killed three, but the fourth, who had red paint and
a rattle, assisted by his dog, killed him and restored his brothers to
life. After that they killed the bear chief, whose slave they had
already destroyed, and went down to his house, where the

<span id="page_420">p. 420</span>

most powerful of them took his place. That evening the people outside
played with a hoop, and the three younger brothers were killed by it.
Then the other brother sent the dog after it, and he threw it far up
into the mountains where it made their curved outlines. The next time he
threw, it went around the sun and made the ring of light seen there.
After that the three brothers were restored to life and all started off.
They came to Athapascan people, who had holes in their faces in place of
mouths, and. who fed themselves with worms through these. There the
youngest brother., Lq!ayâ'k!, obtained bows and arrows. By and by they
came to some people who were bathing for strength in the sea, and joined
them. At this time they suspected that Lq!ayâ'k! was going with his
sister, so they put spruce gum around the place where she slept and
discovered it was true, for which they called him all sorts of names,
and told him to go away from them and become a "thunder." He did so, and
their sister was so ashamed that she went down into Mount Edgecumbe.
When the thunder is heard nowadays people call upon it to drive away
sickness. The other brothers started across the Stikine and became rocks
there.

### 4. ORIGIN OF THE KILLER WHALE

The killer whales were made out of yellow cedar by a man of the
Tsague'd<u>î</u> after he had tried every other kind of wood in vain.

One time a man and his wife discovered some killer whales camping, and
scared them away. When the man began to take away their provisions,
however, they came back and carried off his wife. The husband followed,
and when he saw them go down into the ocean he jumped in after them.
First he came to a town occupied by the shark people, where he met a
hook he had formerly lost, now become their slave. Directed by the shark
chief, he met the killer-whale chief's slave chopping wood behind the
town, caused him to break his ax, and mended it for him. Then the slave
stationed him at the door, and as he carried some water into the house
pretended to spill it into the fire. While the house was full of steam
the man seized his wife and ran off. Then the killer whales and sharks
had a great fight and many killer whales were destroyed. When the killer
whales start north the seals say, "Here come the warriors!" There are
several kinds of killer whales. In former times the killer whales dug
through a cliff in the bay Kots!ê'L! and carried their canoes across to
the other side on skids. They still cross at this place every year.

### 5. KAKA'

KAka' was taken south from Sitka by the land otters and sent back again
by the husbands of a woman who had been carried off like. himself. What
they used as a canoe was a skate, and they kept him

<span id="page_421">p. 421</span>

covered all the way. After a time one of his friends heard him singing
in the midst of a fog, but they could not get near him until they had
fasted for two days. Then they found him lying upon a log with blood
running out of his nose and mouth. They brought him home, and he became
a great shaman.

### 6. THE LAND-OTTER SISTER

A man's sister had been taken away by the land otters and was married
among them. One time, when he was camping by himself making a canoe, she
began bringing him food. Afterward she sent her three, children to help
him get bait, catch halibut, and launch his new canoe.

### 7. THE LAND-OTTER SON

During a famine at Sitka a man's son, who had been taken by the land
otters, brought him bait and put halibut on his hook when they went
fishing together. On the way back he speared a seal, and afterward they
brought home loads of halibut, seal, etc. At first he went back into the
forest during the day, but after a while he began to stay with them and
day by day his body became plainer. By and by they started back to town,
and as they neared it, their son's form began to grow indistinct. When
his mother moved forward to look at him he was gone.

### 8. THE WOLF-CHIEF'S SON

A boy found a little wolf, which killed all kinds of animals for him.
One day he loaned it to his brother-in-law, and the latter did not treat
it right, so it ran away. The boy followed it, and finally came to a big
lake over which he was helped by an old woman, who told him that his
wolf was the son of the town chief in the village opposite. When he got
there he was given a quill that would kill any animal it was pointed at,
and a blanket which healed on one side and killed on the other. The
people in that village were rolling something about which the chief told
him was the rainbow. When he reached home again he found all dead, but
he restored them to life by means of his blanket. With his two gifts he
became wealthy.

### 9. WOLVERINE-MAN

A man out hunting saw a wolverine killing a herd of mountain sheep, and
presently he came to Wolverine-man's house, which was full of game.
Wolverine-man taught him various hunting tabus for that region, and
showed him how to make a ground-hog trap. The man also learned that a
small bushy tree called s!Ax is Wolverine-man's wife. When he got home
he explained the trap to his people, and then started off trapping again
with another man who thought he

<span id="page_422">p. 422</span>

understood how to do it. He who had been with Wolverine-man soon
discovered, however, that this person thought he had said that the
ground hogs were caught by whittling up sticks in front of their holes.

### 10. THE HALIBUT PEOPLE

A chief's daughter stepped on halibut slime and said something that made
the halibut people angry. They came by canoe to get her in marriage, but
as soon as they were out of sight of the town they fastened her to a
rock by means of some pitch, and she died there. By and by her brothers
found her body. Then one of them, disguised as their sister, went down
to the halibut chief and killed him. On their way home after this one of
the brothers shot a duck and said something offensive to it. For this
the killer whale, the duck's grandfather, took them down to his house,
burned them badly before the fire, and turned them into a certain
species of duck.

### 11. STORIES OF THE MONSTER DEVILFISH AND THE CRY-BABY

A big devilfish swept all of the occupants of a certain camp into the
sea except three brothers who were out hunting. Then the two elder
brothers killed it with sharpened sticks, although they were themselves
dragged down by it, while their youngest brother traveled to another
place and reported what had happened.

In the same town was a little boy who cried so constantly that his
father called upon a land-otter-man to carry him off. The land-otter
people fed him on what looked like blackberries, but were really
spiders. Two days later his people found him, but when they had expelled
the spiders from his body, nothing was left but his skin.

### 12. THE WOMAN WHO WAS KILLED BY A CLAM

A woman reached under a rock for clams, and a large bivalve closed upon
her hand and held her. When the tide rose she was drowned.

### 13. ROOT-STUMP

The people of a certain village were carried up into the sky out of
sight by seizing something which dropped down among them. Those who were
making canoes also disappeared mysteriously. Only a woman and her
daughter were left. Then the daughter swallowed some root sap and gave
birth to a boy called Root-stump. This boy pulled down the thing that
had carried off his people, by running his roots into the earth, and he
killed the man who had destroyed the canoe makers. Afterward he became a
great hunter.

<span id="page_423">p. 423</span>

### 14. THE PROTRACTED WINTER

For treating a piece of seaweed disrespectfully a certain town was
buried deep in snow at the very beginning of summer. The people were in
want until informed by a bird that berries were ripe in a neighboring
town. So they repaired thither and found it midsummer.

### 15. BEAVER AND PORCUPINE

Porcupine stayed with Beaver to protect him from Bear. By and by
Porcupine went home and Beaver with him, and when Bear approached,
Porcupine carried Beaver up to the very top of the tree and left him.
Finally Squirrel came and helped Beaver down. Then Beaver carried
Porcupine out to an island, from which he escaped only by calling on
Wolverine, who caused the surface of the lake to freeze over. After that
happened, Porcupine went to live with Ground hog. A man caught a ground
hog, but, as he was about to cook its head, the head spoke. He was
seared, stopped trapping ground hogs, and went up to see his bear dead
falls, when one of these fell upon him and killed him.

### 16. THE POOR MAN WHO CAUGHT WONDERFUL THINGS

A poor man could catch no halibut, although others were very successful.
One day he pulled up a huge abalone, but he became so tired at what
people said to him about it that he let it go again. By and by he baited
his hook with a sponge saturated with blood from his nose and pulled up
a nest in which were multitudes of fishes called îcqê'n. From these he
became very rich.

### 17. THE FINDING OF THE BLUE PAINT, AND HOW A CERTAIN CREEK RECEIVED ITS NAME

Four brothers were forced by a storm to take refuge at a place near
Mount Edgecumbe, and one of them discovered a blue substance out of
which they made paint. When they started back with some of this the
weather became stormy, and one of them suggested it might be best to
throw the blue substance overboard, but the eldest held on and they
reached home safe.

One day some women were gathering shellfish at a place not far from
Sitka. While they were down on the beach the baby belonging to one of
them began crying, and its mother shouted to an older child to give it
something to eat. Misunderstanding her words, the child rolled the baby
into the fire and burned it up. Thereafter the stream at that place was
named Creek-where-a-person-was-burned (KA'xsîgAnîhîn).

<span id="page_424">p. 424</span>

### 18. VARIOUS ADVENTURES NEAR CROSS SOUND

A man collecting cedar bark slipped from his tree climber and was
strangled by it. Afterward the board he had slipped from, was always
exhibited at potlatches. Two men belonging to the same place had their
canoe swallowed by a devilfish, and the people, of the town sank a great
piece of half-burned wood in the sea over the devilfish hole. It was
never seen afterward \[and probably killed the devilfish\].

Some hunters killed a land otter, cooked and ate it. They were followed
home by a land-otter-man, who began throwing rocks at them from a tree.
After they said something to it, it threw cones instead. Toward morning
they lighted a fire under the tree and made the land-otter-man fall into
it.

A woman had disappeared from the town these men came from, so everybody
hunted for her. At last they came upon the house of those who had killed
her, which they overthrew and set on fire over the heads of its
occupants. A shaman who belonged to the people they had destroyed
learned from his spirits where there was flint and broke some off by
their help.

### 19. KÂTS!

A Sitka man named Kâts! hunted bear, was taken into a bear's den, and
married a female grizzly bear by which be had several children. When he
went back to his own people his bear wife told him to have nothing to do
with his human wife and children. He went hunting every day, but took
everything to his bear wife and children. One time, however, he
disobeyed her injunctions and was killed by his bear family. Kâts!'s
bear children afterward spread over the world and were killed in various
places, the last by the Sitka people in White Stone Narrows. Before they
killed him the bear destroyed an entire camp in which a girl had said
something bad to him.

### 20. THE UNSUCCESSFUL HUNTERS

A sea-lion hunter speared the sea-lion chief's son and was drowned, but
his companion reached a rock in safety. He was taken into the sea-lion
chief's house, cured the chief's son by palling out the spear point, and
was sent home inside of a sea-lion stomach.

Two other hunters, along with their canoe, were taken into the house of
the <u>G</u>onaqAdê't because one of them had struck his slave, the
skate. When he learned that they were KAtagwA'dî, however, he sent them
home, and told them to use his emblem, Rock House.

### 21. ORIGIN OF ICEBERG HOUSE

A man whose friends had all died took some pieces of ice up into the
house and treated them as if he were feasting them, in order to show
respect to his dead friends. Since that time the Grass people

<span id="page_425">p. 425</span>

have owned Iceberg House. Afterward he went outside and called aloud as
if he were inviting people to a feast, upon which a multitude of bears
came down, and he feasted them. As they went out they showed their
respect for him by licking him.

### 22. THE WOMAN TAKEN AWAY BY THE FROG PEOPLE

A woman in the Yakutat country said something which displeased the
frogs, and she was taken away by them. Next spring a man saw her among
the frogs. So the people drained the pond and recovered her. She had
been living on black mud like the frogs, and after her people got all of
this out of her, she died. From this, according to some, the
K<u>î</u>ksA'd<u>î</u> claim the frog crest and names.

### 23. HOW THE FROGS HONORED THE DEAD

A Kâ'gwAntân chief having died, one of his friends called upon the
K<u>î</u>ksA'd<u>î</u> to take care of his body. The frog people,
hearing this, thought that they were meant, and when the corpse was
being burnt a big frog jumped out from the place, made a noise, and then
jumped into the flames. Afterward they captured slaves for the dead man,
and, when they put food into the fire for him, they named the frog as
well.

### 24. THE BRANT WIVES

A K<u>î</u>ksA'd<u>î</u> found two women swimming in a pond, seized
their coats, and compelled them to marry him. They were really brants.
When the brants came north in the spring his wives obtained food from
their people, but when they returned south the wives went with them. The
man went after them, and, although they were at first afraid of his bow
and arrows, they finally let him live with them. When they went north
once more, war broke out between the heron people and the brant people,
and the man killed so many of the former that they made peace.

### 25. STORY OF THE PUFFIN

A woman used to wish that she might live among the birds on a certain
island. One time, as she and some other women were endeavoring to land
there, they were capsized and all her companions drowned. Some time
afterward her father happened to pass the place and saw his daughter
sitting among the birds. He tried to induce the birds in every way to
give her up, but succeeded only by offering them some white hair that
had belonged to his wife's grandfather. Each bird put one of these hairs
on its head, and they let the woman go. Because the women who were
drowned there were T!A'q!dentân the T!A'q!dentân claim that island.

<span id="page_426">p. 426</span>

### 26. STORY OF THE WAIN-HOUSE PEOPLE

A youth who had been trained to hunt mountain sheep was carried away by
them, and liberated only after his people had made war on the mountain
sheep. Then he taught the people mountain-sheep tabus, and he became a
great shaman. Afterward his people went to Little-lake-fort and built a
big house for him. When the shaman fasted for this, be saw the Wain, so
they carved the posts to represent the Wain and named it Wain House.
Once, after he had had a possession, he sent his friends out for a
grizzly bear. They destroyed it, but it killed the first man who
attacked it, and the shaman restored him to life. Later he performed
about a dead raven to make his people successful in war, and, when they
went out, they destroyed their enemies' fort completely.

One time some women went to a reef near this town, lost their canoe, and
were drowned in the rising tide.

Another time a wealthy man from Yakutat visited Auk. While he was there
the son of the town chief threw the stern piece of his canoe, which was
covered with abalone shell, into the fire. A property contest followed
between the two chiefs in which the man from Yakutat was worsted.

In the same fort a woman gave birth to the greatest liar among those
people. When his mother died he started for Chilkat to give the people a
death feast, and on his return related the following adventures. He said
that on his way Indian rice hailed down into the canoe, and he obtained
sirup to put on it from a waterfall of sirup. They got up to Klukwan by
blowing on the sail, and when he began crying he put a piece of bark in
front of his face and the tears ran down on it in streams.

### 27. THE ALSEK RIVER PEOPLE

Two shamans at Alsek river began singing, the one to bring up eulachon,
the other to bring bears and other forest animals. The first succeeded
in starting a run of fish by going down under the river in a little
canoe. After that the land otters tried to carry off two women who were
menstruant, but, with the assistance of the shaman, the people finally
made them desist. Some people in a neighboring town who heard of it
spoke contemptuously of the land otters, and their whole town with the
exception of two men was destroyed by a flood of water from the lake
above them. After this one of the shamans set out for another place. On
the way he hooked an enormous devilfish which swept all the forest trees
in his vicinity into the ocean. When he performed blindfolded at that
town, the people ran out their feet to trip him up, but he jumped over
them. He also stabbed a man and restored him to life. Presently he
predicted an eclipse, and when

<span id="page_427">p. 427</span>

it came on, the people all danced to dance the moon out and held out
their property to it so that it would not feel poor.

Meanwhile the other shaman brought an enormous salmon into Alsek river,
and his spirits were so powerful that a small boy sufficed to kill it.
There is a hole in the neighborhood of that place out of which
quantities of rocks used to come when there was to be a great run of
eulachon or other fish. A glacier crosses Alsek in one place, and he who
speaks while passing under it is overwhelmed. When it was asked for
food, it would rush into the water and raise a wave, carrying numbers of
salmon ashore. An Athapascan shaman living far up the river was visited
by several canoe loads of people from below and prophesied that one
canoe load would be lost under the glacier. The down-river shaman then
fought with the Athapascan by means of his spirits and killed him. There
is a rock just south of Alsek river inhabited by the spirits of a
certain shaman, and it is used as a crest by the T!A'q!dentân.

The Alsek River people once killed a rich man belonging to some people
who lived on a stream farther north. The next time they went up there
the enemy forced them to enter their fort through a narrow passage and
killed a large number. On their third expedition, however, they
destroyed the fort and all within it. Another time some Alsek people
visited at a place beyond, where they were invited to take sweat baths,
and were killed. Then the Alsek people made their shaman fight the
shaman of the northern people, undertook another raid, and killed a
number equal to those that had been lost.

### 28. THE YOUTHFUL WARRIOR

A man wearing a bear skin climbed a tree, and was accidentally killed by
his brothers-in-law. Some time later his young nephew heard of it and
bathed for strength. Four men went out to carve things for a shaman, and
the young man was deceived into thinking that they had been killed by
the same persons who had shot his uncle, so he started out to war. After
he had killed a great many people be was induced to give up fighting by
some words uttered by his father's sister. After a time he killed one of
his own clan from another town and lost some of his immediate friends in
return, so be decided to go to war, but he was captured and many of his
people were killed. Then he promised not to fight again, so they let him
take the bodies of his people home. Some time afterward a man from
Prince of Wales island, on the way to Chilkat, visited him to inquire
about that place. Then his visitor continued up to Chilkat and brought
home great quantities of presents in payment for dancing.

A rich man started f rout Chilkat for KAq!Anuwû' to obtain property for
a dead friend. He was so high that no one dared speak to him

<span id="page_428">p. 428</span>

until a poor man rushed down with a war spear as if he were going to
kill him. This was to shame them for their delay, and they immediately
brought the visitor ashore and paid him for his dead friend.

### 29. THE FIRST WAR IN THE WORLD

A man named Xaku'tc! killed a large devilfish with his spear, but
perished in doing so. Afterward his spirit came to a man of his clan who
was very powerful. Having tested his spirits, the people started to war.
Just before they reached the fort a brave man there was killed by a
little boy held captive among them. Then they came upon the fort and
destroyed it. Now the southern people started north. On the way they
came to a great climber whom they tried to test by seeing if he could
climb a very steep cliff near Huna. He went up and got away. Afterward
be came down to the place where they were camping and liberated his
steersman to whom they had tied their canoes. The, enemy then attacked a
fort and killed all of the people except one woman who was pregnant. Her
they carried south, and she gave birth to a boy, who became a wealthy
shaman, purchased his mother's freedom, and went north with her. Then he
performed for his own people, and they set out to war and destroyed many
towns, but spared that in which he had formerly lived. Now the southern
people made a great raid, capturing fort after fort. At the second fort
two canoes attempted to pass down through a tideway at half tide and
were destroyed. From another they were driven off by means of clam
shells. In one fort a man was living alone because he was very jealous
of his wife, and while the warriors were talking to him one of their
canoes ran against a rock and split in two, so they left him. When they
had no more space for slaves, the southern people destroyed the canoes
at every fort so that the northern people could not retaliate. The bulk
of the northern people, however, had been encamped along the coast to
the westward. When they heard what had happened they cut down an
enormous spruce, hollowed it out, and started to war the following
spring. The southern people thought that the northern people could not
do anything to them. They were scattered about in various camps and fell
an easy prey to their enemies.

### 30. HOW PROTESTANT CHRISTIANITY WAS FIRST HEARD OF AT SITKA

A man returning to Sitka from the south told his people that
Dekî'-anqâ'wo (God) had come down from Heaven to help them, and the
women dressed up and began dancing. They danced an entire year.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_192"></span>[417:a](tmt135.htm#fr_194.md) An episode which is
perhaps misplaced. See [p. 418](#page_418.md).

<span id="fn_193"></span>[418:a](tmt135.htm#fr_195.md) See above, [p.
417](#page_417.md).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Myths Recorded in English at Wrangell](tmt136.md)
