[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](tmt123)  [Next](tmt125.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_301">p. 301</span>

### 99. MOLDY-END <span id="fr_146"></span>[a](#fn_146.md)

The K<u>î</u>ksA'd<u>î</u> used to live at Da<u>x</u>ê't, where they
dried salmon. After they had gotten through drying it they tied it up
there. So he (a small boy) was baiting a snare for sea gulls. When he
came into the house afterward he was very hungry. "Mother, I am hungry.
Give me some dried salmon." So she, gave him a piece of dried salmon
which had begun to mold on the corner. Then he said, "You always give me
moldy-cornered ones." They always began tying up from the corner of the
house. He spoke to the dried salmon. Just then some one shouted out,
"There is a sea gull in your snare." So he ran down to it. He ran out
into the water to his snare. When he got out into the midst of the water
he looked as if he were pulled down into it. Then all of the drying
salmon ran down to him. Now

<span id="page_302">p. 302</span>

the people were hunting for him, but he was nowhere to be seen. It was
not known what had happened to him. The salmon, however, began feeling
very high. They began to rush about at the mouth of the creek. It was
the salmon people that had done it. Then the salmon people went out to
sea with him. They went seaward with him toward their homes. To him it
looked as if they were in a canoe. A chief among these salmon had made
him his son. The sea gull that he had followed out went along with him.
Then he stayed with them in the salmon people's town. He was among them
for one year. Well out from that town fish eggs were heaped up. He began
to take up and swallow some of them without asking anybody. Then the
people shouted out, "Moldy-end is eating the town-people's dung." At
that time they gave him the name. Afterward he discovered that the
salmon tribe had saved him. Then he went to lie down and remained in
that position. In the morning his father said, "What did they say to
you, my son?" He went out and spoke. "Take him up to Amusement creek.
Put his hands around the necks

<span id="page_303">p. 303</span>

of the sand-hill cranes at the mouth of it." There he saw two sand. hill
cranes jumping up and down, facing each other, at the mouth of the
creek. All creatures, such as brants, could be heard making a noise down
in this creek. This is why it was called Amusement creek. Where was it
that he had been feeling badly? It all got out of him.

The salmon people all knew the salmon month had come up here which was
their month for returning. They always spawn up here among us. At once
they started back with him. They started up this way. Then the cohoes
people broke their canoe. This is why the cohoes come up last. The
L!ûk!nAxA'd<u>î</u> were going to have the cohoes as an emblem, and this
is why the L!ûk!nAxA'd<u>î</u> are also very slow people. At once all
started, dog salmon and humpbacks. They started up this way with
Lively-frog-in-pond (the boy's name). The big salmon people started up
thither. Very soon the salmon tribe came to the "sît." It is this sît
which gives scars to whichever one happens to get caught

<span id="page_304">p. 304</span>

in it. After all got through, the people looking could see a cloud far
down on the horizon which appeared like a canoe. In the evening they
went ashore to camp. They dug holes in the ground and made flat sticks
to stick into the ground. The salmon tribe always does that way. Then
the salmon people would throw hot rocks upon one another. Their bodies
vibrated with the heat. It is that that leaves scars on the skin of the
salmon. It was Lively-frog-in-pond that let people know what the salmon
people do to one another.

At once they started hitherward up this coast. The salmon tribe came
against the herring tribe. In the canoes of the salmon tribe one stood
up. He said to them, "When did your cheek-flesh ever fill a man?" The
others stood by one another. The herring tribe said in reply, "We fed
them before you. Our eggs are our cheek-flesh. When will the space
around your backbone not be dirty?" <span
id="fr_147"></span>[a](#fn_147.md) The salmon tribe started off for the
outside coasts of these islands. When

<span id="page_305">p. 305</span>

they got outside of them the salmon chief said, "To what creek are you
going?" Having held a conference, the salmon people named their choices.
The humpbacks said, "We will go to Saliva creek," but the one among them
who had taken the man, mentioned Da<u>x</u>ê't. The salmon people called
it Right-to-the-town. Then they came in sight of the mouth of the creek.
They called the point Floating point, and the smoke house that was there
a fort. It looked like that in the eyes of the salmon people. The salmon
called human beings "seal-children's dog salmon." When they first came
into the mouth of the creek the people sharpened poles for them to fall
on when they jumped. Then the boys always said, "Upon my father's." At
once one jumped upon it, where before they had not killed any. At that
they (the people) were very happy.

Now they saw his father plainly coming down from far up the creek. They
said to him (the boy), "Stand up." He jumped up. "Very fine," said his
mother. His mother called him a fine salmon.

<span id="page_306">p. 306</span>

\[paragraph continues\] After that the salmon swam up the creek. The
women who were cutting salmon were always seated by Da<u>x</u>ê't with
their backs downstream. The salmon, however, were always rushing about
down in the creek. The salmon tribe shouted about those who were
cutting. When they were partly through drying the salmon people said to
him, "Go to your mother." His mother was cutting salmon on the beach.
The canoe floated below her on the back current. So be floated there
with his head sticking out from under it. Then she called her husband's
attention to it. "A fine salmon is floating here with its head out." His
father took up a hook, for he did not know that it was his son. It swam
out from him. He never expected \[to see\] his son again. One year had
passed since he had disappeared. At once he swam out in front of his
father. When he had hooked it he pulled it out on a sandy bar. He bit it
on the head in order to keep it fresh. Then he threw it to his wife.
"Cut it up. We will cook it," \[he said\]. So she put the salmon down to
cut it up in the usual manner.

<span id="page_307">p. 307</span>

The Tlingit obtained copper in ancient times. A chain of twisted copper
was around the young man's neck, for be had gone into the water with it
on. After she had tried to cut around his neck for a while, and found
that she could not, she looked at her knife. There were bits of copper
on her knife. Then she called out to her husband, "Come here." So they
began to examine it. It was the copper chain that used to hang around
his son's neck. Anciently the people used to have a fine woven basket
called ~~l~~ît!. As soon as he knew this he threw it into such a basket.
\[He spit upon it\] and blew on eagle's down. Then he put the basket
enclosing the salmon on the roof of the house. Toward morning there was
a noise inside of it. His (the boy's) spirit began to work inside of it.
At daybreak he went up to look at it, and a large man lay where the
salmon had been.

They took their things out of all of the houses. When they brought what
had been a salmon inside a man went out and spoke to the many

<span id="page_308">p. 308</span>

\[paragraph continues\] K<u>î</u>ksA'd<u>î</u>. "Let all the people go
with their heads down." So it was given out. They brought up salt and
devil's clubs. As soon as they had drunk it down in accordance with his
directions they vomited. The devil's club and sea water were vomited
out. Toward evening the shaman bathed. Below this town is a little pond
named Beating-time-for-shaman lake because he also bathed in that. In
the evening his spirits really came to him, and blood kept running out
of his mouth. The sea gull for which he had gone out came to be his
spirit. Then he showed them all things that were to be done to the
salmon down in the creek. <span id="fr_148"></span>[a](#fn_148.md) "Cut
them into four pieces," he said. He called \[the tabus\] Adêyâ' ("That's
the way"). After that his spirits said to him, "Tie up a raft over there
on the edge of Noisy-waterfall." He was testing his spirits to see how
strong they were. This waterfall comes down a long distance. The
K<u>î</u>ksA'd<u>î</u> began to get on the raft, which

<span id="page_309">p. 309</span>

his spirits named Sea-lion raft. At once he said "Go." He began blowing
on the raft. One man was not courageous enough to go down into the
waterfall, and when the raft went down he seized the bough of a tree at
the edge of the fall. Then it went under. It was gone for one night.

Next morning the noise of shamans' sticks was heard at the mouth of the
creek. The raft came up from underneath. Meanwhile the one that had
saved himself came among his friends and told them that the
K<u>î</u>ksA'd<u>î</u> were all destroyed. Therefore the women were all
weeping. When the shaman saw them he spoke. His spirits said that the
people were not hurt at all. Nor were their clothes even torn. This is
why a K<u>î</u>ksA'd<u>î</u> is very brave. The man who jumped out,
however, was very much ashamed. Then they brought the people up from
\[the place where they had come out\].

Now the spirits worked in him, and he sang for another land otter so
that the people could see his strength. He sent out his clothes-man to a
point that could be seen below. "Take a spear" \[he said\]. He went to
it. He saw nothing, and stayed there that night. Then he

<span id="page_310">p. 310</span>

came back. When it was day he (the shaman) said, "Take me down there."
He said, "Go around the point below here." He said to his clothes-man,
"Be brave." Then he spit on the end of the spear. He spoke to get
strength. When he got up after speaking and threw it over the point he
hit the land otter in the tail. Now the shaman sent for it \[and said\],
"Take it round there." The land otter lay stiff. The spear was stuck
into the end of its tail. This is why even now the people call that
place Point-thrown-across. He put the shadow of his paddle against an
island below this. He was going to cut off the tongue of the land otter
upon it (the shadow). This is why they named the island
Divided-by-motion-of-paddle. <span id="fr_149"></span>[a](#fn_149.md) He
fasted eight days on the island, when he cut off the land-otter tongue.
Afterward he came up, and they were going to start home from that place.
He lived for more than a hundred years. His spirits were of such
strength that he lived so long that he could just turn about in one
place.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_146"></span>[301:a](tmt124.htm#fr_146.md) This is the Sitka
version of the story.

<span id="fn_147"></span>[304:a](tmt124.htm#fr_147.md) An exchange of
taunts.

<span id="fn_148"></span>[308:a](tmt124.htm#fr_148.md) That is, the tabus.

<span id="fn_149"></span>[310:a](tmt124.htm#fr_149.md) By a mere motion of
his paddle he cut off the land otter's tongue.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 100. Moldy-end](tmt125.md)
