[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](tmt121)  [Next](tmt123.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_297">p. 297</span>

### 97. THE FOUR BROTHERS <span id="fr_141"></span>[a](#fn_141.md)

Another being that hated us was a shaman, who used to live in a cave.
His name was <u>G</u>onê'tqâsâ'xduk!âq!. They could do nothing to him,
so they gave their sister to him in marriage. He always slept with his
back to the fire, and a spirit watched at his door. Finally a plot was
made regarding him, and the people prepared for him. They prepared boxes
full of bows and arrows for him, and there came to be plenty of them.
When they came to him they pulled their sister into the canoe. He (the
shaman) always wore a red-snapper coat. When he was pursuing them, he
kept jumping so (accompanied by gesture). While he was chasing them they
shot at him. They kept asking their sister, "Where is your husband's
heart?" She said, "I still love my husband's heart." After a time she
told them where her husband's heart was. "Shoot him in the middle of his
hand.

<span id="page_298">p. 298</span>

\[paragraph continues\] His heart is there." Then they killed him
outside of Ring island. They carried him to Ring island. They took the
red-snapper coat off from him. It was for this coat that they had killed
their brother-in-law.

After that ~~L~~q!ayâ'k! put it on and went after large animals. He
chased something from below named KAck!A'Lk!. <span
id="fr_142"></span>[a](#fn_142.md) He chased it far up out into the sky.
They are ~~L~~q!ayâ'k!'s footprints which are there. <span
id="fr_143"></span>[b](#fn_143.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_141"></span>[297:a](tmt122.htm#fr_141.md) Part of story told
in story 3 and in story 31.

<span id="fn_142"></span>[298:a](tmt122.htm#fr_142.md) An error. KAck!A'Lk!
was ~~L~~q!ayâ'k!'s elder brother.

<span id="fn_143"></span>[298:b](tmt122.htm#fr_143.md) That is, the milky
way.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 98. The K<u>î</u>ksA'd<u>î</u> Woman Who Was Turned Into An
Owl](tmt123.md)
