[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](tmt122)  [Next](tmt124.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_299">p. 299</span>

### 98. THE K<u>Î</u>KSA'D<u>Î</u> WOMAN WHO WAS TURNED INTO AN OWL <span id="fr_144"></span>[a](#fn_144.md)

When this town (Sitka) was first discovered the KîksA'dî were here, and
we stayed on this (the north) side. This town (at the northern end) was
named Mossy-town. There four men grew up, two of whom were named
~~L~~q!ayâ'k! and KAck!A'Lk!. They married. ~~L~~q!ayâ'k!'s mother was
named KAck!A'Lk!'s-mother. ~~L~~q!ayâ'k!'s wife refused to give her
mother-in-law herring to eat. After she had refused her twice she put
hot milt into her hand. She told \[her son\], "She put hot milt from a
male herring into my hand." It burned her hand. For this reason her son
carried down the canoe. He filled it with herring by means of a herring
rake. When \[the canoe\] was filled, he brought them in. The herring
rock is over yonder this side of Big-fort. <span
id="fr_145"></span>[b](#fn_145.md) He brought them in in the evening. He
said to his wife, "Go down to it," and she went down empty handed.

<span id="page_300">p. 300</span>

Then she shouted up, "Bring down the basket," but her husband said,
"Don't listen to her." Night came on. Toward morning the woman began to
change her cries. "This way with the basket (kât)", she said toward
morning. Later still she began to say, "Hû, hû, hû, û." Her husband said
to her, "You can become an owl from this time on." So she started to fly
off. She became an owl. She flew first among the trees. She was heard
saying, "Sit in your holes," after which he (her husband) went outside.
He said to her, "You put milt into my mother's hand. For that you can
become an owl. Way back there for you is Owl's-rock-slide." This is why
it is so. This is why we can always understand it (the owl). It always
predicts bad weather. It always tells what is going to happen in other
towns.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_144"></span>[299:a](tmt123.htm#fr_144.md) See story 37 for
another version.

<span id="fn_145"></span>[299:b](tmt123.htm#fr_145.md) The hill on which
Baranoff's castle stood.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 99. Moldy-end](tmt124.md)
