[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tmt129)  [Next](tmt131) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_347">p. 347</span>

### 105. STORY OF THE KÂ'CK!E QOAN <span id="fr_162"></span>[a](#fn_162)

LtAxdA'x was dead. He had a valuable copper, and he also had a dish
named Ts!AnAt!û'k!. When he was dead they took his property out. Those
of the house in which these people lived who obtained the dish got into
trouble over it. Whoever had a sister told her to go with him. "Let us
go to some other place," he said. The people that went away were from
that side of the house from which the dish was taken away. They were sad
on that account. Probably they numbered about forty. They said, "Let us
go straight for that mountain." Whoever had three brothers took them
along to carry things for him. After that they carne out under the brow
of the big mountain. On the way they dressed themselves in their fine
clothing, some in weasel-skin coats, some in marten-skin coats, and they
wore hats also because

<span id="page_348">p. 348</span>

they wanted to die wearing them. Not very many came away. Many more
stayed up there than came out. When they got up to the foot of the
mountain they came together to talk over where they should pass through.
They came to a place where there were many ground squirrels, which they
clubbed. This is why it became foggy. They lost one another in it, and
some of them disappeared. It was the fog that they got lost in. Then
they let them (those who had disappeared) go. After that they made good
headway toward the place whither they were bound. There appeared no
place to get through. The mountain seemed to be very close to them.

By and by they came to the very foot of the mountain. There was no place
where they could get through. But through the northern part of the
mountain passed a glacier, and they went up that way toward the top.
They thought that they were all going to die off when they reached the
top. They did not come to the highest summit of the mountain, however.
Then they put on all of their best clothing for good. They stayed there
perhaps five days. They were

<span id="page_349">p. 349</span>

now going to start on singing the song that they had sung when they left
home. The morning of the day after they started away. And they started
the song they used to sing up on Copper river. At that time they wore
nose pins. When they were about to start from that place they put on
weasel hats and coats. All mourned together over the friends they had
left behind and over those who had been lost in the fog. When they were
through mourning they arose and started off.

The Athapascans did not know about the sea, and they called one another
together. They said, "What is that so very blue?" They said, "Let us go
down to it. We have saved ourselves," they said. Coming to the lower end
of the glacier, they traveled very fast down to the sea. They crossed a
river boiling out from under the mountain and almost as large as Copper
river. They went down to the sea alongside of the big river. Afterward
they stayed down there at the

<span id="page_350">p. 350</span>

mouth of that river. The first thing they did there was to claim the big
mountain \[as a crest\], because they were the first to pass through it.
When winter began to come on they built a house beside the river. They
named it Mountain house because they had nearly lost their lives on that
mountain. This is why they so named it. They stayed right there in that
house, and the settlement grew into a town.

Then the Câ'dAdûx <span id="fr_163"></span>[a](#fn_163) grew strong.
They were the ones who built Mountain house. After they had been there
ten years one person began living away from town in order to make the
frame of a skin boat.

A woman named K!w<u>â</u>dê'~~l~~tA reared a young sea gull. The sea
gull did not grow large. All at once she did something to it that made
it grow as large as an eagle. It began to grow big. Now it was almost as
large as a house. When it got large she wanted to take it among her
playmates. Her brothers, however, wanted to kill it. When she was
playing with it the sea gull swam out of the mouth of the river. She
also disappeared. She started after it. They used the song that

<span id="page_351">p. 351</span>

they came out with over her. The song is a hard one, having all kinds of
notes.

Then the man sent off six of his nephews. He told them to go along shore
in the canoe he had made, to search for people. When the weather was
very good they started off. They came down this way to a place opposite
Yakutat. There they discovered eulachon and a fish called k!â'gAn. These
were in a creek. They put a small net into it to catch the eulachon, and
they put the k!â'gAn into a small cooking basket while they were still
alive. They offended them, however, by laughing at them. Just as day
broke they started off. When they got out on the sea there came up a
south wind, so that they could not go anywhere. They came right back to
their starting point, and their skin canoe was broken. One of them went
under it and was killed. They stayed there. Probably they were there for
twenty-one days. Then the weather became fair. Meanwhile they

<span id="page_352">p. 352</span>

lived upon k!â'gAn and eulachon. When it was good weather they again
started off.

At that time the people got over to Yakutat. There were many people in
the town, some called Kosk!ê'd<u>î</u>, Some L!uq!oe'dî, who refused to
let them remain, though they told them truly how they had come out from
behind the mountain. They were there for some time. Then they started
back to their own place. They came again to the place where their canoe
had been broken and remained there for one night. Again they went out.
They spent the night in their canoe. Then they came ashore. When they
reached the foot of the big mountain they were told that a little girl
had been given the name of the woman who followed the sea gull out.

This little girl went out to dig roots and dug up a red thing. The thing
she dug up was quite long. So they made this into a dish like the one
that had been taken away from them. After this dish had been finished
they beat the drums for the girl who had followed out

<span id="page_353">p. 353</span>

the sea gull. At that time a song was composed in remembrance of her.
The people remained there one year after the six men had gotten back.
Then the ninth month was beginning to come on. At that time a skin canoe
came in sight from the direction of Copper river. It was bound
southward. The people were called in, and they came, ashore there. These
were Kâ'gwAntân from the mouth of Copper river. They called them into
the house and gave them food.

After they had fed them six brothers went hunting with dogs, and the
youngest killed nothing. They always put up a great quantity of food,
and carried it around with them. By and by all rushed after mountain
sheep on top of the mountains. Their brother-in-law also went along with
them. One of them (the youngest) in chasing the mountain sheep went
astray in front of a cliff. It was toward evening. He was shaking all
over. When it was almost evening the mountain sheep rushed toward him.
Their leader went to him and

<span id="page_354">p. 354</span>

took him on its horns. It ran away with him and made him stand up on a
place to one side. Then the people started down. They went down without
hunting any more. When they got down on the beach they started home for
Yakutat.

Now the six brothers started on a journey for the place whence they had
all come out. Their uncle told them to go back for a copper plate which
was in a valley called ~~L~~taxê'n, leading down to Copper river. They
did not want to leave it there because it was valuable. When the people
first came out, it took them forty days and nights, but the young men
took only twenty days and nights. They got back among their friends.
When they came among their friends again these, wept with them and did
not want them to return. But after they had stayed there for some time
they went to the valley where was the copper plate. Since they had left
their friends no one had been to the valley. The real owner of it, too,
was dead. They reached the opposite side of that valley. When they got
there they saw the

<span id="page_355">p. 355</span>

copper, which was very long. It also had eyes and hands. The copper was
pointing its hands in the direction whither its friends had gone. They
cut it in two in the middle and took it apart. Then all six of them
carried it. Their friends did not bother them about it at all. They
started back. Again they traveled for twenty days, and came down to the
ocean once more.

At that time all the people started for Yakutat. They started off with
the copper that the six men had brought out. Again they came out to the
place where their canoe had been broken up. They camped there one night.
From there they started across to Yakutat. They came ashore there. Then
the people did not want to have them there. The Kosk!ê'd<u>î</u> did not
want to let them stay. They discovered Duqdanê'k<sup>u</sup> (one of the
new arrivals) coming from a small stream called Kâck! with some
humpbacks be had speared. When the Kosk!ê'd<u>î</u> saw him coming with
a string of humpbacks they cut the string on which they were hung. They
also broke his spear. Then

<span id="page_356">p. 356</span>

the people were grieved over what had been done to him. They called one
another together about it and thought it best to buy the place and pay
for it once for all. So they bought the place. The six brothers were the
ones who got it. They bought it for the copper plate, which was worth
ten slaves, and sent the Kosk!ê'd<u>î</u> away. Afterward things were
compared to the six Athapascan brothers \[because they were very fast
runners\]. They stayed here probably twenty years. Meanwhile the
Kosk!ê'd<u>î</u> and L!uq!oe'dî left the place. They were the only ones
there. There were no other Athapascans at that place.

One of these brothers slept too much and became lazy. In olden times
people went hunting with dogs. The six went hunting and camped in a
house near a mountain. Afterward they went away from the youngest. One
night while he was sleeping they went away from him hunting, because he
was lazy. They went away to find out what he could do. They camped away
from him for two nights. Meanwhile

<span id="page_357">p. 357</span>

he slept very soundly. He dreamed that a man came to him and said, "I
come to help you. Come down here by the salmon creek and vomit."
Immediately he went down to the creek and vomited four times. While he
was vomiting, he vomited up a salmon bone. "This is what makes you
lazy," be said to him. "This is what you are eating all the time, the
salmon people's toilet sticks. This is what makes you lazy." The one
that helped him was the being of the mountain. The mountain being said,
"Come with me this evening." Immediately he went with him. When they got
far up, the doors into the mountain were all opened. Then he went down
with him inside. There were rooms inside of the mountain for all things.
In the first were grizzly bears, in the next black bears, in the next
mountain sheep. All things were inside.

After they had stayed away two days his brothers came back for him.
Their brother was not there, and they felt very sorry. They thought

<span id="page_358">p. 358</span>

that he was dead. Then they floated down, laying the blame on one
another. When they reached home there were other people in the town.
These were the Te'qoed<u>î</u> who had come up from Prince of Wales
island to the south.

The mountain being told the man he had taken how he could find the holes
of grizzly bears in winter. Whatever he wished was killed for him inside
of the mountain. While he was there winter began to come on. Then spring
was coming. \[The being\] said to him, "Be careful not to use green fern
roots for they are my things. If you are not careful about it you will
kill nothing. Watch for the green fern roots. They grow wherever there
are grizzly bears. The green fern roots will be found growing below. You
will kill more things than your brothers. To-morrow you go away. I will
give you my canoe which is here. In it you will float out among your
friends." What he called one night was a whole month. Months kept on and
on for him, however. His mind began to be troubled on account of it.

<span id="page_359">p. 359</span>

By and by they began to make things ready for him. They dried all kinds
of things for him. Then he started away. \[The being\] said to him, "It
is well that you come now and see my canoe which you are going to take
among your friends." He took him thither. It looked like a grizzly bear.
What was there about it like a canoe? "The things you see inside are
this canoe's food. When it is hungry it will always look back. If you do
not give it anything it will eat you. It gets hungry quickly," said the
mountain being. "Go on now."

It went down the river. They had loaded the canoe with mountain-sheep's
fat and all kinds of fat. There came a time when it acted as he had
said. It started to turn back. When it began to swim around quickly he
gave it one whole mountain sheep. Already he was close to his home. When
it started ashore with him in front of the town he began to feed it so
that it would not kill any person. His friends ran down opposite him.
They saw their friend who had been long lost. It came ashore with him a
short distance from the town. When

<span id="page_360">p. 360</span>

he got close to the shore he took his canoe up quickly, and it became a
stone. Where it had turned around the river became crooked. They called
it River-the-stone-canoe-came-down-through.

Then the man who used to sleep so much was ready to hunt. The man that
had been lazy always went by himself. Just at the head of Kâck! is a
glacier. There is a cottonwood tree standing there, rather old inside.
When it is going to be stormy a noise is heard inside of this. Then
people do not cross that glacier. When no noise can be heard inside then
they go up across. The youngest killed more things than his brothers. He
always took around bow and arrows with him. They are called dîna'. They
all went in one canoe up to this glacier where was the seals' home. When
they came up there, plenty of seals were around that place. There were
plenty of grizzly bears and mountain sheep alongside of the glacier. The
youngest would say to those with him, "There is a bear hole up there."
Then they made a hunting house in one place. They took the canoe far up.
After that

<span id="page_361">p. 361</span>

a large piece of ice fell and raised a swell that carried their canoe
off. They were in want of provisions. Their food was quickly gone. This
happened in the Snow-shoveling moon (November). It was always blowing so
that they could not get home. There was a cliff at that place. Already
two months had passed over them. They could not see a canoe coming from
any place, and they were living by the skill of the man whom the
mountain being had saved.

When they became discouraged they made steps across the glacier. In one
place was a precipice, and they had a hard struggle. They left one of
their brothers in front of the cliff. He had become dizzy. So they left
him. They came among trees after they had left him. He suffered very
much from the cold. They, however, came upon a red-cedar house. They
used a fire drill. Already it smoked. Then the fire came quickly out of
the red cedar, and they sat by the fire without food. Day came without
their brother having died.

<span id="page_362">p. 362</span>

Now they made fun of their youngest brother. "Where is the being that
helped you? Didn't you say that you could kill anything?" Then he became
angry at the way they talked about him. He started off aimlessly. When
he started he did just as the mountain being had directed him. Then he
saw their white dog that used to go everywhere with them. He saw the
little dog running up. He looked toward it. He saw that a mountain sheep
was holed in there for the winter. Before he could believe it he heard
the little dog bark. The mountain sheep had very large horns. He ran his
spear into it just once and killed it. Not knowing what he should do, he
squeezed himself in beside it. He cut open the animal, which was very
large. This was the mother of the bears. He cut off only the fat from
around its stomach. It was of the thickness of two fingers. Then he ran
down to his brothers with it. That made them feel lively and drove away
all their hunger. Then they brought down all of the parts. After they
had brought everything down into the house they started back to hunt

<span id="page_363">p. 363</span>

for their brother, but the wolf people had taken him. When the canoe
that was hunting for them came outside they did not have much food left.
They let their brother go, for they could not find him. They started to
the town, and they got home. Then they stayed right where they were
because something was always happening to them.

Afterward they started down in this direction with their brother-in-law,
whose name was Heavy-wings. They started this way and came out here. He
had a daughter. They came to KAstaxê'xda. Their daughter was grown up,
but no man had ever seen her. Then they were going to Auk, but could not
reach it on account of a storm. Heavy-wings had many nephews. They had
some eulachon grease inside a sea-lion stomach, which they would throw
on the fire whenever they made one. After that they said something to
anger the north wind. On account of the north wind they had already been
there for two months, and the food in the sea-lion's stomach that they
thought would never be used up, was quickly consumed. Already only half
of

<span id="page_364">p. 364</span>

a piece of dried fish was left and the north wind was still blowing
hard. They had already consumed everything. One night, when they went to
bed, they could not sleep for thinking about their condition, but toward
morning all except Heavy-wings fell asleep. When he at last fell asleep
he dreamed a man came to him. It was a fine-looking man that came to
him. It was North Wind that he dreamed of. \[The man\] said to him,"
Give me your daughter. Then you will seethe place you are bound for."
But he did not believe his dream. In the morning he said, "One does not
follow the directions of a dream." His wife, however, said, "It is not
right to disbelieve what the dream says." His wife was angry with him.
She said, "Why then did you tell your dream to me? This is why I am
talking to you so." Next morning they went down to dig clams, but his
nephews kept very silent as if they were thinking about themselves. When
they were about to go to bed their fire was heard. <span
id="fr_164"></span>[a](#fn_164) Four days later he dreamed North

<span id="page_365">p. 365</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Man came to him again. "Give me your daughter
quickly if you want to see the place whither you are bound." In the
morning he said to his wife, "Had I not better obey my dream?" and he
said to his nephew, "Go outside and shout, 'I give my daughter to you.'"

Then the North Wind came to his daughter. "It is well that I marry you,"
he said to her, and he slept with her. She was willing to cohabit with
him. Then he did so, and it became calm. So they started off. Afterward
the woman told her mother about it. "A fine man keeps coming tome." They
started to cross the bay. Then this fine man came to her again. Cruor
eius defluebat e rostro in puppim, de qua depletus est. Undae, ubi
effusus erat, semper clarae erant. Now they came ashore. This is why
people keep saving to one another, "Did you give your daughter to North
Wind that you are not afraid of all the weather in the world?" He came
ashore and stayed among the people.

That winter the people going for firewood went away forever. When they
were gone, Heavy-wing's wife's labret broke and he went

<span id="page_366">p. 366</span>

after one. He went along, the shore. He kept chopping into things to
find the hard part of the tree. Then he saw a woman digging far down on
the beach. She had a child on her back. He said, "Some one might think I
was fooling with her." When he came up close to her, he saw that she was
not a woman such as he had been in the habit of seeing. It was the
L!<u>ê</u>'nAx<u>x</u>î'dAq that he saw. The mussel shells that she
threw up always fitted together.

Then he went out after her to the place where she was digging. Without
thinking of anything else he ran to her and caught her. His hands passed
right through her body. He chased her and seized her again. Again his
hands passed through her. When he got close up to the trees he
remembered his earrings. He threw them away. Afterward he chased her
once more. He seized the child on her back, and she immediately began to
cry out. She scratched him in the face. She made great marks upon him.
When he caught her he said within himself, "May I be a rich man. May all
the children that come after

<span id="page_367">p. 367</span>

me catch you." But he made a mistake in speaking, for he said, "Let me
burst open with riches." After he had chased her a short distance up
into the woods she sat down in front of him. There the woman defecated.
When she got up there was only foam to be seen. Her excrement was very
long and white. Then he took the foam and put it into a piece of paper.
He made a box for the foam. The scabs from his face were called
Medicine-to-rub-on-the-body (Dâ-nâk<sup>u</sup>), and he gave it to
those of his brothers-in-law who loved him. Although anything he had was
very little it grew to be much, and he became a rich man.

Toward the end of winter he started for Yakutat. Before he reached home
they went ashore. The sun was shining. He had his things taken outside.
Then he wanted to sleep, and he lay down beside them. By and by some
children ran against them and the pile fell on top of him. A copper
plate cut through his stomach, and it was all laid open. His sister's
son, named XAtgâwê't, was with him. Right there

<span id="page_368">p. 368</span>

he burned his uncle's body. He gathered together his bones and all of
his uncle's property, and he took his uncle's bones to Yakutat. The same
thing happened to his nephew. He also seized the
L!<u>ê</u>'nAx<u>x</u>î'dAq. He caught her when going for an ax handle.
But he handled the L!<u>ê</u>'nAx<u>x</u>î'dAq better than his uncle. He
became richer than his uncle had been. <span
id="fr_165"></span>[a](#fn_165)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_162"></span>[347:a](tmt130.htm#fr_162) This story was told
by a man named Q!â'dustin, who belongs to the same family, and therefore
contains some of the peculiarities of Yakutat speech.

<span id="fn_163"></span>[350:a](tmt130.htm#fr_163) This seems to have
been the ancient name of the family.

<span id="fn_164"></span>[364:a](tmt130.htm#fr_164) The fire being a
medium of communication between the two worlds.

<span id="fn_165"></span>[368:a](tmt130.htm#fr_165) Cf. stories 35 and
94.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 106. Origin of a Low-Caste Name](tmt131)
