[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tmt130)  [Next](tmt132) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_369">p. 369</span>

### 106. ORIGIN OF A LOW-CASTE NAME <span id="fr_166"></span>[a](#fn_166)

There was a certain village in the north from which the people were fond
of going hunting. By and by three men went out, and finally came to the
rocks among which they always hunted. After they reached the rocks they
saw a little boy. Then they took him aboard, thinking it was strange
that be should be there. When they spoke to him he did not reply. After
that they came home. They kept him as their friend. Whenever they gave
him something to eat he ate nothing. Only after everyone had gone to bed
did he eat. Whatever thing he touched would spill on him. He was
whimsical and they could do nothing with him. He was also lazy. When he
was asked to chop wood he broke all of their stone axes. The axes

<span id="page_370">p. 370</span>

were then valuable. Then the people who had kept him were very sorry.
When he played with the children he hurt them badly. Afterward the
people who kept him would have to pay for the injuries. If he made
something with a knife he would break it. Right after a skin shirt had
been put upon him it was in rags. If shoes were put on his feet they
were soon in pieces. He drank a great deal of water. He was a great
eater. He was a dirty little fellow. He was a crybaby. If they gave him
anything to take to another place he lost it. So he made a great deal of
trouble for the people.

Then they said of him, "He is really a man of the rocks." All the town
people agreed to take him back to the place where he had been found.
After he had been brought in it was very rainy. Then the people who had
saved him got into their canoe and carried him back. They put him on the
very same rock from which they had taken him. Then they went back. They
reached home. The world was

<span id="page_371">p. 371</span>

now calm. The rain also had ceased. Then the town people were all
talking about it. They said to one another, "What could it have been?"
and no one knew. Finally the town people said, "Don't you see it was a
rock-man's son?"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_166"></span>[369:a](tmt131.htm#fr_166) A Wrangell story.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Tobacco Feast](tmt132)
