[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tmt135) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_429">p. 429</span>

## MYTHS RECORDED IN ENGLISH AT WRANGELL

### 31. RAVEN

\[This version of the Raven story contains, besides frequent minor
variations, many episodes not found in the Sitka version, and a number
of stories usually given independently are incorporated into it. Only
the sections that do not occur in the Sitka version are noted at
length.\]

Raven's mother kept losing her children, until Heron told her to swallow
a red-hot pebble. She did so and gave birth to Raven, who was called
from that circumstance Hammer-father. Nâs-cA'k<u>î</u>-yêl tried to make
human beings out of rock and leaf, but the latter was quicker and man
came from it, so there is death. Then he told them that if they lived
right there would be a good place for them afterward. One time Raven
sent a woman into the other world to convince her that it existed; so
she went along the spirit trail and was ferried across a river at the
end of it to the ghosts' country. The ghosts told her that they were
hungry, thirsty, and cold, so, when she got back she told people to send
the dead food and to burn their bodies. Raven taught people to have
slaves and shamans, also to make all kinds of hooks, spears, traps, and
canoes. He went under the sea and visited all of the fish people,
teaching men afterward that fish are really human beings. Then Raven
instituted war. Afterward he told the birds what they were to be like.
He told what the land otter would do, especially how it would capture
men. \[Here follows the account of KAka', story 5.\] After this, Raven
lived in a cliff near Taku with North Wind, and that is why people
believe that cliffs are inhabited by spirits. He also taught them the
tabus to be used when paddling on the rivers. The killer-whale chief
took him into a sweat house and tried to roast him, but Raven outwitted
him by concealing a piece of ice near by. He taught the people that
there were Athapascans, and he taught the Chilkat people how to keep
salmon frozen in storehouses all winter. He taught them also about
Indian tobacco.

Now Raven went to ~~L~~axa<u>yî</u>'k and taught the people there to
make skin canoes. A man in that country killed all of his wife's people
and kept their hands in a basket in his house. When she found it out the
woman asked to be taken to her own town. Her husband left her therewith
her children, and they found everyone dead. Then her children made a
canoe out of skins taken from the bodies, went to their father's town
and made him give up their uncles' hands. Afterward they made his town
sink under the sea with everybody in it. Raven instructed the boys how
to restore their uncles to life.

One time Raven came to a town inhabited by ghosts and tried to carry off
their property, but it was taken back by invisible hands.

<span id="page_430">p. 430</span>

\[paragraph continues\] He went into the interior and lived with two
giants successively. He told the second giant how he might kill
Wolverine-man by pretending that he had been caught in Wolverine-man's
trap. After Wolverine-man had carried him home Raven continued to
instruct the giant, and helped him burn Wolverine-man's body, which
turned into mosquitoes and gnats.

Coming to another place, Raven found a woman and her daughter living
alone, and he told the latter how to make fire with the fire drill, and
then told her to eat some of the powder that comes from it. She gave
birth to a boy, who was called Fire-drill's-son. When he grew up his
father, Fire-drill, gave him a dog, a bow and arrows, and a club, with
which he killed Man-with-one-eye, a shaman who had destroyed the people
of his village. Then he came to the wife of this man, who killed people
by throwing her hand, which had a knife fastened to it, at them, and he
destroyed her also. Starting inland. he came to Old-mole-woman, who fed
him with food taken from between her teeth, and told him where the hawk
lived that had carried away his people. When he reached the place he
made the young birds tell him about their father and mother, who came in
clouds, and killed them, after which he got ground hogs for the young
ones and told them not to eat human beings, any more. After that he left
enough food with his mother and grandmother to last them all their
lives, and went away from them. Pursuing something called Dry-cloud, he
came among the mink and the marten people successively, but did not stop
until he reached the wolf people. These became jealous of him and tried
to destroy him by getting him to jump through a hoop which cut a person
in two if he failed. His dog, however, seized it and threw it up to the
moon, where it became the ring that indicates change of weather. Now the
man and his friend among the wolves kept on after Dry-cloud and came to
an old woman who told them that there was a monster fish near by. On
looking at it, they found only a red cod, which Fire-drill's-son killed.
He skinned it and dried the skin. After that he married
Daughter-of-the-calm, and they had a son named
~~L~~Ak<u>î</u>tc<u>î</u>ne', and this man married a woman who had a
litter of puppies by the dog. Afterward she found that they were able to
take off their dog skins and appear in human form, so she surprised
them, gathered together the skins, and burnt them. When
~~L~~Ak<u>î</u>tc<u>î</u>ne' saw these children he began to maltreat his
wife, and her children jumped upon him and killed him. Then they went
through Alaska, killing off harmful monsters. One of these, which was
like an eagle, used to forewarn other animals, until they made him
promise not to do so. \[Here follows the adventure with the one-legged
man told in story 3.\] Afterward ~~L~~q!ayâ'k! chased Dry-cloud across
the sky and made the Milky Way. Coming to a very cold region in the sky,
he wanted to get down, but the clouds prevented until his

<span id="page_431">p. 431</span>

eldest brother, KAck!A'Lk!, opened a passage. After that they wanted to
kill a monster near Wrangell, so they borrowed the canoe of
He-who-knows-everything-that-happens, and passed many obstacles in it,
thereby rendering them harmless, until they came to the monster and
tried to catch its head in a noose. All of their nooses broke, however,
until they tried one made out of the sinews of a little bird called
old-person. After that they returned to their mother and sister and went
southward with them through the forest, destroying the forest monsters.
Coming to an old blind man whose wife had left him, they taught him how
to catch fish in a net and how to cook it. They also met an Athapascan
shaman with long hair, and he and KAck!A'Lk! compared the relative
strengths of their spirits in the sweat house, KAck!A'Lk!'s proving to
be the stronger. So they told the Athapascan not to harm the people in
his neighborhood. Then they moved south and tried to cross the Stikine,
but their sister, who was menstruant, looked out at them, and they were
turned to stone.

One time while Raven was traveling along he came to a sculpin who
claimed to be older than he, so he placed it in the sky where it still
is (the Pleiades). He also sent a canoe load of halibut fishermen
thither. He invited the seal people to a feast, smeared their foreheads
with pitch which ran down over their eyes, and then clubbed them. He
married the daughter of a chief named Fog-over-the-salmon, who obtained
a quantity of salmon for him by simply washing her hands in a basket
filled with water. One time he hit her with a piece of dried salmon, and
she went away, taking all of the salmon with her. He wanted to marry
another high-caste woman, but a bird named tsAgwâ'n told the people bow
he had treated his first wife and they rejected him. Going on from
there, he turned an old man named DAmnâ'dj<u>î</u> into a handsome
youth, and told him to marry the girl. This man did so, but on the way
home resumed his proper shape. When his wife's people came to visit him,
he had to receive them in his miserable hovel because no one else would
have anything to do with him. When he went out after water, however, he
came to an old woman at the bead of the stream who made him young again,
and gave him a basket full of dentalia through which he became rich.
Some time afterward his wife wished to marry among the bird people, and
at last the brants carried her off, finally dropping her naked. She came
to an old woman and obtained some fox skins. She was now really a fox,
and let herself be killed by her father. On cutting the fox open,
however, they discovered her copper ornaments, and laid her on top of
the house, when she revived and became a great shaman.

After this Raven changed himself into a woman, and married the
killer-whale chief's son. She stole their food at night, and when her
labret was discovered in a box of grease, pretended that it had gone
there of its own accord. By and by she killed her husband, and pretended

<span id="page_432">p. 432</span>

to mourn over his body while in reality eating him. Raven pretended he
was going to make all of the killer whales white, but instead of doing
so killed and ate them. Then he came to the fishhawk and began living
upon its food, saying that he was going to bring it food in return later
on. He tried to live with another bird, also, but the bird left him. He
married among the goose people, but they discovered him eating a goose,
so they left him. After this Raven was invited to a feast, but did not
come at once, and they went on without him. When he did come they paid
him no attention, and he had nothing but leavings. Then Raven gave a
feast himself, and instituted the feast customs.

Now Raven returned to the house of his grandfather,
Nâs-cA'k<u>î</u>-yê~~l~~, and liberated the flickers which had been kept
under his mother's arms. For this his grandfather tried to kill him by
having a tree fall upon him, and a canoe close in on him, and by putting
him into a kettle full of water over the fire, successively, but in
vain, so, finally he raised a great flood. Raven and his mother climbed
from one retaining timber to another in Nâs-cA'k<u>î</u>-yê~~l~~'s
house, which was really the world itself, and finally flew to the
highest cloud in the sky and hung there, while his mother floated on the
water in the skin of a diver. Then he let go and fell upon a kelp. Next
he obtained sea urchins from the bottom of the sea and deceived the
woman who controls the tide, so as to make it go down. He and another
person tried out grease, and the other for a deceit Raven practised put
him inside of a box of grease and kicked him off of a cliff.

All of the people of a Nass town named G<u>î</u>t!<u>î</u>'kc were
killed except a chief, his sister, and his sister's daughter. Then the
chief got Old-man-who-foresees-all-troubles-in-the-world to help him.
This old man gave him an arrow which enabled him to kill many of his
enemies, but finally he disobeyed instructions and was himself killed,
while his sister and her daughter fled to the woods. Having offered her
daughter in marriage and refused all of the animals, this woman finally
accepted the sun's son. Then he put his mother-in-law into a tree where
she became the echo, and took his wife up to the sky. There she had
eight children, who were let down to earth on the town site of
G<u>î</u>t!<u>î</u>'kc and were helped by the sun to destroy all of
their enemies.

One time a woman of the same town stepped upon some grizzly-bear
excrement and was carried away by the bear people. Finally she was
helped by an old woman, and ran away. As she went she threw various
articles behind her which obstructed her pursuers, and at last she was
taken into the canoe of a man named GinAxcAmg<u>ê</u>'tk who married her
and took her home. Her husband had also for wife a big clam, which
killed the new wife, but was in turn destroyed by her husband, who also
restored her to life. Finally she went back to her father, but she had
really been living under ground all this time and

<span id="page_433">p. 433</span>

was very filthy. After a time she gave birth to a boy who was very
smart. When he was out fishing he was taken into his father's house and
received a magic club which killed of itself. With this he destroyed a
giant crab and a giant mussel which used to kill people. By and by this
boy had a son, who was very different from him and was called
Man-that-eats-the-leavings. At that time the daughter of a chief in a
neighboring village said something about the devilfish for which she was
carried off by them and married to a devilfish man. Presently her two
children came up to visit their grandfather and he learned what had
become of her. Then he invited her and her husband and children, and
killed the husband, keeping her with them. For this the devilfish made
war upon them and suffocated several people, but
Man-that-cats-the-leavings happened along and stopped them. Then
Man-that-eats-the-leavings lived in a brush house on the beach, and the
rest of his story is similar to that of Garbage-man in story 89.

Man-that-eats-the-leavings had a son who was a great hunter. One time,
when he was out hunting, he lost consciousness and, coming to, found
himself surrounded by several men who taught him the secret-society
dances. After a time he went to the Queen Charlotte islands and was told
about two youths who had become wizards by sleeping on the beach among
driftwood. They would be out all night, flying around among the brants
and geese. Finally a man found it out by fasting and drinking sea water,
but they paid him not to tell about them. When he got back to Alaska the
secret-society man told this story, and wherever it was repeated there
began to be wizards.

One time Raven went shooting with some boys, when the canoe was upset
and they were drowned, and he changed them into sea birds.

At the southern end of Prince of Wales island he met a man called
QonA~~l~~gî'c, who had lost everything by gambling, and he enabled him
to meet Greatest Gambler and win. So QonA~~l~~gî'c renewed the game and
got back everything he had lost besides all that his antagonist had
owned. Then his opponent's wife left him, and he went away and lived by
himself. From a grouse this latter learned of a great medicine-man, who
in turn taught him a medicine which would make him a great dancer. He
went to another town and pleased people so much by his dances and the
songs that he composed that they paid him a great deal of property, and
he became wealthy. After a while he taught a chief's son, so that he
became a still better dancer, but the boy's father determined that it
was best to leave this sort of dancing to low-caste people, reserving
the chief's dance for those of high caste.

The man that first learned about dancing was upset in a canoe and became
a land-otter-man called Tûts!îd<u>î</u>gû'L, who has very great power.
Some time afterward four boys were drawn out to sea after some black
ducks, upset there, and taken into the land-otters' dens. A shaman

<span id="page_434">p. 434</span>

told the people where they were, and they burned out the dens, killing
many otters, but Tûts!îd<u>î</u>gû'L escaped with the boys. Now the land
otters made war on human beings, and the bodies of the latter broke out
in pimples and sores which were really caused by the spider-crab-shell
arrows. At last some people came upon two white land otters, which they
carried home and treated as if they were deer (peace ambassadors). Then
the land otters came to the town and danced to make peace.

The people of that place were now very happy, but before they could
leave it Raven came to them and told them not to go away. When four boys
were at last sent, a man came down from the woods and told them that
three would die successively, while the fourth would reach home,
announce that the shaman was to die, and then perish. Everything
happened as he foretold, so that the people were very much frightened
and no longer dared to leave town. A child which cried very much was
carried away by Man-with-a-burning-hand, and when its parents found it,
was lying in a hole in the cliff, and ants were crawling out of its
nose, eyes and ears. Now follows a much longer version of story 93,
below. Instead of being brought home at once from the sea-lion rock,
according to this version the hero was abandoned there and taken into
the house of the sea lions, where he cured a wounded sea lion and
received a box in return which controlled the winds. Inside of this he
drifted ashore. Next follows the story of the monster devilfish (story
11). At Tuxican a girl began to nurse a woodworm, which grew so large
that the people became afraid, induced her to come away from it, and
killed it. Since then her people, the GânAxte'd<u>î</u>, have used it as
a crest. A shaman there named S!âwA'n was sent for by the land otters to
cure one of their number, who was carried along concealed under a mat.
When they reached their town they tried to make him think that the sick
person was in another house, but his rattle and belt ran ashore ahead of
him to the right place. Then he cured the sick otter by drawing an arrow
point out of its side; soon afterward the shaman was found lying upon a
sandy beach not far from his own town with gulls flying about him.

32\. KAKÊ'Q!<sup>u</sup>T

Ê

This story is partially identical with story 104. A man named
Kakê'q!<sup>u</sup>t<u>ê</u> went up among the Athapascans and taught
them all sorts of ways of collecting and preserving food. Then he
brought them down to the Grass people, who sent them away, so they came
to the L!ûk!nAxA'd<u>î</u>. After that the L!ûk!nAxA'd<u>î</u> settled
along the coast above Cross sound. One time the GânAxte'd<u>î</u> of
Chilkat gave a feast and made a raven hat. The L!ûk!nAxA'd<u>î</u> also
made a raven out of coppers, and took it to the Kâ'gwAntân when they
went to feast them.

<span id="page_435">p. 435</span>

\[paragraph continues\] War followed with the Chilkat, and at first the
L!ûk!nAxA'd<u>î</u> were defeated, but, when they had obtained new spear
heads made of iron that had been washed ashore on some wreckage, they
renewed the fight, killed Chief Yê~~l~~-<u>x</u>âk, and carried off his
carved pole. Then the Chilkat went to KAq!Anuwû', and they made peace.

### 33. ORIGIN OF THE <u>G</u>ONAQADÊ'T

A certain woman disliked her son-in-law very much because he was lazy
and fond of gambling. When the people went to camp he split a tree in
two, spread it apart, and caught a lake monster. He put on its skin and
then began catching fish and sea animals, which he left where his
mother-in-law could find them. She thought she was a shaman, and began
prophesying what animal would be left next. One time the Raven called
just as her son-in-law was coming out of the monster's skin in front of
the village, and be died, and, when she found who had been bringing in
the animals, his mother-in-law died of shame. After that the man's wife
had his body and the skin carried back to the edge of the lake. There he
came to life and carried her down into his house at the bottom. He
became the <u>G</u>onaqAdê't, and their children are the women at the
head of the creeks.

### 34. A STORY OF THE <u>G</u>ONAQADÊ'T

A chief accompanied by his nephews anchored in front of a cliff near the
mouth of Nass. During the night all were carried away by the
<u>G</u>onaqAdê't except the chief, who was discovered there and brought
home. At first the people prepared to wage war in retaliation, but the
chief induced them to invite the <u>G</u>onaqAdê't to a feast instead.
The latter came, restored the chief's nephews, and gave each of them a
headdress, rattle, and songs.

### 35. ORIGIN OF THE L!Ê'NAXXÎ'DAQ

The first part of this is another version of story 94, while the latter
part is a version of the last episode in story 105.

### 36. THE THUNDERS

A girl offended a snail and was found next morning on the side of a high
cliff with a big snail coiled about her. Then her brothers made wings,
flew up to her, and brought her down. Afterward they brought food to the
people of that town, and finally they became the Thunders.

### 37. ORIGIN OF THE SCREECH OWL

A woman at Sitka refused to give her mother-in-law herring, and when she
held out her hand for some, dropped the hot milt of a male

<span id="page_436">p. 436</span>

herring into her hand and burned it. When her son came home the old
woman told him. Then the son went out in his canoe, brought in a load of
herring, and told his wife to go down and bring it up. She went down
without her basket, and began calling to them to bring it to her. As
they paid no attention, she kept on calling, and she called all night.
Finally her voice changed to the hooting of an owl, and she also changed
into an owl.

### 38. LITTLE FELON

A little person came out of the felon on a man's finger. He was a hard
worker and a fast runner. One time he raced Heron all the way around
Prince of Wales island. A certain woman would give her daughter only to
the person who should guess to what animal a louse skin she had,
belonged. Little Felon helped a young man to guess it and afterward
assisted him to overcome various monster animals the woman sent him
after. Finally he helped him bring up the old woman's bracelet from
under the ocean. By and by this young man and his wife had a quarrel and
she disappeared. He went hunting for her and became a beach snipe.

### 39. ORIGIN OF THE FERN ROOT AND THE GROUND HOG

A cliff fell over on some girls, imprisoning all of them. They rubbed
grease on the rocks, and the birds inclosed with them pecked at it and
pecked a hole through. As the last girl was trying to get out through
this aperture the rock closed on her, and her head and breast became the
fern root, but her hinder portion the ground hog.

### 40. THE HALIBUT THAT DIVIDED THE QUEEN CHARLOTTE ISLANDS

An unsuccessful fisherman on the Queen Charlotte islands finally caught
a small halibut which flopped about on the beach, and at last increased
so in size that it smashed that town to pieces and the Queen Charlotte
islands themselves into numerous fragments.

### 41. THE IMAGE THAT CAME TO LIFE

A young Haida lost his wife, of whom he was so fond that he had an image
carved to resemble her. He cherished this for a long time, until it
finally came to life, but it neither moved nor spoke much. It gave birth
to a flourishing red cedar, and that is why cedars are so fine on the
Queen Charlotte group.

### 42. DJÎYÎ'N

An orphan girl named Djîyî'n was very badly treated. One time she
determined to stay on an island by herself, and while there she became a
shaman and discovered a great quantity of food which made

<span id="page_437">p. 437</span>

her rich. By and by the town chief's daughter fell sick and all kinds of
shamans were summoned to no purpose. Finally they called Djîyî'n, who
found that the wild canary (s!âs!) had bewitched her. She made this bird
find the charm and throw it into the sea. Then the bird was taken at its
own request to a place some distance from the village, where it
disappeared.

### 43. THE SELF-BURNING FIRE

All of the people of a certain town on Copper river died of starvation
except eight men. These started to walk down to the sea, but fell by the
way one at a time. Then the last man came to a self-burning fire which
warmed him, and all of his friends came to life and assembled around it.

### 41. THE GIANT OF TÂ'SNA

A boy whose people had died off met a giant and shot him in the mouth,
bringing them all back.

### 45. THE WOMAN WHO MARRIED A LAND OTTER

Another version of story 6, which differs principally in making the man
visit the land-otter town.

### 46. THE LAND-OTTERS' CAPTIVE

A Sitka man was captured and carried south by the land otters. There he
met an aunt who had been captured long before, and her husbands brought
him back again. He was now a land-otter-man, and annoyed the people so
much that they captured him and restored him by harsh treatment to his
senses.

### 47. THE MAN FED FROM THE SKY

During a period of scarcity a chief's nephew received food through the
smoke hole, with which he filled the empty food boxes and feasted all of
his uncle's people. Then his uncle gave him his younger wife, who had
been kind to him.

### 48. THE SALMON SACK

A poor boy went fishing and pulled up a sack filled with multitudes of
salmon.

### 49. ROOTS

A version of story 13.

<span id="page_438">p. 438</span>

### 50. THE MUCUS CHILD

All of the people of a certain village disappeared except a woman and
her daughter. The latter swallowed some mucus and gave birth to a boy
who grew rapidly. By and by he met a being called Strength, who made him
bathe every day, pull up trees, and break rocks, till he was very
strong. After that he climbed to the top of a mountain, found a town
occupied by wolves, and killed all. He came to another wolf town and
obtained the box of his uncles' lives. After he had left this in each
house for four days, his people all came to life again.

### 51. THE SALMON CHIEF

A man came upon a salmon lying on the beach and was about to take it
home, when the salmon spoke to him, telling him to put it into the sea.
He did so and afterward caught many salmon. Another time he met a salmon
in the same place, which told him to eat it and put the bones of its
head under his pillow. In the morning he saw two fine baby boys there.
One always stayed at home, but the other was very energetic and started
away. He came to an old woman who told him about a seven-headed monster
to which they were about to give the chief's daughter. The boy killed
this monster and married the girl.

### 52. THE JEALOUS UNCLE

A man was so jealous of his wife that he killed all of his nephews but
one by pushing them inside of the shell of a big clam or into the hole
of a devilfish. The last of the nephews obtained an eagle-down bracelet
which enabled him to turn into a ball of feathers, and with its
assistance destroyed both of the creatures. He also escaped in this
manner when his uncle pushed him off a high tree. Finally his uncle
fastened him on a plank, which be set adrift, but the plank went ashore
where two girls lived, and he married them. One of these had been in
love with the first boy that was killed. By and by the man returned to
his uncle and killed him.

### 53. THE MAN WHO MARRIED THE EAGLE

The wife of a Haida youth went with the son of the town chief, and when
her husband discovered it he shot him. The slayer, escaping by canoe,
was abandoned by his slave on a small reef. He got inside of a sea-lion
skin, floated ashore, and was found by a girl among the eagle people,
whom he married. All his brothers-in-law gave him eagle skins, in which
he went hunting. After a while he learned that his mother had been
driven out of town, so he carried all kinds of animals to her. One time
he killed a whale and left it in front of her house. The people of the
town he had come from found this and began

<span id="page_439">p. 439</span>

cutting it up, but he seized the town chief and carried him, along with
the other men in that village, who were holding on to one another, far
out to sea, where he drowned them.

### 54. THE BRANT WIFE

This is a version of story 24. It differs mainly in the concluding
portion, according to which the hero was left on a rock far out at sea
and was carried ashore by a sea bird.

### 55. THE DUCK HELPER

All the people of a certain village died except a woman and her son. One
time the boy went far inland and got lost. He came to a lake and found a
black duck there, which lent him its coat in which to fly home.

### 56. THE BOY WHO SHOT THE STAR

Two boys were great playmates, but one of them said something that
displeased the moon, and the moon carried him off. Then the other boy
shot an arrow into a star in the sky and kept shooting until be had made
a chain reaching down to the earth. This turned into a ladder on which
he mounted, living on berries borne on branches stuck into his hair.
Arrived in the sky country, he met an old woman who told him where to go
for his friend and how to get him. Then he went to the moon's house,
pulled his friend out from a place near the smoke hole where he had been
kept, and placed a cone there to imitate his cries. When the people
discovered that their captive was gone, they pursued, but the boys threw
behind them some things that the old woman had provided, which turned
into great obstacles, and escaped to her house. Afterward, by her
direction, they lay down where the second boy had lain, went to sleep
there, and, when they woke up, found themselves on the earth below.

### 57. THE BOY AND THE GIANT

A little boy went hunting and came upon a giant with whom he lived for a
long time. As the giant was carrying him along they came upon a very
small bird, which the boy shot and put into the bosom of his shirt. This
bird was so heavy for the giant that he had to throw it away. By and by
another giant attacked the first, and would have killed him, but the boy
threw his friend's club, made out of a beaver skeleton, at the intruder,
and it chewed off his legs, so that he was easily destroyed.

### 58. THE BOY WITH ARROWS ON HIS HEAD

A boy was born with sharp arrow points on his head. He was of so evil a
disposition that he killed his own mother and afterward ran

<span id="page_440">p. 440</span>

about in the forest, destroying all he met. At last an uncle of his
killed him and burned his body, the ashes of which became minute gnats.

59\. GAMNÂ'TCK!

Î

A somewhat extreme variant of part of story 4. The hero obtains the
favor of the red-cod people by painting them red and of the shark people
by painting them black.

60\. THE HÎN-TA<u>Y</u>Î'C

Î

A shaman took his friends to a place near Sitka and seated them there
facing the sea. Then a large number of killer whales came near and
fought a flat fish with sharp edges, called hîn-ta<u>y</u>î'c<u>î</u>,
which killed all of them except three. Some time later the shaman took
them out again and the same thing recurred. The killer whales got
devilfishes and a big halibut to assist them successively with like
result, but finally they brought a big crab by which the
hîn-ta<u>y</u>î'c<u>î</u> was destroyed.

### 61. THE EAST AND NORTH WINDS

A man married the daughter of East Wind, and afterward he married the
daughter of North Wind. Everyone thought the latter was very pretty on
account of her sparkling clothing, but when the east wind began to blow
it disappeared, for it was only frost and icicles.

### 62. THE BIG BEAVER

Some people drained a beaver lake and killed all of the beaver there
except one very large one. Some time afterward they went up to that
place and heard a woman singing, and on their way down they were all
drowned. Most of them were taken captive by the big beaver.

### 63. BEAVER AND PORCUPINE

A short version of story 15.

### 64. THE MAN WHO ENTERTAINED THE BEARS

A man who had lost all of his friends did not care to live, so he lay
down across a grizzly-bear trail. When the bears came down, however, he
invited them to his house to a feast, upon which they went straight back
into the forest. Early next day they came down, and he fed them, after
which they licked the paint from his breast and arm. Next day the
smallest bear came back, told their host that he was a human being who
had been carried off by the bears, and interpreted what the bear chief
had said in his speech the day before.

<span id="page_441">p. 441</span>

### 65. MOUNTAIN DWELLER

Two girls ate between meals, contrary to the tabus, and their mother
scratched the inside of the mouth of the elder and scolded them both.
Among other things she told them that they could not marry Mountain
Dweller. Then the girls ran away, and after wandering for some time,
came to Mountain Dweller, who married them. While they were there their
mother-in-law killed them because they looked at her while she was
eating, but Mountain Dweller killed her in turn and restored them to
life. After that they went to their father's town, and their husband
accompanied them, carrying a magic basket which contained an enormous
amount of food, and yet was made small enough to be carried on his
thumb. Afterward they killed their mother in revenge.

### 66. HOW THE SITKA K<u>Î</u>KSA'D<u>Î</u> OBTAINED THE FROG

A man and his wife hunting near Sitka heard a frog singing. Both claimed
it at first, but finally the man let his wife have it, and her people,
the K<u>î</u>ksA'd<u>î</u>, have used it ever since.

### 67. QÂQ!ATCGÛ'K

A very successful fur-seal hunter was driven to a rock far out at sea
where there was a great abundance of sea animals. After some months he
and his companions set out on their return, guiding themselves by the
sun. At length they came in sight of the summit of Mount Edgecumbe and
later of Verstovaia. They rested on Kruzof island, and then came to
Da<u>x</u>ê't, where the people were camping, and were received
joyfully. The elder of his two wives had grieved for him all this time
and was the first to catch sight of him, but the younger had married
again and now felt very much ashamed.

### 68. THE BEAVER OF KILLISNOO

A beaver was captured by some of the Dê'citân, who afterward found two
spears that it had made. Becoming offended, it killed its master with
one of these and then caused the earth on which his house stood to fall
in. It had previously made a great excavation underneath.

69\. STORY OF THE GRIZZLY-BEAR CREST OF THE TE'QOED

Î

Almost the same as story 19.

70\. STORY OF THE EAGLE CREST OF THE NEXA'D

Î

A poor man out hunting was guided by an eagle to a great house up in the
woods. This was occupied by eagles, and the man was so happy

<span id="page_442">p. 442</span>

among them that he married there and remained with them forever. Then
his brothers-in-law gave him an eagle skin with which he caught all
kinds of fish. Some of these he left where his mother and brothers could
find them, and he told them in a dream what had become of him, and that
it was he that was providing them with food. One day they saw him
bringing in some fish, and heard him say, "It is I."

71\. STORY OF THE KILLER-WHALE CREST OF THE DAQL!AWE'D

Î

A man quarreled so much with his wife that his brothers became ashamed
of it and left him on an island out at sea. There be whittled out from
various kinds of wood killer whales, to which he endeavored to give
life, and was finally successful with yellow cedar. He sent these out to
upset his brothers-in-law's canoes and destroy them.

### 72. STORY OF THE NAN<u>Y</u>AÂ'<u>YÎ</u> CRESTS

At the time of the flood a grizzly bear and a mountain goat accompanied
the Nan<u>y</u>aâ'<u>yî</u> as they were climbing a mountain. Since then
they have used those animals as crests.

### 73. STORY OF THE FROG CREST OF THE K<u>Î</u>KSA'D<u>Î</u> OF WRANGELL

A youth kicked a frog over on its back and lost his senses. His body was
taken home, but his soul had been captured by the frogs. He was tied to
a post by them until the chief came home, who upbraided him for having
treated one of his own people, also a K<u>î</u>ksA'd<u>î</u>, in this
manner. Then he let him go, and immediately his body revived. He told
his friends all that had happened to him.

### 74. STORY OF THE KÂ'GWANTÂN CRESTS

A man removed a bone from the mouth of a wolf and next night dreamed
that he had come to a fine town where the wolf told him something that
would make him lucky.

While members of this clan were out camping, a bear stole some fish by
reaching down through the smoke hole. Then they called it a thief, and
it became so angry that it destroyed all of them. Afterward the people
made war on all of those bears-who were Kâts!'s children (see story
19)--and destroyed them.

### 75. MIGRATION OF THE GÂNAXA'D<u>Î</u> TO TONGASS

A man at Klawak lost all of his property in gambling, and his wife left
him. Then he took the sons of his seven sisters and started away by
canoe. Finally they settled at Tongass. While there they saw an animal
that looked like a bear and shot at it, but it was medicine, and a
clayey substance came off on their arrow points, which enabled them to
get plenty of game, and which also caused them to become

<span id="page_443">p. 443</span>

handsome men. One time they went farther on and came to a Tsimshian
town. After that a canoe came to them from their friends, and when these
found what had happened to them, all joined them.

### 76. THE WOMAN WHO MARRIED THE FROG

A version of story 22.

### 77. THE GIRL WHO MARRIED THE L!AL!

A girl said something about a fish called L!AL!, and afterward the fish
married her. He was a very good polo player, and one time the boys
became so jealous of him that they knocked him down and made fun of him.
Then the L!AL! told his father-in-law to tie down his house firmly, and
went off up stream. There he grew large, lay down across Chilkat river
for a while, and then got up, letting the stream sweep all of the houses
away except that of his father-in-law.

### 78. THE WOMAN WHO MARRIED A TREE

The spirit of a spruce tree at one end of a village came to a girl and
married her, and they had a son. One day the child began calling for its
father, and after all the other people had been called in, the tree
people were summoned, and the child recognized an old man near the door
as its parent.

### 79. THE GIRL WHO MARRIED THE FIRE SPIRIT

A girl said something to the fire which offended it, so that it carried
her away and married her. After her people had hunted everywhere for her
they kept the fires extinguished as much as possible, and she was sent
back. For some time she kept going back and forth from her husband to
her father and mother, but once her nephew, who was in love with her,
seized a spoon that she was holding and her fire husband treated her
badly on account of it. She never went back to him.

### 80. ORPHAN

A poor girl was so smart and painstaking that she married a wealthy man.
She became proud, however, and treated her poor adopted brothers
ungenerously. By and by her husband died and his relatives took all of
his property, leaving her as poor as before.

### 81. THE DEAD BASKET-MAKER

A man used to cry over his dead wife's incompleted basket. By and by he
married again, and one time, when he was playing with his new wife, the
basket fell from above over his head and almost strangled him, so that
the people were obliged to cut it loose.

<span id="page_444">p. 444</span>

### 82. THE CRYING-FOR MEDICINE

The wife of a certain man kept running away from him. One time when be
was out hunting, he pursued what he thought was a bear and saw it go
into a hole in the side of a cliff. He knew that it was medicine, so he
took his slave up to the top of the cliff and let him down in front of
it, telling him to reach a dipper in and take whatever came out. With
the things so obtained the man compounded a medicine which made his wife
want to come back to him, but he refused to take her. It would also
bring down any animal he wanted, so that he became very wealthy.

### 83. THE RUNAWAY WIFE

The wife of a Haida youth kept leaving him until he learned from a
certain woman how to make her love him. When she tried to come back,
however, he refused to take her, and married somebody else.

### 84. THE REJECTED LOVER

A youth was in love with his cousin, but she would have nothing to do
with him. Finally, in order to please her she made him throw away his
clothing and ornaments and pull out all of his hair, after which she
left him. Then a loon came to him and restored his hair by diving under
water with him. It also gave back his clothing and landed him at another
town where be married the daughter of Calm. A long time afterward they
went back to his people. Every day while they were there he brought his
wife water, and she put a quill into it before drinking to see whether
he had been faithful to her. One day the girl he had formerly been in
love with seized his hand, and when his wife tried her quill the water
was slimy. Then she left him and started to walk home on the surface of
the sea. He followed her, but presently she looked round on him and he
went down out of sight.

### 85. THE FAITHLESS WIFE

The wife of a certain man pretended to die and was put into the grave
box. Then the son of the town chief, with whom she was in love, took her
to his father's house and married her. One time her little girl came to
that house for fire, saw her, and told her father. Then her father went
to the grave box and saw it was empty, and through the smoke hole of the
chief's house he saw her playing with the chief's son. Then he made
himself a wizard by playing with dead men's bones, flew to the chief's
house, and ran two sharp-pointed sticks into the hearts of his wife and
her new husband. Next morning he went out gambling.

<span id="page_445">p. 445</span>

### 86. THE WOMAN WHO MARRIED THE DEAD MAN

A girl kicked aside the skull of a dead person, and the following night
two boys came to her and she married one of them. This was the man who
had owned the skull. The two youths stayed there for a long time. When
they hunted they went all through the actions of paddling, spearing, and
camping without ever leaving the house. When they pretended to get back,
however, their canoe would be found on the beach loaded with fish and
seals. They were slowly becoming materialized when another girl became
jealous of them and destroyed them by marking the places where they sat
with human blood.

### 87. THE RETURNED FROM SPIRIT LAND

After the death of a certain woman her husband, who was very fond of
her, started off aimlessly and came by the spirit road to a lake. He
shouted to the people on the other side to come over and get him, but
they did not hear him until he spoke in a whisper. After he reached the
other side he found his wife and started back with her. At first nothing
could be seen of her but a shadow, but gradually she became more and
more distinct. She was about to resume her proper shape, when a young
man who had been in love with her lifted the curtain which was stretched
around her and her husband, and both went back to ghost land.

### 88. THE SKY COUNTRY

A man whose wife had died felt so lonely that he set out after her along
the beach. He soon found himself in a wide trail, and met a woman
tanning a skin, who directed him to his wife. The people in the town
where she was staying wanted to burn him, but he made them think he was
more afraid of being thrown into the water, so he saved himself. They
were really in the sky. By and by a spider woman let them down, and they
returned home.

### 89. THE ORIGIN OF COPPER

A woman was carried away by the grizzly-bear people, escaped, and
impeded her pursuers by throwing small objects behind her which changed
into great obstructions. Finally she was taken up into the sun in a
canoe and married the sun's sons, who made way for her by killing their
former cannibal wife above a Tsimshian town. Therefore there are many
cannibals among the Tsimshian. At last the woman returned to her parents
in a canoe which was like a live grizzly bear. By and by her husbands
became angry with her and left her. Then she and her child lived in a
brush house covered with filth, at one end of the town. When he got
larger her boy shot something in the lake which proved to be his
fathers' canoe, and pounded

<span id="page_446">p. 446</span>

out all kinds of copper objects from the metal of which it was composed.
Then he married the daughter of the town chief and became a great man.

### 90. THE MAN WHO WAS ABANDONED

A lazy man was abandoned by his townspeople, who left him nothing except
a piece of dried fish which one of his uncle's wives dropped into a post
hole. After that a small animal killed all kinds of game for him, and he
became wealthy, while the other people were starving. By and by some
slaves were sent to burn his body and were feasted by him. They were
told not to say anything about him, but one of them concealed a piece of
fat for her child and the cries of the infant over this food let the
truth be discovered. Then they went to him and he became a great chief.
He married the woman who had been good to him, but killed his uncle's
other wife and her husband.

### 91. THE SHAMAN WHO WENT INTO THE FIRE, AND THE HERON'S SON

A little boy was so badly treated by his uncle's wife that he went off
into the woods, made eight nests, like those of the salmon, along the
edge of a stream, and spent as many nights in them. So he became a
shaman and could bring to himself and destroy all kinds of animals by
means of his songs. By and by his uncle searched for him and found him.
A spirit called Ni<u>xâ</u>' came to him and took him into the fire, and
he burned down to a very small size, but his uncle, obeying his
directions, took him out, put him into a basket, and so restored him.
Afterward be had his uncle send for his wife, but he took the bottom
part of her away so that what she ate did her no good. By and by a
spirit showed itself in the form of a bear, after the Shaman had been
carried into the fire, searing his uncle's wife so that she died, while
the uncle forgot to take his nephew out of the fire and let him burn up.
At once all of the animals that had been killed came to life and ran
away.

All the people of the town to which this shaman had belonged disappeared
except a woman and her daughter. The woman called for something to marry
her daughter and was answered by the heron, by whom the daughter had a
son very fond of hunting. One time he found a fish called
hîn-ta<u>y</u>î'c<u>î</u> swimming in a pool, reared it, and, when it
became as large as himself, killed it and made use of its skin. After a
while be went up on one of the two trails on which his uncles had
disappeared, saw a finger sticking up there, pulled up the being to
which it belonged, and killed it. Then he went along in the other trail,
saw a head, and killed the being to which it belonged. Next he went
along the beach, came upon a monster devilfish, and killed it by means
of his hîn-ta<u>y</u>î'c<u>î</u> coat. He killed an enormous rat in the
same manner. Then he came to a cannibal woman who offered him human

<span id="page_447">p. 447</span>

flesh to eat. When he refused it she throw a mussel shell at him to kill
him, but he jumped aside, threw the shell back, and destroyed her. He
put her body into the fire and the ashes became mosquitoes. Then he met
and killed her cannibal husband.

### 92. MOUNTAIN DWELLER

Another version of story 65.

### 93. KÂHÂ'S!<u>Î</u> THE STRONG MAN

In a certain town two persons were bathing for strength in order to kill
sea lions. One of these, the town chief, bathed in public accompanied by
all of the town people, while his nephew bathed during the night only,
and lay in bed all day, pretending that he was a weakling. Finally a
being called Strength came to the latter and made him so powerful that
he was able to accomplish the feats the chief had set himself, namely,
to pull the stump of a branch out of a tree and twist another tree down
to the base. Having done so, however, he put them into their original
positions, and when the chief tried them next he thought that he had
become strong. When they started out for the sea-lion islands, they let
Kâhâ's!<u>î</u> go along also, and, while the chief was killed,
Kâhâ's!<u>î</u> destroyed two big sea lions, one with each hand.

### 94. THE L!<u>Ê</u>'NAXXÎ'DAQ

A man saw a woman and two children floating in Auk lake, and he captured
one of the children and brought it home. During the night the child
gouged out the eyes of all the people living in the village except one
woman, and ate them. This woman killed the child, and taking on her back
her own child, to which she had just given birth, she went up into the
woods and became the L!<u>ê</u>'nAxxî'dAq. As she went along she ate
mussels and fitted the shells together.

95\. ORIGIN OF THE FROG CREST AMONG THE K<u>Î</u>KSA'D

Î

Another version of story 66.

### 96. HOW THE K<u>Î</u>KSA'D<u>Î</u> CAME TO SITKA

When the K<u>î</u>ksA'd<u>î</u> first reached Sitka some people, called
Sky people, killed all of them except one woman who concealed herself in
a cave. She called for some one to marry her, and, after having refused
all the animals, married the sun's son. By him she had four boys and a
girl, and their grandfather placed them inside of a fort which he let
down on the site of their former village. Then the enemy came upon them,
and when they were in danger, their grandfather heated the land so hot
that the enemy ran down into the sea. They found that boiling hot also
and were destroyed.

<span id="page_448">p. 448</span>

### 97. THE FOUR BROTHERS

In order to destroy a malevolent shaman four brothers let their sister
marry him, took her back, and got her to tell them the location of her
husband's heart. They killed him outside of Ring island, Sitka sound,
and took away his red-snapper coat. One of these brothers, named
~~L~~q!ayâ'k!, then put this on and used it in the pursuit of large
animals. By and by he pursued an animal up into the sky and his
footprints formed the Milky Way. <span id="fr_196"></span>[a](#fn_194)

### 98. THE K<u>Î</u>KSA'D<u>Î</u> WOMAN WHO WAS TURNED INTO AN OWL

Another version of story 37.

### 99. MOLDY-END

A small boy made an angry remark about a piece of moldy salmon and was
carried off by the salmon people to their town. When he became hungry he
began eating the salmon eggs lying upon the beach, but was told that
they were salmon dung. Finding that he was homesick, his salmon father
diverted him by sending him to Amusement creek and placing his arms
around two sand-hill cranes. By and by they started back with him, and
passed through something called sît which opens and closes, and scars
those salmon which are caught in it. When they camped they made other
scars by throwing hot rocks upon one another, as if cooking. Then they
met the herring tribe, with which they had a verbal contest, and finally
announced what creeks they would enter. The boy's father went to
Da<u>x</u>ê't, where the boy let his human father spear him. When his
mother began to cut him open she discovered his copper necklace, and
concluded it was her son. His father put him into a basket and placed it
upon the roof, where his spirit began to work in him, and he turned back
into a man. Then he became a great shaman and told the people what had
happened to him. By and by he tested his spirits by sending a raft load
of his people over a waterfall under the sea. The next morning it came
up with all the people safe. He sent his clothes-man to spear land
otter, and, although he had him throw his spear across a point at an
invisible animal, it struck the land otter on the tip of the tail and
killed it. He lived to be more than a hundred.

### 100. MOLDY-END

Wrangell version of the above story, more detailed in the main portion
but without the last episode.

### 101. QÂQ!ATCGÛ'K

Another version of story 67.

<span id="page_449">p. 449</span>

### 102. THE SEA-LION HUNT

Some hunters killed a large number of sea lions by pushing sharpened
sticks into their noses.

### 103. THE WAR IN THE SPRUCE CANOE

The Chilkat people once warred against the Stikine in a spruce canoe and
killed numbers of people. (This probably refers to story 29.)

### 104. STORY OF THE KÂ'GWANTÂN

A noted hunter named Qakê'q!<sup>u</sup>t<u>ê</u> killed the sleep bird,
and along with it all his own people. Being unable to sleep himself, he
wandered north to the mouth of Alsek river where he tried to trap a
ground hog, but found a frog in his trap instead. He thought he saw some
people but found they were stones. Then he went up the river and came
among the Athapascans, whose goodwill he obtained by teaching them how
to catch eulachon, thus preserving them from starvation, In spring they
accompanied him back to his own people, bringing loads of furs with
them. They came first to the Grass people, but these were afraid and
sent them away, so they went to the Kâ'gwAntân who opened trade with
them and became rich. The Athapascans traded particularly for a kind of
seaweed.

From the wealth thus obtained the Kâ'gwAntân built Shadow house, and had
a great feast. By and by the chief's daughter, who was menstruant, said
something to anger the glacier, and it extended itself over the town,
driving the people to KAq!Anuwû, while the T!A'q!dentân settled
opposite. Later on the people warred with the ~~L~~uqâ'xAd<u>î</u> of
Alsek river and captured the Wolf post from them. A ~~L~~uqâ'xAd<u>î</u>
shaman was attacked by some warriors and flew away. He flew around for
some time until a menstruant woman looked at him, making him fall into a
pond. The warriors who had attacked him began to tamper with his spirit
paraphernalia, and all but one of them were destroyed. Then the
Kâ'gwAntân erected another house, which they named Wolf house, and
carved its posts like the Wolf post they had captured. They invited
people to the feast from Chilkat, Sitka, and Killisnoo. Slave's valley
then received its name from some slaves who came to life after having
been killed and thrown down into it, supposedly dead. Afterward two
parties of young people contended with each other going after firewood,
and later on pushed the house fire over on each other until the great
beams caught. As a result of this fight the family scattered, and some
moved to Sitka. From that time, too, they came to be known as
Burnt-house people (Kâ'gwAntân).

<span id="page_450">p. 450</span>

### 105. STORY OF THE KÂ'CK!E QOAN

After the death of an Athapascan chief on Copper river the people of his
house began fighting over the possession of a dish, and those who lost
it determined to emigrate. They set out, and, after losing some of their
people in the mist, crossed the mountains near Mount St. Elias and came
to the sea. While they were living at the mouth of a large river a
little girl reared a sea gull which attained enormous proportions. When
it got large her brothers wanted to kill it, but it disappeared together
with the girl. By and by the chief sent six brothers along shore to hunt
for other people. They encountered head winds at one place and lost one
of their number, but finally reached Yakutat. W hen they got back they
heard that the name of the girl who had reared the sea gull had been
given to another. This girl dug up something long and red in the forest
out of which a dish was carved like the one that had been taken away
from them. Presently they called in some Burnt-house people who were
coming south from the mouth of Copper river and entertained them.

After this the six brothers were sent back to Copper river for a certain
copper plate that had been left there, and they went and came in twenty
days each way, half the time it had taken the whole band to come out.
Then the people all set out for Yakutat, where they were at first
received in a hostile manner by the Kosk!ê'd<u>î</u> and
L!uq!oe'd<u>î</u> living there, until they purchased a creek from them
with the copper plate and settled upon it. This was Kâck!, from which
they obtained their name. By and by the six brothers went hunting, and
one of them became so lazy that the others left him for some time. Then
a mountain being came to him and helped him to become a great hunter.
Finally he sent him home in a canoe which was really a grizzly bear.
This bear turned around to be fed when it was hungry, and that is what
made the turns in the river. After a time the brothers went up to a
glacier at the head of Kâck! to hunt, but their canoe was carried away
by a swell raised by falling ice. After waiting in vain for succor, they
started to cross the glacier, but one of them became dizzy and was
carried away by the Wolf people. The others got across and were in a
starving condition, when the youngest discovered a mountain sheep with
very large horns, that was really "the mother of the bears." After that
they reached home.

By and by the six brothers started south with their brother-in-law. They
tried to cross from KAstaxê'xda-ân to Auk, but were delayed for months
by storms. Finally Heavy-wings, their brother-in-law, discovered that
this was caused by North Wind, who was in love with his daughter, and be
gave her to him. After that Heavy-wings saw and caught the
L!<u>ê</u>'nAx<u>x</u>î'dAq and became wealthy, but because he did not
use exactly the right words at that time he was killed by a copper

<span id="page_451">p. 451</span>

falling upon him and cutting him open. His nephew also saw the
L!<u>ê</u>'nAx<u>x</u>î'dAq, used the right words toward it, and became
very wealthy.

### 106. ORIGIN OF A LOW-CASTE NAME

Some people found a rock man's son on some rocks and adopted him, but he
got them into so much trouble that they carried him back there. Then the
weather, which had been bad, immediately cleared. Since that time a
low-caste person has been called a "man of the rocks."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_194"></span>[448:a](tmt136.htm#fr_196) This is part of a
longer story of which story 3 is one version while a second is contained
in story 31.
