[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tmt116)  [Next](tmt118) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_280">p. 280</span>

### 92. MOUNTAIN DWELLER <span id="fr_132"></span>[a](#fn_132)

A chief was living with his two children in the middle of a long town.
People were always visiting him, and he kept tallow stored away for
strangers. By and by a big canoe came to him, and \[the peoples'\]
things were taken up. \[The children's\] grandmother had charge of the
tallow. She always had things stored away for strangers. Then she would
give these to her grandchildren. Afterward the old woman would say, "The
old shaggy dog took it away from me."

After that he invited the foreign people up. He ordered the tallow in
the big box to be brought for them. Now there was nothing inside of the
big box. The foreign people, however, were all seated. It was thought
that his children had done it. They had invited them for the food that
was all eaten up. This is why people say even now,

<span id="page_281">p. 281</span>

\[paragraph continues\] "They came to invite for the food that was
gone." It was entirely empty, and great was the shame that the chief
felt. Afterward he questioned his children. Their dishes had hair on
them. There was a dish apiece, which always lay by them. Then their
mother came in to them. "Did you do this?" she said. When they kept on
crying, she raised the face of the older girl. She scratched her
daughter's cheek, and also that of the younger one. She scratched on
both of their cheeks because they ate up the tallow for which \[her
husband\] had invited strangers. When the people went to bed that night
the girls made a hole under the boards. Then they put the hairy dishes
in their places. Afterward they went back into a hollow tree.

Next morning \[their mother\] said, "I wonder where they have gone." She
said to them, "Get up now." Then the long dishes moved \[as she pulled
at the covers\]. It was the dishes they had put in their places. They,
however, had dug a hole underneath and were gone. Then their mother came
out from behind the screens. No one knew

<span id="page_282">p. 282</span>

whither they had gone. Afterward they went straight up into the woods.
And after they had started \[the people\] rushed up to hunt for them,
but they hid themselves. The younger kept saying to the elder, "Let us
make some kind of noise for our mother." She answered, "How does the
inside of your cheeks feel?" She kept saying to her younger sister, "Oh!
we can not do it. She said to us, 'Let Mountain Dweller marry both of
you.' I know what she was saying to us."

For this reason they went far up into the woods. They wandered along,
aimlessly crying. The younger sister wanted her elder sister to go back
to the place from which they had started, but she did not want her
mother to see her down there. After they had gone a long distance they
saw a small mouse running across a log. The mouse went into a little
hill. Then her younger sister said, "Grandmother mouse, people have seen
you." So said her younger sister. "Put me quickly across this log," said
the little mouse. "My grandmother says 'Call them into the house.'" On
account of that it had run out.

<span id="page_283">p. 283</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Then the door flew open. They \[entered and\]
sat down. <span id="fr_133"></span>[a](#fn_133) "Why did you come?" she
said to them. After they had been seated for some time she pushed
something between her teeth, and got something out. It was a piece of
dried fish. She shook it. It was now a spring salmon taken from between
her teeth, and they placed it by the fire. She set it before them, and
they consumed it. She took a cranberry out from between her teeth. She
placed it before them, and they consumed that. After they had eaten she
said again, "Why did you come, my little grandchildren?" and the elder
replied, "My mother said we could not marry Mountain Dweller." "He is a
very difficult person to get near. Go now, my little grandchildren."
Then she told them what to do. "Crushing-mountain is before the place,
granddaughters, and also the fighting dogs (cAk!) <span
id="fr_134"></span>[b](#fn_134)." She also said, "Kelps float together
in front of it. Take your knife and a whetstone with you," she said.
After she had instructed them they started out. When they had gone along
for

<span id="page_284">p. 284</span>

some time they saw the fighting dogs. They throw a piece of dried fish
bone to them, and the dogs <span id="fr_135"></span>[a](#fn_135) began
to divide it. Again they went forward. Before they had gone far they
came upon kelps floating together. They threw moss between. Then they
passed through. After that they saw Crushing-mountain. (Just the way
people tell this I am telling you, my opposite clansman.) They threw a
whetstone between these. They went through. Now they saw the camp. They
came to the house door.

Mountain Dweller's mother was at home. Nothing could be seen inside of
this house, there was so much fat. They were told they could not get
into Mountain Dweller's house. That is why they went there. After they
had been seated for some time they were given something to eat. By and
by the hunter brought in a load of food. He asked his mother, "What are
those people that have come to you doing?" "They came to marry you
because it was said that they could not." So Mountain Dweller married
both of them.

<span id="page_285">p. 285</span>

After they had been there for some time he started off. He said to his
wives, "My mother does not let the person that stays with me last long."
For this reason they kept sticks in their hands while he was away from
them. Sometime afterward their mother-in-law put aside of mountain sheep
into the fire. She stood it up on end. Then it caught fire. This was the
way she killed her son's wives. After that they kept watch on her. When
it was burning she pushed it toward her son's wives. Then they pushed it
back upon her, and killed her. They pulled her body outside and put
something over it. They let it stand out of the ground a very little.

Meanwhile her son was away. When he arrived he was carrying a big
mountain sheep. Then he asked for his mother. "She did to us just as you
said. We threw it over upon her. We pulled her outside." He said to
them, "What you have done to her is well. My mother would not let a
person who lived with me last long." After that he collected sides of
mountain sheep, inside fat, and tallow.

<span id="page_286">p. 286</span>

After many years had passed Mountain Dweller said to his wives,
"Wouldn't you like to go home?" "Yes," said they. \[The elder\]said to
him, "My mother said we could not marry you. That is why we came to find
you." "Weave some baskets," he said. So they wove them. "Weave two that
you can just put on your thumbs" \[he said\]. They were going to start.
There were many mountains between. After they had put many canoe loads
of things inside of the baskets he put them both on his thumb, and they
started along with them. They were gone for a very few days.

When they were going along with him he seemed to be changed suddenly.
Mountain Dweller began to shine from within. By and by they sighted
their father's town. The town was long. In the evening they came in
front of the house. He had the small baskets on his thumb. Then they
wished that their little brother might run out to them. They called him
to them. The people had already

<span id="page_287">p. 287</span>

given a mourning feast for them there. A year was now past. For this
reason he ran into the house. Then he said to his mother, "My sisters
have come and are outside." At this she became angry with her young son,
who had longed for his sisters. "You lie," she said to him. At once he
went back to them, crying. When he came into the house again he said to
his mother, "They are there. It is well that you go out to them." "Take
a piece off of their marten blankets and bring it here," she said. So he
told them. (The way I am telling you is the way people always tell old
stories.) Then he brought it into the house. At that time his mother
started out. She looked. Her children were really there. "Come into the
house," she said. So they came into the house to her. Afterward the
elder girl told her mother about the baskets. Mountain Dweller having
shaken the baskets, she said, "There are big baskets outside. Let them
be brought in." Then two persons went out. The baskets were too heavy
for them. More went out. All the men in the house tried to bring them
in.

<span id="page_288">p. 288</span>

\[paragraph continues\] When they could not, Mountain Dweller rose to
get the baskets. Although they were unable to get them, Mountain Dweller
put the baskets on his third finger. Inside was fat from the inside of a
mountain sheep. Because her mother had scratched the inside of her
daughters' cheeks, \[the elder girl\] invited the people for nothing but
fat. The things in the baskets were too much for them. The baskets in
which these things were contained, were called World-renowned-baskets.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_132"></span>[280:a](tmt117.htm#fr_132) For another version,
see story 65.

<span id="fn_133"></span>[283:a](tmt117.htm#fr_133) The story is very
much condensed here. The mouse's "grandmother" had sent it to invite
them in. The mouse asks to be put over the log because the entrance to
her grandmother's house was on the other side. "On account of that she
had run out" refers to the mouse's first appearance.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[283:b](tmt117.htm#fr_134) An unusual word for
"dog" occurs here.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[284:a](tmt117.htm#fr_135) An unusual word for
"dog" occurs here.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 93. Kâhâ's!<u>î</u>, The Strong Man](tmt118)
