[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](tmt128)  [Next](tmt130.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_326">p. 326</span>

### 104. STORY OF THE KÂ'GWANTÂN <span id="fr_157"></span>[a](#fn_157.md)

From <u>X</u>AkAnuwû' went a man of the <u>X</u>AkAnû'ked<u>î</u>, who
were named from their town. The people used to go out from there after
seals, which, not having guns at that time, they hunted with
long-shanked and short-shanked hunting spears always kept in the bow.
The shank of the long-shanked spear, which is grasped in throwing, is
called cûx. This man's name was Qakê'q!<sup>u</sup>t<u>ê</u>. On
starting off, he went up toward the head of the bay.

This Qakê'q!<sup>u</sup>t<u>ê</u> was a great hunter and used to kill
all kinds of things, but now he could get nothing. Then he stopped in a
place named The Bay, and dropped his anchor into the water beside the
canoe. Immediately his steersman went sound asleep, but he could not. By
and by a small thing began flying around his face, and, taking up his
paddle, he knocked it down into the canoe. It made a noise, "Ts, ts."

<span id="page_327">p. 327</span>

Daylight found Qakê'q!<sup>u</sup>t<u>ê</u> still awake. He took up the
bird he had killed and saw that its eyes were swollen up and hung down
over its face. Blood was on both sides of its mouth. What he had hit was
his own sleep. Then he called to his steersman to awaken him. He did not
hear him. Qakê'q!<sup>u</sup>t<u>ê</u> took up his spear and pushed his
steersman with the end of it. As he did not answer, he went over to him
and found him dead. Like the sleep bird Qakê'q!<sup>u</sup>t<u>ê</u> had
hit, blood was coming out of his mouth. Then
Qakê'q!<sup>u</sup>t<u>ê</u> went along sadly toward the town with the
body. \[I am now telling you about the very ancient people.\]

When Qakê'q!<sup>u</sup>t<u>ê</u> came in sight of <u>X</u>AkAnuwû'
there was no smoke visible, and nobody walked outside or came down to
meet him as he had expected. Then he jumped out into the water and went
up to his house. The people of that town were numerous, and it was long.

<span id="page_328">p. 328</span>

\[paragraph continues\] In those days doors were made of skin hung on
the outside, and the women wore labrets. All of the people there lay
dead as they slept just like his steersman. He went through the houses
among their bodies. Because he had knocked down Sleep not even one small
boy was saved, and to this day people have the saying, "He knocked down
the sleeper." They made a parable of it.

Fur blankets were not scarce in ancient times, so
Qakê'q!<sup>u</sup>t<u>ê</u> took two marten blankets out of a box and
put them around him. He was going to start away in desperation because
he had killed his own sleep. He also put abalone shell in his ears and
piled together the things they used for snowshoes. In a bag he carried
along a bone knife and a bone trap, tied a weasel skin in his hair, and
put a painted drum on his shoulder such as people used to beat when
anybody was dead.

<span id="page_329">p. 329</span>

\[paragraph continues\] He was going to die with these things. Then he
started toward a mountain named TsA~~l~~xâ'n. <span
id="fr_158"></span>[a](#fn_158.md) He took no food with him but put some
Indian red paint in a sack and, when he was ready to start, painted his
face and hair. Then he started toward <u>G</u>onâ'xo. For perhaps ten
days he traveled without food, using instead leaf tobacco mixed with
calcined shells. His snowshoes had claws, enabling him to climb cliffs
and cross glaciers. The mountain over which he was passing is called
TsA~~l~~xâ'n.

By and by Qakê'q!<sup>u</sup>t<u>ê</u> came out upon a ground-bog place.
There was then no rain, for he was traveling with reference to the
clouds which rose in waves behind Mount TsA~~l~~xâ'n. When these clouds
come down to the very foot of the mountain there will be good weather,
and people then paddle far out into the ocean. Seeing an animal go down
into the ground-hog hole, he set up his trap there,

<span id="page_330">p. 330</span>

and it is from him that people know how to fix it. He camped near it.
When he went to look at it next day it could not be seen. He took away
the thing used to cover the top of the trap. He had set this trap
because he was hungry, and he was very glad to see that it was down.
When he came to examine it, however, he found that a frog had gotten
inside. "This frog pretended that it was a ground hog," said
Qakê'q!<sup>u</sup>t<u>ê</u>, and, taking up all of his things, he went
to a bay near by called Canoe bay, hoping to see some people. He thought
that he saw some at Seaweed point, and, being very lonely, he started
down toward them. Then he discovered that they were black stones that
looked like people, and said, "These are small stones which appear like
human beings." <span id="fr_159"></span>[a](#fn_159.md) Starting on again
toward the head of Alsek, he traveled for some time and came to its
upper course.

<span id="page_331">p. 331</span>

people did not know then that Athapascans lived up there. Although
eulachon ran up this river the people there were starving, as they had
no other way of catching eulachon than by means of hooks. At first
Qakê'q!<sup>u</sup>t<u>ê</u> remained in the woods, not letting himself
be seen by them. By and by, however, he tied together two eulachon traps
(or nets) used by the Tlingit and called "seal's-head." Toward evening
he went down to the place where those Athapascans came up to fish and
set the two traps near by at the edge of the water. Both of them were
filled that same night, and he emptied them where the Athapascans were
in the habit of fishing. There was a large pile.

When the Athapascans came up next morning they exclaimed in
astonishment, "What has done this?" Qakê'q!<sup>u</sup>t<u>ê</u> did not
know that they were Athapascans, and they did not know him. After that
an Athapascan shaman began performing to discover what was working

<span id="page_332">p. 332</span>

for them. When he discovered it he said, "Something has come to help
you. Hang all kinds of food around there." As he did not cat any of the
food they hung about, they hung there a copper spear. Then they found
him. They also placed the daughter of a chief there so that they could
get him by having him marry her. So he at last went out among them. Now,
the Athapascans took him with them, and be explained the fish trap to
them. This is the way in which they were preserved from starvation, and
the way in which they found out about the trap. When be married the
woman they had given him they put many things upon him-moose skins,
marten skins, beaver skins, and two copper spears valued at two slaves.
The Athapascans paid him for that trap.

Qakê'q!<sup>u</sup>t<u>ê</u> spent two years among these people, and
afterward they began to pack up his property in order to accompany him
back to his friends, the Tlingit. All the Athapascans packed up his
things for

<span id="page_333">p. 333</span>

him. Just as the warm weather was beginning these
People-of-the-last-stomach, as they were called, started with him for
his town.

There was a stream called Brush creek owned by the Brush-creek people,
who were his friends, so, feeling high, Qakê'q!<sup>u</sup>t<u>ê</u> led
these men thither. At first the Tlingit did not know who they were
walking along with him, for they had never seen such people, and a great
number of men came along bearing load after load by means of forehead
bands. When be and his companions, carrying packs of moose, beaver, and
squirrel skins, came out on the side of the stream opposite the town,
Qakê'q!<sup>u</sup>t<u>ê</u> said, "Come over to me in a canoe." The
people had heard about these Athapascans, although they had not seen
them. But after Qakê'q!<sup>u</sup>t<u>ê</u> had said, "Come over to me"
twice, one ran out toward him from among the Brush people and said, "Are
we splitting land-otter tongues on account of you? Go on below. Go to
the people who are splitting tongues for you." The Athapascans asked
Qakê'q!<sup>u</sup>t<u>ê</u>, "What is it that they are saying to us?"
and he answered, "They are sending us away from here." That

<span id="page_334">p. 334</span>

is why people now say, "The Brush people sent the Athapascans away from
the other side." <span id="fr_160"></span>[a](#fn_160.md)

At once the Athapascans put their packs over their shoulders. It was as
quickly done as if hot water had been thrown among them. The Brush
people sent them away because they were afraid. As they set out they
began making a noise, "Hê'yê." They went directly to the place whither
they had been sent, and, crossing a glacier, came to Sand-hill-town.
When the Kâ'gwAntân learned that Qakê'q!<sup>u</sup>t<u>ê</u> had left
<u>X</u>AkAnuwû', they caught those Athapascans and obtained all of
their things. The <u>G</u>ânAxte'd<u>î</u> also came to have dealings
with them. Even now these people stop among them. They never became
Tlingit, but they became people with whom one may trade. Whatever things
they had, such as abalones, the Athapascans gave to them. That is how
the Tlingit used to do in olden times. In exchange the Tlingit gave them
every sort of thing to eat and especially an edible seaweed; but they
did not know what to make of this last. The Athapascans

<span id="page_335">p. 335</span>

did not know how it was cooked, and, when hot stones were thrown inside
of a basket pot and the pot began shaking, they took up their bows and
arrows to shoot at it. But the people said, "It is something to be eaten
after it has cooled," and gave them horn spoons for it. "Where do people
go to get this?" said they, for it suited their taste. "They get it from
the very edge of the water at the lowest tide." When the Athapascans
went back with Qakê'q!<sup>u</sup>t<u>ê</u> to their homes they told the
Tlingit to bring seaweed up when they came, so the Tlingit began taking
this up to them. A beaver skin could be bought with one bunch of
seaweed. From them were learned of the flat nose ring and dancing.

After this the people were going to build a feast house out of the
wealth the Athapascans had brought them. Every morning before they had
eaten anything they went after large trees for house timbers. They had
nothing with which to chop except stone axes. While it was being
completed the drum was beaten continually. The owner

<span id="page_336">p. 336</span>

of this house was named Man-from-himself. Soon it was finished. There
were eight main timbers, and it was completed in one year. After its
long stringers had been put on they danced the house together. There are
always eight songs for this. Then a stomach named
<u>x</u>e'ca-hî'n<u>î</u> was soaked in water. The house was so big that
a person who walked in front of it always appeared small, and, when he
entered, one had to speak loudly to be heard across. This is why it was
named Shadow-house.

Now all the women began to put fringed ornaments upon their ears in
preparation for the feast. Anciently they wore these and had red paint
upon their heads. After his guests were all seated, the chief put on the
<u>g</u>onaqAdê't dance hat, and, just before the gifts were
distributed, the <u>x</u>e'ca-hî'n<u>î</u>, which was close to the door,
was thrown among them. Then they gave away to the opposite phratry the
things

<span id="page_337">p. 337</span>

they had received from the Athapascans and their other property. These
feasts were always called q!aoduwacî'. They also called out to whom the
slaves should be given and gave out coppers, which were placed around
inside of the house. After their guests had gone out they danced. The
other side also danced, wearing raven hats, and the feast was over.

The Athapascans on their way down used to be seen when still far back
from the coast. Onetime, as they were coming across the glacier, the
chief's daughter, who was menstruant, said something to make the glacier
angry. In those days a girl menstruant for the first time did not stay
out of the house. They placed something heavy in front of her, and for
five months she was not allowed to talk. This is the period during which
a labret hole was made. It was always done when she was fasting. This
girl said to the glacier, "Would that that glacier were

<span id="page_338">p. 338</span>

my father's," and during that night it began to grow out over their new
house. It extended itself far out over the town, and the people fled
from it to KAq!Anuwû', where they built a new one. The T!A'q!dentân fled
to and established themselves at a place just opposite.

By and by the people of KAq!Anuwû' started to <u>G</u>onâ'xo to make war
on the ~~L~~uqâ'xAd<u>î</u>, because of a Kâ'gwAntân woman who had been
killed. They were armed with native picks, war spears, and bows and
arrows. After they had killed their enemies they discovered a woman left
alone in that place, whom they caught for a slave. She was mother of
Chief Q!aye<u>g</u>a'tqên. Then she said to them, "For what could you
use me? Up here is the wolf post belonging to my son." The wolf post had
been hidden when the people fled. Letting the woman go, therefore, the
Kâ'gwAntân warriors rushed greedily for the post, and brought it down. A
man whose face had been scratched up by the

<span id="page_339">p. 339</span>

scratching-sponge that people used in ancient times before starting to
war reached the post first. His name was Top-spirit, and the name of the
next Fish-that-comes-up-in-front-of-one's-face-and-shakes. Then they
started back with it but quarreled so much over it that they began to
talk of not allowing anybody to have it. When they were out from shore,
however, the war-leader, whose name was Dancer, stood up wearing objects
representing ears over his face and said, "Who sent out these warriors?
I, a high-caste Kâ'gwAntân, am also a brave man." Then they started off.

At that time there were two canoe loads of Island people going along,
and there was a shaman among them named Wolf-weasel, who had eight
tongues. The Kâ'gwAntân shaman tore his canoe apart by pretending to
split the water of its wake. Before they got far out it began to split.
The Kâ'gwAntân warriors had already landed at <u>X</u>uq! creek where
this shaman also went ashore, and they came out. behind him. His
spirits' apparel was in a box in the bow.

<span id="page_340">p. 340</span>

When the warriors rushed down upon them they soon destroyed his canoe
men, but the shaman himself flew away by means of his spirits. Even now
people say that a shaman can fly about. After he had flown about a
certain town for some time the people told a menstruant woman to look at
him. She did so, and he fell into a small lake. Then he swam under a
rock, sticking up in it, leaving his buttocks protruding. To the present
time this lake is red. It is his blood.

The sister and aunt of this shaman were enslaved, and the warriors also
carried away his spirit box. Before they had gotten very far off,
however, they stopped, untied the box, and began to handle the things in
it. They took out all of the spirits (i.e., masks, whistles, etc.), and
asked his sister \[regarding one of them\], "What is its name?" This was
the chief spirit, and had a long switch of hair. "The spirit is named
Hanging-down spirit," said she. Then the warrior in the bow put it on
saying, "Let me be named Hanging-down spirit."

<span id="page_341">p. 341</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Immediately he fell down as if he had been
knocked over. He ceased to breathe. Another put it on. "Let me be named
Hanging-down spirit," he said. All of those who put this on were
destroyed. One, however, stood up, made a noise, and ran off. To this
day his (the shaman's) spirit has not ceased killing.

After the other warriors had returned to KAq!Anuwû', they determined to
erect a house. They were the old Kâ'gwAntân who were going to put it up.
So they sharpened the jadite which they used in chopping and went out.
On account of the house timbers the owner of that house fasted for four
days. After they had chopped for one month it was finished, and the
chief went outside and spoke to all the people. In the morning those of
the opposite phratry went out in ten canoes to push the timbers down.
They paddled across singing, and brought all of them in, and they left
them on the beach overnight.

<span id="page_342">p. 342</span>

\[paragraph continues\] In the morning they were invited for tobacco.
There was no white leaf tobacco in those days. Then mortars were brought
out so that the part of the house near the door was covered with them.
The tobacco was chewed, a liquid was poured over it, and it was mixed
with powdered shells. After that the names of those of the opposite
phratry to whom balls of tobacco were to be given, were called out, for
they did not have any pipes at that time. Those who had received the
tobacco prepared to dance, and those who owned emblem hats, as the raven
or the whale, wore them. Now they started to carry up the house timbers
for the first of the houses of the Kâ'gwAntân chiefs. They carved the
wolf posts and finished the entire house in one year. It was named Wolf
house from its posts.

When the house was completed a man went to Chilkat to invite the
<u>G</u>ânAxte'd<u>î</u>, to Sitka for the K<u>î</u>ksA'd<u>î</u>, and
to Killisnoo for the Dê'citân.

<span id="page_343">p. 343</span>

\[paragraph continues\] They were going to invite all of them besides
the T!A'q!dentân into this house. Since then inviting back and forth has
been going on. The guests kept coming out from the nearest point to the
town site to look at the new house. The drums made a great noise there
continually. After they had spent one night close to the town they came
in quickly, dancing and singing. Inside, the town people began to dress
themselves to dance before their guests. They went into the water,
wearing Chilkat and marten-skin blankets. After that the owner of Wolf
house went out and made a speech.

On the point at KAq!Anuwû' is a place named Slaves'-valley. Their slaves
always <span id="fr_161"></span>[a](#fn_161.md) came from far to the south.
Then the owner of this house killed four slaves for his guests, while
the next in rank killed two slaves, and the whole number killed at that
time was ten. After they had killed them they threw their bodies down
into this valley. There two of them came to life, and one, getting up,
opened and

<span id="page_344">p. 344</span>

closed his fingers to the people sitting on the hill. From that time the
place was named Slaves'-valley by the Kâ'gwAntân.

By and by they began to feed their guests. The people of all this world
were there. The one who had invited them began to dress himself. Even
now this part of the feast is named All-arisen \[to attend to the
feast\]. They put on their abalone shells, Indian paint, and eagle
feathers on their heads, and the women ear pendants. By and by the
headman was told to start his song. This man always said, "All right,
you are ready, my outside shell." He wore a blanket which had been kept
laid away in a box and all the other things that his dead predecessor
had worn. His wife also had her blanket secured around her waist. He
always handed out his moose skins to the people. The chief always
distributed for the dead.

After all the blankets had been brought out, they were taken up one at a
time, and the names of those who were to receive called out, beginning
with the guest highest in rank. When one's name was

<span id="page_345">p. 345</span>

called he rose and said, "Hade'" ("This way"). The chief's property was
sufficient for all of his guests. Whoever had slaves gave them away as
well. When they began to give his property away the giver stood near the
door with a baton in his hand. At that time there were no white men's
things, the guests being invited for Indian articles only. After all of
his property had been distributed the chief made a speech, and the
people took their things home. In the morning the guests received all of
the dishes, spoons, baskets, etc., and they thanked their host by
leaving a dance. Afterward all of the guests returned to their homes.

Now all the people lived inside of this big house, Wolf house. The young
fellows were in the habit of racing one another when they went to cut
firewood with their stone axes. They called it
"Stone-ax-taken-in-canoe." The party that had been beaten became angry,
and when they were eating grease together they pushed the fire over upon
those who had left them behind. Their opponents did the same

<span id="page_346">p. 346</span>

thing. They did not have any shirts on. The chiefs, however, were
sitting on top of the retaining timbers and had nothing to do with this.
It was all done by their nephews. This thing never was forgotten,
although now people do not kill one another. They threw fire at one
another. Finally, however, one of the cohoes people, whose house was
behind this, ran down bearing the raven hat, and made a noise like the
raven. "<u>G</u>â," he said. Because they heard this raven they did not
kill one another.

This is what caused all the trouble. We are called Burnt-house people,
because the timbers of that house caught fire and were burned, and for
this reason the people moved out of it and built other houses in the
same place. Afterward some of the Burnt-house people moved to this place
(Sitka). Because we are their descendants we are here also. They
continue to be here because we occupy their places.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_157"></span>[326:a](tmt129.htm#fr_157.md) Cf. story 32.

<span id="fn_158"></span>[329:a](tmt129.htm#fr_158.md) At Cape Fairweather.

<span id="fn_159"></span>[330:a](tmt129.htm#fr_159.md) For songs composed
regarding these experiences of Qakê'q!<sup>u</sup>t<u>ê</u>, see songs 2
and 3

<span id="fn_160"></span>[334:a](tmt129.htm#fr_160.md) Said when one loses
a good thing or refuses to take it,

<span id="fn_161"></span>[343:a](tmt129.htm#fr_161.md) "usually" would be
truer.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 105. Story Of The Kâ'ck!e Qoan](tmt130.md)
