<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Americana](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pow094)  [Next](pow096) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Pow-Wows, or Long Lost Friend*, by John George Hoffman, \[1820\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

CURE FOR THE BITE OF A MAD DOG.

A certain Mr. Valentine Kittering, of Dauphin County, has communicated
to the Senate of Pennsylvania a sure remedy for the bite of any kind of
mad animals. He says that his ancestors had already used it in Germany
250 years ago, and that he had always found it to answer the purpose,
during a residence of fifty years in the United States. He only
published it from motives of humanity. This remedy consists in the weed
called *Chick-weed*. It is a summer plant, known to the Germans and
Swiss by the names of *Gauchneil*, *Rothea Meyer*, or *Rother
Huehnerdarm*. In England it is called *Red Pimpernel*; and its botanical
name is *Angelica Phonicea*. It must be gathered in June when in full
bloom and dried in the shade, and then pulverized. The dose of this for
a grown person is a small tablespoonful, or in weight a drachm and a
scruple, at once, in beer or water. For children the dose is the same,
yet it must be administered at three different times. In applying it to
animals, it must be used green, cut to pieces and mixed with bran or
other feed. For the hogs the pulverized weed is made into little balls
by mixing it with flour and water. It can also be put on bread and
butter,

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

or in honey, molasses, etc. The Rev. Henry Muhlenberg says that in
Germany 30 grains of this powder are given four times a day, the first
day, then one dose a day for a whole week; while at the same time the
wound is washed out with a decoction of the weed, and then the powder
strewed in it. Mr. Kittering says that he in all instances administered
but one dose, with the most happy results. This is said to be the same
remedy through which the late Doctor William Stoy effected so many
cures.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Increase The Growth Of Wool](pow096)

</div>
