<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Americana](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pow105)  [Next](pow107) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Pow-Wows, or Long Lost Friend*, by John George Hoffman, \[1820\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

A VERY GOOD AND SAFE REMEDY FOR RHEUMATISM.

From one to two dollars have often been paid for this recipe alone, it
being the best and surest remedy to cure the rheumatism. Let it be known
therefore: Take a piece of cloth, some tape and thread, neither of which
must ever have been in water; the thread must not have a single knot in
it, and the cloth and tape must have been spun by a child not quite or
at least not more than seven years of age. The letter given below must
be carefully sewed in the piece of cloth, and tied around the neck,
unbeshrewdly, on the first Friday in the decreasing moon; and
immediately after hanging it around the neck, the Lord's prayer and the
articles of faith must be repeated. What now follows must be written in
the before-mentioned letter:

"May God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost grant it, Amen. Seek
immediately, and seek; thus commandeth the Lord thy God, through the
first man whom God did love upon earth. Seek immediately, and seek; thus
commandeth the Lord thy God, through Luke, the Evangelist, and through
Paul, the Apostle. Seek immediately, and seek; thus commandeth the Lord
thy God, through the twelve messengers. Seek immediately, and seek; thus
commandeth the Lord thy God by the first man that God might be loved.
Seek immediately, and convulse; thus commandeth the Lord thy God,
through the Holy Fathers, who have been made by divine and

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

holy writ. Seek immediately, and convulse; thus commandeth the Lord thy
God, through the dear and holy angels, and through his paternal and
divine Omnipotence, and his heavenly confidence and endurance. Seek
immediately, and convulse; thus commandeth the Lord thy God, through the
burning oven which was preserved by the blessing of God. Seek
immediately, and convulse; thus commandeth the Lord thy God, through all
power and might, through the prophet Jonah who was preserved in the
belly of the whale for three days and three nights, by the blessing of
God. Seek immediately, and convulse; thus commandeth the Lord thy God,
through all the power and might which proceed from divine humility, and
in all-eternity; whereby no harm be done unto + N + nor unto any part of
his body be they the ravenous convulsions, or the yellow convulsions, or
the white convulsions, or the red convulsions, or the black convulsions,
or by whatever name convulsions may be called; these all shall do no
harm unto thee + N + nor unto any part of thy body, nor to thy head, nor
to thy neck, nor to thy heart, nor to thy stomach, nor to any of thy
veins, nor to thy arms, nor to thy legs, nor to thy eyes, nor to thy
tongue, nor to any part or parcel of thy body. This I write for thee + N
+ in these words, and in the name of God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost.
Amen. God bless it. Amen."

Notice.--If anyone write such a letter for another, the Christian name
of the person must be mentioned in it; as you will observe, where the N
stands singly in the above letter, there must be the name.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Worms In Bee-Hives](pow107)

</div>
