<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Americana](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pow157)  [Next](pow159) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Pow-Wows, or Long Lost Friend*, by John George Hoffman, \[1820\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

# APPENDIX.

The following remedy for Epilepsy was published in Lancaster (Pa.)
papers, in the year 1828.

TO SUFFERING HUMANITY.

We ourselves know of many unfortunate beings who are afflicted with
epilepsy, yet how many more may be in the country who have perhaps
already spent their fortunes in seeking aid in this disease, without
gaining relief. We have now been informed of a remedy which is said to
be infallible, and which has been adopted by the most distinguished
physicians in Europe, and has so well stood the test of repeated trials
that it is now generally applied in Europe. 1t directs a bedroom for the
sick person to be fitted up over the cow-stable, where the patient must
sleep at night, and should spend the greater part of his time during the
day in it. This is easily done by building a regular room over the
stable. Then care is to be taken to leave an opening in the ceiling of
the stable, in such a manner that the evaporation from the same can pass
into the room, while, at the same time, the cow may inhale the
perspiration of the sick person. In this way the animal will gradually
attract the whole disease, and be affected with arthritic attacks, and
when the patient has entirely lost them the cow will fall dead to the
ground. The stable must not be cleaned during the operation, though
fresh straw or bay may be put in; and of course, the milk of the cow, as
long as she gives any, must be thrown away as useless. \[*Lancaster
Eagle.*\]

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Salve to Heal Wounds](pow159)

</div>
