<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Americana](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pow151)  [Next](pow153) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Pow-Wows, or Long Lost Friend*, by John George Hoffman, \[1820\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

A BENEDICTION FOR AND AGAINST ALL ENEMIES.

The cross of Christ be with me; the cross of Christ overcomes all water
and every fire; the cross of Christ overcomes all weapons; the cross of
Christ is a perfect sign and blessing to my soul. May Christ be with me
and my body during all my life at. day and at night. Now 1 pray, 1,
\[name\], pray God the Father for the soul's sake, and I pray God the
Son for the Father's sake, and I pray God the Holly Ghost for the
Father's and the Son's sake, that the holy corpse of God may bless me
against all evil things, words and works. The cross of Christ open unto
me future bliss; the cross of Christ

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

be with me, above me, before me, behind me, beneath me, aside of me and
everywhere, and before all my enemies, visible and invisible; these all
flee from me as soon as they but know or hear. Enoch and Elias, the two
prophets, were never imprisoned, nor bound, nor beaten and came never
out of their power; thus no one of my enemies must be able to injure or
attack me in my body or my life, in the name of God the Father, the Son,
and the Holy Ghost. Amen.

A BENEDICTION AGAINST ENEMIES, SICKNESS AND MISFORTUNE.

The blessing which came from heaven, from God the Father, when the true
living Son was born, be with me at all times; the blessing which God
spoke over the whole human race, be with me always. The holy cross of
God, as long and as broad as the one upon which God suffered his
blessed, bitter tortures, bless me to-day and forever. The three holy
nails which were driven through the holy hands and feet of Jesus Christ
shall bless me to-day and forever. The bitter crown of thorns which was
forced upon the holy head of Christ, shall bless me to-day and forever.
The spear by which the holy side of Jesus was opened, shall bless me
to-day and forever. The rosy blood protect me from all my enemies, and
from everything which might be injurious to my body or soul or my
worldly goods. Bless me, oh ye five holy wounds, in order that all my
enemies may be driven away and bound, while God has encompassed all
Christendom. In this shall assist me God the Father, the Son and the
Holy Ghost. Amen. Thus must I \[N.\] be blessed as well and as valid as
the cup and the wine, and the true, living bread which Jesus gave his
disciples on the evening of Maunday Thursday. All those that hate you
must be silent before me; their hearts are dead in regard to me; and
their tongues are mute, so that

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

they are not at all able to inflict the least injury upon me, or my
house, or my premises: And likewise, all those who intend attacking and
wounding me with their arms and weapons shall be defenceless, weak and
conquered before me. In this shall assist me thee holy power of God,
which can make all arms or weapons of no avail. All this in the name of
God the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. Amen.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hunting Talismans](pow153)

</div>
