<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Americana](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pow145)  [Next](pow147) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Pow-Wows, or Long Lost Friend*, by John George Hoffman, \[1820\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

A CHARM TO BE CARRIED ABOUT THE PERSON

Carry these words about you, and nothing can hit you: Ananiah, Azariah,
and Missel, blessed be the Lord, for he has redeemed us from hell, and
has saved us from death, and he has redeemed us out of the fiery furnace
and has preserved us even in the midst of the fire; in the same manner
may it please him the Lord that there be no fire.

|     |     |     |
|-----|-----|-----|
|     | I.  |     |
| N.  | I.  | R.  |
|     | I.  |     |

 

TO CHARM ENEMIES, ROBBERS AND MURDERERS

God be with you, brethren; stop, ye thieves, robbers, murderers,
horsemen, and soldiers, in all humility, for we have tasted the rosy
blood of Jesus. Your rifles and guns will be stopped up with the holy
blood of Jesus; all swords and arms are made harmless by the five holy
wounds of Jesus. There are three roses upon the heart of God; the first
in beneficent, the other is omnipotent, the third is his holy will. You
thieves must therefore stand under it, standing still as long as I will

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

In the name of God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, you are conjured and
made to stand.

A CHARM AGAINST FIRE-ARMS.

Jesus passed over the Red Sea, and looked upon the land; and thus must
break all ropes and bands, and thus must break all manner of fire-arms,
rifles, guns, or pistols, and all false tongues be silenced. May the
benediction of God on creating the first man always be upon me; the
benediction spoken by God, when he ordered in a dream that Joseph and
Mary together with Jesus should flee into Egypt, be, upon me always, and
may the holy t be ever lovely and beloved in my right hand I journey
through the country at large where no one is robbed, killed or
murdered--where no one can do me any injury, and where not even a dog
could bite me, or any other animal tear me to pieces. In all things let
me be protected, as also my flesh and blood, against sins and false
tongues which reach from the earth up to heaven. by the power of the
four Evangelists, in the name of God the Father, God the Son, and God
the Holy Ghost. Amen.

ANOTHER FOR THE SAME.

I (name) conjure ye guns, swords and knives, as well as all other kinds
of arms, by the spear that pierced the side of God, and opened it so
that blood and water could flow out, that ye do not injure me, a servant
of God, in the + + +. I conjure ye, by Saint Stephen, who was stoned by
the Virgin, that ye cannot injure me who am a servant of God, in the
name of + + +. Amen.

PROTECTION AGAINST ALL KINDS OF WEAPONS.

Jesus, God and man, do thou protect me against all manner of guns,
fire-arms, long or short, of any kind of metal. Keep thou thy fire, like
the Virgin Mary, who kept her fire both before and after her birth. May

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

Christ bind up all fire-arms after the manner of his having bound up
himself in humility while in the flesh. Jesus, do thou render harmless
all arms and weapons, like unto the husband of Mary the mother of God,
he having been harmless likewise. Furthermore, do thou guard the three
holy drops of blood which Christ sweated on the Mount of Olives. Jesus
Christ! do thou protect me against being killed and against burning
fires. Jesus, do thou not suffer me to be killed, much less to be
damned, without having received the Lord's Supper. May God the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, assist me in this. Amen.

A CHARM AGAINST SHOOTING, CUTTING OR THRUSTING.

In the name of J. J. J. Amen. I (*name*); Jesus Christ is the true
salvation; Jesus Christ governs, reigns, defeats and conquers every
enemy, visible or invisible; Jesus, be thou with me at all times,
forever and ever, upon all roads and ways, upon the water and the land,
on the mountain and in the valley, in the house and in the yard, in the
whole world wherever I am, stand, run, ride or drive; whether I sleep or
wake, eat or drink, there be thou also, Lord Jesus Christ, at all times,
late and early, every hour, every moment; and in all my goings in or
goings out. Those five holy red wounds, oh, Lord Jesus Christ, may they
guard me against all fire-arms, be they secret or public, that they
cannot injure me or do me any harm whatever, in the name of + + +. May
Jesus, with his guardianship and protection, shield me (*name*) always
from daily commission of sins, worldly injuries and injustice, from
contempt, from pestilence and other diseases, from fear, torture, and
great suffering, from all evil intentions, from false tongues and old
clatter-brains; and that no kind of fire-arms can inflict any injury to
my body, do thou take care of me. + + +. And that no band of

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

thieves nor Gypsies, highway robbers, incendiaries, witches and other
evil spirits may secretly enter my house or premises, nor break in; may
the dear Virgin Mary, and all children who are in heaven with God, in
eternal joys, protect and guard me against them; and the glory of God
the Father shall strengthen me, the. wisdom of God the Son shall
enlighten me, and the grace of God the Holy Ghost shall empower me from
this hour unto all eternity. Amen.

TO CHARM GUNS AND OTHER ARMS.

The blessing which came from heaven at the birth of Christ be with me
(*name*). The blessing of God at the creation of the first man be with
me; the blessing of Christ on being imprisoned, bound, lashed, crowned
so dreadfully, and beaten, and dying on the cross, be with me; the
blessing which the Priest spoke over the tender, joyful corpse of our
Lord Jesus Christ, be with me; the constancy of the Holy Mary and all
the saints of God. of the three holy kings, Caspar, Melchior and
Balthasar, be with me; the holy four Evangelists, Matthew, Mark, Luke
and John, be with me; the Archangels St. Michael, St. Gabriel, St.
Raphael and St. Uriel, be with me; the twelve holy messengers of the
Patriarchs and all the Hosts of Heaven, be with me; and the
inexpressible number of all the Saints be with me. Amen.

Papa, R. tarn, Tetregammate Angen.  
Jesus Nazarenus, Rex Judeorum.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Be At All Times Blessed](pow147)

</div>
