[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gb00303)  [Next](gb00400) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter 3. Sympathetic Magic.

## Section 4. The Magician's Progress.

WE have now concluded our examination of the general principles of
sympathetic magic. The examples by which I have illustrated them have
been drawn for the most part from what may be called private magic, that
is from magical rites and incantations practised for the benefit or the
injury of individuals. But in savage society there is commonly to be
found in addition what we may call public magic, that is, sorcery
practised for the benefit of the whole community. Wherever ceremonies of
this sort are observed for the common good, it is obvious that the
magician ceases to be merely a private practitioner and becomes to some
extent a public functionary. The development of such a class of
functionaries is of great importance for the political as well as the
religious evolution of society. For when the welfare of the tribe is
supposed to depend on the performance of these magical rites, the
magician rises into a position of much influence and repute, and may
readily acquire the rank and authority of a chief or king. The
profession accordingly draws into its ranks some of the ablest and most
ambitious men of the tribe, because it holds out to them a prospect of
honour, wealth, and power such as hardly any other career could offer.
The acuter minds perceive how easy it is to dupe their weaker brother
and to play on his superstition for their own advantage. Not that the
sorcerer is always a knave and impostor; he is often sincerely convinced
that he really possesses those wonderful powers which the credulity of
his fellows ascribes to him. But the more sagacious he is, the more
likely he is to see through the fallacies which impose on duller wits.
Thus the ablest members of the profession must tend to be more or less
conscious deceivers; and it is just these men who in virtue of their
superior ability will generally come to the top and win for themselves
positions of the highest dignity and the most commanding authority. The
pitfalls which beset the path of the professional sorcerer are many, and
as a rule only the man of coolest head and sharpest wit will be able to
steer his way through them safely. For it must always be remembered that
every single profession and claim put forward by the magician as such is
false; not one of them can be maintained without deception, conscious or
unconscious. Accordingly the sorcerer who sincerely believes in his own
extravagant pretensions is in far greater peril and is much more likely
to be cut short in his career than the deliberate impostor. The honest
wizard always expects that his charms and incantations will produce
their supposed effect; and when they fail, not only really, as they
always do, but conspicuously and disastrously, as they often do, he is
taken aback: he is not, like his knavish colleague, ready with a
plausible excuse to account for the failure, and before he can find one
he may be knocked on the head by his disappointed and angry
employers.   1

  The general result is that at this stage of social evolution the
supreme power tends to fall into the hands of men of the keenest
intelligence and the most unscrupulous character. If we could balance
the harm they do by their knavery against the benefits they confer by
their superior sagacity, it might well be found that the good greatly
outweighed the evil. For more mischief has probably been wrought in the
world by honest fools in high places than by intelligent rascals. Once
your shrewd rogue has attained the height of his ambition, and has no
longer any selfish end to further, he may, and often does, turn his
talents, his experience, his resources, to the service of the public.
Many men who have been least scrupulous in the acquisition of power have
been most beneficent in the use of it, whether the power they aimed at
and won was that of wealth, political authority, or what not. In the
field of politics the wily intriguer, the ruthless victor, may end by
being a wise and magnanimous ruler, blessed in his lifetime, lamented at
his death, admired and applauded by posterity. Such men, to take two of
the most conspicuous instances, were Julius Caesar and Augustus. But
once a fool always a fool, and the greater the power in his hands the
more disastrous is likely to be the use he makes of it. The heaviest
calamity in English history, the breach with America, might never have
occurred if George the Third had not been an honest dullard.   2

  Thus, so far as the public profession of magic affected the
constitution of savage society, it tended to place the control of
affairs in the hands of the ablest man: it shifted the balance of power
from the many to the one: it substituted a monarchy for a democracy, or
rather for an oligarchy of old men; for in general the savage community
is ruled, not by the whole body of adult males, but by a council of
elders. The change, by whatever causes produced, and whatever the
character of the early rulers, was on the whole very beneficial. For the
rise of monarchy appears to be an essential condition of the emergence
of mankind from savagery. No human being is so hide-bound by custom and
tradition as your democratic savage; in no state of society consequently
is progress so slow and difficult. The old notion that the savage is the
freest of mankind is the reverse of the truth. He is a slave, not indeed
to a visible master, but to the past, to the spirits of his dead
forefathers, who haunt his steps from birth to death, and rule him with
a rod of iron. What they did is the pattern of right, the unwritten law
to which he yields a blind unquestioning obedience. The least possible
scope is thus afforded to superior talent to change old customs for the
better. The ablest man is dragged down by the weakest and dullest, who
necessarily sets the standard, since he cannot rise, while the other can
fall. The surface of such a society presents a uniform dead level, so
far as it is humanly possible to reduce the natural inequalities, the
immeasurable real differences of inborn capacity and temper, to a false
superficial appearance of equality. From this low and stagnant condition
of affairs, which demagogues and dreamers in later times have lauded as
the ideal state, the Golden Age, of humanity, everything that helps to
raise society by opening a career to talent and proportioning the
degrees of authority to men’s natural abilities, deserves to be welcomed
by all who have the real good of their fellows at heart. Once these
elevating influences have begun to operate—and they cannot be for ever
suppressed—the progress of civilisation becomes comparatively rapid. The
rise of one man to supreme power enables him to carry through changes in
a single lifetime which previously many generations might not have
sufficed to effect; and if, as will often happen, he is a man of
intellect and energy above the common, he will readily avail himself of
the opportunity. Even the whims and caprices of a tyrant may be of
service in breaking the chain of custom which lies so heavy on the
savage. And as soon as the tribe ceases to be swayed by the timid and
divided counsels of the elders, and yields to the direction of a single
strong and resolute mind, it becomes formidable to its neighbours and
enters on a career of aggrandisement, which at an early stage of history
is often highly favourable to social, industrial, and intellectual
progress. For extending its sway, partly by force of arms, partly by the
voluntary submission of weaker tribes, the community soon acquires
wealth and slaves, both of which, by relieving some classes from the
perpetual struggle for a bare subsistence, afford them an opportunity of
devoting themselves to that disinterested pursuit of knowledge which is
the noblest and most powerful instrument to ameliorate the lot of
man.   3

  Intellectual progress, which reveals itself in the growth of art and
science and the spread of more liberal views, cannot be dissociated from
industrial or economic progress, and that in its turn receives an
immense impulse from conquest and empire. It is no mere accident that
the most vehement outbursts of activity of the human mind have followed
close on the heels of victory, and that the great conquering races of
the world have commonly done most to advance and spread civilisation,
thus healing in peace the wounds they inflicted in war. The Babylonians,
the Greeks, the Romans, the Arabs are our witnesses in the past: we may
yet live to see a similar outburst in Japan. Nor, to remount the stream
of history to its sources, is it an accident that all the first great
strides towards civilisation have been made under despotic and
theocratic governments, like those of Egypt, Babylon, and Peru, where
the supreme ruler claimed and received the servile allegiance of his
subjects in the double character of a king and a god. It is hardly too
much to say that at this early epoch despotism is the best friend of
humanity and, paradoxical as it may sound, of liberty. For after all
there is more liberty in the best sense—liberty to think our own
thoughts and to fashion our own destinies—under the most absolute
despotism, the most grinding tyranny, than under the apparent freedom of
savage life, where the individual’s lot is cast from the cradle to the
grave in the iron mould of hereditary custom.   4

  So far, therefore, as the public profession of magic has been one of
the roads by which the ablest men have passed to supreme power, it has
contributed to emancipate mankind from the thraldom of tradition and to
elevate them into a larger, freer life, with a broader outlook on the
world. This is no small service rendered to humanity. And when we
remember further that in another direction magic has paved the way for
science, we are forced to admit that if the black art has done much
evil, it has also been the source of much good; that if it is the child
of error, it has yet been the mother of freedom and truth.   5
