[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gb01904)  [Next](gb02001) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter 19. Tabooed Acts.

## Section 5. Taboos on Leaving Food over.

AGAIN, magic mischief may be wrought upon a man through the remains of
the food he has partaken of, or the dishes out of which he has eaten. On
the principles of sympathetic magic a real connexion continues to
subsist between the food which a man has in his stomach and the refuse
of it which he has left untouched, and hence by injuring the refuse you
can simultaneously injure the eater. Among the Narrinyeri of South
Australia every adult is constantly on the look-out for bones of beasts,
birds, or fish, of which the flesh has been eaten by somebody, in order
to construct a deadly charm out of them. Every one is therefore careful
to burn the bones of the animals which he has eaten, lest they should
fall into the hands of a sorcerer. Too often, however, the sorcerer
succeeds in getting hold of such a bone, and when he does so he believes
that he has the power of life and death over the man, woman, or child
who ate the flesh of the animal. To put the charm in operation he makes
a paste of red ochre and fish oil, inserts in it the eye of a cod and a
small piece of the flesh of a corpse, and having rolled the compound
into a ball sticks it on the top of the bone. After being left for some
time in the bosom of a dead body, in order that it may derive a deadly
potency by contact with corruption, the magical implement is set up in
the ground near the fire, and as the ball melts, so the person against
whom the charm is directed wastes with disease; if the ball is melted
quite away, the victim will die. When the bewitched man learns of the
spell that is being cast upon him, he endeavours to buy the bone from
the sorcerer, and if he obtains it he breaks the charm by throwing the
bone into a river or lake. In Tana, one of the New Hebrides, people bury
or throw into the sea the leavings of their food, lest these should fall
into the hands of the disease-makers. For if a disease-maker finds the
remnants of a meal, say the skin of a banana, he picks it up and burns
it slowly in the fire. As it burns, the person who ate the banana falls
ill and sends to the disease-maker, offering him presents if he will
stop burning the banana skin. In New Guinea the natives take the utmost
care to destroy or conceal the husks and other remains of their food,
lest these should be found by their enemies and used by them for the
injury or destruction of the eaters. Hence they burn their leavings,
throw them into the sea, or otherwise put them out of harm’s way.   1

  From a like fear, no doubt, of sorcery, no one may touch the food
which the king of Loango leaves upon his plate; it is buried in a hole
in the ground. And no one may drink out of the king’s vessel. In
antiquity the Romans used immediately to break the shells of eggs and of
snails which they had eaten, in order to prevent enemies from making
magic with them. The common practice, still observed among us, of
breaking egg-shells after the eggs have been eaten may very well have
originated in the same superstition.   2

  The superstitious fear of the magic that may be wrought on a man
through the leavings of his food has had the beneficial effect of
inducing many savages to destroy refuse which, if left to rot, might
through its corruption have proved a real, not a merely imaginary,
source of disease and death. Nor is it only the sanitary condition of a
tribe which has benefited by this superstition; curiously enough the
same baseless dread, the same false notion of causation, has indirectly
strengthened the moral bonds of hospitality, honour, and good faith
among men who entertain it. For it is obvious that no one who intends to
harm a man by working magic on the refuse of his food will himself
partake of that food, because if he did so he would, on the principles
of sympathetic magic, suffer equally with his enemy from any injury done
to the refuse. This is the idea which in primitive society lends
sanctity to the bond produced by eating together; by participation in
the same food two men give, as it were, hostages for their good
behaviour; each guarantees the other that he will devise no mischief
against him, since, being physically united with him by the common food
in their stomachs, any harm he might do to his fellow would recoil on
his own head with precisely the same force with which it fell on the
head of his victim. In strict logic, however, the sympathetic bond lasts
only so long as the food is in the stomach of each of the parties. Hence
the covenant formed by eating together is less solemn and durable than
the covenant formed by transfusing the blood of the covenanting parties
into each other’s veins, for this transfusion seems to knit them
together for life.   3
