[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gb01702)  [Next](gb01802) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter 18. The Perils of the Soul.

## Section 1. The Soul as a Mannikin.

THE FOREGOING examples have taught us that the office of a sacred king
or priest is often hedged in by a series of burdensome restrictions or
taboos, of which a principal purpose appears to be to preserve the life
of the divine man for the good of his people. But if the object of the
taboos is to save his life, the question arises, How is their observance
supposed to effect this end? To understand this we must know the nature
of the danger which threatens the king’s life, and which it is the
intention of these curious restrictions to guard against. We must,
therefore, ask: What does early man understand by death? To what causes
does he attribute it? And how does he think it may be guarded
against?   1

  As the savage commonly explains the processes of inanimate nature by
supposing that they are produced by living beings working in or behind
the phenomena, so he explains the phenomena of life itself. If an animal
lives and moves, it can only be, he thinks, because there is a little
animal inside which moves it: if a man lives and moves, it can only be
because he has a little man or animal inside who moves him. The animal
inside the animal, the man inside the man, is the soul. And as the
activity of an animal or man is explained by the presence of the soul,
so the repose of sleep or death is explained by its absence; sleep or
trance being the temporary, death being the permanent absence of the
soul. Hence if death be the permanent absence of the soul, the way to
guard against it is either to prevent the soul from leaving the body,
or, if it does depart, to ensure that it shall return. The precautions
adopted by savages to secure one or other of these ends take the form of
certain prohibitions or taboos, which are nothing but rules intended to
ensure either the continued presence or the return of the soul. In
short, they are life-preservers or life-guards. These general statements
will now be illustrated by examples.   2

  Addressing some Australian blacks, a European missionary said, “I am
not one, as you think, but two.” Upon this they laughed. “You may laugh
as much as you like,” continued the missionary, “I tell you that I am
two in one; this great body that you see is one; within that there is
another little one which is not visible. The great body dies, and is
buried, but the little body flies away when the great one dies.” To this
some of the blacks replied, “Yes, yes. We also are two, we also have a
little body within the breast.” On being asked where the little body
went after death, some said it went behind the bush, others said it went
into the sea, and some said they did not know. The Hurons thought that
the soul had a head and body, arms and legs; in short, that it was a
complete little model of the man himself. The Esquimaux believe that
“the soul exhibits the same shape as the body it belongs to, but is of a
more subtle and ethereal nature.” According to the Nootkas the soul has
the shape of a tiny man; its seat is the crown of the head. So long as
it stands erect, its owner is hale and hearty; but when from any cause
it loses its upright position, he loses his senses. Among the Indian
tribes of the Lower Fraser River, man is held to have four souls, of
which the principal one has the form of a mannikin, while the other
three are shadows of it. The Malays conceive the human soul as a little
man, mostly invisible and of the bigness of a thumb, who corresponds
exactly in shape, proportion, and even in complexion to the man in whose
body he resides. This mannikin is of a thin, unsubstantial nature,
though not so impalpable but that it may cause displacement on entering
a physical object, and it can flit quickly from place to place; it is
temporarily absent from the body in sleep, trance, and disease, and
permanently absent after death.   3

  So exact is the resemblance of the mannikin to the man, in other
words, of the soul to the body, that, as there are fat bodies and thin
bodies, so there are fat souls and thin souls; as there are heavy bodies
and light bodies, long bodies and short bodies, so there are heavy souls
and light souls, long souls and short souls. The people of Nias think
that every man, before he is born, is asked how long or how heavy a soul
he would like, and a soul of the desired weight or length is measured
out to him. The heaviest soul ever given out weighs about ten grammes.
The length of a man’s life is proportioned to the length of his soul;
children who die young had short souls. The Fijian conception of the
soul as a tiny human being comes clearly out in the customs observed at
the death of a chief among the Nakelo tribe. When a chief dies, certain
men, who are the hereditary undertakers, call him, as he lies, oiled and
ornamented, on fine mats, saying, “Rise, sir, the chief, and let us be
going. The day has come over the land.” Then they conduct him to the
river side, where the ghostly ferryman comes to ferry Nakelo ghosts
across the stream. As they thus attend the chief on his last journey,
they hold their great fans close to the ground to shelter him, because,
as one of them explained to a missionary, “His soul is only a little
child.” People in the Punjaub who tattoo themselves believe that at
death the soul, “the little entire man or woman” inside the mortal
frame, will go to heaven blazoned with the same tattoo patterns which
adorned the body in life. Sometimes, however, as we shall see, the human
soul is conceived not in human but in animal form.   4
