[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gb01500)  [Next](gb01701) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter 16. Dianus and Diana.

IN THIS CHAPTER I propose to recapitulate the conclusions to which the
enquiry has thus far led us, and drawing together the scattered rays of
light, to turn them on the dark figure of the priest of Nemi.   1

  We have found that at an early stage of society men, ignorant of the
secret processes of nature and of the narrow limits within which it is
in our power to control and direct them, have commonly arrogated to
themselves functions which in the present state of knowledge we should
deem superhuman or divine. The illusion has been fostered and maintained
by the same causes which begot it, namely, the marvellous order and
uniformity with which nature conducts her operations, the wheels of her
great machine revolving with a smoothness and precision which enable the
patient observer to anticipate in general the season, if not the very
hour, when they will bring round the fulfilment of his hopes or the
accomplishment of his fears. The regularly recurring events of this
great cycle, or rather series of cycles, soon stamp themselves even on
the dull mind of the savage. He foresees them, and foreseeing them
mistakes the desired recurrence for an effect of his own will, and the
dreaded recurrence for an effect of the will of his enemies. Thus the
springs which set the vast machine in motion, though they lie far beyond
our ken, shrouded in a mystery which we can never hope to penetrate,
appear to ignorant man to lie within his reach: he fancies he can touch
them and so work by magic art all manner of good to himself and evil to
his foes. In time the fallacy of this belief becomes apparent to him: he
discovers that there are things he cannot do, pleasures which he is
unable of himself to procure, pains which even the most potent magician
is powerless to avoid. The unattainable good, the inevitable ill, are
now ascribed by him to the action of invisible powers, whose favour is
joy and life, whose anger is misery and death. Thus magic tends to be
displaced by religion, and the sorcerer by the priest. At this stage of
thought the ultimate causes of things are conceived to be personal
beings, many in number and often discordant in character, who partake of
the nature and even of the frailty of man, though their might is greater
than his, and their life far exceeds the span of his ephemeral
existence. Their sharply-marked individualities, their clear-cut
outlines have not yet begun, under the powerful solvent of philosophy,
to melt and coalesce into that single unknown substratum of phenomena
which, according to the qualities with which our imagination invests it,
goes by one or other of the high-sounding names which the wit of man has
devised to hide his ignorance. Accordingly, so long as men look on their
gods as beings akin to themselves and not raised to an unapproachable
height above them, they believe it to be possible for those of their own
number who surpass their fellows to attain to the divine rank after
death or even in life. Incarnate human deities of this latter sort may
be said to halt midway between the age of magic and the age of religion.
If they bear the names and display the pomp of deities, the powers which
they are supposed to wield are commonly those of their predecessor the
magician. Like him, they are expected to guard their people against
hostile enchantments, to heal them in sickness, to bless them with
offspring, and to provide them with an abundant supply of food by
regulating the weather and performing the other ceremonies which are
deemed necessary to ensure the fertility of the earth and the
multiplication of animals. Men who are credited with powers so lofty and
far-reaching naturally hold the highest place in the land, and while the
rift between the spiritual and the temporal spheres has not yet widened
too far, they are supreme in civil as well as religious matters: in a
word, they are kings as well as gods. Thus the divinity which hedges a
king has its roots deep down in human history, and long ages pass before
these are sapped by a profounder view of nature and man.   2

  In the classical period of Greek and Latin antiquity the reign of
kings was for the most part a thing of the past; yet the stories of
their lineage, titles, and pretensions suffice to prove that they too
claimed to rule by divine right and to exercise superhuman powers. Hence
we may without undue temerity assume that the King of the Wood at Nemi,
though shorn in later times of his glory and fallen on evil days,
represented a long line of sacred kings who had once received not only
the homage but the adoration of their subjects in return for the
manifold blessings which they were supposed to dispense. What little we
know of the functions of Diana in the Arician grove seems to prove that
she was here conceived as a goddess of fertility, and particularly as a
divinity of childbirth. It is reasonable, therefore, to suppose that in
the discharge of these important duties she was assisted by her priest,
the two figuring as King and Queen of the Wood in a solemn marriage,
which was intended to make the earth gay with the blossoms of spring and
the fruits of autumn, and to gladden the hearts of men and women with
healthful offspring.   3

  If the priest of Nemi posed not merely as a king, but as a god of the
grove, we have still to ask, What deity in particular did he personate?
The answer of antiquity is that he represented Virbius, the consort or
lover of Diana. But this does not help us much, for of Virbius we know
little more than the name. A clue to the mystery is perhaps supplied by
the Vestal fire which burned in the grove. For the perpetual holy fires
of the Aryans in Europe appear to have been commonly kindled and fed
with oak-wood, and in Rome itself, not many miles from Nemi, the fuel of
the Vestal fire consisted of oaken sticks or logs, as has been proved by
a microscopic analysis of the charred embers of the Vestal fire, which
were discovered by Commendatore G. Boni in the course of the memorable
excavations which he conducted in the Roman forum at the end of the
nineteenth century. But the ritual of the various Latin towns seems to
have been marked by great uniformity; hence it is reasonable to conclude
that wherever in Latium a Vestal fire was maintained, it was fed, as at
Rome, with wood of the sacred oak. If this was so at Nemi, it becomes
probable that the hallowed grove there consisted of a natural oak-wood,
and that therefore the tree which the King of the Wood had to guard at
the peril of his life was itself an oak; indeed, it was from an
evergreen oak, according to Virgil, that Aeneas plucked the Golden
Bough. Now the oak was the sacred tree of Jupiter, the supreme god of
the Latins. Hence it follows that the King of the Wood, whose life was
bound up in a fashion with an oak, personated no less a deity than
Jupiter himself. At least the evidence, slight as it is, seems to point
to this conclusion. The old Alban dynasty of the Silvii or Woods, with
their crown of oak leaves, apparently aped the style and emulated the
powers of Latian Jupiter, who dwelt on the top of the Alban Mount. It is
not impossible that the King of the Wood, who guarded the sacred oak a
little lower down the mountain, was the lawful successor and
representative of this ancient line of the Silvii or Woods. At all
events, if I am right in supposing that he passed for a human Jupiter,
it would appear that Virbius, with whom legend identified him, was
nothing but a local form of Jupiter, considered perhaps in his original
aspect as a god of the greenwood.   4

  The hypothesis that in later times at all events the King of the Wood
played the part of the oak god Jupiter, is confirmed by an examination
of his divine partner Diana. For two distinct lines of argument converge
to show that if Diana was a queen of the woods in general, she was at
Nemi a goddess of the oak in particular. In the first place, she bore
the title of Vesta, and as such presided over a perpetual fire, which we
have seen reason to believe was fed with oak wood. But a goddess of fire
is not far removed from a goddess of the fuel which burns in the fire;
primitive thought perhaps drew no sharp line of distinction between the
blaze and the wood that blazes. In the second place, the nymph Egeria at
Nemi appears to have been merely a form of Diana, and Egeria is
definitely said to have been a Dryad, a nymph of the oak. Elsewhere in
Italy the goddess had her home on oak-clad mountains. Thus Mount
Algidus, a spur of the Alban hills, was covered in antiquity with dark
forests of oak, both of the evergreen and the deciduous sort. In winter
the snow lay long on these cold hills, and their gloomy oak-woods were
believed to be a favourite haunt of Diana, as they have been of brigands
in modern times. Again, Mount Tifata, the long abrupt ridge of the
Apennines which looks down on the Campanian plain behind Capua, was
wooded of old with evergreen oaks, among which Diana had a temple. Here
Sulla thanked the goddess for his victory over the Marians in the plain
below, attesting his gratitude by inscriptions which were long
afterwards to be seen in the temple. On the whole, then, we conclude
that at Nemi the King of the Wood personated the oak-god Jupiter and
mated with the oak-goddess Diana in the sacred grove. An echo of their
mystic union has come down to us in the legend of the loves of Numa and
Egeria, who according to some had their trysting-place in these holy
woods.   5

  To this theory it may naturally be objected that the divine consort of
Jupiter was not Diana but Juno, and that if Diana had a mate at all he
might be expected to bear the name not of Jupiter, but of Dianus or
Janus, the latter of these forms being merely a corruption of the
former. All this is true, but the objection may be parried by observing
that the two pairs of deities, Jupiter and Juno on the one side, and
Dianus and Diana, or Janus and Jana, on the other side, are merely
duplicates of each other, their names and their functions being in
substance and origin identical. With regard to their names, all four of
them come from the same Aryan root DI, meaning “bright,” which occurs in
the names of the corresponding Greek deities, Zeus and his old female
consort Dione. In regard to their functions, Juno and Diana were both
goddesses of fecundity and childbirth, and both were sooner or later
identified with the moon. As to the true nature and functions of Janus
the ancients themselves were puzzled; and where they hesitated, it is
not for us confidently to decide. But the view mentioned by Varro that
Janus was the god of the sky is supported not only by the etymological
identity of his name with that of the sky-god Jupiter, but also by the
relation in which he appears to have stood to Jupiter’s two mates, Juno
and Juturna. For the epithet Junonian bestowed on Janus points to a
marriage union between the two deities; and according to one account
Janus was the husband of the water-nymph Juturna, who according to
others was beloved by Jupiter. Moreover, Janus, like Jove, was regularly
invoked, and commonly spoken of under the title of Father. Indeed, he
was identified with Jupiter not merely by the logic of the learned St.
Augustine, but by the piety of a pagan worshipper who dedicated an
offering to Jupiter Dianus. A trace of his relation to the oak may be
found in the oakwoods of the Janiculum, the hill on the right bank of
the Tiber, where Janus is said to have reigned as a king in the remotest
ages of Italian history.   6

  Thus, if I am right, the same ancient pair of deities was variously
known among the Greek and Italian peoples as Zeus and Dione, Jupiter and
Juno, or Dianus (Janus) and Diana (Jana), the names of the divinities
being identical in substance, though varying in form with the dialect of
the particular tribe which worshipped them. At first, when the peoples
dwelt near each other, the difference between the deities would be
hardly more than one of name; in other words, it would be almost purely
dialectical. But the gradual dispersion of the tribes, and their
consequent isolation from each other, would favour the growth of
divergent modes of conceiving and worshipping the gods whom they had
carried with them from their old home, so that in time discrepancies of
myth and ritual would tend to spring up and thereby to convert a nominal
into a real distinction between the divinities. Accordingly when, with
the slow progress of culture, the long period of barbarism and
separation was passing away, and the rising political power of a single
strong community had begun to draw or hammer its weaker neighbours into
a nation, the confluent peoples would throw their gods, like their
dialects, into a common stock; and thus it might come about that the
same ancient deities, which their forefathers had worshipped together
before the dispersion, would now be so disguised by the accumulated
effect of dialectical and religious divergencies that their original
identity might fail to be recognised, and they would take their places
side by side as independent divinities in the national pantheon.   7

  This duplication of deities, the result of the final fusion of kindred
tribes who had long lived apart, would account for the appearance of
Janus beside Jupiter, and of Diana or Jana beside Juno in the Roman
religion. At least this appears to be a more probable theory than the
opinion, which has found favour with some modern scholars, that Janus
was originally nothing but the god of doors. That a deity of his dignity
and importance, whom the Romans revered as a god of gods and the father
of his people, should have started in life as a humble, though doubtless
respectable, doorkeeper appears very unlikely. So lofty an end hardly
consorts with so lowly a beginning. It is more probable that the door
(janua) got its name from Janus than that he got his name from it. This
view is strengthened by a consideration of the word janua itself. The
regular word for door is the same in all the languages of the Aryan
family from India to Ireland. It is dur in Sanscrit, thura in Greek, tür
in German, door in English, dorus in old Irish, and foris in Latin. Yet
besides this ordinary name for door, which the Latins shared with all
their Aryan brethren, they had also the name janua, to which there is no
corresponding term in any Indo-European speech. The word has the
appearance of being an adjectival form derived from the noun Janus. I
conjecture that it may have been customary to set up an image or symbol
of Janus at the principal door of the house in order to place the
entrance under the protection of the great god. A door thus guarded
might be known as a janua foris, that is, a Januan door, and the phrase
might in time be abridged into janua, the noun foris being understood
but not expressed. From this to the use of janua to designate a door in
general, whether guarded by an image of Janus or not, would be an easy
and natural transition.   8

  If there is any truth in this conjecture, it may explain very simply
the origin of the double head of Janus, which has so long exercised the
ingenuity of mythologists. When it had become customary to guard the
entrance of houses and towns by an image of Janus, it might well be
deemed necessary to make the sentinel god look both ways, before and
behind, at the same time, in order that nothing should escape his
vigilant eye. For if the divine watchman always faced in one direction,
it is easy to imagine what mischief might have been wrought with
impunity behind his back. This explanation of the double-headed Janus at
Rome is confirmed by the double-headed idol which the Bush negroes in
the interior of Surinam regularly set up as a guardian at the entrance
of a village. The idol consists of a block of wood with a human face
rudely carved on each side; it stands under a gateway composed of two
uprights and a cross-bar. Beside the idol generally lies a white rag
intended to keep off the devil; and sometimes there is also a stick
which seems to represent a bludgeon or weapon of some sort. Further,
from the cross-bar hangs a small log which serves the useful purpose of
knocking on the head any evil spirit who might attempt to pass through
the gateway. Clearly this double-headed fetish at the gateway of the
negro villages in Surinam bears a close resemblance to the double-headed
images of Janus which, grasping a stick in one hand and a key in the
other, stood sentinel at Roman gates and doorways; and we can hardly
doubt that in both cases the heads facing two ways are to be similarly
explained as expressive of the vigilance of the guardian god, who kept
his eye on spiritual foes behind and before, and stood ready to bludgeon
them on the spot. We may, therefore, dispense with the tedious and
unsatisfactory explanations which, if we may trust Ovid, the wily Janus
himself fobbed off an anxious Roman enquirer.   9

  To apply these conclusions to the priest of Nemi, we may suppose that
as the mate of Diana he represented originally Dianus or Janus rather
than Jupiter, but that the difference between these deities was of old
merely superficial, going little deeper than the names, and leaving
practically unaffected the essential functions of the god as a power of
the sky, the thunder, and the oak. It was fitting, therefore, that his
human representative at Nemi should dwell, as we have seen reason to
believe he did, in an oak grove. His title of King of the Wood clearly
indicates the sylvan character of the deity whom he served; and since he
could only be assailed by him who had plucked the bough of a certain
tree in the grove, his own life might be said to be bound up with that
of the sacred tree. Thus he not only served but embodied the great Aryan
god of the oak; and as an oak-god he would mate with the oak-goddess,
whether she went by the name of Egeria or Diana. Their union, however
consummated, would be deemed essential to the fertility of the earth and
the fecundity of man and beast. Further, as the oak-god was also a god
of the sky, the thunder, and the rain, so his human representative would
be required, like many other divine kings, to cause the clouds to
gather, the thunder to peal, and the rain to descend in due season, that
the fields and orchards might bear fruit and the pastures be covered
with luxuriant herbage. The reputed possessor of powers so exalted must
have been a very important personage; and the remains of buildings and
of votive offerings which have been found on the site of the sanctuary
combine with the testimony of classical writers to prove that in later
times it was one of the greatest and most popular shrines in Italy. Even
in the old days, when the champaign country around was still parcelled
out among the petty tribes who composed the Latin League, the sacred
grove is known to have been an object of their common reverence and
care. And just as the kings of Cambodia used to send offerings to the
mystic kings of Fire and Water far in the dim depths of the tropical
forest, so, we may well believe, from all sides of the broad Latian
plain the eyes and footsteps of Italian pilgrims turned to the quarter
where, standing sharply out against the faint blue line of the Apennines
or the deeper blue of the distant sea, the Alban Mountain rose before
them, the home of the mysterious priest of Nemi, the King of the Wood.
There, among the green woods and beside the still waters of the lonely
hills, the ancient Aryan worship of the god of the oak, the thunder, and
the dripping sky lingered in its early, almost Druidical form, long
after a great political and intellectual revolution had shifted the
capital of Latin religion from the forest to the city, from Nemi to
Rome.   10
