[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gb01701)  [Next](gb01801) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter 17. The Burden of Royalty.

## Section 2. Divorce of the Spiritual from the Temporal Power.

THE BURDENSOME observances attached to the royal or priestly office
produced their natural effect. Either men refused to accept the office,
which hence tended to fall into abeyance; or accepting it, they sank
under its weight into spiritless creatures, cloistered recluses, from
whose nerveless fingers the reins of government slipped into the firmer
grasp of men who were often content to wield the reality of sovereignty
without its name. In some countries this rift in the supreme power
deepened into a total and permanent separation of the spiritual and
temporal powers, the old royal house retaining their purely religious
functions, while the civil government passed into the hands of a younger
and more vigorous race.   1

  To take examples. In a previous part of this work we saw that in
Cambodia it is often necessary to force the kingships of Fire and Water
upon the reluctant successors, and that in Savage Island the monarchy
actually came to an end because at last no one could be induced to
accept the dangerous distinction. In some parts of West Africa, when the
king dies, a family council is secretly held to determine his successor.
He on whom the choice falls is suddenly seized, bound, and thrown into
the fetish-house, where he is kept in durance till he consents to accept
the crown. Sometimes the heir finds means of evading the honour which it
is sought to thrust upon him; a ferocious chief has been known to go
about constantly armed, resolute to resist by force any attempt to set
him on the throne. The savage Timmes of Sierra Leone, who elect their
king, reserve to themselves the right of beating him on the eve of his
coronation; and they avail themselves of this constitutional privilege
with such hearty goodwill that sometimes the unhappy monarch does not
long survive his elevation to the throne. Hence when the leading chiefs
have a spite at a man and wish to rid themselves of him, they elect him
king. Formerly, before a man was proclaimed king of Sierra Leone, it
used to be the custom to load him with chains and thrash him. Then the
fetters were knocked off, the kingly robe was placed on him, and he
received in his hands the symbol of royal dignity, which was nothing but
the axe of the executioner. It is not therefore surprising to read that
in Sierra Leone, where such customs have prevailed, “except among the
Mandingoes and Suzees, few kings are natives of the countries they
govern. So different are their ideas from ours, that very few are
solicitous of the honour, and competition is very seldom heard of.”   2

  The Mikados of Japan seem early to have resorted to the expedient of
transferring the honours and burdens of supreme power to their infant
children; and the rise of the Tycoons, long the temporal sovereigns of
the country, is traced to the abdication of a certain Mikado in favour
of his three-year-old son. The sovereignty having been wrested by a
usurper from the infant prince, the cause of the Mikado was championed
by Yoritomo, a man of spirit and conduct, who overthrew the usurper and
restored to the Mikado the shadow, while he retained for himself the
substance, of power. He bequeathed to his descendants the dignity he had
won, and thus became the founder of the line of Tycoons. Down to the
latter half of the sixteenth century the Tycoons were active and
efficient rulers; but the same fate overtook them which had befallen the
Mikados. Immeshed in the same inextricable web of custom and law, they
degenerated into mere puppets, hardly stirring from their palaces and
occupied in a perpetual round of empty ceremonies, while the real
business of government was managed by the council of state. In Tonquin
the monarchy ran a similar course. Living like his predecessors in
effeminacy and sloth, the king was driven from the throne by an
ambitious adventurer named Mack, who from a fisherman had risen to be
Grand Mandarin. But the king’s brother Tring put down the usurper and
restored the king, retaining, however, for himself and his descendants
the dignity of general of all the forces. Thenceforward the kings,
though invested with the title and pomp of sovereignty, ceased to
govern. While they lived secluded in their palaces, all real political
power was wielded by the hereditary generals.   3

  In Mangaia, a Polynesian island, religious and civil authority were
lodged in separate hands, spiritual functions being discharged by a line
of hereditary kings, while the temporal government was entrusted from
time to time to a victorious war-chief, whose investiture, however, had
to be completed by the king. Similarly in Tonga, besides the civil king
whose right to the throne was partly hereditary and partly derived from
his warlike reputation and the number of his fighting men, there was a
great divine chief who ranked above the king and the other chiefs in
virtue of his supposed descent from one of the chief gods. Once a year
the first-fruits of the ground were offered to him at a solemn ceremony,
and it was believed that if these offerings were not made the vengeance
of the gods would fall in a signal manner on the people. Peculiar forms
of speech, such as were applied to no one else, were used in speaking of
him, and everything that he chanced to touch became sacred or tabooed.
When he and the king met, the monarch had to sit down on the ground in
token of respect until his holiness had passed by. Yet though he enjoyed
the highest veneration by reason of his divine origin, this sacred
personage possessed no political authority, and if he ventured to meddle
with affairs of state it was at the risk of receiving a rebuff from the
king, to whom the real power belonged, and who finally succeeded in
ridding himself of his spiritual rival.   4

  In some parts of Western Africa two kings reign side by side, a fetish
or religious king and a civil king, but the fetish king is really
supreme. He controls the weather and so forth, and can put a stop to
everything. When he lays his red staff on the ground, no one may pass
that way. This division of power between a sacred and a secular ruler is
to be met with wherever the true negro culture has been left unmolested,
but where the negro form of society has been disturbed, as in Dahomey
and Ashantee, there is a tendency to consolidate the two powers in a
single king.   5

  In some parts of the East Indian island of Timor we meet with a
partition of power like that which is represented by the civil king and
the fetish king of Western Africa. Some of the Timorese tribes recognise
two rajahs, the ordinary or civil rajah, who governs the people, and the
fetish or taboo rajah, who is charged with the control of everything
that concerns the earth and its products. This latter ruler has the
right of declaring anything taboo; his permission must be obtained
before new land may be brought under cultivation, and he must perform
certain necessary ceremonies when the work is being carried out. If
drought or blight threatens the crops, his help is invoked to save them.
Though he ranks below the civil rajah, he exercises a momentous
influence on the course of events, for his secular colleague is bound to
consult him in all important matters. In some of the neighbouring
islands, such as Rotti and eastern Flores, a spiritual ruler of the same
sort is recognised under various native names, which all mean “lord of
the ground.” Similarly in the Mekeo district of British New Guinea there
is a double chieftainship. The people are divided into two groups
according to families, and each of the groups has its chief. One of the
two is the war chief, the other is the taboo chief. The office of the
latter is hereditary; his duty is to impose a taboo on any of the crops,
such as the coco-nuts and areca nuts, whenever he thinks it desirable to
prohibit their use. In his office we may perhaps detect the beginning of
a priestly dynasty, but as yet his functions appear to be more magical
than religious, being concerned with the control of the harvests rather
than with the propitiation of higher powers.   6
