[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gb00902)  [Next](gb01100) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter 10. Relics of Tree Worship in Modern Europe.

FROM THE FOREGOING review of the beneficent qualities commonly ascribed
to tree-spirits, it is easy to understand why customs like the May-tree
or May-pole have prevailed so widely and figured so prominently in the
popular festivals of European peasants. In spring or early summer or
even on Midsummer Day, it was and still is in many parts of Europe the
custom to go out to the woods, cut down a tree and bring it into the
village, where it is set up amid general rejoicings; or the people cut
branches in the woods, and fasten them on every house. The intention of
these customs is to bring home to the village, and to each house, the
blessings which the tree-spirit has in its power to bestow. Hence the
custom in some places of planting a May-tree before every house, or of
carrying the village May-tree from door to door, that every household
may receive its share of the blessing. Out of the mass of evidence on
this subject a few examples may be selected.   1

  Sir Henry Piers, in his Description of Westmeath, writing in 1682
says: “On May-eve, every family sets up before their door a green bush,
strewed over with yellow flowers, which the meadows yield plentifully.
In countries where timber is plentiful, they erect tall slender trees,
which stand high, and they continue almost the whole year; so as a
stranger would go nigh to imagine that they were all signs of
ale-sellers, and that all houses were ale-houses.” In Northamptonshire a
young tree ten or twelve feet high used to be planted before each house
on May Day so as to appear growing; flowers were thrown over it and
strewn about the door. “Among ancient customs still retained by the
Cornish, may be reckoned that of decking their doors and porches on the
first of May with green boughs of sycamore and hawthorn, and of planting
trees, or rather stumps of trees, before their houses.” In the north of
England it was formerly the custom for young people to rise a little
after midnight on the morning of the first of May, and go out with music
and the blowing of horns into the woods, where they broke branches and
adorned them with nosegays and crowns of flowers. This done, they
returned about sunrise and fastened the flower-decked branches over the
doors and windows of their houses. At Abingdon in Berkshire young people
formerly went about in groups on May morning, singing a carol of which
the following are two of the verses:

“We’ve been rambling all the night,

And sometime of this day;

And now returning back again,

We bring a garland gay.

A garland gay we bring you here;

And at your door we stand;

It is a sprout well budded out,

The work of our Lord’s hand.”    2

  At the towns of Saffron Walden and Debden in Essex on the first of May
little girls go about in parties from door to door singing a song almost
identical with the above and carrying garlands; a doll dressed in white
is usually placed in the middle of each garland. Similar customs have
been and indeed are still observed in various parts of England. The
garlands are generally in the form of hoops intersecting each other at
right angles. It appears that a hoop wreathed with rowan and marsh
marigold, and bearing suspended within it two balls, is still carried on
May Day by villagers in some parts of Ireland. The balls, which are
sometimes covered with gold and silver paper, are said to have
originally represented the sun and moon.   3

  In some villages of the Vosges Mountains on the first Sunday of May
young girls go in bands from house to house, singing a song in praise of
May, in which mention is made of the “bread and meal that come in May.”
If money is given them, they fasten a green bough to the door; if it is
refused, they wish the family many children and no bread to feed them.
In the French department of Mayenne, boys who bore the name of
Maillotins used to go about from farm to farm on the first of May
singing carols, for which they received money or a drink; they planted a
small tree or a branch of a tree. Near Saverne in Alsace bands of people
go about carrying May-trees. Amongst them is a man dressed in a white
shirt with his face blackened; in front of him is carried a large
May-tree, but each member of the band also carries a smaller one. One of
the company bears a huge basket, in which he collects eggs, bacon, and
so forth.   4

  On the Thursday before Whitsunday the Russian villagers “go out into
the woods, sing songs, weave garlands, and cut down a young birch-tree,
which they dress up in woman’s clothes, or adorn with many-coloured
shreds and ribbons. After that comes a feast, at the end of which they
take the dressed-up birch-tree, carry it home to their village with
joyful dance and song, and set it up in one of the houses, where it
remains as an honoured guest till Whitsunday. On the two intervening
days they pay visits to the house where their ‘guest’ is; but on the
third day, Whitsunday, they take her to a stream and fling her into its
waters,” throwing their garlands after her. In this Russian custom the
dressing of the birch in woman’s clothes shows how clearly the tree is
personified; and the throwing it into a stream is most probably a
raincharm.   5

  In some parts of Sweden on the eve of May Day lads go about carrying
each a bunch of fresh birch twigs wholly or partly in leaf. With the
village fiddler at their head, they make the round of the houses singing
May songs; the burden of their songs is a prayer for fine weather, a
plentiful harvest, and worldly and spiritual blessings. One of them
carries a basket in which he collects gifts of eggs and the like. If
they are well received, they stick a leafy twig in the roof over the
cottage door. But in Sweden midsummer is the season when these
ceremonies are chiefly observed. On the Eve of St. John (the
twenty-third of June) the houses are thoroughly cleansed and garnished
with green boughs and flowers. Young fir-trees are raised at the doorway
and elsewhere about the homestead; and very often small umbrageous
arbours are constructed in the garden. In Stockholm on this day a
leaf-market is held at which thousands of May-poles (Maj Staˇnger), from
six inches to twelve feet high, decorated with leaves, flowers, slips of
coloured paper, gilt egg-shells strung on reeds, and so on, are exposed
for sale. Bonfires are lit on the hills, and the people dance round them
and jump over them. But the chief event of the day is setting up the
May-pole. This consists of a straight and tall sprucepine tree, stripped
of its branches. “At times hoops and at others pieces of wood, placed
crosswise, are attached to it at intervals; whilst at others it is
provided with bows, representing, so to say, a man with his arms akimbo.
From top to bottom not only the ‘Maj Sta˘ng’ (May-pole) itself, but the
hoops, bows, etc., are ornamented with leaves, flowers, slips of various
cloth, gilt egg-shells, etc.; and on the top of it is a large vane, or
it may be a flag.” The raising of the May-pole, the decoration of which
is done by the village maidens, is an affair of much ceremony; the
people flock to it from all quarters, and dance round it in a great
ring. Midsummer customs of the same sort used to be observed in some
parts of Germany. Thus in the towns of the Upper Harz Mountains tall
fir-trees, with the bark peeled off their lower trunks, were set up in
open places and decked with flowers and eggs, which were painted yellow
and red. Round these trees the young folk danced by day and the old folk
in the evening. In some parts of Bohemia also a May-pole or
midsummer-tree is erected on St. John’s Eve. The lads fetch a tall fir
or pine from the wood and set it up on a height, where the girls deck it
with nosegays, garlands, and red ribbons. It is afterwards burned.   6

  It would be needless to illustrate at length the custom, which has
prevailed in various parts of Europe, such as England, France, and
Germany, of setting up a village May-tree or May-pole on May Day. A few
examples will suffice. The puritanical writer Phillip Stubbes in his
Anatomie of Abuses, first published at London in 1583, has described
with manifest disgust how they used to bring in the May-pole in the days
of good Queen Bess. His description affords us a vivid glimpse of merry
England in the olden time. “Against May, Whitsonday, or other time, all
the yung men and maides, olde men and wives, run gadding over night to
the woods, groves, hils, and mountains, where they spend all the night
in plesant pastimes; and in the morning they return, bringing with them
birch and branches of trees, to deck their assemblies withall. And no
mervaile, for there is a great Lord present amongst them, as
superintendent and Lord over their pastimes and sportes, namely, Sathan,
prince of hel. But the chiefest jewel they bring from thence is their
May-pole, which they bring home with great veneration, as thus. They
have twentie or fortie yoke of oxen, every oxe having a sweet nose-gay
of flouers placed on the tip of his hornes, and these oxen drawe home
this May-pole (this stinkyng ydol, rather), which is covered all over
with floures and hearbs, bound round about with strings, from the top to
the bottome, and sometime painted with variable colours, with two or
three hundred men, women and children following it with great devotion.
And thus beeing reared up, with handkercheefs and flags hovering on the
top, they straw the ground rounde about, binde green boughes about it,
set up sommer haules, bowers, and arbors hard by it. And then fall they
to daunce about it, like as the heathen people did at the dedication of
the Idols, whereof this is a perfect pattern, or rather the thing
itself. I have heard it credibly reported (and that viva voce) by men of
great gravitie and reputation, that of fortie, threescore, or a hundred
maides going to the wood over night, there have scaresly the third part
of them returned home againe undefiled.”   7

  In Swabia on the first of May a tall fir-tree used to be fetched into
the village, where it was decked with ribbons and set up; then the
people danced round it merrily to music. The tree stood on the village
green the whole year through, until a fresh tree was brought in next May
Day. In Saxony “people were not content with bringing the summer
symbolically (as king or queen) into the village; they brought the fresh
green itself from the woods even into the houses: that is the May or
Whitsuntide trees, which are mentioned in documents from the thirteenth
century onwards. The fetching in of the May-tree was also a festival.
The people went out into the woods to seek the May (majum quaerere),
brought young trees, especially firs and birches, to the village and set
them up before the doors of the houses or of the cattle-stalls or in the
rooms. Young fellows erected such May-trees, as we have already said,
before the chambers of their sweethearts. Besides these household Mays,
a great May-tree or May-pole, which had also been brought in solemn
procession to the village, was set up in the middle of the village or in
the market-place of the town. It had been chosen by the whole community,
who watched over it most carefully. Generally the tree was stripped of
its branches and leaves, nothing but the crown being left, on which were
displayed, in addition to many-coloured ribbons and cloths, a variety of
victuals such as sausages, cakes, and eggs. The young folk exerted
themselves to obtain these prizes. In the greasy poles which are still
to be seen at our fairs we have a relic of these old May-poles. Not
uncommonly there was a race on foot or on horseback to the May-tree—a
Whitsunday pastime which in course of time has been divested of its goal
and survives as a popular custom to this day in many parts of Germany.”
At Bordeaux on the first of May the boys of each street used to erect in
it a May-pole, which they adorned with garlands and a great crown; and
every evening during the whole of the month the young people of both
sexes danced singing about the pole. Down to the present day May-trees
decked with flowers and ribbons are set up on May Day in every village
and hamlet of gay Provence. Under them the young folk make merry and the
old folk rest.   8

  In all these cases, apparently, the custom is or was to bring in a new
May-tree each year. However, in England the village May-pole seems as a
rule, at least in later times, to have been permanent, not renewed
annually. Villages of Upper Bavaria renew their May-pole once every
three, four, or five years. It is a fir-tree fetched from the forest,
and amid all the wreaths, flags, and inscriptions with which it is
bedecked, an essential part is the bunch of dark green foliage left at
the top “as a memento that in it we have to do, not with a dead pole,
but with a living tree from the greenwood.” We can hardly doubt that
originally the practice everywhere was to set up a new May-tree every
year. As the object of the custom was to bring in the fructifying spirit
of vegetation, newly awakened in spring, the end would have been
defeated if, instead of a living tree, green and sappy, an old withered
one had been erected year after year or allowed to stand permanently.
When, however, the meaning of the custom had been forgotten, and the
May-tree was regarded simply as a centre for holiday merry-making,
people saw no reason for felling a fresh tree every year, and preferred
to let the same tree stand permanently, only decking it with fresh
flowers on May Day. But even when the May-pole had thus become a
fixture, the need of giving it the appearance of being a green tree, not
a dead pole, was sometimes felt. Thus at Weverham in Cheshire “are two
May-poles, which are decorated on this day (May Day) with all due
attention to the ancient solemnity; the sides are hung with garlands,
and the top terminated by a birch or other tall slender tree with its
leaves on; the bark being peeled, and the stem spliced to the pole, so
as to give the appearance of one tree from the summit.” Thus the renewal
of the May-tree is like the renewal of the Harvest-May; each is intended
to secure a fresh portion of the fertilising spirit of vegetation, and
to preserve it throughout the year. But whereas the efficacy of the
Harvest-May is restricted to promoting the growth of the crops, that of
the May-tree or May-branch extends also, as we have seen, to women and
cattle. Lastly, it is worth noting that the old May-tree is sometimes
burned at the end of the year. Thus in the district of Prague young
people break pieces of the public May-tree and place them behind the
holy pictures in their rooms, where they remain till next May Day, and
are then burned on the hearth. In Würtemberg the bushes which are set up
on the houses on Palm Sunday are sometimes left there for a year and
then burnt.   9

  So much for the tree-spirit conceived as incorporate or immanent in
the tree. We have now to show that the tree-spirit is often conceived
and represented as detached from the tree and clothed in human form, and
even as embodied in living men or women. The evidence for this
anthropomorphic representation of the tree-spirit is largely to be found
in the popular customs of European peasantry.   10

  There is an instructive class of cases in which the tree-spirit is
represented simultaneously in vegetable form and in human form, which
are set side by side as if for the express purpose of explaining each
other. In these cases the human representative of the tree-spirit is
sometimes a doll or puppet, sometimes a living person, but whether a
puppet or a person, it is placed beside a tree or bough; so that
together the person or puppet, and the tree or bough, form a sort of
bilingual inscription, the one being, so to speak, a translation of the
other. Here, therefore, there is no room left for doubt that the spirit
of the tree is actually represented in human form. Thus in Bohemia, on
the fourth Sunday in Lent, young people throw a puppet called Death into
the water; then the girls go into the wood, cut down a young tree, and
fasten to it a puppet dressed in white clothes to look like a woman;
with this tree and puppet they go from house to house collecting
gratuities and singing songs with the refrain:

“We carry Death out of the village,

We bring Summer into the village.” 

Here, as we shall see later on, the “Summer” is the spirit of vegetation
returning or reviving in spring. In some parts of our own country
children go about asking for pence with some small imitations of
May-poles, and with a finely-dressed doll which they call the Lady of
the May. In these cases the tree and the puppet are obviously regarded
as equivalent.   11

  At Thann, in Alsace, a girl called the Little May Rose, dressed in
white, carries a small May-tree, which is gay with garlands and ribbons.
Her companions collect gifts from door to door, singing a song:

“Little May Rose turn round three times,

Let us look at you round and round!

Rose of the May, come to the greenwood away,

We will be merry all.

So we go from the May to the roses.” 

In the course of the song a wish is expressed that those who give
nothing may lose their fowls by the marten, that their vine may bear no
clusters, their tree no nuts, their field no corn; the produce of the
year is supposed to depend on the gifts offered to these May singers.
Here and in the cases mentioned above, where children go about with
green boughs or garlands on May Day singing and collecting money, the
meaning is that with the spirit of vegetation they bring plenty and good
luck to the house, and they expect to be paid for the service. In
Russian Lithuania, on the first of May, they used to set up a green tree
before the village. Then the rustic swains chose the prettiest girl,
crowned her, swathed her in birch branches and set her beside the
May-tree, where they danced, sang, and shouted “O May! O May!” In Brie
(Isle de France) a May-tree is erected in the midst of the village; its
top is crowned with flowers; lower down it is twined with leaves and
twigs, still lower with huge green branches. The girls dance round it,
and at the same time a lad wrapt in leaves and called Father May is led
about. In the small towns of the Franken Wald mountains in Northern
Bavaria, on the second of May, a Walber tree is erected before a tavern,
and a man dances round it, enveloped in straw from head to foot in such
a way that the ears of corn unite above his head to form a crown. He is
called the Walber, and used to be led in procession through the streets,
which were adorned with sprigs of birch.   12

  Amongst the Slavs of Carinthia, on St. George’s Day (the twentythird
of April), the young people deck with flowers and garlands a tree which
has been felled on the eve of the festival. The tree is then carried in
procession, accompanied with music and joyful acclamations, the chief
figure in the procession being the Green George, a young fellow clad
from head to foot in green birch branches. At the close of the
ceremonies the Green George, that is an effigy of him, is thrown into
the water. It is the aim of the lad who acts Green George to step out of
his leafy envelope and substitute the effigy so adroitly that no one
shall perceive the change. In many places, however, the lad himself who
plays the part of Green George is ducked in a river or pond, with the
express intention of thus ensuring rain to make the fields and meadows
green in summer. In some places the cattle are crowned and driven from
their stalls to the accompaniment of a song:

“Green George we bring,

Green George we accompany,

May he feed our herds well.

If not, to the water with him.” 

Here we see that the same powers of making rain and fostering the
cattle, which are ascribed to the tree-spirit regarded as incorporate in
the tree, are also attributed to the tree-spirit represented by a living
man.   13

  Among the gypsies of Transylvania and Roumania the festival of Green
George is the chief celebration of spring. Some of them keep it on
Easter Monday, others on St. George’s Day (the twentythird of April). On
the eve of the festival a young willow tree is cut down, adorned with
garlands and leaves, and set up in the ground. Women with child place
one of their garments under the tree, and leave it there over night; if
next morning they find a leaf of the tree lying on the garment, they
know that their delivery will be easy. Sick and old people go to the
tree in the evening, spit on it thrice, and say, “You will soon die, but
let us live.” Next morning the gypsies gather about the willow. The
chief figure of the festival is Green George, a lad who is concealed
from top to toe in green leaves and blossoms. He throws a few handfuls
of grass to the beasts of the tribe, in order that they may have no lack
of fodder throughout the year. Then he takes three iron nails, which
have lain for three days and nights in water, and knocks them into the
willow; after which he pulls them out and flings them into a running
stream to propitiate the water-spirits. Finally, a pretence is made of
throwing Green George into the water, but in fact it is only a puppet
made of branches and leaves which is ducked in the stream. In this
version of the custom the powers of granting an easy delivery to women
and of communicating vital energy to the sick and old are clearly
ascribed to the willow; while Green George, the human double of the
tree, bestows food on the cattle, and further ensures the favour of the
water-spirits by putting them in indirect communication with the
tree.   14

  Without citing more examples to the same effect, we may sum up the
results of the preceding pages in the words of Mannhardt: “The customs
quoted suffice to establish with certainty the conclusion that in these
spring processions the spirit of vegetation is often represented both by
the May-tree and in addition by a man dressed in green leaves or flowers
or by a girl similarly adorned. It is the same spirit which animates the
tree and is active in the inferior plants and which we have recognised
in the May-tree and the Harvest-May. Quite consistently the spirit is
also supposed to manifest his presence in the first flower of spring and
reveals himself both in a girl representing a May-rose, and also, as
giver of harvest, in the person of the Walber. The procession with this
representative of the divinity was supposed to produce the same
beneficial effects on the fowls, the fruit-trees, and the crops as the
presence of the deity himself. In other words the mummer was regarded
not as an image but as an actual representative of the spirit of
vegetation; hence the wish expressed by the attendants on the May-rose
and the May-tree that those who refuse them gifts of eggs, bacon, and so
forth, may have no share in the blessings which it is in the power of
the itinerant spirit to bestow. We may conclude that these begging
processions with May-trees or May-boughs from door to door (‘bringing
the May or the summer’) had everywhere originally a serious and, so to
speak, sacramental significance; people really believed that the god of
growth was present unseen in the bough; by the procession he was brought
to each house to bestow his blessing. The names May, Father May, May
Lady, Queen of the May, by which the anthropomorphic spirit of
vegetation is often denoted, show that the idea of the spirit of
vegetation is blent with a personification of the season at which his
powers are most strikingly manifested.”   15

  So far we have seen that the tree-spirit or the spirit of vegetation
in general is represented either in vegetable form alone, as by a tree,
bough, or flower; or in vegetable and human form simultaneously, as by a
tree, bough, or flower in combination with a puppet or a living person.
It remains to show that the representation of him by a tree, bough, or
flower is sometimes entirely dropped, while the representation of him by
a living person remains. In this case the representative character of
the person is generally marked by dressing him or her in leaves or
flowers; sometimes, too, it is indicated by the name he or she
bears.   16

  Thus in some parts of Russia on St. George’s Day (the twenty-third of
April) a youth is dressed out, like our Jack-in-the-Green, with leaves
and flowers. The Slovenes call him the Green George. Holding a lighted
torch in one hand and a pie in the other, he goes out to the
corn-fields, followed by girls singing appropriate songs. A circle of
brushwood is next lighted, in the middle of which is set the pie. All
who take part in the ceremony then sit down around the fire and divide
the pie among them. In this custom the Green George dressed in leaves
and flowers is plainly identical with the similarly disguised Green
George who is associated with a tree in the Carinthian, Transylvanian,
and Roumanian customs observed on the same day. Again, we saw that in
Russia at Whitsuntide a birch-tree is dressed in woman’s clothes and set
up in the house. Clearly equivalent to this is the custom observed on
Whit-Monday by Russian girls in the district of Pinsk. They choose the
prettiest of their number, envelop her in a mass of foliage taken from
the birch-trees and maples, and carry her about through the
village.   17

  In Ruhla as soon as the trees begin to grow green in spring, the
children assemble on a Sunday and go out into the woods, where they
choose one of their playmates to be the Little Leaf Man. They break
branches from the trees and twine them about the child till only his
shoes peep out from the leafy mantle. Holes are made in it for him to
see through, and two of the children lead the Little Leaf Man that he
may not stumble or fall. Singing and dancing they take him from house to
house, asking for gifts of food such as eggs, cream, sausages, and
cakes. Lastly, they sprinkle the Leaf Man with water and feast on the
food they have collected. In the Fricktal, Switzerland, at Whitsuntide
boys go out into a wood and swathe one of their number in leafy boughs.
He is called the Whitsuntide-lout, and being mounted on horseback with a
green branch in his hand he is led back into the village. At the
village-well a halt is called and the leaf-clad lout is dismounted and
ducked in the trough. Thereby he acquires the right of sprinkling water
on everybody, and he exercises the right specially on girls and street
urchins. The urchins march before him in bands begging him to give them
a Whitsuntide wetting.   18

  In England the best-known example of these leaf-clad mummers is the
Jack-in-the-Green, a chimney-sweeper who walks encased in a pyramidal
framework of wickerwork, which is covered with holly and ivy, and
surmounted by a crown of flowers and ribbons. Thus arrayed he dances on
May Day at the head of a troop of chimney-sweeps, who collect pence. In
Fricktal a similar frame of basketwork is called the Whitsuntide Basket.
As soon as the trees begin to bud, a spot is chosen in the wood, and
here the village lads make the frame with all secrecy, lest others
should forestall them. Leafy branches are twined round two hoops, one of
which rests on the shoulders of the wearer, the other encircles his
claves; holes are made for his eyes and mouth; and a large nosegay
crowns the whole. In this guise he appears suddenly in the village at
the hour of vespers, preceded by three boys blowing on horns made of
willow bark. The great object of his supporters is to set up the
Whitsuntide Basket on the village well, and to keep it and him there,
despite the efforts of the lads from neighbouring villages, who seek to
carry off the Whitsuntide Basket and set it up on their own well.   19

  In the class of cases of which the foregoing are specimens it is
obvious that the leaf-clad person who is led about is equivalent to the
May-tree, May-bough, or May-doll, which is carried from house to house
by children begging. Both are representatives of the beneficent spirit
of vegetation, whose visit to the house is recompensed by a present of
money or food.   20

  Often the leaf-clad person who represents the spirit of vegetation is
known as the king or the queen; thus, for example, he or she is called
the May King, Whitsuntide King, Queen of May, and so on. These titles,
as Mannhardt observes, imply that the spirit incorporate in vegetation
is a ruler, whose creative power extends far and wide.   21

  In a village near Salzwedel a May-tree is set up at Whitsuntide and
the boys race to it; he who reaches it first is king; a garland of
flowers is put round his neck and in his hand he carries a May-bush,
with which, as the procession moves along, he sweeps away the dew. At
each house they sing a song, wishing the inmates good luck, referring to
the “black cow in the stall milking white milk, black hen on the nest
laying white eggs,” and begging a gift of eggs, bacon, and so on. At the
village of Ellgoth in Silesia a ceremony called the King’s Race is
observed at Whitsuntide. A pole with a cloth tied to it is set up in a
meadow, and the young men ride past it on horseback, each trying to
snatch away the cloth as he gallops by. The one who succeeds in carrying
it off and dipping it in the neighbouring Oder is proclaimed King. Here
the pole is clearly a substitute for a May-tree. In some villages of
Brunswick at Whitsuntide a May King is completely enveloped in a
May-bush. In some parts of Thüringen also they have a May King at
Whitsuntide, but he is dressed up rather differently. A frame of wood is
made in which a man can stand; it is completely covered with birch
boughs and is surmounted by a crown of birch and flowers, in which a
bell is fastened. This frame is placed in the wood and the May King gets
into it. The rest go out and look for him, and when they have found him
they lead him back into the village to the magistrate, the clergyman,
and others, who have to guess who is in the verdurous frame. If they
guess wrong, the May King rings his bell by shaking his head, and a
forfeit of beer or the like must be paid by the unsuccessful guesser. At
Wahrstedt the boys at Whitsuntide choose by lot a king and a
high-steward. The latter is completely concealed in a May-bush, wears a
wooden crown wreathen with flowers, and carries a wooden sword. The
king, on the other hand, is only distinguished by a nosegay in his cap,
and a reed, with a red ribbon tied to it, in his hand. They beg for eggs
from house to house, threatening that, where none are given, none will
be laid by the hens throughout the year. In this custom the high-steward
appears, for some reason, to have usurped the insignia of the king. At
Hildesheim five or six young fellows go about on the afternoon of
Whit-Monday cracking long whips in measured time and collecting eggs
from the houses. The chief person of the band is the Leaf King, a lad
swathed so completely in birchen twigs that nothing of him can be seen
but his feet. A huge head-dress of birchen twigs adds to his apparent
stature. In his hand he carries a long crook, with which he tries to
catch stray dogs and children. In some parts of Bohemia on Whit-Monday
the young fellows disguise themselves in tall caps of birch bark adorned
with flowers. One of them is dressed as a king and dragged on a sledge
to the village green, and if on the way they pass a pool the sledge is
always overturned into it. Arrived at the green they gather round the
king; the crier jumps on a stone or climbs up a tree and recites
lampoons about each house and its inmates. Afterwards the disguises of
bark are stripped off and they go about the village in holiday attire,
carrying a May-tree and begging. Cakes, eggs, and corn are sometimes
given them. At Grossvargula, near Langensalza, in the eighteenth century
a Grass King used to be led about in procession at Whitsuntide. He was
encased in a pyramid of poplar branches, the top of which was adorned
with a royal crown of branches and flowers. He rode on horseback with
the leafy pyramid over him, so that its lower end touched the ground,
and an opening was left in it only for his face. Surrounded by a
cavalcade of young fellows, he rode in procession to the town hall, the
parsonage, and so on, where they all got a drink of beer. Then under the
seven lindens of the neighbouring Sommerberg, the Grass King was
stripped of his green casing; the crown was handed to the Mayor, and the
branches were stuck in the flax fields in order to make the flax grow
tall. In this last trait the fertilising influence ascribed to the
representative of the tree-spirit comes out clearly. In the
neighbourhood of Pilsen (Bohemia) a conical hut of green branches,
without any door, is erected at Whitsuntide in the midst of the village.
To this hut rides a troop of village lads with a king at their head. He
wears a sword at his side and a sugar-loaf hat of rushes on his head. In
his train are a judge, a crier, and a personage called the Frog-flayer
or Hangman. This last is a sort of ragged merryandrew, wearing a rusty
old sword and bestriding a sorry hack. On reaching the hut the crier
dismounts and goes round it looking for a door. Finding none, he says,
“Ah, this is perhaps an enchanted castle; the witches creep through the
leaves and need no door.” At last he draws his sword and hews his way
into the hut, where there is a chair, on which he seats himself and
proceeds to criticise in rhyme the girls, farmers, and farm-servants of
the neighbourhood. When this is over, the Frog-flayer steps forward and,
after exhibiting a cage with frogs in it, sets up a gallows on which he
hangs the frogs in a row. In the neighbourhood of Plas the ceremony
differs in some points. The king and his soldiers are completely clad in
bark, adorned with flowers and ribbons; they all carry swords and ride
horses, which are gay with green branches and flowers. While the village
dames and girls are being criticised at the arbour, a frog is secretly
pinched and poked by the crier till it quacks. Sentence of death is
passed on the frog by the king; the hangman beheads it and flings the
bleeding body among the spectators. Lastly, the king is driven from the
hut and pursued by the soldiers. The pinching and beheading of the frog
are doubtless, as Mannhardt observes, a rain-charm. We have seen that
some Indians of the Orinoco beat frogs for the express purpose of
producing rain, and that killing a frog is a European rain-charm.   22

  Often the spirit of vegetation in spring is represented by a queen
instead of a king. In the neighbourhood of Libchowic (Bohemia), on the
fourth Sunday in Lent, girls dressed in white and wearing the first
spring flowers, as violets and daisies, in their hair, lead about the
village a girl who is called the Queen and is crowned with flowers.
During the procession, which is conducted with great solemnity, none of
the girls may stand still, but must keep whirling round continually and
singing. In every house the Queen announces the arrival of spring and
wishes the inmates good luck and blessings, for which she receives
presents. In German Hungary the girls choose the prettiest girl to be
their Whitsuntide Queen, fasten a towering wreath on her brow, and carry
her singing through the streets. At every house they stop, sing old
ballads, and receive presents. In the south-east of Ireland on May Day
the prettiest girl used to be chosen Queen of the district for twelve
months. She was crowned with wild flowers; feasting, dancing, and rustic
sports followed, and were closed by a grand procession in the evening.
During her year of office she presided over rural gatherings of young
people at dances and merry-makings. If she married before next May Day,
her authority was at an end, but her successor was not elected till that
day came round. The May Queen is common In France and familiar in
England.   23

  Again the spirit of vegetation is sometimes represented by a king and
queen, a lord and lady, or a bridegroom and bride. Here again the
parallelism holds between the anthropomorphic and the vegetable
representation of the tree-spirit, for we have seen above that trees are
sometimes married to each other. At Halford in South Warwickshire the
children go from house to house on May Day, walking two and two in
procession and headed by a King and Queen. Two boys carry a May-pole
some six or seven feet high, which is covered with flowers and greenery.
Fastened to it near the top are two cross-bars at right angles to each
other. These are also decked with flowers, and from the ends of the bars
hang hoops similarly adorned. At the houses the children sing May songs
and receive money, which is used to provide tea for them at the
schoolhouse in the afternoon. In a Bohemian village near Königgrätz on
Whit-Monday the children play the king’s game, at which a king and queen
march about under a canopy, the queen wearing a garland, and the
youngest girl carrying two wreaths on a plate behind them. They are
attended by boys and girls called groomsmen and bridesmaids, and they go
from house to house collecting gifts. A regular feature in the popular
celebration of Whitsuntide in Silesia used to be, and to some extent
still is, the contest for the kingship. This contest took various forms,
but the mark or goal was generally the May-tree or May-pole. Sometimes
the youth who succeeded in climbing the smooth pole and bringing down
the prize was proclaimed the Whitsuntide King and his sweetheart the
Whitsuntide Bride. Afterwards the king, carrying the May-bush, repaired
with the rest of the company to the alehouse, where a dance and a feast
ended the merry-making. Often the young farmers and labourers raced on
horseback to the May-pole, which was adorned with flowers, ribbons, and
a crown. He who first reached the pole was the Whitsuntide King, and the
rest had to obey his orders for that day. The worst rider became the
clown. At the May-tree all dismounted and hoisted the king on their
shoulders. He nimbly swarmed up the pole and brought down the May-bush
and the crown, which had been fastened to the top. Meanwhile the clown
hurried to the alehouse and proceeded to bolt thirty rolls of bread and
to swig four quart bottles of brandy with the utmost possible despatch.
He was followed by the king, who bore the May-bush and crown at the head
of the company. If on their arrival the clown had already disposed of
the rolls and the brandy, and greeted the king with a speech and a glass
of beer, his score was paid by the king; otherwise he had to settle it
himself. After church time the stately procession wound through the
village. At the head of it rode the king, decked with flowers and
carrying the May-bush. Next came the clown with his clothes turned
inside out, a great flaxen beard on his chain, and the Whitsuntide crown
on his head. Two riders disguised as guards followed. The procession
drew up before every farmyard; the two guards dismounted, shut the clown
into the house, and claimed a contribution from the housewife to buy
soap with which to wash the clown’s beard. Custom allowed them to carry
off any victuals which were not under lock and key. Last of all they
came to the house in which the king’s sweetheart lived. She was greeted
as Whitsuntide Queen and received suitable presents—to wit, a
many-coloured sash, a cloth, and an apron. The king got as a prize, a
vest, a neck-cloth, and so forth, and had the right of setting up the
May-bush or Whitsuntide-tree before his master’s yard, where it remained
as an honourable token till the same day next year. Finally the
procession took its way to the tavern, where the king and queen opened
the dance. Sometimes the Whitsuntide King and Queen succeeded to office
in a different way. A man of straw, as large as life and crowned with a
red cap, was conveyed in a cart, between two men armed and disguised as
guards, to a place where a mock court was waiting to try him. A great
crowd followed the cart. After a formal trial the straw man was
condemned to death and fastened to a stake on the execution ground. The
young men with bandaged eyes tried to stab him with a spear. He who
succeeded became king and his sweetheart queen. The straw man was known
as the Goliath.   24

  In a parish of Denmark it used to be the custom at Whitsuntide to
dress up a little girl as the Whitsun-bride and a little boy as her
groom. She was decked in all the finery of a grown-up bride, and wore a
crown of the freshest flowers of spring on her head. Her groom was as
gay as flowers, ribbons, and knots could make him. The other children
adorned themselves as best they could with the yellow flowers of the
trollius and caltha. Then they went in great state from farmhouse to
farmhouse, two little girls walking at the head of the procession as
bridesmaids, and six or eight outriders galloping ahead on hobby-horses
to announce their coming. Contributions of eggs, butter, loaves, cream,
coffee, sugar, and tallow-candles were received and conveyed away in
baskets. When they had made the round of the farms, some of the farmers’
wives helped to arrange the wedding feast, and the children danced
merrily in clogs on the stamped clay floor till the sun rose and the
birds began to sing. All this is now a thing of the past. Only the old
folks still remember the little Whitsun-bride and her mimic pomp.   25

  We have seen that in Sweden the ceremonies associated elsewhere with
May Day or Whitsuntide commonly take place at Midsummer. Accordingly we
find that in some parts of the Swedish province of Blekinge they still
choose a Midsummer’s Bride, to whom the “church coronet” is occasionally
lent. The girl selects for herself a Bridegroom, and a collection is
made for the pair, who for the time being are looked on as man and wife.
The other youths also choose each his bride. A similar ceremony seems to
be still kept up in Norway.   26

  In the neighbourhood of Briançon (Dauphiné) on May Day the lads wrap
up in green leaves a young fellow whose sweetheart has deserted him or
married another. He lies down on the ground and feigns to be asleep.
Then a girl who likes him, and would marry him, comes and wakes him, and
raising him up offers him her arm and a flag. So they go to the
alehouse, where the pair lead off the dancing. But they must marry
within the year, or they are treated as old bachelor and old maid, and
are debarred the company of the young folks. The lad is called the
Bridegroom of the month of May. In the alehouse he puts off his garment
of leaves, out of which, mixed with flowers, his partner in the dance
makes a nosegay, and wears it at her breast next day, when he leads her
again to the alehouse. Like this is a Russian custom observed in the
district of Nerechta on the Thursday before Whitsunday. The girls go out
into a birch-wood, wind a girdle or band round a stately birch, twist
its lower branches into a wreath, and kiss each other in pairs through
the wreath. The girls who kiss through the wreath call each other
gossips. Then one of the girls steps forward, and mimicking a drunken
man, flings herself on the ground, rolls on the grass, and feigns to
fall fast asleep. Another girl wakens the pretended sleeper and kisses
him; then the whole bevy trips singing through the wood to twine
garlands, which they throw into the water. In the fate of the garlands
floating on the stream they read their own. Here the part of the sleeper
was probably at one time played by a lad. In these French and Russian
customs we have a forsaken bridegroom, in the following a forsaken
bride. On Shrove Tuesday the Slovenes of Oberkrain drag a straw puppet
with joyous cries up and down the village; then they throw it into the
water or burn it, and from the height of the flames they judge of the
abundance of the next harvest. The noisy crew is followed by a female
masker, who drags a great board by a string and gives out that she is a
forsaken bride.   27

  Viewed in the light of what has gone before, the awakening of the
forsaken sleeper in these ceremonies probably represents the revival of
vegetation in spring. But it is not easy to assign their respective
parts to the forsaken bridegroom and to the girl who wakes him from his
slumber. Is the sleeper the leafless forest or the bare earth of winter?
Is the girl who awakens him the fresh verdure or the genial sunshine of
spring? It is hardly possible, on the evidence before us, to answer
these questions.   28

  In the Highlands of Scotland the revival of vegetation in spring used
to be graphically represented on St. Bride’s Day, the first of February.
Thus in the Hebrides “the mistress and servants of each family take a
sheaf of oats, and dress it up in women’s apparel, put it in a large
basket and lay a wooden club by it, and this they call Briid’s bed; and
then the mistress and servants cry three times, ‘Briid is come, Briid is
welcome.’ This they do just before going to bed, and when they rise in
the morning they look among the ashes, expecting to see the impression
of Briid’s club there; which if they do, they reckon it a true presage
of a good crop and prosperous year, and the contrary they take as an ill
omen.” The same custom is described by another witness thus: “Upon the
night before Candlemas it is usual to make a bed with corn and hay, over
which some blankets are laid, in a part of the house, near the door.
When it is ready, a person goes out and repeats three times, … ‘Bridget,
Bridget, come in; thy bed is ready.’ One or more candles are left
burning near it all night.” Similarly in the Isle of Man “on the eve of
the first of February, a festival was formerly kept, called, in the
Manks language, Laa’l Breeshey, in honour of the Irish lady who went
over to the Isle of Man to receive the veil from St. Maughold. The
custom was to gather a bundle of green rushes, and standing with them in
the hand on the threshold of the door, to invite the holy Saint Bridget
to come and lodge with them that night. In the Manks language, the
invitation ran thus: ‘Brede, Brede, tar gys my thie tar dyn thie ayms
noght Foshil jee yn dorrys da Brede, as lhig da Brede e heet staigh.’ In
English: ‘Bridget, Bridget, come to my house, come to my house to-night.
Open the door for Bridget, and let Bridget come in.’ After these words
were repeated, the rushes were strewn on the floor by way of a carpet or
bed for St. Bridget. A custom very similar to this was also observed in
some of the Out-Isles of the ancient Kingdom of Man.” In these Manx and
Highland ceremonies it is obvious that St. Bride, or St. Bridget, is an
old heathen goddess of fertility, disguised in a threadbare Christian
cloak. Probably she is no other than Brigit, the Celtic goddess of fire
and apparently of the crops.   29

  Often the marriage of the spirit of vegetation in spring, though not
directly represented, is implied by naming the human representative of
the spirit, “the Bride,” and dressing her in wedding attire. Thus in
some villages of Altmark at Whitsuntide, while the boys go about
carrying a May-tree or leading a boy enveloped in leaves and flowers,
the girls lead about the May Bride, a girl dressed as a bride with a
great nosegay in her hair. They go from house to house, the May Bride
singing a song in which she asks for a present and tells the inmates of
each house that if they give her something they will themselves have
something the whole year through; but if they give her nothing they will
themselves have nothing. In some parts of Westphalia two girls lead a
flower-crowned girl called the Whitsuntide Bride from door to door,
singing a song in which they ask for eggs.   30
