[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gb01201)  [Next](gb01301) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter 12. The Sacred Marriage.

## Section 2. The Marriage of the Gods.

AT BABYLON the imposing sanctuary of Bel rose like a pyramid above the
city in a series of eight towers or stories, planted one on the top of
the other. On the highest tower, reached by an ascent which wound about
all the rest, there stood a spacious temple, and in the temple a great
bed, magnificently draped and cushioned, with a golden table beside it.
In the temple no image was to be seen, and no human being passed the
night there, save a single woman, whom, according to the Chaldean
priests, the god chose from among all the women of Babylon. They said
that the deity himself came into the temple at night and slept in the
great bed; and the woman, as a consort of the god, might have no
intercourse with mortal man.   1

  At Thebes in Egypt a woman slept in the temple of Ammon as the consort
of the god, and, like the human wife of Bel at Babylon, she was said to
have no commerce with a man. In Egyptian texts she is often mentioned as
“the divine consort,” and usually she was no less a personage than the
Queen of Egypt herself. For, according to the Egyptians, their monarchs
were actually begotten by the god Ammon, who assumed for the time being
the form of the reigning king, and in that disguise had intercourse with
the queen. The divine procreation is carved and painted in great detail
on the walls of two of the oldest temples in Egypt, those of Deir el
Bahari and Luxor; and the inscriptions attached to the paintings leave
no doubt as to the meaning of the scenes.   2

  At Athens the god of the vine, Dionysus, was annually married to the
Queen, and it appears that the consummation of the divine union, as well
as the espousals, was enacted at the ceremony; but whether the part of
the god was played by a man or an image we do not know. We learn from
Aristotle that the ceremony took place in the old official residence of
the King, known as the Cattle-stall, which stood near the Prytaneum or
Town-hall on the north-eastern slope of the Acropolis. The object of the
marriage can hardly have been any other than that of ensuring the
fertility of the vines and other fruit-trees of which Dionysus was the
god. Thus both in form and in meaning the ceremony would answer to the
nuptials of the King and Queen of May.   3

  In the great mysteries solemnised at Eleusis in the month of September
the union of the sky-god Zeus with the corn-goddess Demeter appears to
have been represented by the union of the hierophant with the priestess
of Demeter, who acted the parts of god and goddess. But their
intercourse was only dramatic or symbolical, for the hierophant had
temporarily deprived himself of his virility by an application of
hemlock. The torches having been extinguished, the pair descended into a
murky place, while the throng of worshippers awaited in anxious suspense
the result of the mystic congress, on which they believed their own
salvation to depend. After a time the hierophant reappeared, and in a
blaze of light silently exhibited to the assembly a reaped ear of corn,
the fruit of the divine marriage. Then in a loud voice he proclaimed,
“Queen Brimo has brought forth a sacred boy Brimos,” by which he meant,
“The Mighty One has brought forth the Mighty.” The corn-mother in fact
had given birth to her child, the corn, and her travail-pangs were
enacted in the sacred drama. This revelation of the reaped corn appears
to have been the crowning act of the mysteries. Thus through the glamour
shed round these rites by the poetry and philosophy of later ages there
still looms, like a distant landscape through a sunlit haze, a simple
rustic festival designed to cover the wide Eleusinian plain with a
plenteous harvest by wedding the goddess of the corn to the sky-god, who
fertilised the bare earth with genial showers. Every few years the
people of Plataea, in Boeotia, held a festival called the Little
Daedala, at which they felled an oak-tree in an ancient oak forest. Out
of the tree they carved an image, and having dressed it as a bride, they
set it on a bullock-cart with a bridesmaid beside it. The image seems
then to have been drawn to the bank of the river Asopus and back to the
town, attended by a piping and dancing crowd. Every sixty years the
festival of the Great Daedala was celebrated by all the people of
Boeotia; and at it all the images, fourteen in number, which had
accumulated at the lesser festivals, were dragged on wains in procession
to the river Asopus and then to the top of Mount Cithaeron, where they
were burnt on a great pyre. The story told to explain the festivals
suggests that they celebrated the marriage of Zeus to Hera, represented
by the oaken image in bridal array. In Sweden every year a life-size
image of Frey, the god of fertility, both animal and vegetable, was
drawn about the country in a waggon attended by a beautiful girl who was
called the god’s wife. She acted also as his priestess in his great
temple at Upsala. Wherever the waggon came with the image of the god and
his blooming young bride, the people crowded to meet them and offered
sacrifices for a fruitful year.   4

  Thus the custom of marrying gods either to images or to human beings
was widespread among the nations of antiquity. The ideas on which such a
custom is based are too crude to allow us to doubt that the civilised
Babylonians, Egyptians, and Greeks inherited it from their barbarous or
savage forefathers. This presumption is strengthened when we find rites
of a similar kind in vogue among the lower races. Thus, for example, we
are told that once upon a time the Wotyaks of the Malmyz district in
Russia were distressed by a series of bad harvests. They did not know
what to do, but at last concluded that their powerful but mischievious
god Keremet must be angry at being unmarried. So a deputation of elders
visited the Wotyaks of Cura and came to an understanding with them on
the subject. Then they returned home, laid in a large stock of brandy,
and having made ready a gaily decked waggon and horses, they drove in
procession with bells ringing, as they do when they are fetching home a
bride, to the sacred grove at Cura. There they ate and drank merrily all
night, and next morning they cut a square piece of turf in the grove and
took it home with them. After that, though it fared well with the people
of Malmyz, it fared ill with the people of Cura; for in Malmyz the bread
was good, but in Cura it was bad. Hence the men of Cura who had
consented to the marriage were blamed and roughly handled by their
indignant fellow-villagers. “What they meant by this marriage ceremony,”
says the writer who reports it, “it is not easy to imagine. Perhaps, as
Bechterew thinks, they meant to marry Keremet to the kindly and fruitful
Mukylcin, the Earth-wife, in order that she might influence him for
good.” When wells are dug in Bengal, a wooden image of a god is made and
married to the goddess of water.   5

  Often the bride destined for the god is not a log or a cloud, but a
living woman of flesh and blood. The Indians of a village in Peru have
been known to marry a beautiful girl, about fourteen years of age, to a
stone shaped like a human being, which they regarded as a god (huaca).
All the villagers took part in the marriage ceremony, which lasted three
days, and was attended with much revelry. The girl thereafter remained a
virgin and sacrificed to the idol for the people. They showed her the
utmost reverence and deemed her divine. Every year about the middle of
March, when the season for fishing with the dragnet began, the
Algonquins and Hurons married their nets to two young girls, aged six or
seven. At the wedding feast the net was placed between the two maidens,
and was exhorted to take courage and catch many fish. The reason for
choosing the brides so young was to make sure that they were virgins.
The origin of the custom is said to have been this. One year, when the
fishing season came round, the Algonquins cast their nets as usual, but
took nothing. Surprised at their want of success, they did not know what
to make of it, till the soul or genius (oki) of the net appeared to them
in the likeness of a tall well-built man, who said to them in a great
passion, “I have lost my wife and I cannot find one who has known no
other man but me; that is why you do not succeed, and why you never will
succeed till you give me satisfaction on this head.” So the Algonquins
held a council and resolved to appease the spirit of the net by marrying
him to two such very young girls that he could have no ground of
complaint on that score for the future. They did so, and the fishing
turned out all that could be wished. The thing got wind among their
neighbours the Hurons, and they adopted the custom. A share of the catch
was always given to the families of the two girls who acted as brides of
the net for the year.   6

  The Oraons of Bengal worship the Earth as a goddess, and annually
celebrate her marriage with the Sun-god Dharme¯ at the time when the
sa¯l tree is in blossom. The ceremony is as follows. All bathe, then the
men repair to the sacred grove (sarna), while the women assemble at the
house of the village priest. After sacrificing some fowls to the Sun-god
and the demon of the grove, the men eat and drink. “The priest is then
carried back to the village on the shoulders of a strong man. Near the
village the women meet the men and wash their feet. With beating of
drums and singing, dancing, and jumping, all proceed to the priest’s
house, which has been decorated with leaves and flowers. Then the usual
form of marriage is performed between the priest and his wife,
symbolising the supposed union between Sun and Earth. After the ceremony
all eat and drink and make merry; they dance and sing obscene songs, and
finally indulge in the vilest orgies. The object is to move the mother
earth to become fruitful.” Thus the Sacred Marriage of the Sun and
Earth, personated by the priest and his wife, is celebrated as a charm
to ensure the fertility of the ground; and for the same purpose, on the
principle of homoeopathic magic, the people indulge in licentious
orgy.   7

  It deserves to be remarked that the supernatural being to whom women
are married is often a god or spirit of water. Thus Mukasa, the god of
the Victoria Nyanza lake, who was propitiated by the Baganda every time
they undertook a long voyage, had virgins provided for him to serve as
his wives. Like the Vestals they were bound to chastity, but unlike the
Vestals they seem to have been often unfaithful. The custom lasted until
Mwanga was converted to Christianity. The Akikuyu of British East Africa
worship the snake of a certain river, and at intervals of several years
they marry the snake-god to women, but especially to young girls. For
this purpose huts are built by order of the medicine-men, who there
consummate the sacred marriage with the credulous female devotees. If
the girls do not repair to the huts of their own accord in sufficient
numbers, they are seized and dragged thither to the embraces of the
deity. The offspring of these mystic unions appears to be fathered on
God (ngai); certainly there are children among the Akikuyu who pass for
children of God. It is said that once, when the inhabitants of Cayeli in
Buru—an East Indian island—were threatened with destruction by a swarm
of crocodiles, they ascribed the misfortune to a passion which the
prince of the crocodiles had conceived for a certain girl. Accordingly,
they compelled the damsel’s father to dress her in bridal array and
deliver her over to the clutches of her crocodile lover.   8

  A usage of the same sort is reported to have prevailed in the Maldive
Islands before the conversion of the inhabitants to Islam. The famous
Arab traveller Ibn Batutah has described the custom and the manner in
which it came to an end. He was assured by several trustworthy natives,
whose names he gives, that when the people of the islands were idolaters
there appeared to them every month an evil spirit among the jinn, who
came from across the sea in the likeness of a ship full of burning
lamps. The wont of the inhabitants, as soon as they perceived him, was
to take a young virgin, and, having adorned her, to lead her to a
heathen temple that stood on the shore, with a window looking out to
sea. There they left the damsel for the night, and when they came back
in the morning they found her a maid no more, and dead. Every month they
drew lots, and he upon whom the lot fell gave up his daughter to the
jinnee of the sea. The last of the maidens thus offered to the demon was
rescued by a pious Berber, who by reciting the Koran succeeded in
driving the jinnee back into the sea.   9

  Ibn Batutah’s narrative of the demon lover and his mortal brides
closely resembles a well-known type of folk-tale, of which versions have
been found from Japan and Annam in the East to Senegambia, Scandinavia,
and Scotland in the West. The story varies in details from people to
people, but as commonly told it runs thus. A certain country is infested
by a many-headed serpent, dragon, or other monster, which would destroy
the whole people if a human victim, generally a virgin, were not
delivered up to him periodically. Many victims have perished, and at
last it has fallen to the lot of the king’s own daughter to be
sacrificed. She is exposed to the monster, but the hero of the tale,
generally a young man of humble birth, interposes in her behalf, slays
the monster, and receives the hand of the princess as his reward. In
many of the tales the monster, who is sometimes described as a serpent,
inhabits the water of a sea, a lake, or a fountain. In other versions he
is a serpent or dragon who takes possession of the springs of water, and
only allows the water to flow or the people to make use of it on
condition of receiving a human victim.   10

  It would probably be a mistake to dismiss all these tales as pure
inventions of the story-teller. Rather we may suppose that they reflect
a real custom of sacrificing girls or women to be the wives of
waterspirits, who are very often conceived as great serpents or
dragons.   11
