[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gb02204)  [Next](gb02300) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter 22. Tabooed Words.

## Section 5. Names of Gods tabooed.

PRIMITIVE man creates his gods in his own image. Xenophanes remarked
long ago that the complexion of negro gods was black and their noses
flat; that Thracian gods were ruddy and blue-eyed; and that if horses,
oxen, and lions only believed in gods and had hands wherewith to portray
them, they would doubtless fashion their deities in the form of horses,
and oxen, and lions. Hence just as the furtive savage conceals his real
name because he fears that sorcerers might make an evil use of it, so he
fancies that his gods must likewise keep their true name secret, lest
other gods or even men should learn the mystic sounds and thus be able
to conjure with them. Nowhere was this crude conception of the secrecy
and magical virtue of the divine name more firmly held or more fully
developed than in ancient Egypt, where the superstitions of a dateless
past were embalmed in the hearts of the people hardly less effectually
than the bodies of cats and crocodiles and the rest of the divine
menagerie in their rock-cut tombs. The conception is well illustrated by
a story which tells how the subtle Isis wormed his secret name from Ra,
the great Egyptian god of the sun. Isis, so runs the tale, was a woman
mighty in words, and she was weary of the world of men, and yearned
after the world of the gods. And she meditated in her heart, saying,
“Cannot I by virtue of the great name of Ra make myself a goddess and
reign like him in heaven and earth?” For Ra had many names, but the
great name which gave him all power over gods and men was known to none
but himself. Now the god was by this time grown old; he slobbered at the
mouth and his spittle fell upon the ground. So Isis gathered up the
spittle and the earth with it, and kneaded thereof a serpent and laid it
in the path where the great god passed every day to his double kingdom
after his heart’s desire. And when he came forth according to his wont,
attended by all his company of gods, the sacred serpent stung him, and
the god opened his mouth and cried, and his cry went up to heaven. And
the company of gods cried, “What aileth thee?” and the gods shouted, “Lo
and behold!” But he could not answer; his jaws rattled, his limbs shook,
the poison ran through his flesh as the Nile floweth over the land. When
the great god had stilled his heart, he cried to his followers, “Come to
me, O my children, offspring of my body. I am a prince, the son of a
prince, the divine seed of a god. My father devised my name; my father
and my mother gave me my name, and it remained hidden in my body since
my birth, that no magician might have magic power over me. I went out to
behold that which I have made, I walked in the two lands which I have
created, and lo! something stung me. What it was, I know not. Was it
fire? was it water? My heart is on fire, my flesh trembleth, all my
limbs do quake. Bring me the children of the gods with healing words and
understanding lips, whose power reacheth to heaven.” Then came to him
the children of the gods, and they were very sorrowful. And Isis came
with her craft, whose mouth is full of the breath of life, whose spells
chase pain away, whose word maketh the dead to live. She said, “What is
it, divine Father? what is it?” The holy god opened his mouth, he spake
and said, “I went upon my way, I walked after my heart’s desire in the
two regions which I have made to behold that which I have created, and
lo! a serpent that I saw not stung me. Is it fire? is it water? I am
colder than water, I am hotter than fire, all my limbs sweat, I tremble,
mine eye is not steadfast, I behold not the sky, the moisture bedeweth
my face as in summer-time.” Then spake Isis, “Tell me thy name, divine
Father, for the man shall live who is called by his name.” Then answered
Ra, “I created the heavens and the earth, I ordered the mountains, I
made the great and wide sea, I stretched out the two horizons like a
curtain. I am he who openeth his eyes and it is light, and who shutteth
them and it is dark. At his command the Nile riseth, but the gods know
not his name. I am Khepera in the morning, I am Ra at noon, I am Tum at
eve.” But the poison was not taken away from him; it pierced deeper, and
the great god could no longer walk. Then said Isis to him, “That was not
thy name that thou spakest unto me. Oh tell it me, that the poison may
depart; for he shall live whose name is named.” Now the poison burned
like fire, it was hotter than the flame of fire. The god said, “I
consent that Isis shall search into me, and that my name shall pass from
my breast into hers.” Then the god hid himself from the gods, and his
place in the ship of eternity was empty. Thus was the name of the great
god taken from him, and Isis, the witch, spake, “Flow away, poison,
depart from Ra. It is I, even I, who overcome the poison and cast it to
the earth; for the name of the great god hath been taken away from him.
Let Ra live and let the poison die.” Thus spake great Isis, the queen of
the gods, she who knows Ra and his true name.   1

  From this story it appears that the real name of the god, with which
his power was inextricably bound up, was supposed to be lodged, in an
almost physical sense, somewhere in his breast, from which Isis
extracted it by a sort of surgical operation and transferred it with all
its supernatural powers to herself. In Egypt attempts like that of Isis
to appropriate the power of a high god by possessing herself of his name
were not mere legends told of the mythical beings of a remote past;
every Egyptian magician aspired to wield like powers by similar means.
For it was believed that he who possessed the true name possessed the
very being of god or man, and could force even a deity to obey him as a
slave obeys his master. Thus the art of the magician consisted in
obtaining from the gods a revelation of their sacred names, and he left
no stone unturned to accomplish his end. When once a god in a moment of
weakness or forgetfulness had imparted to the wizard the wondrous lore,
the deity had no choice but to submit humbly to the man or pay the
penalty of his contumacy.   2

  The belief in the magic virtue of divine names was shared by the
Romans. When they sat down before a city, the priests addressed the
guardian deity of the place in a set form of prayer or incantation,
inviting him to abandon the beleaguered city and come over to the
Romans, who would treat him as well as or better than he had ever been
treated in his old home. Hence the name of the guardian deity of Rome
was kept a profound secret, lest the enemies of the republic might lure
him away, even as the Romans themselves had induced many gods to desert,
like rats, the falling fortunes of cities that had sheltered them in
happier days. Nay, the real name, not merely of its guardian deity, but
of the city itself, was wrapt in mystery and might never be uttered, not
even in the sacred rites. A certain Valerius Soranus, who dared to
divulge the priceless secret, was put to death or came to a bad end. In
like manner, it seems, the ancient Assyrians were forbidden to mention
the mystic names of their cities; and down to modern times the Cheremiss
of the Caucasus keep the names of their communal villages secret from
motives of superstition.   3

  If the reader has had the patience to follow this examination of the
superstitions attaching to personal names, he will probably agree that
the mystery in which the names of royal personages are so often shrouded
is no isolated phenomenon, no arbitrary expression of courtly servility
and adulation, but merely the particular application of a general law of
primitive thought, which includes within its scope common folk and gods
as well as kings and priests.   4
