[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gb02203)  [Next](gb02205) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter 22. Tabooed Words.

## Section 4. Names of Kings and other Sacred Persons tabooed.

WHEN we see that in primitive society the names of mere commoners,
whether alive or dead, are matters of such anxious care, we need not be
surprised that great precautions should be taken to guard from harm the
names of sacred kings and priests. Thus the name of the king of Dahomey
is always kept secret, lest the knowledge of it should enable some
evil-minded person to do him a mischief. The appellations by which the
different kings of Dahomey have been known to Europeans are not their
true names, but mere titles, or what the natives call “strong names.”
The natives seem to think that no harm comes of such titles being known,
since they are not, like the birth-names, vitally connected with their
owners. In the Galla kingdom of Ghera the birth-name of the sovereign
may not be pronounced by a subject under pain of death, and common words
which resemble it in sound are changed for others. Among the Bahima of
Central Africa, when the king dies, his name is abolished from the
language, and if his name was that of an animal, a new appellation must
be found for the creature at once. For example, the king is often called
a lion; hence at the death of a king named Lion a new name for lions in
general has to be coined. In Siam it used to be difficult to ascertain
the king’s real name, since it was carefully kept secret from fear of
sorcery; any one who mentioned it was clapped into gaol. The king might
only be referred to under certain high-sounding titles, such as “the
august,” “the perfect,” “the supreme,” “the great emperor,” “descendant
of the angels,” and so on. In Burma it was accounted an impiety of the
deepest dye to mention the name of the reigning sovereign; Burmese
subjects, even when they were far from their country, could not be
prevailed upon to do so; after his accession to the throne the king was
known by his royal titles only.   1

  Among the Zulus no man will mention the name of the chief of his tribe
or the names of the progenitors of the chief, so far as he can remember
them; nor will he utter common words which coincide with or merely
resemble in sound tabooed names. In the tribe of the Dwandwes there was
a chief called Langa, which means the sun; hence the name of the sun was
changed from langa to gala, and so remains to this day, though Langa
died more than a hundred years ago. Again, in the Xnumayo tribe the word
meaning “to herd cattle” was changed from alusa or ayusa to kagesa,
because u-Mayusi was the name of the chief. Besides these taboos, which
were observed by each tribe separately, all the Zulu tribes united in
tabooing the name of the king who reigned over the whole nation. Hence,
for example, when Panda was king of Zululand, the word for “a root of a
tree,” which is impando, was changed to nxabo. Again, the word for
“lies” or “slander” was altered from amacebo to amakwata, because
amacebo contains a syllable of the name of the famous King Cetchwayo.
These substitutions are not, however, carried so far by the men as by
the women, who omit every sound even remotely resembling one that occurs
in a tabooed name. At the king’s kraal, indeed, it is sometimes
difficult to understand the speech of the royal wives, as they treat in
this fashion the names not only of the king and his forefathers, but
even of his and their brothers back for generations. When to these
tribal and national taboos we add those family taboos on the names of
connexions by marriage which have been already described, we can easily
understand how it comes about that in Zululand every tribe has words
peculiar to itself, and that the women have a considerable vocabulary of
their own. Members, too, of one family may be debarred from using words
employed by those of another. The women of one kraal, for instance, may
call a hyaena by its ordinary name; those of the next may use the common
substitute; while in a third the substitute may also be unlawful and
another term may have to be invented to supply its place. Hence the Zulu
language at the present day almost presents the appearance of being a
double one; indeed, for multitudes of things it possesses three or four
synonyms, which through the blending of tribes are known all over
Zululand.   2

  In Madagascar a similar custom everywhere prevails and has resulted,
as among the Zulus, in producing certain dialectic differences in the
speech of the various tribes. There are no family names in Madagascar,
and almost every personal name is drawn from the language of daily life
and signifies some common object or action or quality, such as a bird, a
beast, a tree, a plant, a colour, and so on. Now, whenever one of these
common words forms the name or part of the name of the chief of the
tribe, it becomes sacred and may no longer be used in its ordinary
signification as the name of a tree, an insect, or what not. Hence a new
name for the object must be invented to replace the one which has been
discarded. It is easy to conceive what confusion and uncertainty may
thus be introduced into a language when it is spoken by many little
local tribes each ruled by a petty chief with his own sacred name. Yet
there are tribes and people who submit to this tyranny of words as their
fathers did before them from time immemorial. The inconvenient results
of the custom are especially marked on the western coast of the island,
where, on account of the large number of independent chieftains, the
names of things, places, and rivers have suffered so many changes that
confusion often arises, for when once common words have been banned by
the chiefs the natives will not acknowledge to have ever known them in
their old sense.   3

  But it is not merely the names of living kings and chiefs which are
tabooed in Madagascar; the names of dead sovereigns are equally under a
ban, at least in some parts of the island. Thus among the Sakalavas,
when a king has died, the nobles and people meet in council round the
dead body and solemnly choose a new name by which the deceased monarch
shall be henceforth known. After the new name has been adopted, the old
name by which the king was known during his life becomes sacred and may
not be pronounced under pain of death. Further, words in the common
language which bear any resemblance to the forbidden name also become
sacred and have to be replaced by others. Persons who uttered these
forbidden words were looked on not only as grossly rude, but even as
felons; they had committed a capital crime. However, these changes of
vocabulary are confined to the district over which the deceased king
reigned; in the neighbouring districts the old words continue to be
employed in the old sense.   4

  The sanctity attributed to the persons of chiefs in Polynesia
naturally extended also to their names, which on the primitive view are
hardly separable from the personality of their owners. Hence in
Polynesia we find the same systematic prohibition to utter the names of
chiefs or of common words resembling them which we have already met with
in Zululand and Madagascar. Thus in New Zealand the name of a chief is
held so sacred that, when it happens to be a common word, it may not be
used in the language, and another has to be found to replace it. For
example, a chief of the southward of East Cape bore the name of Maripi,
which signified a knife, hence a new word (nekra) for knife was
introduced, and the old one became obsolete. Elsewhere the word for
water (wai) had to be changed, because it chanced to be the name of the
chief, and would have been desecrated by being applied to the vulgar
fluid as well as to his sacred person. This taboo naturally produced a
plentiful crop of synonyms in the Maori language, and travellers newly
arrived in the country were sometimes puzzled at finding the same things
called by quite different names in neighbouring tribes. When a king
comes to the throne in Tahiti, any words in the language that resemble
his name in sound must be changed for others. In former times, if any
man were so rash as to disregard this custom and to use the forbidden
words, not only he but all his relations were immediately put to death.
But the changes thus introduced were only temporary; on the death of the
king the new words fell into disuse, and the original ones were
revived.   5

  In ancient Greece the names of the priests and other high officials
who had to do with the performance of the Eleusinian mysteries might not
be uttered in their lifetime. To pronounce them was a legal offence The
pedant in Lucian tells how he fell in with these august personages
haling along to the police court a ribald fellow who had dared to name
them, though well he knew that ever since their consecration it was
unlawful to do so, because they had become anonymous, having lost their
old names and acquired new and sacred titles. From two inscriptions
found at Eleusis it appears that the names of the priests were committed
to the depths of the sea; probably they were engraved on tablets of
bronze or lead, which were then thrown into deep water in the Gulf of
Salamis. The intention doubtless was to keep the names a profound
secret; and how could that be done more surely than by sinking them in
the sea? what human vision could spy them glimmering far down in the dim
depths of the green water? A clearer illustration of the confusion
between the incorporeal and the corporeal, between the name and its
material embodiment, could hardly be found than in this practice of
civilised Greece.   6
