[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gb02807)  [Next](gb02809) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter 28. The Killing of the Tree-Spirit.

## Section 8. Analogous Rites in India.

IN THE KANAGRA district of India there is a custom observed by young
girls in spring which closely resembles some of the European spring
ceremonies just described. It is called the Ralî Ka melâ, or fair of
Ralî, the Ralî being a small painted earthen image of Siva or Pârvatî.
The custom is in vogue all over the Kanagra district, and its
celebration, which is entirely confined to young girls, lasts through
most of Chet (March-April) up to the Sankrânt of Baisâkh (April). On a
morning in March all the young girls of the village take small baskets
of dûb grass and flowers to an appointed place, where they throw them in
a heap. Round this heap they stand in a circle and sing. This goes on
every day for ten days, till the heap of grass and flowers has reached a
fair height. Then they cut in the jungle two branches, each with three
prongs at one end, and place them, prongs downwards, over the heap of
flowers, so as to make two tripods or pyramids. On the single uppermost
points of these branches they get an image-maker to construct two clay
images, one to represent Siva, and the other Pârvatî. The girls then
divide themselves into two parties, one for Siva and one for Pârvatî,
and marry the images in the usual way, leaving out no part of the
ceremony. After the marriage they have a feast, the cost of which is
defrayed by contributions solicited from their parents. Then at the next
Sankrânt (Baisâkh) they all go together to the river-side, throw the
images into a deep pool, and weep over the place, as though they were
performing funeral obsequies. The boys of the neighbourhood often tease
them by diving after the images, bringing them up, and waving them about
while the girls are crying over them. The object of the fair is said to
be to secure a good husband.   1

  That in this Indian ceremony the deities Siva and Pârvatî are
conceived as spirits of vegetation seems to be proved by the placing of
their images on branches over a heap of grass and flowers. Here, as
often in European folk-custom, the divinities of vegetation are
represented in duplicate, by plants and by puppets. The marriage of
these Indian deities in spring corresponds to the European ceremonies in
which the marriage of the vernal spirits of vegetation is represented by
the King and Queen of May, the May Bride, Bridegroom of the May, and so
forth. The throwing of the images into the water, and the mourning for
them, are the equivalents of the European customs of throwing the dead
spirit of vegetation under the name of Death, Yarilo, Kostroma, and the
rest, into the water and lamenting over it. Again, in India, as often in
Europe, the rite is performed exclusively by females. The notion that
the ceremony helps to procure husbands for the girls can be explained by
the quickening and fertilising influence which the spirit of vegetation
is believed to exert upon the life of man as well as of plants.   2
