[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gb02005)  [Next](gb02101) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter 20. Tabooed Persons.

## Section 6. Hunters and Fishers tabooed.

IN SAVAGE society the hunter and the fisherman have often to observe
rules of abstinence and to submit to ceremonies of purification of the
same sort as those which are obligatory on the warrior and the
manslayer; and though we cannot in all cases perceive the exact purpose
which these rules and ceremonies are supposed to serve, we may with some
probability assume that, just as the dread of the spirits of his enemies
is the main motive for the seclusion and purification of the warrior who
hopes to take or has already taken their lives, so the huntsman or
fisherman who complies with similar customs is principally actuated by a
fear of the spirits of the beasts, birds, or fish which he has killed or
intends to kill. For the savage commonly conceives animals to be endowed
with souls and intelligences like his own, and hence he naturally treats
them with similar respect. Just as he attempts to appease the ghosts of
the men he has slain, so he essays to propitiate the spirits of the
animals he has killed. These ceremonies of propitiation will be
described later on in this work; here we have to deal, first, with the
taboos observed by the hunter and the fisherman before or during the
hunting and fishing seasons, and, second, with the ceremonies of
purification which have to be practised by these men on returning with
their booty from a successful chase.   1

  While the savage respects, more or less, the souls of all animals, he
treats with particular deference the spirits of such as are either
especially useful to him or formidable on account of their size,
strength, or ferocity. Accordingly the hunting and killing of these
valuable or dangerous beasts are subject to more elaborate rules and
ceremonies than the slaughter of comparatively useless and insignificant
creatures. Thus the Indians of Nootka Sound prepared themselves for
catching whales by observing a fast for a week, during which they ate
very little, bathed in the water several times a day, sang, and rubbed
their bodies, limbs, and faces with shells and bushes till they looked
as if they had been severely torn with briars. They were likewise
required to abstain from any commerce with their women for the like
period, this last condition being considered indispensable to their
success. A chief who failed to catch a whale has been known to attribute
his failure to a breach of chastity on the part of his men. It should be
remarked that the conduct thus prescribed as a preparation for whaling
is precisely that which in the same tribe of Indians was required of men
about to go on the war-path. Rules of the same sort are, or were
formerly, observed by Malagasy whalers. For eight days before they went
to sea the crew of a whaler used to fast, abstaining from women and
liquor, and confessing their most secret faults to each other; and if
any man was found to have sinned deeply, he was forbidden to share in
the expedition. In the island of Mabuiag continence was imposed on the
people both before they went to hunt the dugong and while the turtles
were pairing. The turtle-season lasts during parts of October and
November; and if at that time unmarried persons had sexual intercourse
with each other, it was believed that when the canoe approached the
floating turtle, the male would separate from the female and both would
dive down in different directions. So at Mowat in New Guinea men have no
relation with women when the turtles are coupling, though there is
considerable laxity of morals at other times. In the island of Uap, one
of the Caroline group, every fisherman plying his craft lies under a
most strict taboo during the whole of the fishing season, which lasts
for six or eight weeks. Whenever he is on shore he must spend all his
time in the men’s clubhouse, and under no pretext whatever may he visit
his own house or so much as look upon the faces of his wife and
womenkind. Were he but to steal a glance at them, they think that flying
fish must inevitably bore out his eyes at night. If his wife, mother, or
daughter brings any gift for him or wishes to talk with him, she must
stand down towards the shore with her back turned to the men’s
clubhouse. Then the fisherman may go out and speak to her, or with his
back turned to her he may receive what she has brought him; after which
he must return at once to his rigorous confinement. Indeed the fishermen
may not even join in dance and song with the other men of the clubhouse
in the evening; they must keep to themselves and be silent. In Mirzapur,
when the seed of the silkworm is brought into the house, the Kol or
Bhuiyar puts it in a place which has been carefully plastered with holy
cowdung to bring good luck. From that time the owner must be careful to
avoid ceremonial impurity. He must give up cohabitation with his wife;
he may not sleep on a bed, nor shave himself, nor cut his nails, nor
anoint himself with oil, nor eat food cooked with butter, nor tell lies,
nor do anything else that he deems wrong. He vows to Singarmati Devi
that, if the worms are duly born, he will make her an offering. When the
cocoons open and the worms appear, he assembles the women of the house
and they sing the same song as at the birth of a baby, and red lead is
smeared on the parting of the hair of all the married women of the
neighbourhood. When the worms pair, rejoicings are made as at a
marriage. Thus the silkworms are treated as far as possible like human
beings. Hence the custom which prohibits the commerce of the sexes while
the worms are hatching may be only an extension, by analogy, of the rule
which is observed by many races, that the husband may not cohabit with
his wife during pregnancy and lactation.   2

  In the island of Nias the hunters sometimes dig pits, cover them
lightly over with twigs, grass, and leaves, and then drive the game into
them. While they are engaged in digging the pits, they have to observe a
number of taboos. They may not spit, or the game would turn back in
disgust from the pits. They may not laugh, or the sides of the pit would
fall in. They may eat no salt, prepare no fodder for swine, and in the
pit they may not scratch themselves, for if they did, the earth would be
loosened and would collapse. And the night after digging the pit they
may have no intercourse with a woman, or all their labour would be in
vain.   3

  This practice of observing strict chastity as a condition of success
in hunting and fishing is very common among rude races; and the
instances of it which have been cited render it probable that the rule
is always based on a superstition rather than on a consideration of the
temporary weakness which a breach of the custom may entail on the hunter
or fisherman. In general it appears to be supposed that the evil effect
of incontinence is not so much that it weakens him, as that, for some
reason or other, it offends the animals, who in consequence will not
suffer themselves to be caught. A Carrier Indian of British Columbia
used to separate from his wife for a full month before he set traps for
bears, and during this time he might not drink from the same vessel as
his wife, but had to use a special cup made of birch bark. The neglect
of these precautions would cause the game to escape after it had been
snared. But when he was about to snare martens, the period of continence
was cut down to ten days.   4

  An examination of all the many cases in which the savage bridles his
passions and remains chaste from motives of superstition, would be
instructive, but I cannot attempt it now. I will only add a few
miscellaneous examples of the custom before passing to the ceremonies of
purification which are observed by the hunter and fisherman after the
chase and the fishing are over. The workers in the salt-pans near
Siphoum, in Laos, must abstain from all sexual relations at the place
where they are at work; and they may not cover their heads nor shelter
themselves under an umbrella from the burning rays of the sun. Among the
Kachins of Burma the ferment used in making beer is prepared by two
women, chosen by lot, who during the three days that the process lasts
may eat nothing acid and may have no conjugal relations with their
husbands; otherwise it is supposed that the beer would be sour. Among
the Masai honey-wine is brewed by a man and a woman who live in a hut
set apart for them till the wine is ready for drinking. But they are
strictly forbidden to have sexual intercourse with each other during
this time; it is deemed essential that they should be chaste for two
days before they begin to brew and for the whole of the six days that
the brewing lasts. The Masai believe that were the couple to commit a
breach of chastity, not only would the wine be undrinkable but the bees
which made the honey would fly away. Similarly they require that a man
who is making poison should sleep alone and observe other taboos which
render him almost an outcast. The Wandorobbo, a tribe of the same region
as the Masai, believe that the mere presence of a woman in the
neighbourhood of a man who is brewing poison would deprive the poison of
its venom, and that the same thing would happen if the wife of the
poison-maker were to commit adultery while her husband was brewing the
poison. In this last case it is obvious that a rationalistic explanation
of the taboo is impossible. How could the loss of virtue in the poison
be a physical consequence of the loss of virtue in the poison-maker’s
wife? Clearly the effect which the wife’s adultery is supposed to have
on the poison is a case of sympathetic magic; her misconduct
sympathetically affects her husband and his work at a distance. We may,
accordingly, infer with some confidence that the rule of continence
imposed on the poison-maker himself is also a simple case of sympathetic
magic, and not, as a civilised reader might be disposed to conjecture, a
wise precaution designed to prevent him from accidentally poisoning his
wife.   5

  Among the Ba-Pedi and Ba-Thonga tribes of South Africa, when the site
of a new village has been chosen and the houses are building, all the
married people are forbidden to have conjugal relations with each other.
If it were discovered that any couple had broken this rule, the work of
building would immediately be stopped, and another site chosen for the
village. For they think that a breach of chastity would spoil the
village which was growing up, that the chief would grow lean and perhaps
die, and that the guilty woman would never bear another child. Among the
Chams of Cochin-China, when a dam is made or repaired on a river for the
sake of irrigation, the chief who offers the traditional sacrifices and
implores the protection of the deities on the work has to stay all the
time in a wretched hovel of straw, taking no part in the labour, and
observing the strictest continence; for the people believe that a breach
of his chastity would entail a breach of the dam. Here, it is plain,
there can be no idea of maintaining the mere bodily vigour of the chief
for the accomplishment of a task in which he does not even bear a
hand.   6

  If the taboos or abstinences observed by hunters and fishermen before
and during the chase are dictated, as we have seen reason to believe, by
superstitious motives, and chiefly by a dread of offending or
frightening the spirits of the creatures whom it is proposed to kill, we
may expect that the restraints imposed after the slaughter has been
perpetrated will be at least as stringent, the slayer and his friends
having now the added fear of the angry ghosts of his victims before
their eyes. Whereas on the hypothesis that the abstinences in question,
including those from food, drink, and sleep, are merely salutary
precautions for maintaining the men in health and strength to do their
work, it is obvious that the observance of these abstinences or taboos
after the work is done, that is, when the game is killed and the fish
caught, must be wholly superfluous, absurd, and inexplicable. But as I
shall now show, these taboos often continue to be enforced or even
increased in stringency after the death of the animals, in other words,
after the hunter or fisher has accomplished his object by making his bag
or landing his fish. The rationalistic theory of them therefore breaks
down entirely; the hypothesis of superstition is clearly the only one
open to us.   7

  Among the Inuit or Esquimaux of Bering Strait “the dead bodies of
various animals must be treated very carefully by the hunter who obtains
them, so that their shades may not be offended and bring bad luck or
even death upon him or his people.” Hence the Unalit hunter who has had
a hand in the killing of a white whale, or even has helped to take one
from the net, is not allowed to do any work for the next four days, that
being the time during which the shade or ghost of the whale is supposed
to stay with its body. At the same time no one in the village may use
any sharp or pointed instrument for fear of wounding the whale’s shade,
which is believed to be hovering invisible in the neighbourhood; and no
loud noise may be made lest it should frighten or offend the ghost.
Whoever cuts a whale’s body with an iron axe will die. Indeed the use of
all iron instruments is forbidden in the village during these four
days.   8

  These same Esquimaux celebrate a great annual festival in December
when the bladders of all the seals, whales, walrus, and white bears that
have been killed in the year are taken into the assembly-house of the
village. They remain there for several days, and so long as they do so
the hunters avoid all intercourse with women, saying that if they failed
in that respect the shades of the dead animals would be offended.
Similarly among the Aleuts of Alaska the hunter who had struck a whale
with a charmed spear would not throw again, but returned at once to his
home and separated himself from his people in a hut specially
constructed for the purpose, where he stayed for three days without food
or drink, and without touching or looking upon a woman. During this time
of seclusion he snorted occasionally in imitation of the wounded and
dying whale, in order to prevent the whale which he had struck from
leaving the coast. On the fourth day he emerged from his seclusion and
bathed in the sea, shrieking in a hoarse voice and beating the water
with his hands. Then, taking with him a companion, he repaired to that
part of the shore where he expected to find the whale stranded. If the
beast was dead, he at once cut out the place where the death-wound had
been inflicted. If the whale was not dead, he again returned to his home
and continued washing himself until the whale died. Here the hunter’s
imitation of the wounded whale is probably intended by means of
homoeopathic magic to make the beast die in earnest. Once more the soul
of the grim polar bear is offended if the taboos which concern him are
not observed. His soul tarries for three days near the spot where it
left his body, and during these days the Esquimaux are particularly
careful to conform rigidly to the laws of taboo, because they believe
that punishment overtakes the transgressor who sins against the soul of
a bear far more speedily than him who sins against the souls of the
sea-beasts.   9

  When the Kayans have shot one of the dreaded Bornean panthers, they
are very anxious about the safety of their souls, for they think that
the soul of a panther is almost more powerful than their own. Hence they
step eight times over the carcase of the dead beast reciting the spell,
“Panther, thy soul under my soul.” On returning home they smear
themselves, their dogs, and their weapons with the blood of fowls in
order to calm their souls and hinder them from fleeing away; for, being
themselves fond of the flesh of fowls, they ascribe the same taste to
their souls. For eight days afterwards they must bathe by day and by
night before going out again to the chase. Among the Hottentots, when a
man has killed a lion, leopard, elephant, or rhinoceros, he is esteemed
a great hero, but he has to remain at home quite idle for three days,
during which his wife may not come near him; she is also enjoined to
restrict herself to a poor diet and to eat no more than is barely
necessary to keep her in health. Similarly the Lapps deem it the height
of glory to kill a bear, which they consider the king of beasts.
Nevertheless, all the men who take part in the slaughter are regarded as
unclean, and must live by themselves for three days in a hut or tent
made specially for them, where they cut up and cook the bear’s carcase.
The reindeer which brought in the carcase on a sledge may not be driven
by a woman for a whole year; indeed, according to one account, it may
not be used by anybody for that period. Before the men go into the tent
where they are to be secluded, they strip themselves of the garments
they had worn in killing the bear, and their wives spit the red juice of
alder bark in their faces. They enter the tent not by the ordinary door
but by an opening at the back. When the bear’s flesh has been cooked, a
portion of it is sent by the hands of two men to the women, who may not
approach the men’s tent while the cooking is going on. The men who
convey the flesh to the women pretend to be strangers bringing presents
from a foreign land; the women keep up the pretence and promise to tie
red threads round the legs of the strangers. The bear’s flesh may not be
passed in to the women through the door of their tent, but must be
thrust in at a special opening made by lifting up the hem of the
tent-cover. When the three days’ seclusion is over and the men are at
liberty to return to their wives, they run, one after the other, round
the fire, holding the chain by which pots are suspended over it. This is
regarded as a form of purification; they may now leave the tent by the
ordinary door and rejoin the women. But the leader of the party must
still abstain from cohabitation with his wife for two days more.   10

  Again, the Caffres are said to dread greatly the boa-constrictor or an
enormous serpent resembling it; “and being influenced by certain
superstitious notions they even fear to kill it. The man who happened to
put it to death, whether in self-defence or otherwise, was formerly
required to lie in a running stream of water during the day for several
weeks together; and no beast whatever was allowed to be slaughtered at
the hamlet to which he belonged, until this duty had been fully
performed. The body of the snake was then taken and carefully buried in
a trench, dug close to the cattle-fold, where its remains, like those of
a chief, were henceforward kept perfectly undisturbed. The period of
penance, as in the case of mourning for the dead, is now happily reduced
to a few days.” In Madras it is considered a great sin to kill a cobra.
When this has happened, the people generally burn the body of the
serpent, just as they burn the bodies of human beings. The murderer
deems himself polluted for three days. On the second day milk is poured
on the remains of the cobra. On the third day the guilty wretch is free
from pollution.   11

  In these last cases the animal whose slaughter has to be atoned for is
sacred, that is, it is one whose life is commonly spared from motives of
superstition. Yet the treatment of the sacrilegious slayer seems to
resemble so closely the treatment of hunters and fishermen who have
killed animals for food in the ordinary course of business, that the
ideas on which both sets of customs are based may be assumed to be
substantially the same. Those ideas, if I am right, are the respect
which the savage feels for the souls of beasts, especially valuable or
formidable beasts, and the dread which he entertains of their vengeful
ghosts. Some confirmation of this view may be drawn from the ceremonies
observed by fishermen of Annam when the carcase of a whale is washed
ashore. These fisherfolk, we are told, worship the whale on account of
the benefits they derive from it. There is hardly a village on the
sea-shore which has not its small pagoda, containing the bones, more or
less authentic, of a whale. When a dead whale is washed ashore, the
people accord it a solemn burial. The man who first caught sight of it
acts as chief mourner, performing the rites which as chief mourner and
heir he would perform for a human kinsman. He puts on all the garb of
woe, the straw hat, the white robe with long sleeves turned inside out,
and the other paraphernalia of full mourning. As next of kin to the
deceased he presides over the funeral rites. Perfumes are burned, sticks
of incense kindled, leaves of gold and silver scattered, crackers let
off. When the flesh has been cut off and the oil extracted, the remains
of the carcase are buried in the sand. After wards a shed is set up and
offerings are made in it. Usually some time after the burial the spirit
of the dead whale takes possession of some person in the village and
declares by his mouth whether he is a male or a female.   12
