[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gb02801)  [Next](gb02803) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter 28. The Killing of the Tree-Spirit.

## Section 2. Burying the Carnival.

THUS far I have offered an explanation of the rule which required that
the priest of Nemi should be slain by his successor. The explanation
claims to be no more than probable; our scanty knowledge of the custom
and of its history forbids it to be more. But its probability will be
augmented in proportion to the extent to which the motives and modes of
thought which it assumes can be proved to have operated in primitive
society. Hitherto the god with whose death and resurrection we have been
chiefly concerned has been the tree-god. But if I can show that the
custom of killing the god and the belief in his resurrection originated,
or at least existed, in the hunting and pastoral stage of society, when
the slain god was an animal, and that it survived into the agricultural
stage, when the slain god was the corn or a human being representing the
corn, the probability of my explanation will have been considerably
increased. This I shall attempt to do in the sequel, and in the course
of the discussion I hope to clear up some obscurities which still
remain, and to answer some objections which may have suggested
themselves to the reader.   1

  We start from the point at which we left off—the spring customs of
European peasantry. Besides the ceremonies already described there are
two kindred sets of observances in which the simulated death of a divine
or supernatural being is a conspicuous feature. In one of them the being
whose death is dramatically represented is a personification of the
Carnival; in the other it is Death himself. The former ceremony falls
naturally at the end of the Carnival, either on the last day of that
merry season, namely Shrove Tuesday, or on the first day of Lent, namely
Ash Wednesday. The date of the other ceremony—the Carrying or Driving
out of Death, as it is commonly called—is not so uniformly fixed.
Generally it is the fourth Sunday in Lent, which hence goes by the name
of Dead Sunday; but in some places the celebration falls a week earlier,
in others, as among the Czechs of Bohemia, a week later, while in
certain German villages of Moravia it is held on the first Sunday after
Easter. Perhaps, as has been suggested, the date may originally have
been variable, depending on the appearance of the first swallow or some
other herald of the spring. Some writers regard the ceremony as Slavonic
in its origin. Grimm thought it was a festival of the New Year with the
old Slavs, who began their year in March. We shall first take examples,
of the mimic death of the Carnival, which always falls before the other
in the calendar.   2

  At Frosinone, in Latium, about half-way between Rome and Naples, the
dull monotony of life in a provincial Italian town is agreeably broken
on the last day of the Carnival by the ancient festival known as the
Radica. About four o’clock in the afternoon the town band, playing
lively tunes and followed by a great crowd, proceeds to the Piazza del
Plebiscito, where is the Sub-Prefecture as well as the rest of the
Government buildings. Here, in the middle of the square, the eyes of the
expectant multitude are greeted by the sight of an immense car decked
with many-coloured festoons and drawn by four horses. Mounted on the car
is a huge chair, on which sits enthroned the majestic figure of the
Carnival, a man of stucco about nine feet high with a rubicund and
smiling countenance. Enormous boots, a tin helmet like those which grace
the heads of officers of the Italian marine, and a coat of many colours
embellished with strange devices, adorn the outward man of this stately
personage. His left hand rests on the arm of the chair, while with his
right he gracefully salutes the crowd, being moved to this act of
civility by a string which is pulled by a man who modestly shrinks from
publicity under the mercy-seat. And now the crowd, surging excitedly
round the car, gives vent to its feelings in wild cries of joy, gentle
and simple being mixed up together and all dancing furiously the
Saltarello. A special feature of the festival is that every one must
carry in his hand what is called a radica ( “root”), by which is meant a
huge leaf of the aloe or rather the agave. Any one who ventured into the
crowd without such a leaf would be unceremoniously hustled out of it,
unless indeed he bore as a substitute a large cabbage at the end of a
long stick or a bunch of grass curiously plaited. When the multitude,
after a short turn, has escorted the slow-moving car to the gate of the
Sub-Prefecture, they halt, and the car, jolting over the uneven ground,
rumbles into the courtyard. A hush now falls on the crowd, their subdued
voices sounding, according to the description of one who has heard them,
like the murmur of a troubled sea. All eyes are turned anxiously to the
door from which the Sub-Prefect himself and the other representatives of
the majesty of the law are expected to issue and pay their homage to the
hero of the hour. A few moments of suspense and then a storm of cheers
and hand-clapping salutes the appearance of the dignitaries, as they
file out and, descending the staircase, take their place in the
procession. The hymn of the Carnival is now thundered out, after which,
amid a deafening roar, aloe leaves and cabbages are whirled aloft and
descend impartially on the heads of the just and the unjust, who lend
fresh zest to the proceedings by engaging in a free fight. When these
preliminaries have been concluded to the satisfaction of all concerned,
the procession gets under weigh. The rear is brought up by a cart laden
with barrels of wine and policemen, the latter engaged in the congenial
task of serving out wine to all who ask for it, while a most internecine
struggle, accompanied by a copious discharge of yells, blows, and
blasphemy, goes on among the surging crowd at the cart’s tail in their
anxiety not to miss the glorious opportunity of intoxicating themselves
at the public expense. Finally, after the procession has paraded the
principal streets in this majestic manner, the effigy of Carnival is
taken to the middle of a public square, stripped of his finery, laid on
a pile of wood, and burnt amid the cries of the multitude, who
thundering out once more the song of the Carnival fling their so-called
“roots” on the pyre and give themselves up without restraint to the
pleasures of the dance.   3

  In the Abruzzi a pasteboard figure of the Carnival is carried by four
grave-diggers with pipes in their mouths and bottles of wine slung at
their shoulder-belts. In front walks the wife of the Carnival, dressed
in mourning and dissolved in tears. From time to time the company halts,
and while the wife addresses the sympathising public, the grave-diggers
refresh the inner man with a pull at the bottle. In the open square the
mimic corpse is laid on a pyre, and to the roll of drums, the shrill
screams of the women, and the gruffer cries of the men a light is set to
it. While the figure burns, chestnuts are thrown about among the crowd.
Sometimes the Carnival is represented by a straw-man at the top of a
pole which is borne through the town by a troop of mummers in the course
of the afternoon. When evening comes on, four of the mummers hold out a
quilt or sheet by the corners, and the figure of the Carnival is made to
tumble into it. The procession is then resumed, the performers weeping
crocodile tears and emphasising the poignancy of their grief by the help
of saucepans and dinner bells. Sometimes, again, in the Abruzzi the dead
Carnival is personified by a living man who lies in a coffin, attended
by another who acts the priest and dispenses holy water in great
profusion from a bathing tub.   4

  At Lerida, in Catalonia, the funeral of the Carnival was witnessed by
an English traveller in 1877. On the last Sunday of the Carnival a grand
procession of infantry, cavalry, and maskers of many sorts, some on
horseback and some in carriages, escorted the grand car of His Grace Pau
Pi, as the effigy was called, in triumph through the principal streets.
For three days the revelry ran high, and then at midnight on the last
day of the Carnival the same procession again wound through the streets,
but under a different aspect and for a different end. The triumphal car
was exchanged for a hearse, in which reposed the effigy of his dead
Grace: a troop of maskers, who in the first procession had played the
part of Students of Folly with many a merry quip and jest, now, robed as
priests and bishops, paced slowly along holding aloft huge lighted
tapers and singing a dirge. All the mummers wore crape, and all the
horsemen carried blazing flambeaux. Down the high street, between the
lofty, many-storeyed and balconied houses, where every window, every
balcony, every housetop was crammed with a dense mass of spectators, all
dressed and masked in fantastic gorgeousness, the procession took its
melancholy way. Over the scene flashed and played the shifting
cross-lights and shadows from the moving torches: red and blue Bengal
lights flared up and died out again; and above the trampling of the
horses and the measured tread of the marching multitude rose the voices
of the priests chanting the requiem, while the military bands struck in
with the solemn roll of the muffled drums. On reaching the principal
square the procession halted, a burlesque funeral oration was pronounced
over the defunct Pau Pi, and the lights were extinguished. Immediately
the devil and his angels darted from the crowd, seized the body and fled
away with it, hotly pursued by the whole multitude, yelling, screaming,
and cheering. Naturally the fiends were overtaken and dispersed; and the
sham corpse, rescued from their clutches, was laid in a grave that had
been made ready for its reception. Thus the Carnival of 1877 at Lerida
died and was buried.   5

  A ceremony of the same sort is observed in Provence on Ash Wednesday.
An effigy called Caramantran, whimsically attired, is drawn in a chariot
or borne on a litter, accompanied by the populace in grotesque costumes,
who carry gourds full of wine and drain them with all the marks, real or
affected, of intoxication. At the head of the procession are some men
disguised as judges and barristers, and a tall gaunt personage who
masquerades as Lent; behind them follow young people mounted on
miserable hacks and attired as mourners who pretend to bewail the fate
that is in store for Caramantran. In the principal square the procession
halts, the tribunal is constituted, and Caramantran placed at the bar.
After a formal trial he is sentenced to death amid the groans of the
mob: the barrister who defended him embraces his client for the last
time: the officers of justice do their duty: the condemned is set with
his back to a wall and hurried into eternity under a shower of stones.
The sea or a river receives his mangled remains. Throughout nearly the
whole of the Ardennes it was and still is customary on Ash Wednesday to
burn an effigy which is supposed to represent the Carnival, while
appropriate verses are sung round about the blazing figure. Very often
an attempt is made to fashion the effigy in the likeness of the husband
who is reputed to be least faithful to his wife of any in the village.
As might perhaps have been anticipated, the distinction of being
selected for portraiture under these painful circumstances has a slight
tendency to breed domestic jars, especially when the portrait is burnt
in front of the house of the gay deceiver whom it represents, while a
powerful chorus of caterwauls, groans, and other melodious sounds bears
public testimony to the opinion which his friends and neighbours
entertain of his private virtues. In some villages of the Ardennes a
young man of flesh and blood, dressed up in hay and straw, used to act
the part of Shrove Tuesday (Mardi Gras), as the personification of the
Carnival is often called in France after the last day of the period
which he personates. He was brought before a mock tribunal, and being
condemned to death was placed with his back to a wall, like a soldier at
a military execution, and fired at with blank cartridges. At
Vrigne-aux-Bois one of these harmless buffoons, named Thierry, was
accidentally killed by a wad that had been left in a musket of the
firing-party. When poor Shrove Tuesday dropped under the fire, the
applause was loud and long, he did it so naturally; but when he did not
get up again, they ran to him and found him a corpse. Since then there
have been no more of these mock executions in the Ardennes.   6

  In Normandy on the evening of Ash Wednesday it used to be the custom
to hold a celebration called the Burial of Shrove Tuesday. A squalid
effigy scantily clothed in rags, a battered old hat crushed down on his
dirty face, his great round paunch stuffed with straw, represented the
disreputable old rake who, after a long course of dissipation, was now
about to suffer for his sins. Hoisted on the shoulders of a sturdy
fellow, who pretended to stagger under the burden, this popular
personification of the Carnival promenaded the streets for the last time
in a manner the reverse of triumphal. Preceded by a drummer and
accompanied by a jeering rabble, among whom the urchins and all the
tag-rag and bobtail of the town mustered in great force, the figure was
carried about by the flickering light of torches to the discordant din
of shovels and tongs, pots and pans, horns and kettles, mingled with
hootings, groans, and hisses. From time to time the procession halted,
and a champion of morality accused the broken-down old sinner of all the
excesses he had committed and for which he was now about to be burned
alive. The culprit, having nothing to urge in his own defence, was
thrown on a heap of straw, a torch was put to it, and a great blaze shot
up, to the delight of the children who frisked round it screaming out
some old popular verses about the death of the Carnival. Sometimes the
effigy was rolled down the slope of a hill before being burnt. At
Saint-Lô the ragged effigy of Shrove Tuesday was followed by his widow,
a big burly lout dressed as a woman with a crape veil, who emitted
sounds of lamentation and woe in a stentorian voice. After being carried
about the streets on a litter attended by a crowd of maskers, the figure
was thrown into the River Vire. The final scene has been graphically
described by Madame Octave Feuillet as she witnessed it in her childhood
some sixty years ago. “My parents invited friends to see, from the top
of the tower of Jeanne Couillard, the funeral procession passing. It was
there that, quaffing lemonade—the only refreshment allowed because of
the fast—we witnessed at nightfall a spectacle of which I shall always
preserve a lively recollection. At our feet flowed the Vire under its
old stone bridge. On the middle of the bridge lay the figure of Shrove
Tuesday on a litter of leaves, surrounded by scores of maskers dancing,
singing, and carrying torches. Some of them in their motley costumes ran
along the parapet like fiends. The rest, worn out with their revels, sat
on the posts and dozed. Soon the dancing stopped, and some of the troop,
seizing a torch, set fire to the effigy, after which they flung it into
the river with redoubled shouts and clamour. The man of straw, soaked
with resin, floated away burning down the stream of the Vire, lighting
up with its funeral fires the woods on the bank and the battlements of
the old castle in which Louis XI. and Francis I. had slept. When the
last glimmer of the blazing phantom had vanished, like a falling star,
at the end of the valley, every one withdrew, crowd and maskers alike,
and we quitted the ramparts with our guests.”   7

  In the neighbourhood of Tübingen on Shrove Tuesday a straw-man, called
the Shrovetide Bear, is made up; he is dressed in a pair of old
trousers, and a fresh black-pudding or two squirts filled with blood are
inserted in his neck. After a formal condemnation he is beheaded, laid
in a coffin, and on Ash Wednesday is buried in the churchyard. This is
called “Burying the Carnival.” Amongst some of the Saxons of
Transylvania the Carnival is hanged. Thus at Braller on Ash Wednesday or
Shrove Tuesday two white and two chestnut horses draw a sledge on which
is placed a straw-man swathed in a white cloth; beside him is a
cart-wheel which is kept turning round. Two lads disguised as old men
follow the sledge lamenting. The rest of the village lads, mounted on
horseback and decked with ribbons, accompany the procession, which is
headed by two girls crowned with evergreen and drawn in a waggon or
sledge. A trial is held under a tree, at which lads disguised as
soldiers pronounce sentence of death. The two old men try to rescue the
straw-man and to fly with him, but to no purpose; he is caught by the
two girls and handed over to the executioner, who hangs him on a tree.
In vain the old men try to climb up the tree and take him down; they
always tumble down, and at last in despair they throw themselves on the
ground and weep and howl for the hanged man. An official then makes a
speech in which he declares that the Carnival was condemned to death
because he had done them harm, by wearing out their shoes and making
them tired and sleepy. At the “Burial of Carnival” in Lechrain, a man
dressed as a woman in black clothes is carried on a litter or bier by
four men; he is lamented over by men disguised as women in black
clothes, then thrown down before the village dung-heap, drenched with
water, buried in the dung-heap, and covered with straw. On the evening
of Shrove Tuesday the Esthonians make a straw figure called metsik or
“wood-spirit”; one year it is dressed with a man’s coat and hat, next
year with a hood and a petticoat. This figure is stuck on a long pole,
carried across the boundary of the village with loud cries of joy, and
fastened to the top of a tree in the wood. The ceremony is believed to
be a protection against all kinds of misfortune.   8

  Sometimes at these Shrovetide or Lenten ceremonies the resurrection of
the pretended dead person is enacted. Thus, in some parts of Swabia on
Shrove Tuesday Dr. Iron-Beard professes to bleed a sick man, who
thereupon falls as dead to the ground; but the doctor at last restores
him to life by blowing air into him through a tube. In the Harz
Mountains, when Carnival is over, a man is laid on a baking-trough and
carried with dirges to the grave; but in the grave a glass of brandy is
buried instead of the man. A speech is delivered and then the people
return to the village-green or meeting-place, where they smoke the long
clay pipes which are distributed at funerals. On the morning of Shrove
Tuesday in the following year the brandy is dug up and the festival
begins by every one tasting the spirit which, as the phrase goes, has
come to life again.   9
