[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gb02806)  [Next](gb02808) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter 28. The Killing of the Tree-Spirit.

## Section 7. Death and Revival of Vegetation.

THESE Russian customs are plainly of the same nature as those which in
Austria and Germany are known as “Carrying out Death.” Therefore if the
interpretation here adopted of the latter is right, the Russian
Kostrubonko, Yarilo, and the rest must also have been originally
embodiments of the spirit of vegetation, and their death must have been
regarded as a necessary preliminary to their revival. The revival as a
sequel to the death is enacted in the first of the ceremonies described,
the death and resurrection of Kostrubonko. The reason why in some of
these Russian ceremonies the death of the spirit of vegetation is
celebrated at midsummer may be that the decline of summer is dated from
Midsummer Day, after which the days begin to shorten, and the sun sets
out on his downward journey:

“To the darksome hollows

Where the frosts of winter lie.”

Such a turning-point of the year, when vegetation might be thought to
share the incipient though still almost imperceptible decay of summer,
might very well be chosen by primitive man as a fit moment for resorting
to those magic rites by which he hopes to stay the decline, or at least
to ensure the revival, of plant life.   1

  But while the death of vegetation appears to have been represented in
all, and its revival in some, of these spring and midsummer ceremonies,
there are features in some of them which can hardly be explained on this
hypothesis alone. The solemn funeral, the lamentations, and the mourning
attire, which often characterise these rites, are indeed appropriate at
the death of the beneficent spirit of vegetation. But what shall we say
of the glee with which the effigy is often carried out, of the sticks
and stones with which it is assailed, and the taunts and curses which
are hurled at it? What shall we say of the dread of the effigy evinced
by the haste with which the bearers scamper home as soon as they have
thrown it away, and by the belief that some one must soon die in any
house into which it has looked? This dread might perhaps be explained by
a belief that there is a certain infectiousness in the dead spirit of
vegetation which renders its approach dangerous. But this explanation,
besides being rather strained, does not cover the rejoicings which often
attend the carrying out of Death. We must therefore recognise two
distinct and seemingly opposite features in these ceremonies: on the one
hand, sorrow for the death, and affection and respect for the dead; on
the other hand, fear and hatred of the dead, and rejoicings at his
death. How the former of these features is to be explained I have
attempted to show: how the latter came to be so closely associated with
the former is a question which I shall try to answer in the sequel.   2
