[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gb03600)  [Next](gb03800) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter 37. Oriental Religions in the West.

THE WORSHIP of the Great Mother of the Gods and her lover or son was
very popular under the Roman Empire. Inscriptions prove that the two
received divine honours, separately or conjointly, not only in Italy,
and especially at Rome, but also in the provinces, particularly in
Africa, Spain, Portugal, France, Germany, and Bulgaria. Their worship
survived the establishment of Christianity by Constantine; for Symmachus
records the recurrence of the festival of the Great Mother, and in the
days of Augustine her effeminate priests still paraded the streets and
squares of Carthage with whitened faces, scented hair, and mincing gait,
while, like the mendicant friars of the Middle Ages, they begged alms
from the passers-by. In Greece, on the other hand, the bloody orgies of
the Asiatic goddess and her consort appear to have found little favour.
The barbarous and cruel character of the worship, with its frantic
excesses, was doubtless repugnant to the good taste and humanity of the
Greeks, who seem to have preferred the kindred but gentler rites of
Adonis. Yet the same features which shocked and repelled the Greeks may
have positively attracted the less refined Romans and barbarians of the
West. The ecstatic frenzies, which were mistaken for divine inspiration,
the mangling of the body, the theory of a new birth and the remission of
sins through the shedding of blood, have all their origin in savagery,
and they naturally appealed to peoples in whom the savage instincts were
still strong. Their true character was indeed often disguised under a
decent veil of allegorical or philosophical interpretation, which
probably sufficed to impose upon the rapt and enthusiastic worshippers,
reconciling even the more cultivated of them to things which otherwise
must have filled them with horror and disgust.   1

  The religion of the Great Mother, with its curious blending of crude
savagery with spiritual aspirations, was only one of a multitude of
similar Oriental faiths which in the later days of paganism spread over
the Roman Empire, and by saturating the European peoples with alien
ideals of life gradually undermined the whole fabric of ancient
civilisation. Greek and Roman society was built on the conception of the
subordination of the individual to the community, of the citizen to the
state; it set the safety of the commonwealth, as the supreme aim of
conduct, above the safety of the individual whether in this world or in
the world to come. Trained from infancy in this unselfish ideal, the
citizens devoted their lives to the public service and were ready to lay
them down for the common good; or if they shrank from the supreme
sacrifice, it never occurred to them that they acted otherwise than
basely in preferring their personal existence to the interests of their
country. All this was changed by the spread of Oriental religions which
inculcated the communion of the soul with God and its eternal salvation
as the only objects worth living for, objects in comparison with which
the prosperity and even the existence of the state sank into
insignificance. The inevitable result of this selfish and immoral
doctrine was to withdraw the devotee more and more from the public
service, to concentrate his thoughts on his own spiritual emotions, and
to breed in him a contempt for the present life which he regarded merely
as a probation for a better and an eternal. The saint and the recluse,
disdainful of earth and rapt in ecstatic contemplation of heaven, became
in popular opinion the highest ideal of humanity, displacing the old
ideal of the patriot and hero who, forgetful of self, lives and is ready
to die for the good of his country. The earthly city seemed poor and
contemptible to men whose eyes beheld the City of God coming in the
clouds of heaven. Thus the centre of gravity, so to say, was shifted
from the present to a future life, and however much the other world may
have gained, there can be little doubt that this one lost heavily by the
change. A general disintegration of the body politic set in. The ties of
the state and the family were loosened: the structure of society tended
to resolve itself into its individual elements and thereby to relapse
into barbarism; for civilisation is only possible through the active
co-operation of the citizens and their willingness to subordinate their
private interests to the common good. Men refused to defend their
country and even to continue their kind. In their anxiety to save their
own souls and the souls of others, they were content to leave the
material world, which they identified with the principle of evil, to
perish around them. This obsession lasted for a thousand years. The
revival of Roman law, of the Aristotelian philosophy, of ancient art and
literature at the close of the Middle Ages, marked the return of Europe
to native ideals of life and conduct, to saner, manlier views of the
world. The long halt in the march of civilisation was over. The tide of
Oriental invasion had turned at last. It is ebbing still.   2

  Among the gods of eastern origin who in the decline of the ancient
world competed against each other for the allegiance of the West was the
old Persian deity Mithra. The immense popularity of his worship is
attested by the monuments illustrative of it which have been found
scattered in profusion all over the Roman Empire. In respect both of
doctrines and of rites the cult of Mithra appears to have presented many
points of resemblance not only to the religion of the Mother of the Gods
but also to Christianity. The similarity struck the Christian doctors
themselves and was explained by them as a work of the devil, who sought
to seduce the souls of men from the true faith by a false and insidious
imitation of it. So to the Spanish conquerors of Mexico and Peru many of
the native heathen rites appeared to be diabolical counterfeits of the
Christian sacraments. With more probability the modern student of
comparative religion traces such resemblances to the similar and
independent workings of the mind of man in his sincere, if crude,
attempts to fathom the secret of the universe, and to adjust his little
life to its awful mysteries. However that may be, there can be no doubt
that the Mithraic religion proved a formidable rival to Christianity,
combining as it did a solemn ritual with aspirations after moral purity
and a hope of immortality. Indeed the issue of the conflict between the
two faiths appears for a time to have hung in the balance. An
instructive relic of the long struggle is preserved in our festival of
Christmas, which the Church seems to have borrowed directly from its
heathen rival. In the Julian calendar the twenty-fifth of December was
reckoned the winter solstice, and it was regarded as the Nativity of the
Sun, because the day begins to lengthen and the power of the sun to
increase from that turning-point of the year. The ritual of the
nativity, as it appears to have been celebrated in Syria and Egypt, was
remarkable. The celebrants retired into certain inner shrines, from
which at midnight they issued with a loud cry, “The Virgin has brought
forth! The light is waxing!” The Egyptians even represented the new-born
sun by the image of an infant which on his birthday, the winter
solstice, they brought forth and exhibited to his worshippers. No doubt
the Virgin who thus conceived and bore a son on the twenty-fifth of
December was the great Oriental goddess whom the Semites called the
Heavenly Virgin or simply the Heavenly Goddess; in Semitic lands she was
a form of Astarte. Now Mithra was regularly identified by his
worshippers with the Sun, the Unconquered Sun, as they called him; hence
his nativity also fell on the twenty-fifth of December. The Gospels say
nothing as to the day of Christ’s birth, and accordingly the early
Church did not celebrate it. In time, however, the Christians of Egypt
came to regard the sixth of January as the date of the Nativity, and the
custom of commemorating the birth of the Saviour on that day gradually
spread until by the fourth century it was universally established in the
East. But at the end of the third or the beginning of the fourth century
the Western Church, which had never recognised the sixth of January as
the day of the Nativity, adopted the twenty-fifth of December as the
true date, and in time its decision was accepted also by the Eastern
Church. At Antioch the change was not introduced till about the year 375
A.D.   3

  What considerations led the ecclesiastical authorities to institute
the festival of Christmas? The motives for the innovation are stated
with great frankness by a Syrian writer, himself a Christian. “The
reason,” he tells us, “why the fathers transferred the celebration of
the sixth of January to the twenty-fifth of December was this. It was a
custom of the heathen to celebrate on the same twenty-fifth of December
the birthday of the Sun, at which they kindled lights in token of
festivity. In these solemnities and festivities the Christians also took
part. Accordingly when the doctors of the Church perceived that the
Christians had a leaning to this festival, they took counsel and
resolved that the true Nativity should be solemnised on that day and the
festival of the Epiphany on the sixth of January. Accordingly, along
with this custom, the practice has prevailed of kindling fires till the
sixth.” The heathen origin of Christmas is plainly hinted at, if not
tacitly admitted, by Augustine when he exhorts his Christian brethren
not to celebrate that solemn day like the heathen on account of the sun,
but on account of him who made the sun. In like manner Leo the Great
rebuked the pestilent belief that Christmas was solemnised because of
the birth of the new sun, as it was called, and not because of the
nativity of Christ.   4

  Thus it appears that the Christian Church chose to celebrate the
birthday of its Founder on the twenty-fifth of December in order to
transfer the devotion of the heathen from the Sun to him who was called
the Sun of Righteousness. If that was so, there can be no intrinsic
improbability in the conjecture that motives of the same sort may have
led the ecclesiastical authorities to assimilate the Easter festival of
the death and resurrection of their Lord to the festival of the death
and resurrection of another Asiatic god which fell at the same season.
Now the Easter rites still observed in Greece, Sicily, and Southern
Italy bear in some respects a striking resemblance to the rites of
Adonis, and I have suggested that the Church may have consciously
adapted the new festival to its heathen predecessor for the sake of
winning souls to Christ. But this adaptation probably took place in the
Greek-speaking rather than in the Latin-speaking parts of the ancient
world; for the worship of Adonis, while it flourished among the Greeks,
appears to have made little impression on Rome and the West. Certainly
it never formed part of the official Roman religion. The place which it
might have taken in the affections of the vulgar was already occupied by
the similar but more barbarous worship of Attis and the Great Mother.
Now the death and resurrection of Attis were officially celebrated at
Rome on the twenty-fourth and twenty-fifth of March, the latter being
regarded as the spring equinox, and therefore as the most appropriate
day for the revival of a god of vegetation who had been dead or sleeping
throughout the winter. But according to an ancient and widespread
tradition Christ suffered on the twenty-fifth of March, and accordingly
some Christians regularly celebrated the Crucifixion on that day without
any regard to the state of the moon. This custom was certainly observed
in Phrygia, Cappadocia, and Gaul, and there seem to be grounds for
thinking that at one time it was followed also in Rome. Thus the
tradition which placed the death of Christ on the twenty-fifth of March
was ancient and deeply rooted. It is all the more remarkable because
astronomical considerations prove that it can have had no historical
foundation. The inference appears to be inevitable that the passion of
Christ must have been arbitrarily referred to that date in order to
harmonise with an older festival of the spring equinox. This is the view
of the learned ecclesiastical historian Mgr. Duchesne, who points out
that the death of the Saviour was thus made to fall upon the very day on
which, according to a widespread belief, the world had been created. But
the resurrection of Attis, who combined in himself the characters of the
divine Father and the divine Son, was officially celebrated at Rome on
the same day. When we remember that the festival of St. George in April
has replaced the ancient pagan festival of the Parilia; that the
festival of St. John the Baptist in June has succeeded to a heathen
midsummer festival of water: that the festival of the Assumption of the
Virgin in August has ousted the festival of Diana; that the feast of All
Souls in November is a continuation of an old heathen feast of the dead;
and that the Nativity of Christ himself was assigned to the winter
solstice in December because that day was deemed the Nativity of the
Sun; we can hardly be thought rash or unreasonable in conjecturing that
the other cardinal festival of the Christian church—the solemnisation of
Easter—may have been in like manner, and from like motives of
edification, adapted to a similar celebration of the Phrygian god Attis
at the vernal equinox.   5

  At least it is a remarkable coincidence, if it is nothing more, that
the Christian and the heathen festivals of the divine death and
resurrection should have been solemnised at the same season and in the
same places. For the places which celebrated the death of Christ at the
spring equinox were Phrygia, Gaul, and apparently Rome, that is, the
very regions in which the worship of Attis either originated or struck
deepest root. It is difficult to regard the coincidence as purely
accidental. If the vernal equinox, the season at which in the temperate
regions the whole face of nature testifies to a fresh outburst of vital
energy, had been viewed from of old as the time when the world was
annually created afresh in the resurrection of a god, nothing could be
more natural than to place the resurrection of the new deity at the same
cardinal point of the year. Only it is to be observed that if the death
of Christ was dated on the twenty-fifth of March, his resurrection,
according to Christian tradition, must have happened on the
twenty-seventh of March, which is just two days later than the vernal
equinox of the Julian calendar and the resurrection of Attis. A similar
displacement of two days in the adjustment of Christian to heathen
celebrations occurs in the festivals of St. George and the Assumption of
the Virgin. However, another Christian tradition, followed by Lactantius
and perhaps by the practice of the Church in Gaul, placed the death of
Christ on the twenty-third and his resurrection on the twenty-fifth of
March. If that was so, his resurrection coincided exactly with the
resurrection of Attis.   6

  In point of fact it appears from the testimony of an anonymous
Christian, who wrote in the fourth century of our era, that Christians
and pagans alike were struck by the remarkable coincidence between the
death and resurrection of their respective deities, and that the
coincidence formed a theme of bitter controversy between the adherents
of the rival religions, the pagans contending that the resurrection of
Christ was a spurious imitation of the resurrection of Attis, and the
Christians asserting with equal warmth that the resurrection of Attis
was a diabolical counterfeit of the resurrection of Christ. In these
unseemly bickerings the heathen took what to a superficial observer
might seem strong ground by arguing that their god was the older and
therefore presumably the original, not the counterfeit, since as a
general rule an original is older than its copy. This feeble argument
the Christians easily rebutted. They admitted, indeed, that in point of
time Christ was the junior deity, but they triumphantly demonstrated his
real seniority by falling back on the subtlety of Satan, who on so
important an occasion had surpassed himself by inverting the usual order
of nature.   7

  Taken altogether, the coincidences of the Christian with the heathen
festivals are too close and too numerous to be accidental. They mark the
compromise which the Church in the hour of its triumph was compelled to
make with its vanquished yet still dangerous rivals. The inflexible
Protestantism of the primitive missionaries, with their fiery
denunciations of heathendom, had been exchanged for the supple policy,
the easy tolerance, the comprehensive charity of shrewd ecclesiastics,
who clearly perceived that if Christianity was to conquer the world it
could do so only by relaxing the too rigid principles of its Founder, by
widening a little the narrow gate which leads to salvation. In this
respect an instructive parallel might be drawn between the history of
Christianity and the history of Buddhism. Both systems were in their
origin essentially ethical reforms born of the generous ardour, the
lofty aspirations, the tender compassion of their noble Founders, two of
those beautiful spirits who appear at rare intervals on earth like
beings come from a better world to support and guide our weak and erring
nature. Both preached moral virtue as the means of accomplishing what
they regarded as the supreme object of life, the eternal salvation of
the individual soul, though by a curious antithesis the one sought that
salvation in a blissful eternity, the other in a final release from
suffering, in annihilation. But the austere ideals of sanctity which
they inculcated were too deeply opposed not only to the frailties but to
the natural instincts of humanity ever to be carried out in practice by
more than a small number of disciples, who consistently renounced the
ties of the family and the state in order to work out their own
salvation in the still seclusion of the cloister. If such faiths were to
be nominally accepted by whole nations or even by the world, it was
essential that they should first be modified or transformed so as to
accord in some measure with the prejudices, the passions, the
superstitions of the vulgar. This process of accommodation was carried
out in after ages by followers who, made of less ethereal stuff than
their masters, were for that reason the better fitted to mediate between
them and the common herd. Thus as time went on, the two religions, in
exact proportion to their growing popularity, absorbed more and more of
those baser elements which they had been instituted for the very purpose
of suppressing. Such spiritual decadences are inevitable. The world
cannot live at the level of its great men. Yet it would be unfair to the
generality of our kind to ascribe wholly to their intellectual and moral
weakness the gradual divergence of Buddhism and Christianity from their
primitive patterns. For it should never be forgotten that by their
glorification of poverty and celibacy both these religions struck
straight at the root not merely of civil society but of human existence.
The blow was parried by the wisdom or the folly of the vast majority of
mankind, who refused to purchase a chance of saving their souls with the
certainty of extinguishing the species.   8
