[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gb04704)  [Next](gb04802) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter 48. The Corn-Spirit as an Animal.

## Section 1. Animal Embodiments of the Corn-spirit.

IN SOME of the examples which I have cited to establish the meaning of
the term “neck” as applied to the last sheaf, the corn-spirit appears in
animal form as a gander, a goat, a hare, a cat, and a fox. This
introduces us to a new aspect of the corn-spirit, which we must now
examine. By doing so we shall not only have fresh examples of killing
the god, but may hope also to clear up some points which remain obscure
in the myths and worship of Adonis, Attis, Osiris, Dionysus, Demeter,
and Virbius.   1

  Amongst the many animals whose forms the corn-spirit is supposed to
take are the wolf, dog, hare, fox, cock, goose, quail, cat, goat, cow
(ox, bull), pig, and horse. In one or other of these shapes the
corn-spirit is often believed to be present in the corn, and to be
caught or killed in the last sheaf. As the corn is being cut the animal
flees before the reapers, and if a reaper is taken ill on the field, he
is supposed to have stumbled unwittingly on the corn-spirit, who has
thus punished the profane intruder. It is said “the Rye-wolf has got
hold of him,” “the Harvest-goat has given him a push.” The person who
cuts the last corn or binds the last sheaf gets the name of the animal,
as the Rye-wolf, the Rye-sow, the Oats-goat, and so forth, and retains
the name sometimes for a year. Also the animal is frequently represented
by a puppet made out of the last sheaf or of wood, flowers, and so on,
which is carried home amid rejoicings on the last harvest-waggon. Even
where the last sheaf is not made up in animal shape, it is often called
the Rye-wolf, the Hare, Goat, and so forth. Generally each kind of crop
is supposed to have its special animal, which is caught in the last
sheaf, and called the Rye-wolf, the Barley-wolf, the Oats-wolf, the
Pea-wolf, or the Potato-wolf, according to the crop; but sometimes the
figure of the animal is only made up once for all at getting in the last
crop of the whole harvest. Sometimes the creature is believed to be
killed by the last stroke of the sickle or scythe. But oftener it is
thought to live so long as there is corn still unthreshed, and to be
caught in the last sheaf threshed. Hence the man who gives the last
stroke with the flail is told that he has got the Corn-sow, the
Threshing-dog, or the like. When the threshing is finished, a puppet is
made in the form of the animal, and this is carried by the thresher of
the last sheaf to a neighbouring farm, where the threshing is still
going on. This again shows that the corn-spirit is believed to live
wherever the corn is still being threshed. Sometimes the thresher of the
last sheaf himself represents the animal; and if the people of the next
farm, who are still threshing, catch him, they treat him like the animal
he represents, by shutting him up in the pig-sty, calling him with the
cries commonly addressed to pigs, and so forth. These general statements
will now be illustrated by examples.   2
