[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gb04808)  [Next](gb04810) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter 48. The Corn-Spirit as an Animal.

## Section 9. The Corn-spirit as a Pig (Boar or Sow).

THE LAST animal embodiment of the corn-spirit which we shall notice is
the pig (boar or sow). In Thüringen, when the wind sets the young corn
in motion, they sometimes say, “The Boar is rushing through the corn.”
Amongst the Esthonians of the island of Oesel the last sheaf is called
the Ryeboar, and the man who gets it is saluted with a cry of “You have
the Rye-boar on your back!” In reply he strikes up a song, in which he
prays for plenty. At Kohlerwinkel, near Augsburg, at the close of the
harvest, the last bunch of standing corn is cut down, stalk by stalk, by
all the reapers in turn. He who cuts the last stalk “gets the Sow,” and
is laughed at. In other Swabian villages also the man who cuts the last
corn “has the Sow,” or “has the Rye-sow.” At Bohlingen, near Radolfzell
in Baden, the last sheaf is called the Rye-sow or the Wheat-sow,
according to the crop; and at Röhrenbach in Baden the person who brings
the last armful for the last sheaf is called the Corn-sow or the
Oats-sow. At Friedingen, in Swabia, the thresher who gives the last
stroke is called Sow—Barley-sow, Corn-sow, or the like, according to the
crop. At Onstmettingen the man who gives the last stroke at threshing
“has the Sow”; he is often bound up in a sheaf and dragged by a rope
along the ground. And, generally, in Swabia the man who gives the last
stroke with the flail is called Sow. He may, however, rid himself of
this invidious distinction by passing on to a neighbour the straw-rope,
which is the badge of his position as Sow. So he goes to a house and
throws the straw-rope into it, crying, “There, I bring you the Sow.” All
the inmates give chase; and if they catch him they beat him, shut him up
for several hours in the pig-sty, and oblige him to take the “Sow” away
again. In various parts of Upper Bavaria the man who gives the last
stroke at threshing must “carry the Pig”—that is, either a straw effigy
of a pig or merely a bundle of straw-ropes. This he carries to a
neighbouring farm where the threshing is not finished, and throws it
into the barn. If the threshers catch him they handle him roughly,
beating him, blackening or dirtying his face, throwing him into filth,
binding the Sow on his back, and so on; if the bearer of the Sow is a
woman they cut off her hair. At the harvest supper or dinner the man who
“carried the Pig” gets one or more dumplings made in the form of pigs.
When the dumplings are served up by the maidservant, all the people at
table cry “Süz, süz, süz !” that being the cry used in calling pigs.
Sometimes after dinner the man who “carried the Pig” has his face
blackened, and is set on a cart and drawn round the village by his
fellows, followed by a crowd crying “Süz, süz, süz !” as if they were
calling swine. Sometimes, after being wheeled round the village, he is
flung on the dunghill.   1

  Again, the corn-spirit in the form of a pig plays his part at
sowing-time as well as at harvest. At Neuautz, in Courland, when barley
is sown for the first time in the year, the farmer’s wife boils the
chine of a pig along with the tail, and brings it to the sower on the
field. He eats of it, but cuts off the tail and sticks it in the field;
it is believed that the ears of corn will then grow as long as the tail.
Here the pig is the corn-spirit, whose fertilising power is sometimes
supposed to lie especially in his tail. As a pig he is put in the ground
at sowing-time, and as a pig he reappears amongst the ripe corn at
harvest. For amongst the neighbouring Esthonians, as we have seen, the
last sheaf is called the Rye-boar. Somewhat similar customs are observed
in Germany. In the Salza district, near Meiningen, a certain bone in the
pig is called “the Jew on the winnowing-fan.” The flesh of this bone is
boiled on Shrove Tuesday, but the bone is put amongst the ashes which
the neighbours exchange as presents on St. Peter’s Day (the
twenty-second of February), and then mix with the seedcorn. In the whole
of Hesse, Meiningen, and other districts, people eat pea-soup with dried
pig-ribs on Ash Wednesday or Candlemas. The ribs are then collected and
hung in the room till sowing-time, when they are inserted in the sown
field or in the seed-bag amongst the flax seed. This is thought to be an
infallible specific against earth-fleas and moles, and to cause the flax
to grow well and tall.   2

  But the idea of the corn-spirit as embodied in pig form is nowhere
more clearly expressed than in the Scandinavian custom of the Yule Boar.
In Sweden and Denmark at Yule (Christmas) it is the custom to bake a
loaf in the form of a boar-pig. This is called the Yule Boar. The corn
of the last sheaf is often used to make it. All through Yule the Yule
Boar stands on the table. Often it is kept till the sowing-time in
spring, when part of it is mixed with the seed-corn and part given to
the ploughman and plough-horses or ploughoxen to eat, in the expectation
of a good harvest. In this custom the corn-spirit, immanent in the last
sheaf, appears at midwinter in the form of a boar made from the corn of
the last sheaf; and his quickening influence on the corn is shown by
mixing part of the Yule Boar with the seed-corn, and giving part of it
to the ploughman and his cattle to eat. Similarly we saw that the
Corn-wolf makes his appearance at mid-winter, the time when the year
begins to verge towards spring. Formerly a real boar was sacrificed at
Christmas, and apparently also a man in the character of the Yule Boar.
This, at least, may perhaps be inferred from a Christmas custom still
observed in Sweden. A man is wrapt up in a skin, and carries a wisp of
straw in his mouth, so that the projecting straws look like the bristles
of a boar. A knife is brought, and an old woman, with her face
blackened, pretends to sacrifice him.   3

  On Christmas Eve in some parts of the Esthonian island of Oesel they
bake a long cake with the two ends turned up. It is called the Christmas
Boar, and stands on the table till the morning of New Year’s Day, when
it is distributed among the cattle. In other parts of the island the
Christmas Boar is not a cake but a little pig born in March, which the
housewife fattens secretly, often without the knowledge of the other
members of the family. On Christmas Eve the little pig is secretly
killed, then roasted in the oven, and set on the table standing on all
fours, where it remains in this posture for several days. In other parts
of the island, again, though the Christmas cake has neither the name nor
the shape of a boar, it is kept till the New Year, when half of it is
divided among all the members and all the quadrupeds of the family. The
other half of the cake is kept till sowing-time comes round, when it is
similarly distributed in the morning among human beings and beasts. In
other parts of Esthonia, again, the Christmas Boar, as it is called, is
baked of the first rye cut at harvest; it has a conical shape and a
cross is impressed on it with a pig’s bone or a key, or three dints are
made in it with a buckle or a piece of charcoal. It stands with a light
beside it on the table all through the festal season. On New Year’s Day
and Epiphany, before sunrise, a little of the cake is crumbled with salt
and given to the cattle. The rest is kept till the day when the cattle
are driven out to pasture for the first time in spring. It is then put
in the herdsman’s bag, and at evening is divided among the cattle to
guard them from magic and harm. In some places the Christmas Boar is
partaken of by farm-servants and cattle at the time of the barley
sowing, for the purpose of thereby producing a heavier crop.   4
