[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gb04702)  [Next](gb04704) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter 47. Lityerses.

## Section 3. Human Sacrifices for the Crops.

THE INDIANS of Guayaquil, in Ecuador, used to sacrifice human blood and
the hearts of men when they sowed their fields. The people of Cañar (now
Cuenca in Ecuador) used to sacrifice a hundred children annually at
harvest. The kings of Quito, the Incas of Peru, and for a long time the
Spaniards were unable to suppress the bloody rite. At a Mexican
harvest-festival, when the first-fruits of the season were offered to
the sun, a criminal was placed between two immense stones, balanced
opposite each other, and was crushed by them as they fell together. His
remains were buried, and a feast and dance followed. This sacrifice was
known as “the meeting of the stones.” We have seen that the ancient
Mexicans also sacrificed human beings at all the various stages in the
growth of the maize, the age of the victims corresponding to the age of
the corn; for they sacrificed new-born babes at sowing, older children
when the grain had sprouted, and so on till it was fully ripe, when they
sacrificed old men. No doubt the correspondence between the ages of the
victims and the state of the corn was supposed to enhance the efficacy
of the sacrifice.   1

  The Pawnees annually sacrificed a human victim in spring when they
sowed their fields. The sacrifice was believed to have been enjoined on
them by the Morning Star, or by a certain bird which the Morning Star
had sent to them as its messenger. The bird was stuffed and preserved as
a powerful talisman. They thought that an omission of this sacrifice
would be followed by the total failure of the crops of maize, beans, and
pumpkins. The victim was a captive of either sex. He was clad in the
gayest and most costly attire, was fattened on the choicest food, and
carefully kept in ignorance of his doom. When he was fat enough, they
bound him to a cross in the presence of the multitude, danced a solemn
dance, then cleft his head with a tomahawk and shot him with arrows.
According to one trader, the squaws then cut pieces of flesh from the
victim’s body, with which they greased their hoes; but this was denied
by another trader who had been present at the ceremony. Immediately
after the sacrifice the people proceeded to plant their fields. A
particular account has been preserved of the sacrifice of a Sioux girl
by the Pawnees in April 1837 or 1838. The girl was fourteen or fifteen
years old and had been kept for six months and well treated. Two days
before the sacrifice she was led from wigwam to wigwam, accompanied by
the whole council of chiefs and warriors. At each lodge she received a
small billet of wood and a little paint, which she handed to the warrior
next to her. In this way she called at every wigwam, receiving at each
the same present of wood and paint. On the twenty-second of April she
was taken out to be sacrificed, attended by the warriors, each of whom
carried two pieces of wood which he had received from her hands. Her
body having been painted half red and half black, she was attached to a
sort of gibbet and roasted for some time over a slow fire, then shot to
death with arrows. The chief sacrificer next tore out her heart and
devoured it. While her flesh was still warm it was cut in small pieces
from the bones, put in little baskets, and taken to a neighbouring
corn-field. There the head chief took a piece of the flesh from a basket
and squeezed a drop of blood upon the newly-deposited grains of corn.
His example was followed by the rest, till all the seed had been
sprinkled with the blood; it was then covered up with earth. According
to one account the body of the victim was reduced to a kind of paste,
which was rubbed or sprinkled not only on the maize but also on the
potatoes, the beans, and other seeds to fertilise them. By this
sacrifice they hoped to obtain plentiful crops.   2

  A West African queen used to sacrifice a man and woman in the month of
March. They were killed with spades and hoes, and their bodies buried in
the middle of a field which had just been tilled. At Lagos in Guinea it
was the custom annually to impale a young girl alive soon after the
spring equinox in order to secure good crops. Along with her were
sacrificed sheep and goats, which, with yams, heads of maize, and
plantains, were hung on stakes on each side of her. The victims were
bred up for the purpose in the king’s seraglio, and their minds had been
so powerfully wrought upon by the fetish men that they went cheerfully
to their fate. A similar sacrifice used to be annually offered at Benin,
in Guinea. The Marimos, a Bechuana tribe, sacrifice a human being for
the crops. The victim chosen is generally a short, stout man. He is
seized by violence or intoxicated and taken to the fields, where he is
killed amongst the wheat to serve as “seed” (so they phrase it). After
his blood has coagulated in the sun, it is burned along with the frontal
bone, the flesh attached to it, and the brain; the ashes are then
scattered over the ground to fertilise it. The rest of the body is
eaten.   3

  The Bagobos of Mindanao, one of the Philippine Islands, offer a human
sacrifice before they sow their rice. The victim is a slave, who is hewn
to pieces in the forest. The natives of Bontoc in the interior of Luzon,
one of the Philippine Islands, are passionate head-hunters. Their
principal seasons for head-hunting are the times of planting and reaping
the rice. In order that the crop may turn out well, every farm must get
at least one human head at planting and one at sowing. The head-hunters
go out in twos or threes, lie in wait for the victim, whether man or
woman, cut off his or her head, hands, and feet, and bring them back in
haste to the village, where they are received with great rejoicings. The
skulls are at first exposed on the branches of two or three dead trees
which stand in an open space of every village surrounded by large stones
which serve as seats. The people then dance round them and feast and get
drunk. When the flesh has decayed from the head, the man who cut it off
takes it home and preserves it as a relic, while his companions do the
same with the hands and the feet. Similar customs are observed by the
Apoyaos, another tribe in the interior of Luzon.   4

  Among the Lhota Naga, one of the many savage tribes who inhabit the
deep rugged labyrinthine glens which wind into the mountains from the
rich valley of Brahmapootra, it used to be a common custom to chop off
the heads, hands, and feet of people they met with, and then to stick up
the severed extremities in their fields to ensure a good crop of grain.
They bore no ill-will whatever to the persons upon whom they operated in
this unceremonious fashion. Once they flayed a boy alive, carved him in
pieces, and distributed the flesh among all the villagers, who put it
into their corn-bins to avert bad luck and ensure plentiful crops of
grain. The Gonds of India, a Dravidian race, kidnapped Brahman boys, and
kept them as victims to be sacrificed on various occasions. At sowing
and reaping, after a triumphal procession, one of the lads was slain by
being punctured with a poisoned arrow. His blood was then sprinkled over
the ploughed field or the ripe crop, and his flesh was devoured. The
Oraons or Uraons of Chota Nagpur worship a goddess called Anna Kuari,
who can give good crops and make a man rich, but to induce her to do so
it is necessary to offer human sacrifices. In spite of the vigilance of
the British Government these sacrifices are said to be still secretly
perpetrated. The victims are poor waifs and strays whose disappearance
attracts no notice. April and May are the months when the catchpoles are
out on the prowl. At that time strangers will not go about the country
alone, and parents will not let their children enter the jungle or herd
the cattle. When a catchpole has found a victim, he cuts his throat and
carries away the upper part of the ring finger and the nose. The goddess
takes up her abode in the house of any man who has offered her a
sacrifice, and from that time his fields yield a double harvest. The
form she assumes in the house is that of a small child. When the
householder brings in his unhusked rice, he takes the goddess and rolls
her over the heap to double its size. But she soon grows restless and
can only be pacified with the blood of fresh human victims.   5

  But the best known case of human sacrifices, systematically offered to
ensure good crops, is supplied by the Khonds or Kandhs, another
Dravidian race in Bengal. Our knowledge of them is derived from the
accounts written by British officers who, about the middle of the
nineteenth century, were engaged in putting them down. The sacrifices
were offered to the Earth Goddess. Tari Pennu or Bera Pennu, and were
believed to ensure good crops and immunity from all disease and
accidents. In particular, they were considered necessary in the
cultivation of turmeric, the Khonds arguing that the turmeric could not
have a deep red colour without the shedding of blood. The victim or
Meriah, as he was called, was acceptable to the goddess only if he had
been purchased, or had been born a victim—that is, the son of a victim
father, or had been devoted as a child by his father or guardian. Khonds
in distress often sold their children for victims, “considering the
beatification of their souls certain, and their death, for the benefit
of mankind, the most honourable possible.” A man of the Panua tribe was
once seen to load a Khond with curses, and finally to spit in his face,
because the Khond had sold for a victim his own child, whom the Panua
had wished to marry. A party of Khonds, who saw this, immediately
pressed forward to comfort the seller of his child, saying, “Your child
has died that all the world may live, and the Earth Goddess herself will
wipe that spittle from your face.” The victims were often kept for years
before they were sacrificed. Being regarded as consecrated beings, they
were treated with extreme affection, mingled with deference, and were
welcomed wherever they went. A Meriah youth, on attaining maturity, was
generally given a wife, who was herself usually a Meriah or victim; and
with her he received a portion of land and farm-stock. Their offspring
were also victims. Human sacrifices were offered to the Earth Goddess by
tribes, branches of tribes, or villages, both at periodical festivals
and on extraordinary occasions. The periodical sacrifices were generally
so arranged by tribes and divisions of tribes that each head of a family
was enabled, at least once a year, to procure a shred of flesh for his
fields, generally about the time when his chief crop was laid down.   6

  The mode of performing these tribal sacrifices was as follows. Ten or
twelve days before the sacrifice, the victim was devoted by cutting off
his hair, which, until then, had been kept unshorn. Crowds of men and
women assembled to witness the sacrifice; none might be excluded, since
the sacrifice was declared to be for all mankind. It was preceded by
several days of wild revelry and gross debauchery. On the day before the
sacrifice the victim, dressed in a new garment, was led forth from the
village in solemn procession, with music and dancing, to the Meriah
grove, a clump of high forest trees standing a little way from the
village and untouched by the axe. There they tied him to a post, which
was sometimes placed between two plants of the sankissar shrub. He was
then anointed with oil, ghee, and turmeric, and adorned with flowers;
and “a species of reverence, which it is not easy to distinguish from
adoration,” was paid to him throughout the day. A great struggle now
arose to obtain the smallest relic from his person; a particle of the
turmeric paste with which he was smeared, or a drop of his spittle, was
esteemed of sovereign virtue, especially by the women. The crowd danced
round the post to music, and addressing the earth, said, “O God, we
offer this sacrifice to you; give us good crops, seasons, and health”;
then speaking to the victim they said, “We bought you with a price, and
did not seize you; now we sacrifice you according to custom, and no sin
rests with us.”   7

  On the last morning the orgies, which had been scarcely interrupted
during the night, were resumed, and continued till noon, when they
ceased, and the assembly proceeded to consummate the sacrifice. The
victim was again anointed with oil, and each person touched the anointed
part, and wiped the oil on his own head. In some places they took the
victim in procession round the village, from door to door, where some
plucked hair from his head, and others begged for a drop of his spittle,
with which they anointed their heads. As the victim might not be bound
nor make any show of resistance, the bones of his arms and, if
necessary, his legs were broken; but often this precaution was rendered
unnecessary by stupefying him with opium. The mode of putting him to
death varied in different places. One of the commonest modes seems to
have been strangulation, or squeezing to death. The branch of a green
tree was cleft several feet down the middle; the victim’s neck (in other
places, his chest) was inserted in the cleft, which the priest, aided by
his assistants, strove with all his force to close. Then he wounded the
victim slightly with his axe, whereupon the crowd rushed at the wretch
and hewed the flesh from the bones, leaving the head and bowels
untouched. Sometimes he was cut up alive. In Chinna Kimedy he was
dragged along the fields, surrounded by the crowd, who, avoiding his
head and intestines, hacked the flesh from his body with their knives
till he died. Another very common mode of sacrifice in the same district
was to fasten the victim to the proboscis of a wooden elephant, which
revolved on a stout post, and, as it whirled round, the crowd cut the
flesh from the victim while life remained. In some villages Major
Campbell found as many as fourteen of these wooden elephants, which had
been used at sacrifices. In one district the victim was put to death
slowly by fire. A low stage was formed, sloping on either side like a
roof; upon it they laid the victim, his limbs wound round with cords to
confine his struggles. Fires were then lighted and hot brands applied,
to make him roll up and down the slopes of the stage as long as
possible; for the more tears he shed the more abundant would be the
supply of rain. Next day the body was cut to pieces.   8

  The flesh cut from the victim was instantly taken home by the persons
who had been deputed by each village to bring it. To secure its rapid
arrival, it was sometimes forwarded by relays of men, and conveyed with
postal fleetness fifty or sixty miles. In each village all who stayed at
home fasted rigidly until the flesh arrived. The bearer deposited it in
the place of public assembly, where it was received by the priest and
the heads of families. The priest divided it into two portions, one of
which he offered to the Earth Goddess by burying it in a hole in the
ground with his back turned, and without looking. Then each man added a
little earth to bury it, and the priest poured water on the spot from a
hill gourd. The other portion of flesh he divided into as many shares as
there were heads of houses present. Each head of a house rolled his
shred of flesh in leaves, and buried it in his favourite field, placing
it in the earth behind his back without looking. In some places each man
carried his portion of flesh to the stream which watered his fields, and
there hung it on a pole. For three days thereafter no house was swept;
and, in one district, strict silence was observed, no fire might be
given out, no wood cut, and no strangers received. The remains of the
human victim (namely, the head, bowels, and bones) were watched by
strong parties the night after the sacrifice; and next morning they were
burned, along with a whole sheep, on a funeral pile. The ashes were
scattered over the fields, laid as paste over the houses and granaries,
or mixed with the new corn to preserve it from insects. Sometimes,
however, the head and bones were buried, not burnt. After the
suppression of the human sacrifices, inferior victims were substituted
in some places; for instance, in the capital of Chinna Kimedy a goat
took the place of the human victim. Others sacrifice a buffalo. They tie
it to a wooden post in a sacred grove, dance wildly round it with
brandished knives, then, falling on the living animal, hack it to shreds
and tatters in a few minutes, fighting and struggling with each other
for every particle of flesh. As soon as a man has secured a piece he
makes off with it at full speed to bury it in his fields, according to
ancient custom, before the sun has set, and as some of them have far to
go they must run very fast. All the women throw clods of earth at the
rapidly retreating figures of the men, some of them taking very good
aim. Soon the sacred grove, so lately a scene of tumult, is silent and
deserted except for a few people who remain to guard all that is left of
the buffalo, to wit, the head, the bones, and the stomach, which are
burned with ceremony at the foot of the stake.   9

  In these Khond sacrifices the Meriahs are represented by our
authorities as victims offered to propitiate the Earth Goddess. But from
the treatment of the victims both before and after death it appears that
the custom cannot be explained as merely a propitiatory sacrifice. A
part of the flesh certainly was offered to the Earth Goddess, but the
rest was buried by each householder in his fields, and the ashes of the
other parts of the body were scattered over the fields, laid as paste on
the granaries, or mixed with the new corn. These latter customs imply
that to the body of the Meriah there was ascribed a direct or intrinsic
power of making the crops to grow, quite independent of the indirect
efficacy which it might have as an offering to secure the good-will of
the deity. In other words, the flesh and ashes of the victim were
believed to be endowed with a magical or physical power of fertilising
the land. The same intrinsic power was ascribed to the blood and tears
of the Meriah, his blood causing the redness of the turmeric and his
tears producing rain; for it can hardly be doubted that, originally at
least, the tears were supposed to bring down the rain, not merely to
prognosticate it. Similarly the custom of pouring water on the buried
flesh of the Meriah was no doubt a rain-charm. Again, magical power as
an attribute of the Meriah appears in the sovereign virtue believed to
reside in anything that came from his person, as his hair or spittle.
The ascription of such power to the Meriah indicates that he was much
more than a mere man sacrificed to propitiate a deity. Once more, the
extreme reverence paid him points to the same conclusion. Major Campbell
speaks of the Meriah as “being regarded as something more than mortal,”
and Major Macpherson says, “A species of reverence, which it is not easy
to distinguish from adoration, is paid to him.” In short, the Meriah
seems to have been regarded as divine. As such, he may originally have
represented the Earth Goddess or, perhaps, a deity of vegetation; though
in later times he came to be regarded rather as a victim offered to a
deity than as himself an incarnate god. This later view of the Meriah as
a victim rather than a divinity may perhaps have received undue emphasis
from the European writers who have described the Khond religion.
Habituated to the later idea of sacrifice as an offering made to a god
for the purpose of conciliating his favour, European observers are apt
to interpret all religious slaughter in this sense, and to suppose that
wherever such slaughter takes place, there must necessarily be a deity
to whom the carnage is believed by the slayers to be acceptable. Thus
their preconceived ideas may unconsciously colour and warp their
descriptions of savage rites.   10

  The same custom of killing the representative of a god, of which
strong traces appear in the Khond sacrifices, may perhaps be detected in
some of the other human sacrifices described above. Thus the ashes of
the slaughtered Marimo were scattered over the fields; the blood of the
Brahman lad was put on the crop and field; the flesh of the slain Naga
was stowed in the corn-bin; and the blood of the Sioux girl was allowed
to trickle on the seed. Again, the identification of the victim with the
corn, in other words, the view that he is an embodiment or spirit of the
corn, is brought out in the pains which seem to be taken to secure a
physical correspondence between him and the natural object which he
embodies or represents. Thus the Mexicans killed young victims for the
young corn and old ones for the ripe corn; the Marimos sacrifice, as
“seed,” a short, fat man, the shortness of his stature corresponding to
that of the young corn, his fatness to the condition which it is desired
that the crops may attain; and the Pawnees fattened their victims
probably with the same view. Again, the identification of the victim
with the corn comes out in the African custom of killing him with spades
and hoes, and the Mexican custom of grinding him, like corn, between two
stones.   11

  One more point in these savage customs deserves to be noted. The
Pawnee chief devoured the heart of the Sioux girl, and the Marimos and
Gonds ate the victim’s flesh. If, as we suppose, the victim was regarded
as divine, it follows that in eating his flesh his worshippers believed
themselves to be partaking of the body of their god.   12
