[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gb04803)  [Next](gb04805) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter 48. The Corn-Spirit as an Animal.

## Section 4. The Corn-spirit as a Hare.

ANOTHER common embodiment of the corn-spirit is the hare. In Galloway
the reaping of the last standing corn is called “cutting the Hare.” The
mode of cutting it is as follows. When the rest of the corn has been
reaped, a handful is left standing to form the Hare. It is divided into
three parts and plaited, and the ears are tied in a knot. The reapers
then retire a few yards and each throws his or her sickle in turn at the
Hare to cut it down. It must be cut below the knot, and the reapers
continue to throw their sickles at it, one after the other, until one of
them succeeds in severing the stalks below the knot. The Hare is then
carried home and given to a maidservant in the kitchen, who places it
over the kitchen-door on the inside. Sometimes the Hare used to be thus
kept till the next harvest. In the parish of Minnigaff, when the Hare
was cut, the unmarried reapers ran home with all speed, and the one who
arrived first was the first to be married. In Germany also one of the
names for the last sheaf is the Hare. Thus in some parts of Anhalt, when
the corn has been reaped and only a few stalks are left standing, they
say, “The Hare will soon come,” or the reapers cry to each other, “Look
how the Hare comes jumping out.” In East Prussia they say that the Hare
sits in the last patch of standing corn, and must be chased out by the
last reaper. The reapers hurry with their work, each being anxious not
to have “to chase out the Hare”; for the man who does so, that is, who
cuts the last corn, is much laughed at. At Aurich, as we have seen, an
expression for cutting the last corn is “to cut off the Hare’s tail.”
“He is killing the Hare” is commonly said of the man who cuts the last
corn in Germany, Sweden, Holland, France, and Italy. In Norway the man
who is thus said to “kill the Hare” must give “hare’s blood,” in the
form of brandy, to his fellows to drink. In Lesbos, when the reapers are
at work in two neighbouring fields, each party tries to finish first in
order to drive the Hare into their neighbour’s field; the reapers who
succeed in doing so believe that next year the crop will be better. A
small sheaf of corn is made up and kept beside the holy picture till
next harvest.   1
