[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gb05203)  [Next](gb05205) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter 52. Killing the Divine Animal.

## Section 4. Killing the Sacred Turtles.

IN THE CALIFORNIAN, Egyptian, and Fernando Po customs the worship of the
animal seems to have no relation to agriculture, and may therefore be
presumed to date from the hunting or pastoral stage of society. The same
may be said of the following custom, though the Zuni Indians of New
Mexico, who practise it, are now settled in walled villages or towns of
a peculiar type, and practise agriculture and the arts of pottery and
weaving. But the Zuni custom is marked by certain features which appear
to place it in a somewhat different class from the preceding cases. It
may be well therefore to describe it at full length in the words of an
eye-witness.   1

   “With midsummer the heat became intense. My brother \[i.e. adopted
Indian brother\] and I sat, day after day, in the cool under-rooms of
our house,—the latter \[sic\] busy with his quaint forge and crude
appliances, working Mexican coins over into bangles, girdles, ear-rings,
buttons, and what not, for savage ornament. Though his tools were
wonderfully rude, the work he turned out by dint of combined patience
and ingenuity was remarkably beautiful. One day as I sat watching him, a
procession of fifty men went hastily down the hill, and off westward
over the plain. They were solemnly led by a painted and shell-bedecked
priest, and followed by the torch-bearing Shu-lu-wit-si or God of Fire.
After they had vanished, I asked old brother what it all meant.   2

   “‘They are going,’ said he, ‘to the city of Ka-ka and the home of our
others.’   3

   “Four days after, towards sunset, costumed and masked in the
beautiful paraphernalia of the Ka-k’ok-shi, or ‘Good Dance,’ they
returned in file up the same pathway, each bearing in his arms a basket
filled with living, squirming turtles, which he regarded and carried as
tenderly as a mother would her infant. Some of the wretched reptiles
were carefully wrapped in soft blankets, their heads and forefeet
protruding,—and, mounted on the backs of the plume-bedecked pilgrims,
made ludicrous but solemn caricatures of little children in the same
position. While I was at supper upstairs that evening, the governor’s
brother-in-law came in. He was welcomed by the family as if a messenger
from heaven. He bore in his tremulous fingers one of the much abused and
rebellious turtles. Paint still adhered to his hands and bare feet,
which led me to infer that he had formed one of the sacred embassy.   4

   “‘So you went to Ka-thlu-el-lon, did you?’ I asked.   5

   “‘E’e,’ replied the weary man, in a voice husky with long chanting,
as he sank, almost exhausted, on a roll of skins which had been placed
for him, and tenderly laid the turtle on the floor. No sooner did the
creature find itself at liberty than it made off as fast as its lame
legs would take it. Of one accord, the family forsook dish, spoon, and
drinking-cup, and grabbing from a sacred meal-bowl whole handfuls of the
contents, hurriedly followed the turtle about the room, into dark
corners, around water-jars, behind the grinding-troughs, and out into
the middle of the floor again, praying and scattering meal on its back
as they went. At last, strange to say, it approached the foot-sore man
who had brought it.   6

   “‘Ha!’ he exclaimed with emotion; ‘see it comes to me again; ah, what
great favours the fathers of all grant me this day,’ and, passing his
hand gently over the sprawling animal, he inhaled from his palm deeply
and long, at the same time invoking the favour of the gods. Then he
leaned his chin upon his hand, and with large, wistful eyes regarded his
ugly captive as it sprawled about, blinking its meal-bedimmed eyes, and
clawing the smooth floor in memory of its native element. At this
juncture I ventured a question:   7

   “‘Why do you not let him go, or give him some water?’   8

   “Slowly the man turned his eyes toward me, an odd mixture of pain,
indignation, and pity on his face, while the worshipful family stared at
me with holy horror.   9

   “‘Poor younger brother!’ he said at last, ‘know you not how precious
it is? It die? It will not die; I tell you, it cannot die.’   10

   “‘But it will die if you don’t feed it and give it water.’   11

   “‘I tell you it cannot die; it will only change houses to-morrow, and
go back to the home of its brothers. Ah, well! How should you know?’ he
mused. Turning to the blinded turtle again: ‘Ah! my poor dear lost child
or parent, my sister or brother to have been! Who knows which? Maybe my
own great-grandfather or mother!’ And with this he fell to weeping most
pathetically, and, tremulous with sobs, which were echoed by the women
and children, he buried his face in his hands. Filled with sympathy for
his grief, however mistaken, I raised the turtle to my lips and kissed
its cold shell; then depositing it on the floor, hastily left the
grief-stricken family to their sorrows. Next day, with prayers and
tender beseechings, plumes, and offerings, the poor turtle was killed,
and its flesh and bones were removed and deposited in the little river,
that it might ‘return once more to eternal life among its comrades in
the dark waters of the lake of the dead.’ The shell, carefully scraped
and dried, was made into a dance-rattle, and, covered by a piece of
buckskin, it still hangs from the smoke-stained rafters of my brother’s
house. Once a Navajo tried to buy it for a ladle; loaded with indignant
reproaches, he was turned cut of the house. Were any one to venture the
suggestion that the turtle no longer lived, his remark would cause a
flood of tears, and he would be reminded that it had only ‘changed
houses and gone to live for ever in the home of “our lost
others.”’”   12

  In this custom we find expressed in the clearest way a belief in the
transmigration of human souls into the bodies of turtles. The theory of
transmigration is held by the Moqui Indians, who belong to the same race
as the Zunis. The Moquis are divided into totem clans—the Bear clan,
Deer clan, Wolf clan, Hare clan, and so on; they believe that the
ancestors of the clans were bears, deer, wolves, hares, and so forth;
and that at death the members of each clan become bears, deer, and so on
according to the particular clan to which they belonged. The Zuni are
also divided into clans, the totems of which agree closely with those of
the Moquis, and one of their totems is the turtle. Thus their belief in
transmigration into the turtle is probably one of the regular articles
of their totem faith. What then is the meaning of killing a turtle in
which the soul of a kinsman is believed to be present? Apparently the
object is to keep up a communication with the other world in which the
souls of the departed are believed to be assembled in the form of
turtles. It is a common belief that the spirits of the dead return
occasionally to their old homes; and accordingly the unseen visitors are
welcomed and feasted by the living, and then sent upon their way. In the
Zuni ceremony the dead are fetched home in the form of turtles, and the
killing of the turtles is the way of sending back the souls to the
spirit-land. Thus the general explanation given above of the custom of
killing a god seems inapplicable to the Zuni custom, the true meaning of
which is somewhat obscure. Nor is the obscurity which hangs over the
subject entirely dissipated by a later and fuller account which we
possess of the ceremony. From it we learn that the ceremony forms part
of the elaborate ritual which these Indians observe at the midsummer
solstice for the purpose of ensuring an abundant supply of rain for the
crops. Envoys are despatched to bring “their otherselves, the
tortoises,” from the sacred lake Kothluwalawa, to which the souls of the
dead are believed to repair. When the creatures have thus been solemnly
brought to Zuni, they are placed in a bowl of water and dances are
performed beside them by men in costume, who personate gods and
goddesses. “After the ceremonial the tortoises are taken home by those
who caught them and are hung by their necks to the rafters till morning,
when they are thrown into pots of boiling water. The eggs are considered
a great delicacy. The meat is seldom touched except as a medicine, which
is curative for cutaneous diseases. Part of the meat is deposited in the
river with kóhakwa (white shell beads) and turquoise beads as offerings
to Council of the Gods.” This account at all events confirms the
inference that the tortoises are supposed to be reincarnations of the
human dead, for they are called the “otherselves” of the Zuni; indeed,
what else should they be than the souls of the dead in the bodies of
tortoises seeing that they come from the haunted lake? As the principal
object of the prayers uttered and of the dances performed at these
midsummer ceremonies appears to be to procure rain for the crops, it may
be that the intention of bringing the tortoises to Zuni and dancing
before them is to intercede with the ancestral spirit, incarnate in the
animals, that they may be pleased to exert their power over the waters
of heaven for the benefit of their living descendants.   13
