[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gb05402)  [Next](gb05502) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter 55. The Transference of Evil.

## Section 1. The Transference to Inanimate Objects.

WE have now traced the practice of killing a god among peoples in the
hunting, pastoral, and agricultural stages of society; and I have
attempted to explain the motives which led men to adopt so curious a
custom. One aspect of the custom still remains to be noticed. The
accumulated misfortunes and sins of the whole people are sometimes laid
upon the dying god, who is supposed to bear them away for ever, leaving
the people innocent and happy. The notion that we can transfer our guilt
and sufferings to some other being who will bear them for us is familiar
to the savage mind. It arises from a very obvious confusion between the
physical and the mental, between the material and the immaterial.
Because it is possible to shift a load of wood, stones, or what not,
from our own back to the back of another, the savage fancies that it is
equally possible to shift the burden of his pains and sorrows to
another, who will suffer them in his stead. Upon this idea he acts, and
the result is an endless number of very unamiable devices for palming
off upon some one else the trouble which a man shrinks from bearing
himself. In short, the principle of vicarious suffering is commonly
understood and practised by races who stand on a low level of social and
intellectual culture. In the following pages I shall illustrate the
theory and the practice as they are found among savages in all their
naked simplicity, undisguised by the refinements of metaphysics and the
subtleties of theology.   1

  The devices to which the cunning and selfish savage resorts for the
sake of easing himself at the expense of his neighbour are manifold;
only a few typical examples out of a multitude can be cited. At the
outset it is to be observed that the evil of which a man seeks to rid
himself need not be transferred to a person; it may equally well be
transferred to an animal or a thing, though in the last case the thing
is often only a vehicle to convey the trouble to the first person who
touches it. In some of the East Indian islands they think that epilepsy
can be cured by striking the patient on the face with the leaves of
certain trees and then throwing them away. The disease is believed to
have passed into the leaves, and to have been thrown away with them. To
cure toothache some of the Australian blacks apply a heated
spear-thrower to the cheek. The spear-thrower is then cast away, and the
toothache goes with it in the shape of a black stone called karriitch.
Stones of this kind are found in old mounds and sandhills. They are
carefully collected and thrown in the direction of enemies in order to
give them toothache. The Bahima, a pastoral people of Uganda, often
suffer from deep-seated abscesses: “their cure for this is to transfer
the disease to some other person by obtaining herbs from the
medicine-man, rubbing them over the place where the swelling is, and
burying them in the road where people continually pass; the first person
who steps over these buried herbs contracts the disease, and the
original patient recovers.”   2

  Sometimes in case of sickness the malady is transferred to an effigy
as a preliminary to passing it on to a human being. Thus among the
Baganda the medicine-man would sometimes make a model of his patient in
clay; then a relative of the sick man would rub the image over the
sufferer’s body and either bury it in the road \\??\\ it in the grass by
the wayside. The first person who stepped over the image or passed by it
would catch the disease. Sometimes the effigy was made out of a
plantain-flower tied up so as to look like a person; it was used in the
same way as the clay figure. But the use of images for this maleficent
purpose was a capital crime; any person caught in the act of burying one
of them in the public road would surely have been put to death.   3

  In the western district of the island of Timor, when men or women are
making long and tiring journeys, they fan themselves with leafy
branches, which they afterwards throw away on particular spots where
their forefathers did the same before them. The fatigue which they felt
is thus supposed to have passed into the leaves and to be left behind.
Others use stones instead of leaves. Similarly in the Babar Archipelago
tired people will strike themselves with stones, believing that they
thus transfer to the stones the weariness which they felt in their own
bodies. They then throw away the stones in places which are specially
set apart for the purpose. A like belief and practice in many distant
parts of the world have given rise to those cairns or heaps of sticks
and leaves which travellers often observe beside the path, and to which
every passing native adds his contribution in the shape of a stone, or
stick, or leaf. Thus in the Solomon and Banks’ Islands the natives are
wont to throw sticks, stones, or leaves upon a heap at a place of steep
descent, or where a difficult path begins, saying, “There goes my
fatigue.” The act is not a religious rite, for the thing thrown on the
heap is not an offering to spiritual powers, and the words which
accompany the act are not a prayer. It is nothing but a magical ceremony
for getting rid of fatigue, which the simple savage fancies he can
embody in a stick, leaf, or stone, and so cast it from him.   4
