[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gb05205)  [Next](gb05401) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter 53. The Propitiation of Wild Animals By Hunters.

THE EXPLANATION of life by the theory of an indwelling and practically
immortal soul is one which the savage does not confine to human beings
but extends to the animate creation in general. In so doing he is more
liberal and perhaps more logical than the civilised man, who commonly
denies to animals that privilege of immortality which he claims for
himself. The savage is not so proud; he commonly believes that animals
are endowed with feelings and intelligence like those of men, and that,
like men, they possess souls which survive the death of their bodies
either to wander about as disembodied spirits or to be born again in
animal form.   1

  Thus to the savage, who regards all living creatures as practically on
a footing of equality with man, the act of killing and eating an animal
must wear a very different aspect from that which the same act presents
to us, who regard the intelligence of animals as far inferior to our own
and deny them the possession of immortal souls. Hence on the principles
of his rude philosophy the primitive hunter who slays an animal believes
himself exposed to the vengeance either of its disembodied spirit or of
all the other animals of the same species, whom he considers as knit
together, like men, by the ties of kin and the obligations of the blood
feud, and therefore as bound to resent the injury done to one of their
number. Accordingly the savage makes it a rule to spare the life of
those animals which he has no pressing motive for killing, at least such
fierce and dangerous animals as are likely to exact a bloody vengeance
for the slaughter of one of their kind. Crocodiles are animals of this
sort. They are only found in hot countries, where, as a rule, food is
abundant and primitive man has therefore little reason to kill them for
the sake of their tough and unpalatable flesh. Hence it is a custom with
some savages to spare crocodiles, or rather only to kill them in
obedience to the law of blood feud, that is, as a retaliation for the
slaughter of men by crocodiles. For example, the Dyaks of Borneo will
not kill a crocodile unless a crocodile has first killed a man. “For
why, say they, should they commit an act of aggression, when he and his
kindred can so easily repay them? But should the alligator take a human
life, revenge becomes a sacred duty of the living relatives, who will
trap the man-eater in the spirit of an officer of justice pursuing a
criminal. Others, even then, hang back, reluctant to embroil themselves
in a quarrel which does not concern them. The man-eating alligator is
supposed to be pursued by a righteous Nemesis; and whenever one is
caught they have a profound conviction that it must be the guilty one,
or his accomplice.”   2

  Like the Dyaks, the natives of Madagascar never kill a crocodile
“except in retaliation for one of their friends who has been destroyed
by a crocodile. They believe that the wanton destruction of one of these
reptiles will be followed by the loss of human life, in accordance with
the principle of lex talionis.” The people who live near the lake Itasy
in Madagascar make a yearly proclamation to the crocodiles, announcing
that they will revenge the death of some of their friends by killing as
many crocodiles in return, and warning all well-disposed crocodiles to
keep out of the way, as they have no quarrel with them, but only with
their evil-minded relations who have taken human life. Various tribes of
Madagascar believe themselves to be descended from crocodiles, and
accordingly they view the scaly reptile as, to all intents and purposes,
a man and a brother. If one of the animals should so far forget himself
as to devour one of his human kinsfolk, the chief of the tribe, or in
his absence an old man familiar with the tribal customs, repairs at the
head of the people to the edge of the water, and summons the family of
the culprit to deliver him up to the arm of justice. A hook is then
baited and cast into the river or lake. Next day the guilty brother, or
one of his family, is dragged ashore, and after his crime has been
clearly brought home to him by a strict interrogation, he is sentenced
to death and executed. The claims of justice being thus satisfied and
the majesty of the law fully vindicated, the deceased crocodile is
lamented and buried like a kinsman; a mound is raised over his relics
and a stone marks the place of his head.   3

  Again, the tiger is another of those dangerous beasts whom the savage
prefers to leave alone, lest by killing one of the species he should
excite the hostility of the rest. No consideration will induce a
Sumatran to catch or wound a tiger except in self-defence or immediately
after a tiger has destroyed a friend or relation. When a European has
set traps for tigers, the people of the neighbourhood have been known to
go by night to the place and explain to the animals that the traps are
not set by them nor with their consent. The inhabitants of the hills
near Rajamahall, in Bengal, are very averse to killing a tiger, unless
one of their kinsfolk has been carried off by one of the beasts. In that
case they go out for the purpose of hunting and slaying a tiger; and
when they have succeeded they lay their bows and arrows on the carcase
and invoke God, declaring that they slew the animal in retaliation for
the loss of a kinsman. Vengeance having been thus taken, they swear not
to attack another tiger except under similar provocation.   4

  The Indians of Carolina would not molest snakes when they came upon
them, but would pass by on the other side of the path, believing that if
they were to kill a serpent, the reptile’s kindred would destroy some of
their brethren, friends, or relations in return. So the Seminole Indians
spared the rattlesnake, because they feared that the soul of the dead
rattlesnake would incite its kinsfolk to take vengeance. The Cherokee
regard the rattlesnake as the chief of the snake tribe and fear and
respect him accordingly. Few Cherokee will venture to kill a
rattlesnake, unless they cannot help it, and even then they must atone
for the crime by craving pardon of the snake’s ghost either in their own
person or through the mediation of a priest, according to a set formula.
If these precautions are neglected, the kinsfolk of the dead snake will
send one of their number as an avenger of blood, who will track down the
murderer and sting him to death. No ordinary Cherokee dares to kill a
wolf, if he can possibly help it; for he believes that the kindred of
the slain beast would surely avenge its death, and that the weapon with
which the deed had been done would be quite useless for the future,
unless it were cleaned and exorcised by a medicine-man. However, certain
persons who know the proper rites of atonement for such a crime can kill
wolves with impunity, and they are sometimes hired to do so by people
who have suffered from the raids of the wolves on their cattle or
fish-traps. In Jebel-Nuba, a district of the Eastern Sudan, it is
forbidden to touch the nests or remove the young of a species of black
birds, resembling our blackbirds, because the people believe that the
parent birds would avenge the wrong by causing a stormy wind to blow,
which would destroy the harvest.   5

  But the savage clearly cannot afford to spare all animals. He must
either eat some of them or starve, and when the question thus comes to
be whether he or the animal must perish, he is forced to overcome his
superstitious scruples and take the life of the beast. At the same time
he does all he can to appease his victims and their kinsfolk. Even in
the act of killing them he testifies his respect for them, endeavours to
excuse or even conceal his share in procuring their death, and promises
that their remains will be honourably treated. By thus robbing death of
its terrors, he hopes to reconcile his victims to their fate and to
induce their fellows to come and be killed also. For example, it was a
principle with the Kamtchatkans never to kill a land or sea animal
without first making excuses to it and begging that the animal would not
take it ill. Also they offered it cedarnuts and so forth, to make it
think that it was not a victim but a guest at a feast. They believed
that this hindered other animals of the same species from growing shy.
For instance, after they had killed a bear and feasted on its flesh, the
host would bring the bear’s head before the company, wrap it in grass,
and present it with a variety of trifles. Then he would lay the blame of
the bear’s death on the Russians, and bid the beast wreak his wrath upon
them. Also he would ask the bear to inform the other bears how well he
had been treated, that they too might come without fear. Seals,
sea-lions, and other animals were treated by the Kamtchatkans with the
same ceremonious respect. Moreover, they used to insert sprigs of a
plant resembling bear’s wort in the mouths of the animals they killed;
after which they would exhort the grinning skulls to have no fear but to
go and tell it to their fellows, that they also might come and be caught
and so partake of this splendid hospitality. When the Ostiaks have
hunted and killed a bear, they cut off its head and hang it on a tree.
Then they gather round in a circle and pay it divine honours. Next they
run towards the carcase uttering lamentations and saying, “Who killed
you? It was the Russians. Who cut off your head? It was a Russian axe.
Who skinned you? It was a knife made by a Russian.” They explain, too,
that the feathers which sped the arrow on its flight came from the wing
of a strange bird, and that they did nothing but let the arrow go. They
do all this because they believe that the wandering ghost of the slain
bear would attack them on the first opportunity, if they did not thus
appease it. Or they stuff the skin of the slain bear with hay; and after
celebrating their victory with songs of mockery and insult, after
spitting on and kicking it, they set it up on its hind legs, “and then,
for a considerable time, they bestow on it all the veneration due to a
guardian god.” When a party of Koryak have killed a bear or a wolf, they
skin the beast and dress one of themselves in the skin. Then they dance
round the skin-clad man, saying that it was not they who killed the
animal, but some one else, generally a Russian. When they kill a fox
they skin it, wrap the body in grass, and bid him go tell his companions
how hospitably he has been received, and how he has received a new cloak
instead of his old one. A fuller account of the Koryak ceremonies is
given by a more recent writer. He tells us that when a dead bear is
brought to the house, the women come out to meet it, dancing with
firebrands. The bear-skin is taken off along with the head; and one of
the women puts on the skin, dances in it, and entreats the bear not to
be angry, but to be kind to the people. At the same time they offer meat
on a wooden platter to the dead beast, saying, “Eat, friend.” Afterwards
a ceremony is performed for the purpose of sending the dead bear, or
rather his spirit, away back to his home. He is provided with provisions
for the journey in the shape of puddings or reindeer-flesh packed in a
grass bag. His skin is stuffed with grass and carried round the house,
after which he is supposed to depart towards the rising sun. The
intention of the ceremonies is to protect the people from the wrath of
the slain bear and his kinsfolk, and so to ensure success in future
bear-hunts. The Finns used to try to persuade a slain bear that he had
not been killed by them, but had fallen from a tree, or met his death in
some other way; moreover, they held a funeral festival in his honour, at
the close of which bards expatiated on the homage that had been paid to
him, urging him to report to the other bears the high consideration with
which he had been treated, in order that they also, following his
example, might come and be slain. When the Lapps had succeeded in
killing a bear with impunity, they thanked him for not hurting them and
for not breaking the clubs and spears which had given him his death
wounds; and they prayed that he would not visit his death upon them by
sending storms or in any other way. His flesh then furnished a
feast.   6

  The reverence of hunters for the bear whom they regularly kill and eat
may thus be traced all along the northern region of the Old World from
Bering’s Straits to Lappland. It reappears in similar forms in North
America. With the American Indians a bear hunt was an important event
for which they prepared by long fasts and purgations. Before setting out
they offered expiatory sacrifices to the souls of bears slain in
previous hunts, and besought them to be favourable to the hunters. When
a bear was killed the hunter lit his pipe, and putting the mouth of it
between the bear’s lips, blew into the bowl, filling the beast’s mouth
with smoke. Then he begged the bear not to be angry at having been
killed, and not to thwart him afterwards in the chase. The carcase was
roasted whole and eaten; not a morsel of the flesh might be left over.
The head, painted red and blue, was hung on a post and addressed by
orators, who heaped praise on the dead beast. When men of the Bear clan
in the Ottawa tribe killed a bear, they made him a feast of his own
flesh, and addressed him thus: “Cherish us no grudge because we have
killed you. You have sense; you see that our children are hungry. They
love you and wish to take you into their bodies. Is it not glorious to
be eaten by the children of a chief?” Amongst the Nootka Indians of
British Columbia, when a bear had been killed, it was brought in and
seated before the head chief in an upright posture, with a chief’s
bonnet, wrought in figures, on its head, and its fur powdered over with
white down. A tray of provisions was then set before it, and it was
invited by words and gestures to eat. After that the animal was skinned,
boiled, and eaten.   7

  A like respect is testified for other dangerous creatures by the
hunters who regularly trap and kill them. When Caffre hunters are in the
act of showering spears on an elephant, they call out, “Don’t kill us,
great captain; don’t strike or tread upon us, mighty chief.” When he is
dead they make their excuses to him, pretending that his death was a
pure accident. As a mark of respect they bury his trunk with much solemn
ceremony; for they say that “the elephant is a great lord; his trunk is
his hand.” Before the Amaxosa Caffres attack an elephant they shout to
the animal and beg him to pardon them for the slaughter they are about
to perpetrate, professing great submission to his person and explaining
clearly the need they have of his tusks to enable them to procure beads
and supply their wants. When they have killed him they bury in the
ground, along with the end of his trunk, a few of the articles they have
obtained for the ivory, thus hoping to avert some mishap that would
otherwise befall them. Amongst some tribes of Eastern Africa, when a
lion is killed, the carcase is brought before the king, who does homage
to it by prostrating himself on the ground and rubbing his face on the
muzzle of the beast. In some parts of Western Africa if a negro kills a
leopard he is bound fast and brought before the chiefs for having killed
one of their peers. The man defends himself on the plea that the leopard
is chief of the forest and therefore a stranger. He is then set at
liberty and rewarded. But the dead leopard, adorned with a chief’s
bonnet, is set up in the village, where nightly dances are held in its
honour. The Baganda greatly fear the ghosts of buffaloes which they have
killed, and they always appease these dangerous spirits. On no account
will they bring the head of a slain buffalo into a village or into a
garden of plantains: they always eat the flesh of the head in the open
country. Afterwards they place the skull in a small hut built for the
purpose, where they pour out beer as an offering and pray to the ghost
to stay where he is and not to harm them.   8

  Another formidable beast whose life the savage hunter takes with joy,
yet with fear and trembling, is the whale. After the slaughter of a
whale the maritime Koryak of North-eastern Siberia hold a communal
festival, the essential part of which “is based on the conception that
the whale killed has come on a visit to the village; that it is staying
for some time, during which it is treated with great respect; that it
then returns to the sea to repeat its visit the following year; that it
will induce its relatives to come along, telling them of the hospitable
reception that has been accorded to it. According to the Koryak ideas,
the whales, like all other animals, constitute one tribe, or rather
family, of related individuals, who live in villages like the Koryak.
They avenge the murder of one of their number, and are grateful for
kindnesses that they may have received.” When the inhabitants of the
Isle of St. Mary, to the north of Madagascar, go a-whaling, they single
out the young whales for attack and “humbly beg the mother’s pardon,
stating the necessity that drives them to kill her progeny, and
requesting that she will be pleased to go below while the deed is doing,
that her maternal feelings may not be outraged by witnessing what must
cause her so much uneasiness.” An Ajumba hunter having killed a female
hippopotamus on Lake Azyingo in West Africa, the animal was decapitated
and its quarters and bowels removed. Then the hunter, naked, stepped
into the hollow of the ribs, and kneeling down in the bloody pool washed
his whole body with the blood and excretions of the animal, while he
prayed to the soul of the hippopotamus not to bear him a grudge for
having killed her and so blighted her hopes of future maternity; and he
further entreated the ghost not to stir up other hippopotamuses to
avenge her death by butting at and capsizing his canoe.   9

  The ounce, a leopard-like creature, is dreaded for its depredations by
the Indians of Brazil. When they have caught one of these animals in a
snare, they kill it and carry the body home to the village. There the
women deck the carcase with feathers of many colours, put bracelets on
its legs, and weep over it, saying, “I pray thee not to take vengeance
on our little ones for having been caught and killed through thine own
ignorance. For it was not we who deceived thee, it was thyself. Our
husbands only set the trap to catch animals that are good to eat; they
never thought to take thee in it. Therefore, let not thy soul counsel
thy fellows to avenge thy death on our little ones!” When a Blackfoot
Indian has caught eagles in a trap and killed them, he takes them home
to a special lodge, called the eagles’ lodge, which has been prepared
for their reception outside of the camp. Here he sets the birds in a row
on the ground, and propping up their heads on a stick, puts a piece of
dried meat in each of their mouths in order that the spirits of the dead
eagles may go and tell the other eagles how well they are being treated
by the Indians. So when Indian hunters of the Orinoco region have killed
an animal, they open its mouth and pour into it a few drops of the
liquor they generally carry with them, in order that the soul of the
dead beast may inform its fellows of the welcome it has met with, and
that they too, cheered by the prospect of the same kind reception, may
come with alacrity to be killed. When a Teton Indian is on a journey,
and he meets a grey spider or a spider with yellow legs, he kills it,
because some evil would befall him if he did not. But he is very careful
not to let the spider know that he kills it, for if the spider knew, his
soul would go and tell the other spiders, and one of them would be sure
to avenge the death of his relation. So in crushing the insect, the
Indian says, “O Grandfather Spider, the Thunder-beings kill you.” And
the spider is crushed at once and believes what is told him. His soul
probably runs and tells the other spiders that the Thunder-beings have
killed him; but no harm comes of that. For what can grey or
yellow-legged spiders do to the Thunder-beings?   10

  But it is not merely dangerous creatures with whom the savage desires
to keep on good terms. It is true that the respect which he pays to wild
beasts is in some measure proportioned to their strength and ferocity.
Thus the savage Stiens of Cambodia, believing that all animals have
souls which roam about after their death, beg an animal’s pardon when
they kill it, lest its soul should come and torment them. Also they
offer it sacrifices, but these sacrifices are proportioned to the size
and strength of the animal. The ceremonies which they observe at the
death of an elephant are conducted with much pomp and last seven days.
Similar distinctions are drawn by North American Indians. “The bear, the
buffalo, and the beaver are manidos \[divinities\] which furnish food.
The bear is formidable, and good to eat. They render ceremonies to him,
begging him to allow himself to be eaten, although they know he has no
fancy for it. We kill you, but you are not annihilated. His head and
paws are objects of homage… . Other animals are treated similarly from
similar reasons… . Many of the animal manidos, not being dangerous, are
often treated with contempt—the terrapin, the weasel, polecat, etc.” The
distinction is instructive. Animals which are feared, or are good to
eat, or both, are treated with ceremonious respect; those which are
neither formidable nor good to eat are despised. We have had examples of
reverence paid to animals which are both feared and eaten. It remains to
prove that similar respect is shown to animals which, without being
feared, are either eaten or valued for their skins.   11

  When Siberian sable-hunters have caught a sable, no one is allowed to
see it, and they think that if good or evil be spoken of the captured
sable no more sables will be caught. A hunter has been known to express
his belief that the sables could hear what was said of them as far off
as Moscow. He said that the chief reason why the sable hunt was now so
unproductive was that some live sables had been sent to Moscow. There
they had been viewed with astonishment as strange animals, and the
sables cannot abide that. Another, though minor, cause of the diminished
take of sables was, he alleged, that the world is now much worse than it
used to be, so that nowadays a hunter will sometimes hide the sable
which he has got instead of putting it into the common stock. This also,
said he, the sables cannot abide. Alaskan hunters preserve the bones of
sables and beavers out of reach of the dogs for a year and then bury
them carefully, “lest the spirits who look after the beavers and sables
should consider that they are regarded with contempt, and hence no more
should be killed or trapped.” The Canadian Indians were equally
particular not to let their dogs gnaw the bones, or at least certain of
the bones, of beavers. They took the greatest pains to collect and
preserve these bones, and, when the beaver had been caught in a net,
they threw them into the river. To a Jesuit who argued that the beavers
could not possibly know what became of their bones, the Indians replied,
“You know nothing about catching beavers and yet you will be prating
about it. Before the beaver is stone dead, his soul takes a turn in the
hut of the man who is killing him and makes a careful note of what is
done with his bones. If the bones are given to the dogs, the other
beavers would get word of it and would not let themselves be caught.
Whereas, if their bones are thrown into the fire or a river, they are
quite satisfied; and it is particularly gratifying to the net which
caught them.” Before hunting the beaver they offered a solemn prayer to
the Great Beaver, and presented him with tobacco; and when the chase was
over, an orator pronounced a funeral oration over the dead beavers. He
praised their spirit and wisdom. “You will hear no more,” said he, “the
voice of the chieftains who commanded you and whom you chose from among
all the warrior beavers to give you laws. Your language, which the
medicine-men understand perfectly, will be heard no more at the bottom
of the lake. You will fight no more battles with the otters, your cruel
foes. No, beavers! But your skins shall serve to buy arms; we will carry
your smoked hams to our children; we will keep the dogs from eating your
bones, which are so hard.”   12

  The elan, deer, and elk were treated by the American Indians with the
same punctilious respect, and for the same reason. Their bones might not
be given to the dogs nor thrown into the fire, nor might their fat be
dropped upon the fire, because the souls of the dead animals were
believed to see what was done to their bodies and to tell it to the
other beasts, living and dead. Hence, if their bodies were illused, the
animals of that species would not allow themselves to be taken, neither
in this world nor in the world to come. Among the Chiquites of Paraguay
a sick man would be asked by the medicine-man whether he had not thrown
away some of the flesh of the deer or turtle, and if he answered yes,
the medicine-man would say, “That is what is killing you. The soul of
the deer or turtle has entered into your body to avenge the wrong you
did it.” The Canadian Indians would not eat the embryos of the elk,
unless at the close of the hunting season; otherwise the mother-elks
would be shy and refuse to be caught.   13

  In the Timor-laut islands of the Indian Archipelago the skulls of all
the turtles which a fisherman has caught are hung up under his house.
Before he goes out to catch another, he addresses himself to the skull
of the last turtle that he killed, and having inserted betel between its
jaws, he prays the spirit of the dead animal to entice its kinsfolk in
the sea to come and be caught. In the Poso district of Central Celebes
hunters keep the jawbones of deer and wild pigs which they have killed
and hang them up in their houses near the fire. Then they say to the
jawbones, “Ye cry after your comrades, that your grandfathers, or
nephews, or children may not go away.” Their notion is that the souls of
the dead deer and pigs tarry near their jawbones and attract the souls
of living deer and pigs, which are thus drawn into the toils of the
hunter. Thus the wily savage employs dead animals as decoys to lure
living animals to their doom.   14

  The Lengua Indians of the Gran Chaco love to hunt the ostrich, but
when they have killed one of these birds and are bringing home the
carcase to the village, they take steps to outwit the resentful ghost of
their victim. They think that when the first natural shock of death is
passed, the ghost of the ostrich pulls himself together and makes after
his body. Acting on this sage calculation, the Indians pluck feathers
from the breast of the bird and strew them at intervals along the track.
At every bunch of feathers the ghost stops to consider, “Is this the
whole of my body or only a part of it?” The doubt gives him pause, and
when at last he has made up his mind fully at all the bunches, and has
further wasted valuable time by the zigzag course which he invariably
pursues in going from one to another, the hunters are safe at home, and
the bilked ghost may stalk in vain round about the village, which he is
too timid to enter.   15

  The Esquimaux about Bering Strait believe that the souls of dead
sea-beasts, such as seals, walrus, and whales, remain attached to their
bladders, and that by returning the bladders to the sea they can cause
the souls to be reincarnated in fresh bodies and so multiply the game
which the hunters pursue and kill. Acting on this belief every hunter
carefully removes and preserves the bladders of all the sea-beasts that
he kills; and at a solemn festival held once a year in winter these
bladders, containing the souls of all the sea-beasts that have been
killed throughout the year, are honoured with dances and offerings of
food in the public assembly-room, after which they are taken out on the
ice and thrust through holes into the water; for the simple Esquimaux
imagine that the souls of the animals, in high good humour at the kind
treatment they have experienced, will thereafter be born again as seals,
walrus, and whales, and in that form will flock willingly to be again
speared, harpooned, or otherwise done to death by the hunters.   16

  For like reasons, a tribe which depends for its subsistence, chiefly
or in part, upon fishing is careful to treat the fish with every mark of
honour and respect. The Indians of Peru “adored the fish that they
caught in greatest abundance; for they said that the first fish that was
made in the world above (for so they named Heaven) gave birth to all
other fish of that species, and took care to send them plenty of its
children to sustain their tribe. For this reason they worshipped
sardines in one region, where they killed more of them than of any other
fish; in others, the skate; in others, the dogfish; in others, the
golden fish for its beauty; in others, the crawfish; in others, for want
of larger gods, the crabs, where they had no other fish, or where they
knew not how to catch and kill them. In short, they had whatever fish
was most serviceable to them as their gods.” The Kwakiutl Indians of
British Columbia think that when a salmon is killed its soul returns to
the salmon country. Hence they take care to throw the bones and offal
into the sea, in order that the soul may reanimate them at the
resurrection of the salmon. Whereas if they burned the bones the soul
would be lost, and so it would be quite impossible for that salmon to
rise from the dead. In like manner the Ottawa Indians of Canada,
believing that the souls of dead fish passed into other bodies of fish,
never burned fish bones, for fear of displeasing the souls of the fish,
who would come no more to the nets. The Hurons also refrained from
throwing fish bones into the fire, lest the souls of the fish should go
and warn the other fish not to let themselves be caught, since the
Hurons would burn their bones. Moreover, they had men who preached to
the fish and persuaded them to come and be caught. A good preacher was
much sought after, for they thought that the exhortations of a clever
man had a great effect in drawing the fish to the nets. In the Huron
fishing village where the French missionary Sagard stayed, the preacher
to the fish prided himself very much on his eloquence, which was of a
florid order. Every evening after supper, having seen that all the
people were in their places and that a strict silence was observed, he
preached to the fish. His text was that the Hurons did not burn fish
bones. “Then enlarging on this theme with extraordinary unction, he
exhorted and conjured and invited and implored the fish to come and be
caught and to be of good courage and to fear nothing, for it was all to
serve their friends who honoured them and did not burn their bones.” The
natives of the Duke of York Island annually decorate a canoe with
flowers and ferns, lade it, or are supposed to lade it, with
shell-money, and set it adrift to compensate the fish for their fellows
who have been caught and eaten. It is especially necessary to treat the
first fish caught with consideration in order to conciliate the rest of
the fish, whose conduct may be supposed to be influenced by the
reception given to those of their kind which were the first to be taken.
Accordingly the Maoris always put back into the sea the first fish
caught, “with a prayer that it may tempt other fish to come and be
caught.”   17

  Still more stringent are the precautions taken when the fish are the
first of the season. On salmon rivers, when the fish begin to run up the
stream in spring, they are received with much deference by tribes who,
like the Indians of the Pacific Coast of North America, subsist largely
upon a fish diet. In British Columbia the Indians used to go out to meet
the first fish as they came up the river: “They paid court to them, and
would address them thus: ‘You fish, you fish; you are all chiefs, you
are; you are all chiefs.’” Amongst the Tlingit of Alaska the first
halibut of the season is carefully handled and addressed as a chief, and
a festival is given in his honour, after which the fishing goes on. In
spring, when the winds blow soft from the south and the salmon begin to
run up the Klamath river, the Karoks of California dance for salmon, to
ensure a good catch. One of the Indians, called the Kareya or God-man,
retires to the mountains and fasts for ten days. On his return the
people flee, while he goes to the river, takes the first salmon of the
catch, eats some of it, and with the rest kindles the sacred fire in the
sweating house. “No Indian may take a salmon before this dance is held,
nor for ten days after it, even if his family are starving.” The Karoks
also believe that a fisherman will take no salmon if the poles of which
his spearing-booth is made were gathered on the river-side, where the
salmon might have seen them. The poles must be brought from the top of
the highest mountain. The fisherman will also labour in vain if he uses
the same poles a second year in booths or weirs, “because the old salmon
will have told the young ones about them. There is a favourite fish of
the Aino which appears in their rivers about May and June. They prepare
for the fishing by observing rules of ceremonial purity, and when they
have gone out to fish, the women at home must keep strict silence or the
fish would hear them and disappear. When the first fish is caught he is
brought home and passed through a small opening at the end of the hut,
but not through the door; for if he were passed through the door, “the
other fish would certainly see him and disappear.” This may partly
explain the custom observed by other savages of bringing game in certain
cases into their huts, not by the door, but by the window, the
smoke-hole, or by a special opening at the back of the hut.   18

  With some savages a special reason for respecting the bones of game,
and generally of the animals which they eat, is a belief that, if the
bones are preserved, they will in course of time be reclothed with
flesh, and thus the animal will come to life again. It is, therefore,
clearly for the interest of the hunter to leave the bones intact since
to destroy them would be to diminish the future supply of game. Many of
the Minnetaree Indians “believe that the bones of those bisons which
they have slain and divested of flesh rise again clothed with renewed
flesh, and quickened with life, and become fat, and fit for slaughter
the succeeding June.” Hence on the western prairies of America, the
skulls of buffaloes may be seen arranged in circles and symmetrical
piles, awaiting the resurrection. After feasting on a dog, the Dacotas
carefully collect the bones, scrape, wash, and bury them, “partly, as it
is said, to testify to the dog-species, that in feasting upon one of
their number no disrespect was meant to the species itself, and partly
also from a belief that the bones of the animal will rise and reproduce
another.” In sacrificing an animal the Lapps regularly put aside the
bones, eyes, ears, heart, lungs, sexual parts (if the animal was a
male), and a morsel of flesh from each limb. Then, after eating the
remainder of the flesh, they laid the bones and the rest in anatomical
order in a coffin and buried them with the usual rites, believing that
the god to whom the animal was sacrificed would reclothe the bones with
flesh and restore the animal to life in Jabme-Aimo, the subterranean
world of the dead. Sometimes, as after feasting on a bear, they seem to
have contented themselves with thus burying the bones. Thus the Lapps
expected the resurrection of the slain animal to take place in another
world, resembling in this respect the Kamtchatkans, who believed that
every creature, down to the smallest fly, would rise from the dead and
live underground. On the other hand, the North American Indians looked
for the resurrection of the animals in the present world. The habit,
observed especially by Mongolian peoples, of stuffing the skin of a
sacrificed animal, or stretching it on a framework, points rather to a
belief in a resurrection of the latter sort. The objection commonly
entertained by primitive peoples to break the bones of the animals which
they have eaten or sacrificed may be based either on a belief in the
resurrection of the animals, or on a fear of intimidating other
creatures of the same species and offending the ghosts of the slain
animals. The reluctance of North American Indians and Esquimaux to let
dogs gnaw the bones of animals is perhaps only a precaution to prevent
the bones from being broken.   19

  But after all the resurrection of dead game may have its
inconveniences, and accordingly some hunters take steps to prevent it by
hamstringing the animal so as to prevent it or its ghost from getting up
and running away. This is the motive alleged for the practice by Koui
hunters in Laos; they think that the spells which they utter in the
chase may lose their magical virtue, and that the slaughtered animal may
consequently come to life again and escape. To prevent that catastrophe
they therefore hamstring the beast as soon as they have butchered it.
When an Esquimau of Alaska has killed a fox, he carefully cuts the
tendons of all the animal’s legs in order to prevent the ghost from
reanimating the body and walking about. But hamstringing the carcase is
not the only measure which the prudent savage adopts for the sake of
disabling the ghost of his victim. In old days, when the Aino went out
hunting and killed a fox first, they took care to tie its mouth up
tightly in order to prevent the ghost of the animal from sallying forth
and warning its fellows against the approach of the hunter. The Gilyaks
of the Amoor River put out the eyes of the seals they have killed, lest
the ghosts of the slain animals should know their slayers and avenge
their death by spoiling the seal-hunt.   20

  Besides the animals which primitive man dreads for their strength and
ferocity, and those which he reveres on account of the benefits which he
expects from them, there is another class of creatures which he
sometimes deems it necessary to conciliate by worship and sacrifice.
These are the vermin that infest his crops and his cattle. To rid
himself of these deadly foes the farmer has recourse to many
superstitious devices, of which, though some are meant to destroy or
intimidate the vermin, others aim at propitiating them and persuading
them by fair means to spare the fruits of the earth and the herds. Thus
Esthonian peasants, in the island of Oesel, stand in great awe of the
weevil, an insect which is exceedingly destructive to the grain. They
give it a fine name, and if a child is about to kill a weevil they say,
“Don’t do it; the more we hurt him, the more he hurts us.” If they find
a weevil they bury it in the earth instead of killing it. Some even put
the weevil under a stone in the field and offer corn to it. They think
that thus it is appeased and does less harm. Amongst the Saxons of
Transylvania, in order to keep sparrows from the corn, the sower begins
by throwing the first handful of seed backwards over his head, saying,
“That is for you, sparrows.” To guard the corn against the attacks of
leaf-flies he shuts his eyes and scatters three handfuls of oats in
different directions. Having made this offering to the leaf-flies he
feels sure that they will spare the corn. A Transylvanian way of
securing the crops against all birds, beasts, and insects, is this:
after he has finished sowing, the sower goes once more from end to end
of the field imitating the gesture of sowing, but with an empty hand. As
he does so he says, “I sow this for the animals; I sow it for every
thing that flies and creeps, that walks and stands, that sings and
springs, in the name of God the Father, etc.” The following is a German
way of freeing a garden from caterpillars. After sunset or at midnight
the mistress of the house, or another female member of the family, walks
all round the garden dragging a broom after her. She may not look behind
her, and must keep murmuring, “Good evening, Mother Caterpillar, you
shall come with your husband to church.” The garden gate is left open
till the following morning.   21

  Sometimes in dealing with vermin the farmer aims at hitting a happy
mean between excessive rigour on the one hand and weak indulgence on the
other; kind but firm, he tempers severity with mercy. An ancient Greek
treatise on farming advises the husbandman who would rid his lands of
mice to act thus: “Take a sheet of paper and write on it as follows: ‘I
adjure you, ye mice here present, that ye neither injure me nor suffer
another mouse to do so. I give you yonder field’ (here you specify the
field); ‘but if ever I catch you here again, by the Mother of the Gods I
will rend you in seven pieces.’ Write this, and stick the paper on an
unhewn stone in the field before sunrise, taking care to keep the
written side up.” In the Ardennes they say that to get rid of rats you
should repeat the following words: “Erat verbum, apud Deum vestrum. Male
rats and female rats, I conjure you, by the great God, to go out of my
house, out of all my habitations, and to betake yourselves to such and
such a place, there to end your days. Decretis, reversis et
desembarassis virgo potens, clemens, justitiae.” Then write the same
words on pieces of paper, fold them up, and place one of them under the
door by which the rats are to go forth, and the other on the road which
they are to take. This exorcism should be performed at sunrise. Some
years ago an American farmer was reported to have written a civil letter
to the rats, telling them that his crops were short, that he could not
afford to keep them through the winter, that he had been very kind to
them, and that for their own good he thought they had better leave him
and go to some of his neighbours who had more grain. This document he
pinned to a post in his barn for the rats to read.   22

  Sometimes the desired object is supposed to be attained by treating
with high distinction one or two chosen individuals of the obnoxious
species, while the rest are pursued with relentless rigour. In the East
Indian island of Bali, the mice which ravage the rice-fields are caught
in great numbers, and burned in the same way that corpses are burned.
But two of the captured mice are allowed to live, and receive a little
packet of white linen. Then the people bow down before them, as before
gods, and let them go. When the farms of the Sea Dyaks or Ibans of
Sarawak are much pestered by birds and insects, they catch a specimen of
each kind of vermin (one sparrow, one grasshopper, and so on), put them
in a tiny boat of bark well-stocked with provisions, and then allow the
little vessel with its obnoxious passengers to float down the river. If
that does not drive the pests away, the Dyaks resort to what they deem a
more effectual mode of accomplishing the same purpose. They make a clay
crocodile as large as life and set it up in the fields, where they offer
it food, rice-spirit, and cloth, and sacrifice a fowl and a pig before
it. Mollified by these attentions, the ferocious animal very soon
gobbles up all the creatures that devour the crops. In Albania, if the
fields or vineyards are ravaged by locusts or beetles, some of the women
will assemble with dishevelled hair, catch a few of the insects, and
march with them in a funeral procession to a spring or stream, in which
they drown the creatures. Then one of the women sings, “O locusts and
beetles who have left us bereaved,” and the dirge is taken up and
repeated by all the women in chorus. Thus by celebrating the obsequies
of a few locusts and beetles, they hope to bring about the death of them
all. When caterpillars invaded a vineyard or field in Syria, the virgins
were gathered, and one of the caterpillars was taken and a girl made its
mother. Then they bewailed and buried it. Thereafter they conducted the
“mother” to the place where the caterpillars were, consoling her, in
order that all the caterpillars might leave the garden.   23
