[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gb05601)  [Next](gb05603) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter 56. The Public Expulsion of Evils.

## Section 2. The Occasional Expulsion of Evils.

WE can therefore understand why those general clearances of evil, to
which from time to time the savage resorts, should commonly take the
form of a forcible expulsion of devils. In these evil spirits primitive
man sees the cause of many if not of most of his troubles, and he
fancies that if he can only deliver himself from them, things will go
better with him. The public attempts to expel the accumulated ills of a
whole community may be divided into two classes, according as the
expelled evils are immaterial and invisible or are embodied in a
material vehicle or scape-goat. The former may be called the direct or
immediate expulsion of evils; the latter the indirect or mediate
expulsion, or the expulsion by scapegoat. We begin with examples of the
former.   1

  In the island of Rook, between New Guinea and New Britain, when any
misfortune has happened, all the people run together, scream, curse,
howl, and beat the air with sticks to drive away the devil, who is
supposed to be the author of the mishap. From the spot where the mishap
took place they drive him step by step to the sea, and on reaching the
shore they redouble their shouts and blows in order to expel him from
the island. He generally retires to the sea or to the island of Lottin.
The natives of New Britain ascribe sickness, drought, the failure of
crops, and in short all misfortunes, to the influence of wicked spirits.
So at times when many people sicken and die, as at the beginning of the
rainy season, all the inhabitants of a district, armed with branches and
clubs, go out by moonlight to the fields, where they beat and stamp on
the ground with wild howls till morning, believing that this drives away
the devils; and for the same purpose they rush through the village with
burning torches. The natives of New Caledonia are said to believe that
all evils are caused by a powerful and malignant spirit; hence in order
to rid themselves of him they will from time to time dig a great pit,
round which the whole tribe gathers. After cursing the demon, they fill
up the pit with earth, and trample on the top with loud shouts. This
they call burying the evil spirit. Among the Dieri tribe of Central
Australia, when a serious illness occurs, the medicine-men expel
Cootchie or the devil by beating the ground in and outside of the camp
with the stuffed tail of a kangaroo, until they have chased the demon
away to some distance from the camp.   2

  When a village has been visited by a series of disasters or a severe
epidemic, the inhabitants of Minahassa in Celebes lay the blame upon the
devils who are infesting the village and who must be expelled from it.
Accordingly, early one morning all the people, men, women, and children,
quit their homes, carrying their household goods with them, and take up
their quarters in temporary huts which have been erected outside the
village. Here they spend several days, offering sacrifices and preparing
for the final ceremony. At last the men, some wearing masks, others with
their faces blackened, and so on, but all armed with swords, guns,
pikes, or brooms, steal cautiously and silently back to the deserted
village. Then, at a signal from the priest, they rush furiously up and
down the streets and into and under the houses (which are raised on
piles above the ground), yelling and striking on walls, doors, and
windows, to drive away the devils. Next, the priests and the rest of the
people come with the holy fire and march nine times round each house and
thrice round the ladder that leads up to it, carrying the fire with
them. Then they take the fire into the kitchen, where it must burn for
three days continuously. The devils are now driven away, and great and
general is the joy.   3

  The Alfoors of Halmahera attribute epidemics to the devil who comes
from other villages to carry them off. So, in order to rid the village
of the disease, the sorcerer drives away the devil. From all the
villagers he receives a costly garment and places it on four vessels,
which he takes to the forest and leaves at the spot where the devil is
supposed to be. Then with mocking words he bids the demon abandon the
place. In the Kei Islands to the south-west of New Guinea, the evil
spirits, who are quite distinct from the souls of the dead, form a
mighty host. Almost every tree and every cave is the lodging-place of
one of these fiends, who are moreover extremely irascible and apt to fly
out on the smallest provocation. They manifest their displeasure by
sending sickness and other calamities. Hence in times of public
misfortune, as when an epidemic is raging, and all other remedies have
failed, the whole population go forth with the priest at their head to a
place at some distance from the village. Here at sunset they erect a
couple of poles with a cross-bar between them, to which they attach bags
of rice, wooden models of pivot-guns, gongs, bracelets, and so on. Then,
when everybody has taken his place at the poles and a death-like silence
reigns, the priest lifts up his voice and addresses the spirits in their
own language as follows: “Ho! ho! ho! ye evil spirits who dwell in the
trees, ye evil spirits who live in the grottoes, ye evil spirits who
lodge in the earth, we give you these pivot-guns, these gongs, etc. Let
the sickness cease and not so many people die of it.” Then everybody
runs home as fast as their legs can carry them.   4

  In the island of Nias, when a man is seriously ill and other remedies
have been tried in vain, the sorcerer proceeds to exorcise the devil who
is causing the illness. A pole is set up in front of the house, and from
the top of the pole a rope of palm-leaves is stretched to the roof of
the house. Then the sorcerer mounts the roof with a pig, which he kills
and allows to roll from the roof to the ground. The devil, anxious to
get the pig, lets himself down hastily from the roof by the rope of
palm-leaves, and a good spirit, invoked by the sorcerer, prevents him
from climbing up again. If this remedy fails, it is believed that other
devils must still be lurking in the house. So a general hunt is made
after them. All the doors and windows in the house are closed, except a
single dormer-window in the roof. The men, shut up in the house, hew and
slash with their swords right and left to the clash of gongs and the
rub-a-dub of drums. Terrified at this onslaught, the devils escape by
the dormer-window, and sliding down the rope of palm-leaves take
themselves off. As all the doors and windows, except the one in the
roof, are shut, the devils cannot get into the house again. In the case
of an epidemic, the proceedings are similar. All the gates of the
village, except one, are closed; every voice is raised, every gong and
drum beaten, every sword brandished. Thus the devils are driven out and
the last gate is shut behind them. For eight days thereafter the village
is in a state of siege, no one being allowed to enter it.   5

  When cholera has broken out in a Burmese village the able-bodied men
scramble on the roofs and lay about them with bamboos and billets of
wood, while all the rest of the population, old and young, stand below
and thump drums, blow trumpets, yell, scream, beat floors, walls, tin
pans, everything to make a din. This uproar, repeated on three
successive nights, is thought to be very effective in driving away the
cholera demons. When smallpox first appeared amongst the Kumis of
South-Eastern India, they thought it was a devil come from Aracan. The
villages were placed in a state of siege, no one being allowed to leave
or enter them. A monkey was killed by being dashed on the ground, and
its body was hung at the village gate. Its blood, mixed with small river
pebbles, was sprinkled on the houses, the threshold of every house was
swept with the monkey’s tail, and the fiend was adjured to depart.   6

  When an epidemic is raging on the Gold Coast of West Africa, the
people will sometimes turn out, armed with clubs and torches, to drive
the evil spirits away. At a given signal the whole population begin with
frightful yells to beat in every corner of the houses, then rush like
mad into the streets waving torches and striking frantically in the
empty air. The uproar goes on till somebody reports that the cowed and
daunted demons have made good their escape by a gate of the town or
village; the people stream out after them, pursue them for some distance
into the forest, and warn them never to return. The expulsion of the
devils is followed by a general massacre of all the cocks in the village
or town, lest by their unseasonable crowing they should betray to the
banished demons the direction they must take to return to their old
homes. When sickness was prevalent in a Huron village, and all other
remedies had been tried in vain, the Indians had recourse to the
ceremony called Lonouyroya, “which is the principal invention and most
proper means, so they say, to expel from the town or village the devils
and evil spirits which cause, induce, and import all the maladies and
infirmities which they suffer in body and mind.” Accordingly, one
evening the men would begin to rush like madmen about the village,
breaking and upsetting whatever they came across in the wigwams. They
threw fire and burning brands about the streets, and all night long they
ran howling and singing without cessation. Then they all dreamed of
something, a knife, dog, skin, or whatever it might be, and when morning
came they went from wigwam to wigwam asking for presents. These they
received silently, till the particular thing was given them which they
had dreamed about. On receiving it they uttered a cry of joy and rushed
from the hut, amid the congratulations of all present. The health of
those who received what they had dreamed of was believed to be assured;
whereas those who did not get what they had set their hearts upon
regarded their fate as sealed.   7

  Sometimes, instead of chasing the demon of disease from their homes,
savages prefer to leave him in peaceable possession, while they
themselves take to flight and attempt to prevent him from following in
their tracks. Thus when the Patagonians were attacked by small-pox,
which they attributed to the machinations of an evil spirit, they used
to abandon their sick and flee, slashing the air with their weapons and
throwing water about in order to keep off the dreadful pursuer; and when
after several days’ march they reached a place where they hoped to be
beyond his reach, they used by way of precaution to plant all their
cutting weapons with the sharp edges turned towards the quarter from
which they had come, as if they were repelling a charge of cavalry.
Similarly, when the Lules or Tonocotes Indians of the Gran Chaco were
attacked by an epidemic, they regularly sought to evade it by flight,
but in so doing they always followed a sinuous, not a straight, course;
because they said that when the disease made after them he would be so
exhausted by the turnings and windings of the route that he would never
be able to come up with them. When the Indians of New Mexico were
decimated by smallpox or other infectious disease, they used to shift
their quarters every day, retreating into the most sequestered parts of
the mountains and choosing the thorniest thickets they could find, in
the hope that the smallpox would be too afraid of scratching himself on
the thorns to follow them. When some Chins on a visit to Rangoon were
attacked by cholera, they went about with drawn swords to scare away the
demon, and they spent the day hiding under bushes so that he might not
be able to find them.   8
