[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gb05701)  [Next](gb05703) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter 57. Public Scapegoats.

## Section 2. The Occasional Expulsion of Evils in a Material Vehicle.

THE VEHICLE which conveys away the demons may be of various kinds. A
common one is a little ship or boat. Thus, in the southern district of
the island of Ceram, when a whole village suffers from sickness, a small
ship is made and filled with rice, tobacco, eggs, and so forth, which
have been contributed by all the people. A little sail is hoisted on the
ship. When all is ready, a man calls out in a very loud voice, “O all ye
sicknesses, ye smallpoxes, agues, measles, etc., who have visited us so
long and wasted us so sorely, but who now cease to plague us, we have
made ready this ship for you, and we have furnished you with provender
sufficient for the voyage. Ye shall have no lack of food nor of
betel-leaves nor of areca nuts nor of tobacco. Depart, and sail away
from us directly; never come near us again; but go to a land which is
far from here. Let all the tides and winds waft you speedily thither,
and so convey you thither that for the time to come we may live sound
and well, and that we may never see the sun rise on you again.” Then ten
or twelve men carry the vessel to the shore, and let it drift away with
the land-breeze, feeling convinced that they are free from sickness for
ever, or at least till the next time. If sickness attacks them again,
they are sure it is not the same sickness, but a different one, which in
due time they dismiss in the same manner. When the demon-laden bark is
lost to sight, the bearers return to the village, whereupon a man cries
out, “The sicknesses are now gone, vanished, expelled, and sailed away.”
At this all the people come running out of their houses, passing the
word from one to the other with great joy, beating on gongs and on
tinkling instruments.   1

  Similar ceremonies are commonly resorted to in other East Indian
islands. Thus in Timor-laut, to mislead the demons who are causing
sickness, a small proa, containing the image of a man and provisioned
for a long voyage, is allowed to drift away with wind and tide. As it is
being launched, the people cry, “O sickness, go from here; turn back;
what do you here in this poor land?” Three days after this ceremony a
pig is killed, and part of the flesh is offered to Dudilaa, who lives in
the sun. One of the oldest men says, “Old sir, I beseech you make well
the grand-children, children, women, and men, that we may be able to eat
pork and rice and to drink palmwine. I will keep my promise. Eat your
share, and make all the people in the village well.” If the proa is
stranded at any inhabited spot, the sickness will break out there. Hence
a stranded proa excites much alarm amongst the coast population, and
they immediately burn it, because demons fly from fire. In the island of
Buru the proa which carries away the demons of disease is about twenty
feet long, rigged out with sails, oars, anchor, and so on, and well
stocked with provisions. For a day and a night the people beat gongs and
drums, and rush about to frighten the demons. Next morning ten stalwart
young men strike the people with branches, which have been previously
dipped in an earthen pot of water. As soon as they have done so, they
run down to the beach, put the branches on board the proa, launch
another boat in great haste, and tow the disease-burdened bark far out
to sea. There they cast it off, and one of them calls out, “Grandfather
Smallpox, go away—go willingly away—go visit another land; we have made
you food ready for the voyage, we have now nothing more to give.” When
they have landed, all the people bathe together in the sea. In this
ceremony the reason for striking the people with the branches is clearly
to rid them of the disease-demons, which are then supposed to be
transferred to the branches. Hence the haste with which the branches are
deposited in the proa and towed away to sea. So in the inland districts
of Ceram, when smallpox or other sickness is raging, the priest strikes
all the houses with consecrated branches, which are then thrown into the
river, to be carried down to the sea; exactly as amongst the Wotyaks of
Russia the sticks which have been used for expelling the devils from the
village are thrown into the river, that the current may sweep the
baleful burden away. The plan of putting puppets in the boat to
represent sick persons, in order to lure the demons after them, is not
uncommon. For example, most of the pagan tribes on the coast of Borneo
seek to drive away epidemic disease as follows. They carve one or more
rough human images from the pith of the sago palm and place them on a
small raft or boat or full-rigged Malay ship together with rice and
other food. The boat is decked with blossoms of the areca palm and with
ribbons made from its leaves, and thus adorned the little craft is
allowed to float out to sea with the ebb-tide, bearing, as the people
fondly think or hope, the sickness away with it.   2

  Often the vehicle which carries away the collected demons or ills of a
whole community is an animal or scapegoat. In the Central Provinces of
India, when cholera breaks out in a village, every one retires after
sunset to his house. The priests then parade the streets, taking from
the roof of each house a straw, which is burnt with an offering of rice,
ghee, and turmeric, at some shrine to the east of the village. Chickens
daubed with vermilion are driven away in the direction of the smoke, and
are believed to carry the disease with them. If they fail, goats are
tried, and last of all pigs. When cholera rages among the Bhars,
Mallans, and Kurmis of India, they take a goat or a buffalo—in either
case the animal must be a female, and as black as possible—then having
tied some grain, cloves, and red lead in a yellow cloth on its back they
turn it out of the village. The animal is conducted beyond the boundary
and not allowed to return. Sometimes the buffalo is marked with a red
pigment and driven to the next village, where he carries the plague with
him.   3

  Amongst the Dinkas, a pastoral people of the White Nile, each family
possesses a sacred cow. When the country is threatened with war, famine,
or any other public calamity, the chiefs of the village require a
particular family to surrender their sacred cow to serve as a scapegoat.
The animal is driven by the women to the brink of the river and across
it to the other bank, there to wander in the wilderness and fall a prey
to ravening beasts. Then the women return in silence and without looking
behind them; were they to cast a backward glance, they imagine that the
ceremony would have no effect. In 1857, when the Aymara Indians of
Bolivia and Peru were suffering from a plague, they loaded a black llama
with the clothes of the plague-stricken people, sprinkled brandy on the
clothes, and then turned the animal loose on the mountains, hoping that
it would carry the pest away with it.   4

  Occasionally the scapegoat is a man. For example, from time to time
the gods used to warn the King of Uganda that his foes the Banyoro were
working magic against him and his people to make them die of disease. To
avert such a catastrophe the king would send a scapegoat to the frontier
of Bunyoro, the land of the enemy. The scapegoat consisted of either a
man and a boy or a woman and her child, chosen because of some mark or
bodily defect, which the gods had noted and by which the victims were to
be recognised. With the human victims were sent a cow, a goat, a fowl,
and a dog; and a strong guard escorted them to the land which the god
had indicated. There the limbs of the victims were broken and they were
left to die a lingering death in the enemy’s country, being too crippled
to crawl back to Uganda. The disease or plague was thought to have been
thus transferred to the victims and to have been conveyed back in their
persons to the land from which it came.   5

  Some of the aboriginal tribes of China, as a protection against
pestilence, select a man of great muscular strength to act the part of
scapegoat. Having besmeared his face with paint, he performs many antics
with the view of enticing all pestilential and noxious influences to
attach themselves to him only. He is assisted by a priest. Finally the
scapegoat, hotly pursued by men and women beating gongs and tom-toms, is
driven with great haste out of the town or village. In the Punjaub a
cure for the murrain is to hire a man of the Chamar caste, turn his face
away from the village, brand him with a red-hot sickle, and let him go
out into the jungle taking the murrain with him. He must not look
back.   6
