[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gb05702)  [Next](gb05704) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter 57. Public Scapegoats.

## Section 3. The Periodic Expulsion of Evils in a Material Vehicle.

THE MEDIATE expulsion of evils by means of a scapegoat or other material
vehicle, like the immediate expulsion of them in invisible form, tends
to become periodic, and for a like reason. Thus every year, generally in
March, the people of Leti, Moa, and Lakor, islands of the Indian
Archipelago, send away all their diseases to sea. They make a proa about
six feet long, rig it with sails, oars, rudder, and other gear, and
every family deposits in its some rice, fruit, a fowl, two eggs, insects
that ravage the fields, and so on. Then they let it drift away to sea,
saying, “Take away from here all kinds of sickness, take them to other
islands, to other lands, distribute them in places that lie eastward,
where the sun rises.” The Biajas of Borneo annually send to sea a little
bark laden with the sins and misfortunes of the people. The crew of any
ship that falls in with the ill-omened bark at sea will suffer all the
sorrows with which it is laden. A like custom is annually observed by
the Dusuns of the Tuaran district in British North Borneo. The ceremony
is the most important of the whole year. Its aim is to bring good luck
to the village during the ensuing year by solemnly expelling all the
evil spirits that may have collected in or about the houses throughout
the last twelve months. The task of routing out the demons and banishing
them devolves chiefly on women. Dressed in their finest array, they go
in procession through the village. One of them carries a small sucking
pig in a basket on her back; and all of them bear wands, with which they
belabour the little pig at the appropriate moment; its squeals help to
attract the vagrant spirits. At every house the women dance and sing,
clashing castanets or cymbals of brass and jingling bunches of little
brass bells in both hands. When the performance has been repeated at
every house in the village, the procession defiles down to the river,
and all the evil spirits, which the performers have chased from the
houses, follow them to the edge of the water. There a raft has been made
ready and moored to the bank. It contains offerings of food, cloth,
cooking-pots, and swords; and the deck is crowded with figures of men,
women, animals, and birds, all made out of the leaves of the sago palm.
The evil spirits now embark on the raft, and when they are all aboard,
it is pushed off and allowed to float down with the current, carrying
the demons with it. Should the raft run aground near the village, it is
shoved off with all speed, lest the invisible passengers should seize
the opportunity of landing and returning to the village. Finally, the
sufferings of the little pig, whose squeals served to decoy the demons
from their lurking-places, are terminated by death, for it is killed and
its carcase thrown away.   1

  Every year, at the beginning of the dry season, the Nicobar Islanders
carry the model of a ship through their villages. The devils are chased
out of the huts, and driven on board the little ship, which is then
launched and suffered to sail away with the wind. The ceremony has been
described by a catechist, who witnessed it at Car Nicobar in July 1897.
For three days the people were busy preparing two very large floating
cars, shaped like canoes, fitted with sails, and loaded with certain
leaves, which possessed the valuable property of expelling devils. While
the young people were thus engaged, the exorcists and the elders sat in
a house singing songs by turns; but often they would come forth, pace
the beach armed with rods, and forbid the devil to enter the village.
The fourth day of the solemnity bore a name which means “Expelling the
Devil by Sails.” In the evening all the villagers assembled, the women
bringing baskets of ashes and bunches of devil-expelling leaves. These
leaves were then distributed to everybody, old and young. When all was
ready, a band of robust men, attended by a guard of exorcists, carried
one of the cars down to the sea on the right side of the village
graveyard, and set it floating in the water. As soon as they had
returned, another band of men carried the other car to the beach and
floated it similarly in the sea to the left of the graveyard. The
demon-laden barks being now launched, the women threw ashes from the
shore, and the whole crowd shouted, saying, “Fly away, devil, fly away,
never come again!” The wind and the tide being favourable, the canoes
sailed quickly away; and that night all the people feasted together with
great joy, because the devil had departed in the direction of Chowra. A
similar expulsion of devils takes place once a year in other Nicobar
villages; but the ceremonies are held at different times in different
places.   2

  Amongst many of the aboriginal tribes of China, a great festival is
celebrated in the third month of every year. It is held by way of a
general rejoicing over what the people believe to be a total
annihilation of the ills of the past twelve months. The destruction is
supposed to be effected in the following way. A large earthenware jar
filled with gunpowder, stones, and bits of iron is buried in the earth.
A train of gunpowder, communicating with the jar, is then laid; and a
match being applied, the jar and its contents are blown up. The stones
and bits of iron represent the ills and disasters of the past year, and
the dispersion of them by the explosion is believed to remove the ills
and disasters themselves. The festival is attended with much revelling
and drunkenness.   3

  At Old Calabar on the coast of Guinea, the devils and ghosts are, or
used to be, publicly expelled once in two years. Among the spirits thus
driven from their haunts are the souls of all the people who died since
the last lustration of the town. About three weeks or a month before the
expulsion, which according to one account takes place in the month of
November, rude effigies representing men and animals, such as
crocodiles, leopards, elephants, bullocks, and birds, are made of
wicker-work or wood, and being hung with strips of cloth and bedizened
with gew-gaws, are set before the door of every house. About three
o’clock in the morning of the day appointed for the ceremony the whole
population turns out into the streets, and proceeds with a deafening
uproar and in a state of the wildest excitement to drive all lurking
devils and ghosts into the effigies, in order that they may be banished
with them from the abodes of men. For this purpose bands of people roam
through the streets knocking on doors, firing guns, beating drums,
blowing on horns, ringing bells, clattering pots and pans, shouting and
hallooing with might and main, in short making all the noise it is
possible for them to raise. The hubbub goes on till the approach of
dawn, when it gradually subsides and ceases altogether at sunrise. By
this time the houses have been thoroughly swept, and all the frightened
spirits are supposed to have huddled into the effigies or their
fluttering drapery. In these wicker figures are also deposited the
sweepings of the houses and the ashes of yesterday’s fires. Then the
demon-laden images are hastily snatched up, carried in tumultuous
procession down to the brink of the river, and thrown into the water to
the tuck of drums. The ebb-tide bears them away seaward, and thus the
town is swept clean of ghosts and devils for another two years.   4

  Similar annual expulsions of embodied evils are not unknown in Europe.
On the evening of Easter Sunday the gypsies of Southern Europe take a
wooden vessel like a band-box, which rests cradle-wise on two cross
pieces of wood. In this they place herbs and simples, together with the
dried carcase of a snake, or lizard, which every person present must
first have touched with his fingers. The vessel is then wrapt in white
and red wool, carried by the oldest man from tent to tent, and finally
thrown into running water, not, however, before every member of the band
has spat into it once, and the sorceress has uttered some spells over
it. They believe that by performing this ceremony they dispel all the
illnesses that would otherwise have afflicted them in the course of the
year; and that if any one finds the vessel and opens it out of
curiosity, he and his will be visited by all the maladies which the
others have escaped.   5

  The scapegoat by means of which the accumulated ills of a whole year
are publicly expelled is sometimes an animal. For example, among the
Garos of Assam, “besides the sacrifices for individual cases of illness,
there are certain ceremonies which are observed once a year by a whole
community or village, and are intended to safeguard its members from
dangers of the forest, and from sickness and mishap during the coming
twelve months. The principal of these is the Asongtata ceremony. Close
to the outskirts of every big village a number of stones may be noticed
stuck into the ground, apparently without order or method. These are
known by the name of asong, and on them is offered the sacrifice which
the Asongtata demands. The sacrifice of a goat takes place, and a month
later, that of a langur (Entellus monkey) or a bamboo-rat is considered
necessary. The animal chosen has a rope fastened round its neck and is
led by two men, one on each side of it, to every house in the village.
It is taken inside each house in turn, the assembled villagers,
meanwhile, beating the walls from the outside, to frighten and drive out
any evil spirits which may have taken up their residence within. The
round of the village having been made in this manner, the monkey or rat
is led to the outskirts of the village, killed by a blow of a dao, which
disembowels it, and then crucified on bamboos set up in the ground.
Round the crucified animal long, sharp bamboo stakes are placed, which
form chevaux de frise round about it. These commemorate the days when
such defences surrounded the villages on all sides to keep off human
enemies, and they are now a symbol to ward off sickness and dangers to
life from the wild animals of the forest. The langur required for the
purpose is hunted down some days before, but should it be found
impossible to catch one, a brown monkey may take its place; a hulock may
not be used.” Here the crucified ape or rat is the public scapegoat,
which by its vicarious sufferings and death relieves the people from all
sickness and mishap in the coming year.   6

  Again, on one day of the year the Bhotiyas of Juhar, in the Western
Himalayas, take a dog, intoxicate him with spirits and bhang or hemp,
and having fed him with sweetmeats, lead him round the village and let
him loose. They then chase and kill him with sticks and stones, and
believe that, when they have done so, no disease or misfortune will
visit the village during the year. In some parts of Breadalbane it was
formerly the custom on New Year’s Day to take a dog to the door, give
him a bit of bread, and drive him out, saying, “Get away, you dog!
Whatever death of men or loss of cattle would happen in this house to
the end of the present year, may it all light on your head!” On the Day
of Atonement, which was the tenth day of the seventh month, the Jewish
high-priest laid both his hands on the head of a live goat, confessed
over it all the iniquities of the Children of Israel, and, having
thereby transferred the sins of the people to the beast, sent it away
into the wilderness.   7

  The scapegoat upon whom the sins of the people are periodically laid,
may also be a human being. At Onitsha, on the Niger, two human beings
used to be annually sacrificed to take away the sins of the land. The
victims were purchased by public subscription. All persons who, during
the past year, had fallen into gross sins, such as incendiarism, theft,
adultery, witchcraft, and so forth, were expected to contribute 28
ngugas, or a little over £2. The money thus collected was taken into the
interior of the country and expended in the purchase of two sickly
persons “to be offered as a sacrifice for all these abominable
crimes—one for the land and one for the river.” A man from a
neighbouring town was hired to put them to death. On the twenty-seventh
of February 1858 the Rev. J. C. Taylor witnessed the sacrifice of one of
these victims. The sufferer was a woman, about nineteen or twenty years
of age. They dragged her alive along the ground, face downwards, from
the king’s house to the river, a distance of two miles, the crowds who
accompanied her crying, “Wickedness! wickedness!” The intention was “to
take away the iniquities of the land. The body was dragged along in a
merciless manner, as if the weight of all their wickedness was thus
carried away.” Similar customs are said to be still secretly practised
every year by many tribes in the delta of the Niger in spite of the
vigilance of the British Government. Among the Yoruba negroes of West
Africa “the human victim chosen for sacrifice, and who may be either a
freeborn or a slave, a person of noble or wealthy parentage, or one of
humble birth, is, after he has been chosen and marked out for the
purpose, called an Oluwo. He is always well fed and nourished and
supplied with whatever he should desire during the period of his
confinement. When the occasion arrives for him to be sacrificed and
offered up, he is commonly led about and paraded through the streets of
the town or city of the Sovereign who would sacrifice him for the
well-being of his government and of every family and individual under
it, in order that he might carry off the sin, guilt, misfortune and
death of all without exception. Ashes and chalk would be employed to
hide his identity by the one being freely thrown over his head, and his
face painted with the latter, whilst individuals would often rush out of
their houses to lay their hands upon him that they might thus transfer
to him their sin, guilt, trouble, and death.” This parade over, he is
taken to an inner sanctuary and beheaded. His last words or dying groans
are the signal for an outburst of joy among the people assembled
outside, who believe that the sacrifice has been accepted and the divine
wrath appeased.   8

  In Siam it used to be the custom on one day of the year to single out
a woman broken down by debauchery, and carry her on a litter through all
the streets to the music of drums and hautboys. The mob insulted her and
pelted her with dirt; and after having carried her through the whole
city, they threw her on a dunghill or a hedge of thorns outside the
ramparts, forbidding her ever to enter the walls again. They believed
that the woman thus drew upon herself all the malign influences of the
air and of evil spirits. The Bataks of Sumatra offer either a red horse
or a buffalo as a public sacrifice to purify the land and obtain the
favour of the gods. Formerly, it is said, a man was bound to the same
stake as the buffalo, and when they killed the animal, the man was
driven away; no one might receive him, converse with him, or give him
food. Doubtless he was supposed to carry away the sins and misfortunes
of the people.   9

  Sometimes the scapegoat is a divine animal. The people of Malabar
share the Hindoo reverence for the cow, to kill and eat which “they
esteem to be a crime as heinous as homicide or wilful murder.”
Nevertheless the “Bramans transfer the sins of the people into one or
more Cows, which are then carry’d away, both the Cows and the Sins
wherewith these Beasts are charged, to what place the Braman shall
appoint.” When the ancient Egyptians sacrificed a bull, they invoked
upon its head all the evils that might otherwise befall themselves and
the land of Egypt, and thereupon they either sold the bull’s head to the
Greeks or cast it into the river. Now, it cannot be said that in the
times known to us the Egyptians worshipped bulls in general, for they
seem to have commonly killed and eaten them. But a good many
circumstances point to the conclusion that originally all cattle, bulls
as well as cows, were held sacred by the Egyptians. For not only were
all cows esteemed holy by them and never sacrificed, but even bulls
might not be sacrificed unless they had certain natural marks; a priest
examined every bull before it was sacrificed; if it had the proper
marks, he put his seal on the animal in token that it might be
sacrificed; and if a man sacrificed a bull which had not been sealed, he
was put to death. Moreover, the worship of the black bulls Apis and
Mnevis, especially the former, played an important part in Egyptian
religion; all bulls that died a natural death were carefully buried in
the suburbs of the cities, and their bones were afterwards collected
from all parts of Egypt and interred in a single spot; and at the
sacrifice of a bull in the great rites of Isis all the worshippers beat
their breasts and mourned. On the whole, then, we are perhaps entitled
to infer that bulls were originally, as cows were always, esteemed
sacred by the Egyptians, and that the slain bull upon whose head they
laid the misfortunes of the people was once a divine scapegoat. It seems
not improbable that the lamb annually slain by the Madis of Central
Africa is a divine scapegoat, and the same supposition may partly
explain the Zuni sacrifice of the turtle.   10

  Lastly, the scapegoat may be a divine man. Thus, in November the Gonds
of India worship Ghansyam Deo, the protector of the crops, and at the
festival the god himself is said to descend on the head of one of the
worshippers, who is suddenly seized with a kind of fit and, after
staggering about, rushes off into the jungle, where it is believed that,
if left to himself, he would die mad. However, they bring him back, but
he does not recover his senses for one or two days. The people think
that one man is thus singled out as a scapegoat for the sins of the rest
of the village. In the temple of the Moon the Albanians of the Eastern
Caucasus kept a number of sacred slaves, of whom many were inspired and
prophesied. When one of these men exhibited more than usual symptoms of
inspiration or insanity, and wandered solitary up and down the woods,
like the Gond in the jungle, the high priest had him bound with a sacred
chain and maintained him in luxury for a year. At the end of the year he
was anointed with unguents and led forth to be sacrificed. A man whose
business it was to slay these human victims and to whom practice had
given dexterity, advanced from the crowd and thrust a sacred spear into
the victim’s side, piercing his heart. From the manner in which the
slain man fell, omens were drawn as to the welfare of the commonwealth.
Then the body was carried to a certain spot where all the people stood
upon it as a purificatory ceremony. This last circumstance clearly
indicates that the sins of the people were transferred to the victim,
just as the Jewish priest transferred the sins of the people to the
scapegoat by laying his hands on the animal’s head; and since the man
was believed to be possessed by the divine spirit, we have here an
undoubted example of a man-god slain to take away the sins and
misfortunes of the people.   11

  In Tibet the ceremony of the scapegoat presents some remarkable
features. The Tibetan new year begins with the new moon which appears
about the fifteenth of February. For twenty-three days afterwards the
government of Lhasa, the capital, is taken out of the hands of the
ordinary rulers and entrusted to the monk of the Debang monastery who
offers to pay the highest sum for the privilege. The successful bidder
is called the Jalno, and he announces his accession to power in person,
going through the streets of Lhasa with a silver stick in his hand.
Monks from all the neighbouring monasteries and temples assemble to pay
him homage. The Jalno exercises his authority in the most arbitrary
manner for his own benefit, as all the fines which he exacts are his by
purchase. The profit he makes is about ten times the amount of the
purchase money. His men go about the streets in order to discover any
conduct on the part of the inhabitants that can be found fault with.
Every house in Lhasa is taxed at this time, and the slightest offence is
punished with unsparing rigour by fines. This severity of the Jalno
drives all working classes out of the city till the twenty-three days
are over. But if the laity go out, the clergy come in. All the Buddhist
monasteries of the country for miles round about open their gates and
disgorge their inmates. All the roads that lead down into Lhasa from the
neighbouring mountains are full of monks hurrying to the capital, some
on foot, some on horseback, some riding asses or lowing oxen, all
carrying their prayer-books and culinary utensils. In such multitudes do
they come that the streets and squares of the city are encumbered with
their swarms, and incarnadined with their red cloaks. The disorder and
confusion are indescribable. Bands of the holy men traverse the streets
chanting prayers, or uttering wild cries. They meet, they jostle, they
quarrel, they fight; bloody noses, black eyes, and broken heads are
freely given and received. All day long, too, from before the peep of
dawn till after darkness has fallen, these red-cloaked monks hold
services in the dim incense-laden air of the great Machindranath temple,
the cathedral of Lhasa; and thither they crowd thrice a day to receive
their doles of tea and soup and money. The cathedral is a vast building,
standing in the centre of the city, and surrounded by bazaars and shops.
The idols in it are richly inlaid with gold and precious stones.   12

  Twenty-four days after the Jalno has ceased to have authority, he
assumes it again, and for ten days acts in the same arbitrary manner as
before. On the first of the ten days the priests again assemble at the
cathedral, pray to the gods to prevent sickness and other evils among
the people, “and, as a peace-offering, sacrifice one man. The man is not
killed purposely, but the ceremony he undergoes often proves fatal.
Grain is thrown against his head, and his face is painted half white,
half black.” Thus grotesquely disguised, and carrying a coat of skin on
his arm, he is called the King of the Years, and sits daily in the
market-place, where he helps himself to whatever he likes and goes about
shaking a black yak’s tail over the people, who thus transfer their bad
luck to him. On the tenth day, all the troops in Lhasa march to the
great temple and form in line before it. The King of the Years is
brought forth from the temple and receives small donations from the
assembled multitude. He then ridicules the Jalno, saying to him, “What
we perceive through the five senses is no illusion. All you teach is
untrue,” and the like. The Jalno, who represents the Grand Lama for the
time being, contests these heretical opinions; the dispute waxes warm,
and at last both agree to decide the questions at issue by a cast of the
dice, the Jalno offering to change places with the scapegoat should the
throw be against him. If the King of the Years wins, much evil is
prognosticated; but if the Jalno wins, there is great rejoicing, for it
proves that his adversary has been accepted by the gods as a victim to
bear all the sins of the people of Lhasa. Fortune, however, always
favours the Jalno, who throws sixes with unvarying success, while his
opponent turns up only ones. Nor is this so extraordinary as at first
sight it might appear; for the Jalno’s dice are marked with nothing but
sixes and his adversary’s with nothing but ones. When he sees the finger
of Providence thus plainly pointed against him, the King of the Years is
terrified and flees away upon a white horse, with a white dog, a white
bird, salt, and so forth, which have all been provided for him by the
government. His face is still painted half white and half black, and he
still wears his leathern coat. The whole populace pursues him, hooting,
yelling, and firing blank shots in volleys after him. Thus driven out of
the city, he is detained for seven days in the great chamber of horrors
at the Samyas monastery, surrounded by monstrous and terrific images of
devils and skins of huge serpents and wild beasts. Thence he goes away
into the mountains of Chetang, where he has to remain an outcast for
several months or a year in a narrow den. If he dies before the time is
out, the people say it is an auspicious omen; but if he survives, he may
return to Lhasa and play the part of scapegoat over again the following
year.   13

  This quaint ceremonial, still annually observed in the secluded
capital of Buddhism—the Rome of Asia—is interesting because it exhibits,
in a clearly marked religious stratification, a series of divine
redeemers themselves redeemed, of vicarious sacrifices vicariously
atoned for, of gods undergoing a process of fossilisation, who, while
they retain the privileges, have disburdened themselves of the pains and
penalties of divinity. In the Jalno we may without undue straining
discern a successor of those temporary kings, those mortal gods, who
purchase a short lease of power and glory at the price of their lives.
That he is the temporary substitute of the Grand Lama is certain; that
he is, or was once, liable to act as scapegoat for the people is made
nearly certain by his offer to change places with the real scapegoat—the
King of the Years—if the arbitrament of the dice should go against him.
It is true that the conditions under which the question is now put to
the hazard have reduced the offer to an idle form. But such forms are no
mere mushroom growths, springing up of themselves in a night. If they
are now lifeless formalities, empty husks devoid of significance, we may
be sure that they once had a life and a meaning; if at the present day
they are blind alleys leading nowhere, we may be certain that in former
days they were paths that led somewhere, if only to death. That death
was the goal to which of old the Tibetan scapegoat passed after his
brief period of licence in the market-place, is a conjecture that has
much to commend it. Analogy suggests it; the blank shots fired after
him, the statement that the ceremony often proves fatal, the belief that
his death is a happy omen, all confirm it. We need not wonder then that
the Jalno, after paying so dear to act as deputy-deity for a few weeks,
should have preferred to die by deputy rather than in his own person
when his time was up. The painful but necessary duty was accordingly
laid on some poor devil, some social outcast, some wretch with whom the
world had gone hard, who readily agreed to throw away his life at the
end of a few days if only he might have his fling in the meantime. For
observe that while the time allowed to the original deputy—the Jalno—was
measured by weeks, the time allowed to the deputy’s deputy was cut down
to days, ten days according to one authority, seven days according to
another. So short a rope was doubtless thought a long enough tether for
so black or sickly a sheep; so few sands in the hour-glass, slipping so
fast away, sufficed for one who had wasted so many precious years. Hence
in the jack-pudding who now masquerades with motley countenance in the
market-place of Lhasa, sweeping up misfortune with a black yak’s tail,
we may fairly see the substitute of a substitute, the vicar of a vicar,
the proxy on whose back the heavy burden was laid when it had been
lifted from nobler shoulders. But the clue, if we have followed it
aright, does not stop at the Jalno; it leads straight back to the pope
of Lhasa himself, the Grand Lama, of whom the Jalno is merely the
temporary vicar. The analogy of many customs in many lands points to the
conclusion that, if this human divinity stoops to resign his ghostly
power for a time into the hands of a substitute, it is, or rather was
once, for no other reason than that the substitute might die in his
stead. Thus through the mist of ages unillumined by the lamp of history,
the tragic figure of the pope of Buddhism—God’s vicar on earth for
Asia—looms dim and sad as the man-god who bore his people’s sorrows, the
Good Shepherd who laid down his life for the sheep.   14
