[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gb05504)  [Next](gb05602) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter 56. The Public Expulsion of Evils.

## Section 1. The Omnipresence of Demons.

IN THE FOREGOING chapter the primitive principle of the transference of
ills to another person, animal, or thing was explained and illustrated.
But similar means have been adopted to free a whole community from
diverse evils that afflict it. Such attempts to dismiss at once the
accumulated sorrows of a people are by no means rare or exceptional; on
the contrary they have been made in many lands, and from being
occasional they tend to become periodic and annual.   1

  It needs some effort on our part to realise the frame of mind which
prompts these attempts. Bred in a philosophy which strips nature of
personality and reduces it to the unknown cause of an orderly series of
impressions on our senses, we find it hard to put ourselves in the place
of the savage, to whom the same impressions appear in the guise of
spirits or the handiwork of spirits. For ages the army of spirits, once
so near, has been receding farther and farther from us, banished by the
magic wand of science from hearth and home, from ruined cell and ivied
tower, from haunted glade and lonely mere, from the riven murky cloud
that belches forth the lightning, and from those fairer clouds that
pillow the silvery moon or fret with flakes of burning red the golden
eve. The spirits are gone even from their last stronghold in the sky,
whose blue arch no longer passes, except with children, for the screen
that hides from mortal eyes the glories of the celestial world. Only in
poets’ dreams or impassioned flights of oratory is it given to catch a
glimpse of the last flutter of the standards of the retreating host, to
hear the beat of their invisible wings, the sound of their mocking
laughter, or the swell of angel music dying away in the distance. Far
otherwise is it with the savage. To his imagination the world still
teems with those motley beings whom a more sober philosophy has
discarded. Fairies and goblins, ghosts and demons, still hover about him
both waking and sleeping. They dog his footsteps, dazzle his senses,
enter into him, harass and deceive and torment him in a thousand
freakish and mischievous ways. The mishaps that befall him, the losses
he sustains, the pains he has to endure, he commonly sets down, if not
to the magic of his enemies, to the spite or anger or caprice of the
spirits. Their constant presence wearies him, their sleepless malignity
exasperates him; he longs with an unspeakable longing to be rid of them
altogether, and from time to time, driven to bay, his patience utterly
exhausted, he turns fiercely on his persecutors and makes a desperate
effort to chase the whole pack of them from the land, to clear the air
of their swarming multitudes, that he may breathe more freely and go on
his way unmolested, at least for a time. Thus it comes about that the
endeavour of primitive people to make a clean sweep of all their
troubles generally takes the form of a grand hunting out and expulsion
of devils or ghosts. They think that if they can only shake off these
their accursed tormentors, they will make a fresh start in life, happy
and innocent; the tales of Eden and the old poetic golden age will come
true again.   2
