[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gb06702)  [Next](gb06704) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter 67. The External Soul in Folk-Custom.

## Section 3. The External Soul in Animals.

BUT in practice, as in folk-tales, it is not merely with inanimate
objects and plants that a person is occasionally believed to be united
by a bond of physical sympathy. The same bond, it is supposed, may exist
between a man and an animal, so that the welfare of the one depends on
the welfare of the other, and when the animal dies the man dies also.
The analogy between the custom and the tales is all the closer because
in both of them the power of thus removing the soul from the body and
stowing it away in an animal is often a special privilege of wizards and
witches. Thus the Yakuts of Siberia believe that every shaman or wizard
keeps his soul, or one of his souls, incarnate in an animal which is
carefully concealed from all the world. “Nobody can find my external
soul,” said one famous wizard, “it lies hidden far away in the stony
mountains of Edzhigansk.” Only once a year, when the last snows melt and
the earth turns black, do these external souls of wizards appear in the
shape of animals among the dwellings of men. They wander everywhere, yet
none but wizards can see them. The strong ones sweep roaring and noisily
along, the weak steal about quietly and furtively. Often they fight, and
then the wizard whose external soul is beaten, falls ill or dies. The
weakest and most cowardly wizards are they whose souls are incarnate in
the shape of dogs, for the dog gives his human double no peace, but
gnaws his heart and tears his body. The most powerful wizards are they
whose external souls have the shape of stallions, elks, black bears,
eagles, or boars. Again, the Samoyeds of the Turukhinsk region hold that
every shaman has a familiar spirit in the shape of a boar, which he
leads about by a magic belt. On the death of the boar the shaman himself
dies; and stories are told of battles between wizards, who send their
spirits to fight before they encounter each other in person. The Malays
believe that “the soul of a person may pass into another person or into
an animal, or rather that such a mysterious relation can arise between
the two that the fate of the one is wholly dependent on that of the
other.”   1

  Among the Melanesians of Mota, one of the New Hebrides islands, the
conception of an external soul is carried out in the practice of daily
life. In the Mota language the word tamaniu signifies “something animate
or inanimate which a man has come to believe to have an existence
intimately connected with his own… . It was not every one in Mota who
had his tamaniu; only some men fancied that they had this relation to a
lizard, a snake, or it might be a stone; sometimes the thing was sought
for and found by drinking the infusion of certain leaves and heaping
together the dregs; then whatever living thing was first seen in or upon
the heap was the tamaniu. It was watched but not fed or worshipped; the
natives believed that it came at call, and that the life of the man was
bound up with the life of his tamaniu, if a living thing, or with its
safety; should it die, or if not living get broken or be lost, the man
would die. Hence in case of sickness they would send to see if the
tamaniu was safe and well.”   2

  The theory of an external soul deposited in an animal appears to be
very prevalent in West Africa, particularly in Nigeria, the Cameroons,
and the Gaboon. Among the Fans of the Gaboon every wizard is believed at
initiation to unite his life with that of some particular wild animal by
a rite of blood-brotherhood; he draws blood from the ear of the animal
and from his own arm, and inoculates the animal with his own blood, and
himself with the blood of the beast. Henceforth such an intimate union
is established between the two that the death of the one entails the
death of the other. The alliance is thought to bring to the wizard or
sorcerer a great accession of power, which he can turn to his advantage
in various ways. In the first place, like the warlock in the fairy tales
who has deposited his life outside of himself in some safe place, the
Fan wizard now deems himself invulnerable. Moreover, the animal with
which he has exchanged blood has become his familiar, and will obey any
orders he may choose to give it; so he makes use of it to injure and
kill his enemies. For that reason the creature with whom he establishes
the relation of blood-brotherhood is never a tame or domestic animal,
but always a ferocious and dangerous wild beast, such as a leopard, a
black serpent, a crocodile, a hippopotamus, a wild boar, or a vulture.
Of all these creatures the leopard is by far the commonest familiar of
Fan wizards, and next to it comes the black serpent; the vulture is the
rarest. Witches as well as wizards have their familiars; but the animals
with which the lives of women are thus bound up generally differ from
those to which men commit their external souls. A witch never has a
panther for her familiar, but often a venomous species of serpent,
sometimes a horned viper, sometimes a black serpent, sometimes a green
one that lives in banana-trees; or it may be a vulture, an owl, or other
bird of night. In every case the beast or bird with which the witch or
wizard has contracted this mystic alliance is an individual, never a
species; and when the individual animal dies the alliance is naturally
at an end, since the death of the animal is supposed to entail the death
of the man.   3

  Similar beliefs are held by the natives of the Cross River valley
within the provinces of the Cameroons. Groups of people, generally the
inhabitants of a village, have chosen various animals, with which they
believe themselves to stand on a footing of intimate friendship or
relationship. Amongst such animals are hippopotamuses, elephants,
leopards, crocodiles, gorillas, fish, and serpents, all of them
creatures which are either very strong or can easily hide themselves in
the water or a thicket. This power of concealing themselves is said to
be an indispensable condition of the choice of animal familiars, since
the animal friend or helper is expected to injure his owner’s enemy by
stealth; for example, if he is a hippopotamus, he will bob up suddenly
out of the water and capsize the enemy’s canoe. Between the animals and
their human friends or kinsfolk such a sympathetic relation is supposed
to exist that the moment the animal dies the man dies also, and
similarly the instant the man perishes so does the beast. From this it
follows that the animal kinsfolk may never be shot at or molested for
fear of injuring or killing the persons whose lives are knit up with the
lives of the brutes. This does not, however, prevent the people of a
village, who have elephants for their animal friends, from hunting
elephants. For they do not respect the whole species but merely certain
individuals of it, which stand in an intimate relation to certain
individual men and women; and they imagine that they can always
distinguish these brother elephants from the common herd of elephants
which are mere elephants and nothing more. The recognition indeed is
said to be mutual. When a hunter, who has an elephant for his friend,
meets a human elephant, as we may call it, the noble animal lifts up a
paw and holds it before his face, as much as to say, “Don’t shoot.” Were
the hunter so inhuman as to fire on and wound such an elephant, the
person whose life was bound up with the elephant would fall ill.   4

  The Balong of the Cameroons think that every man has several souls, of
which one is in his body and another in an animal, such as an elephant,
a wild pig, a leopard, and so forth. When a man comes home, feeling ill,
and says, “I shall soon die,” and dies accordingly, the people aver that
one of his souls has been killed in a wild pig or a leopard and that the
death of the external soul has caused the death of the soul in his body.
A similar belief in the external souls of living people is entertained
by the Ibos, an important tribe of the Niger delta. They think that a
man’s spirit can quit his body for a time during life and take up its
abode in an animal. A man who wishes to acquire this power procures a
certain drug from a wise man and mixes it with his food. After that his
soul goes out and enters into an animal. If it should happen that the
animal is killed while the man’s soul is lodged in it, the man dies; and
if the animal be wounded, the man’s body will presently be covered with
boils. This belief instigates to many deeds of darkness; for a sly rogue
will sometimes surreptitiously administer the magical drug to his enemy
in his food, and having thus smuggled the other’s soul into an animal
will destroy the creature, and with it the man whose soul is lodged in
it.   5

  The negroes of Calabar, at the mouth of the Niger, believe that every
person has four souls, one of which always lives outside of his or her
body in the form of a wild beast in the forest. This external soul, or
bush soul, as Miss Kingsley calls it, may be almost any animal, for
example, a leopard, a fish, or a tortoise; but it is never a domestic
animal and never a plant. Unless he is gifted with second sight, a man
cannot see his own bush soul, but a diviner will often tell him what
sort of creature his bush soul is, and after that the man will be
careful not to kill any animal of that species, and will strongly object
to any one else doing so. A man and his sons have usually the same sort
of animals for their bush souls, and so with a mother and her daughters.
But sometimes all the children of a family take after the bush soul of
their father; for example, if his external soul is a leopard, all his
sons and daughters will have leopards for their external souls. And on
the other hand, sometimes they all take after their mother; for
instance, if her external soul is a tortoise, all the external souls of
her sons and daughters will be tortoises too. So intimately bound up is
the life of the man with that of the animal which he regards as his
external or bush soul, that the death or injury of the animal
necessarily entails the death or injury of the man. And, conversely,
when the man dies, his bush soul can no longer find a place of rest, but
goes mad and rushes into the fire or charges people and is knocked on
the head, and that is an end of it.   6

  Near Eket in North Calabar there is a sacred lake, the fish of which
are carefully preserved because the people believe that their own souls
are lodged in the fish, and that with every fish killed a human life
would be simultaneously extinguished. In the Calabar River not very many
years ago there used to be a huge old crocodile, popularly supposed to
contain the external soul of a chief who resided in the flesh at Duke
Town. Sporting vice-consuls used from time to time to hunt the animal,
and once an officer contrived to hit it. Forthwith the chief was laid up
with a wound in his leg. He gave out that a dog had bitten him, but no
doubt the wise shook their heads and refused to be put off with so
flimsy a pretext. Again, among several tribes on the banks of the Niger
between Lokoja and the delta there prevails “a belief in the possibility
of a man possessing an alter ego in the form of some animal such as a
crocodile or a hippopotamus. It is believed that such a person’s life is
bound up with that of the animal to such an extent that, whatever
affects the one produces a corresponding impression upon the other, and
that if one dies the other must speedily do so too. It happened not very
long ago that an Englishman shot a hippopotamus close to a native
village; the friends of a woman who died the same night in the village
demanded and eventually obtained five pounds as compensation for the
murder of the woman.”   7

  Amongst the Zapotecs of Central America, when a woman was about to be
confined, her relations assembled in the hut, and began to draw on the
floor figures of different animals, rubbing each one out as soon as it
was completed. This went on till the moment of birth, and the figure
that then remained sketched upon the ground was called the child’s tona
or second self. “When the child grew old enough, he procured the animal
that represented him and took care of it, as it was believed that health
and existence were bound up with that of the animal’s, in fact that the
death of both would occur simultaneously,” or rather that when the
animal died the man would die too. Among the Indians of Guatemala and
Honduras the nagual or naual is “that animate or inanimate object,
generally an animal, which stands in a parallel relation to a particular
man, so that the weal and woe of the man depend on the fate of the
nagual.” According to an old writer, many Indians of Guatemala “are
deluded by the devil to believe that their life dependeth upon the life
of such and such a beast (which they take unto them as their familiar
spirit), and think that when that beast dieth they must die; when he is
chased, their hearts pant; when he is faint, they are faint; nay, it
happeneth that by the devil’s delusion they appear in the shape of that
beast (which commonly by their choice is a buck, or doe, a lion, or
tigre, or dog, or eagle) and in that shape have been shot at and
wounded.” The Indians were persuaded that the death of their nagual
would entail their own. Legend affirms that in the first battles with
the Spaniards on the plateau of Quetzaltenango the naguals of the Indian
chiefs fought in the form of serpents. The nagual of the highest chief
was especially conspicuous, because it had the form of a great bird,
resplendent in green plumage. The Spanish general Pedro de Alvarado
killed the bird with his lance, and at the same moment the Indian chief
fell dead to the ground.   8

  In many tribes of South-Eastern Australia each sex used to regard a
particular species of animals in the same way that a Central American
Indian regarded his nagual, but with this difference, that whereas the
Indian apparently knew the individual animal with which his life was
bound up, the Australians only knew that each of their lives was bound
up with some one animal of the species, but they could not say with
which. The result naturally was that every man spared and protected all
the animals of the species with which the lives of the men were bound
up; and every woman spared and protected all the animals of the species
with which the lives of the women were bound up; because no one knew but
that the death of any animal of the respective species might entail his
or her own; just as the killing of the green bird was immediately
followed by the death of the Indian chief, and the killing of the parrot
by the death of Punchkin in the fairy tale. Thus, for example, the
Wotjobaluk tribe of South-Eastern Australia “held that ‘the life of
Nguˇnuˇnguˇnuˇt (the Bat) is the life of a man, and the life of
Yártatguˇrk (the Nightjar) is the life of a woman,’ and that when either
of these creatures is killed the life of some man or of some woman is
shortened. In such a case every man or every woman in the camp feared
that he or she might be the victim, and from this cause great fights
arose in this tribe. I learn that in these fights, men on one side and
women on the other, it was not at all certain which would be victorious,
for at times the women gave the men a severe drubbing with their
yamsticks, while often women were injured or killed by spears.” The
Wotjobaluk said that the bat was the man’s “brother” and that the
nightjar was his “wife.” The particular species of animals with which
the lives of the sexes were believed to be respectively bound up varied
somewhat from tribe to tribe. Thus whereas among the Wotjobaluk the bat
was the animal of the men, at Gunbower Creek on the Lower Murray the bat
seems to have been the animal of the women, for the natives would not
kill it for the reason that “if it was killed, one of their lubras
\[women\] would be sure to die in consequence.” But whatever the
particular sorts of creature with which the lives of men and women were
believed to be bound up, the belief itself and the fights to which it
gave rise are known to have prevailed over a large part of South-Eastern
Australia, and probably they extended much farther. The belief was a
very serious one, and so consequently were the fights which sprang from
it. Thus among some tribes of Victoria “the common bat belongs to the
men, who protect it against injury, even to the half-killing of their
wives for its sake. The fern owl, or large goatsucker, belongs to the
women, and, although a bird of evil omen, creating terror at night by
its cry, it is jealously protected by them. If a man kills one, they are
as much enraged as if it was one of their children, and will strike him
with their long poles.”   9

  The jealous protection thus afforded by Australian men and women to
bats and owls respectively (for bats and owls seem to be the creatures
usually allotted to the two sexes) is not based upon purely selfish
considerations. For each man believes that not only his own life but the
lives of his father, brothers, sons, and so on are bound up with the
lives of particular bats, and that therefore in protecting the bat
species he is protecting the lives of all his male relations as well as
his own. Similarly, each woman believes that the lives of her mother,
sisters, daughters, and so forth, equally with her own, are bound up
with the lives of particular owls, and that in guarding the owl species
she is guarding the lives of all her female relations besides her own.
Now, when men’s lives are thus supposed to be contained in certain
animals, it is obvious that the animals can hardly be distinguished from
the men, or the men from the animals. If my brother John’s life is in a
bat, then, on the one hand, the bat is my brother as well as John; and,
on the other hand, John is in a sense a bat, since his life is in a bat.
Similarly, if my sister Mary’s life is in an owl, then the owl is my
sister and Mary is an owl. This is a natural enough conclusion, and the
Australians have not failed to draw it. When the bat is the man’s
animal, it is called his brother; and when the owl is the woman’s
animal, it is called her sister. And conversely a man addresses a woman
as an owl, and she addresses him as a bat. So with the other animals
allotted to the sexes respectively in other tribes. For example, among
the Kurnai all emu-wrens were “brothers” of the men, and all the men
were emu-wrens; all superb warblers were “sisters” of the women, and all
the women were superb warblers.   10

  But when a savage names himself after an animal, calls it his brother,
and refuses to kill it, the animal is said to be his totem. Accordingly
in the tribes of South-Eastern Australia which we have been considering
the bat and the owl, the emu-wren and the superb warbler, may properly
be described as totems of the sexes. But the assignation of a totem to a
sex is comparatively rare, and has hitherto been discovered nowhere but
in Australia. Far more commonly the totem is appropriated not to a sex,
but to a clan, and is hereditary either in the male or female line. The
relation of an individual to the clan totem does not differ in kind from
his relation to the sex totem; he will not kill it, he speaks of it as
his brother, and he calls himself by its name. Now if the relations are
similar, the explanation which holds good of the one ought equally to
hold good of the other. Therefore, the reason why a clan revere a
particular species of animals or plants (for the clan totem may be a
plant) and call themselves after it, would seem to be a belief that the
life of each individual of the clan is bound up with some one animal or
plant of the species, and that his or her death would be the consequence
of killing that particular animal, or destroying that particular plant.
This explanation of totemism squares very well with Sir George Grey’s
definition of a totem or kobong in Western Australia. He says: “A
certain mysterious connexion exists between a family and its kobong, so
that a member of the family will never kill an animal of the species to
which his kobong belongs, should he find it asleep; indeed he always
kills it reluctantly, and never without affording it a chance to escape.
This arises from the family belief that some one individual of the
species is their nearest friend, to kill whom would be a great crime,
and to be carefully avoided. Similarly, a native who has a vegetable for
his kobong may not gather it under certain circumstances, and at a
particular period of the year.” Here it will be observed that though
each man spares all the animals or plants of the species, they are not
all equally precious to him; far from it, out of the whole species there
is only one which is specially dear to him; but as he does not know
which the dear one is, he is obliged to spare them all from fear of
injuring the one. Again, this explanation of the clan totem harmonises
with the supposed effect of killing one of the totem species. “One day
one of the blacks killed a crow. Three or four days afterwards a Boortwa
(crow) \[i.e. a man of the Crow clan\] named Larry died. He had been
ailing for some days, but the killing of his wingong \[totem\] hastened
his death.” Here the killing of the crow caused the death of a man of
the Crow clan, exactly as, in the case of the sex-totems, the killing of
a bat causes the death of a Bat-man or the killing of an owl causes the
death of an Owl-woman. Similarly, the killing of his

nagual causes the death of a Central American Indian, the killing of his
bush soul causes the death of a Calabar negro, the killing of his
tamaniu causes the death of a Banks Islander, and the killing of the
animal in which his life is stowed away causes the death of the giant or
warlock in the fairy tale.   11

  Thus it appears that the story of “The giant who had no heart in his
body” may perhaps furnish the key to the relation which is supposed to
subsist between a man and his totem. The totem, on this theory, is
simply the receptacle in which a man keeps his life, as Punchkin kept
his life in a parrot, and Bidasari kept her soul in a golden fish. It is
no valid objection to this view that when a savage has both a sex totem
and a clan totem his life must be bound up with two different animals,
the death of either of which would entail his own. If a man has more
vital places than one in his body, why, the savage may think, should he
not have more vital places than one outside it? Why, since he can put
his life outside himself, should he not transfer one portion of it to
one animal and another to another? The divisibility of life, or, to put
it otherwise, the plurality of souls, is an idea suggested by many
familiar facts, and has commended itself to philosophers like Plato, as
well as to savages. It is only when the notion of a soul, from being a
quasi-scientific hypothesis, becomes a theological dogma that its unity
and indivisibility are insisted upon as essential. The savage,
unshackled by dogma, is free to explain the facts of life by the
assumption of as many souls as he thinks necessary. Hence, for example,
the Caribs supposed that there was one soul in the head, another in the
heart, and other souls at all the places where an artery is felt
pulsating. Some of the Hidatsa Indians explain the phenomena of gradual
death, when the extremities appear dead first, by supposing that man has
four souls, and that they quit the body, not simultaneously, but one
after the other, dissolution being only complete when all four have
departed. Some of the Dyaks of Borneo and the Malays of the Peninsula
believe that every man has seven souls. The Alfoors of Poso in Celebes
are of opinion that he has three. The natives of Laos suppose that the
body is the seat of thirty spirits, which reside in the hands, the feet,
the mouth, the eyes, and so on. Hence, from the primitive point of view,
it is perfectly possible that a savage should have one soul in his sex
totem and another in his clan totem. However, as I have observed, sex
totems have been found nowhere but in Australia; so that as a rule the
savage who practises totemism need not have more than one soul out of
his body at a time.   12

  If this explanation of the totem as a receptacle in which a man keeps
his soul or one of his souls is correct, we should expect to find some
totemic people of whom it is expressly said that every man amongst them
is believed to keep at least one soul permanently out of his body, and
that the destruction of this external soul is supposed to entail the
death of its owner. Such a people are the Bataks of Sumatra. The Bataks
are divided into exogamous clans (margas) with descent in the male line;
and each clan is forbidden to eat the flesh of a particular animal. One
clan may not eat the tiger, another the ape, another the crocodile,
another the dog, another the cat, another the dove, another the white
buffalo, and another the locust. The reason given by members of a clan
for abstaining from the flesh of the particular animal is either that
they are descended from animals of that species, and that their souls
after death may transmigrate into the animals, or that they or their
forefathers have been under certain obligations to the creatures.
Sometimes, but not always, the clan bears the name of the animal. Thus
the Bataks have totemism in full. But, further, each Batak believes that
he has seven or, on a more moderate computation, three souls. One of
these souls is always outside the body, but nevertheless whenever it
dies, however far away it may be at the time, that same moment the man
dies also. The writer who mentions this belief says nothing about the
Batak totems; but on the analogy of the Australian, Central American,
and African evidence we may conjecture that the external soul, whose
death entails the death of the man, is housed in the totemic animal or
plant.   13

  Against this view it can hardly be thought to militate that the Batak
does not in set terms affirm his external soul to be in his totem, but
alleges other grounds for respecting the sacred animal or plant of his
clan. For if a savage seriously believes that his life is bound up with
an external object, it is in the last degree unlikely that he will let
any stranger into the secret. In all that touches his inmost life and
beliefs the savage is exceedingly suspicious and reserved; Europeans
have resided among savages for years without discovering some of their
capital articles of faith, and in the end the discovery has often been
the result of accident. Above all, the savage lives in an intense and
perpetual dread of assassination by sorcery; the most trifling relics of
his person—the clippings of his hair and nails, his spittle, the
remnants of his food, his very name—all these may, he fancies, be turned
by the sorcerer to his destruction, and he is therefore anxiously
careful to conceal or destroy them. But if in matters such as these,
which are but the outposts and outworks of his life, he is so shy and
secretive, how close must be the concealment, how impenetrable the
reserve in which he enshrouds the inner keep and citadel of his being!
When the princess in the fairy tale asks the giant where he keeps his
soul, he often gives false or evasive answers, and it is only after much
coaxing and wheedling that the secret is at last wrung from him. In his
jealous reticence the giant resembles the timid and furtive savage; but
whereas the exigencies of the story demand that the giant should at last
reveal his secret, no such obligation is laid on the savage; and no
inducement that can be offered is likely to tempt him to imperil his
soul by revealing its hiding-place to a stranger. It is therefore no
matter for surprise that the central mystery of the savage’s life should
so long have remained a secret, and that we should be left to piece it
together from scattered hints and fragments and from the recollections
of it which linger in fairy tales.   14
