[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gb06401)  [Next](gb06500) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter 64. The Burning of Human Beings in the Fires.

## Section 2. The Burning of Men and Animals in the Fires.

IN THE POPULAR customs connected with the fire-festivals of Europe there
are certain features which appear to point to a former practice of human
sacrifice. We have seen reasons for believing that in Europe living
persons have often acted as representatives of the tree-spirit and
corn-spirit and have suffered death as such. There is no reason,
therefore, why they should not have been burned, if any special
advantages were likely to be attained by putting them to death in that
way. The consideration of human suffering is not one which enters into
the calculations of primitive man. Now, in the fire-festivals which we
are discussing, the pretence of burning people is sometimes carried so
far that it seems reasonable to regard it as a mitigated survival of an
older custom of actually burning them. Thus in Aachen, as we saw, the
man clad in peas-straw acts so cleverly that the children really believe
he is being burned. At Jumièges in Normandy the man clad all in green,
who bore the title of the Green Wolf, was pursued by his comrades, and
when they caught him they feigned to fling him upon the midsummer
bonfire. Similarly at the Beltane fires in Scotland the pretended victim
was seized, and a show made of throwing him into the flames, and for
some time afterwards people affected to speak of him as dead. Again, in
the Hallowe’en bonfires of Northeastern Scotland we may perhaps detect a
similar pretence in the custom observed by a lad of lying down as close
to the fire as possible and allowing the other lads to leap over him.
The titular king at Aix, who reigned for a year and danced the first
dance round the midsummer bonfire, may perhaps in days of old have
discharged the less agreeable duty of serving as fuel for that fire
which in later times he only kindled. In the following customs Mannhardt
is probably right in recognising traces of an old custom of burning a
leaf-clad representative of the spirit of vegetation. At Wolfeck, in
Austria, on Midsummer Day, a boy completely clad in green fir branches
goes from house to house, accompanied by a noisy crew, collecting wood
for the bonfire. As he gets the wood he sings:

“Forest trees I want,

No sour milk for me,

But beer and wine,

So can the wood-man be jolly and gay.”    1

  In some parts of Bavaria, also, the boys who go from house to house
collecting fuel for the midsummer bonfire envelop one of their number
from head to foot in green branches of firs, and lead him by a rope
through the whole village. At Moosheim, in Wurtemberg, the festival of
St. John’s Fire usually lasted for fourteen days, ending on the second
Sunday after Midsummer Day. On this last day the bonfire was left in
charge of the children, while the older people retired to a wood. Here
they encased a young fellow in leaves and twigs, who, thus disguised,
went to the fire, scattered it, and trod it out. All the people present
fled at the sight of him.   2

  But it seems possible to go farther than this. Of human sacrifices
offered on these occasions the most unequivocal traces, as we have seen,
are those which, about a hundred years ago, still lingered at the
Beltane fires in the Highlands of Scotland, that is, among a Celtic
people who, situated in a remote corner of Europe and almost completely
isolated from foreign influence, had till then conserved their old
heathenism better perhaps than any other people in the West of Europe.
It is significant, therefore, that human sacrifices by fire are known,
on unquestionable evidence, to have been systematically practised by the
Celts. The earliest description of these sacrifices has been bequeathed
to us by Julius Caesar. As conqueror of the hitherto independent Celts
of Gaul, Caesar had ample opportunity of observing the national Celtic
religion and manners, while these were still fresh and crisp from the
native mint and had not yet been fused in the melting-pot of Roman
civilisation. With his own notes Caesar appears to have incorporated the
observations of a Greek explorer, by name Posidonius, who travelled in
Gaul about fifty years before Caesar carried the Roman arms to the
English Channel. The Greek geographer Strabo and the historian Diodorus
seem also to have derived their descriptions of the Celtic sacrifices
from the work of Posidonius, but independently of each other, and of
Caesar, for each of the three derivative accounts contain some details
which are not to be found in either of the others. By combining them,
therefore, we can restore the original account of Posidonius with some
probability, and thus obtain a picture of the sacrifices offered by the
Celts of Gaul at the close of the second century before our era. The
following seem to have been the main outlines of the custom. Condemned
criminals were reserved by the Celts in order to be sacrificed to the
gods at a great festival which took place once in every five years. The
more there were of such victims, the greater was believed to be the
fertility of the land. If there were not enough criminals to furnish
victims, captives taken in war were immolated to supply the deficiency.
When the time came the victims were sacrificed by the Druids or priests.
Some they shot down with arrows, some they impaled, and some they burned
alive in the following manner. Colossal images of wicker-work or of wood
and grass were constructed; these were filled with live men, cattle, and
animals of other kinds; fire was then applied to the images, and they
were burned with their living contents.   3

  Such were the great festivals held once every five years. But besides
these quinquennial festivals, celebrated on so grand a scale, and with,
apparently, so large an expenditure of human life, it seems reasonable
to suppose that festivals of the same sort, only on a lesser scale, were
held annually, and that from these annual festivals are lineally
descended some at least of the fire-festivals which, with their traces
of human sacrifices, are still celebrated year by year in many parts of
Europe. The gigantic images constructed of osiers or covered with grass
in which the Druids enclosed their victims remind us of the leafy
framework in which the human representative of the tree-spirit is still
so often encased. Hence, seeing that the fertility of the land was
apparently supposed to depend upon the due performance of these
sacrifices, Mannhardt interpreted the Celtic victims, cased in osiers
and grass, as representatives of the tree-spirit or spirit of
vegetation.   4

  These wicker giants of the Druids seem to have had till lately, if not
down to the present time, their representatives at the spring and
midsummer festivals of modern Europe. At Douay, down at least to the
early part of the nineteenth century, a procession took place annually
on the Sunday nearest to the seventh of July. The great feature of the
procession was a colossal figure, some twenty or thirty feet high, made
of osiers, and called “the giant,” which was moved through the streets
by means of rollers and ropes worked by men who were enclosed within the
effigy. The figure was armed as a knight with lance and sword, helmet
and shield. Behind him marched his wife and his three children, all
constructed of osiers on the same principle, but on a smaller scale. At
Dunkirk the procession of the giants took place on Midsummer Day, the
twenty-fourth of June. The festival, which was known as the Follies of
Dunkirk, attracted multitudes of spectators. The giant was a huge figure
of wicker-work, occasionally as much as forty-five feet high, dressed in
a long blue robe with gold stripes, which reached to his feet,
concealing the dozen or more men who made it dance and bob its head to
the spectators. This colossal effigy went by the name of Papa Reuss, and
carried in its pocket a bouncing infant of Brobdingnagian proportions.
The rear was brought up by the daughter of the giant, constructed, like
her sire, of wicker-work, and little, if at all, inferior to him in
size. Most towns and even villages of Brabant and Flanders have, or used
to have, similar wicker giants which were annually led about to the
delight of the populace, who loved these grotesque figures, spoke of
them with patriotic enthusiasm, and never wearied of gazing at them. At
Antwerp the giant was so big that no gate in the city was large enough
to let him go through; hence he could not visit his brother giants in
neighbouring towns, as the other Belgian giants used to do on solemn
occasions.   5

  In England artificial giants seem to have been a standing feature of
the midsummer festival. A writer of the sixteenth century speaks of
“Midsommer pageants in London, where to make the people wonder, are set
forth great and uglie gyants marching as if they were alive, and armed
at all points, but within they are stuffed full of browne paper and tow,
which the shrewd boyes, underpeering, do guilefully discover, and turne
to a greate derision.” At Chester the annual pageant on Midsummer Eve
included the effigies of four giants, with animals, hobby-horses, and
other figures. At Coventry it appears that the giant’s wife figured
beside the giant. At Burford, in Oxfordshire, Midsummer Eve used to be
celebrated with great jollity by the carrying of a giant and a dragon up
and down the town. The last survivor of these perambulating English
giants lingered at Salisbury, where an antiquary found him mouldering to
decay in the neglected hall of the Tailors’ Company about the year 1844.
His bodily framework was a lath and hoop, like the one which used to be
worn by Jack-in-the-Green on May Day.   6

  In these cases the giants merely figured in the processions. But
sometimes they were burned in the summer bonfires. Thus the people of
the Rue aux Ours in Paris used annually to make a great wicker-work
figure, dressed as a soldier, which they promenaded up and down the
streets for several days, and solemnly burned on the third of July, the
crowd of spectators singing Salve Regina. A personage who bore the title
of king presided over the ceremony with a lighted torch in his hand. The
burning fragments of the image were scattered among the people, who
eagerly scrambled for them. The custom was abolished in 1743. In Brie,
Isle de France, a wicker-work giant, eighteen feet high, was annually
burned on Midsummer Eve.   7

  Again, the Druidical custom of burning live animals, enclosed in
wicker-work, has its counterpart at the spring and midsummer festivals.
At Luchon in the Pyrenees on Midsummer Eve “a hollow column, composed of
strong wicker-work, is raised to the height of about sixty feet in the
centre of the principal suburb, and interlaced with green foliage up to
the very top; while the most beautiful flowers and shrubs procurable are
artistically arranged in groups below, so as to form a sort of
background to the scene. The column is then filled with combustible
materials, ready for ignition. At an appointed hour—about 8 P.M.—a grand
procession, composed of the clergy, followed by young men and maidens in
holiday attire, pour forth from the town chanting hymns, and take up
their position around the column. Meanwhile, bonfires are lit, with
beautiful effect, in the surrounding hills. As many living serpents as
could be collected are now thrown into the column, which is set on fire
at the base by means of torches, armed with which about fifty boys and
men dance around with frantic gestures. The serpents, to avoid the
flames, wriggle their way to the top, whence they are seen lashing out
laterally until finally obliged to drop, their struggles for life giving
rise to enthusiastic delight among the surrounding spectators. This is a
favourite annual ceremony for the inhabitants of Luchon and its
neighbourhood, and local tradition assigns it to a heathen origin.” In
the midsummer fires formerly kindled on the Place de Grève at Paris it
was the custom to burn a basket, barrel, or sack full of live cats,
which was hung from a tall mast in the midst of the bonfire; sometimes a
fox was burned. The people collected the embers and ashes of the fire
and took them home, believing that they brought good luck. The French
kings often witnessed these spectacles and even lit the bonfire with
their own hands. In 1648 Louis the Fourteenth, crowned with a wreath of
roses and carrying a bunch of roses in his hand, kindled the fire,
danced at it and partook of the banquet afterwards in the town hall. But
this was the last occasion when a monarch presided at the midsummer
bonfire in Paris. At Metz midsummer fires were lighted with great pomp
on the esplanade, and a dozen cats, enclosed in wicker cages, were
burned alive in them, to the amusement of the people. Similarly at Gap,
in the department of the High Alps, cats used to be roasted over the
midsummer bonfire. In Russia a white cock was sometimes burned in the
midsummer bonfire; in Meissen or Thuringia a horse’s head used to be
thrown into it. Sometimes animals are burned in the spring bonfires. In
the Vosges cats were burned on Shrove Tuesday; in Alsace they were
thrown into the Easter bonfire. In the department of the Ardennes cats
were flung into the bonfires kindled on the first Sunday in Lent;
sometimes, by a refinement of cruelty, they were hung over the fire from
the end of a pole and roasted alive. “The cat, which represented the
devil, could never suffer enough.” While the creatures were perishing in
the flames, the shepherds guarded their flocks and forced them to leap
over the fire, esteeming this an infallible means of preserving them
from disease and witchcraft. We have seen that squirrels were sometimes
burned in the Easter fire.   8

  Thus it appears that the sacrificial rites of the Celts of ancient
Gaul can be traced in the popular festivals of modern Europe. Naturally
it is in France, or rather in the wider area comprised within the limits
of ancient Gaul, that these rites have left the clearest traces in the
customs of burning giants of wicker-work and animals enclosed in
wicker-work or baskets. These customs, it will have been remarked, are
generally observed at or about midsummer. From this we may infer that
the original rites of which these are the degenerate successors were
solemnised at midsummer. This inference harmonises with the conclusion
suggested by a general survey of European folk-custom, that the
midsummer festival must on the whole have been the most widely diffused
and the most solemn of all the yearly festivals celebrated by the
primitive Aryans in Europe. At the same time we must bear in mind that
among the British Celts the chief fire-festivals of the year appear
certainly to have been those of Beltane (May Day) and Hallowe’en (the
last day of October); and this suggests a doubt whether the Celts of
Gaul also may not have celebrated their principal rites of fire,
including their burnt sacrifices of men and animals, at the beginning of
May or the beginning of November rather than at Midsummer.   9

  We have still to ask, What is the meaning of such sacrifices? Why were
men and animals burnt to death at these festivals? If we are right in
interpreting the modern European fire-festivals as attempts to break the
power of witchcraft by burning or banning the witches and warlocks, it
seems to follow that we must explain the human sacrifices of the Celts
in the same manner; that is, we must suppose that the men whom the
Druids burnt in wicker-work images were condemned to death on the ground
that they were witches or wizards, and that the mode of execution by
fire was chosen because burning alive is deemed the surest mode of
getting rid of these noxious and dangerous beings. The same explanation
would apply to the cattle and wild animals of many kinds which the Celts
burned along with the men. They, too, we may conjecture, were supposed
to be either under the spell of witchcraft or actually to be the witches
and wizards, who had transformed themselves into animals for the purpose
of prosecuting their infernal plots against the welfare of their
fellow-creatures. This conjecture is confirmed by the observation that
the victims most commonly burned in modern bonfires have been cats, and
that cats are precisely the animals into which, with the possible
exception of hares, witches were most usually supposed to transform
themselves. Again, we have seen that serpents and foxes used sometimes
to be burnt in the midsummer fires; and Welsh and German witches are
reported to have assumed the form both of foxes and serpents. In short,
when we remember the great variety of animals whose forms witches can
assume at pleasure, it seems easy on this hypothesis to account for the
variety of living creatures that have been burnt at festivals both in
ancient Gaul and modern Europe; all these victims, we may surmise, were
doomed to the flames, not because they were animals, but because they
were believed to be witches who had taken the shape of animals for their
nefarious purposes. One advantage of explaining the ancient Celtic
sacrifices in this way is that it introduces, as it were, a harmony and
consistency into the treatment which Europe has meted out to witches
from the earliest times down to about two centuries ago, when the
growing influence of rationalism discredited the belief in witchcraft
and put a stop to the custom of burning witches. Be that as it may, we
can now perhaps understand why the Druids believed that the more persons
they sentenced to death, the greater would be the fertility of the land.
To a modern reader the connexion at first sight may not be obvious
between the activity of the hangman and the productivity of the earth.
But a little reflection may satisfy him that when the criminals who
perish at the stake or on the gallows are witches, whose delight it is
to blight the crops of the farmer or to lay them low under storms of
hail, the execution of these wretches is really calculated to ensure an
abundant harvest by removing one of the principal causes which paralyse
the efforts and blast the hopes of the husbandman.   10

  The Druidical sacrifices which we are considering were explained in a
different way by W. Mannhardt. He supposed that the men whom the Druids
burned in wicker-work images represented the spirits of vegetation, and
accordingly that the custom of burning them was a magical ceremony
intended to secure the necessary sunshine for the crops. Similarly, he
seems to have inclined to the view that the animals which used to be
burnt in the bonfires represented the cornspirit, which, as we saw in an
earlier part of this work, is often supposed to assume the shape of an
animal. This theory is no doubt tenable, and the great authority of W.
Mannhardt entitles it to careful consideration. I adopted it in former
editions of this book; but on reconsideration it seems to me on the
whole to be less probable than the theory that the men and animals burnt
in the fires perished in the character of witches. This latter view is
strongly supported by the testimony of the people who celebrate the
fire-festivals, since a popular name for the custom of kindling the
fires is “burning the witches,” effigies of witches are sometimes
consumed in the flames, and the fires, their embers, or their ashes are
supposed to furnish protection against witchcraft. On the other hand
there is little to show that the effigies or the animals burnt in the
fires are regarded by the people as representatives of the
vegetation-spirit, and that the bonfires are sun-charms. With regard to
serpents in particular, which used to be burnt in the midsummer fire at
Luchon, I am not aware of any certain evidence that in Europe snakes
have been regarded as embodiments of the tree-spirit or corn-spirit,
though in other parts of the world the conception appears to be not
unknown. Whereas the popular faith in the transformation of witches into
animals is so general and deeply rooted, and the fear of these uncanny
beings is so strong, that it seems safer to suppose that the cats and
other animals which were burnt in the fire suffered death as embodiments
of witches than that they perished as representatives of
vegetation-spirits.   11
