[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gb06205)  [Next](gb06207) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter 62. The Fire-Festivals of Europe.

## Section 6. The Hallowe'en Fires.

FROM THE FOREGOING survey we may infer that among the heathen
forefathers of the European peoples the most popular and widespread
fire-festival of the year was the great celebration of Midsummer Eve or
Midsummer Day. The coincidence of the festival with the summer solstice
can hardly be accidental. Rather we must suppose that our pagan
ancestors purposely timed the ceremony of fire on earth to coincide with
the arrival of the sun at the highest point of his course in the sky. If
that was so, it follows that the old founders of the midsummer rites had
observed the solstices or turning-points of the sun’s apparent path in
the sky, and that they accordingly regulated their festal calendar to
some extent by astronomical considerations.   1

  But while this may be regarded as fairly certain for what we may call
the aborigines throughout a large part of the continent, it appears not
to have been true of the Celtic peoples who inhabited the Land’s End of
Europe, the islands and promontories that stretch out into the Atlantic
Ocean on the North-West. The principal fire-festivals of the Celts,
which have survived, though in a restricted area and with diminished
pomp, to modern times and even to our own day, were seemingly timed
without any reference to the position of the sun in the heaven. They
were two in number, and fell at an interval of six months, one being
celebrated on the eve of May Day and the other on Allhallow Even or
Hallowe’en, as it is now commonly called, that is, on the thirty-first
of October, the day preceding All Saints’ or Allhallows’ Day. These
dates coincide with none of the four great hinges on which the solar
year revolves, to wit, the solstices and the equinoxes. Nor do they
agree with the principal seasons of the agricultural year, the sowing in
spring and the reaping in autumn. For when May Day comes, the seed has
long been committed to the earth; and when November opens, the harvest
has long been reaped and garnered, the fields lie bare, the fruit-trees
are stripped, and even the yellow leaves are fast fluttering to the
ground. Yet the first of May and the first of November mark
turning-points of the year in Europe; the one ushers in the genial heat
and the rich vegetation of summer, the other heralds, if it does not
share, the cold and barrenness of winter. Now these particular points of
the year, as has been well pointed out by a learned and ingenious
writer, while they are of comparatively little moment to the European
husbandman, do deeply concern the European herdsman; for it is on the
approach of summer that he drives his cattle out into the open to crop
the fresh grass, and it is on the approach of winter that he leads them
back to the safety and shelter of the stall. Accordingly it seems not
improbable that the Celtic bisection of the year into two halves at the
beginning of May and the beginning of November dates from a time when
the Celts were mainly a pastoral people, dependent for their subsistence
on their herds, and when accordingly the great epochs of the year for
them were the days on which the cattle went forth from the homestead in
early summer and returned to it again in early winter. Even in Central
Europe, remote from the region now occupied by the Celts, a similar
bisection of the year may be clearly traced in the great popularity, on
the one hand, of May Day and its Eve (Walpurgis Night), and, on the
other hand, of the Feast of All Souls at the beginning of November,
which under a thin Christian cloak conceals an ancient pagan festival of
the dead. Hence we may conjecture that everywhere throughout Europe the
celestial division of the year according to the solstices was preceded
by what we may call a terrestrial division of the year according to the
beginning of summer and the beginning of winter.   2

  Be that as it may, the two great Celtic festivals of May Day and the
first of November or, to be more accurate, the Eves of these two days,
closely resemble each other in the manner of their celebration and in
the superstitions associated with them, and alike, by the antique
character impressed upon both, betray a remote and purely pagan origin.
The festival of May Day or Beltane, as the Celts called it, which
ushered in summer, has already been described; it remains to give some
account of the corresponding festival of Hallowe’en, which announced the
arrival of winter.   3

  Of the two feasts Hallowe’en was perhaps of old the more important,
since the Celts would seem to have dated the beginning of the year from
it rather than from Beltane. In the Isle of Man, one of the fortresses
in which the Celtic language and lore longest held out against the siege
of the Saxon invaders, the first of November, Old Style, has been
regarded as New Year’s day down to recent times. Thus Manx mummers used
to go round on Hallowe’en (Old Style), singing, in the Manx language, a
sort of Hogmanay song which began “To-night is New Year’s Night,
Hogunnaa!” In ancient Ireland, a new fire used to be kindled every year
on Hallowe’en or the Eve of Samhain, and from this sacred flame all the
fires in Ireland were rekindled. Such a custom points strongly to
Samhain or All Saints’ Day (the first of November) as New Year’s Day;
since the annual kindling of a new fire takes place most naturally at
the beginning of the year, in order that the blessed influence of the
fresh fire may last throughout the whole period of twelve months.
Another confirmation of the view that the Celts dated their year from
the first of November is furnished by the manifold modes of divination
which were commonly resorted to by Celtic peoples on Hallowe’en for the
purpose of ascertaining their destiny, especially their fortune in the
coming year; for when could these devices for prying into the future be
more reasonably put in practice than at the beginning of the year? As a
season of omens and auguries Hallowe’en seems to have far surpassed
Beltane in the imagination of the Celts; from which we may with some
probability infer that they reckoned their year from Hallowe’en rather
than Beltane. Another circumstance of great moment which points to the
same conclusion is the association of the dead with Hallowe’en. Not only
among the Celts but throughout Europe, Hallowe’en, the night which marks
the transition from autumn to winter, seems to have been of old the time
of year when the souls of the departed were supposed to revisit their
old homes in order to warm themselves by the fire and to comfort
themselves with the good cheer provided for them in the kitchen or the
parlour by their affectionate kinsfolk. It was, perhaps, a natural
thought that the approach of winter should drive the poor shivering
hungry ghosts from the bare fields and the leafless woodlands to the
shelter of the cottage with its familiar fireside. Did not the lowing
kine then troop back from the summer pastures in the forests and on the
hills to be fed and cared for in the stalls, while the bleak winds
whistled among the swaying boughs and the snow-drifts deepened in the
hollows? and could the good-man and the good-wife deny to the spirits of
their dead the welcome which they gave to the cows?   4

  But it is not only the souls of the departed who are supposed to be
hovering unseen on the day “when autumn to winter resigns the pale
year.” Witches then speed on their errands of mischief, some sweeping
through the air on besoms, others galloping along the roads on
tabby-cats, which for that evening are turned into coal-black steeds.
The fairies, too, are all let loose, and hobgoblins of every sort roam
freely about.   5

  Yet while a glamour of mystery and awe has always clung to Hallowe’en
in the minds of the Celtic peasantry, the popular celebration of the
festival has been, at least in modern times, by no means of a prevailing
gloomy cast; on the contrary it has been attended by picturesque
features and merry pastimes, which rendered it the gayest night of all
the year. Amongst the things which in the Highlands of Scotland
contributed to invest the festival with a romantic beauty were the
bonfires which used to blaze at frequent intervals on the heights. “On
the last day of autumn children gathered ferns, tar-barrels, the long
thin stalks called gàinisg, and everything suitable for a bonfire. These
were placed in a heap on some eminence near the house, and in the
evening set fire to. The fires were called Samhnagan. There was one for
each house, and it was an object of ambition who should have the
biggest. Whole districts were brilliant with bonfires, and their glare
across a Highland loch, and from many eminences, formed an exceedingly
picturesque scene.” Like the Beltane fires on the first of May, the
Hallowe’en bonfires seem to have been kindled most commonly in the
Perthshire Highlands. In the parish of Callander they still blazed down
to near the end of the eighteenth century. When the fire had died down,
the ashes were carefully collected in the form of a circle, and a stone
was put in, near the circumference, for every person of the several
families interested in the bonfire. Next morning, if any of these stones
was found to be displaced or injured, the people made sure that the
person represented by it was fey or devoted, and that he could not live
twelve months from that day. At Balquhidder down to the latter part of
the nineteenth century each household kindled its bonfire at Hallowe’en,
but the custom was chiefly observed by children. The fires were lighted
on any high knoll near the house; there was no dancing round them.
Hallowe’en fires were also lighted in some districts of the north-east
of Scotland, such as Buchan. Villagers and farmers alike must have their
fire. In the villages the boys went from house to house and begged a
peat from each householder, usually with the words, “Ge’s a peat t’ burn
the witches.” When they had collected enough peats, they piled them in a
heap, together with straw, furze, and other combustible materials, and
set the whole on fire. Then each of the youths, one after another, laid
himself down on the ground as near to the fire as he could without being
scorched, and thus lying allowed the smoke to roll over him. The others
ran through the smoke and jumped over their prostrate comrade. When the
heap was burned down, they scattered the ashes, vying with each other
who should scatter them most.   6

  In the northern part of Wales it used to be customary for every family
to make a great bonfire called Coel Coeth on Hallowe’en. The fire was
kindled on the most conspicuous spot near the house; and when it had
nearly gone out every one threw into the ashes a white stone, which he
had first marked. Then having said their prayers round the fire, they
went to bed. Next morning, as soon as they were up, they came to search
out the stones, and if any one of them was found to be missing, they had
a notion that the person who threw it would die before he saw another
Hallowe’en. According to Sir John Rhys, the habit of celebrating
Hallowe’en by lighting bonfires on the hills is perhaps not yet extinct
in Wales, and men still living can remember how the people who assisted
at the bonfires would wait till the last spark was out and then would
suddenly take to their heels, shouting at the top of their voices, “The
cropped black sow seize the hindmost!” The saying, as Sir John Rhys
justly remarks, implies that originally one of the company became a
victim in dead earnest. Down to the present time the saying is current
in Carnarvonshire, where allusions to the cutty black sow are still
occasionally made to frighten children. We can now understand why in
Lower Brittany every person throws a pebble into the midsummer bonfire.
Doubtless there, as in Wales and the Highlands of Scotland, omens of
life and death have at one time or other been drawn from the position
and state of the pebbles on the morning of All Saints’ Day. The custom,
thus found among three separate branches of the Celtic stock, probably
dates from a period before their dispersion, or at least from a time
when alien races had not yet driven home the wedges of separation
between them.   7

  In the Isle of Man also, another Celtic country, Hallowe’en was
celebrated down to modern times by the kindling of fires, accompanied
with all the usual ceremonies designed to prevent the baneful influence
of fairies and witches.   8
