[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gb06302)  [Next](gb06401) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter 63. The Interpretation of the Fire-Festivals.

## Section 3. The Purificatory Theory of the Fire-festivals.

THUS far we have considered what may be said for the theory that at the
European fire-festivals the fire is kindled as a charm to ensure an
abundant supply of sunshine for man and beast, for corn and fruits. It
remains to consider what may be said against this theory and in favour
of the view that in these rites fire is employed not as a creative but
as a cleansing agent, which purifies men, animals, and plants by burning
up and consuming the noxious elements, whether material or spiritual,
which menace all living things with disease and death.   1

  First, then, it is to be observed that the people who practise the
fire-customs appear never to allege the solar theory in explanation of
them, while on the contrary they do frequently and emphatically put
forward the purificatory theory. This is a strong argument in favour of
the purificatory and against the solar theory; for the popular
explanation of a popular custom is never to be rejected except for grave
cause. And in the present case there seems to be no adequate reason for
rejecting it. The conception of fire as a destructive agent, which can
be turned to account for the consumption of evil things, is so simple
and obvious that it could hardly escape the minds even of the rude
peasantry with whom these festivals originated. On the other hand the
conception of fire as an emanation of the sun, or at all events as
linked to it by a bond of physical sympathy, is far less simple and
obvious; and though the use of fire as a charm to produce sunshine
appears to be undeniable, nevertheless in attempting to explain popular
customs we should never have recourse to a more recondite idea when a
simpler one lies to hand and is supported by the explicit testimony of
the people themselves. Now in the case of the fire-festivals the
destructive aspect of fire is one upon which the people dwell again and
again; and it is highly significant that the great evil against which
the fire is directed appears to be witchcraft. Again and again we are
told that the fires are intended to burn or repel the witches; and the
intention is sometimes graphically expressed by burning an effigy of a
witch in the fire. Hence, when we remember the great hold which the
dread of witchcraft has had on the popular European mind in all ages, we
may suspect that the primary intention of all these fire-festivals was
simply to destroy or at all events get rid of the witches, who were
regarded as the causes of nearly all the misfortunes and calamities that
befall men, their cattle, and their crops.   2

  This suspicion is confirmed when we examine the evils for which the
bonfires and torches were supposed to provide a remedy. Foremost,
perhaps, among these evils we may reckon the diseases of cattle; and of
all the ills that witches are believed to work there is probably none
which is so constantly insisted on as the harm they do to the herds,
particularly by stealing the milk from the cows. Now it is significant
that the need-fire, which may perhaps be regarded as the parent of the
periodic fire-festivals, is kindled above all as a remedy for a murrain
or other disease of cattle; and the circumstance suggests, what on
general grounds seems probable, that the custom of kindling the
need-fire goes back to a time when the ancestors of the European peoples
subsisted chiefly on the products of their herds, and when agriculture
as yet played a subordinate part in their lives. Witches and wolves are
the two great foes still dreaded by the herdsman in many parts of
Europe; and we need not wonder that he should resort to fire as a
powerful means of banning them both. Among Slavonic peoples it appears
that the foes whom the need-fire is designed to combat are not so much
living witches as vampyres and other evil spirits, and the ceremony aims
rather at repelling these baleful beings than at actually consuming them
in the flames. But for our present purpose these distinctions are
immaterial. The important thing to observe is that among the Slavs the
need-fire, which is probably the original of all the ceremonial fires
now under consideration, is not a sun-charm, but clearly and
unmistakably nothing but a means of protecting man and beast against the
attacks of maleficent creatures, whom the peasant thinks to burn or
scare by the heat of the fire, just as he might burn or scare wild
animals.   3

  Again, the bonfires are often supposed to protect the fields against
hail and the homestead against thunder and lightning. But both hail and
thunderstorms are frequently thought to be caused by witches; hence the
fire which bans the witches necessarily serves at the same time as a
talisman against hail, thunder, and lightning. Further, brands taken
from the bonfires are commonly kept in the houses to guard them against
conflagration; and though this may perhaps be done on the principle of
homoeopathic magic, one fire being thought to act as a preventive of
another, it is also possible that the intention may be to keep
witch-incendiaries at bay. Again, people leap over the bonfires as a
preventive of colic, and look at the flames steadily in order to
preserve their eyes in good health; and both colic and sore eyes are in
Germany, and probably elsewhere, set down to the machinations of
witches. Once more, to leap over the midsummer fires or to
circumambulate them is thought to prevent a person from feeling pains in
his back at reaping; and in Germany such pains are called “witch-shots”
and ascribed to witchcraft.   4

  But if the bonfires and torches of the fire-festivals are to be
regarded primarily as weapons directed against witches and wizards, it
becomes probable that the same explanation applies not only to the
flaming discs which are hurled into the air, but also to the burning
wheels which are rolled down hill on these occasions; discs and wheels,
we may suppose, are alike intended to burn the witches who hover
invisible in the air or haunt unseen the fields, the orchards, and the
vineyards on the hillside. Certainly witches are constantly thought to
ride through the air on broomsticks or other equally convenient
vehicles; and if they do so, how can you get at them so effectually as
by hurling lighted missiles, whether discs, torches, or besoms, after
them as they flit past overhead in the gloom? The South Slavonian
peasant believes that witches ride in the dark hail-clouds; so he shoots
at the clouds to bring down the hags, while he curses them, saying,
“Curse, curse Herodias, thy mother is a heathen, damned of God and
fettered through the Redeemer’s blood.” Also he brings out a pot of
glowing charcoal on which he has thrown holy oil, laurel leaves, and
wormwood to make a smoke. The fumes are supposed to ascend to the clouds
and stupefy the witches, so that they tumble down to earth. And in order
that they may not fall soft, but may hurt themselves very much, the
yokel hastily brings out a chair and tilts it bottom up so that the
witch in falling may break her legs on the legs of the chair. Worse than
that, he cruelly lays scythes, bill-hooks, and other formidable weapons
edge upwards so as to cut and mangle the poor wretches when they drop
plump upon them from the clouds.   5

  On this view the fertility supposed to follow the application of fire
in the form of bonfires, torches, discs, rolling wheels, and so forth,
is not conceived as resulting directly from an increase of solar heat
which the fire has magically generated; it is merely an indirect result
obtained by freeing the reproductive powers of plants and animals from
the fatal obstruction of witchcraft. And what is true of the
reproduction of plants and animals may hold good also of the fertility
of the human sexes. The bonfires are supposed to promote marriage and to
procure offspring for childless couples. This happy effect need not flow
directly from any quickening or fertilising energy in the fire; it may
follow indirectly from the power of the fire to remove those obstacles
which the spells of witches and wizards notoriously present to the union
of man and wife.   6

  On the whole, then, the theory of the purificatory virtue of the
ceremonial fires appears more probable and more in accordance with the
evidence than the opposing theory of their connexion with the sun.   7
