[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gb06701)  [Next](gb06703) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter 67. The External Soul in Folk-Custom.

## Section 2. The External Soul in Plants.

FURTHER it has been shown that in folk-tales the life of a person is
sometimes so bound up with the life of a plant that the withering of the
plant will immediately follow or be followed by the death of the person.
Among the M’Bengas in Western Africa, about the Gaboon, when two
children are born on the same day, the people plant two trees of the
same kind and dance round them. The life of each of the children is
believed to be bound up with the life of one of the trees; and if the
tree dies or is thrown down, they are sure that the child will soon die.
In the Cameroons, also, the life of a person is believed to be
sympathetically bound up with that of a tree. The chief of Old Town in
Calabar kept his soul in a sacred grove near a spring of water. When
some Europeans, in frolic or ignorance, cut down part of the grove, the
spirit was most indignant and threatened the perpetrators of the deed,
according to the king, with all manner of evil.   1

  Some of the Papuans unite the life of a new-born babe sympathetically
with that of a tree by driving a pebble into the bark of the tree. This
is supposed to give them complete mastery over the child’s life; if the
tree is cut down, the child will die. After a birth the Maoris used to
bury the navel-string in a sacred place and plant a young sapling over
it. As the tree grew, it was a tohu oranga or sign of life for the
child; if it flourished, the child would prosper; if it withered and
died, the parents augured the worst for the little one. In some parts of
Fiji the navel-string of a male infant is planted together with a
coco-nut or the slip of a breadfruit-tree, and the child’s life is
supposed to be intimately connected with that of the tree. Amongst the
Dyaks of Landak and Tajan, districts of Dutch Borneo, it is customary to
plant a fruit-tree for a baby, and henceforth in the popular belief the
fate of the child is bound up with that of the tree. If the tree shoots
up rapidly, it will go well with the child; but if the tree is dwarfed
or shrivelled, nothing but misfortune can be expected for its human
counterpart.   2

  It is said that there are still families in Russia, Germany, England,
France, and Italy who are accustomed to plant a tree at the birth of a
child. The tree, it is hoped, will grow with the child, and it is tended
with special care. The custom is still pretty general in the canton of
Aargau in Switzerland; an apple-tree is planted for a boy and a
pear-tree for a girl, and the people think that the child will flourish
or dwindle with the tree. In Mecklenburg the afterbirth is thrown out at
the foot of a young tree, and the child is then believed to grow with
the tree. Near the Castle of Dalhousie, not far from Edinburgh, there
grows an oak-tree, called the Edgewell Tree, which is popularly believed
to be linked to the fate of the family by a mysterious tie; for they say
that when one of the family dies, or is about to die, a branch falls
from the Edgewell Tree. Thus, on seeing a great bough drop from the tree
on a quiet, still day in July 1874, an old forester exclaimed, “The
laird’s deid noo!” and soon after news came that Fox Maule, eleventh
Earl of Dalhousie, was dead.   3

  In England children are sometimes passed through a cleft ash-tree as a
cure for rupture or rickets, and thenceforward a sympathetic connexion
is supposed to exist between them and the tree. An ash-tree which had
been used for this purpose grew at the edge of Shirley Heath, on the
road from Hockly House to Birmingham. “Thomas Chillingworth, son of the
owner of an adjoining farm, now about thirty-four, was, when an infant
of a year old, passed through a similar tree, now perfectly sound, which
he preserves with so much care that he will not suffer a single branch
to be touched, for it is believed the life of the patient depends on the
life of the tree, and the moment that is cut down, be the patient ever
so distant, the rupture returns, and a mortification ensues, and
terminates in death, as was the case in a man driving a waggon on the
very road in question.” “It is not uncommon, however,” adds the writer,
“for persons to survive for a time the felling of the tree.” The
ordinary mode of effecting the cure is to split a young ash-sapling
longitudinally for a few feet and pass the child, naked, either three
times or three times three through the fissure at sunrise. In the West
of England it is said that the passage should be “against the sun.” As
soon as the ceremony has been performed, the tree is bound tightly up
and the fissure plastered over with mud or clay. The belief is that just
as the cleft in the tree closes up, so the rupture in the child’s body
will be healed; but that if the rift in the tree remains open, the
rupture in the child will remain too, and if the tree were to die, the
death of the child would surely follow.   4

  A similar cure for various diseases, but especially for rupture and
rickets, has been commonly practised in other parts of Europe, as
Germany, France, Denmark, and Sweden; but in these countries the tree
employed for the purpose is usually not an ash but an oak; sometimes a
willow-tree is allowed or even prescribed instead. In Mecklenburg, as in
England, the sympathetic relation thus established between the tree and
the child is believed to be so close that if the tree is cut down the
child will die.   5
